Title
Another sense of the ontological innocence of mereology : from a
neo-Aristotelian point of view
Sub Title
Author
北村, 直彰(Kitamura, Naoaki)
Publisher
三田哲學會
Publication
year
2012
Jtitle
哲學 No.129 (2012. 3) ,p.73- 86 
Abstract
The problem of the ontological commitment of mereology has
provoked a great deal of controversy. One aspect of the problem
emerges as the conflict between mereology and familiar ways of
counting. In recent years, a novel proposal labeled the Minimalist
View has been advanced to solve the conflict. It separates
quantifying and counting on the basis of a double notion of
existence. The proposal, however, involves a crucial ambiguity
concerning the notion of existence, and has been criticized for that
fault. In this paper, we first point out that an existing objection to
the Minimalist View is not to the point and does not work well. Then,
it is argued that the Minimalist View can be recast to be a more
plausible and attractive thesis from a neo-Aristotelian point of view,
which rests on the concept of grounding. The discussion reveals a
neo-Aristotelian conception of the ontological innocence of
mereology.
Notes
投稿論文
Genre
Journal Article
URL
https://koara.lib.keio.ac.jp/xoonips/modules/xoonips/detail.php?ko
ara_id=AN00150430-00000129-0073
慶應義塾大学学術情報リポジトリ(KOARA)に掲載されているコンテンツの著作権は、それぞれの著作者、学会または
出版社/発行者に帰属し、その権利は著作権法によって保護されています。引用にあたっては、著作権法を遵守して
ご利用ください。
The copyrights of content available on the KeiO Associated Repository of Academic resources (KOARA) belong to
the respective authors, academic societies, or publishers/issuers, and these rights are protected by the Japanese
Copyright Act. When quoting the content, please follow the Japanese copyright act.
Powered by TCPDF (www.tcpdf.org)

Abstract
The problem of the ontological commitment of mereology has
provoked a great deal of controversy. One aspect of the prob-
lem emerges as the conﬂict between mereology and familiar
ways of counting. In recent years, a novel proposal labeled the
Minimalist View has been advanced to solve the conﬂict. It sepa-
rates quantifying and counting on the basis of a double notion
of existence. The proposal, however, involves a crucial ambigui-
ty concerning the notion of existence, and has been criticized
for that fault. In this paper, we ﬁrst point out that an existing ob-
jection to the Minimalist View is not to the point and does not
work well. Then, it is argued that the Minimalist View can be
recast to be a more plausible and attractive thesis from a neo-
Aristotelian point of view, which rests on the concept of ground-
ing. The discussion reveals a neo-Aristotelian conception of the
ontological innocence of mereology.
Contributed Paper
Another Sense of the Ontological
Innocence of Mereology: From a
Neo-Aristotelian Point of View
Naoaki Kitamura
 Department of Philosophy, Keio University.
Philosophy No. 129
 73 

Introduction
Classical mereology1 (from now on just “mereology” for short),
whose expressive power is so strong that various concepts concern-
ing part-whole relations can be deﬁned with formal rigor, has often
been criticized for the fault of being committed to enormous num-
bers of bizarre wholes.
Such alleged fault, however, is only one
aspect of the problem of the ontological commitment of mereology.
Another aspect of the problem emerges as the conﬂict between mereo-
logy and familiar ways of counting; We often don’t want to count
the parts of maximally connected objects as full-ﬂedged objects them-
selves, and we don’t want to count the sums of discontinuous ob-
jects as further, full-ﬂedged objects, whereas mereology commit us
to the existence of both of parts and wholes. A. C. Varzi calls this con-
ﬂict the “tension beween countenancing and counting”, and makes
an attempt to clarify a way of dealing with it, under the label of the
Minimalist View.
2 Against Varzi’s proposal, F. Berto and M. Carrara
makes an objection based on the inseparability of quantifying and
counting. In our opinion, the Varzi’s proposal includes a crucial ambi-
guity in its notion of existence, but the objection by Berto and Car-
rara is not to the point and fails to appreciate the signiﬁcance of the
Minimalist View. This paper tries to present a favorable disambigua-
tion of Varzi’s proposal and to reﬁne the Minimalist View, in light of
a neo-Aristotelian conception of metaphysics.
The discussion pro-
ceeds as follows. First, we characterize the conﬂict between mereo-
logy and counting as one aspect of the problem of the ontological
1 By “classical mereology”, we mean one including (i) some version of the Ext-
ensionality Principle, to the e#ect that for any (non-atomic) x and y, if x
and y have the same (proper) parts, then x  y, and (ii) some version of Un-
restricted Composition, to the e#ect that given any x and y, there is a
(unique) mereological sum z  xy.
2 Varzi (2000).
Another Sense of the Ontological Innocence of Mereology
 74 

commitment of mereology ( 1).
Second, the crucial feature of
Varzi’s proposal is presented, and then, it is pointed out that the objec-
tion against the Minimalist View by Berto and Carrara misses the
point of Varzi’s proposal and does not work well (2). Finally, we
try
to
solve
the
ambiguity
in
Varzi’s
proposal
from
a
neo-
Aristotelian point of view, and argue that, in that light, the Minimal-
ist View can be recast as a more plausible and attractive thesis that
suggests a neo-Aristotelian conception of the ontological innocence
of mereology (3).
1.
Two Aspects of the Problem of the Ontological
Commitment of Mereology
1.1
The First Aspect: The Implausibility of Unrestricted Composi-
tion
Mereology has often been criticized for the fault of committing to
the existence of enormous numbers of bizarre wholes. For instance,
let us consider the top of some table a and its four legs b, c, d, e.
Given Unrestricted Composition, we have to countenance ab, ab
c, abcd and so on, as well as the whole table abcde.
Generally speaking, given n atomic objects, the number of objects to
whose existence mereology commits is (2 n1). If we consider the
top of another table a and its four legs b, c, d, e, the total
number of objects that mereology countenance exceeds 1000. Fur-
thermore, mereology has to commit to the existence of sums of ob-
jects that is spatially so detached that they cannot be in any usual
causal connection (such as Tokyo Tower  Ei#el Tower), and also
the existence of sums of di#erent sorts of properties (such as red-
nessroundness). It has often been said that these examples shows
a crucial fault of mereology. In this light, the problem of ontologi-
cal commitment of mereology can be encapsulated in the following
form:
Philosophy No. 129
 75 

(POM1) Mereology, with its Unrestricted Composition, commits to
the existence of enormous numbers of bizarre wholes.3
1.2
The Second Aspect: The Conﬂict between Countenancing and
Counting
The problem of the ontological commitment of mereology has usu-
ally been taken as (POM1) (or its variant that corresponds to some re-
stricted version of composition principle).
However, it is only one
aspect of the problem. Another aspect emerges when we call into que-
stion not only the existence of wholes but also that of parts in-
cluded in the domain of the quantiﬁcation of mereology. The most re-
markable cases can be found when we consider (i) the parts of maxim-
ally connected objects and (ii) the sums of discontinuous objects.
To see the ﬁrst case, let us consider again a table and its parts a,
b, c, d, and e. Given these objects, mereology has to countenance (qua-
ntify over) all of the proper parts of the table such as ab and cd
e on a par with the whole table, abcde.
On the other
hand, when we count the number of objects in a room, we usually
count only the table as a whole, ignoring the undetached parts of
the table. Next, to see the second case, let us consider a table A and
a chair B. Given these objects, mereology has to countenance AB
on a par with A and B. On the other hand, we usually count only A
and B separately, ignoring the scattered whole AB.
In general, mereology distinguishes a whole from its parts and coun-
tenances (quantiﬁes over) them all on a par, but they “ecompass the
same amount of reality”,4 and we want to avoid counting both of
them.
In this light, the problem of the ontological commitment of
mereology can be encapsulated in the following form:
3 “POM” stands for the Problem of the Ontological commitment of Mereo-
logy.
4 Varzi (2000), p. 285.
Another Sense of the Ontological Innocence of Mereology
 76 

(POM2) The domain of quantiﬁcation of mereology is redundant; We
must choose either of wholes or their parts as reality.
Whereas (POM1) is concerned with the implausibility of Unrestrict-
ed Composition, (POM2) is concerned with the conﬂict between coun-
tenancing (i.e., the quantiﬁcation of mereology) and counting. Never-
theless, in spite of this di#erence, they have the issue in common:
the ontological status of some of the entities included in the domain
of quantiﬁcation of mereology. The di#erence merely reﬂects the ava-
ilability of a certain domain given in advance; The former form of
the problem arises when we have in advance some domain the reali-
ty of whose members is guaranteed in some way or other. On the
other hand, the latter form of the problem arises when we don’t
have such domain but have only some domain of quantiﬁcation of
mereology none of whose members is guaranteed for its reality in ad-
vance. This is why we think of (POM1) and (POM2) as two aspects of
the same problem, the one of the ontological commitment of mereo-
logy.
2.
The Minimalist View, Double Existence,
and Counting
2.1
The Minimalist View
Varzi responds to the conﬂict as follows:
. . . [W]e should not include entities that overlap, i.e., share
common parts.
If we include the table we should not in-
clude its top and legs.
If we include its top and legs, we
ought to disregard the whole table as well as every other
table part.
For instance, we ought to disregard the right
half of the table, consisting of the two right legs and the
right half of the top.
Philosophy No. 129
 77 

Call this the Minimalist View. The Minimalist View says
nothing speciﬁc about mereology, about what entities are
part of what. But, given a mereological theory and a corre-
sponding domain of quantiﬁcation, the view tells us how to
weigh our ontological commitments.5
Then, the Minimalist View is formulated as the following thesis:
(M) An inventory of the world is to include an entity x if and only
if x does not overlap any other entity y that is itself included in
that inventory.6
According to (M), when we count real objects and make the “inven-
tory of the world”, the restriction is imposed us, to the e#ect that
we must disregard any object that overlaps some object in order not
to include redundant objects in the inventory.
The most striking feature of the Minimalist View is that it intro-
duces a double notion of existence.
After formulating Minimalist
View in the above way, Varzi continues:
. . . [T] he Minimalist View draws a distinction between
two senses in which a thing can be object of reference or qua-
ntiﬁcationtwo notions of individual existence.
In one
sense, those items exist that are included in the domain of
quantiﬁcation of our part-whole theory, whatever it is (call
this the Quinean notion of existence). . . . On the other hand,
there is a sense in which just those items exist that are
listed in the relevant inventory of the world, depending on
how this is drawn up.
These items will all be included
5
Varzi (2000), pp. 285286, emphasis in original.
What is taken into ac-
count here is not classical mereology in particular but mereology in gener-
eal, but this does not a#ect the following discussion.
6 Varzi (2000), p. 287.
Another Sense of the Ontological Innocence of Mereology
 78 

among those things that enjoy Quinean existence, since
they will have to be recognized as objects of reference and
quantiﬁcation by the partwhole theory; but not everything
that exists in the Quinean sense must exist in this restricted
sense (the selective notion of existence). . . . [T]he Minimalist
View says that the Quinean notion of existence sets the back-
ground for the selective notion, but does not exhaust it; the
rest must be done in compliance with (M).7
In short, the “Quinean notion of existence” corresponds to the mean-
ing of “everything” in its strongest sense, which is given by unrestrict-
ed quantiﬁcation. On the other hand, the extension of the “selective
notion of existence” consists in the objects that have the status of real-
ity among the objects that belong to the extension of the “Quinean
notion of existence”.
2.2
An Objection Based on the Inseparability of Counting from
Quantifying
It is for this feature that Berto and Carrara makes an objection aga-
inst the Minimalist View. They state:
We have a problem with its (ambiguously) parting quan-
tifying and counting, if both are given strict metaphysical
import. One cannot part quantifying and counting, i.e. exist-
ence and numbers: to be is to be the value of a variable,
that is, to be is to be in the domain of quantiﬁcation, and to
be is to exist, and to exist is to count as one.8
Then they argue that we cannnot make sense of the distinction be-
tween Quinean existence and selective existence in a way both of
7 Varzi (2000), p. 287, emphasis in original.
8 Berto and Carrara (2009), p. 353.
Philosophy No. 129
 79 

them are given metaphysical import.9
The core of the objection by Berto and Carrara is the second sen-
tence of the above quotation, which notes the (alleged) inseparabili-
ty of counting from quantifying. In order to vindicate this observa-
tion, they rest on van Inwagen’s remark concerning the univocality
of existence10 and Frege’s theory of counting.11 However, whatever ar-
gument or theory they rest on, claiming simply the inseparability of
counting from quantifying cannot establish their conclusion that
the double notion of existence in the Minimalist View can get no jus-
tiﬁcation that has full metaphysical import. This is because such al-
leged inseparability is the very starting point of Varzi’s discussion.
That is, the alleged inseparability of counting from quantifying is,
as it were, just another name of the tension between countenancing
and counting pointed out by Varzi. He (implicitly) starts the former
familiar idea, and then, make the latter problem clear and proposes
his own strategy, namely the Minimalist View. Of course it may be
found diﬁcult to understand what is the di#erence in senses and the
relation between “Quinean notion of existence” and “selective notion
of existence”, but to merely point out such ambiguity is hardly su$-
cient to undermining the proposal for the duplication of existence
as a strategy for solving the tension in question.
For these reasons, the objection by Berto and Carrara, which is
based on the alleged inseparability of counting from quantifying,
fails.
However, it remains the fact that the Minimalist View in-
cludes the crucial ambiguity in the double notion of existence; We
have to say it is unclear how both of the two notions of existence
can be given metaphysical import and how the they can solve the con-
ﬂict between mereology and familiar ways of counting. In the next
section, with the view to disambiguating the double notion of exist-
9 Berto and Carrara (2009), p. 353
10 van Inwagen (1998).
11 Frege (1884).
Another Sense of the Ontological Innocence of Mereology
 80 

ence, we will make an attempt to discuss these questions from a neo-
Aristotelian point of view.
3.
A Neo-Aristotelian Conception of Ontological
Innocence of Mereology
3.1
The Triviality of Existence Questions and the Grounding
Problem
Recently, J. Scha#er conspicuously defended the neo-Aristotelian
view of metaphysics,12 which characterizes metaphysics as centered
on what grounds what, as opposed to the Quinean view, on which
the task of metaphysics is to say what exist.13 In particular, he en-
dorses the former coupled with a permissive stance on existence, ac-
cording to which Quinean existence question are trivial. For exam-
ple, as to the question of whether numbers exist, Scha#er claims
that the a$rmative answer that they do exist can be trivially vindica-
ted by such an inference as:
(1)
There are prime numbers.
(2)
Therefore there are numbers.
Through this inference, we can be trivially justiﬁed to claim the exist-
ence of numbers. Similarly, as to the question of whether properties
exist, the a$rmative answer that they do exist can be trivially vindi-
cated by such an inference as
(3)
There are properties that I and my father have in common.
(4)
Therefore there are properties.
12 For a variety of recent discussions concerned with neo-Aristotelian meta-
physics, see Tahko (2012).
13 Scha#er (2009).
Philosophy No. 129
 81 

Through this inference, we can be trivially justiﬁed to claim the exist-
ence of properties. In the same vein, (almost) every existence ques-
tion can be a$rmatively answered with this type of inference.
Thus it follows that these existence questions are trivial, and that
(almost) everything exists (permissivism).14 Accordingly metaphysics
should not be troubled about what exists, but instead tackle with the
genuinely substantial question of how entities exist, or rather what
grounds what.
This conception of metaphysics is plausibly rooted in Aristotle.
When he presents a catalogue of types of entities such as substance,
quantity and quality, he simply assumes that all such types of en-
tities exist without any further discussion (1984: 4; Cat.1b257). And
also, Aristotle characterizes his investigation as centered on sub-
stance (1984; 1688; Meta. 1069 a 1820).
As Scha#er states, the core
notion of substance is that of “basic ultimate, fundamental unit of
being”.15 Thus, on Aritotle’s view, the task of metaphysics is to
study substances and their modes and kinds, and its method is to
deploy diagnosis for what entities are fundamental and what dep-
ends on them.
Scha#er reinterprets many central metaphysical debates from
these points of view. For instance, the controversy of realism and con-
structivism about the existence of numbers is taken to be one over
whether numbers are independent of the minds, or based on our con-
cepts, rather than whether we can accept the existence of numbers.
In general, there is no dispute about what exists. It is the metaphys-
ical status of entities, such as mind-independence, fundamentality
and priority, that metaphysical debates concern.
14 For a remark on the exceptions of Scha#er’s permissive stance on exist-
ence, see Scha#er (2009), p. 359.
15 Scha#er (2009), p. 351.
Another Sense of the Ontological Innocence of Mereology
 82 

3.2
The Quantiﬁer and the Fundamental Commitment
From this point of view, we can present a way to solve the prob-
lem of the ontological commitment of mereology and how to dis-
ambiguate the Minimalist View in a favorable way.
Given permissivism, whether the objects included in the domain of
the quantiﬁcation of mereology really exist is trivial, because it can
be admitted that we can talk about (refer to, quantify over) any of
those objects in various ways in certain contexts. For example, the ex-
istence of some undetached parts of a whole can be proved by such
an inference as:
(5)
This top and these four legs are all parts of a table.
(6)
Therefore there are the top and the four legs of a table.
Metaphysics, under the neo-Aristotelian conception of it, tries to
answer the question of which objects countenanced by mereology
are fundamental, that is, of which are included in the “inventory of
the world”, not of which objects exist.
Here the signiﬁcance of (M) can be construed. It can be seen as o#er-
ing a plausible constraint that guides metaphysical investigation on
what grounds what; We can reformulate (M) as the following require-
ment, to the e#ect that no two basic entities have a common part:
(No Overlap) xy((BxByxy) z(PzxPzy)),
where “B” express the basicness or fundamentality and “P” express
the relation of pathood.16 This constraint can be justiﬁed by the fol-
lowing two plausible intuitions: (i) the fundamental objects qua inde-
pendent units of being should be freely recombinable17 (“entirely
loose and separate”, in Hume’s words), and (ii) any two overlapping ob-
jects are not freely recombinable, because it is not possible that one
of the overlapping objects exists and the other doesn’t exist since
16 See Scha#er (2010), p. 39.
17 Cf. Lewis (1986).
Philosophy No. 129
 83 	

they have some common part.18
On the basis of this reinterpretation of (M), the disambiguation of
the Minimalist View can be accomplished as follows.
The two no-
tions of existence, the Quinean existence and the selective existence,
can be recast to be the two notions of commitment of a theory, the qua-
ntiﬁer commitment and the fundamental commitment: The former are
what a theory says exists, while the latter are what says is fundamen-
tal.19 This way of disambiguation embraces the single notion of exist-
ence and the double notion of commitment, and both of the two no-
tions of commitment are given metaphysical import, although the
latter is taken as much more important in metaphysical inquiry.
Now, from this neo-Aristotelian point of view, the sense of the onto-
logical innocence of mereology is renewed; it is usually construed
under Composition as Identity, to the e#ect that wholes and its parts
are (in some sense) identical.20 In this light, the ontological inno-
cence of mereology consists in that mereology is not committed to fur-
ther objects in addition to objects included in some domain given in
advance. However, given permissivism and the grounding structure
of reality, the ontological innocence of mereology consists in that mer-
eology is neutral about the question of which objects countenanced
are basic while keeping wholes and its parts numerically distinct.
We are allowed to freely refer to, or quantify over, the objects in-
cluded in the domain of mereology as far as it is not committed to
the question of what grounds what. Here we get a neo-Aristotelian
conception of the onotological innocence of mereology.
18 For a more detailed discussion about (No Overlap), see Scha#er (2010), pp.
3842.
19
We owe these terminologies to Scha#er (2008), although Scha#er dis-
cusses the problem of the ontological commitment of a theory in general,
in connection with truthmaker theory.
20 Lewis (1991).
Another Sense of the Ontological Innocence of Mereology
 84 

A Concluding Remark
We have been tried to present a favorable disambiguation of
Varzi’s proposal and to reﬁne the Minimalist View, in light of a neo-
Aristotelian
conception
of
metaphysics,
and
revealed
a
neo-
Aristotelian conception of the ontological innocence of mereology.
However, there remains a lot of important issues concerning the neo-
Aristotelian conception of metaphysics, especially ones concerning
the concept of grounding: Is there a distinctive form of dependence
marked by our use of “ground”? What is the logic of grounding and
what are the structural principles that govern grounding? How do
the notions of grounding, modality, and reduction interact? What is
the connection between grounding and explanation?21
Since the
“grounding” is one of the core concepts in the neo-Aristotelian meta-
physics, the clariﬁcation and the discusstion of these issues must be
given thorough elaborate consideration. They have to be done on an-
other occasion.
References
Aristotle (1984), The Complete Works of Aristotle: The Revised Oxford Transla-
tion, Vols 1 and 2, J. Barnes (ed.), Princeton University Press.
Bennett, K. (2011), “Construction Area (No Hard Hat Required)”, Philosophical
Studies 154: 79104.
Berto, F. and Carrara, M. (2009), “To Exist and To Count: a Note on the Mini-
malist View”, dialectica 63: 343356.
Correia, F. and Schnieder, B. (eds.) (forthcoming), Grounding and Explanation,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Frege, G. (1884), Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik: Eine logisch-mathematische
Untersuchungen u
¨ber den Begri# der Zahl, Breslau: W. Ko¨bner.
Lewis, D. (1986), On the Plurality of Worlds, Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1991), Parts of Classes, Oxford: Blackwell.
21
For some recent discussion about these issues, see for example Rosen
(2010), Bennett (2011), and Correia and Schnieder (forthcoming).
Philosophy No. 129
 85 

Rosen, G. (2010), “Metaphysical Dependence: Grounding and Reduction”, in B.
Hale and A. Ho#mann (eds.), Modality: Metaphysics, Logic, and Epistemol-
ogy, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scha#er, J. (2008), “Truthmaker Commitments”, Philosophical Studies 141: 7
19.
Scha#er, J. (2009), “On What Grounds What”, in D. Chalmers, D. Manley, and
R. Wasserman (eds.), Metametaphysics, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Scha#er, J. (2010), “Monism: The Priority of the Whole”, Philosophical Review
119: 3176.
Tahko, T. E. (ed.) (2012), Contemporary Aristotelian Metaphysics, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Van Inwagen, P. (1998), “Meta-ongology”, Erkenntnis 48: 233250.
Varzi, A. C. (2000), “Mereological Commitments”, Dialectica 54: 283305.
Another Sense of the Ontological Innocence of Mereology
 86 

