
Epistemology
‘Audi’s introduction is at once philosophically insightful and masterfully written –
even more so in its new edition. Guaranteed to fascinate the beginner while
retaining its exalted status with the experts.’ Claudio de Almeida, PUCRS, Brazil
‘My students like this book and have learned much from it, as I have ...
Epistemology – especially in its second edition – is simply the best textbook in
epistemology that I know of.’ Thomas Vinci, Dalhousie University, Canada
Praise for the first edition:
‘No less than one would expect from a first-rate epistemologist who is also a
master expositor; lucid, comprehensive, well-structured, and excellently informed
both by the tradition and by recent developments. A superb introduction.’
Ernest Sosa, Brown University
‘An excellent book. It is comprehensive in scope and very systematically organised.’
Philosophical Books
‘This is a massively impressive book, introducing the reader to virtually all areas
of epistemology. Robert Audi’s text is lucid and highly readable, while not
shirking the considerable complexities of the subject matter.’ Elizabeth Fricker,
University of Oxford
‘Easily among the best and most comprehensive introductions to epistemology.’
Noah Lemos, DePauw University
‘A state-of-the-art introduction to epistemology by one of the leading figures in
the field.’ William P. Alston, Syracuse University
Epistemology, or the theory of knowledge, is concerned with how we know what we
do, what justifies us in believing what we do, and what standards of evidence we
should use in seeking truths about the world and human experience. This compre-
hensive book introduces the concepts and theories central for understanding
knowledge. This revised edition builds on the topics covered in the widely
acclaimed first edition and includes new material on subjects such as virtue episte-
mology, social epistemology and feminist epistemology. The chapter on moral,
scientific and religious knowledge has also been expanded and revised. 
Robert Audi is the Charles J. Mach University Professor of Philosophy at the
University of Nebraska, Lincoln. He has published many books and articles in the
field and is Editor of the Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy (1995, 1999).

Routledge Contemporary Introductions 
to Philosophy
Series Editor:
Paul K. Moser
Loyola University of Chicago
This innovative, well-structured series is for students who have already done an
introductory course in philosophy. Each book introduces a core general subject
in contemporary philosophy and offers students an accessible but substantial
transition from introductory to higher-level college work in that subject. The
series is accessible to non-specialists and each book clearly motivates and
expounds the problems and positions introduced. An orientating chapter briefly
introduces its topic and reminds readers of any crucial material they need to
have retained from a typical introductory course. Considerable attention is
given to explaining the central philosophical problems of a subject and the main
competing solutions and arguments for those solutions. The primary aim is to
educate students in the main problems, positions and arguments of contempo-
rary philosophy rather than to convince students of a single position.
Epistemology
Second Edition
Robert Audi
Ethics
Harry Gensler
Metaphysics
Second Edition
Michael J. Loux
Philosophy of Art
Noël Carroll
Philosophy of Language
William G. Lycan
Philosopy of Mind
John Heil
Philosophy of Religion
Keith E.Yandell
Philosophy of Science
Alex Rosenberg
Social and Political Philosophy
John Christman

Epistemology
A contemporary introduction 
to the theory of knowledge  
Second edition
Robert Audi

First edition 1998
by Routledge
11 New Fetter Lane, London EC4P 4EE
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
29 West 35th Street, New York, NY 10001
Second edition 2003
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group
©2003 Robert Audi
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic,
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any
information storage or retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British
Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
A catalog record for this book has been requested
ISBN   0–415–28108–3 (HBK)
0–415–28109–1 (PBK)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s 
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-98707-1 Master e-book ISBN

To Malou


Contents
Preface to the first edition
ix
Preface to the second edition
xv
Introduction: a sketch of the sources and nature of 
belief, justification, and knowledge
1
Perception, belief, and justification
1
Justification as process, as status, and as property
2
Knowledge and justification
3
Memory, introspection, and self-consciousness
4
Reason and rational reflection
5
Testimony
5
Basic sources of belief, justification, and knowledge
6
Three kinds of grounds of belief
7
Fallibility and skepticism
8
Overview
9
Part One
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth
13
1 Perception
15
The elements and basic kinds of perception
16
Seeing and believing
21
Some commonsense views of perception
30
The theory of appearing
32
Sense-datum theories of perception
33
Adverbial theories of perception
`38
Adverbial and sense-datum theories of sensory experience
41
Phenomenalism
43
Perception and the senses
47
2 Memory
55
Memory and the past
57
The causal basis of memory beliefs
58
Theories of memory
60
Remembering, recalling, and imaging
66
Remembering, imaging, and recognition
67

The epistemological centrality of memory
69
3 Consciousness
75
Two basic kinds of mental properties
76
Introspection and inward vision
78
Some theories of introspective consciousness
79
Consciousness and privileged access
83
Introspective consciousness as a source of justification and knowledge
88
4 Reason
93
Self-evident truths of reason
94
The classical view of the truths of reason
96
The empiricist view of the truths of reason
105
The conventionalist view of the truths of reason
110
Some difficulties and strengths of the classical view
114
Reason, experience, and a priori justification
119
5 Testimony
131
The nature of testimony: formal and informal
132
The psychology of testimony
133
The epistemology of testimony
137
The indispensability of testimonial grounds
142
Part Two
The structure and growth of justification 
and knowledge
153
6 Inference and the extension of knowledge
155
The process, content, and structure of inference
157
Inference and the growth of knowledge
161
Source conditions and transmission conditions for inferential 
knowledge and justification
164
The inferential transmission of justification and knowledge
167
Memorial preservation of inferential justification and inferential 
knowledge
177
7 The architecture of knowledge
183
Inferential chains and the structure of belief
184
The epistemic regress problem
188
The epistemic regress argument
192
Foundationalism and coherentism
193
viii
Contents

Holistic coherentism
195
The nature of coherence
197
Coherence, reason, and experience
200
Coherence and second-order justification
206
Moderate foundationalism
209
Part Three
The nature and scope of justification and 
knowledge
217
8 The analysis of knowledge
219
Knowledge and justified true belief
220
Knowledge as the right kind of justified true belief
222
Naturalistic accounts of the concept of knowledge
227
Problems for reliability theories
230
Knowledge and justification
235
Internalism and externalism in epistemology
238
Justification and truth
245
Concluding proposals
250
9 Scientific, moral, and religious knowledge
257
Scientific knowledge
258
Moral knowledge
267
Religious knowledge
278
10 Skepticism
291
The possibility of pervasive error
292
Skepticism generalized
295
The egocentric predicament
300
Fallibility
301
Uncertainty
304
Deducibility, evidential transmission, and induction
310
The authority of knowledge and the cogency of its grounds
313
Refutation and rebuttal
317
Prospects for a positive defense of common sense
318
Skepticism and common sense
323
11 Conclusion
329
Short annotated bibliography of books in epistemology
339
Index
347
Contents
ix

Preface to the first edition
This book is a wide-ranging introduction to epistemology, conceived as the
theory of knowledge and justification. It presupposes no special background
in philosophy and is meant to be fully understandable to any generally
educated, careful reader, but for students it is most appropriately studied
after completing at least one more general course in philosophy.
The main focus is the body of concepts, theories, and problems central in
understanding knowledge and justification. Historically, justification –
sometimes under such names as ‘reason to believe,’ ‘evidence,’ and ‘warrant’
– has been as important in epistemology as knowledge itself. This is surely
so at present. In many parts of the book, justification and knowledge are
discussed separately; but they are also interconnected at many points. The
book is not historically organized, but it does discuss selected major posi-
tions in the history of philosophy, particularly some of those that have
greatly influenced human thought. Moreover, even where major philoso-
phers are not mentioned, I try to take their views into account. One of my
primary aims is to facilitate the reading of those philosophers, especially
their epistemological writings. It would take a very long book to discuss
representative contemporary epistemologists or, in any detail, even a few
historically important epistemologies, but a shorter one can provide many of
the tools needed to understand them. Providing such tools is one of my
main purposes.
The use of this book in the study of philosophy is not limited to courses
or investigations in epistemology. Epistemological problems and theories are
often interconnected with problems and theories in the philosophy of mind;
nor are these two fields of philosophy easily separated (a point that may
hold, if to a lesser extent, for any two central philosophical fields). There is,
then, much discussion of the topics in the philosophy of mind that are
crucial for epistemology, for instance the phenomenology of perception, the
nature of belief, the role of imagery in memory and introspection, the
variety of mental properties figuring in self-knowledge, the nature of infer-
ence, and the structure of a person’s system of beliefs.
Parts of the book might serve as collateral reading not only in pursuing
the philosophy of mind but also in the study of a number of philosophers
often discussed in philosophy courses, especially Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas,
Descartes, Leibniz, Locke, Berkeley, Hume, Kant, and Mill. The book might
facilitate the study of moral philosophy, such as Kantian and utilitarian
ethics, both discussed in some detail in Chapter 9; and it bears directly on
topics in the epistemology of religion, some of which are also discussed in
Chapter 9.

The writing is intended to be as simple and concrete as possible for a
philosophically serious introduction that does not seek simplicity at the cost
of falsehood. The territory surveyed, however, is extensive and rich. This
means that the book cannot be traversed quickly without missing landmarks
or failing to get a view of the larger segments and their place in the whole.
Any one chapter can perhaps be read at a sitting, but experience has shown
that even the shortest chapter covers too many concepts and positions for
most readers to assimilate in a single reading and far more than most
instructors can cover in any detail in a single session.
To aid concentration on the main points, and to keep the book from
becoming more complicated, notes are limited, though parenthetical refer-
ences are given in some places and there is also a short selected bibliography
with thumbnail annotations. By and large, the notes are not needed for full
comprehension and are intended mainly for professional philosophers and
serious students. There are also some subsections that most readers can prob-
ably scan, or even skip, without significant loss in comprehending the main
points of the relevant chapter. Technical terms are explained briefly when
introduced and are avoided when they can be. Most of the major terms
central in epistemology are defined or explicated, and boldfaced numbers in
the index indicate main definitional passages. But some are indispensable:
they are not mere words, but tools; and some of these terms express concepts
valuable outside epistemology and even outside philosophy. The index, by
its boldfaced page references to definitions, obviates a glossary.
It should also be stressed that this book is mainly concerned to introduce
the field of epistemology rather than the literature of epistemology – an
important but less basic task. It will, however, help non-professional readers
prepare for a critical study of that literature, contemporary as well as clas-
sical. For that reason, too, some special vocabulary is introduced and a
number of the notes refer to contemporary works.
The sequence of topics is designed to introduce the field in a natural
progression: from the genesis of justification and knowledge (Part One), to
their development and structure (Part Two), and thence to questions about
what they are and how far they extend (Part Three). Even apart from its
place in this ordering, each chapter addresses a major epistemological topic,
and any subset of the chapters can be studied in any order provided some
appropriate effort is made to supply the (generally few) essential points for
which a later chapter depends on an earlier one.
For the most part this book does epistemology rather than talk about it or,
especially, about its literature. In keeping with that focus, the ordering of
chapters is intended to encourage understanding epistemology before
discussing it in large-scale terms, for instance before considering what sort
of epistemological theory, say normativist or naturalistic, best accounts for
knowledge. My strategy is, in part, to discuss myriad cases of justification
and knowledge before approaching analyses of what they are, or the skeptical
case against our having them.
Preface to the first edition
xi

In one way, this approach differs markedly from that of many epistemo-
logical books. I leave the assessment of skepticism for the last chapter; early
passages indicate that skeptical problems must be faced and, in some cases,
how they are connected with the subject at hand or are otherwise important.
Unlike some philosophers, I do not think extensive discussion of skepticism
is the best way to motivate the study of epistemology. Granted, historically
skepticism has been a major motivating force; but it is not the only one, and
epistemological concepts hold independent interest. Moreover, in assessing
skepticism I use many concepts and points developed in earlier chapters; to
treat it early in the book, I would have to delay assessing it.
There is also a certain risk in posing skeptical problems at or near the
outset: non-professional readers may tend to be distracted, even in
discussing conceptual questions concerning, say, what knowledge is, by a
desire to deal with skeptical arguments purporting to show that there is
none. There may be no best or wholly neutral way to treat skepticism, but I
believe my approach to it can be adapted to varying degrees of skeptical
inclination. An instructor who prefers to begin with skepticism can do so by
taking care to explain some of the ideas introduced earlier in the book. The
first few sections of Chapter 10, largely meant to introduce and motivate
skepticism, presuppose far less of the earlier chapters than the later, evalua-
tive discussion; and most of the chapter is understandable on the basis of
Part One, which is probably easier reading than Part Two.
My exposition of problems and positions is meant to be as nearly unbi-
ased as I can make it, and where controversial interpretations are
unavoidable I try to present them tentatively. In many places, however, I
offer my own view. Given the scope of the book, I cannot provide a highly
detailed explanation of each major position discussed, or argue at length for
my own views. I make no pretense of treating anything conclusively. But in
some cases – as with skepticism – I do not want to leave the reader
wondering where I stand, or perhaps doubting that there is any solution to
the problem at hand. I thus propose some tentative positions for critical
discussion.
Acknowledgments in the first edition
This book has profited from my reading of many articles and books by
contemporary philosophers, and from many discussions I have had with
them and, of course, with my students. I cannot mention all of these
philosophers, and I am sure that my debt to those I will name – as well as to
some I do not, such as some whose journal papers I have read but have not
picked up again, and some I have heard at conferences – is incalculable.
Over many years, I have benefited greatly from discussions with William
Alston, as well as from reading his works; and I thank him for detailed crit-
ical comments on parts of the manuscript. Reading of books or articles (or
both) by Roderick Chisholm, Richard Foley, Paul Moser, Alvin Plantinga,
xii
Preface to the first edition

Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, and Ernest Sosa, and a number of discussions
with them, have also substantially helped me over many years. My
colleagues at the University of Nebraska, especially Albert Casullo, and
several of my students have also helped me at many points. I have learned
greatly from the participants in the National Endowment for the
Humanities seminars and institutes I have directed. I also benefited much
from the papers given to the seminars or institutes by (among others)
Laurence BonJour, Fred Dretske, Alvin Goldman, Gilbert Harman, Keith
Lehrer, Ruth Marcus, and John Perry, with all of whom I have been fruit-
fully discussing epistemological topics on one occasion or another for many
years.
In relation to some of the main problems treated in the book, I have
learned immensely from many other philosophers, including Frederick
Adams, Robert Almeder, David Armstrong, John A. Barker, Richard
Brandt, Panayot Butchvarov, Carol Caraway, the late Hector-Neri Castañeda,
Wayne Davis, Michael DePaul, Susan Feagin, Richard Feldman, Roderick
Firth, Richard Fumerton, Carl Ginet, Alan Goldman, Risto Hilpinen,
Jaegwon Kim, John King-Farlow, Peter Klein, Hilary Kornblith,
Christopher Kulp, Jonathan Kvanvig, Brian McLaughlin, George S. Pappas,
John Pollock, Lawrence Powers, W.V. Quine, William Rowe, Bruce Russell,
Frederick Schmitt, Thomas Senor, Robert Shope, Donna Summerfield,
Marshall Swain, William Throop, Raimo Tuomela, James Van Cleve,
Thomas Vinci, Jonathan Vogel, and Nicholas Wolterstorff. In most cases I
have not only read some epistemological work of theirs, but discussed one or
another epistemological problem with them in detail.
Other philosophers whose comments or works have helped me with some
part of the book include Anthony Brueckner, Stewart Cohen, Earl Conee,
Dan Crawford, Jonathan Dancy, Timothy Day, Robert Fogelin, Elizabeth
Fricker, Bernard Gert, Heather Gert, David Henderson, Terence Horgan,
Dale Jacquette, Eric Kraemer, Noah Lemos, Kevin Possin, Dana Radcliffe,
Nicholas Rescher, Stefan Sencerz, James Taylor, Paul Tidman, Mark
Timmons, William Tolhurst, Mark Webb, Douglas Weber, Ümit Yalçin,
and Patrick Yarnell.
I owe special thanks to the philosophers who generously commented in
detail on all or most of some version of the manuscript: John Greco, Louis
Pojman, and Matthias Steup. Their numerous remarks led to many improve-
ments. Detailed helpful comments were also provided by readers for the
Press, including Nicholas Everett, Frank Jackson, and Noah Lemos. All of
the philosophers who commented on an earlier draft not only helped me
eliminate errors, but also gave me constructive suggestions and critical
remarks that evoked both clarification and other improvements. I am also
grateful for permission to reuse much material that appears here in revised
form from my Belief, Justification, and Knowledge (Wadsworth Publishing Co.,
1988) and I thank the editor of American Philosophical Quarterly for allowing
me to use material from ‘The Place of Testimony in the Fabric of Knowledge
Preface to the first edition
xiii

and Justification’ (vol. 34, 1997). For advice and help at several stages I
thank Paul Moser, Editor of the series in which this book appears, and
Adrian Driscoll and the staff at Routledge in London, including Moira
Taylor and Sarah Hall, and Dennis Hodgson.
Robert Audi
February, 1997
xiv
Preface to the first edition

Preface to the second edition
This preface will presuppose the Preface to the first edition and can therefore
be brief. Many improvements have been made in this edition, but they do
not make the previous preface inapplicable, and reading it should help
anyone considering a study of even part of the book.
My main concern in revising has been to produce a book that is both
philosophically stronger and easier to read. Doing this has required adding
new substantive material, making minor changes throughout, adding or
extending many examples, making various refinements and corrections, and
bringing in new references, notes, and bibliography.
Instructors who have used the volume in their teaching will find that the
content and organization are highly similar and that a transition from the
first edition to this one is easy. Students and people reading for general
interest should find the book easier to understand. The emphasis is still on
enhancing comprehension of the field of epistemology – its concepts, prob-
lems, and methods – rather than on presenting its literature. But, perhaps
even more than in the first edition, the book is generally in close contact
with both classical and contemporary literature. In this edition there are also
more many references to pertinent books and papers, particularly those
published in recent years.
This edition includes more extensive discussion of virtue epistemology and
social epistemology, with feminist epistemology figuring significantly (though not
exclusively) in relation to social epistemology. The connection of episte-
mology with philosophy of mind and language also receives more emphasis
in this edition. So does contextualism and the related theory of “relevant alter-
natives.”
I am happy to say that Routledge has published a fine and wide-ranging
new collection of readings to accompany this book: Michael Huemer’s
Epistemology: Contemporary Readings (2002). Huemer has chosen classical and
contemporary book sections and papers that go well with every chapter in
the present book; his larger sections match mine; and he offers helpful intro-
ductions to each section and study questions on each chapter. This edition of
my book is certainly self-contained, but its integration with Huemer’s
supporting collection (for which I have done a long narrative introduction to
help both instructors and students) is close, and the two together provide
enough substance and diversity to facilitate numerous different kinds of
epistemology courses.

Acknowledgments
Fortunately, I have continued to benefit from reading of or discussions with
most of the people acknowledged above, in the first edition. But since that
writing I have come to know the work of many other writers in the field and
profited from teaching many more students. I am bound to omit some people
I should thank, but I want to acknowledge here a number of people not
mentioned above: John Broome, Tyler Burge, David Chalmers, Roger Crisp,
Mario DeCaro, Keith DeRose, Rosaria Egidi, Guido Frongia, Douglas
Geivett, Joshua Gert, Peter Graham, D.W. Hamlyn, Brad Hooker,
Christopher Hookway, Michael Huemer, Jonathan Jacobs, Ralph Kennedy,
Simo Knuutila, Matthias Lutz-Bachmann, Hugh McCann, John McDowell,
Tito Megri, Cyrille Michon, Nicholas Nathan, Ilkka Niiniluoto, Tom O’ Neil,
Derek Parfit, James Pryor, Jlenia Quartarone, Joseph Raz, John Searle, John
Skorupski, David Sosa, William Talbot, Wilhelm Vossenkuhl, Fritz Warfield
and Paul Weirich. In addition, I have continued to benefit from regular
exchanges of ideas or papers (usually both) with many philosophers, including
William Alston, Laurence BonJour, Panayot Butchvarov, Elizabeth Fricker,
Alvin Goldman, John Greco, Gilbert Harman, Jaegwon Kim, Christopher
Kulp, Jonathan Kvanvig, Bruce Russell, Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, Ernest
Sosa, Matthias Steup, Eleonore Stump, Richard Swinburne, Raimo Tuomela,
Nicholas Wolterstorff, and Linda Zagzebski.
Readers of earlier versions of this edition deserve special thanks, not only
the anonymous readers for the Press but also Michael Pace, Bruce Russell,
Mark Owen Webb, and especially Claudio de Almeida, who provided
numerous expert comments and criticism (more, indeed, than I could fully
take into account in the available time and space). Special thanks are also
due the Editors at Routledge, particularly Tony Bruce, Simon Bailey, and
Siobhan Pattinson, whose ideas and support have been immensely helpful.
xvi
Preface to the second edition

Introduction
A sketch of the sources and nature of belief,
justification, and knowledge
Before me is a grassy green field. It has a line of trees at its far edge and is
punctuated by a spruce on its left side and a maple on its right. Birds are
singing. A warm breeze brings the smell of roses from a nearby trellis. I reach
for a tall glass of iced tea, still cold to the touch and flavored by fresh mint. I
am alert, the air is clear, the scene is quiet. My perceptions are quite distinct.
It is altogether natural to think that from perceptions like these, we come
to know a great deal – enough to guide us through many of the typical
activities of daily life. But we sometimes make mistakes about what we
perceive, just as we sometimes misremember what we have done, or infer
false conclusions from what we believe. We may then think we know some-
thing when in fact we do not, as where we make errors through inattention
or are deceived by vivid dreams. And is it not possible that vivid dreams
occur more often than we think?
Perception, belief, and justification
Philosophers have given a great deal of thought to these matters, especially
to the nature of perceiving and to what we can know – or may mistakenly
think we know – through perception or through other sources of knowledge,
such as memory as a storehouse of what we have learned in the past,
consciousness as revealing our inner lives, reflection as a way to acquire
knowledge of abstract matters, and testimony as a source of knowledge orig-
inally acquired by other people. In approaching these topics in epistemology
– the theory of knowledge and justification – it is appropriate to begin with
perception. In my opening description, what I detailed was what I perceived:
what I saw, heard, smelled, felt, and tasted. In describing my experience, I
also expressed some of what I believed: that there was a green field before me,
that there were bird songs, that there was a smell of roses, that my glass was
cold to the touch, and that the tea tasted of mint.
It seems altogether natural to believe these things given the kind of expe-
rience I had, and I think I justifiedly believed them. I believed them, not in
the way I would if I accepted the result of wishful thinking or of my making
a sheer guess, but with justification. By that I mean above all that the beliefs
I refer to were justified. This a good thing; justified beliefs are of a kind it is
reasonable to hold.

Justification as process, as status, and as property
Being justified, in the sense illustrated by my beliefs about what is clearly
before me, need not be the result of a process. Being justified is not, for
instance, like being purified, which requires a process of purification. My
beliefs about what is before me are not justified because they have been
through a process of being justified, as where one defends a controversial belief
by giving reasons for it. They have not; the question whether they are justi-
fied has not even come up. No one has challenged them or even asked why I
hold them. They are justified – in the sense that they have the property of
being justified (justifiedness) – because there is something about them in virtue
of which they are natural and appropriate for me as a normal rational person.
We can see what justifiedness is by starting with a contrast. Unlike
believing something one might arrive at through a wild guess in charades,
our justified perceptual beliefs are justified for us simply through their
arising in the normal way they have from our clear perceptions. Roughly,
they are justified in the sense that they are quite in order from the point of
view of the standards for what we may reasonably believe. That, in turn, is
roughly what we may believe without being subject to certain kinds of criti-
cism, say as intellectually lax, sloppy, overhasty, or the like. Justified beliefs
are also a kind that we tend to expect to be true. Imagine someone’s saying
‘His belief is justified, but I don’t expect it to turn out to be true’. Without
special explanation, this would be to take away with one hand something
given by the other.
In saying that I justifiedly believe there is a green field before me, I am
implying something else, something quite different, though it sounds very
similar, namely, that I am justified in believing there is a green field before me.
To see the difference, notice that we can be justified in believing something
without believing it at all, quite as we can be justified in doing something,
such as criticizing a person who has failed us, without doing it. Similarly, I
might be justified in believing that I can do a certain difficult task, yet fail
to believe this until someone helps me overcome my hesitation. I may then
see that I should have believed it.
Being justified in believing something is having justification for
believing it. This, in turn, is roughly a matter of having ground for
believing it (and we sometimes speak of having a justification or a reason).
Just as we can have reason to do things we do not do, we can have reason to
believe things we do not believe. You can have reason to go to the library
and forget to, and I can have reason to believe someone is making excuses for
me but – because I have no inkling that I need any – fail to believe this. Our
justification for believing is basic raw material for actual justified belief; and
justified belief is commonly good raw material for knowledge.
The two justificational notions are intimately related: if one justifiedly
believes something, one is also justified in believing it (hence has justifica-
tion for believing it). But converse does not hold: not everything we are
justified in believing is something we do believe. When I look at a lawn, I
2
Introduction

am justified in believing it has more than ten blades of grass per square foot,
but I would not normally have any belief about the number of blades per
square foot. We have more justificational raw material than we need or use.
There are many things we are justified in believing which we do not actu-
ally believe, such as the proposition that normal people do not drink 100
liters of water a day. Let us call the first kind of justification – justifiedly
believing – belief justification, since it belongs to actual beliefs (it is also
called doxastic justification, from the Greek doxa, translatable as ‘belief’).
Call the second kind – being justified in believing – situational justification,
since it is based on the informational situation one is in. It is a status one has
in virtue of that situation. This situation includes not just what one
perceives, but also one’s background beliefs and knowledge, such as the
belief that people drink at most a few liters of water a day.
In any ordinary situation in waking life, we have both a lot of general
information stored in memory and much specific information presented in
our perceptions. We do not need all this information, and our situational
justification for believing something is often unaccompanied by our having
an actual justified belief that it is so. We have situational justification for
vastly more justified beliefs than we actually have. Here nature is very
generous. In forming beliefs, we can often draw on far more information
than we normally need to use.
Without situational justification, such as the kind that comes from seeing
a green field, there would be no belief justification. I would not, for instance,
justifiedly believe that there is a green field before me. We cannot have a
justified belief without being in a position to have it. Without situational
justification, we are not in such a position. Without belief justification, on
the other hand, we would have no beliefs of a kind we want and need, those
with a positive status – being justified – that makes them appropriate for us
as rational creatures and warrants us in expecting them to be true. Belief
justification, then, is more than the situational kind it presupposes.
Belief justification occurs when there is a certain kind of connection
between what yields situational justification and the justified belief that
benefits from it. Belief justification occurs when a belief is grounded in, and
thus in a way supported by, something that gives one situational justifica-
tion for that belief, such as seeing a field of green. Seeing is of course
perceiving; and perceiving is a basic source of knowledge – perhaps our most
elemental source, at least in childhood. This is largely why perception is so
large a topic in epistemology and such a natural subject with which to begin
thinking about knowledge and justification.
Knowledge and justification
Knowledge would not be possible without belief justification (or something
very much like it). If I did not have the kind of justified belief I do – if, for
instance, I were wearing dark sunglasses and could not tell the difference
Introduction
3

between a green field and a smoothly ploughed one that is really an earthen
brown – then on the basis of what I now see, I would not know that there is
a green field before me.
To see how knowledge fits into the picture so far sketched, consider two
points. First, justified belief is important for knowledge because at least the
typical things we know we also justifiedly believe on the same basis that
grounds our knowing them. If I know someone is making excuses for me,
say by the way she explains my lateness, I do not just believe this but justi-
fiedly believe it. Second, much of what we justifiedly believe we also know.
Surely I could have maintained, regarding each of the things I have said I
justifiedly believed through perception, that I also knew it. And do I not
know these things – say that there is a lawn before me and a car on the road
beyond it – on the same basis on which I justifiedly believe them, for
instance on the basis of what I see and hear? This is very plausible.
As closely associated as knowledge and justified belief are, there is a
major difference. If I know that something is so, then it is true, whereas I can
justifiedly believe something that is false. If a normally reliable friend
tricked me into believing something false, say that he has lost my car keys, I
could justifiedly believe that he has lost them even if it were not true. We
may not assume, then, that everything we learn about justified belief applies
to knowledge. We should look at both concepts independently to discern
their differences, and we should consider them together to appreciate their
similarities.
I said that I saw the green field and that my belief that there was a green
field before me arose from my seeing it. If the belief arose, under normal
conditions, from my seeing the field (so that I believed it is there simply
because I saw it there), then the belief was true, justified, and constituted
knowledge. Again, however, we can alter the example to bring out how
knowledge and justification may diverge: the belief might remain justified
even if, unbeknownst to me, the grass had been burned up since I last saw it,
and there were now a perfect artificial replica of it spread out there in grassy-
looking strips of cloth (perhaps put there to hide the ugly charred ground).
Then, although I might think I know the green field is there, I would only
falsely believe I know this. Such a bizarre happening is, to be sure, extremely
improbable. Still, a justified but false belief could arise in this way.
Memory, introspection, and self-consciousness
As I look at the field before me, I remember carefully cutting a poison ivy vine
from the trunk of the spruce. Surely, my memory belief that I cut off this
vine is justified. I think I also know that I did this. But here I confess to
being less confident than I am of the justification of my perceptual belief,
held in the radiant sunlight, that there is (now) a green field before me.
As our memories become less vivid, we tend to be correspondingly less
sure that our beliefs apparently based on them are justified. Still, I distinctly
4
Introduction

recall cutting the vine. The stem was furry; it was bonded to the tree trunk;
the cutting was difficult and slightly wounded the tree. By contrast, I have
no belief about whether I did this in the summer or in the fall. I entertain the
proposition that it was in the summer; I consider whether it is true; but,
having too little to go on, all I can do is suspend judgment on it. I thus neither
believe it nor disbelieve it, that is believe it is false. My stance is one of non-
belief. I need not try to force myself to resolve the question and judge the
proposition either way. I might need to resolve it if something important
turned on when I did the pruning; but here suspended judgment, with the
resulting non-belief, is not uncomfortable.
As I think about cutting the vine, it occurs to me that in recalling that
task, I am vividly imaging it. Here, I seem to be looking into my own
consciousness, thus engaging in a kind of introspection. I can still see, in my
mind’s eye, the furry vine clinging to the tree, the ax, the sappy wound
along the trunk where the vine was severed from it. I have turned my atten-
tion inward to my own imagery. The object of my attention, my own
imaging of the scene, seems internal and is present to my consciousness,
though its object is external and long gone by. But clearly, I believe that I
am imaging the vine; and there is no apparent reason to doubt that I justi-
fiedly believe this and know that it is so. This is a simple case of
self-knowledge.
Reason and rational reflection
I now look back at the field and am struck by how perfectly rectangular it
looks. If it is perfectly rectangular, then the angles at its corners are all
ninety degrees. Here I believe something different in kind from the things
cited so far: that if the field is rectangular, then its angles are all ninety
degrees. This is a geometrical belief. I do not hold it on the same sort of
basis I have for the other things I have mentioned believing. My conception
of geometry as applied to ideal figures seems to be the crucial basis. On that
basis, my belief seems to be firmly justified and to constitute knowledge.
I can see that the spruce is taller than the maple, and that the maple is
taller than the crab apple tree on the lawn closer by. I now realize that the
spruce is taller than the crab apple. My underlying belief here is that if one
thing is taller than a second and the second taller than a third, then the first
is taller than the third. And, perhaps even more than the geometrical belief,
this abstract belief seems to arise simply from my grasp of the concepts in
question, above all the concept of one thing’s being taller than another.
Testimony
The season has been dry, and it now occurs to me that the roses will not
flourish without a good deal of water. But this I do not believe simply on
the basis of perception. One source from which I learned it is repeated
Introduction
5

observation. But there is another possible source: although much knowledge
comes from our own experience in observing its subject matter, much
knowledge also originates with testimony from others. I have received testi-
mony as to where on the stem to trim off dead roses. If I did not learn about
watering roses from my own experience, I could have learned the same
things from testimony, just as I learned from a friend how far back to clip off
dead roses.
To be sure, I need perception, such as hearing what I am told, to acquire
knowledge on the basis of testimony, just as I needed perception to learn
these things about roses on my own; and I need memory to retain them
whatever their source. They are, however, generalizations and hence do not
arise from perception in the direct and apparently simple way my visual
beliefs do, or emerge from memory in the way my beliefs about past events I
witnessed do. But do I not still justifiedly believe that the roses will not
flourish without a lot of water? The commonsense view is that I both justi-
fiedly believe and know this about roses, and that I can know it either
through generalizing – a kind of reasoning – from my own observations or
from testimony, or both.
Basic sources of belief, justification, and knowledge
The examples just given represent what philosophers have called perceptual,
memorial, introspective, a priori, inductive, and testimony-based beliefs.
The first four kinds are basic in epistemology. My belief that the glass is
cold to the touch is perceptual, being based as it is on tactual perception. My
belief that I cut the poison ivy vine from the spruce is memorial, since it is
stored in my memory and held because of that fact. My belief that I am
imagining a green field is called introspective because it is conceived as based
on “looking within” (the etymological meaning of ‘introspection’); but it
could also be called simply self-directed: no “peering” within or special
concentration is required. My belief that if the spruce is taller than the
maple and the maple is taller than the crab apple, then the spruce is taller
than the crab apple is called a priori (meaning, roughly, based on what is
“prior” to observational experience) because it apparently arises not from
experience of how things actually behave but simply in an intuitive way. It
arises from a rational grasp of the key concepts one needs in order to have
the belief, such as the concept of one thing’s being taller than another.
By contrast, my belief that the roses will not grow well without abundant
water does not arise directly from one of the four basic sources just
mentioned: perception, memory, introspection, and a priori intuition
(reason, in one sense of the term). It is called inductive because it is formed
(and held) on the basis of a generalization from something more basic, in this
case what I learned from perceptual experiences with roses. Those experi-
ences, apparently through my beliefs recording them, “lead into” the
generalization about roses, to follow the etymological meaning of ‘induc-
6
Introduction

tion’. For instance, I remember numerous cases in which roses have faded
when dry, and I eventually concluded that they need abundant water.
Each of the four basic kinds of belief I have described – perceptual,
memorial, introspective, and a priori – is grounded in the source from which
it arises. The nature of this grounding is explored in detail in the first four
chapters, concerning perception, memory, consciousness, and reason. These
sources are commonly taken to provide raw materials for inductive general-
izations, as where observations and memories about roses yield a basis for
generalizing about their needs.
Any of the beliefs we considered could instead have been grounded in
testimony (the topic of Chapter 5), had I formed the beliefs on the basis of
being given the same information by someone I trust. That person, however,
would presumably have acquired it through one of these other sources (or
ultimately through someone’s having done so), and this makes testimony a
different kind of source. This is why testimony is not a basic source of
knowledge. It is still, however, incalculably important for human knowledge
and unlimitedly broad. It can, for instance, justify a much wider range of
propositions than perception can. We can credibly tell others virtually
anything we know.
Three kinds of grounds of belief
Our examples illustrate not only grounding of beliefs in a source, such as
perception or introspection, but also ways in which they are grounded in
these sources. There are at least three important kinds of grounding of
beliefs – ways they are grounded. These are causal, justificational, and epis-
temic grounding. All three are important for many major epistemological
questions.
Consider my belief that there is a green field before me. It is causally
grounded in my experience of seeing the field because that experience
produces or underlies the belief. It is justificationally grounded in that experi-
ence because the experience, or at least some element in the experience,
justifies my belief. And it is epistemically grounded in the experience because
in virtue of that experience my belief constitutes knowledge that there is a
green field before me (‘epistemic’ comes from the Greek episteme meaning,
roughly, ‘knowledge’). These three kinds of grounding very often coincide
(though Chapter 8 will describe important cases in which knowledge and
justification do not). I will thus often speak simply of a belief as grounded in
a source, such as visual experience, when what grounds the belief does so in
all three ways.
Causal, justificational, and epistemic grounding each go with a very
common kind of question about belief. Let me illustrate.
Causal grounding goes with ‘Why do you believe that?’ An answer to
this, asked about my belief that there is a green field before me, would be
that I see it. This is the normal kind of reply; but as far as mere causal
Introduction
7

production of beliefs goes, the answer could be brain manipulation or mere
hypnotic suggestion. If, however, mere brain manipulation or hypnotic
suggestion produces a belief, then the causal ground of the belief would not
justify it. If, under hypnosis, I am told that someone is angry with me and as
a result I believe this, the belief is not thereby justified.
Justificational grounding goes with such questions as ‘What is your justi-
fication for believing that?’ or ‘What justifies you in thinking that?’ or
‘Why should I accept that?’ (‘Why do you believe that?’ can be asked with
this same justification-seeking force.) Again, I might answer that I see it. I
might, however, have a justification (the situational kind) that, unlike
seeing the truth in question, is not a cause of my believing it.
The justification I cite could also be the testimony of a credible good
friend. It could be this even where, by a short circuit, brain manipulation
does the causal work of producing my belief and leaves the testimony like a
board that slides just beneath a roof beam but bears none of its weight. This
shows that an element that provides only situational justification for a belief
may play no role in producing or supporting the belief, even if this element,
like the auxiliary unstressed beam, stands ready to play a supporting role if
the belief is put under pressure by a challenge.
Epistemic grounding goes with ‘How do you know that?’ Once again,
saying that I see it will commonly answer the question. Here, however, it
may be that a correct answer must cite something that is also a causal ground
for the belief (a matter discussed in Chapter 8). Certainly a justificational
ground need not be a ground of knowledge. One can justifiedly believe a
proposition without knowing it.
Clearly, the same sorts of points can be made for the other five cases I
have described: memorial beliefs are grounded in memory, self-directed
(“introspective”) beliefs in consciousness, inductively based beliefs in further,
premise-beliefs that rest on experience, a priori beliefs in reason, and testi-
monially based beliefs in testimony.
Fallibility and skepticism
Even well-grounded beliefs can be mistaken. We can be deceived by our
senses. We are fallible in perceptual matters as in our memories, in our
reasoning, and in other respects. One might now wonder, as skeptics do,
whether we know even that it is improbable that we are now deceived by our
senses. One might also wonder whether we are even justified in our belief
that no such mistake has occurred as we take ourselves to see green grass.
Suppose that I am in a public park in an unfamiliar city. I do not know or
even justifiedly believe that artificial grass has not been put in place of the
natural grass I take to be before me. (I may have heard of such substitutions
and may have no good reason to believe this has not happened, though I do
not consider the matter.) In that case, am I justified in believing that there is
a green field before me?
8
Introduction

Suppose that I am not justified in believing there is a green field before
me. If not, how can I be justified in believing what appear to be far less
obvious truths, such as that my home is secure against the elements, my car
safe to drive, and my food free of poison? And how can I know the many
things I need to know in life, such as that my family and friends are trust-
worthy, that I can control my behavior and can thus partly determine my
future, and that the world we live in at least approximates the structured
reality portrayed by common sense and science?
These are difficult and important questions. They indicate how insecure
and disordered human life would be if we could not suppose that we possess
justified beliefs and knowledge. We stake our lives every day on what we
take ourselves to know. It would be unsettling to revise this stance and
retreat to the view that at best we have justification to believe. But if we had
to give up even this moderate view and to conclude, say, that what we
believe is not even justified, we would face a crisis. Much later, in discussing
skepticism, I will explore such questions at some length. Until then I will
assume the commonsense view that beliefs with a basis like that of my belief
that there is a green field before me are not only justified but also constitute
knowledge.
Once we proceed on this commonsense assumption, it is easy to see that
there are many different kinds of circumstances in which beliefs arise in
such a way that they are apparently both justified and constitute knowl-
edge. In considering this variety of circumstances yielding justification
and knowledge, we can explore how beliefs are related to perception,
memory, consciousness, reason, and testimony (the topics of Chapters 1 to
5, respectively).
Overview
There is a great deal more to be said about each of these sources of belief,
justification, and knowledge and about what it is for them to ground what
they do ground. The first five chapters will explore, and in some cases
compare, the most basic sources of belief, justification, and knowledge.
In the light of what those chapters show, we can discuss the development
and structure of knowledge and justification (the task of Part Two). Much of
what we believe does not come directly from perception, memory, introspec-
tion, or reflection of the kind appropriate to knowledge of such truths as
those of elementary mathematics or those turning on our grasp of simple
relations, for instance the proposition that if the spruce is taller than the
maple, then the maple is shorter than the spruce, which we know by virtue
of understanding the relations expressed by ‘taller’ and ‘shorter’. We must
explore how inference and other developmental processes expand our body of
knowledge and justified beliefs (this is the task of Chapter 6). Moreover,
once we think of a person as having the resulting complex body of knowl-
edge and justified belief, we encounter the questions of what structure that
Introduction
9

large and intricate body has, and of how its structure is related to the
amount and kind of knowledge and justification it contains. As we shall see
in Chapter 7, these structural questions take us into an area where episte-
mology and the philosophy of mind overlap.
On the basis of what Part One shows about sources of knowledge and
justification and what Part Two shows about their development and struc-
ture, we can fruitfully proceed to consider more explicitly what knowledge
and justification are and what kinds of things can be known (the task of Part
Three). It is true that if we had no sense at all of what they are, we could not
find the kinds of examples of them needed to explore their sources and their
development and structure. If we do not have before us a wide range of
examples of justification and knowledge, we lack the data appropriate to
seeking a philosophically illuminating analysis of them. It is in the light of
the examples and conclusions of Parts One and Two that Chapter 8 clarifies
the concept of knowledge, and, to a lesser extent, that of justification, in
some detail.
With a conception of knowledge laid out, it is possible to explore the
apparent extent of knowledge and justification in three major territories –
the scientific, the ethical, and the religious. In exploring these domains,
Chapter 9 applies some of the epistemological results of the earlier chapters.
In doing this I continue to take the commonsense view that we have a great
deal of knowledge and justification. If, however, skepticism is in the end a
sound position, then the commonsense assessment that the first nine chap-
ters make regarding the extent of knowledge and justification must be
revised. Whether it is sound is the focus of Chapter 10.
Along the way in all ten chapters, there is something to be learned about
concepts that are important both in and outside epistemology, especially
those of belief, causation, certainty, coherence, explanation, fallibility, illu-
sion, inference, intellectual virtue, introspection, intuition, meaning,
memory, reasoning, relativity, reliability, truth. There are also numerous
epistemological positions to be considered, sometimes in connection with
historically influential philosophers. But the main focus will be on the major
concepts and problems in the field, not on any particular philosopher or
epistemological text. This may well be the best way to facilitate studying
philosophers and epistemological texts; it will certainly simplify an already
complex task.
Knowledge and justification are not only interesting in their own right as
central epistemological topics; they also represent positive values in the life
of every reasonable person. For all of us, there is much we want to know. We
also care whether we are justified in what we believe – and whether others
are justified in what they tell us. The study of epistemology can help in
making this quest, even if it often does so indirectly. It can certainly help us
assess how well we have done in the quest when we look back on our results.
Well-developed concepts of knowledge and justification can play the role
of ideals in human life: positively, we can try to achieve knowledge and
10
Introduction

justification in relation to subjects that concern us; negatively, we can refrain
from forming beliefs where we think we lack justification, and we can avoid
claiming knowledge where we think we can at best hypothesize. If we learn
enough about knowledge and justification conceived philosophically, we can
better search for them in matters that concern us and can better avoid the
dangerous pitfalls that come from confusing mere impressions with justifi-
cation or mere opinion with knowledge. This is not to say that
epistemological knowledge can be guaranteed to yield new knowledge in
everyday concerns. But the more we know about the constitution of knowl-
edge and justification, the better we can build them through our own
inquiries, and the less easily we will fall into the pervasive temptation to
take an imitation to be the real thing.
Introduction
11


Part One
Sources of justification,
knowledge, and truth


1
Perception
• The elements and basic kinds of perception
Perceptual belief
Perception, conception, and belief
• Seeing and believing
Perception as a source of potential beliefs
The perceptual hierarchy
Seeing and seeing as
Seeing as and perceptual grounds of justification
Seeing as a ground of perceptual knowledge
• Some commonsense views of perception
Perception as a causal relation and its four main elements
Illusion and hallucination
• The theory of appearing
• Sense-datum theories of perception
The argument from hallucination
Sense-datum theory as an indirect, representative realism
Appraisal of the sense-datum approach
• Adverbial theories of perception
• Adverbial and sense-datum theories of sensory 
experience
• Phenomenalism
A sense-datum version of phenomenalism
Adverbial phenomenalism
Appraisal of phenomenalism
• Perception and the senses
Indirect seeing and delayed perception
Sight and light
Vision and the eyes

1
Perception
As I look at the green field before me, I might believe not only that there is
a green field there but also that I see one. And I do see one. I visually
perceive it, just as I tactually perceive the glass in my hand. Both beliefs, the
belief that there is a green field there, and the self-referential belief that I see
one, are grounded, causally, justificationally, and epistemically, in my visual
experience. They are produced by that experience, justified by it, and consti-
tute knowledge in virtue of it.
The same sort of thing holds for the other senses. Consider touch. I not
only believe, through touch (as well as sight) that there is a glass here, I also
feel its coldness. Both beliefs – that there is a glass here and that it is cold –
are grounded in my tactual experience. I could believe any of these things on
the basis of someone’s testimony. My beliefs would then have a quite
different status. For instance, my belief that there is a glass here would not
be perceptual, but only a belief about a perceptible, that is, a perceivable object,
the kind of thing that can be seen, touched, heard, smelled, or tasted.
Through testimony we have beliefs about perceptibles we have never seen or
experienced in any way.
My concern here is not with the hodgepodge of beliefs that are simply
about perceptibles, but with perception and perceptual beliefs. Perceptual
beliefs are not simply beliefs about perceptibles; they are beliefs grounded in percep-
tion. We classify beliefs as perceptual by the nature of their roots, not by the
color of their foliage. Those roots may be visual, auditory, and so forth for
each perceptual mode. But vision and visual beliefs are an excellent basis for
discussing perception and perceptual beliefs, and I will concentrate on them
and mention the other senses only occasionally.
Perception is a source of knowledge and justification mainly by virtue of
yielding beliefs that constitute knowledge or are justified. But we cannot hope
to understand perceptual knowledge and justification simply by exploring
those beliefs by themselves. We must also understand what perception is
and how it yields beliefs. We can then begin to understand how it yields
knowledge and justification or – in some cases – fails to yield them.
The elements and basic kinds of perception
There are apparently at least four elements in perception, all evident in our
example: (1) the perceiver, me; (2) the object, the field I see; (3) the sensory
experience, say my visual experience of colors and shapes; and (4) the rela-
tion between the object and the subject, commonly taken to be a causal

relation by which the object produces the sensory experience in the
perceiver. To see the field is apparently to have a certain sensory experience
as a result of the impact of the field on our vision.
Some accounts of perception add to the four items on this list; others
subtract from it. To understand perception we must consider both kinds of
account and how these elements are to be conceived in relation to one
another. But first, it is essential to explore examples of perception.
There are three quite different ways to speak of perception. Each corre-
sponds to a different way of perceptually responding to experience. We often
speak simply of what people perceive, for instance see. We also speak of what
they perceive the object to be, and we commonly talk of facts they know
through perception, such as that the grass is long. Visual perception most
readily illustrates this, so let us start there.
I see, hence perceive, the green field. Second, speaking in a less familiar
way, I see it to be rectangular. Thus, I might say that I know it looks different
from that hill, but from the air one can see it to be perfectly rectangular.
Third, I see that it is rectangular. Perception is common to all three cases.
Seeing, which is a paradigm case of perception, is central in all of them.
The first case is one of simple perception, perception taken by itself (here,
visual perception). I see the field, and this experience is the visual parallel of
hearing a bird (an auditory experience), touching a glass (a tactual experi-
ence), smelling roses (an olfactory experience), and tasting mint (a gustatory
experience). If the first case is simply perceiving of some object, the second is a
case of perceiving to be, since it is seeing something to be so: I do not just see
the field, as when I drive by at high speed and do not even realize what sort
of green is in my peripheral vision; I see the field to be rectangular. The
third case is one of perceiving that; it is seeing that a particular thing is so,
namely, that the field is rectangular.
These cases represent three kinds, or modes, of perception. Perception of
the simplest kind (or in the simplest mode), such as seeing, occurs in all
three; but, especially because of their relation to knowledge and justified
belief, they are significantly different. We can best understand these three
kinds (or modes) of perception if we first focus on their relation to belief.
Perceptual belief
The latter two cases – perceiving that, and perceiving to be – are different
from the first – perceiving of – in implying corresponding kinds of beliefs:
seeing that the field is rectangular implies believing that it is, and seeing it
to be green implies believing it to be green. If we consider how both kinds
of beliefs – beliefs that something is so and beliefs of (or about) something –
are related to perception, we can begin to understand how perception occurs
in all three cases, the simple and the more complex. In my second and third
examples of perception, visual perception issues in beliefs that are then
grounded in it and can thereby constitute visual knowledge.1
Perception
17

In the first example, that of simple perception, my just seeing the field
provides a basis for both kinds of beliefs. It does this even if, because my
mind is entirely occupied with what I am hearing on the radio as I glance
over the field, no belief about the field actually arises in me. The visual
experience is in this instance like a foundation that has nothing built on it
but is ready to support a structure. If, for example, someone were to ask if
the field has shrubbery, then given the lilacs prominent in one place, I
might immediately form the belief that it does and reply affirmatively. This
belief is visually grounded; it comes from my seeing the field though it did
not initially come with it. When beliefs do arise from visual experiences, as
they usually do, what kinds of beliefs are they, and how are they specifically
perceptual?
Many of my beliefs arising through perception correspond to perception
that, say to seeing that something is so. I believe that the field is lighter
green toward its borders where it gets less sunlight, that it is rectangular in
shape, and that it has many ruts. But I may also have various beliefs about it
that are of the second kind: they correspond to perception to be, for instance
to seeing something to be a certain color. Thus, I believe the field to be
green, to be rectangular, and so on. The difference between these two kinds
of belief is significant. As we shall shortly see, it corresponds first of all to
two distinct ways in which we are related to the objects we perceive and,
second, to two different ways of assessing the truth of what, on the basis of
our perceptions, we believe.
The first kind of belief just described is the kind people usually think of
when they consider beliefs: it is propositional, since it is a case of believing a
proposition – say, that the field is rectangular. The belief is thus true or false
depending on whether the proposition that the field is rectangular is true or
false. In holding the belief, moreover, in some way I think of what I see as a
field which is rectangular: in believing that the field is rectangular, I conceive
what I take to be rectangular as a field.
The second kind of belief might be called objectual: it is a belief
regarding an object, say the field, with which the belief is actually
connected. This is an object of (or about) which I believe something, say
that it is rectangular. If I believe the field to be rectangular, there really is
such an object, and I have a certain relation to it. A special feature of this
relation is that there is no particular proposition I must believe about the
field. To see that there is no particular proposition, notice that in holding
this objectual belief I need not think of what I see as a field, for I might
mistakenly take it to be (for instance) a lawn or a huge canvas or a
grasslike artificial turf, yet still believe it to be rectangular. I might think
of it just in terms of what I believe it to be and not in terms of what else it
actually is.
Thus, although there is some property I must take the field to have –
corresponding to what I believe it to be – there is no other particular way I
must think of it. With objectual belief, then, there is no particular notion
18
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

that must yield the subject of any proposition I believe about the object: I
do not have to believe that the field is green, that the grass is, or any such
thing. Perception leaves us vast latitude as to what we learn from it. People
differ markedly in the beliefs they form about the very same things they
each see.2
The concept of objectual perception, then, is very permissive about what
one believes about the object perceived. This is one reason why it leaves so
much space for imagination and learning – a space often filled by the forma-
tion of propositional beliefs, each capturing a different aspect of what is
perceived, say that the field is richly green, that it is windblown, and that it
ends at a line of trees.
A different example may bring these points out better. After seeing a
distant flare and coming to believe, of something blurry and far away, that it
glowed, one might ask, ‘What on Earth was it that glowed?’ Before we can
believe the proposition that a flare glowed, we may have to think about
where we are, the movement and fading of the glow, and so forth. The objec-
tual belief is a guide by which we may arrive at propositional beliefs and
propositional knowledge.
Perception, conception, and belief
The same kind of example can be used to illustrate how belief depends on
our conceptual resources in a way that perception does not. Suppose I had
grown up in the desert and somehow failed to acquire the concept of a
field. I could certainly still see the green field, and from a purely visual
point of view it might look the same to me as it does now. I could also still
believe, regarding the field I see – and perhaps conceive as sand artificially
covered with something green – that it is rectangular. But I could not
believe that the field is rectangular. This propositional belief as it were
portrays what I see as a field in a way that requires my having a concept of
one.
There is a connection here between thought and language (or at least
conceptualization). If I believe (think) that the field is rectangular, or even
simply have the thought that it is, I should be able to say that it is and to
know what I am talking about. But if I had no concept of a field, then in
saying this I would not know what I am talking about.3 Similarly, a two-
year-old, say, Susie, who has no notion of a tachistoscope, can, upon seeing
one and hearing its fan, believe it to be making noise; but she cannot
believe specifically that the tachistoscope is making noise. Her proposi-
tional belief, if any, would be, say, that the thing on the table is making
noise. Since this is true, what she believes is true and she may know this
truth, but she need not know much about the object this truth concerns:
in a way, she does not know just what it is she has this true belief about.
The general lesson here is important. A basic mode of learning about
objects is to find out truths about them in this elementary way: we get a
Perception
19

handle on them through perception; we form objectual (and other) beliefs
about them from different perspectives; and (often) we finally reach an
adequate concept of what they are. From the properties I believe the flare in
the distance to have, I finally figure out that it is a flare that has them. This
suggests that there is at least one respect in which our knowledge of (percep-
tible) properties is more basic than our knowledge of the substances that have
them; but whether that is so is a question I cannot pursue here.
Unlike propositional beliefs, objectual beliefs have a significant degree of
indefiniteness in virtue of which it can be misleading simply to call them
true or false; they are accurate or inaccurate, depending on whether what one
believes of the object (such as that it is rectangular) is or is not true of it.
Recall Susie. If she attributes noise-making to the tachistoscope, she truly
believes, of it, that it is making noise. She is, then, right about it. But this
holds even if she has no specific concept of what it is that is making the
noise. If we say unqualifiedly that her belief about it is true, we invite the
question ‘What belief?’ and the expectation that the answer will specify a
particular proposition, say that the tachistoscope is making noise. But it
need not, and we might be unable to find any proposition that she does
believe about it. She can be right about something without knowing or even
having any conception of what kind of thing it is that she is right about.
Knowledge is often partial in this way. Still, once we get the kind of epis-
temic handle on something that objectual belief can provide, we can usually
use that to learn more about it.4 Suppose I see a dog’s tail projecting from
under a bed and do not recognize it as such. If I believe (and know) it to be a
slender furry thing, I have a place to start in finding out just what else it is.
I will, moreover, be disposed to form such beliefs as that there is a slender
furry thing before me. I will also have justification for them; but I need not
form them, particularly if my attention quickly turns elsewhere.
Corresponding to the two kinds of beliefs I have described are two ways
of talking about perception. I see that the field is rectangular. This is (visual)
propositional perception: perceiving that. I also see it to be rectangular. This is
(visual) objectual perception: perceiving to be. The same distinction apparently
applies to hearing and touch. Perhaps, for example, I can hear that a piano is
out of tune by hearing its sour notes, as opposed to hearing the tuner say it
needs tuning. As for taste and smell, we speak as if they yielded only simple
perception: we talk of smelling mint in the iced tea, but not of smelling that
it is minty or smelling it to be minty. Such talk is, however, intelligible on
the model of seeing that something is so or seeing it to be so. We may thus
take the distinction between perceiving that and perceiving to be to apply in
principle to all the senses.
It is useful to think of perceptual beliefs as embedded in the corresponding
propositional or objectual perception, roughly in the sense that they are
integrally tied to perceiving of that kind and derive their character and
perhaps their authority from their perceptual grounding. Thus, my belief
that the field is rectangular is embedded in my seeing that it is, and Susie’s
20
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

believing the tachistoscope to be making noise is embedded in her hearing it
to be doing so. In each case, without the belief, there would not be percep-
tion of that kind. These kinds of perception might therefore be called
cognitive, since belief is a cognitive attitude: roughly the kind that has a
proposition (something true or false) as its object.5 The object of the belief
that the field is rectangular is the specific proposition that the field is rect-
angular, which is true or false; and the object of believing the tachistoscope
to be making noise is some proposition or other to the effect that it is
making noise, which (though left unspecified by the ascription of the belief)
is also true or false. In this respect, belief is unlike attitudes of approval or
admiration or indignation, which are evaluated as, say, appropriate or inap-
propriate rather than true or false.6
Both propositional and objectual beliefs are grounded in simple percep-
tion. If I do not see a thing at all, I do not see that it has any particular
property and I do not see it to be anything. Depending on whether percep-
tual beliefs are propositional or objectual, they may differ in the kind of
knowledge they give us. Propositional perception yields knowledge both of
what it is that we perceive and of some property of it, for instance of the field’s
being rectangular. Objectual perception may, in special cases, give us knowl-
edge only of a property of what we perceive, say that it is green, when we do
not know what it is or have any belief as to what it is.
In objectual perception, we are, to be sure, in a good position to come to
know something or other about the object, say, that it is a green expanse.
Objectual perception may thus give us information not only about objects of
which we have a definite conception, such as home furnishings, but also
about utterly unfamiliar, unconceptualized objects or about objects of which
we have only a very general conception, say ‘that noisy thing’. This is impor-
tant. We could not learn as readily from perception if it gave us information
only about objects we conceive in the specific ways in which we conceive
most of the familiar things we see, hear, touch, taste, and smell.7
Seeing and believing
Both propositional and objectual perceptual beliefs are quite commonly
grounded in perception in a way that apparently connects us with the real,
outside world and assures their truth. For instance, my visual belief that the
field is rectangular is so grounded in my seeing the field that I veridically
(truly) see it is rectangular; my tactually believing the glass to be cold is so
grounded in my feeling it that I veridically feel it to be cold.
Admittedly, I might visually (or tactually) believe that something is rect-
angular under conditions poor for judging it, as where I view a straight stick
half submerged in water (it would look bent whether it is or not). My visu-
ally grounded belief might then be mistaken. But such a mistaken belief is
not embedded in propositional perception that the stick is bent – that propo-
sition is false and hence is not something one sees is so (or to be so). The
Perception
21

belief is merely produced by some element in the simple perception of the
stick: I see the stick in the water, and the operation of reflected light causes
me to have the illusion of a bent stick. I thus do not see that the stick is
bent: my genuine perception is of it, but not of its curvature. Seeing that
curvature or seeing that the stick is bent would entail that it is bent, which
is false. If the stick is not bent, I cannot see that it is.
As this suggests, there is something special about both perceiving that
and perceiving to be. They are veridical experiences, i.e., they imply truth.
Specifically, if I see that the field is rectangular, or even just see it to be rect-
angular, then it truly is rectangular. Thus, when I simply see the
rectangularity of the field, if I acquire the corresponding embedded percep-
tual beliefs – if I believe that it is rectangular when I see that it is, or believe
it to be rectangular when I see it to be – then I am correct in so believing.
Perceiving that and perceiving to be, then, imply (truly) believing some-
thing about the object perceived – and so are factive, as it is sometimes put.
Does simple perception, perception of something, which is required for
either of these more complex kinds of perception, also imply true belief?
Very commonly, simple perception does imply truly believing something
about the object perceived. If I hear a car go by, I commonly believe a car is
passing. But could I not hear it, but be so occupied with my reading that I
form no belief about it? Let us explore this.
Perception as a source of potential beliefs
As is suggested by the case of perception overshadowed by preoccupation
with reading, there is reason to doubt that simple perceiving must produce
any belief at all. But it is not only when there is an overshadowing that
simple perception need not produce beliefs. It normally does not produce
beliefs even of what would be readily believed if the question arose. Suppose I
am looking appreciatively at a beautiful rug. Must I believe that it is not
producing yellow smoke, plain though this fact is? I think not; there seems
to be a natural economy of nature – perhaps explainable on an evolutionary
basis – that prevents our minds being cluttered with the innumerable beliefs
we would have if we formed one for each fact we can see to be the case.
This line of thought may seem to fly in the face of the adage that seeing
is believing. But properly understood, that may apply just to propositional
or objectual seeing. In those cases, perception plainly does entail beliefs.
Seeing that golfball-size hail is falling is believing it.8 This fact, however, is
not only perceptible; it is striking.
In any event, could I see the field and believe nothing regarding it? Must
I not see it to be something or other, say, green? And if so, would I not
believe, of it, something that is true of it, even if only that it is a green object
some distance away? Consider a different example.
Imagine that we are talking excitedly and a bird flies quickly across my
path. Could I see it, yet form no beliefs about it? There may be no clearly
22
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

correct answer. For one thing, while there is much we can confidently say
about seeing and believing, ‘seeing’ and ‘believing’ are, like most philosoph-
ically interesting terms, not precise. They have an element of vagueness. No
standard dictionary definition or authoritative statement can be expected
either to tell us precisely what they mean or, especially, to settle every ques-
tion about when they do and do not apply.9 Still, we should be wary of
concluding that vagueness makes any significant philosophical question
unanswerable. How, then, should we answer the question whether seeing
entails believing?
A negative response might be supported as follows. Suppose I merely see
the bird but pay no attention to it because I am utterly intent on what we are
discussing. Why must I form any belief about the bird? Granted, if someone
later asks if I saw a blue bird, I may assent, thereby indicating a belief that
the bird was blue. But this belief is not perceptual: it is about a perceptible
and indeed has visual content, but it is not grounded in seeing or any other
mode of perception. Moreover, it may have been formed only when I recalled
my visual experience of the bird. Recalling that experience in such a context
may produce a belief about the thing I saw even if my original experience of
the thing did not. For plainly a recollected sensory experience can produce
beliefs about the object that caused it, especially when I have reason to
provide information about that object. Perhaps one notices something in
one’s recollected image of the bird, an image merely recorded in the original
experience, but one formed no belief about the bird. Granted, perception
must produce a sensory experience, such as an image, and granted such an
image – and even a recollection of it – is raw material for beliefs; it does not
follow that perception must produce beliefs.
It might be objected that genuinely seeing an object must produce
beliefs, even if we are not conscious of its doing so. How else can perception
guide our behavior, as it does where, on seeing a log in our path, we step
over it?
One answer is that not everything we see, including the bird that flies by as
I concentrate on something else, demands or even evokes a cognitive response:
one entailing belief-formation. If I am cataloguing local birds, the situation is
different. But where an unobtrusive object we see – as opposed to one
blocking our path – has no particular relation to what we are doing, perhaps
our visual impressions of it are simply a basis for forming beliefs about it
should the situation call for it, and it need not produce any belief if our
concerns and the direction of our attention give the object no significance.
Despite the complexity I am pointing to in the relation between seeing
and believing, clearly we may hold what is epistemologically most impor-
tant here. Suppose I can see a bird without believing anything about (or of)
it. Still, when I do see one, I can see it to be something or other, and my
perceptual circumstances are such that I might readily both come to believe
something about it and see that to be true of it. Imagine that someone
suddenly interrupts a conversation to say, ‘Look at that bird!’ If I see it, I am
Perception
23

in a position to form some belief about it, if only that it is swift, though I
need not actually form any belief about it, at least not one I am conscious of.
To see these points more concretely, imagine I am alone and see the bird
in the distance for just a second, mistakenly taking it to be a speck of ash. If
there is not too much color distortion, I may still both know and justifiedly
believe it to be dark. Granted, I would misdescribe it, and I might falsely
believe that it is a speck of ash. But I could still know something about it,
and I might point the bird out under the misleading but true description,
‘that dark thing out there’. The bird is that thing I point at; and I can see,
know, and justifiedly believe that there is a dark thing there.
My perception of the bird, then, gives me a ready basis for some knowl-
edge and justification, even if the perception occurs in a way that does not
cause me to believe, say, that there is a bird before me and so does not give
me actual knowledge of it. Seeing is virtual believing, or at least potential
believing. It is similar with the other senses, though some, such as smell, are
in general less richly informative.10
The perceptual hierarchy
Our discussion seems to show that simple perceiving need not produce
belief, and objectual perceiving need not always yield propositional
perceiving. Still, this third kind of perception is clearly not possible without
the first and, I think, the second as well. I certainly cannot see that the bird
is anything if I do not see it at all; and I must also see it in order to see it to
be something, say a speck of blue. Thus, simple perceiving is fundamental: it
is required for objectual and propositional perceiving, yet does not clearly
entail either. If, for instance, you do not perceive in the simple mode, say see
a blue speck, you do not perceive in the other two modes either, say see a
speck to be blue or see that it is blue. And since objectual perceiving seems
possible without propositional perceiving, but not conversely, the former
seems basic relative to the latter.
We have, then, a perceptual hierarchy: propositional perceiving depends
on objectual perceiving, which in turn depends on simple perceiving.
Simple perceiving is basic, and it commonly yields, even if it need not
always yield, objectual perceiving, which, in turn, commonly yields, even if
it need not always yield, propositional perceiving. Simple perceiving, such
as just seeing a green field, may apparently occur without either of the other
two kinds, but seeing something to be anything at all, such as rectangular,
requires seeing it; and seeing that it is something in particular, say, green,
requires both seeing it to be something and, of course, seeing it.
Thus, even if simple perception does not always produce at least one true
belief, it characteristically does put us in a position to form any number of
true beliefs. It gives us access to perceptual information, perhaps even records
that information in some sense, whether or not we register the information
conceptually by forming perceptual beliefs of either kind.
24
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

As this suggests, perception by its very nature is informational; it might
even be understood as equivalent to a kind – a sensory kind – of receipt of
information about the object perceived.11 The point here is that not all
perceptually given information is propositional or even conceptualized. This is
why we do not receive or store all of it in the contents of our beliefs. Some of
the information is imagistic. Indeed, if we think of all the senses as capable
of images or their non-visual counterparts for the other senses – of percepts, to
use a technical term for such elements in perceptual experience – it is in
these sensory impressions they give us that the bulk of perceptual informa-
tion apparently resides. Hence the idea that a picture is worth a thousand
words – which is not to deny that, for some purposes, some words are worth
a thousand pictures. A single report of smoke may avert a catastrophic fire; a
single promise may alter a million lives.
It is in part because perception is so richly informative that it normally
gives us not only imagistic information but also situational justification.
Even if I could be so lost in conversation that I do not form any belief about
the passing bird, I am, as I see it pass, normally justified in believing some-
thing about it, concerning its perceptible properties, for instance that it
glides.12 There may perhaps be nothing highly specific that I am justified in
believing about it, say that it is a cardinal or that it has a wing span of ten
inches, but if I really see it, as opposed to its merely causing in me a visual
impression too indistinct to qualify me as seeing it, then there is something
or other that I may justifiably believe about it.
When we have a clear perception of something, it is even easier to have
perceptual justification for believing a proposition about it without actually
believing it. Just by taking stock of the size and texture of the field in clear
view before me, I am justified in believing that it has more than 289 blades
of grass; but I do not ordinarily believe – or disbelieve – any such thing
about grassy fields I look at. It was only when I sought a philosophical
example about perception and belief, and then arbitrarily chose the proposi-
tion that the field has more that 289 blades of grass, that I came to believe
this proposition. Again, I was justified in believing the proposition before I
actually did believe it.
Seeing and seeing as
What is it that explains why seeing the bird or the field justifies us in
believing something about what we see, that is, gives us situational justifi-
cation for such a belief? And does the same thing explain why seeing
something enables us to know various facts about it? One possible answer is
that if we see something at all, say a bird, we see it as something, for
instance black or large or swift, and we are justified in believing it to be
what we see it as being. The idea is that all seeing and perhaps all perceiving
is aspectual perception of a kind that confers justification. We see things by
seeing their properties or aspects, for instance their colors or their front
Perception
25

sides, and we are justified in taking them to have the properties or aspects
we see them as having.
Let us not go too fast. Consider two points, one concerning the nature of
seeing as, the other its relation to justification.
First, might not the sort of distinction we have observed between situa-
tional and belief justification apply to seeing itself? Specifically, might not
my seeing the bird imply that I am only in a position to see it as something,
and not that I do see it as something? It is true that when we see something,
we see it by seeing some property or aspect of it; but it does not follow that
we see it as having this property or aspect. I might see a van Gogh painting
by its distinctive brush strokes, but not see it as having them because my
visual experience is dominated by the painting as a whole. Someone might
reply that if I see it by those strokes, I am disposed to believe it has them
and so must see it as having them; but this disposition implies at most a
capacity to see it as having them. There may, to be sure, be a sense in which
if we see something aright, for example see a van Gogh with recognition,
then we must see it as what we recognize it to be. Seeing as can also be a
matter of conceptualization – roughly, conceiving as. But these are both
different from the perceptual seeing as in question here. The distinction
between seeing as and seeing by remains.
Second, suppose that seeing the bird did imply (visually) seeing it as
something. Clearly, this need not be something one is justified in believing
it to be (and perhaps it need not be something one does believe it to be).
Charles might erroneously see a plainly black bird as blue, simply because
he so loves birds of blue color and so dislikes black birds that (as he himself
knows) his vision plays tricks on him when he is bird-watching. He might
then not be justified in believing that the bird is blue.
Assume for the sake of argument that seeing implies seeing as and that
typically, seeing as implies at least objectually believing something or other
about the thing seen. Still, seeing an object as having a certain property –
say, a stick in the water as bent – does not entail that it has the property.
Nor does it always give one (overall) situational justification for believing it
to have that property.
Seeing as and perceptual grounds of justification
Whether or not seeing always implies seeing as, it is clear that seeing some-
thing normally puts one in a position to form at least one justified belief
about it. Suppose I see the bird so briefly and distractedly that I do not see it
as anything in particular; still, my visual impression of it has some feature or
other by which I am justified in believing something of the bird, if only that
it is a moving thing. Even Charles would be justified in believing some-
thing like this. His tendency to see black birds as blue is irrelevant to his
perception of movement and does not affect his justification for believing
moving objects to be in motion.
26
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

Suppose, however, that for hours Charles had been hallucinating all
manner of unreal things, and he knows this. Then he might not be justified
in taking the bird he sees to be anything real, even though it is real. For as a
rational person in this position he should see that if his belief is true, it may
well be true only in the way a lucky guess is. Thus, the best conclusion here
– and I suggest that this is an important justification principle concerning
perception – is that normally, seeing an object gives one situational justifica-
tion for believing something or other about it.
More broadly, it is very plausible to hold that the evidence of the senses –
including above all the sensory experiences characteristic of perception –
normally provides justification for beliefs with content appropriate to that
evidence. If your experience is of a green expanse, you are justified in
believing there is something green before you; if it is of something cool in
your hand, you are justified in believing there is something cool in your
hand; and so on.
One might also say something slightly different, in a terminology that is
from some points of view preferable: seeing an object (always) gives one
prima facie justification for believing something or other about it, where
prima facie justification is roughly justification that prevails unless defeated,
for instance by such factors as a strong justification for believing something
to the contrary. If I see a green field, I have a justification for believing it to
be green, but I may not be justified, overall, in believing this if credible
friends give me compelling reason to believe that despite appearances the
field is entirely covered by blue grass, or that I am not seeing a field at all
but hallucinating one.13
If seeing is typical of perception in (normally) putting us in a position
to form at least one justified belief about the object seen, then perception
in general normally gives us at least situational justification. This is
roughly justification for holding a belief of the proposition for which we
have the justification. As our examples show, however, it does not follow
that every perceptual belief is justified. Far from it. Some perceptual
beliefs, like perceptual beliefs that are evidentially undermined by one’s
having formed similar beliefs based on hallucinations, are not. As with the
biased bird-watcher, belief can be grounded in perception under conditions
that prevent its being justified by that grounding.
Nevertheless, there is a simple principle of justification we can see to be
plausible despite all these complexities: normally, a visual belief that is consti-
tuted by seeing that something is so or by seeing it to be so is justified (and it is
always prima facie justified). If I see that a field is rectangular and, in virtue of
seeing that it is rectangular, believe that it is, then (normally) I justifiedly
believe that it is. Call this the visual justification principle, since it applies to cases
of belief based on seeing that what is believed is true (or seeing it to be true).
I say normally (and that the justification is prima facie) because even here
one’s justification can be defeated. Thus, Charles might see that a bird is blue
and believe on this basis that it is, yet realize that all morning he has been
Perception
27

seeing black birds as dark blue and thus mistaking the black ones for the
blue ones. Until he verifies his first impression, then, he does not justifiedly
believe that the bird is blue, even though it in fact is. (We could say that he
has some justification for believing this, yet better justification for not
believing it; but to simplify matters I am ignoring degrees of justification.)
He does indeed see a bird and may justifiedly believe that, but his belief
that the bird is black is not justified.
Suppose, on the other hand, that Charles has no idea that he has been
hallucinating. Then, even when he does hallucinate a blue bird, he may be
justified in believing that there is one before him. This suggests a related
principle of justification, one that applies to visual experience whether it is a
case of seeing or merely of visual hallucination: when, on the basis of an
apparently normal visual experience (such as the sort we have in seeing a
bird nearby), one believes something of the kind the experience seems to
show (for instance that the bird is blue), normally this belief is justified. Call
this the visual experience principle, since it applies to cases in which one has a
belief based on visual experience even if not an experience of actually seeing
(the veridical kind). The visual principle takes us from seeing (vision) to
justification; the visual experience principle takes us from visual experience
– conceived as apparent seeing – to justification.
Similar principles can be formulated for all of the other senses, though
the formulations will not be as natural. If, for example, you hear a note to be
flat and on that basis believe that it is flat, normally your belief is justified.
It is grounded in a veridical perception in which you have discriminated the
flatness you believe the note has. And suppose, by contrast, that in what
clearly seem to be everyday circumstances you have an utterly normal-
seeming auditory hallucination of a flat note. If that experience makes it
seem clear that you are hearing a flat note, then if you believe on the basis of
the experience that this is a flat note, normally your belief would be justi-
fied. You have no reason to suspect hallucination, and the justification of
your belief that the note is flat piggybacks, as it were, on the principle that
normally applies to veridical beliefs.14
Seeing as a ground of perceptual knowledge
Some of what holds for the justification of perceptual beliefs also applies to
perceptual knowledge. Seeing the green field, for instance, normally yields
(for someone who has the concept of a field) knowledge about the field as
well as justified belief about it. This suggests another visual principle, a
visual knowledge principle. It might be called an epistemic principle, since it
states a condition for the visual generation of knowledge: at least normally, if
we see that a thing (such as a field) has a property (say is rectangular), we
(visually) know that it has it. A parallel principle holds for objectual seeing:
at least normally, if I see something to have a property (say to be rectan-
gular), I know it to have the property.
28
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

There are, however, special circumstances that explain why these epis-
temic principles may have to be restricted to “normal” cases. It may be
possible to see that something is so, believe on that basis that it is, and yet
not know that it is. Charles’s case seems to show this. For if, in the kind of
circumstances he is in, he often takes a black bird to be blue, then even if he
sees that a certain blue bird is blue and, on that basis, believes it is blue, he
apparently does not know that it is.15 He might as well have been wrong,
one wants to say; he is just lucky that this time his belief is true and he was
not hallucinating. Since he has no reason to think he has been hallucinating,
and does not realize he has been, one cannot fault him for holding the belief
that the bird is blue or regard the belief as inappropriate to his situation.
Still, knowledge apparently needs better grounding than is provided by his
blameless good fortune. This kind of case has led some philosophers to
maintain that when we know that something is so, our being right is not
accidental.
There is an important difference here between knowledge and justifica-
tion. Take knowledge first. If Charles is making errors like this, then even if
he has no idea that he is and no reason to suspect he is, he does not know
that the bird he believes to be blue is blue. But even if he has no idea that he
is making errors, or any reason to suspect he is, he may still justifiedly
believe that the bird is blue. The main difference between knowledge and
justification here may be this: he can have a true belief which does not
constitute knowledge because there is something wrong for which he is in
no way criticizable (his errors might arise from a handicap which he has no
reason to suspect, such as sudden color blindness); but he cannot have a true
yet unjustified belief without being in some way criticizable. The standards
for knowledge, one might say, permit fewer unsuspected weaknesses in
discriminating the truth than those for justification, if the standards for
knowledge permit any at all.
This difference between knowledge and justification must be reflected in
the kinds of principles that indicate how justification, as opposed to knowl-
edge, is generated. Justification principles need not imply that the relevant
basis of a belief’s justification assures its truth; but since a false belief cannot
be knowledge, epistemic principles (knowledge principles) cannot capture
elements that generate knowledge unless they rule out factors that may
produce a false belief (or at least factors that have a significant chance of
producing one). A ground of knowledge must, in some way, suffice for the
truth of the proposition known; a ground of justification must, in some way,
count toward the truth of the proposition one is justified in believing, but
need not rule out its falsehood.
On the basis of what we see, hear, feel, smell, and taste, we have a great
many beliefs, propositional and objectual. We have seen no reason to
doubt that these perceptual beliefs are commonly justified or that, quite
often, they are true and constitute knowledge. But to see that perception
is a basis of justification and knowledge is to go only part way toward
Perception
29

understanding what perception, justification, and knowledge are. Here the
main question is what constitutes perception, philosophically speaking.
Until we have a good understanding of what it is, we cannot see in detail
how perception grounds belief, justification, and knowledge. These prob-
lems cannot be fully resolved in this book, but we can achieve partial
resolutions. I want to discuss (further) what perception is first and, later,
to illustrate in new ways how it grounds what it does. Let us start by
considering some of the major theories of the nature of perception. Again,
I concentrate on vision, and I want to discuss mainly simple perceiving,
the fundamental kind.
Some commonsense views of perception
One natural thing to say about what it is for us to see the green field is
appealingly brief. We simply see it, in an ordinary way: it is near and
squarely before us; we need no light to penetrate a haze or a telescope to
magnify our view. We simply see the field, and it is as it appears. This sort
of view, called naive realism, has been taken to represent untutored common
sense: it says roughly that perception is simply a matter of the senses telling
us about real things, and it presupposes that no philosophical account of
how they do this is needed.
The view is naive because it ignores problems of a kind to be described in
a moment; it is a form of realism because it takes the objects of perception to
be real things external to the perceiver, the sorts of things that are “out
there” to be seen whether anyone sees them or not.
A more thoughtful commonsense view retains the realism without the
naivety. It is quite commonsensical, for instance, to say that I see the field
because it is before my open eyes and stimulates my vision, thereby appearing
to me as a green, rectangular shape. Stimulating my vision is a causal rela-
tion: the field, by reflecting light, causes me to have the visual experience
that is part of my seeing that very field. Moreover, the field apparently must
cause my visual experience if I am to see it. Since the more thoughtful
commonsense view specifies that the object of perception must be a real
external thing, we might call it a perceptual realism. Most – but not all –
theories of perception incorporate this kind of realism.
To understand why perception must have a causal element, suppose I am
looking at the field and, without my noticing, someone instantaneously
drops a perfect picture of the field right in front of me. If the picture is
shaped and textured just right, my visual experience might not change.
What appears to me might look just as the field did. Yet I no longer see the
field. Instead, I see a picture of it. (I do see the field in the picture, but that
is secondary seeing and not the kind I am talking about.) The reason I do
not now see the field is roughly that it has no (causal) effect on my visual
experience.
30
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

Perception as a causal relation and its four main elements
Examples like this suggest that perception is a kind of causal relation between
whatever is perceived and its perceiver, wherein the object perceived
produces a sensory experience in the perceiver. This is a plausible,
commonsensical, and important point, though it does not tell us precisely
what perception is. I call any theory of perception which incorporates the
point a causal theory of perception. Most theories of perception are causal.
We can now better understand the four elements I have described as
among those crucial in perception: the perceiver, the object perceived, the
sensory experience in which the object appears to the perceiver, and the
causal relation between the object and the perceiver, by virtue of which the
object produces that experience. Thus, if you see the field, there is a
distinctive way, presumably through light transmission to your eyes, in
which the field produces in you the visual sensory experience of a green,
rectangular shape characteristic of your seeing it. If a picture of the field
produces an exactly similar visual experience in the same way, it is the
picture you see, not the field. Similarly, if you hear a piano piece, there is a
special way in which it causes you to have the auditory sensations of
chords and melody and harmony that go with it.
It is difficult, though fortunately not necessary for a general under-
standing of perception, to specify precisely what these causal paths from
the object to the perceiver are. Some of the details are the business of the
psychology and neurophysiology of perception. Others are determinable by
philosophical inquiry. Philosophical reflection shows us, for instance, that
not just any causal chain is the right sort for perception. Suppose the piano
sounds cause a special machine, created by a prankster, to produce in me
both temporary deafness and a faithful auditory hallucination of the piece.
Then I do not hear it, though my sensory experience, the auditory experi-
ence I live through in my own consciousness, is just what it would be if I
did hear it. Nor do I hear it if, though the sound waves reach my brain and
cause me to believe a piano is playing just the piece in question, I have no
auditory experience. Even such a highly informed inner silence is not
musical.
Illusion and hallucination
We can make progress by pursuing the question of why naive realism is
naive. Suppose there is a gray haze that makes the green field look gray. Or
suppose the cup I am holding appears, from a certain angle, as if its mouth
were an ellipse rather than a circle, or feels warm only because my hand is
cold. These are perceptual illusions. They illustrate that things are not always
as they seem. The cup’s mouth is neither elliptical nor warm.
Now imagine that the field burns up. I sorely miss its rich green and
the spruce and maple, and on waking from a slumber in my chair I have a
Perception
31

hallucination in which my visual experience is just as it would be if I were
seeing the field as it originally was. Here the grass I seem to see is not there
at all. The point is not that something I see is not as it seems (as in the case
of illusion) but that there seems to be something where there is nothing.
With illusion, as illustrated by a partly submerged stick’s looking bent,
experience distorts what is there and is perceived; with hallucination, it
appears that something is there when there is nothing there at all.
Illusions and hallucinations are possible for the other senses too. When
they occur, we do not just see (or hear, taste, smell, or touch) the object.
Either we do not see it as it is or (perhaps) do not see anything at all. Not
everything we perceive is as it appears to be, and naive realism does not
account for this point.
One way to deal with illusion and hallucination is to stress how they
show the need to distinguish appearance from reality. In a visual illusion,
one sees something, but it does not appear as it really is, say circular. In a
hallucination, if anything appears to one, it is in reality even less what it
appears to be than is the object of an illusion, or is not what it appears to
be at all: instead of a blue spruce tree’s appearing blue to me, for instance,
perhaps the conical section of space where it stood appears “bespruced.”
The theory of appearing
The sort of account of perception just sketched as an improvement over
naive realism has been called the theory of appearing: it says roughly that
perceiving an object, such as a book, is simply its appearing to one to have
one or more properties, such as being rectangular. Thus, one perceives it – in
this case, sees it – as rectangular. The theory can also provide the basis of an
account of the sort of experience we have in hallucination as opposed to
normal perception: that experience, too, the theory takes to be a case of
something’s appearing to one to have a set of properties; the object that
appears is simply a different kind: it is hallucinatory.16
The theory of appearing is initially plausible. For one thing, it incorpo-
rates much reflective common sense, for instance the view that if one sees
something, then it appears to one in some way, say as a red barn or at least as
a visually experienced rectangular patch. The theory says nothing, however,
about the need for a causal relation between the object and its perceiver. If,
consistently with its commonsense motivation, one stipulated that the
crucial relation of appearing to the perceiver to have a property – say, to be
rectangular – is or implies a causal relation, one would then have a different
theory (of a kind to be discussed shortly).
In addition to the question of how the theory can do justice to the causal
element in perception, it faces a problem in accounting for hallucinations in
which there is no object to appear to the person at all. I could, after all,
hallucinate a green field when I see nothing physical at all, say because it is
pitch dark or my eyes are closed. In such an empty hallucination – one that
32
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

occurs despite my perceiving nothing – what is it that appears green to me?
There is a plausible answer, but it is associated with a quite different theory
of perception. Let us explore that contrasting view.
Sense-datum theories of perception
Once we think seriously about illusion and hallucination, we begin to
question not only naive realism but also any kind of direct realism in the
theory of perception, any perceptual realism which, like the theory of
appearing, says that we see (or otherwise perceive) external objects
directly, rather than through seeing (or at least visually experiencing)
something else. After all, not only do light rays come between us and
what we see, there are also brain events crucial for seeing. Perhaps these
events or other intermediaries in perception produce or indicate an inte-
rior object, presumably a mental object that plays an intermediary role in
perception.
Hallucination illustrates most readily how such an intermediary might
figure in understanding perception. Imagine that you vividly hallucinate
the field just as it would be if it were before you. This seems quite
possible. If such a “faithful” hallucination occurs, your visual experience –
roughly, what you are aware of in your visual consciousness – is exactly
like the experience you have when you see the field. Does it not then seem
that the difference between ordinary seeing and visual hallucination is
simply in what causes the visual experience, rather than in what you
directly see? When I see the field, it causes my visual experience. When I
hallucinate it, something else (such as my deep desire to have it back)
causes my visual experience. But apparently what I directly see, that is, the
immediate object of my visual experience, is the same in both cases. This
point presumably explains why my visual experience – what occupies my
visual consciousness – is the same whether I am hallucinating the field or
really seeing it. If it were not the same, we could not say things like ‘It
was exactly as if I were seeing the tree in normal light’.
The argument from hallucination
We might develop these ideas by considering an argument from hallucina-
tion. It consists of two connected arguments. The first constituent
argument attempts to show a parallel between hallucination and ordinary
perception:
1
A perfectly faithful (visual) hallucination of a field is intrinsically indis-
tinguishable from an ordinary experience of seeing that field, that is, not
distinguishable from it just in itself as a visual experience, as opposed to
being distinguishable through verifying one’s visual impression by
touching the things around one.
Perception
33

Hence,
2
What is directly seen, the immediate object of one’s visual experience, is
the same sort of (non-physical) thing in a perfect hallucination of a field
as in an ordinary experience of seeing a field.
But – and we now come to the second constituent argument, which builds
on (2) as its first premise – clearly,
3
What is directly seen in a hallucination of a field is not a field (or any
other physical thing).
Indeed, no field is seen at all in a hallucinatory visual experience, so (3)
seems plainly true. Hence, putting (1) – (3) together, we may infer that
4
What is directly seen in an ordinary experience of seeing a field is not a
field.
The overall idea is that when we ordinarily see an everyday perceptible
object such as a field, we see it through seeing something else directly: some-
thing not seen by seeing anything else. What we see directly – call it a
sense-datum – might be an image. One may prefer (as some philosophers do)
to say that we do not see such things but are only visually acquainted with
them. To simplify, let us just bear this alternative in mind but use the more
natural term ‘see’.
Just what is directly seen when one sees a field, then, and how is the field
indirectly seen? Why not say that what is directly seen is a two-dimensional
object consisting of the same sorts of colors and shapes one sees in the hallu-
cinatory experience? After all, nothing, not even (physical) light, intervenes
between us and them. There is no “space” for intermediaries. Hence, no
intermediaries can misrepresent these special objects. These objects are
apparently internal to us: as traditionally conceived, they could exist even if
we were disembodied minds in an otherwise empty world. The only space
they need is in the mind. Yet we do see the field by seeing them; hence, we
see it indirectly.
The idea that experiencing sense-data is required for perception is nicely
expressed in Emily Dickinson’s poem ‘I Heard a Fly Buzz When I Died’. In
the final moment of her terminal experience,
There interposed a fly,
With blue, uncertain stumbling buzz,
Between the light and me;
And then the windows failed, and then
I could not see to see.
34
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

The external light from the window blocks her eyesight, but this leaves
inner seeing – portrayed here as a condition for ordinary seeing – still
possible. Until the end, she can see to see. It is sense-data that are conceived
as the direct objects of such inner sight.
A sense-datum theory is perfectly consistent with a causal theory of
perception: the field causes the colors and shapes to arise in my visual
consciousness in a way that fully accords with the view that perception is a
causal relation between something external and the perceiver. Perception is
simply a mediated, hence indirect, causal relation between external objects we
perceive and us: the object produces the mediating colors and shapes that
appear in our visual fields, and, through seeing them, we see it.
The theory I am describing is a version of a sense-datum theory of perception.
Such theories are so called because they account for perception by appeal to a
view of what is directly given in sense experience, hence is a datum (a given)
for such experience – the sort of thing one is visually aware of in halluci-
nating a field. This sense-datum thesis (unlike the phenomenalist
sense-datum view to be discussed shortly) is a realist view; but its realism,
by contrast with that of naive realism and the theory of appearing, is indi-
rect.17
Sense-datum theory as an indirect, representative realism
A sense-datum theory is a kind of representative realism because it conceives
perception as a relation in which sense-data represent perceived external
(hence real) objects to us. On some conceptions of sense-data, they are copies
of those objects: shape for shape, color for color, sound for sound. John Locke
held a view of this kind (and in 1689 published it in An Essay Concerning
Human Understanding, especially Books II and IV), though for him sense-
data are copies (‘resemblances’) only of the primary qualities of physical
things – solidity, extension (in space), shape, and mobility – not of their
secondary qualities, above all colors, sounds, smells, and tastes. (He took the
primary qualities to be objective and of the kind that concern physical
science; and he considered the secondary ones to be in a sense subjective, not
belonging to physical things but something like representational mental
elements that they cause in us. Color, then, disappears in the dark, though
the physical object causing us to see it is not changed by the absence of
light.) Our question is whether any sense-datum version of representation-
alism is sound, and we need not pursue the interesting question of how these
two kinds of qualities differ.
Sense-datum theories have had brilliant defenders down to the present
age. The theory has also had powerful opponents. To appreciate it better, let
us first consider how it takes perception to be indirect. Sense-datum theo-
rists might offer several reasons to explain why we do not ordinarily notice
the indirectness of perception (I speak generally here, not solely of Locke’s
version of the theory). Here are two important ones.
Perception
35

First, normally what we directly see, say, colors and shapes, roughly corre-
sponds to the physical objects we indirectly see by means of what we see
directly. It is only when there is an illusion or hallucination that we are
forced to notice a discrepancy between what we directly see and the object
commonly said to be seen, such as a book.
Second, the beliefs we form on the basis of perception are formed sponta-
neously, not through any process requiring us to consider sense-data. Above
all, we do not normally infer what we believe about external objects from
what we believe about the colors and shapes we directly see. This is why it is
easy to think we “just see” things, directly. Perceiving is not inferential, and
for that reason (perhaps among others) it is not epistemically indirect, in the
sense that knowledge of external objects or beliefs about them are based on
knowledge of sense-data, or beliefs about them. I know that the field is
green through having rectangular green sense-data, not through inference from
propositions about them.18
Perception is not, then, inferentially indirect. But, for sense-datum theo-
rists, it is nonetheless causally and objectually indirect. The perceived object
is presented to us via another object, though not by way of a premise. Let me
describe a bit differently how the sense-datum view conceives the indirect-
ness of perception.
Perception is causally indirect because perceived physical objects cause
sensory experience, say of colors and shapes, by causing the occurrence of
sense-data, with which we are directly (and presumably non-causally)
acquainted in perceptual experience. Perception is objectually indirect
because we perceive external things, such as fields, through our acquaintance
with other objects, namely, sense-data. Roughly, we perceive external things
through perceptual acquaintance with internal things.
By contrast, we normally do not use information about sense-data to
arrive at perceptual beliefs inferentially, say by an inference from my directly
seeing a grassy, green rectangular expanse to the conclusion that a green
field is before me. Ordinarily, when I look around I form beliefs about the
external environment and none at all about my sensory experience. That
experience causes my perceptual beliefs, but what they are about is the
external things I perceive. It is when the colors and shapes do not correspond
to the external object, as where a circle appears as an ellipse, that it seems we
can understand our experience only if we suppose that the direct objects of
sensory experience are internal and need not match their external, indirect
objects.
Appraisal of the sense-datum approach
Let us focus first of all on the argument from hallucination, whose conclu-
sion suggests that what is directly seen in visual perception of external
objects is a set of sense-data. Suppose I do have a hallucination that is intrin-
sically just like the normal experience of seeing a field. Does it follow that
36
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

what is directly seen in the hallucination is the same sort of thing as what is
directly seen in the normal experience? At least two problems confront the
sense-datum theory here.
First, why must anything be seen at all in a hallucination? Imagine that
you see me hallucinate the burned-up field. I might get up, still half asleep,
and cry out, ‘It’s regrown!,’ pointing to the area. You might conclude that I
think I see the field again. My initial reaction to realizing I had hallucinated
the field might be that, hallucination or no, I saw it. But I might just as
easily slump back in my chair and mumble that I wish I had seen it.
A compromise view would be that I saw the hallucinated grass in my
mind’s eye. But suppose I did see it in my mind’s eye, and again suppose that
the hallucination is intrinsically just like the ordinary seeing. Does it follow
that what I directly see in the ordinary experience is the same as what I see
in the hallucination, namely, something in my mind’s eye? It does not. The
notion of seeing in one’s mind’s eye is metaphorical, and such seeing need
not imply that there is any real thing seen, in or outside the mind. However
vividly I may, in my mind’s eye, see myself standing atop a giant pyramid in
Toronto, there is no pyramid there, nor need there be any pyramidal object
in my mind.
There is a second reason for resisting the conclusion that something must
be directly seen in hallucinations. Recall that my seeing a green field is
apparently a causal relation between a sensory experience in me and the field
that produces the experience. If this view is correct, why should the possi-
bility that a hallucination can mimic my seeing the field tell us anything
about what is directly seen (or is an object of visual acquaintance) when one
sees that field? It is not as if we had to assume that only an experienced object
can produce the relevant sensory experience, and must then conclude that it
is an internal perceptual object, since there is no other candidate. Many
things can have more than one cause, and the sense-datum theorist has no
argument to show that only an internal perceptual object, as opposed, say, to
an abnormality in the visual cortex (which need not be an object at all), can
cause the hallucinatory experience.
Moreover, from the similarity of the internal, experiential elements in the
hallucination and the internal ones occurring in genuine perception, one
might as well conclude that since the ordinary experience is one of seeing
only an external rather than an internal object, the hallucinatory experience
is different only in the absence of the external object. Rather than add to the
components that seem needed to account for the ordinary experience, we
subtract one that seems needed to account for the hallucination. This yields
a more economical theory of perception.
An analogy may help. Compare trying to infer facts about how we see an
original painting from facts about how we see it in a photo of it. From the
indirectness of the latter seeing, it certainly does not follow that ordinary
seeing of the painting is indirect. And even if a photographic viewing can be
so realistic that it perfectly mimics an ordinary viewing, it does not follow
Perception
37

that photographic, two-dimensional objects are components in ordinary
seeing. Similarly, no matter how much like ordinary experiences hallucina-
tions can seem, it does not follow that the former have all the internal
elements (roughly, mental or mind-dependent elements) of the latter.
It will help to consider a different analogy. Two perfect ball-bearings, by
virtue of being exactly the same in diameter and constitution, can be intrin-
sically indistinguishable, yet they can still differ significantly, one being on
your left and one on your right. Their intrinsic properties can thus be iden-
tical, while their relations (to you) differ: one is left of you, the other right of
you; hence they do differ in their relational properties. Similarly, the halluci-
nation of a field and the ordinary visual experience of a field can be
intrinsically indistinguishable, yet differ in their relations to me or to other
things. One of them, the visual experience of a field, may be an element in a
perceptual relation to the field; and the experience we call hallucination,
which is not based on perceiving the external object hallucinated, may not be
an element in any perceptual relation to the field, but only a process I
undergo (an element simply “in” me on the plausible assumption that it is
mental).
To account for the difference between the two kinds of experience, we
might say this: the visual experience represents an external thing to me; the
hallucinatory experience, though intrinsically just like the visual one, does
not, but as it were only pretends to represent an external thing. Thus, for all
the argument from hallucination shows, the ordinary experience of seeing
might be a relation to an object such as a green field, namely the relation of
directly seeing, while the hallucinatory experience of a green field is not a
relation to that field, such as being an internal copy of it, or even a relation
to any other object, such as a perceiver.
The points just made about the argument from hallucination indicate
that it is not sound. Its first premise, (1), does not entail the conclusion
drawn from it, (2). Nonetheless, the argument poses serious problems for
alternative theories. What explanatory account of hallucinations and illu-
sions besides the sense-datum account might we adopt? To see some of our
alternatives, it is best to begin with illusion rather than hallucination.
Recall the mouth of the cup viewed from an angle. A sense-datum theory
will say we directly see an elliptical shape and indirectly see the cup. The
theory of appearing, however, can also explain this: it reminds us that things
need not be what they appear to be and says simply that they can appear
elliptical even if they are round.
Adverbial theories of perception
One could also combine the causal element in the sense-datum approach
with the direct realism of the theory of appearing and move to a third
theory, one that says the cup causes us to see it directly, rather than through
producing sense-data in us, yet (because of our angle of vision) we see it as if
38
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

it were elliptical. To avoid suggesting that anything in one’s experience need
be elliptical, one could take this to mean that the cup visually “appears
elliptically” to us. Here the adverb ‘elliptically’ describes a way in which we
visually experience the cup. It does not imply that there is an object that
appears to us and is elliptical.19 Let us explore this idea in relation to the
theory associated with it.
It should now be clear why we need not grant (what sense-datum theo-
rists sometimes seem to assume about perception) that in order for an object
to appear a given way to us there must be something we see that is that way,
for instance an elliptical sense-datum. Suppose that one says simply that the
cup appears elliptically, using this adverb to designate the way it appears, or
(speaking from the perceiver’s point of view) how one visually experiences it:
elliptically. To say it appears elliptically is roughly to say it appears in the
way an ellipse does (viewed from directly above its center), as opposed to the
way a circle does.
If this adverbial interpretation of such statements as ‘I see an ellipse’
seems artificial, consider an ordinary analogy. If I say I have a fever, no one
could plausibly insist that there is an object, a fever, which I have. ‘I have a
fever’ is a way of saying I am feverish, i.e., my body is above a certain
temperature. What our language seems to treat as a statement of a relation
to an object, a fever, is really an ascription of a property: the property of
having a temperature above a certain level. Just as ‘having a fever’ can
ascribe a certain temperature, ‘seeing a parallelogram’ (in illusional and
hallucinatory cases) can ascribe a certain visual experience.
On the basis of this move, one can construct what is called the adverbial
theory of perception. Unlike the theory of appearing, which takes perception to
be an unanalyzable relation in which things appear to us as having one or
more properties, an adverbial theory conceives perception as an analyzable
way of experiencing things. In what may be its most plausible form, it says
roughly that to perceive an object is for that object (in a certain way) to
produce in one a sensory experience of it: to cause one’s experiencing it in a
certain qualitative way, say to see a stick as straight (or, given the illusion
induced by partial submersion, as bent). Both theories are, however, direct
realist views. Other similarities (and some differences) between the two
theories will soon be apparent.20
The adverbial theorist stresses that we see (or otherwise perceive) things
in a particular qualitative way and that they thus appear to us in that way.
Often they appear as they are; sometimes they do not. In each case they are
seen directly, not through intermediaries. Even if I do not see the cup as
circular, I do see it: it is seen directly, yet appears elliptically.
So far, so good, perhaps. But what about hallucinations? Here the adver-
bial theory again differs from the theory of appearing. Unlike the latter, it
denies that all sensory experience is of some object. The importance of this
denial is not immediately apparent, perhaps because we suppose that usually
a person visually hallucinating does see something. Consider Shakespeare’s
Perception
39

Macbeth, distraught by his murder of Duncan, hallucinating a dagger that
seems to him to hover in mid-air:
Is this a dagger which I see before me,
The handle toward my hand? Come, let me clutch thee.
I have thee not, and yet I see thee still.
Art thou not, fatal vision, sensible
To feeling as to sight? or art thou but
A dagger of the mind, a false creation,
Proceeding from the heat-oppressed brain?
I see thee yet, in a form as palpable
As this [sword] which now I draw.
(Act II, scene i)
Perhaps Macbeth does see something in the place in question, say the wall
behind “the dagger” or at least a chunk of space where it hovers. An adver-
bial theorist might thus posit an “object” where the “dagger” seems located,
if only the section of space where it seems to be, for Macbeth to experience
“daggerly.” On one view, this object might be thought to play a role in
causing him to have daggerish visual sensations, but it is not clear that there
need be any such object in a hallucination. For the theory of appearing, the
space before him, despite being transparent, might somehow appear to him
to be a dagger. Indeed, in this case what the adverbial theorist calls experi-
encing “daggerly” might be roughly equivalent to what the theory of
appearing calls having something appear to one to be a dagger.
Supposing we accept this adverbialist account, what happens if it is pitch
dark and Macbeth’s hallucination is therefore empty, in the sense that there is
nothing he sees, and hence nothing to serve as an object distorted into an
apparent dagger? Then, whereas the theory of appearing may have to posit
something like a sense-datum (or other special kind of object) to serve as what
appears to be a dagger, the adverbial theory can take a different line and deny
that there is any kind of object appearing to him. It may posit some quite
different account of his “bedaggered” visual experience, such as a psychological
account appealing to the influence of drugs or of his “heat-oppressed brain.”
Is it really plausible to hold, with the adverbial theory, that in this
instance Macbeth saw nothing at all? Can we really explain how the normal
and hallucinatory experiences are intrinsically alike without assuming they
have the same direct objects? In the light of the special case of empty hallu-
cination, then, the sense-datum theory may seem the most plausible of the
three. It provides an object of Macbeth’s visual experience even if it occurs in
utter darkness, whereas the adverbial theory posits no objects at all to appear
to one in empty hallucinations. Moreover, the sense-datum view postulates
the same sort of direct object for ordinary perception, illusion, and halluci-
nation, whereas the theory of appearing does not offer a uniform account of
their direct objects and must explain why entities like sense-data do not
occur in normal perception as well as in empty hallucination.
40
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

Perhaps, however, the hallucination problem seems more threatening
than it should to the adverbial theory because hallucinations are felt to be
perceptual experiences and hence expected to be of some object. But as we
have seen, although hallucinatory experiences can be intrinsically indistin-
guishable from perceptual ones, all that can be assumed is that the former
are sensory experiences. Hallucinatory experiences, on the adverbial view, are
simply not cases of perceiving, at least not in a sense requiring that any
object appear to one.
Thus, nothing at all need appear to one in hallucinations, though it may
appear to the subject that something is there. The hallucinator may then be
described as having a visual sensory experience, but – since nothing is
perceived – not a genuine perceptual experience.
Adverbial and sense-datum theories of sensory
experience
A perceptual experience is always sensory, and normally a sensory experi-
ence of the sort we have in perceiving is genuinely perceptual. But a kind
of short-circuit can cause the sense-receptors to produce sensory experience
that is not a normal perceptual experience (or even part of one). It is
important to consider the debate between adverbial and sense-datum theo-
ries in relation to sensory experience. Both theories take such experience to
be essential to perception; both offer accounts of sensory experience as well
as of perception; and some in each camp may take the former as a more
basic concern.
The most natural thing for adverbial theorists to say about hallucinatory
experience is that it is not genuinely perceptual, but only sensory. They
might, however, say instead that where a perceptual experience is hallucina-
tory, it is not a case of seeing (except perhaps in the mind’s eye, or perhaps in
the sense that it is seeing colors and shapes conceived abstractly as properties
and not as belonging to sense-datum objects). The former description
accords better with how seeing is normally understood: normally, we cannot
be said to see what is not there.
The theory suggested by these responses to the hallucination problem
might be called the adverbial theory of sensory experience. It says that having a
sensory experience, such as a hallucination of a green field, is experiencing in
a certain way, for example visually experiencing “green-fieldly.” Our
commonsense assumption is that hallucination is not usual (for normal
people) and that most vivid sensory experiences are genuinely perceptual.
They are of, and thus caused by, the external object(s) apparently perceived.
But some sensory experiences are neither genuinely perceptual nor externally
caused. People having them are in, say, a vision-like state, and what is going
on in their visual cortex may be the same sort of process that occurs when
they see things. Yet they are not seeing, and their visual experience typically
has an internal cause, such as an abnormal emotion.
Perception
41

May we, then, regard sense-datum theories of perception as refuted by the
points just made in criticism of the argument from hallucination and on
behalf of the suggested adverbial theory and the theory of appearing?
Certainly not. We have at most seen how one major argument for a sense-
datum theory of perception fails and how alternative theories of perception
can account for the apparently central elements in perception: the perceiver,
the (ordinary) object perceived, the sensory experience, and the causal rela-
tion between the second and third.
Indeed, supposing that the argument from hallucination fails to show
that sense-data are elements in normal everyday perception, sense-data
might still be needed to account for non-perceptual sensory experience
(sometimes loosely called perceptual experience because it is characteristic
of that). In this limited role, one might posit a sense-datum theory of non-
perceptual sensory experience. On this view, such experience is simply direct
acquaintance with sense-data.
A sense-datum view may seem preferable to an adverbial theory of sensory
experience. For one thing, there is something unsatisfying about the idea
that even in a visual hallucination so vivid that, if one did not suspect error,
one would stake one’s life on the presence of the hallucinated object, one sees
nothing, except either metaphorically in one’s mind’s eye, or in a sense of
‘see’ which does not require that any object be seen. Still, perhaps there is
such a sense of ‘see,’ or perhaps one can experience colors and shapes in a
visual way without seeing anything.
There is another aspect of the controversy. It concerns the metaphysics
associated with adverbial and sense-datum theories of any kind, specifi-
cally, the sorts of things they require us to take as fundamental realities. In
this respect, the adverbial theories of perception and sensory experience
have a definite advantage over the counterpart sense-datum theories: the
former do not posit a kind of object we would not otherwise have to regard
as real. From the adverbial perspective, the objects that perception and
sensory experience involve are simply perceivers and what they perceive.
These are quite familiar entities which we must recognize and deal with
anyway.
Sense-data are quite different from ordinary (presumably physical) objects
of perception. Sense-data are either mental or at least depend for their exis-
tence on the mind of the subject. Yet they are unlike some mental
phenomena in that no plausible case can be made for their being really brain
phenomena, since they have properties, for instance green color and perfect
rectangularity, not normally found in the brain.21
Moreover, there are difficulties in the way of fully understanding sense-
data in any terms. Is there, for instance, even a reasonable way of counting
them? Suppose my image of the green field gradually gets greener. Is this
a sense-datum changing or a new one replacing an old one? There seems to
be no way to tell. If there is no way to tell, how can we ever be sure we
learn more about a sense-datum than what initially appears to us in experi-
42
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

encing it: how can one distinguish learning something more about it from
learning about something new?22
Problems like these also affect the theory of appearing insofar as it must
posit sense-data or similar entities to account for hallucinations. To be sure,
such problems can also beset our understanding of ordinary objects. Can we
always distinguish a mountain with two peaks from two mountains, or one
snarled barberry bush from two? But these problems seem less serious, if
only because there is no question that there are some things of the physical
kind in question. The corresponding problems may in the end be soluble for
sense-data, but they at least give us some reason to prefer a theory that does
not force us to regard sense-data as the only objects, or as even among the
objects, we are directly aware of when we see, hear, touch, taste, and smell.
Phenomenalism
If some philosophers have thought that perception can be understood
without appeal to sense-data, others have conceived it as understandable in
terms of sense-data alone as its objects. This view has the advantage of
being, in at least one way, simpler than the adverbial and sense-datum theo-
ries. But the view is motivated by other considerations as well.
A sense-datum version of phenomenalism
Think about the book you see. It is a perceptible object. Suppose we may
conceive a real perceptible object as a perceptible object that is as it is, inde-
pendently of what we think it to be. Still, real perceptibles, such as tables
and chairs and books, are also plausibly conceived to be, by their very
nature, knowable. Indeed, it is doubtful that real objects of this sort could be
unknowable, or even unknowable through the senses if lighting and other
perceptual conditions are good. Now suppose we add to these ideas the
assumption that our only genuine, certain knowledge of perceptibles is
restricted to what directly appears to us and would be as it is even if we
should be hallucinating. And what more does appear to us besides colors,
shapes and other sensory properties? Further, how do we know that this
book, for example, could even exist without someone’s perceiving its sensory
properties? Certainly we cannot observe the book existing unperceived. If you
observe it, you perceive it.
Moreover, if you imagine subtracting the book’s sensory properties one by
one – its color, shape, weight, and so on – what is left of it? This is not like
peeling an apple, leaving its substance. It is like stripping layer after layer
from an onion until nothing remains. Might we not conclude, then, that the
book is not only known by its sensory properties, as the other theories of
perception also hold, but is constituted by a stable collection of such proper-
ties, a collection of visual, tactual, and other sense-data which recur in our
experience, confronting us each time we have the sense-data corresponding
Perception
43

to, say, a certain bookcase in our home? Similarly, might it not be that to see
the book is simply to be visually acquainted with such a stable collection of
sense-data?
George Berkeley argued from a variety of angles that this is indeed what a
perceptible object is. This view (which Berkeley developed in detail in his
Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, published in 1710) is a
version of what is often called phenomenalism, since it constructs external
objects out of phenomena, which, in this use of the term, are equivalent to
sense-data. The view is also considered a kind of idealism, since it construes
physical objects as ideal, in the sense of being composed of “ideas” (an old
term for sense-data) rather than material stuff that would exist even if there
were no minds and no ideas.23
Adverbial phenomenalism
Phenomenalism as just described is focused on the nature of perceptible
objects but implies a related view of perception. In the sense-datum
version of phenomenalism we have been examining, the associated account
of perception retains a sense-datum theory of sensory experience, but not a
sense-datum theory of perception. The latter view posits external objects
as causes of the sense-data experienced in ordinary perception, whereas
sense-datum phenomenalism says physical objects are collections of sense-
data.
Using the adverbial theory of sensory experience, one might also formu-
late an adverbial phenomenalism, which constructs physical objects out of
sensory experience alone and says that to see (for instance) a green field is to
experience “green-fieldly” in a certain vivid and stable way. To see such a
thing is to have a visual experience that predictably occurs under certain
conditions, say when one has the related experiences of walking out on the
porch and looking ahead.
On this phenomenalist view, perception can occur without even sense-
data; it requires only perceivers and their properties. Sense-datum versions of
phenomenalism, however, have been more often discussed by philosophers,
and I will concentrate on them.
Whereas the sense-datum theory is an indirect realism, phenomenalism
is a direct irrealism: it says that perceptual objects are directly perceived,
but it denies that they are real in the sense that they are mind-indepen-
dent and can exist apart from perceivers. This is not to say they are not
perceptually real – real items in sensory experience. The point is that they are
not metaphysically real: things that are “out there,” which are the sorts of
things we think of as such that they would exist even if there were no
perceivers.
Phenomenalism does not, then, deny that physical objects exist in the
sense that they are both stable elements of our experience and governed by
causal laws, such as those of physics. Nor does it deny that there can be
44
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

hallucinations, as where certain experiences, like those presenting Macbeth’s
hallucinatory dagger, are too unstable to represent a physical object, or occur
in only one mode, such as vision, when they should have tactile elements as
well, such as a cool, smooth surface. What phenomenalism denies is that
physical objects are real in the classical sense, implying that their existence
is independent of our experience.
One naturally wonders why things would not go in and out of existence
depending on whether they are experienced, and why, when they do exist,
they obey the laws of physics, which certainly do not seem to depend on our
minds. Berkeley did not neglect to consider what happens to things when
we cease to perceive them, as where we leave a book in an empty room. His
answer has been put in a limerick:
There was a young man who said “God
Must think it exceedingly odd
If he finds that this tree
Continues to be
When there’s no one about in the quad.”
Reply:
Dear Sir:
Your astonishment’s odd:
I am always about in the quad
And that’s why the tree
Will continue to be,
Since observed by Yours faithfully, God.
If the very existence of external objects is sustained by divine perception, it
is not difficult to see how their behavior could obey laws of nature that are
divinely ordained.
A phenomenalist need not be a theist, however, to offer an account of
the stability of external objects and their lawful behavior. John Stuart
Mill, writing in the same epistemological tradition as Berkeley but
without any appeal to God, called external objects “permanent possibili-
ties of sensation.” To say that the book is in the room when no one is in
there to perceive it is to say that there is a certain enduring possibility of
the sensations, where having those sensations constitutes perceiving such a
book. If one enters the room and looks in the appropriate direction, that
possibility should be realized. By contrast, if one merely hallucinated,
there would be no reason to expect this. A phenomenalist can, however, be
more radical and take objects not to have any kind of existence when
unperceived. They are born and die with the experiences in which they
appear.
Perception
45

Appraisal of phenomenalism
Unlike the sense-datum theory of perception, phenomenalism is only occa-
sionally defended by contemporary philosophers. But it has had major
influence. Moreover, compared with the sense-datum theory, it is more
economical and in that way simpler. Instead of perceivers, sense-data, and
external objects, it posits, as the things figuring in perception and sensory
experience, just perceivers and sense-data. Indeed, adverbial phenome-
nalism does not even posit sense-data, though it does appeal to a special
kind of property, that of experiencing in a certain way, for instance blue-
bookly.
As a theory of perception, then, phenomenalism has fewer objects to
analyze and interrelate than do the other theories we have discussed. In addi-
tion, it appears to bridge the most important gap between sensory
experience and perception of objects: since the objects are internal and
directly experienced, it seems natural to say that they must be as they appear
to be – we see all there is of the surface facing us and in principle can see all
there is to them as physical objects. On the other hand, for the external
objects of common sense, whose reality is independent of perceivers, (non-
theistic) phenomenalism must substitute something like permanent
possibilities of experience. Thus, the bare-bones appearance of the theory is
illusory. Even that metaphor is misleading; for even our bodies are also
collections of sense-data; even the flesh itself is not too solid to melt into the
sensations of its perceivers.
It is tempting to reject phenomenalism as preposterous. But if we flatly
reject it, we learn nothing from it. Let me pose just one objection from
which we learn something important about the relation between sense
experience and external objects. The theory says that a book, for instance,
is – or at least that its presence is (necessarily) equivalent to – one’s having
or potentially having a suitably stable collection of sense-data, and that
seeing it is being visually acquainted with them. If this is a correct anal-
ysis of what seeing a book is, then there is a combination of sense-data,
sensory items like colors and shapes in one’s visual field, such that if,
under appropriate conditions, these elements occur in me, then it follows
that I see a book. But surely there is no such combination of sense-data.
No matter how vividly and stably I (or anyone) may experience the colors
and shapes appropriate to a book, it does not follow that anyone sees one.
For it is still possible that I am just hallucinating one or seeing something
else as a book.24
This kind of hallucination remains possible even if I have supporting
tactual experiences, such as the smooth feel of paper. For even the sense of
touch can be stimulated in this way without one’s touching a book. Thus,
seeing a book is not just having appropriate booklike experiences, even if it
is partly this, and even though, as phenomenalists hold, there is no experi-
enceable difference between a sufficiently stable combination of booklike
sense-data and an independently real material book. Still, if seeing a book is
46
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

not equivalent to any such collection of sensory experiences, phenomenalism
fails to account for the perception of ordinary objects. If there are objects for
which it holds, they are not the kind we have in mind in seeking an account
of perception.
Perception and the senses
I want to conclude this chapter by indicating some remaining problems
about perception. I have already suggested that adverbial theories, sense-
datum theories, and the theory of appearing provide plausible accounts of
perception, though I consider some version of the first kind prima facie best
and I leave open that some theory different from all of them may be better
than any of them. I have also suggested that some perceptually grounded
beliefs fail to be justified, and that, even when justified and true, they can
fail to constitute knowledge. There are two further kinds of problems we
should explore. One kind concerns observation, the other the relation of
perception to the five senses.
Indirect seeing and delayed perception
Observing something in a mirror can count as seeing it. Indeed, it illustrates
the sort of thing ordinarily considered seeing something indirectly, as
opposed to seeing it by virtue of seeing sense-data. We can also speak of
seeing through telescopes and other instruments of observation, again indi-
rectly. But what if the object is microscopic and colorless, yet appears to us
through our lens as gray? Perhaps we see it, but not quite as it is.
If we see a microscopic object at all, however, there must be some respect
in which what we see it by is faithful to it or at least represents it by some
relation of causal dependence – sometimes called functional dependence, since
perceptual experience seems to vary as a function of certain changes in the
object, as where a bird’s moving leftward is reflected in a movement of the
image. But what we see a thing by, such as color and shape, need not be
faithful in all respects. A green field can look black at night; we are nonethe-
less seeing it. Moreover, we can see something move in the field even if its
color and shape are distorted.
How much correspondence between an object and our sensory impressions
representing it to us is required in order for us to see it (or hear it, touch it,
and so on)? There may be no answer to this question that is both precise and
highly general. The cases vary greatly, and many must be examined in their
own terms.
Observation of faraway objects poses further problems. Consider seeing
the nearest star in the night sky. It is commonly taken to be about four light
years away. Presumably we see it (if at all) only as it was. For the sense-
datum theory, we have a sense-datum produced by it as it was; on the
adverbial view, we are sensing “starly” in the way we would if we received
Perception
47

the relevant visual stimuli at the time the star produces them. If, however,
we see it only as it was, do we literally see it, or just its traces?
Suppose that unbeknownst to us the star exploded two years ago. Is it not
odd to say we now see it, as opposed to seeing traces of it (as it was)? The
latter view is preferable, on the ground that if we unqualifiedly see some-
thing now, it exists now. But this point is compatible with the view that
even though we may see a thing that exists now only as it was, we still liter-
ally see it now, just as, if we see a cup as elliptical when it is in fact round,
we still do see the cup.
Similar points hold for ordinary seeing, since there is still some
temporal gap, and for hearing. But if I can see the field only as it was a
fraction of a second ago, can I still know that it is now green? I think so,
provided there is no reason to believe its color has suddenly changed (but
this is something to be reconsidered in the light of our discussion of skep-
ticism in Chapter 10). The same is not clear for the star: may we know by
sight alone that it exists now, when it would take about four years for us to
realize that the light that had been emitted is no more? This seems
doubtful, but it may depend on how likely it is that a star of the kind in
question might have burned out during the period in question. If we knew
that such stars last billions of years and that this one is only a few million
years old, we might plausibly think we know it still exists. It is plain,
however, that understanding perception and perceptual knowledge in
these sorts of cases is not easy.
Sight and light
We normally regard seeing as intimately connected with light. But must
seeing involve light? Suppose you could step into a pitch-dark room and
have the experiences you would have if it were fully lighted. The room
would thus look to you just as it would if fully lighted, and you could find
any unobscured object by looking around for it. Would this not show that
you can see in the dark? If so, then the presence of light is not essential to
seeing.
However, the case does not establish quite this much. For seeing is a
causal relation, and for all I have said you are just vividly hallucinating
precisely the right things rather than seeing them. But suppose you are not
hallucinating. Indeed, if someone enclosed a coin you see in a drawer or
covers your eyes, you no longer have a visual experience of a coin. In this
case it could be that somehow the coin affects your eyes through a mecha-
nism other than light transmission, yet requiring an unobstructed path
between the object seen and your eyes. Now it begins to seem that you are
seeing. You are responding visually to stimuli that causally affect your eyes.
Yet their doing so does not depend on the presence of light.
48
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

Vision and the eyes
In an ominous couplet in Shakespeare’s Othello, Desdemona’s father warns
Othello:
Look to her, Moor, if thou hast eyes to see;
She has deceived her father and may thee.
It would not have occurred to him to question whether there is any way
(literally) to see without eyes (figuratively, Othello cannot see well at all,
which is his downfall). But philosophers must sometimes ask whether what
seems patently obvious is in fact true. Let us, then, go a step further than
treating light as inessential to seeing.
Suppose Emma has lost her eyes in an accident, but a camera is later
connected to her brain in the way her eyes were. When she points it in a
given direction in good light, she has just the visual sensations, say of color
and shape, that she would have had by looking with her eyes. Might this not
be seeing? Indeed, do we not think of the camera as functioning like the eye?
If, under the right causal conditions, she gets the right sorts of sensations
through her eyes or a functional equivalent of them, she is seeing.
But are even “eyes” (or organs functioning like eyes) necessary for seeing?
What if someone who lacks “eyes” could get visual sensations “matching”
the objects in the room by strange radiations they emit? Suppose, for
instance, that moving the coin away from the person results in the person’s
visual impression’s representing a decrease in its size, and that the impres-
sions of it are eliminated entirely by enclosing the coin in cardboard. This
confirms the presence of an appropriate causal connection between the coin
and the visual experience of it. If no part of the body (other than the brain)
is required for the visual impression of the coin, there is no organ plausibly
considered a functional equivalent of eyes, but might we not have seeing?
If what is crucial for seeing an object is its producing visual sensations
suitably corresponding to it, presumably the case is one of seeing. If seeing
requires the use of an eye or equivalent organ, then it is not – unless the
brain itself is a visual organ after all. It is clear enough that the person
would have knowledge of what we might call visual properties, above all
colors and shapes. One might call that visual knowledge. But visual knowl-
edge of this kind could be held not to be grounded in seeing, nor acquired
through use of any sense organs. For these reasons, it may seem somewhat
doubtful whether it must be a kind of perceptual knowledge. But a case can
surely be made for the visual sensation conception of seeing, as against the
organ-of-sight conception.
This case, however, may be challenged: can there be “blind sight,” seeing
in the absence of visual sensations? Something like this is reported in the
psychological literature. Imagine an ideal case in which a person with excel-
lent blind sight can navigate among obstacles as if the person saw them, while
honestly reporting an absence of visual sensations. Could this be seeing?
Perception
49

We automatically tend to understand such behavior in terms of seeing,
and there is thus an inclination to say that this is seeing. The inclination is
even stronger if light’s reaching the eyes is necessary for the person to avoid
the obstacles. But if the subject has no visual sensation – as opposed to
lacking ordinary awareness of it – it is not clear that we must say this, and I
doubt that it would be so. The most we must say is that the person seems to
know where the obstacles are. Knowing through some causal process by
which objects produce true beliefs about them is not necessarily perception,
and certainly need not be seeing.25
It may seem that blind sight is genuine seeing because it produces
knowledge of visual propositions – propositions ascribing visual properties.
But knowledge of visual propositions is possible without vision, for instance
by something like sonar. Moreover, even dependence on light does not estab-
lish that the process in question is visual: the light might somehow
stimulate non-visual mechanisms that convey information about the objects
emitting it. Similar questions arise for the importance of sensations to
perception in the other sensory modes, for instance of auditory sensations in
hearing. There, too, we find hard questions for which competing answers are
plausible.
It is difficult, then, to provide an overall philosophical account of just what
seeing, or perception in general, is; and while all the theories we have
discussed can help in answering the questions just posed, none does so in
such a simple and decisive way as to leave all its competitors without some
plausibility. Still, in exploring those theories we have seen many important
points about perception. It is a kind of causal relation. Even its least
complex and apparently most basic mode, simple perceiving, requires, in
addition to the perceiver, both an object of perception and a sensory experi-
ence that in some way corresponds to that object and records, if only
imagistically, an indefinite and possibly quite extensive amount of informa-
tion about the object. Partly on the basis of this information, perception
tends to produce beliefs about the perceived object. It implies that the
perceiver at least normally has justification for certain beliefs about the
object, and it normally produces both justified beliefs about that object and
knowledge of it.
Perception may be illusory, as where something appears to have a prop-
erty it does not have, such as ellipticality where it is really circular.
Perception – or sensory experience that seems to the subject just like it –
may also be hallucinatory, as in the case of Macbeth’s dagger. When it is, the
question arises whether there must be interior objects, sense-data, with
which the subject is directly acquainted. But both illusions and hallucina-
tions can apparently be accounted for without positing sense-data, and thus
without adding a further kind of element to the four that seem central in
perception – the perceiver, the object perceived, the sensory experience, and
the causal relation between the object and perceiver in virtue of which that
50
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

experience is produced – or reducing perceptual objects to sense-data.
Illusion and hallucination can also be accounted for without denying that
perceptual experience – the evidence of the senses – normally yields justified
belief and knowledge about the world outside the perceiver. Many questions
remain, but so far we have seen no reason to doubt that perception is a rich
and basic source of both knowledge and justification.
Notes
1 Perceiving of, perceiving to be, and perceiving that may also be called perception of, percep-
tion to be, and perception that, respectively; but the second expression is not common, and
in that case, at least, the -ing forms usually better express what is intended.
2 A related way to see the difference between objectual and propositional beliefs is this. If I
believe something to have a property, say a British Airways plane to be a Boeing 777,
then this same belief can be ascribed to me using any correct description of that plane,
say, as the most traveled plane in the British Airways fleet: to say I believe BA’s most
traveled plane to be a 777 is to ascribe the same belief to me. This holds even if I do not
believe it meets that description – and it can hold even where I cannot understand the
description, as a child who believes a tachistoscope to be making noise cannot understand
‘tachistoscope’. By contrast, if I have a propositional belief, say that the United Airlines
plane on the runway is the most traveled in its fleet, this ascription cannot be truly made
using just any correct description of that plane, say the plane on which a baby was deliv-
ered on Christmas Day, 2001. I may have no inkling of that fact – or think it holds for a
BA plane. A rough way to put part of the point here is to say that propositional beliefs
about things are about them under a description or name, and objectual beliefs about things
are not (even if the believer could describe them in terms of a property they are believed
to have, such as being noisy). It is in part because we need not conceptualize things – as
by thinking of them under a description – in order to have objectual beliefs about them
that those beliefs are apparently more basic than propositional ones.
3 In terminology common in epistemology, objectual belief is de re – of the thing – whereas
propositional belief is de dicto – of the proposition – and I am making a similar distinc-
tion between objectual and propositional perception. The objectual cases, unlike the
propositional ones, require no particular concept of the thing in question. To be sure,
those who do have the concept of a field and know that I believe it to be rectangular may
say, ‘He believes the field is rectangular,’ meaning that I believe it to be rectangular.
English idiom is often permissive in this way, and in everyday life nothing need turn on
the difference. Moreover, some philosophers have held that a thing, such as a field, can be
a constituent in a proposition, and this might provide a basis for saying that the two
belief ascriptions may be properly interchangeable. I am here ignoring that controversial
and uncommon conception of a proposition. For detailed discussion of the extent to
which perception is conceptual and of how it yields perceptual beliefs, see Michael
Pendelbury, ‘Sensibility and Understanding in Perceptual Judgments,’ South African
Journal of Philosophy 18, 4 (1999).
4 It may be best to leave open here that Susie could, at least for a moment, believe (in an
admittedly weak sense of the term), of a tachistoscope, that it is making noise, yet not
believe any proposition about it: she attributes noise-making to it, yet does not conceptu-
alize it in the way required for having a propositional belief about it, the kind of belief
expressed in a complete declarative sentence such as ‘The thing on the table is making
noise’. She would then have no propositional belief about the instrument, the kind of
belief that should unqualifiedly be called true (or false), such as that the tachistoscope is
making noise. On this approach, what I am calling objectual belief is better called prop-
erty attribution. It is an attribution to the thing in question because of the kind of causal
role that thing plays in grounding the attribution; and if it is not strictly speaking a
Perception
51

belief, it does imply a disposition to form one, such as that the thing on the table is
making noise.
5 Specifically, these are doxastic attitudes (from the Greek doxa, for ‘belief’). A fear can be
propositional and thereby cognitive, but it need not entail believing the proposition one
fears is so, e.g. that the man approaching one will attack. Some might consider objectual
awareness, say awareness of perfect symmetry, cognitive, at least when the person has the
concept of relevant property. By contrast, desires, the paradigm conative attitudes, should
not, I think, be taken to have propositional objects (e.g. ‘to swim’ in ‘my desire to swim’
does not express a truth or falsehood).
6 Perceptions that embody beliefs in the ways illustrated are also called epistemic, since the
embedded belief is commonly considered to constitute knowledge. Their connection
with knowledge is pursued in this chapter and others.
7 The distinction between simple and propositional perceiving and other distinctions
drawn in this chapter are not always observed. At one point W.V. Quine says,
think of “x perceives y” rather in the image of “x perceives that p”. We say “Tom
perceives the bowl” because in emphasizing Tom’s situation we fancy ourselves
volunteering the observation sentence “Bowl” rather than “Surface of a bowl,”
“Front half of a bowl,” “Bowl and background,” and so on. When we ask “What
did he perceive?” we are content with an answer of the form “He perceived that p”.
Pursuit of Truth, revised edn 
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992), p. 65
Notice that since seeing that (say) there is a bowl in front of one obviously entails seeing
a bowl, it is no surprise that we are content with a report of the propositional perception
even if we wanted to know only what object was seen. It does not follow that simple
seeing is or even entails propositional seeing. It is also worth noting that Quine is appar-
ently thinking only of seeing here; for the other four senses, there is less plausibility in
maintaining what he does.
8 The adage could not be taken to refer to simple seeing, for what we simply see, say a
glass or leaf or field, is not the sort of thing that can be believed (to be true or false). To
be sure, seeing something, especially something as striking as golfball-size hail, produces
a disposition to believe certain propositions, say that this is a dangerous storm. But, by what
seems an economy of nature, there are many things we are disposed to believe but do not.
I have defended these points in detail in ‘Dispositional Beliefs and Dispositions to
Believe,’ Nous 28 (1994), 419–34.
9 This applies even to full-scale philosophical dictionaries written by teams of experts,
though such a work can provide concise statements of much valuable information. See,
for example, the entries on blind sight and perception in Robert Audi (ed.) The Cambridge
Dictionary of Philosophy (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1995,
1999).
10 In the light of what has been said in this chapter so far we can accommodate much of
what is plausible in the common view that, as D.M. Armstrong puts it,
[perception] is an acquiring of knowledge or belief about our physical environment
(including our own body). It is a flow of information. In some cases it may be
something less than the acquiring of knowledge or belief, as in the cases where
perceptions are entirely discounted or where their content has been confidently
anticipated.
Belief, Truth and Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), p. 22
First, I can agree that perception entails acquisition of information; the point is that not all
our information is possessed as the content of a belief. Second, Armstrong himself notes an
important way in which perception might fail to produce belief: it is “discounted,” as, for
52
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

example, where one is sure one is hallucinating and so resolutely refuses to accept any of
the relevant propositions.
11 This is the kind of view developed in detail by Fred Dretske. See esp. Knowledge and the
Flow of Information (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1981).
12 The notion of normality here is not statistical; it implies that what is not normal calls for
explanation. In the world as we know it, exceptions to the normality generalizations I
propose seem at least rare; but the point is not that statistical one, but to bring out that
the very concepts in question, such as those of seeing and knowing, have a connection in
virtue of which explanation is called for if what is normally the case does not occur.
13 In speaking of justification that prevails and of overall justification, I have in mind the
kind appropriate to a rational person’s believing the proposition in question, construed as
roughly the kind such that, when we believe a true proposition with that kind of justifi-
cation then (apart from the kinds of case discussed in Chapter 8 that show how justified
true beliefs need not constitute knowledge), we know it.
14 There are complexities I cannot go into, such as how one’s competence figures. I am
imagining here someone competent to tell whether a note is flat (hence someone not tone
deaf): in general, if one is not competent to tell whether a kind of thing has a property or
not, an experience in which it seems to have it may not justify one in believing it does.
There is also the question of what the belief is about when the “object” is hallucinatory, a
problem discussed shortly. Still other problems raised by this justification principle are
discussed in Chapter 8 in connection with the controversy between internalism and
externalism.
15 If, as is arguable, seeing that it is blue entails knowing that it is, then he does not see that
it is, though he sees its blue color. But this entailment claim is far from self-evident.
Suppose he clearly sees a blue bird and believes it is blue, but does not know that it is
because of his frequent hallucinations. A moment before he hallucinated such a bird; a
moment later he will again; and he realized his senses have been playing such tricks on
him. Still, he cannot help believing this bird is blue and believes that on the basis of
clearly seeing it and its color in normal light. Might we say that he sees that the bird is
blue, but does not know this? We cannot say that he “can’t believe his own eyes,” because
he does; but if, in the normal way, they show him the truth and he thereby believes it,
might he not see it through them?
16 The theory of appearing has not been widely defended, but a detailed sympathetic treat-
ment is given in William P. Alston’s ‘Back to the Theory of Appearing,’ forthcoming.
17 For a recent study and defense of a sense-datum theory see Howard Robinson, Perception
(London and New York: Routledge, 1994). Cf. Laurence BonJour’s, Epistemology: Classical
Problems and Contemporary Responses (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2002), esp.
Chapters 6 and 7.
18 The view that ordinary perceptual belief is non-inferential is controversial and – for
various senses of inferences – has been widely discussed by both philosophers and
psychologists. Not all sense-datum views, moreover, take perceptual belief to be non-
inferential. For a discussion of perception that brings to bear both psychological and
philosophical literature see John Heil, Perception and Cognition (Berkeley and Los Angeles,
CA: University of California Press, 1983), esp. Chapter 2. Cf. Armstrong, op. cit.
19 Granted, the mouth of the cup does not appear to us to be elliptical if we realize its shape
cannot be judged from how it visually appears at an angle, but that is a different point. It
concerns what shape we take it to have, not what shape visually appears in our conscious-
ness antecedently to our taking it to be of any particular kind.
20 For a detailed and influential discussion of the adverbial theory, with criticism of the
sense-datum view, see R.M. Chisholm, Perceiving (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press,
1957).
21 This is a very important point. One major materialist theory of the mind–body relation –
the identity theory – says that mental phenomena are identical with brain states or
processes. But this theory fails if sense-data exist as mental entities and have properties,
Perception
53

such as being green and rectangular, that no brain process has. Identity theorists thus
generally oppose the sense-datum theory. See, for example, J.J.C. Smart’s much-discussed
‘Sensations and Brain Processes,’ Philosophical Review 68 (1959), 141–56.
22 These and other problems are brought against the sense-datum theory by Winston H.F.
Barnes in ‘The Myth of Sense-Data,’ Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 45 (1944–5). Cf.
R.M. Chisholm’s discussion of the problem of the speckled hen: is there, for instance, any
answer to the question how many spots there are in an image of such a hen? And how can
we distinguish counting the number there are from the number’s changing? See his
Theory of Knowledge, 3rd edn (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall), 1989, p. 25.
23 For a detailed twentieth-century defense of phenomenalism, see Book II of C.I. Lewis’s
An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation (La Salle, IL: Open Court, 1946). Cf. R.M.
Chisholm’s widely known criticism of this defense in ‘The Problem of Empiricism,’
Journal of Philosophy 45 (1948).
24 Berkeley might hold that if God has booklike sense-data, it does follow that there really
is a book. A case can be made for this, but one might also argue that as an all-powerful
being God could bring it about that there is a distinction between his creating a physical
object and having the corresponding sense-data.
25 A subject who really does have visual impressions could also misreport. The possibility of
such misreporting about one’s own consciousness is discussed in Chapter 3.
54
Sources of justification, knowledge, and truth

2
Memory
• Memory and the past
• The causal basis of memory beliefs
• Theories of memory
Three modes of memory
The direct realist view
The representative theory of memory
Memory images
Remembering
The phenomenalist conception of memory
The adverbial conception of memory
• Remembering, recalling, and imaging
• Remembering, imaging, and recognition
• The epistemological centrality of memory
Remembering, knowing, and being justified
Memorial justification and memorial knowledge
Memory as a preservative and generative source

2
Memory
I believe that in the past I have pruned the flowering crab apple tree that
stands in the center of the lawn. This belief is apparently grounded in my
memory. When I look at the tree and notice its shape, it often occurs to me
that I have pruned it. When this does occur to me, I have a sense of already
believing it. The proposition that I have pruned the tree does not seem to be
either a discovery or a result of inference or a bit of wishful thinking, but
rather something I have had in mind before and now believe with some
conviction.
On the basis of all these facts about my belief that I have pruned this tree,
the belief is justified. Indeed, I cannot help thinking I know that I have
pruned the tree. In particular, my belief that I have seems to be grounded in
memory, in the way that what I genuinely remember is grounded there.
Consider remembering one’s having just read the preceding part of this
page. If one has just done so, there is likely to be a clear sense of having done
it. We do not, for instance, simply have a dreamlike recollection, nor are we
concluding what we seem to remember from something else, as you might
conclude, from the distinctive shape of a tree, that it must have been you
who pruned it.
What, in general terms, is memory? Is it anything beyond a capacity we
conceive as a storehouse of some of what we have experienced and learned?
And what is it to remember something? Whatever it is, it extends to people,
objects, facts, and events, including experiences. We might also say that
remembering is the chief “function” of memory. Is remembering, then, exer-
cising, or being able to exercise, the capacity of memory? And is there – as
with perceptual knowledge by contrast with mere perceptual belief – a
special kind of success that goes with remembering something as opposed to
simply believing it from memory?
In pursuing these questions, it is useful to compare memory with
perception. Both are crucial for knowledge of what is external to the
mind: the latter gives us a view of what is outside of us in the present, the
former of what is outside of the present altogether. Moreover, memory
builds on perception; it preserves much important information we acquire
through the senses. It also preserves information about our own mental
lives. But how does memory achieve this preservation? Must it, for
instance, operate by storing images, or can it preserve bare facts? Before
we can adequately see how memory is connected with knowledge and
justification, we must first understand what it is and something about
how it works.

Memory and the past
We can learn some basic points about memory and remembering by clearing
away some tempting mistakes. To begin with, we cannot say simply that
memory is a capacity for knowledge or belief about the past. It is true that
memory entails that capacity; but one could have and even exercise the
capacity without exhibiting memory of anything in the past. Consider the
events of World War II. I can know a good deal about them through
reading, but at the time I am learning about them through reading I have
no memory of them. I witnessed none of them, and I do not remember
them. To be sure, I may remember a description of them and thereby say –
perhaps recalling a history class – that I remember (for instance) the invasion
of Normandy. This could be called remembering the events indirectly. But it
is not remembering them in the direct and primary sense that concerns us.
Far from all knowledge of the past being a kind of remembering, then,
we commonly know propositions about the past on a basis other than
remembering it. Consider again the knowledge of the past obtained while
reading; this knowledge is not an instance of remembering the past but a kind
of knowledge of the past acquired through present testimony about it.
Similarly, I can gain knowledge about the past from your present description
of what you did yesterday. This knowledge may not be retained, hence need
not be memorial. It may never get into the storehouse: I could possess some
of the detailed knowledge you give me, say that you were carrying a camera,
for just a moment and immediately lose it after I have acquired it, just as we
forget a phone number needed only for a moment. In these instances, I have
knowledge of the past, but only for too brief a time to qualify as remembering
the propositions I momentarily knew.
The same example shows a second major point. Like knowledge of the
past, beliefs about the past, such as those I acquire about your activities, do
not necessarily represent memory. For they need not be retained and so are
not memory beliefs, that is, beliefs grounded in the “faculty” of memory. They
are grounded in testimony and are forgotten before being memorially stored.
Moreover, even when one does memorially retain beliefs about the past,
they need not amount to remembering something. Retained beliefs about the
past can be sheer fabrications unconnected with memory capacities.
Imagine, for instance, that although I have not seen you for a year, for some
reason I groundlessly form the belief that precisely a month ago you were
wearing the same belt I see you wearing now. This belief, even when
retained, would not be memorial; it comes not from memory but from
undisciplined imagination. Retaining a conviction grounded in fantasy does
not upgrade it into a memory belief.
One might think that beliefs about the past, when they are memorial,
and not merely retained, represent remembering. But this need not be so,
because they may be false, whereas everything we genuinely remember to
be the case is true. Remembering is, then, factive. If, for instance, I
Memory
57

remember that Thomas Reid discussed John Locke’s ideas about memory,
then he in fact did.
To see that even a memory belief that something is so need not repre-
sent genuinely remembering that it is, suppose my memory plays a trick
on me and I misremember an actual event, falsely thinking that I planted
a green spruce when it was really a blue one I planted. I would then have a
memory belief (one tracing back in a normal way to an event it is about)
that is mistaken, even though its close relatives in my memory are true.
Still, I cannot remember that I planted a green spruce if in fact I did not.
Even when a falsehood resides in the neighborhood of truth, it is not
elevated into an object of remembering simply because it is retained in a
memory belief. Unlike memory beliefs, the things we remember to be true
invariably are true.
Suppose, however, that a retained belief about the past is true. Is it then
an instance of remembering? Not necessarily. Even true beliefs about the
past may be utterly baseless and true only by lucky accident. Suppose that
my memorially retained belief that you wore that belt just happens to be
true because by chance you did select the same belt for both occasions. This
belief still does not represent remembering that you did. I have merely
retained my luckily true impression that you did. A retained belief of this
sort is stored in memory, but only properly grounded true beliefs stored there
constitute remembering.1
The causal basis of memory beliefs
One might think that just as perceptual beliefs are caused by an object
perceived, memory beliefs are caused by a past event remembered. Some
memory beliefs are caused in this way, and we will soon see that causal
connections to the past are essential for genuine remembering. But even if it
should be true that all memory beliefs are produced at least partly by events
in the past, past events are not the only objects of memory or the only things
it “stores.” We remember, and thereby retain and believe, general truths,
such as mathematical theorems. Mathematical propositions are certainly not
past events (propositions are not events of any kind). Learning them is a past
event for most of us, but that is a quite different point. Nor are the proposi-
tions past objects of some other sort, or even about the past; but many truths
of mathematics are clearly among the objects of remembering – the things
we remember.
Moreover, even if every memory belief is at least partly caused by a past
event, not every belief caused by a past event need be memorial. This point
applies even if the belief is true. Suppose that my unknowingly taking a
poisonous drug causes me to feel strangely ill an hour later, and my feeling
ill then causes me to believe I have been poisoned. Then, indirectly, the past
event of taking poison causes me to believe that I have been poisoned. But
this belief is not memorial: it is in no way grounded in my capacity for
58
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

remembering, and I have no memories connected with the belief, such as a
memory of someone’s sprinkling a white powder into my soup. I arrive at
the belief by inference to what I think best explains my illness, and I might
as well have believed something similar about the present, say to the effect
that I am now being poisoned. Thus, the belief’s being caused by the past
event of my taking the drug need not make it a memory belief, even if the
belief is true. My memory has played no role in supporting the content of the
belief. The belief lacks a ground appropriate for suitably connecting it with
the past event it represents.
An analogy with perception will help. Consider a belief caused by a
flash that I do not see, but merely feel as a momentary heat. This belief
need not be a visual belief, even if it is a true belief with visual content,
say that a camera flashed near my hand. A belief caused by something
visible is not thereby a visual belief, just as a belief caused by a past event
– something rememberable – is not thereby a memory belief. Since a belief
caused by a past event need not be memorial, it would be a mistake to
think that a memory belief simply is a belief at least partly caused by a
past event.2
The analogy between memory and perception is limited, but it does get
us on the right track. For surely a belief about the past is memorial only if it
has some causal connection to a past event, just as a belief is perceptual (say,
visual) only if there is some causal connection between it and the perceiver.
Even a belief that arises from testimony and not from first-hand observation
and is then stored in memory is traceable to the past event of one’s acquiring
the belief. A thing cannot normally be stored in memory unless it has
entered that storehouse. Since memory beliefs can concern any subject
matter, including future events or mathematical truths, we can see that such
beliefs need not be about any particular event even if their existence does
trace to one.
Could one, however, have an innate belief? If so, this could be about the
past but not memorially connected with a past event, perhaps because the
belief is possessed at the time one came into being and does not in any way
trace to a remembered experience. It would not enter the storehouse of
memory: it is part of one’s initial equipment. To be sure, perhaps an innate
belief could be memorial in roughly the ordinary way if in some previous
incarnation there is an appropriate event to which it traces, something of the
kind that produces a memory.3 Otherwise, it is merely a retained belief, say
retained from birth as part of one’s native endowment, rather than a belief
entering one’s memory through, say, observation or testimony.
Just as it is hard to specify how, in order to be perceptual, a belief must
be causally connected to the perceptible object it is about, it is hard to
specify how, in order to be memorial, a belief must be causally connected to
the past. This will become clearer as we explore memory, but fortunately
many points can be made about memory without a detailed account of the
kind of causal connection in question.
Memory
59

Theories of memory
If we view theories of memory on the model of three major kinds of theo-
ries of perception discussed in Chapter 1, there is much we can discover
both about the kinds of causal relations required for remembering and
about how memory grounds justification and knowledge. Broadly
speaking, the three kinds are direct realism (including the adverbial theory
and the theory of appearing as well as naive realism), representative
realism, and phenomenalism. Each has an analogue in the theory of
memory.
Three modes of memory
In constructing theories of memory, there are at least three different but
closely related notions we must keep track of: memory, remembering, and
recalling. We remember, and recall – roughly, call back to mind – in virtue
of the power of our memory, conceived as a capacity (or, alternatively, as a
mental “faculty”). There are things we remember, such as isolated facts,
that we may never have occasion to recall. But they remain in the store-
house of memory ready to be retrieved should they be needed. Our
memory is a general capacity: the better it is, the more and better we
remember and the more we can recall. Among the things we remember are
skills and related behavioral capacities, both mental and physical. This is
remembering how. Much of what emerges concerning remembering will
apply to remembering how (though the notion does not seem reducible to
any kind of knowing that), but I will not take time to discuss it specifi-
cally.
There are, then, three memorial notions to be accounted for by a theory
of memory: first, remembering of events, things, and propositions; second,
recalling those items; and third, memory as the capacity in virtue of which
remembering and recalling occur. There is a further task: accounting for
errors. Like perception, memory, as the capacity for remembering and
recalling – and I include recollection as a kind of recalling – can produce
impressions that are illusory or, in a way, hallucinatory. Not every memory
belief is true; not every recollection is faithful to what it recalls.
In developing the memorial counterparts of the three main kinds of
theories of perception, I will concentrate chiefly on remembering, particu-
larly on the simple remembering of events, for instance of my pruning the
tree, as opposed to remembering that I pruned it (propositional remem-
bering) or remembering the pruning to be hard (objectual remembering). I
assume that, like simple perception of something, simple remembering of
an event, such as a bird’s flying by, does not entail having a belief about it,
as opposed to being disposed to form beliefs about it if the occasion elicits
them. But let us concentrate on cases in which one does have such a belief.
These cases are crucial for understanding memorial knowledge.
60
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

The direct realist view
The memorial counterpart of naive realism in the theory of perception is the
view that when we remember an event, we just plain remember it and it is
as it seems to us to be. This might be taken to mean that the event is
directly presented to us by our memory, as if it were present in memory, just
as a flash might be present before us. The difference is that unlike a flash
that fills one’s visual field, the remembered event is not taken to be occur-
ring. Like all the major accounts of memory, this one is best construed as a
causal view: as assuming that some causal chain links us to the remembered
event. If, for example, I remember seeing Bill a year ago, then it must be in
part because I did see him that I believe (or am disposed to believe) that I did,
and not, say, because I dreamt that I did.
As a direct realist view, this position also maintains that our memory
belief is not produced by any intermediary with which we are acquainted,
such as an image. To say that would imply a counterpart of the sense-datum
theory. We would have an indirect realism: just as we perceive through
sense-data which present the outside world to us, we remember by virtue of
memory’s presenting the past to us.
At this point, however, naive realism about memory must be revised. To
begin with, not just any causal connection to the past will do, as we saw with
the poisoning case. The causal chain linking a memory belief to a remem-
bered event must be in a sense unbroken. In part, the idea is that this belief
must be retained in memory, hence cannot be lost from it. To see the idea,
consider a broken chain. Imagine that you saw me prune the apple tree and
you remember my doing so. The pruning is then the main causal ground of
your memory belief, as it is of mine, and we both remember my pruning it.
But suppose I completely forget the event and thus no longer believe I
pruned the tree, then later come to believe, solely on the basis of your testi-
mony, that I pruned it. There is still a causal chain from my present belief
back to the pruning; for the pruning produced your belief, which in a way
produced your testimony, which in turn produced my present belief. But the
memorial chain in me was broken by my forgetting. I do not retain my orig-
inal belief and do not remember my pruning; I simply know, from your
testimony, that I did it. After your testimony, when I have retained the
knowledge you gave me, we might say that I now remember that I pruned
the tree but no longer remember pruning it. Propositional memory about an
event, even an action of one’s own, does not entail event memory of it.
Thus, when a break in the chain of events running from a past event I
witnessed to my true belief about that event, say of the pruning, prevents
my remembering the event, I may still have knowledge of the event; but I
do not remember it. My knowledge of the event no more represents remem-
bering than my knowledge based solely on your testimony that there is a
radiant sunset visible from the front porch represents my seeing it, when I
am inside reading.
Memory
61

A realist view of remembering seems correct, then, if it is coupled with
the requirement of an unbroken causal chain. But as stated so far the view is
deficient in some of the ways that naive realism about perception is. For one
thing, memory is subject to illusion. I might remember an event, such as
meeting you, but not quite as it was, just as you might see white paper in
yellow light, and thus not see it as white but as yellow. Here I do not simply
remember; I remember incorrectly, for example in remembering the meeting
as taking place in New York when it was in fact in Chicago. (I correctly
remember meeting you; I do not remember the location of the meeting.)
Second, there is the memorial counterpart of hallucination: I may have a
vivid image of mailing a letter, and might believe I remember doing so, yet
be quite mistaken. We must, then, account for memorial illusion and
similar problems.
The representative theory of memory
The territory may begin to look familiar, particularly if we recall the sense-
datum theory of perception, which posits inner sensory objects that, as
intermediaries between external things and the mind, represent the former
to the latter. For instance, suppose that there are memory images, and that
they are genuine objects which figure in remembering rather as sense-data
are thought to figure in perceiving. These images might even be sense-data if
they are vivid enough, but normally they are more like the images of fantasy.
It might be like this: seeing the apple tree as I prune it produces sensory
images in me (whether these are sense-data or not); my memorial images of
the tree might be conceived as a kind of residue of perception.4
Perhaps, then, we may properly be said to remember an event when we
have at least one true belief about it suitably grounded in a memorial image
of it, that is, an image of it which derives, by a suitable unbroken chain,
from our experience of the event and represents it correctly in at least some
way. The better the representation of the event, the better our memory of it.
Call this view of the memory of events the representative theory of memory. It
takes event memory to be a representational faculty that works through
images that in some sense picture what they represent to us.
Memory images
Like the sense-datum theory of perception, the representative theory of
memory is an indirect realism. It construes our remembering as mediated by
memory images (though not as based on inference from facts about such
images); it is through images that we are acquainted with the past. The view
is also like the sense-datum theory in readily accounting for memorial illu-
sion and similar problems. To remember incorrectly, as opposed to simply
having a false belief about the past with no basis in memory, is to be
acquainted with a memory image that, despite its being sufficiently faithful
62
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

to the remembered event to ground one’s remembering it, has some aspect
which produces a false belief about the event, say that it was in New York
rather than in Chicago.
The counterpart of hallucination is also treated as one would expect from
a study of the sense-datum theory. Memorial hallucination occurs when one
has an image that is intrinsically like a memorial one, but not linked to a
past event by a suitable causal chain, just as, in perceptual hallucinations,
the sense-data are not produced by the object (or are produced by it in an
abnormal way).
Unfortunately, the representative theory of memory has many of the diffi-
culties of the sense-datum theory and some of its own. Consider the similar
difficulties first, particularly in relation to remembering.
Remembering
Remembering an event surely does not require acquaintance with an image of
it. You may be able to reel off, from memory, some details of a conversation
you heard a week ago, even if you have no images, even auditory ones, of the
conversation or what it concerned. Moreover, misremembering an event does
not require acquaintance with something, such as an image, which actually
has the property one mistakenly remembers the event as having had, as a
sense-datum representing the mouth of a cup from a certain angle is supposed
to have the property of being elliptical. I can misremember my meeting you
by remembering our meeting as being in New York, when it was actually in
Chicago, even if the mistaken element in my memory is not accompanied by
images of anything in New York (and even if the correct aspect of my
memory is not accompanied by an image that is of our actual meeting in
Chicago). I may simply remember the occasion with its animated conversa-
tion, yet have the false impression that it was in New York.
Memorial thinking – an episode of thinking about one or more remem-
bered objects or events – may also be possible without objects to serve as
images of the past. In retrospective imagination, might I not vividly experi-
ence our conversation even if I am acquainted with no object that represents
it for me in the way that, in hallucinations, sense-data are supposed to repre-
sent physical objects?
Granted, if I have no images, then I cannot recall – in the sense of
bringing back into my consciousness – the color of your sweater. But I
might still remember what you said and the hoarseness of your voice owing
to the flu, and I might remember what color your sweater was even if I
cannot bring the color itself to mind (perhaps you said that the pale blue
matched your jacket, and it is by that remark that I remember what the
color was without imaging it). I can apparently imagine past events without
having direct acquaintance with memorial pictures of them, just as I can
apparently hallucinate an object without having direct acquaintance with a
sense-datum representation of it.
Memory
63

A further difficulty for the representative theory arises when we
consider a disanalogy between remembering and perceiving. I can
remember our meeting and describe it to someone from memory even if I
have no images or image-like experiences at all, whereas I apparently
cannot see a tree if I have no visual sensations, such as the impressions of
foliage that make up an image of a tree. Remembering, even of events
that one has perceived, is neither a sensory event nor necessarily an imagi-
national one (even if it often is, especially in some people, such as those
who are highly “visual”). So there need not be, in every case of remem-
bering, even the makings of a representative theory to which images are
crucial.
The phenomenalist conception of memory
The kinds of difficulties we have seen in relation to the representative theory
of memory suggest that the memorial counterpart of phenomenalism may
also suffer irreparable difficulties. Above all, a phenomenalist account of
memory relies on images or imaging at least as heavily as does the represen-
tative theory, but neither images nor imaging seems either necessary or
sufficient for remembering events. Let us explore this.
On the most plausible phenomenalist account of memory, remembering
an event is understood in terms of the imaginational content of present
experience. To remember an event is (roughly) to have a suitable collection
of images representing it, on the basis of which, in a certain way, one
believes (or is disposed to believe) something about that event. But this will
not do. Remembering an event simply does not require a collection of
images analogous to the sense-data from which phenomenalists try to
construct physical objects (or even a collection of imaging experiences such
as an adverbial phenomenalist might posit).
Images of the kind posited to account for remembering are not only not
necessary for remembering, as our examples show; they are not sufficient for
it either. Just as no collection of sense-data is such that its existence implies
perception of an external object, no collection of images (even apparently
memorial images) is such that, in having a belief about the past grounded on
those images, one must be remembering something. No matter how vivid
my images of talking with you beneath the skyscrapers of Wall Street, I may
not remember our talking there, and my belief that we did talk there (or
anywhere) may be mistaken.
The adverbial conception of memory
If these difficulties are as serious as they seem, then if, in search of a better
account of memory, we are to change course and construct a plausible alter-
native theory of remembering, we must take account of them. First, such a
theory will not claim for remembering all the kinds of directness it posits
64
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

for perception. Plainly, memory is not temporally direct, since past events are
not temporally present, whereas we can see a thing’s properties at the same
time that it has them.5
By contrast, any plausible account of remembering, such as a properly
developed adverbial theory of it, will take remembering to be (as perceiving
apparently is) epistemically direct. Memory beliefs, as we have seen, are not
inferential. It is not on the basis of any premise that I believe (or know) that I
have pruned that crab apple tree. My belief is grounded in memory as a
preserver of beliefs and other elements, not in other beliefs which give me
premises to support the belief.6
Moreover, such a theory must not say that (actively) remembering an
event, such as pruning a tree, is constituted by memorially imaging in a way
suitably caused by that past event, as perceiving an object is sensory stimu-
lation suitably caused by the thing perceived. For no such imaging need
occur (though it commonly does, especially in the case of the active remem-
bering that constitutes recalling). We can describe a past event to others, and
in doing so actively remember it, even if we are imaging nothing but the
faces we see.
Positively, the adverbial view of memory, applied to remembering events,
should be expressed as something like this. First, actively (occurrently) remem-
bering an event is realizing a memorial capacity concerning it, where this
capacity is linked to the event by an unbroken causal chain. Just as, in
observing a cat, one is realizing a perceptual capacity, in describing a play
from memory one is realizing a memorial one. The most typical realizations
– the things that constitute experiencing in a memorial way – are probably
(1) imaging processes concerning the event; (2) formations of memorial
beliefs about it; and (3) considering the propositions so believed, with a
sense of already believing them. But there may be other realizations, such as
recognizing a picture of the event. Second, passively (dispositionally) remem-
bering an event is having this capacity in an unrealized state, as where,
though I can recall the pruning if I want to, my mind is wholly on other
things. For me to remember the pruning actively, something would have to
call it to my mind.
To see the difference between the dispositional and the occurrent in
another context, consider elasticity in a rubber band. It is a dispositional
property, whereas stretching is an occurrent property that manifests the
disposition (this distinction is further discussed in Chapter 3). Recalling an
event can be related to remembering it much as a thing’s stretching is to its
elasticity. Just as stretching manifests the disposition of elasticity, recalling
is a case of actively remembering that manifests the dispositional memory
that retains the thing recalled.
Propositional remembering – remembering that – can be construed simi-
larly. On the adverbial view imagined, to remember that an event occurred
is a memorial way of truly believing that it did, roughly, have one or more
true beliefs about it which are suitably linked by an unbroken chain to past
Memory
65

experience and represent the event in a certain way (if only as occurring).
These beliefs constitute knowledge that is preserved in memory. On this
view, then, remembering that something is so constitutes knowledge from
memory, rather as seeing that the cat is sleeping constitutes knowledge
through perception.
Most of what we propositionally remember is dispositional, roughly,
recorded in dispositional beliefs. When these beliefs are called up in active
propositional remembering, as where I describe how I pruned the tree, one is
experiencing in a memorial way. This does not require being acquainted
with imagistic memorial objects. One may, but need not, image memorially,
as where one actually calls up the remembered experience and focuses on its
features in one’s imagination.
Moreover, whether one images a remembered event or not, the event need
not be entirely as one remembers it. Here event memory differs from propo-
sitional memory; the former, like seeing as, can misrepresent the thing in
question, whereas remembering that something is so, like seeing that it is,
entails its being so. One can remember a meeting as being in the wrong city,
thus remember it in the wrong way geographically, just as one can see a
circular cup as elliptical and so see it in the wrong way visually.
In neither case of illusion, to be sure, does one have to be fooled: with
memory as with perception, illusion does not always produce false belief.
Typically, if I remember something as having a certain quality, say a conver-
sation as being rushed, I believe it was like that; but I can remember it as
such, yet know from independent evidence (such as testimony) that it was
not rushed. If, however, we really remember some object or event, then we
are right about some aspect of it, or are at least in a position to form some
true beliefs about it on considering the matter. This is parallel to the point
that if one really sees something, one is at least in a position to see it to be
something or other.
Remembering, recalling, and imaging
So far, the adverbial view seems superior to its competitors in relation to the
crucial notions to be accounted for, such as remembering and recalling. Will
this direct realist view stand scrutiny? In answering this, it is important to
see that the view can account for imaging; it simply does not take imaging
to be an acquaintance with inner objects. Still, there may be a nagging
doubt about whether it does not incline us to posit too little imaging. When
I am remembering an event, especially a perceived one like a ship’s docking
as opposed to an imperceptible one like thinking about knowledge, I typi-
cally do image some aspect of it. I refer, of course, to active remembering, as
opposed to my stored remembering of events that are now far from my mind
but which I could actively recall if the subject came up. The first kind of
remembering is occurrent, since it is in part a matter of something’s occur-
ring in me. The second kind is dispositional, since it is a matter of my being
66
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

disposed (roughly, tending) to remember a thing actively (occurrently)
provided that something, such as a question about the event, activates my
memory. Thus, although yesterday’s concert may be far from my mind while
I write a letter, if someone asks how I liked the Chopin, then my disposi-
tional memory may be activated; and, as I recall it, thereby occurrently
remembering it, I may say I thought it inspiring.
It is occurrent remembering that is analogous to perception and is my
main concern now; and it is occurrent remembering that is closely associated
with imaging. Does occurrent remembering require some sort of imagery
after all, even if not images as sense-datum objects?
Here is a natural way to answer. Consider one of your memories of an
event, for instance meeting someone for the first time. Do this in such a way
that you take yourself to be actively remembering that event. Second, ask
yourself whether you are now imaging. When I do this, I image. Here,
remembering involves imaging. But notice what has happened: I have called
up a memory and inspected the results of my effort. Perhaps I am imaging
because of the way I evoked the remembering, or because I scrutinized the
process of my calling up the meeting. Self-conscious evocation of the past
and scrutiny of the results may yield findings unrepresentative of remem-
bering in general.
This procedure of evoking memories of the past, then – selecting them by
recalling past phenomena – is defective as a way of determining whether
remembering requires imaging. But the procedure does show something.
For suppose that what I have done is to recall a past event. Perhaps recalling,
which is calling back to mind, often by a lengthy search of one’s memory,
does require imaging provided it is a recalling of an imageable event, such as
pruning a tree, as opposed to, say, a theorem. There is some reason to think
this is so. If no imaging of our luncheon comes into my consciousness, how
can I have recalled it? Sometimes, moreover, we say that we cannot recall
someone, meaning not that we do not know who the person is, but that we
cannot image the person. There, recalling seems to imply some sort of
imaging.
Even if recalling should imply imaging, however, remembering does not.
Why, then, does that idea persist? For one thing, when we collect specimen
memories in order to examine remembering, we often do it by recalling
things. If so, it should be no surprise that the specimen memories involve
recalling something. If, in trying to determine the shades of beech leaves, I
collect specimens only from the nearby copper beeches, it is no surprise that
I may erroneously think beeches in general have copper-colored leaves.
Remembering, imaging, and recognition
A deeper point is that what we cannot recall we often believe we cannot
remember. On the adverbial view, this is natural; for an inability to
remember is a lack of a memorial capacity, and, understandably, we may
Memory
67

think we lack that capacity when, under normal conditions, we cannot
exercise it in an expectable way – such as recalling an event we have been
taking ourselves to remember. But imaging is only one exercise of memorial
capacity, important though it is; and just as we can be capable of climbing a
mountain, but not necessarily by every route to the top, we may have the
capacity constituted by remembering something, but be unable to exercise
the capacity in every way it can be exercised. Hence, inability to image does
not imply that one does not remember the thing in question. We can see,
then, both why there is a tendency to think that remembering requires
imaging and why we should not accept this view.
Imaging may still seem more important for remembering than so far
granted. But take another case. Suppose I can neither recall nor image Jane.
I can still remember her; for on seeing her, I might recognize her and might
remember, and even recall, our last meeting. This would suggest that my
memory simply needed to be “jogged.” In adverbial terms, before I see her
again I dispositionally know her in a certain memorial way – I remember
her – even though I cannot imagistically experience her in that memorial
way – namely, recall her.
I choose the example of remembering a person because it is easy to show
that we do remember someone by creating the right occasion. Recalling her
is an indication of my remembering her, but it may not be possible despite
my remembering her; recognizing her when I meet her is a proof of the
pudding. We cannot draw this contrast with past events, since, unlike people,
they cannot be literally brought back. But even here, there is indirect recog-
nition, as where one recognizes a ship’s docking in Helsinki harbor upon
seeing a picture of the event. It is doubtful, then, that the relation between
recalling and remembering is different with events.
It is important to see that the way I am now considering the relation
between recalling and remembering is direct and non-introspective. I am
exploring what is possible and what it would show. It is possible, however
unlikely, that I might have no retained image of pruning the crab apple
tree, yet be able to give an account of the pruning that is both remarkably
accurate and grounded by a suitable causal chain in the original experience
of the pruning. If I do this without my having received any information
about the event from anyone else, it is an excellent reason to think I
remember the event. It is akin to recognition of a person one could not
recall, say by picking the person out of a crowd.
To be sure, our beliefs about what events we remember may depend on
what we can recall, which, in turn, may be largely dependent on what we
can image. But what events we do remember is a matter of how our memo-
rial capacities are grounded in the past and not of what kind of evidence we
can get, imagistically or otherwise, concerning that grounding.
In exercising my capacity to remember events, then, I need not rely on
my images or even on my ability to image, though in fact retention of
images doubtless aids remembering. The representative theory of memory
68
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

therefore seems mistaken, and some memorial analogue of direct realism
regarding perception is apparently preferable. The possibility of a good
analogy is already implicit in the point that an event can be perceived even
though the time at which one has a sensory experience representing it is
later than its occurrence. The suggested adverbial view of remembering is a
good position from which to work; but I leave some important questions
about memory unexplored, and it would be premature to present that view
as clearly correct.
The epistemological centrality of memory
We can now see some points about memory as a source of belief, knowledge,
and justification. Let us start with beliefs, the least complex of the three
cases. Memory is a source of beliefs in the way a storehouse is a source of
what has been put there, but it is not a source of beliefs in the way percep-
tion is. Obviously our memory, as a mental capacity, is a source of beliefs in
the sense that it preserves them and enables us to call them up. It also enables
us to draw on our beliefs to supply premises in reasoning. We do this when we
solve mathematical problems using memorized theorems. We may also rely
on other kinds of presupposed premises that guide us without having to be
recalled.
When our memory beliefs are of propositions we remember to be true,
they constitute knowledge. If you remember that we met, you know that we
did. Similarly, if you remember me, you know me (at least in the sense of
knowing who I am, which is not to say you can recognize me in person). So
memory, when it is a source of what is remembered, commonly yields both
knowledge that and knowledge of. Remembering, then, is knowledge-
entailing. The analogy to perception is significant here too.
Is memory also a source of justification? Surely what justifies the great
majority of my justified beliefs about the past is my memory. For instance,
my belief that I twice pruned the crab apple tree is justified because of the
way that belief resides in my memory. It has, for example, a special kind of
familiarity, confidence, and connection with other things I seem to
remember. Moreover, it appears that if I remember that I met you, I am
justified in believing I met you. It thus seems that where memory yields
genuine remembering it also yields justification. Certainly this commonly
holds.
Remembering, knowing, and being justified
Perhaps, however, I could remember that I met you, yet fail to be justified
in my belief because (in fun) you convince me, by good arguments and by
enlisting the corroboration of plausible cohorts, that I am probably
confusing you with someone else. Still, if my belief remains properly
grounded in my actual memory of having met you (perhaps because the
Memory
69

memory is so clear that the belief is almost unshakable), I may nonetheless
genuinely remember that I met you. Despite this point, if your arguments
are good enough, I may properly reproach myself for still holding the belief
that I met you, and my belief may perhaps cease to be justified. Its justifica-
tion would be defeated by your arguments and by my own credible
self-reproaches based on seeing their plausibility.
If this case is possible, it has an important implication. If, as I have
suggested, remembering that something is so entails knowing it is so, then
the case as described implies that knowing that something is so does not
imply justifiedly believing it. (In Chapter 8, I return to the relation between
knowledge and justification, but it is important here to see that the domain
of memory provides a challenge to understanding that relation.)7
Furthermore, if the case is possible and one can remember that some-
thing is so, yet fail to be justified in one’s believing that it is so, then we
might question whether memory yields any justified beliefs after all.
Fortunately, the example by no means rules this out. Quite apart from cases
of genuine remembering, memory often yields justified belief. If I have a
vivid and confident belief that I met Jane, and this belief seems to me to
arise from a memory of the occasion, I may, simply on that basis, be justi-
fied in the belief. Surely this is, after all, just the sort of belief that usually
does represent remembering; in any case, I have no reason to question its
credentials.
Memory can justify a belief even where that belief does not constitute
knowledge or rest on actual remembering of the proposition or event in
question. If, for instance, I do not in fact remember meeting Jane, perhaps
the only reason why I do not is that it was her identical twin, of whose exis-
tence I had no idea, whom I met. That excusable ignorance may prevent my
knowing that I met Jane, but it does not preclude my justifiedly believing
that I did.
Memorial justification and memorial knowledge
These reflections suggest a memorial justification principle for events: normally,
if one has a clear and confident memory belief that one experienced a given
thing, then the belief is justified. Similarly, we might call such beliefs prima
facie justified.8 A memory belief is one grounded in memory; this is
commonly a kind of belief which represents the event or proposition in
question as familiar in a certain way. Commonly, if one considered the
matter, the belief would seem to one to arise from one’s memory; but the
notion of a memory belief cannot be defined by that normal property of such
beliefs, and it is not easily defined at all.9 We can believe – even know –
from memory propositions we do not find familiar (as where we have not
recalled them or thought of them in years).
A still broader principle may perhaps be true – call it the general memorial
justification principle: normally, clear and confident memory beliefs with any
70
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

subject matter are prima facie justified. Moreover, if they do not conflict
with other beliefs one holds, say that one has never been to the country
where one now seems to remember going to a museum, they tend to be
justified on balance. With both principles the degree of justification may
not be great, particularly if there is no corroboration, such as apparently
recalling a sequence of events related to the belief. My belief that I met
someone at a restaurant tends to be better justified if I apparently remember
related events, such as a friend’s recently mentioning our meeting that
person there, than if it is isolated from other apparent memory beliefs that
confirm it.
Both these and similar principles help to describe how memory is plau-
sibly conceived as a source of justification. This is certainly how it is
standardly conceived. Imagine someone saying “I have a clear and confident
memory that we met at the Café Rouge, but this gives me no justification
whatever for thinking so.” We can understand someone’s holding that there
is better justification for not believing this – say, because of known memory
failure – but that would show only that the justification is defeated, not that
there is none whatever to be defeated.
Memory as a preservative and generative source
There is a very important difference between the way in which memory is
a source of knowledge and the way in which it is a source of justification.
To see this, we must take account of several points. Memory is a preservative
capacity with respect to both belief and knowledge. First, when you
initially come to believe something, you do not (yet) remember it. Second,
you cannot remember something unless you previously knew or at least
believed it, for instance perceptually, and your belief of it is suitably
preserved.
Thus, memory retains belief and knowledge (retention is roughly equiva-
lent to preservation but has a lesser implication of unchangingness; a belief
held with considerably lesser confidence than originally, e.g., is less properly
said to be preserved than to be retained). Memory does not generate belief
and knowledge, except in the sense that, by using what you have in memory,
you can acquire beliefs and knowledge through inference (or perhaps
through other processes that themselves yield belief and knowledge). I may,
for instance, infer much from propositions I remember, or I may arrive at
greater knowledge of a movie I saw by calling up images of various scenes.
Here it is thought processes – inferential and recollective – that, partly on
the basis of retained material, produce belief and knowledge.
To say that memory is not a generative source of knowledge is not to deny
that memory is sufficiently connected with knowledge to figure in a plau-
sible epistemic principle – call it the memorial knowledge principle: normally, a
true memory belief, supported by a vivid, steady experience of recall that is
in turn corroborated by other memory experiences, represents knowledge.
Memory
71

But if this principle is correct, that is because such beliefs are of a kind that
ordinarily constitute knowledge originally, say when one learned through
perception the truth that a tree has recently been pruned, and continued
therefore to have grounds, preserved by one’s memory, for holding this
belief.
Memory is not, then, a basic source of belief or knowledge, a source that
generates them other than through dependence on a contribution by some
different source of them. It is, however, a basic source of justification. We
can be justified in believing something either on the basis of remembering
that it is so, or of our having a clear and confident memory belief that it is.
If we genuinely remember that it is so, it is so, and we know that it is.
Justification for believing the proposition, by contrast, is possible even if
that proposition is false. Memory can preserve justification, particularly
where the justification resides in beliefs retained in memory, for instance
one’s premises for a view one justifiedly holds. But the original justifica-
tion of a belief need not be retained in order for the belief to be memorially
justified. The sense of memory can generate justification by virtue of the
way the proposition or event in question occurs to one.10
This justifying capacity of memory often operates even where we have no
associated images. But in accounting for what justifies memory beliefs,
images do have a significant if restricted role. We are better justified in a
memory belief supported by imagery, especially vivid imagery, than in
memory beliefs not thus supported (other things being equal). Perhaps the
reason is that we have at least some justification for believing that there is
less likelihood of error if both imagery and beliefs point in the same direc-
tion, say to my having met you two years ago.
For all the analogy between memory and perception, then, there are impor-
tant differences. If both are essential to our justification for believing a huge
proportion of what we believe, perception is more fundamental in a way that
is crucial to the development of our outlook on the world. It supplies
memory with much of its raw material, whereas memory, though it guides
us in seeking what to observe and, in that way, often determines what we
perceive, does not supply raw materials to perception: it manufactures no
perceptibles. It does, to be sure, supply raw materials for introspection and
thought: we would have vastly less to “look in on” or think about if we did
not remember sights and sounds, conversations and embraces, ideas and
plans.
Both memory and perception, however, are to be causally conceived, and
both are, in different ways, sources of belief, justification, and knowledge,
propositional as well as objectual. But perception is a basic source of all
three: it can produce them without dependence on contributions from
another belief-producing capacity, such as reasoning. Memory, being a
capacity for the preservation, and not the creation, of belief and knowledge,
is not a basic source of them.
72
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

Still, without memory, perceptual knowledge could not be amassed and
used to help us build theories of the world or of human experience, or even
to make local maps to guide daily living. We would not even have a sense of
who we are, since each moment in our lives would be dead to us by the next.
Beyond this, memory is a basic source of justification. That is a vitally
important epistemological point. And as we shall see, the role of memory in
our knowledge in general is also of enormous epistemological importance.
Notes
1 We might call merely retained beliefs weakly grounded in memory, but I reserve the
terms ‘memory belief’ and ‘memorial belief’ for beliefs grounded in the normal way illus-
trated by remembering what I come to believe from testimony.
2 The point that how beliefs are caused, and what their content is, may not indicate how
they are grounded (where grounding is the notion crucial to determining whether the
belief is justified or represents knowledge) is even wider than so far suggested. A noise
too faint for me to hear may cause Tom to jump, which in turn causes me to believe that
he is startled; my belief that he is startled is thus (indirectly) caused by the noise, but it
is not auditory. It is in no way grounded in my hearing.
3 In both Western philosophy – for example, in Plato and Descartes – and Eastern philos-
ophy, innate ideas have played a significant part. In recent times there has been much
skepticism about whether they – as opposed to innate dispositions to form ideas – are
even possible. I cannot discuss this issue here, but I see no reason not to leave the matter
open for the sake of argument. In any case, the possibility of “innate” beliefs seems
implicit in something less controversial: that in principle a person could be created as a
perfect copy of another, and so would have at least some beliefs at the moment of “birth.”
4 John Locke, for example, in his Essay Concerning Human Understanding, speaks of percep-
tion as “the inlet of all the materials of” knowledge (Book II, Chapter IX, section 15) and
says, comparing perception and memory, that
when my eyes are shut or windows fast, I can at pleasure recall to my mind the
ideas of light, or the sun, which former sensation had lodged in my memory … there is a
manifest difference between the ideas laid up in my memory … and those [of
perception] which force themselves upon me … there is nobody who doth not
perceive the difference in himself between contemplating the sun, as he hath the
idea of it in his memory, and actually looking upon it: Of which two, his percep-
tion is so distinct, that few of his ideas are more distinguishable from one another.
(Book IV, Chapter XI, section 5; italics added)
5 Or virtually the same time: the time-lag argument discussed in Chapter 1 indicates that
if light transmission is essential to seeing, there will be a tiny gap between the time at
which something we see has a property we are visually caused to believe it has and the
time at which we see it as having, or believe it to have, that property. We also noted,
however, that light transmission does not seem absolutely essential for seeing.
6 I am assuming that simple inferences do not require the use of memory; but even if they
do, once a belief is formed inferentially, it can be inferentially held only insofar as it is
supported by the premise beliefs. Then memory may well be what preserves the inferen-
tial structure represented by believing something on the basis of premises; but the belief
of this is itself only preserved by memory without being genuinely memorial. Not every
way that memory preserves a belief renders the belief memorial, and one would explain
why one holds this belief not by saying ‘I remember …’ but by citing one’s premises.
Memory
73

7 I develop this case, defend the conclusion tentatively stated here, and discuss other
matters considered in this chapter, in ‘Memorial Justification,’ Philosophical Topics 23, 1
(1995), 31–45. For a different position on some of the relevant issues see Carl Ginet,
Knowledge, Perception, and Memory (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1975).
8 It is natural to wonder whether the degree of justification normally belonging to such
memory beliefs is as great as that normally belonging to perceptual beliefs. Perhaps not,
and one could add ‘to some degree’ in the normality formulation. But it still appears that
the kind of justification is such that it is generally reasonable to believe the propositions
in question and that when they are true we commonly can know them on the basis of the
relevant kind of justifier.
9 The paper cited in note 7 and some of the literature it refers to consider this difficult
question; fortunately, it is not one that requires here any more than the sketch of an
answer given.
10 Cf. Michael Huemer’s conception of memorial justification in his ‘The Problem of Memory
Knowledge,’ Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 80 (1999), reprinted in his Epistemology:
Contemporary Readings (London: Routledge, 2002).
74
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

3
Consciousness
• Two basic kinds of mental properties
• Introspection and inward vision
• Some theories of introspective consciousness
Realism about the objects of introspection
An adverbial view of introspected objects
The analogy between introspection and ordinary perception
Introspective beliefs, beliefs about introspectables, and fallibility
• Consciousness and privileged access
Infallibility, omniscience, and privileged access
Difficulties for the thesis of privileged access
The possibility of scientific grounds for rejecting privileged access
• Introspective consciousness as a source of
justification and knowledge
The range of introspective knowledge and justification
The defeasibility of introspective justification
Consciousness as a basic source

3
Consciousness
So far, I have talked mainly about beliefs concerning things outside myself:
the green field before me, the smell of roses in the air, the cold glass in my
hand. But there is much that we believe about what is internal to us. I
believe that I am thinking about self-knowledge, that I am imaging cool blue
waters, and that I believe I am a conscientious citizen. In holding these three
beliefs, I attribute rather different sorts of properties to myself: thinking,
imaging, and believing. What sorts of properties – or at least phenomena –
are they, and how do our beliefs about them give us justification and knowl-
edge? For instance, are some of these self-directed beliefs the products of a
kind of inner perception? This seems a natural view. If there is some truth in it,
then exploring the analogy between outer perception and self-consciousness
might help to explain how such beliefs are justified or constitute knowledge.
Our most important kind of self-knowledge is not about our bodies but
about our minds – for instance about what we believe, want, feel, and take
ourselves to remember. It will help to start by describing the three kinds of
mental properties illustrated by thinking, imaging, and believing. Since
they are all broadly mental, this is a task in the philosophy of mind. But
epistemology cannot proceed without considerable reflection on mental
phenomena. Thinking, inferring, and believing, for example, are central in
both branches of philosophy; and to understand self-knowledge, we need a
good sense of what kinds of properties characterize us. We might begin with
two kinds that, for our purposes, yield a basic division.
Two basic kinds of mental properties
Thinking is a kind of process and involves a sequence of events, events natu-
rally said to be in the mind. Thinking in human beings has a beginning, a
middle, and an end; it is constituted by mental events, such as considering a
proposition; and these events are ordered at least in time, often in subject
matter, and sometimes in logic.
Simply having an image, in the minimal way one does when there is a
static, changeless picture in the mind’s eye, is (I assume) being in a certain
(mental) state. Unlike something that changes, such a state does not abso-
lutely require the occurrence of any events. Imaging can be a process of
calling up a succession of images or, as when one of them is held changeless
in the imagination, static. I could image something for a time without any
change whatever in my imaging, and without the occurrence of any mental
event that might be part of the imaging.

Believing could also be called a mental state, but this terminology can
be misleading in suggesting that having a belief is a state of mind, where
that implies a global mental condition like worry or excitement. Unlike
images and aroused emotions like jubilation, beliefs do not tend to crowd
one another out. Beliefs differ from images in at least two further ways.
First, beliefs need not be in consciousness. We all have many which,
unlike my belief that I am now writing, we cannot call to mind without
making some effort. Second, believing need not in any sense be “pictorial.”
Consider a belief present in consciousness, in the way my belief that the
rain has stopped is. This belief is present because I have called it to my
attention; I might have had it without attending to it or even to the fact it
records.
Even a belief present in consciousness in this prominent way and about
something as readily picturable as the Statue of Liberty need not involve
anything pictorial in the way my imaging must. Suppose I believe that the
Statue of Liberty has a majestic beauty standing high in the Bay of New
York. Without picturing anything, I can entertain this proposition, and in
that way have this belief present in my consciousness. By contrast, imaging
cool blue waters requires picturing a blue surface.
To be sure, when we call up this belief about the statue, we tend to
picture that structure. But I could later get the proposition in mind, as
where I am listing some majestically beautiful landmarks deserving preser-
vation, without picturing anything. I could even retain the belief if I had
forgotten what the statue looked like and simply remembered my aesthetic
judgment of it.
It will help in sorting things out if we observe a distinction that has
already come up but needs more development. Let us call mental properties
like beliefs dispositional and mental properties like thinking (processes-prop-
erties, we might say) occurrent. The latter are constituted by mental events
and are occurrences: they take place in the way events do and may be said to
happen or to go on. The former are not occurrences and may not be said to
happen, take place, or go on.
The basic contrast is this. To have a dispositional property, or (perhaps not
quite equivalently) to be in a dispositional state, is to be disposed – roughly,
to tend – to do or undergo something under certain conditions, but not
necessarily to be actually doing or undergoing or experiencing something or
changing in any way. Thus, my believing that I am a conscientious citizen
is, in part, my being disposed to say that I am one, under conditions that
elicit that sort of verbal manifestation of my belief, such as your asking me
whether I intend to vote. Yet I can have this belief without doing or under-
going anything connected with it, just as sugar can be soluble while it is
still in a solid, unaltered lump. I can have the belief even in dreamless sleep.
By contrast, to have an occurrent property is to be doing, undergoing, or expe-
riencing something, as sugar undergoes the process of dissolving. Thus, if
you are thinking about mental phenomena you are doing something, even if
Consciousness
77

you are in an armchair; and if you are imaging a flowering crab apple tree,
you are experiencing something, at least in the sense that your imaging the
tree is now in present in your consciousness.
Having a static image, however, as opposed to calling up an image, is not a
process as, for example, silently talking to oneself is. Occurrent mental prop-
erties, then, must be subdivided. To mark a difference between them, we
might call occurrent mental properties like thinking experiential process prop-
erties and occurrent mental properties like having a static image in mind
experiential state properties.1 Clearly, both differ from dispositional mental
properties; possessing them does not even require being conscious, much less
having a kind of experience. All three kinds of mental properties turn out to
be important for understanding the epistemological role of introspection.2
Introspection and inward vision
If we take a cue from the etymology of ‘introspection,’ which derives from
the Latin introspicere, meaning ‘to look within,’ we might construe introspec-
tion as attending to one’s own consciousness and, when one’s mind is not
blank, thereby achieving a kind of inner seeing. I might introspect my
images, for instance, and conclude that my image of the spruce indicates
that the spruce is taller than the maple. I might have to introspect my image
of the maple to tell without looking back at it whether it has three
secondary trunks. Introspection need not, however, be labored or even
constitute an act. It may be simply a matter of becoming conscious of some-
thing in one’s mind. This can be as natural as something’s coming into one’s
physical field of vision, rather than like making the effort of observation in
order to see.
It is not only in consciously introspecting that one can vividly image. In
King Lear there is a scene in which Edgar wants to convince Gloucester, who
has lost his sight, that he is at the top of a cliff. Edgar’s description is so
vivid that the deception succeeds:
How fearful and dizzy ’tis to cast one’s eye so low!
The crows and choughs that wing the midway air
Show scarce so gross as beetles. Halfway down
Hangs one that gathers samphire, dreadful trade!
Methinks he seems no bigger than his head.
The fishermen that walk upon the beach
Appear like mice, and yond tall anchoring bark …
Almost too small for sight.
(Act IV, scene vi)
What Gloucester sees in his mind’s eye is so vivid that he believes he is at
the edge of a precipice. His visual consciousness is filled with images from
Edgar’s portrait. Here introspection is simply a matter of vivid consciousness
of the imagery that is before the mind.
78
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

If introspective consciousness does produce inner seeing and other
sensuous imagery (such as, commonly, sound), we can try to understand it
by drawing on what we know about perception. For instance, we can explore
introspectional counterparts of some theories of perception and sensory expe-
rience. But one limitation of that procedure is apparent the moment we
reflect on the dispositional mental properties, for instance believing,
wanting, or having a fear of cancer. We do not see such properties in any
sensory way, as we may be thought to see (in our mind’s eye) an image of
cool blue waters. Wants are not seen, not even in our mind’s eye.
The analogy to vision might, however, still hold for introspection
regarding occurrent mental properties. If it does, it presumably applies only to
the mental state properties, like imaging. For surely thinking is not seen. It
need not even be heard in the mind’s ear. I may hear my silent recitation of
Shelley’s ‘Ozymandias,’ but thinking need not occur in inner speech, certainly
not speech of that narrative, punctuated sort.
Perhaps it is only pictorial mental properties that we see through inner
vision; and perhaps it is only sensory properties, such as inner recitations,
tactual imagings (say, of the coldness of a glass), and the like that seem
accessible to inner analogues of perception: to hearing in the mind’s ear,
touching in the tactual imagination, and so on. It is doubtful, then, that we
can go very far conceiving introspection as simply producing inward seeing.
Still, it is worth exploring how the analogy to seeing holds up for the one
important case of pictorial properties.
Some theories of introspective consciousness
Suppose that introspecting such things as images of cool blue waters does
produce a kind of inner seeing. Are we to understand this seeing on realist
lines, so that there must be some real object seen by the introspective eye?
Realism about the objects of introspection
One might think that the sense-datum view simply cannot be extended in
this way to introspection. This is at least a natural assumption about self-
understanding. For on the introspectional counterpart of the sense-datum
view, seeing (in one’s mind’s eye) an image of cool blue waters would require
something like another image, one that represents the first one in the way
sense-data represent a physical object seen by virtue of the perceiver’s
acquaintance with them. Call it a second-order image, since it is an image of an
image.
What would second-order images be like? If I try to have an image of my
image of cool blue waters, I either get that very image all over again, or I
have an image of something else, or I get something that is not an image at
all, such as a thought of my original image. But this point does not show that
there could not be second-order images. Perhaps there could be some that
Consciousness
79

are less vivid than the originals they picture, just as my imaginational image
of cool blue waters is less vivid than the sensory image I have in actually
seeing those waters.
An adverbial view of introspected objects
Supposing there can be such second-order images, a defender of an adverbial
account of sensory experience might argue that even when perceptual imaging
is later “copied” in retrospective imagination, there is really just one kind of
imaging process, and it occurs more vividly in perception than in imagina-
tion. Thus, imaging blue waters is simply imaginationally, rather than
perceptually, sensing in the way one does upon seeing blue waters – in short,
sensing “blue-waterly,” as we might adverbially express it. Since the adver-
bial view conceives imaging as a way of experiencing rather than as a
relation to an object, there is no image as an object to be copied.
On the suggested adverbial view, then, there is no need to posit second-
order images to represent first-order (ordinary) mental images to us, and
the less vivid imagings which might seem to represent mental images are
best construed as less vivid occurrences of the original imaging process.
This point does not show that there cannot be second-order images, but the
adverbial view reduces the inclination to think that there are in fact any by
suggesting a plausible alternative account of the facts that originally
seemed to demand second-order images for their explanation. Chief among
these facts is that in recalling an image, one may have a less vivid image
which apparently stands to the former as an imaginational image of a scene
stands to the sensory image of that scene from which the imaginational
image seems copied. The adverbial account of sensory (and other) experi-
ence might explain this by interpreting the recalled image, say of blue
waters, as recollectively sensing blue-waterly, where this is like visually
sensing blue-waterly, but less vivid.
Given these and other points, it seems doubtful whether any realist
theory of the introspection of images – one that takes them to be objects
existing in their own right and having their own properties – can justify a
strong analogy between that kind of introspection and ordinary viewing. For
it is by no means clear that there is any object introspected to serve as the
counterpart of an object of ordinary vision. For a realist adverbial approach
to experience, although realism about the (physical) objects of perception is
a highly plausible view, realism about the objects of introspection is not.
The idea is roughly that mental properties, such as imaging, can adequately
represent physical objects in our mental life; inner objects should not be
postulated for this task.
The anti-realism of this adverbial view should not be exaggerated. To
deny that mental images are objects having their own properties, and in that
sense are not real, does not in the least imply that imaging is not real.
Imaging processes are surely real properties of persons, even though they are
80
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

not relations between persons and objects of immediate, inner perception.
This is not to say that introspection has no object in the sense of something
it is of (or about), such as imaging blue waters. But on the adverbial view of
introspection, this kind of object is determined by the content of the intro-
spection – what it is about – and is not a thing with its own properties, such
as colors and shapes, sounds and movements, depths and textures.3
The analogy between introspection and ordinary perception
The adverbial view in question may seem unable to do justice to the appar-
ently causal character of introspection. There is surely some causal
explanation of my being acquainted with, say, imaging blue waters rather
than imaging the Statue of Liberty when I monitor a daydream of a rural
summer holiday. Perhaps it is mainly in what causes the relevant imaging
that such introspective consciousness differs from seeing. How might this
difference be explained?
Suppose the adverbial account of introspection is true. Introspection may
still be like simple perception in two ways. First, introspective viewing may
imply some kind of causal relation between what is introspected in it, say an
imaging, and the introspective consciousness of that state or process. Second,
such viewing may imply a causal relation between the object of introspective
knowledge – for instance one’s imaging blue waters – and the beliefs consti-
tuting this knowledge.
In explaining the analogy between introspection and perception, I want
to concentrate mainly on introspective beliefs as compared with perceptual
beliefs; we can then understand how introspection, and indeed consciousness
in general, can ground justification and knowledge. A major question here is
how we can tell whether, in introspecting something, as when we concen-
trate on our own imaging, the beliefs we thereby form about what we are
concentrating on are produced by that very thing, or by some aspect of it,
such as its imagined blue color. It is only to the extent that they are that we
should expect introspection to ground justification and knowledge in the
broadly causal way that perception does. Many considerations are relevant
here, but let me cite just two sorts.
First of all, it is surely because I am imaging cool blue waters that, when,
with closed eyes, I introspectively consider what I am conscious of, I believe
that I am imaging them (and am conscious of my imaging them). It is
natural and apparently reasonable to take this ‘because’ to express a causal
relation, even if I could be mistaken in thinking there is one. If the causal
basis of my belief is not some inner object seen (as on the sense-datum
theory), it is presumably the state or process of imaging. This is, in any event,
how the adverbial theory of sensory experience would view the causal rela-
tions here. Similarly, if I introspectively believe that I am thinking about
introspection, I believe this because I am thinking about it: the thinking
process itself is what causes me to believe that it is occurring. In both cases
Consciousness
81

the introspective beliefs are produced by inner processes, and indeed in a way
that makes it plausible to regard the beliefs as true. Some inner processes are
like seeing an object in still other ways, but these processes can all be under-
stood without presupposing that there really are special inner objects
analogous to perceptible objects like trees and seen by the introspective eye.
A second point is this. Suppose my believing that I am imaging cool blue
waters is not caused by my imaging them. The belief is then not introspec-
tive at all. It is about what is introspectable, but it is not grounded in
introspection, any more than a belief merely about a perceptible, such as the
rich red in a painting in a faraway museum, is a perceptual belief. Here,
then, is another important similarity between introspection and perception.
Introspective beliefs, beliefs about introspectables, and fallibility
It may seem that the case described – believing one is imaging something
when in fact one is not – is impossible. But suppose I have been asked to
image cool blue waters, yet I hate the water and anyway have a lot on my
mind. Still, if I want to be cooperative, then even though my mind is
mainly on my problems, I may call up an image. However, since I am not
concentrating on calling up the image, the image that I actually get might
be only of a blue surface, not of blue waters. I might now inattentively
assume (and thereby come to believe) that I have called up the requested
image of cool blue waters. This belief is produced by a combination of my
calling up the wrong image, which I do not attentively introspect at all, and
by non-imaginational factors such as my desire to cooperate. I might even
retain the belief for at least some moments after I cease to image at all. In
that case, it is not only not true; it is not even introspective.
This example suggests that even a true belief about one’s conscious states
or processes would not be introspective without being causally connected
with them. It would be about these introspectable elements but not
grounded in “seeing” them in the way required for being an introspective
belief. Other examples support the same point. Imagine that my task is to
think about introspection for a solid hour. I monitor myself and, on the basis
of introspection, conclude from time to time that I am thinking about intro-
spection. As I reflect on my topic, I continue to believe that I am thinking
about introspection. Now when I truly believe this simply because I have
repeatedly confirmed it and am confident of steady concentration, and not
because I am still monitoring myself introspectively, my belief, though
perfectly true, is not introspective.
The best explanation of this point seems, again, to be that my belief is
not caused (in the right way, at least) by the thinking that should be its
ground. It is a retained belief about my ongoing mental activity; it is not
grounded in that activity as a focus of my introspective attention. My belief
that I am thinking about introspection is a propositional belief that I am
now doing so, but it is not an objectual belief, regarding my present
82
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

thinking, to the effect that it is about introspection. It is not grounded in
my present thinking at all, any more than my belief about the rich red in a
painting in a distant museum is grounded in seeing it.
The overall conclusion we may draw here is that although there may be
no objects such as sense-data or imaginational copies of them which we
introspect, the process by which self-consciousness leads to introspective
beliefs, and thereby to knowledge and justified beliefs about one’s own
mind, is nevertheless causal. Like perception of the outside world and
(though in a different way) recalling events of the past, it produces some-
thing like a sensory impression and, at least commonly, beliefs about what
seems to be revealed to one by that impression. The causes of introspective
beliefs, however, are apparently processes and events in the mind. They are
not, or at least need not be, objects that reside therein.
Consciousness and privileged access
In the light of what has been said, let us suppose that introspective
consciousness is causally connected with its object, though with limited
similarities to seeing an object. Still, if it is a causal process, then we should
raise some of the same epistemological questions about it that we raised
about perception. For instance, is introspection subject to counterparts of
illusion and hallucination? And if it is, how might it still be a source of
justification and knowledge? Let us start with the question of how anything
like illusion or hallucination might occur in consciousness.
Infallibility, omniscience, and privileged access
One might think that regarding the inner domain, which is the subject of
introspective beliefs, one cannot make mistakes. If so, one might conclude
that neither illusion nor hallucination regarding this domain is possible.
Indeed, David Hume maintained that since “the contents of the mind” are
known by “consciousness” (by which he meant something at least much like
introspection), “they must appear in every respect what they are, and be
what they appear.”4
Hume’s statement suggests two far-reaching claims about self-knowledge.
One claim – that the contents of our minds must be what they appear to us
to be – expresses the idea that introspective consciousness can give us beliefs
that cannot be mistaken. The other claim – that these contents must appear
to be what they are – expresses the idea that consciousness makes us so
richly aware of the (introspectable) contents of the mind that it guarantees
us full knowledge of them. These ideas need refinement before we can
reasonably appraise them.
The first claim suggests a thesis of infallibility (impossibility of error): an
introspective belief – roughly one to the effect that one is (now) in an
occurrent mental state (such as imaging) or that one is undergoing a mental
Consciousness
83

process (such as thinking) or that one is experiencing something (such as
pain) – cannot be mistaken. The infallibility thesis rests largely on the idea
that we are in such a strong position regarding occurrent mental phenomena
that we cannot err in thinking they are going on inside us.
The second claim suggests a thesis of omniscience (all-knowingness) with
respect to the present occurrent contents of consciousness: if one is in an
occurrent mental state, undergoing a mental process, or experiencing some-
thing, one cannot fail to know that one is. The omniscience thesis rests
largely on the idea that occurrent mental phenomena are so prominent in
consciousness that one cannot help knowing of their presence.
Together, these two theses constitute the strong doctrine of privileged access.
The infallibility thesis says that our access to what is (mentally) occurring in
us is so good that our beliefs about its present make-up are infallible; there is
no risk of error. The omniscience thesis says that our access to it is so good that
we cannot fail to know what (mentally) occurs in us; there is no risk of igno-
rance. It is because no one else is in such a good position to know about our
mental life, and because we ourselves are not in such a good position to know
about the external world, that it is natural to speak here of privileged access.
The strong doctrine of privileged access is associated not only with Hume but,
even more, with René Descartes, who is widely taken to maintain it in his
famous Meditations on First Philosophy (1641), especially in Meditation Two.
Suppose for the sake of argument that both the infallibility and omni-
science theses are true. Would that rule out inward counterparts of illusion
and hallucination? Not necessarily. For having illusions and hallucinations
does not imply having false beliefs or being ignorant of anything. Looking
from a sharp angle in a line from corner to corner, you can see a book as
having the shape of a (non-rectangular) parallelogram without believing that
it has that shape; and I can hallucinate a spruce tree like one that has burned
to the ground without believing it is before me. In both cases, we may know
the facts.
Suppose, on the other hand, that there are no inner objects, such as blue,
watery images, to appear to us to have properties they do not possess, such as
wavy surfaces. Then illusions of the kind we have in perception, in which an
object appears to have properties it actually lacks, could not occur, since there
is no object to appear to us. Nor could a hallucination of, say, an image of
blue waters be of such an object and true or false to it. Suppose, however, that
there are inner objects that we see when we image. How would hallucinating
an image of, for instance, a loved one, differ from just having that image? A
sense-datum theorist might say that the hallucinatory image would be less
vivid or stable than a real one. But it is still an image of the same thing and
might also be just like a normal image in vividness and other respects. It
would be wrong to say, then, that a hallucinatory image is simply a less vivid
or less stable version of a normal image, and the difficulty of explaining the
difference between hallucinatory and real images is an additional reason to
avoid (as the adverbial view does) positing mental images as objects.5
84
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

Difficulties for the thesis of privileged access
It might be, however, that quite apart from illusion or hallucination, we can
have false beliefs, or suffer some degree of ignorance, about our mental life. I
think this is clear for some mental phenomena, such as dispositions like
believing, wanting, and fearing. We can mistakenly believe that we do not
have a certain ignoble desire (say, to make a fool of a pretentious boss),
particularly if it is important to our self-image that we see ourselves as
having no hostile desires. For the same reasons, we can fail to know that we
do have the desire. One can also discover a fear which, previously, one quite
honestly disavowed because it was at odds with one’s sense of oneself as
courageous.6
Dispositions, however, should not be conceived as occurring in us, and in
any case it is the occurrent mental phenomena to which philosophers have
tended to think we have the kind of privileged access expressed in the theses
of infallibility and omniscience. Can we be mistaken, or at least ignorant,
about our occurrent mental states or processes?
Consider first the possibility of mistake. Could one believe one is
thinking about the nature of introspection when one is only daydreaming
about the images and feelings one might introspect? It would seem so,
provided one does not attend closely to what is occurring within oneself.
This would not, to be sure, be a wholesale mistake; it would be something
like thinking one is watching someone else observing a game but becoming
preoccupied with the game itself and ceasing to attend to its observer.
Suppose, however, that the infallibility thesis is restricted to beliefs based
on attentive introspection, where this implies “looking” closely at the relevant
aspect of one’s consciousness. Call this the restricted infallibility view; it says
only that attentive introspective beliefs are true. If I carefully consider the
proposition that I am thinking about introspection, and I believe it on the
basis of attentive introspection (that is, on the basis of my carefully focusing
on the relevant aspect of my consciousness), could this belief be mistaken?
It may seem that error here is impossible. But suppose I desperately want
to believe that I am thinking about introspection. Could this not lead me to
take my daydreaming to be such thinking and even cause me to form an
attentive introspective belief that I am doing such thinking? It seems so.
Similarly, I could believe, on the basis of attentive but imperfect introspec-
tion, that I am imaging an octagon and then, concentrating harder and
counting sides, discover that the figure has only seven.
If it is possible to be mistaken in believing that one is now in an occur-
rent mental state (such as thinking), then the omniscience thesis of
privileged access should be abandoned along with the infallibility view. This
holds even if the omniscience thesis, too, is restricted, as it should be, to
cases of carefully attending to one’s consciousness. The easiest way to see
why fallibility cuts against omniscience is to note how omniscience would
tend to guarantee infallibility and so would be cast in doubt if the latter is.
Let me explain.
Consciousness
85

Given the extensive self-knowledge implied by omniscience, if, instead of
thinking about the nature of introspection, I am only daydreaming, then I
must know that I am daydreaming. But I will presumably not be so foolish
as also to believe that I am thinking about introspection – something plainly
different from daydreaming. Since I would know as well that I am occupied
with, say, a series of images that portray me as swimming in cool blue
waters, it is even less likely that I will believe I am thinking about intro-
spection. It appears, then, that if I know every truth about – am omniscient
about – my consciousness, then I presumably cannot believe any falsehood
about it and so am infallible about it as well.7
It is at best extremely unlikely (and perhaps impossible) that these two
things – knowing every truth about one’s consciousness and nonetheless
believing some falsehood about it – occur together, leaving one omniscient
regarding one’s own consciousness, yet inconsistent and fallible about it.
One would know every truth about it yet would also somehow believe false-
hoods incompatible with those truths. This being at best improbable, if I
am fallible I am at least very likely not omniscient. Now recall our
daydreaming example. It casts doubt even on the restricted thesis of omni-
science. In that example, while I am in fact daydreaming, I would
presumably not know that I am. If I do know that I am daydreaming, I
would believe this, and then it is very doubtful that I would also believe I
am thinking about introspection.
These points suggest that, contrary to the thesis of omniscience, I can fail
to know certain things about my consciousness even when I am attending to
it; but they do not imply that the omniscience side of the privileged access
view is wildly mistaken, in that I might be ignorant of every truth about my
daydreaming. Far from it. Since I (objectually) believe it to be thinking
about introspection, I presumably at least know my daydreaming to involve
words or colors or shapes. I have some knowledge of it, but I would still not
know the specific proposition that I am daydreaming and thus would not be
omniscient regarding the mental processes occurring in me.
The possibility of scientific grounds for rejecting privileged access
Perhaps there could someday be a source of significant evidence against even
the restricted doctrines of privileged access. For it could turn out that every
occurrent mental phenomenon is uniquely correlated with some distinct set
of brain processes. Then someone could devise a “cerebroscope” for viewing
the brain and could read off the contents of consciousness from the cerebro-
scopic data (a possibility with disturbing implications that require ethical
scrutiny). What would guarantee that our introspective beliefs must match
what the machine says about our mental lives? And what would a mismatch
show?
Imagine that we could discover cerebroscopically a unique neural pattern
for, say, believing on the basis of attentive introspection that one is imaging
86
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

cool blue waters, at the same time as we discover the pattern for imaging a
field of blue-green grass. It would be natural here to suppose the subject is
mistaking the grassy imaging for a watery one. Might we not regard the
sophisticated equipment as more likely to be right than the subject?
There is a problem with this reasoning. How could one establish the
unique correlations except by relying on the accuracy of people’s introspec-
tive beliefs? Would it not be necessary to start by asking people what they
are, say, imaging, to assume that they are correct, and only then record the
associated brain state? And if learning the correlations would depend on the
accuracy of introspective reports, how could the correlations show such
reports to be mistaken?
A possible reply is this. First, let us suppose that learning the correlations
would depend on the accuracy of introspective reports. Still, neuroscientists
would not have had to rely on the accuracy of precisely the introspective
belief being shown to be mistaken, and perhaps not even on the accuracy of
highly similar beliefs. In any event, once they construct their instrument,
they might no longer consult introspection to use it. They might throw
away the very ladder they have climbed up on.
Imagine, however, that they do have to rely on just the sorts of belief we
are examining, together with evidence regarding these beliefs’ reliability –
evidence we already have independently of the cerebroscope. Would this
imply that the cerebroscope could not provide powerful evidence against
introspective beliefs?
Consider an analogy. We might use a mercury thermometer to construct a
gas thermometer. We might calibrate a container of gas with a piston that
rises and falls as the gas is heated and cooled. The new temperature readings
might correlate perfectly with mercury readings in many instances: in
measuring water temperature, wood temperature, and other cases. The gas
thermometer might then be used for the same jobs as the mercury ther-
mometer and might gauge temperatures that the mercury thermometer
cannot measure, say because they are above the boiling point of mercury.
Could we not use a gas thermometer to correct a mercury thermometer in
some cases, or perhaps to correct all mercury thermometers in restricted
ways? We could. This seems so even if we had originally taken the mercury
thermometer to be infallible in measuring temperature, perhaps because we
mistakenly thought of its readings as partly definitive of what temperature
is. We would rebuild the ladder we have climbed up on.
Similar points might hold for beliefs about what is now occurring in one.
If the analogy does extend this far – if the gas thermometer is to the
mercury thermometer rather as the cerebroscope is to sincere testimony
about one’s current mental life – then even the restricted omniscience view
fares no better than the restricted infallibility view. For even when one is
attentive to what is occurring internally, a cerebroscope could indicate that
one does not believe (hence does not know) that a certain thing is occurring,
such as a frightening image which one thinks one has put out of mind.
Consciousness
87

Introspective consciousness as a source of justification
and knowledge
It is important not to overextend our criticism of various claims of privi-
leged access. After all, even the restricted infallibility and omniscience views
are very strong claims of privileged access. They can be given up along with
the strong theses of privileged access quite consistently with holding that
our access to what is occurring in us is very privileged indeed. Let us explore
the extent of this privilege.
The range of introspective knowledge and justification
Nothing I have said undermines a qualified epistemic principle. This self-
knowledge principle says that our attentively formed introspective beliefs about
what is now occurring in us are normally true and constitute knowledge. The
difficulty of finding grounds for thinking they even could be false provides
some reason to consider them at least very likely to be correct. Similarly, when
we are attentive to what is occurring in us, then if something (knowable) is
occurring in us, such as a certain melody in the mind’s ear, normally we know
that it is occurring, or at least we are in a position to know this simply by
attentively forming a belief about what is going through our mind. At least
this qualified epistemic principle holds for the domain of our conscious life.
Granted, our “access” to our dispositional properties is not as good as our
access to what is occurring in us. We need not be conscious of the former
properties, whereas the very existence of one’s imaging (or of an image if
there are such objects) consists in its place in consciousness. Beliefs and other
mental dispositions need not even enter consciousness, or ever be a subject of
our thoughts or concerns. Some of them may indeed be “repressed,” so that
we normally cannot easily become aware of them.8
Nevertheless – and here is a justification principle applicable to the disposi-
tional mental domain – our beliefs to the effect that we are now in a
dispositional mental state, for instance want, fear, intend, or believe some-
thing, are normally justified. (We might also say that such beliefs, though
defeasibly justified, are always prima facie justified, so that they are justi-
fied overall unless some defeating factor, such as an abnormal
psychological interference, occurs.) Moreover, normally, when we have a
want (or fear, intention, belief, or similar disposition), we are in a position
to know (and justifiedly believe) this. We can, then, usually know this if
we need to. We very commonly do not know it, however; for such things
may not enter consciousness at all, and there is often no reason to take any
notice of them or form any beliefs about them. This kind of ignorance is
innocuous.
There are a great many issues and details I have not mentioned; but if
what I have said is correct, we can now generalize about introspection
(roughly, self-consciousness, i.e., consciousness turned toward one’s own
mind) in relation to belief, justification, and knowledge, and summarize our
88
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

main epistemological conclusions. Plainly, many beliefs arise from introspec-
tion, and the points that have emerged suggest a general epistemic principle
concerning self-knowledge which, though far weaker than the infallibility
thesis, is far-reaching: normally, introspective beliefs grounded in attentive
self-consciousness are true and constitute knowledge. (This principle is
slightly different from the self-knowledge one stated above.) A second epis-
temic principle – an attentional epistemic principle concerning self-knowledge,
though far weaker than the omniscience thesis, is that normally, if we atten-
tively focus introspectively on something going on in us, we know that it is
going on, under at least some description. I may not know that I am
humming the slow movement of Beethoven’s Pathétique Sonata, but I do
know I am humming a melodic piano piece.
The corresponding justification principles suggested by our discussion
seem at least equally plausible. First – to cite an introspective justification prin-
ciple – normally, introspective beliefs grounded in attentive introspection are
justified; and normally, if I attentively focus on something going on in me, I
am justified in believing that it is going on in me. To be sure, some are
better justified than others, and even some that are not attentive are justi-
fied. All of them are plausibly regarded as prima facie justified.
There are many possible principles regarding our justification and knowl-
edge about ourselves, and there are many possible qualifications of the four
just stated. But those four principles are sufficient to suggest the power of
introspection as a source of justification and knowledge. The examples I
used to argue that introspection is fallible do not show that the apparently
false introspective beliefs were unjustified or that true ones are not knowl-
edge. A false belief, particularly if it is of a kind usually justified, can still be
justified; and a true belief of a kind that can sometimes be false may itself
constitute knowledge.9
The defeasibility of introspective justification
These points about the high degree of privileged access we apparently do
have may create a danger of overestimating the strength of introspective
justification. From our examples, it might be thought that attentive intro-
spection, even if not absolutely infallible, generates a kind of justification
that at least cannot be defeated. Even if I am somehow mistaken about
whether I am imaging blue waters, if I believe this on the basis of intro-
spection, it would seem that I am in the right, even if objectively I am not
right.
How could I fail to be justified in believing that I am imaging cool blue
waters, if my belief is grounded in attentive introspection? If the question
seems rhetorical, this may be because one thinks there simply is nothing else
I should have done besides attending and hence no possible defeaters of my
justification by appeal to some other kind of ground for belief. Let us
explore this.
Consciousness
89

Granting that I could not fail to be justified unless I could have good
reason to believe I may be mistaken, still, perhaps I could fail to be justified
if I had good reason for believing I am mistaken, such as evidence from
repeated cerebroscopic results indicating that I have been mistaken in many
quite similar cases. It is far from obvious that I could not have sufficient
evidence of this sort. It seems wisest, then, to conclude that although intro-
spective justification tends to be very strong, it remains prima facie rather
than absolute and can be defeated by counter-evidence.
In any case, plainly beliefs grounded in attentive introspection, such as
my belief that I am now imaging blue waters, are normally justified to a
very high degree. Moreover – and here we have still another justification
principle – normally, my simply being engaged in attentive introspection
also yields situational justification for beliefs about what I am attending to,
even where it does not in fact yield any such beliefs. If I somehow “notice”
my imaging blue waters yet do not form the belief that I am doing so, I am
nonetheless (prima facie) justified in believing that I am, just as, if I see a
bird fly past and take no notice of it, I am still justified in believing it flew
past. The analogy to perception seems sound here, and that is one reason
why introspection is considered a kind of inner observation and (unless it
somehow yields no content) a kind of inner perception.
Consciousness as a basic source
If we now ask whether consciousness, including especially introspective
consciousness, is a basic source of belief, justification, and knowledge, the
answer should be evident. It is. In this, as in many other respects, it is like
perception. But it may well be that the degree of justification which
consciousness (including introspection) generates is greater than the
degree generated by perceptual experience, other things being equal.
The special strength of justification on the part of beliefs about
elements in consciousness has led some philosophers to think that these
beliefs are a kind of foundation for knowledge and for the justification of
all other beliefs. Descartes is often thought to have so regarded introspec-
tively grounded beliefs or knowledge. Whether knowledge and
justification need a kind of foundation and whether, if they do, these
beliefs are the best candidates to serve as a foundation – better than, say,
perceptual and memory beliefs – are the major questions pursued in
Chapter 7.
There seems to be a further epistemologically significant difference
between perception and consciousness, especially as manifested in intro-
spection, as sources of knowledge (and justification). We can by and large
introspect at will – roughly, just by (sufficiently) wanting to – though we
may also do it quite spontaneously. Moreover, there is no limit to how
many things we can come to know by introspecting, if only because we
can, without limit, call up images and construct thoughts. But we cannot
90
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

perceive at will; and what we can know through perception is limited by
what there is outside us to perceive and by external conditions of observa-
tion, just as what we can know through remembering or recalling is
limited by what has actually happened (or what propositions are true) and
by the conditions of belief or image retention crucial for remembering or
recalling.10
Introspective consciousness, then, is unlike perception and memory in
enabling us to acquire a considerable amount of knowledge whether external
circumstances cooperate or not. Whatever one can “observe” in one’s own
mind is a possible subject of study, and it appears that many of the beliefs
we attentively form concerning our mental lives tend to constitute genuine
knowledge. Very roughly, introspective consciousness is a substantially active
faculty; perception and memory are largely reactive faculties.
Granted, some content – like sensations of pain – comes into conscious-
ness uninvited; still, we can very freely call to mind both propositional and
imagistic content. But sensory content, such as perceptual images, enters
our mind only when our senses are taken, by our own observational efforts or
by contingencies of experience, to it. In the inner world, by sharp contrast
with the external world, there is far more at our beck and call. This is
perhaps another reason why introspectively grounded beliefs have sometimes
seemed to be such good material to serve as foundations for knowledge and
justification. In addition to the high degree of justification self-conscious-
ness commonly confers on beliefs, it is an active source of both justification
and knowledge.
There is a trade-off, however. Through perception, we acquire
(primarily) justified beliefs and knowledge about the external world;
without these, we would be unlikely to survive. Through introspection,
we acquire (primarily) justified beliefs and knowledge only about the
internal world; with only this, our knowledge and justification would be
sadly limited to our own minds. This is not to underplay the importance
of the internal world: without good access to it we would have little if any
self-knowledge and, for that reason, probably at best shallow knowledge of
others.
Self-knowledge is also important as a back-up when questions arise about
one’s justification or knowledge regarding external objects. Confronted with
a strange object, one may carefully consider the stability, coherence, and
variations of one’s perceptual experiences of it in order to rule out hallucina-
tion. Told that one merely imagined a car’s passing, one may try to recall the
event and then scrutinize both the vividness of one’s imagery and one’s
confidence that the belief comes from memory rather than merely imagina-
tion. Without the kind of self-knowledge possible here, we would have less
knowledge about the external world. Both perceptual and introspective
knowledge are vital, and both, as we shall soon see, can be extended, by
good reasoning from the raw materials they supply, far beyond their begin-
nings in our experience.
Consciousness
91

Notes
1 To be sure, images can be possessed memorially, as is my image of the Statue of Liberty
when I do not have it in mind; and ‘imaging’ can designate a process, as when I call up
the series of images corresponding to looking at the statue from the Brooklyn Heights
Promenade and glancing northward to Lower Manhattan, thence to the Brooklyn Bridge,
and up the East River beyond the bridge.
2 Both kinds of properties are experiential, in that they represent features of experience.
Both, then, might be considered phenomenal, but sometimes the term ‘phenomenal prop-
erty’ is restricted to the sensory kind that characterizes either the five senses or “inner
sense,” by which we feel sensations pain and pleasure.
3 Such contentual objects are often called intentional objects, largely on the ground that, like
lofty deeds we intend to perform but do not do, they need not exist.
4 See David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature (first published in 1739–40), Part IV,
Section II), ed. by L. A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1888).
5 One might still distinguish between genuine and hallucinatory images by insisting that
to be a genuine image of (say) a loved one is to be an image caused by the corresponding
sense, say, seeing that very person. This view has an odd consequence, however. Through
hearing a detailed description I could have an accurate image of Maj that is in a sense of
her, since it matches her sufficiently well, even if I have never seen her; but this would be
a hallucinatory image, on the causal conception just stated. There are certainly different
kinds of images and various ways in which they can mislead, but the analogy between
perception and introspective consciousness does not extend in any simple way to the
possibility of inner illusions and hallucinations, and there is no need to pursue the matter
in more detail here. For a detailed non-technical discussion of mental imagery see
Alastair Hannay, Mental Images: A Defence (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1971) and
my critical examination of this book in ‘The Ontological Status of Mental Images,’
Inquiry 21 (1978), 348–61.
6 Some of these cases seem to occur in self-deception, a phenomenon that raises profound
questions for both epistemology and the philosophy of mind. For a comprehensive collec-
tion of papers on it (including one offering my own account), see Brian P. McLaughlin
and Amelie O. Rorty (eds), Perspectives on Self-Deception (Berkeley and Los Angeles:
University of California Press, 1988).
7 The thesis of omniscience might be restricted to introspectable truths, as opposed to such
truths as that there are 1,001 berries visible on the blackberry bush I am imaging, which
I could know only on the basis of memory (and arithmetic) as well as introspection. The
infallibility thesis might also be plausibly restricted in a similar way. This point bears on
the connection between the two theses but should not affect the argumentation in the
text.
8 Repression need not be exactly the kind of thing Sigmund Freud described, requiring
psychoanalysis or very special techniques to come to consciousness. There are various
kinds and degrees of repression; the point here is simply that having a belief (or other
dispositional state) is possible even if it is repressed. One might, for example, still act in
the way expected of a believer of the relevant proposition.
9 For reasons to be considered in Chapter 10, skeptics tend to deny this.
10 There is less disanalogy in the negative cases: we cannot always cease at will to concentrate
introspectively on our mental life, as illustrated by preoccupying pains; and we cannot
cease perceiving at will without, for example, closing our eyes or turning off a radio. This
blocks the path of observation, just as an aspirin might block the path of pain.
92
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

4
Reason
• Self-evident truths of reason
• The classical view of the truths of reason
Analytic propositions
Necessary propositions
The analytic, the a priori, and the synthetic
Three types of a priori propositions
The empirical
Analytic truth, concept acquisition, and necessity
• The empiricist view of the truths of reason
Rationalism and empiricism
Empiricism and the genesis and confirmation of arithmetic beliefs
Empiricism and logical and analytic truths
• The conventionalist view of the truths of reason
Truth by definition and truth by virtue of meaning
Knowledge through definitions versus truth by definition
Conventions as grounds for interpretation
• Some difficulties and strengths of the classical view
Vagueness
Meaning change and falsification
The possibility of empirical necessary truth
Essential and necessary truths
• Reason, experience, and a priori justification
A priori beliefs
Loose and strict senses of  ‘a priori justification’ and ‘a priori knowledge’
The power of reason and the possibility of indefeasible justification

4
Reason
I see the green field and I believe that it is there before me. I look away, and
I believe that I am now imaging it. I remember its shape, and I believe that
it is rectangular. These are beliefs grounded in my experience: perceptual,
self-conscious, and memorial. But I also believe something quite different
about what I see: that if the spruce to my left is taller than the maple to my
right, then the maple is shorter than the spruce.
On what basis does one believe this obvious truth? Do we even need to
see the trees to know it? Certainly it is on the basis of perception that I
believe each of the two comparative propositions; it is easy to see, for
instance, that the spruce is taller than the maple. But I do not believe on the
basis of perception that if the spruce is taller than the maple then the maple
is shorter than the spruce. As a rational being, I apparently just grasp this
truth and thereby believe it.
The kind of apparently elementary use of reason this case illustrates seems
basic for both knowledge and justification. But there are other kinds of
examples to be considered, and there is continuing debate about the nature
and grounds of our knowledge and justification regarding the simple,
obvious truths that we seem to know just in virtue of the kind of under-
standing of them any rational being might be expected to have. A good way
to seek an understanding of the epistemological role of reason is to begin
with a notion that seems central for the most basic kind of knowledge and
justification reason gives us – self-evidence.
Self-evident truths of reason
Such truths as the luminous one that if the spruce is taller than the maple,
then the maple is shorter than the spruce, have been said to be evident to
reason, conceived roughly as a mental capacity of understanding. They are
presumably called self-evident because they are thought to be evidently true
taken by themselves, with no need for supporting evidence. Indeed, they are
often thought to be obvious in themselves, roughly in the sense that simply
upon attentively coming to understand them, one normally sees their truth
and thereby knows it.
In the light of such points, we might more specifically characterize self-
evident propositions as those truths such that (1) if one (adequately)
understands them, then by virtue of that understanding one is justified in
believing them, and (2) if one believes them on the basis of (adequately)
understanding them, then one thereby knows them.1 (1) says roughly that

understanding them suffices for being situationally justified in believing
them; it provides a justification for belief. (2) says in effect that this under-
standing can ground knowledge: the understanding is sufficient to render a
belief based on it knowledge. (2) implies, then, that self-evident proposi-
tions are true. This implication is appropriate, since the self-evident is
standardly regarded as true (and in the interest of clarity I have put truth
explicitly into the characterization above).
What I have said does not imply, however, that the kind of justification
one gains from understanding the self-evident is indefeasible (i.e., so secure
that it cannot be defeated) rather than prima facie. But at least some cases of
this kind of justification are plausibly taken to exhibit justification as strong
as any we can have. It can be difficult to appreciate how defeasibility can
occur here because it is commonly thought that all self-evident truths are
also obvious. But not all of them are – at least to finite minds. Apart from
logical training, certain self-evident logical truths are not obvious; and it
may not be obvious to most of us, on first considering it, that first cousins
have a pair of grandparents in common. But this satisfies both (1) and (2)
and is self-evident.2
There is an important analogy to perception. Just as one can see a
visible property of something, such as its rectangularity, without believing
that it has that property, one can comprehendingly (understandingly)
consider a self-evident proposition without coming to believe that propo-
sition; and just as one’s seeing a bird fly past gives one justification for
believing it did whether or not one forms this belief, understanding the
proposition that if the spruce is taller than the maple, the maple is shorter
than the spruce, gives one (situational) justification for believing this
whether one does or not.
When it comes to concepts, there seems to be a further analogy to percep-
tion: a hierarchy analogous to the perceptual one. There is understanding a
concept, such as being taller than. Second, there is objectually believing it to
apply to something, say to a pair of things, such as the spruce and the
maple. Third, there is propositionally believing something that “applies it,”
as where one conceives the trees as, say, the spruce and the maple and
believes that the spruce is taller.3
With self-evident propositions like the straightforward proposition that if
the spruce is taller than the maple, then the maple is shorter than the
spruce, one need not consult one’s experience of the kind of thing described,
or even ponder the propositions in question, in order to grasp – roughly, to
understand – those propositions. And when one does come to understand
them and focuses on them in the light of that understanding, one thereby
normally comes to believe and know that they are true.4
There are many truths which, in the way just illustrated, we readily grasp
and thereby immediately believe. That is, we believe them immediately in
the sense that we see their truth without having to infer them from
anything else. The point is not the temporal one that we grasp them
Reason
95

instantly, though we may. What is crucial is that our belief exhibits epistemic
immediacy: the belief is not based on inference or on a further, evidential
belief. If it were, it would be epistemically mediate: mediated by (and
thereby at least partly grounded in) the set of premises from which we infer
(or on the basis of which we believe) the proposition, as my belief that
Socrates is mortal is mediated by the two propositions which are part of the
basis of my believing this: that he is a human being, and that all human
beings are mortal.5
The proposition that Socrates is mortal is in another way unlike the
proposition that if the spruce is taller than the maple, then the maple is
shorter than the spruce. It is not self-evident. There are at least two ways to
explain why. First, Socrates and mortality are not intrinsically connected, as
are one thing’s being taller than a second and the second’s being shorter than
the first. An omnipotent God could have kept him in existence. Second (and
speaking more generally), to know that Socrates is mortal one needs more
than reflection (a use of reason) on this proposition. One apparently needs
information not contained in the proposition. Even thinking of him as a
human being does not absolutely preclude every route to his immortality.
But reflection (a use of reason) indicates that the spruce’s being taller than
the maple precludes the maple’s not being shorter than the spruce.
This kind of point concerning propositions like the one about the two
trees has led philosophers to consider them to be truths of reason – roughly,
truths knowable through the use of reason as opposed to reliance on sense
experience. The same kind of point has led philosophers to regard them as
also necessarily true–necessary, for short: as such that their falsehood is abso-
lutely precluded; there are simply no circumstances in which they are false.
If a proposition is not necessary (necessarily true) and its negation is also not
necessary, it is called contingent, since whether it is true – i.e., its truth or
falsity, in another terminology – is contingent on (dependent on) circum-
stances. That there are more than two trees in my yard is contingent. There
are more, but there need not be: the number is contingent on how many I
want.
The classical view of the truths of reason
How might we understand the justification of our beliefs of self-evident and
apparently necessary propositions and other truths of reason? And how do
we know them? The best-known answers to these questions, and probably
the only ones we should call the classical answers, derive largely from
Immanuel Kant, though there are similar ideas in earlier philosophers who
influenced Kant. He discussed both the truth of the kinds of propositions in
question and how we know them.6
What Kant said is complex and difficult to interpret precisely, and I am
simply going to lay out a version of the classical account which may corre-
spond only roughly to Kant’s views. Moreover, although I am interested
96
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

mainly in our justification and knowledge regarding the truths of reason, I
will also talk about the basis of these truths themselves where that is useful
in discussing how we can know or justifiedly believe them.
Analytic propositions
Take the proposition that all vixens are female. I easily grasp its truth, and I
immediately believe it: I depend on no premises or evidence. There was a
time when ‘vixen’ was not in my vocabulary. I might then have looked at the
sentence ‘All vixens are female’ and not known what proposition it
expressed, much less seen the particular truth (true proposition) it does
express. But this point does not show that I do not immediately believe that
truth once I do (comprehendingly) consider it. It shows only that encoun-
tering a sentence which expresses a truth does not enable one to consider
that truth unless one understands the sentence.
We can see, moreover, that when we do consider the truth that all vixens
are female, we do not (or at least need not) know it on the basis of beliefs
about the sentence ‘All vixens are female’. For we can consider that same truth
by using some other sentence to express it (say in Spanish), and perhaps
without using a sentence at all.7 If, however, we think about what grounds
the truth of the proposition, we may discover something which in turn helps
to explain why we so readily understand and believe it.
To get a sense of the ground of this truth, consider what a vixen is. It is a
female fox. Indeed, the concept of a vixen may be analyzed in terms of being
female and being a fox. So, in saying that a vixen is a female fox, one could
be giving an elementary analysis of the concept of a vixen. Now suppose that
(like Kant) we think of an analysis of a concept as indicating what the
concept contains (or, in a certain way, includes). We can now say that the
concept of being female is part of the concept of a vixen, and that being
female is thus an element in being a vixen.8
In the light of all this, we might call the truth that all vixens are female
an analytic proposition. To cite one major conception Kant presented, this is a
proposition such that what it predicates of its subject can be “analyzed out
of” the concept of that subject. Here the subject is vixens (or any arbitrarily
given vixen), and the predicate is being female, which is part of, and so
analyzable out of, the concept of a vixen. The same sort of thing holds for
the propositions that all bachelors are unmarried, that all triangles have
three angles, that all sound arguments have true premises and true conclu-
sions, and so on. Analytic propositions are usually considered clear cases of
the self-evident.9
Necessary propositions
This way of looking at our example helps to explain something else that is
true of the proposition that all vixens are female: it cannot be false and, in
Reason
97

that sense, is necessary (a necessary truth). To see this point, try to
conceive of a non-female vixen. Since the concept of a vixen is analyzable
as (and hence equivalent to) that of a female fox, one is in effect trying to
conceive of a non-female female fox. This would be something that both is
and is not female. We would have a contradiction. Hence, there cannot be
such a thing, on pain of contradiction. It is thus absolutely impossible –
in a sense implying impossibility by the laws of logic – that there be a
non-female vixen. By contrast, it is possible that there is, and also that
there is not, a 200-pound vixen. The proposition that all vixens weigh less
(or more) than this is contingent: neither necessarily true nor necessarily
false.
Because the falsity of analytic propositions entails a contradiction in this
way, they are often thought to be – and are sometimes even defined as – those
that are true on pain of contradiction. That is, their falsity entails a contradic-
tion, and hence they can be false only if a contradiction is true. That is
absolutely impossible. Analytic propositions are therefore regarded as truths
that hold in any possible situation and hence are necessary (though other
kinds of truths may also be considered necessary).
Now if analytic propositions are true by virtue of the sort of conceptual
containment relation we have been exploring, might we not know each one
we do know in virtue of grasping the containment relation basic to it, in the
sense that we have an adequate understanding of that relation? In consid-
ering the proposition that all vixens are female, one in some way grasps the
containment relation between the concept of a vixen and that of being
female. Intellectually – intuitively, in one widely used terminology – one sees
the relation and thereby sees and (non-inferentially) knows the truth it
underlies.
It might be objected that the correct account is instead this. One
quickly or subconsciously reasons: The concept of a vixen is analyzable as
that of a female fox; being female is contained in that analysis; hence all
vixens are female. So, it may be claimed, one knows that all vixens are
female only inferentially. A defender of the classical view would reply that
this second-order reasoning indicates how one might show that one knows
that all vixens are female, but it does not indicate how one knows it, at least
not if one just grasps its truth in the normal way.
The classical account can grant that one perhaps could come to know the
proposition in that indirect way, by conceptual analysis. But one need not
come to know it in that way; and normally, if one did not already know
that vixens are female foxes, one would not even be in a position to know
(on one’s own) the sophisticated truth that the concept of a vixen is analyz-
able as that of a female fox. Believing that all vixens are female, in virtue
of grasping the crucial containment relation between the concept of a
vixen and that of a female, does not require coming to know it in that
sophisticated way.
98
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

The analytic, the a priori, and the synthetic
We can now see how the classical account of the truths of reason might
apply to apparently non-analytic truths that are directly and intuitively
grasped. Think about the proposition that nothing is both red and green all
over at one time. This is apparently self-evident and hence a truth of reason.
But is it analytic? Can we analyze being non-red out of the concept of being
green, or being non-green out of the concept of being red, so that anyone who
said that something is red and green all over at once could be shown to be
implying that it is (wholly) red and non-red, or green and non-green? This
is doubtful. For one thing, it is not clear that we can analyze the concept of
being red (or the concept of being green) at all in the relevant sense of
‘analyze’. Still, on the classical view, we can know through the use of reason
the necessary truth that nothing is red and green all over at once.
Let us consider two kinds of objections to the idea that the proposition
that nothing is red and green all over at once is self-evident and necessary,
yet not analytic. The first is based on treating the proposition as contingent
and so not necessary or self-evident; the second objection says it is analytic
after all.
Take the contingency objection first. One might think that there could
be a scientific explanation of why nothing is red and green all over at once;
and if there is, then (on a plausible and standard view of such matters) the
proposition is not self-evident or even necessary. How might such an expla-
nation go? We can, after all, scientifically clarify what being red (or any
other color) is by appeal to facts about light. This might seem to enable us
to know all there is to know about basic relations among colors, even though
the relevant facts about light are contingent. On the classical view, however,
although scientific investigation helps us to understand certain facts about
red things (and perhaps about the property of being red), it does not indicate
what is essential to the concept of a red thing, such as being non-green at the
time it is red. Similarly, it is essential to the concept of a vixen that it is
equivalent to that of a female fox.
To be sure, one could discover scientifically that vixens have a unique
tracking system. But normally one would be identifying them for study as
female foxes and hence would not set out to discover whether they are female.
On the classical view, we cannot identify anything as a vixen – say, for exper-
imental purposes – except under the assumption that it is female. Thus, the
possibility of discovering anything inconsistent with its being female is
ruled out from the start. If our experimental subject is selected by its having a
specified property, we cannot find out experimentally that it (as opposed to
something else it may turn into) lacks that property.
Similarly, one would not normally set out to discover scientifically
whether what is red all over is ever also green all over at the same time –
since it would be at best difficult to wonder whether this is true without
immediately seeing that it is. This does not make analytic or any self-evident
Reason
99

truths more important than scientific truths. The former are simply different:
they are not of the right kind to be open to scientific verification or falsifica-
tion, and in part for this reason they also do not compete with scientific truths.
It appears, then, that the suggested “scientific” objection to the classical
view fails. If, however, the proposition that nothing is red and green all over
at once is not a “scientific truth,” that might be because it is analytic after
all. Let us explore further whether the classical view is correct in claiming
that the two self-evident truths in question still differ in this: being non-
green is not analyzable out of the concept of being red, whereas being female
is analyzable out of the concept of being a vixen.10
This brings us to the second objection. The objection proceeds by arguing
(against the classical view) that the proposition that nothing is red and green
all over at once is analytic. Could one not indirectly analyze the concept of
being red as equivalent to the concept of having a color other than green and
blue and yellow, and so on, where we list all the remaining colors? This
claim may seem right, because it seems self-evidently true that red is the only
color filling that bill. But the claim is doubtful. For one thing, it is ques-
tionable whether a determinate list of all the other colors is even possible.
More important, even if it is possible, the concept of being red is not negative
in this way. There is, in addition, an important disanalogy: whereas one
could not have the concept of a vixen without having the concepts of a fox
and a female, one could have the concept of being red (and so have an under-
standing of that concept) without even having all of these other color
concepts (even if one must have some other color concept).
Moreover, proponents of the classical view would stress here (what is
independently plausible) that an analysis does not merely provide a conceptual
equivalent, that is, one which (necessarily) applies to the same things to
which the concept being analyzed does, as the concept of being not-not-red
applies to everything the concept of being red does. An analysis of a concept
(as we shall see in Chapter 8 in exploring analyses of the concept of knowl-
edge) must meet at least two further conditions. First, it must exhibit a
suitable subset of the elements that constitute the concept; second, it must
do so in such a way that one’s seeing that they constitute it can yield some
significant degree of understanding of the concept. The concept of being red
is surely not constituted by the complex and mainly negative property of
being a color that is not green, not blue, and so on; and one could not
understand what it is for something to be red simply in terms of under-
standing that long and perhaps indefinite list.
Indeed, one could presumably understand the list of other colors quite
well even if one had never seen or imagined redness, and one had no percep-
tual, imaginational, or other concept of redness. It is arguable, in fact, that
the concept is simple in the sense that, unlike that of a vixen, it is not analyz-
able into elements of any kind.
On balance, then, it appears that the proposition that nothing is red and
green all over at once is not analytic. This does not, however, prevent our
100
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

rationally grasping the truth of that proposition. Truths that meet this
rational graspability condition – roughly a knowability through conceptual
understanding condition – have been called a priori propositions (propositions
knowable ‘from the first’), because they have been thought to be such that
they can be known a priori, in a very strict sense of this phrase: known
simply through reason as directed toward them and toward the concepts
occurring in them, at least if reason is used extensively enough and with
sufficient care. Propositions that are a priori in this strict, knowability sense
– as is the proposition that nothing is red and green all over at once – are
also plausibly considered self-evident.11 Moreover, the kind of justification
for believing a self-evident proposition when we believe it in the indicated
way is a basic kind of justification and is often called a priori.
By contrast with analytic propositions, however, the kind of a priori
proposition exemplified by that one seems to assert something beyond what
analysis of the relevant concepts can show. For this reason, propositions of
this kind are also called synthetic propositions, though these are typically
defined negatively, simply as non-analytic. Positively conceived, they typi-
cally bring together or “synthesize” concepts and properties, even if in a
negative way (as by linking redness with colors other than green – by
including it among these other colors). Synthetic propositions do not or
need not, even in part, analyze concepts.
It is noteworthy that although analytic propositions are characterized
roughly in terms of how they are true – by virtue of conceptual containment
(or, on a related account, on pain of contradiction) – a priori propositions are
characterized in terms of how they are known, or can be known: through the
operation of reason.12 (This allows that they can also be known through
experience, say through receiving testimony, at least if the attester’s knowl-
edge is, directly or indirectly, grounded in the operation of reason.)
On this basis, a priori propositions are also negatively characterized as
knowable “independently of experience,” where this phrase above all desig-
nates no need for evidential dependence on experiential grounds, such as
those of perception. But even if this negative characterization of a priori
propositions is correct so far as it goes, understanding them through it will
require understanding the kinds of positive characteristics I am stressing.
Let us pursue these further.
Three types of a priori propositions
If we take knowability through the use of reason as a rough indication of
what constitutes the a priori in general, then it includes not only self-evident
proposition but certain others that are not self-evident: most clearly those
propositions not themselves knowable simply through reason as directed
toward them and toward the concepts occurring in them, but self-evidently
following from (entailed by) such (self-evident) propositions. This is the
simplest case of what is a priori in the broad sense. Consider the proposition
Reason
101

that either nothing is red and green all over at once or I am flying to the
moon. This self-evidently follows from the proposition about red and green,
which (apparently) is self-evident. It self-evidently follows because it is self-
evident that if nothing is red and green all over at once, then either that is
true or I am flying to the moon.
One might think that this disjunctive (either-or) proposition is self-
evident because it is so obviously both true and necessary. But even though
this is true, one knows it, not in virtue of understanding it itself, but in
virtue of its self-evidently following from something that is self-evident.
One knows it inferentially, on the basis of knowing the simpler proposition
that nothing is red and green all over at once. One cannot know it just from
understanding it, as with a self-evident proposition, but only through seeing
the quite different truth that if nothing is both red and green at once, then
either that proposition is true or I am flying to the moon. This conditional
(if–then) proposition is self-evident; hence, it is an utterly secure ladder on
which to climb from knowledge that nothing is red and green all over at
once to knowledge that either this is so or I am flying to the moon. That
disjunctive proposition is a priori in the broad sense.
Suppose, however, that a proposition is neither self-evident nor self-
evidently entailed by a self-evident proposition, but is provable by self-evident
steps (perhaps many) from a self-evident proposition. Since there is more
than one step and there can be many steps, such a provable proposition
might or might not be knowable without reliance on memory, depending
on the mental capacity of the rational being in question. Nonetheless,
since it can be known through such a rigorous proof – one that begins with a
self-evident proposition and proceeds only by self-evident steps (entail-
ments) to its conclusion – a rigorously provable proposition may be called
ultimately a priori (or ultimately self-evident, though the former term
seems preferable). It is not a priori in the broad sense because it is not
linked to the self-evident by a single step – and not necessarily self-
evidently linked to it. But since it is ultimately traceable to a self-evident
proposition, it may be considered a priori in the indicated ultimate prov-
ability sense.
Thus, in speaking of propositions that are a priori in the most compre-
hensive terminology, I include not only the intuitively central cases that are
self-evident or just one step from it – propositions self-evidently entailed by
a self-evident proposition – but also those not thus entailed but nonetheless
provable by self-evident steps from a self-evident proposition.
We could say, then, that for the kind of classical view in question, the
self-evident is the base of the a priori: a priori propositions are those that are
either self-evident (i.e., a priori in the narrow sense) or, though not them-
selves self-evident, self-evidently follow from at least one proposition that is
(hence are a priori in the broad sense). The general notion of an a priori
proposition, applicable to both cases, is roughly the notion of a truth that
either is a self-evident proposition or is self-evidently entailed by one.13
102
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

Knowledge of propositions a priori in the broad or ultimate provability
sense, unlike knowledge of those a priori in the narrow sense, depends on
knowledge of some self-evident proposition as a ground. But neither kind of
knowledge depends on knowledge of any empirical proposition, and in that
sense both kinds are “independent of experience.”14
It is because a priori propositions (of any sort) are understood in relation
to how they can be known that the notion of the a priori is commonly
considered epistemological. The notion of the analytic is more often taken to
be of a different kind, say conceptual, since analytic truths are conceived as
grounded in a simple containment relation of concepts.15 It should perhaps
not be surprising, then, that the categories of the analytic and the a priori
are not identical. In both cases, however, proponents of the classical view
have taken the relevant propositions to be necessary: this is commonly
thought to be obvious for the analytic ones, which are true “on pain of
contradiction,” but it has seemed reasonable to classical theorists to hold
that even synthetic a priori propositions must be necessary. The thought is
apparently that if their truth were contingent and so depended on what
holds in (is contingent on) some possible situations but not others, one
could not know it just on the basis of understanding the proposition itself.
This is plausible, and I shall tentatively assume it.
The empirical
A huge variety of truths are not a priori. That the spruce is taller than the
maple is one of them. Truths that are not a priori are called empirical (or a
posteriori) truths. This means, roughly, that the propositions in question can
be known only empirically, that is, are knowable (assuming they are know-
able) only on the basis of experience, as opposed to reason – above all on the
basis of perceptual or self-conscious experience (in the ways described in
Chapters 1 and 3).
Saying simply that a proposition is empirical (or a posteriori) leaves open
whether it is true: there are empirical falsehoods, such as that it is not the
case that the spruce is taller than the maple, as well as empirical truths. (In
this the term ‘empirical proposition’ is unlike ‘a priori proposition’ and
‘necessary proposition,’ which are not commonly used to refer to falsehoods,
but my main examples of empirical propositions will be truths.)
For the classical view, empirical propositions as well as a priori proposi-
tions are crucial for our lives. Indeed, the former include every truth known
perceptually, such as those known through observing the colors and shapes
of things around us, and all truths known scientifically, such as generaliza-
tions linking the temperatures and the volumes of gases, or ingestions of
drugs with change in behavior. A certain range of a priori propositions, such
as those of logic and pure mathematics, are presupposed by common sense
and science. Empirical propositions are also required to guide us in dealing
with the world, but the classical view sees them as open to disconfirmation
through experience in a way that a priori propositions are not.
Reason
103

Analytic truth, concept acquisition, and necessity
Analytic truths, as well as certain synthetic ones, are called a priori because
analytic truths are knowable through the use of reason. But analytic truths
appear to be knowable – or at least are showable – through a different use of
reason than is appropriate to the synthetic a priori truths. It may be that I
know that nothing is red and green all over at once by virtue of simply
grasping, as a rational creature, a kind of incompatibility between the
concept of being red (at a time and place) and the concept of being green.
But, as pointed out earlier, I apparently do not know it by virtue of grasping
a containment relation between being red (or green) and anything else. If this
does not illustrate two different uses of reason, it at least indicates a different
kind of application of reason to different kinds of relations of concepts.
Since my knowledge of the proposition that nothing is red and green all
over at once is not based on grasping a containment relation, it differs from
my knowledge of the analytic truth that all vixens are female. Yet in both
cases the relation between the concepts involved in the truth seems to be the
basis of that truth. In both, moreover, I apparently know the truth through
rationally understanding that relation: a relation of analytic containment in
one case, and of mutual exclusion in the other.
These points do not imply that experience is irrelevant to knowledge of
the a priori. On the classical view, I do need experience to acquire the
concepts in question, for instance to acquire color concepts or the concept of
a fox. But once I have the needed concepts, it is my grasp of their relations,
and not whatever experience I needed to acquire the concepts, which is the
basis of my knowledge of analytic and other a priori truths.
In part because of these similarities, as well as because the falsity of a
priori propositions seems absolutely inconceivable, the classical view takes
synthetic a priori truths as well as analytic truths to be necessary. They
cannot be false, even though in the synthetic a priori cases it seems not to be
strictly contradictory to deny one. For instance, claiming that something is
red and green all over is not contradictory in the sense that it entails that
some proposition – say, that the object in question has a definite color – is
and is not true. Still, on the classical view it is absolutely impossible that
something be red and green all over at once. We need only reflect on the
relevant concepts (above all, the color concepts) to realize that nothing is red
and green all over at once; we readily grasp (apprehend) an exclusion relation
between being red and being green.
It is also commonly held by philosophers in the classical tradition that all
necessary propositions are a priori. One rationale for this might be that
necessity is grounded in relations of concepts and these (or at least the rele-
vant ones) are the same in all possible situations. A mind that could
adequately survey all possible situations (like the divine mind as often
conceived) could thus know the truth of all necessarily true propositions.
Since this survey method would be possible without analyzing one concept
out of another, the grounding of necessity in conceptual relations would also
104
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

explain how there can be synthetic necessary truths. And for the classical
view, these, being necessary, are also a priori.
Summarizing, then, the classical view says that all necessary propositions
are a priori and vice versa, but it maintains that analytic propositions consti-
tute a subclass of a priori ones, since some a priori propositions are synthetic
rather than analytic. The view tends to conceive the truth of all a priori
propositions as grounded in relations of concepts (or of similar abstract enti-
ties, such as “universals,” in Bertrand Russell’s terminology).16 But the
position conceptually accounts for these propositions differently: for neces-
sary propositions in terms of the unrestricted circumstances of their truth (the
absolute impossibility of their falsehood in any circumstances), for analytic
ones in terms of how they are true (typically, by virtue of containment rela-
tions), and for a priori propositions in terms of how their truth is known
(through understanding).
The empiricist view of the truths of reason
The classical view of the nature of what I am calling a priori truths – also
called truths of reason – and of our knowledge of them has been vigorously
challenged. To appreciate the epistemological significance of reason as a
source of justification and knowledge, and of truths of reason themselves, we
must consider some alternative accounts of these truths.
John Stuart Mill held that ultimately there are only empirical truths and
that our knowledge of them is based on experience, for instance on percep-
tion.17 We might call this sort of view empiricism about the (apparent) truths of
reason. The name suits the view, since the position construes apparently a
priori truths as empirical, though it need not deny that reason as a capacity
distinct from perception has some role in giving us justification and knowl-
edge. Reason may, for example, be crucial in extending our knowledge by
enabling us to prove geometrical theorems from axioms. But the sort of view
I want to explore (without following Mill in particular) denies that reason
grounds justification or knowledge in the non-empirical, a priori way
described by the classical theory.
Rationalism and empiricism
Before we consider Mill’s thesis in detail, we should contrast it, from the
most general epistemological point of view, with that of Kant and other
rationalists to get a better sense of what is at stake in the controversy
between rationalism and empiricism. Kant’s position on the truths of reason
might be called rationalist, Mill’s empiricist. These terms are used too vari-
ously to make precise definition wise. Very roughly, however, rationalism in
epistemology takes reason to be far more important in grounding our
knowledge than empiricism allows, and rationalists virtually always assert or
imply that, in addition to knowledge of analytic truths, there is knowledge
Reason
105

of synthetic a priori truths. Very roughly, empiricism in epistemology takes
experience, most notably sensory experience, to be the basis of all of our
knowledge except possibly that of analytic propositions, understood as
including purely logical truths, such as the truth that if all whales are
mammals and no fish are mammals, then no whales are fish. (For both
empiricists and rationalists, analytic propositions are typically taken to
include logical truths.)18
One might wonder why some empiricists grant that analytic truths may
be a priori. The central point (though an empiricist might not put it this
way) may be seen if we use the terminology of the classical theory: even if
such logical propositions are not true by virtue of containment relations
between concepts, their negations formally entail contradictions, for instance
that some vixens are and are not female foxes. They are therefore paradigms of
truths of reason; for the use of logic alone, which is perhaps the purest use of
reason, can show that they can be false only if a contradiction is true – which
is absolutely impossible. This is another reason why, as noted above, analytic
propositions are sometimes given a broader characterization than I have
proposed and are taken to be those whose negations entail a contradiction.19
Some empiricists do not allow that any knowledge, even of so-called
analytic propositions, is genuinely a priori. A radical empiricist, like Mill,
takes all knowledge to be grounded in experience. A radical rationalist
(which Kant was not) would take all knowledge to be grounded in reason,
for instance to be intuitively grounded in a grasp of self-evident propositions
or deductively based on inference from a priori truths that are intuited.20
Empiricism and the genesis and confirmation of arithmetic beliefs
Empiricism about what are called the truths of reason is most plausible for
the apparently synthetic a priori ones, so let us sketch it with reference to an
apparently synthetic kind of a priori proposition that has been much in
dispute. Mathematical truths, particularly truths of simple arithmetic, are
often regarded as synthetic a priori. Consider the proposition that 7 + 5 =
12 (Kant’s example, also found in Plato’s Theaetetus). It is easy to say that one
just knows this, as one knows that nothing is red and green all over at once.
But how does one know it?
Here we cannot readily find a good analogy for the simple exclusion rela-
tion we apparently grasp in the case of red and green. Could it be that from
experience with objects, say with counting apples, then combining two sets
of them, and recounting, we learn our first arithmetic truths and then use
reason to formulate general rules, such as those for calculating larger sums?
Viewed in this way, arithmetic develops rather as a scientific theory is
often thought to, with observations crucial at the base, generalizations formu-
lated to account for them, and broader generalizations postulated to link all
the observations and the narrower generalizations together. And do we not
first learn to add by counting physical things, or by counting on our fingers?
106
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

To be sure, we perhaps cannot imagine how the number 7 added to the
number 5 could fail to equal the number 12. But the world could go haywire
so that when (for instance) five apples and seven oranges are physically
combined, the result of counting the new set is always eleven. If that
happened, would we not begin to think that arithmetic must be revised, just
as Einstein’s work showed that the physics of “the incomparable Sir Isaac
Newton” needed revision? Perhaps the crucial epistemological consideration
is what overall account of our experience is most reasonable; and if the best
overall account should require rejecting a proposition now considered a
priori and necessary, so be it.
From the standpoint of the classical view, several critical responses can be
made. One concerns the distinction between two related but quite different
things: the genesis of one’s beliefs – what produces them – and their justifica-
tion, in the sense of what justifies them. A second point concerns the
question whether arithmetical propositions can be tested observationally. A
third focuses on the possibility of taking account of what looks like evidence
against arithmetical truths, so that even if one’s final epistemological stan-
dard for judging a proposition is its serving the demands of the best overall
account of experience, these truths can be preserved in any adequate account.
Consider these ideas in turn.
First, granting for the sake of argument that our arithmetic beliefs arise
from counting physical objects, is the experience that produces them what
justifies them? The genesis of a belief – what produces it – is often different
from what justifies it. The testimony of someone I realize is unreliable
might, when I am off guard, produce my belief that different brands of
aspirin do not, apart from additives, differ chemically. My belief would at
that point be unjustified; but it might become justified later when I learn
that aspirin is simply acetylsalicylic acid. Moreover, regardless of what
produces our arithmetic beliefs initially, when they are justified in the way
my belief that 7 + 5 = 12 now is, experience does not appear to be what
justifies them. For my part, I do not see precisely how the truth of the
proposition might be grounded in the behavior of objects when they are
combined; and I would not try to justify it, as opposed to illustrating it, by
citing such behavior.
This brings us to the second point: it is far from clear that the proposi-
tion that 7 + 5 = 12 is (empirically) testable, say by examining how objects
combine, though it is exemplifiable in that way. The empiricist might reply
that this by no means shows that the proposition is, as the classical view
insists, necessarily true rather than contingent and empirical. Indeed, it
does not. But let us look closely at the idea that it could be tested, and
could thereby be disconfirmed by, for instance, our discovering that when
sets of five objects are combined with sets of seven, we then find just
eleven.
This brings us to a third response. How might one deal with repeated
and systematic counter-evidence? Classical theorists will argue that it is
Reason
107

possible for the world to alter in such a way that this combination procedure
results in one item’s disappearing, or in our failing to see it, or in our misre-
membering how many items entered the mix before our re-counting. They
will also argue that the unexpected realization of such possibilities would be
a better interpretation of the strange cases described – hence of our overall
experience – than saying that it has turned out to be false that 7 + 5 = 12.
Thus, instead of saying that an arithmetical principle has been falsified, we
would say that the world no longer uniformly exemplifies it.
One consideration favoring the classical view is that it is at best difficult
even to understand how the purely arithmetical principle could be false. The
number 7 plus the number 5 apparently equals the number 12, regardless of
how apples and oranges behave. The arithmetic statement is apparently not
about apples and oranges, though (so far as we know) their behavior exempli-
fies it. For the classical view, at least, it is about numbers, which, unlike the
arabic or roman or other numerals we use to represent them linguistically, are
abstract and non-physical.
Notice something else. In order to gather purportedly significant
counter-evidence to the arithmetic proposition in question, one would have
to rely, as already noted, not only on memory and perception (both highly
fallible sources) but also on simple arithmetic: one would have to count
disconfirming cases. A single apparent instance, say, of seven and five things
not adding up to twelve, would not be significant, and one must keep track
of how many anomalies there are, relative to confirmatory instances where
the expected sum is counted out. It is not normally reasonable to give up a
good theory on discovering a single apparent counter-instance. It appears,
then, that we must trust arithmetic in our counting in order to take seri-
ously empirical evidence that would undermine arithmetic.
One might think it is enough simply to have a significant number of such
disconfirming cases. But this is not so. One must be justified in believing
that the number is significant. And how could one achieve this if one either
made no count or – in any case – could not rely on one’s count of single cases
to sum to a significantly large number? If it need not be true that 7 + 5 =
12, why should 1 + 1 + 1 disconfirming instances necessarily sum to 3? And
would anything less than a huge number of apparently disconfirming cases
be evidentially decisive against such a proposition of simple arithmetic? A
single disconfirming instance would surely seem just an anomaly; there
must be a significant number. One would, then, have to rely on some arith-
metic propositions, such as that 1 + 1 + 1 disconfirmations = 3 (a
minimally significant number, perhaps) in order to mount an effective chal-
lenge to the (necessary) truth that 7 + 5 = 12. Given the interconnections
among arithmetic propositions, it is not clear that one could consistently (or
at least with any plausibility) maintain the needed disconfirmatory proposi-
tions while denying that 7 + 5 = 12.
There may be a way around this difficulty, but even finding it would
leave one far from a strong case for the contingent or empirical status of
108
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

arithmetic truths.21 Even if one appealed, not to apparent counter-instances
to the proposition that 7 + 5 = 12, but to a well-confirmed theory to argue
that it could be false, one would need to do at least some counting of one’s
confirmatory data regarding that theory (not to mention other ways in
which theory confirmation relies on arithmetic).
None of these points requires us to deny that there is a similar arithmetic
proposition about apples and oranges, namely, that when we count five of the
first and place them next to the result of counting seven of the second, we can
count twelve all told. This proposition may easily be confused with its pure
mathematical counterpart. The former is clearly contingent and empirical,
but its being so does not show that the purely arithmetic proposition is also.
The distinction between pure and applied mathematics can also be brought
to bear on geometry.22
There is a related metaphysical dimension of the question of the status of
arithmetic truths. By contrast with the classical view, radical empiricism
denies that there are abstract entities and so, believing that mathematical
propositions are about something concrete, radical empiricists naturally
view them as generalizations about the behavior of physical objects. We
need not accept the empiricist view to grant that if physical things did not
exemplify the proposition that 7 + 5 = 12, the proposition would be of far
less value to us even if necessarily true. If the physical world went haywire, it
could turn out to be false that when seven apples are placed together with
five more and the total collection is counted, the count yields twelve. This
chaotic situation would falsify the physical principle already contrasted with
the arithmetic one in question. But the physical principle is not, and does
not even follow from, the purely mathematical proposition we are
discussing.
Empiricism and logical and analytic truths
The empiricist view of the a priori can also be applied to analytic proposi-
tions and even to self-evident logical truths, and it may indeed appear more
plausible in that case. Suppose that through scientific investigation we
discover that vixens have certain characteristics we think of as male, such as
certain hormones. Imagine that gradually (perhaps because of chemicals in
the environment) these discoveries mount up so that the female foxes in our
laboratory begin to seem more aptly classified as male than as female. Could
not a time come when we begin to doubt that vixens are female after all?
And what about the logical principle of the excluded middle, which says
that every proposition is either true or false? Consider the proposition that
Tom is bald. Must this proposition be either true or false no matter what the
quantity or distribution of hair on his head? Surely the proposition is an
appropriate counter-example to the principle of the excluded middle.23
The classical view can offer its own account of these examples. For one
thing, particularly over a long time, we can begin to use a term in a sense
Reason
109

different from the one it now has. Thus, the discoveries about vixens could
result in our someday using ‘vixen’ to mean not ‘female fox,’ but ‘fox with
female external sexual characteristics and of the anatomical kind K’ (where K
is the kind of animal we have in our laboratory). Then, when we utter such
words as ‘Vixens are not really female,’ we are not denying the analytic
proposition now expressed by ‘All vixens are female’. We have confirmed
something else, rather than disconfirming this.
In this way, then, our experience might result in our someday no longer
assertively uttering ‘Vixens are female’ to say anything that we believe. This
certainly does not show that experience might falsify the proposition we now
affirm when we assertively utter that. Given what we now mean by ‘vixen,’
in saying that all vixens are female we do not rule out that those “vixens” in
the lab could have internal biological and chemical characteristics in the
light of which they ultimately need not be considered female.
Regarding the principle of the excluded middle, I would stress that
Aristotle plausibly argued against it, and some contemporary philosophers
of logic do, too. The main reasons for doubting it, moreover, do not depend
on empiricism. Let us explore some of them.
Consider again the vague statement that Tom (who has lost much of his
hair) is bald. It may certainly be argued that this need not be either true or
false. It is not as if ‘bald’ meant, say, ‘having fewer than 500 hairs on the top
of one’s head’. It does not. And if it did, the term ‘top’ would still be vague
and would cause the same trouble: it would be unclear in what area we must
find 500 hairs. If the middle possibility – neither truth nor falsity – is to be
ruled out here, it must be by a better argument. The principle of the
excluded middle, though often used to suggest that even logical truths are
not necessarily true, is controversial among rationalists and empiricists alike.
The principle is a poor example to support the empiricist case against the
necessity of logical truths.
When, by contrast, standard examples of simple logical truths are used,
the effect seems very different. Consider the proposition that if Ann is
coming by bus or she is coming by plane, and she is not coming by bus,
then she is coming by plane (which exemplifies the general logical truth
that if at least one of two propositions is the case and the first is not, then
the second is). Is there any plausibility in the view that this might be false? I
find none; and while nothing said here proves that the empiricist account of
the a priori is mistaken, it appears less plausible than the classical account.
The conventionalist view of the truths of reason
There is another important approach to understanding the truths of reason
and our justification and knowledge regarding them. It builds on the unde-
niable connections between how we use our language – specifically, on our
linguistic conventions – and our knowledge of truths expressible in that
language.
110
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

Truth by definition and truth by virtue of meaning
To see how this approach goes, suppose that analytic propositions may be
said to be true by definition. On the assumption that the truth or falsity of
definitions turns on linguistic conventions, one can now make moves
parallel to the classical ones that are expressed in terms of concepts. Thus,
‘vixen’ is definable as meaning (the same thing as) ‘female fox’; ‘female’ is
part of the phrase; hence, by grasping a definition (even if we do not call it
to mind) we can see how the proposition that all vixens are female is true.
The predicate, ‘is female,’ expresses part of the meaning of the subject,
‘vixen,’ just as the concept of being female is part of the content of the
concept of a vixen. Thus, according to conventionalism, by appeal to the
definition of ‘vixen’ as having the same meaning as ‘female fox,’ we can also
show that the proposition that all vixens are female expresses an analytic
truth.
The conventionalist may grant that in the case of synthetic truths of
reason, for instance that nothing is red and green all over at once, we cannot
make the same moves. For the relevant color terms are indefinable, or in any
case not definable in the needed way. But we can still speak of truth by
virtue of meaning, in the limited sense that it seems to be a matter of the
meanings of, say, the terms ‘red’ and ‘green,’ that if one of the terms applies
to a surface at a time and place, the other does not. Why else would someone
who sincerely denies that nothing is red and green all over at once seem to
exhibit an inadequate understanding of at least one crucial term used in
expressing that proposition?
What terms mean is a matter of convention. It depends entirely on agree-
ment, usually tacit agreement, among the users of the relevant language,
concerning the proper application of the term. We could have used ‘vixen’
differently; we in fact would have done so if the history of our language
happened to differ in a certain way. Moreover, even now we could decide to
use ‘vixen’ differently and proceed to do so.
The suggested account of the truths of reason – conventionalism – grounds
them in conventions, especially definitional conventions, regarding
meaning; and it conceives our knowledge of them as based on our knowing
those conventions. Since knowledge of conventions is reasonably taken to be
empirical knowledge based on suitable observations of linguistic behavior,
conventionalism (on this interpretation) turns out to be a kind of empiri-
cism regarding the truths of reason, and it has been held by some
philosophers in the empiricist tradition. The claim is not that they are about
words, but that knowledge of them is based on empirical knowledge of
linguistic usage.
Knowledge through definitions versus truth by definition
Some of the points made by conventionalism are quite plausible. In grasping
the definition of ‘vixen’ as meaning the same thing as ‘female fox,’ perhaps
Reason
111

we (knowing English) can see that all vixens are female; and by appeal to the
definition perhaps under certain conditions we can show that this truth
holds. But do these points undercut the classical view? If the points hold,
that may well be because of something non-linguistic: perhaps, in grasping
the definition we understand the concepts involved and thereby see a contain-
ment relation between the concept of a vixen and that of being female.
Furthermore, as a proponent of the classical account might also note, it
seems possible to grasp the relevant conceptual relations, and thereby
already know the analytic truth, even if one does not know any such defini-
tion. Indeed, it might be only on the basis of the analytic truths one knows
– such as that all vixens are female, and that all female foxes are vixens –
that one is able to construct a definition of ‘vixen’ in the first place. The defi-
nition would reflect what is already true in virtue of how the concepts in
question are related; the concepts are not themselves created by or grounded
in linguistic conventions.
Contrary to conventionalism, then, the knowledge of analytic truths
would then be one’s route to the definitional knowledge, not the other way
around. Understanding the relations between the concepts expressed by the
words in question would be the basis for judging the relevant definitions of
those words; it would not be through a knowledge of the truth of those defi-
nitions that one understands the conceptual relations or knows the analytic
truth. Hence, knowledge of analytic truths apparently does not depend on
knowledge of definitions or conventions.
Conventionalism also fails to give a good account of what grounds the
truth, as distinct from our knowledge, of analytic propositions. It is not
because ‘vixen’ means the same thing as ‘female fox’ that all vixens are female.
For, as we saw in assessing the empiricist view, this analytic truth does not
depend on what ‘vixen’ means. This truth holds whether there is such a
word or not. It could be expressed in some other language or by other
English terms. It could be so expressed even if the word ‘vixen’ never
existed.
There is another way to see limitations on what we can learn merely from
definitions. Suppose that, although ‘vixen’ had always meant the same thing
as ‘female fox,’ both terms had meant something else, for example ‘wily crea-
ture’. In that case, ‘All vixens are female’ would still have expressed an
analytic truth, but not the one it now does. It would have meant what we
now mean by ‘All wily creatures are wily creatures’.
Moreover, although one can come to know that all vixens are female
through understanding definitions of terms that now express this truth, one
cannot know it wholly on the basis of the truth of those definitions. A route
to a foundation is not itself a foundation.24 To know that all vixens are
female by virtue of knowing that, say, ‘vixen’ has the same meaning as
‘female fox,’ I need a bridge between knowledge of linguistic convention and
knowledge of vixens. Consider one thing such a bridge requires. I must be
justified in believing a general principle something like this: that a proposi-
112
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

tion expressed by a subject–predicate sentence such as ‘All vixens are female’
is true if its predicate term – here ‘female’ – expresses something contained
in the concept designated by its subject term, here ‘vixen’. But this bridge
principle is a good candidate for an analytic truth. If it is analytic, then, on
pain of an infinite regress, one can know an analytic truth by knowing
conventions only if one assumes some other analytic truth.
Moreover, to know, in the light of this bridge principle, that all vixens are
female, I must take the relevant sentence, ‘All vixens are female,’ to be the
kind of thing the principle applies to, that is, to be a sentence with a predi-
cate that expresses something contained in the concept designated by its
subject. I am in effect using logic to discern something about a particular
sentence by bringing that sentence under a generalization about sentences.
But how can conventionalism account for my knowledge (or justified belief)
of the logical truths I thereby depend on, such as that if all sentences of a
certain kind express truths, and this sentence is of that kind, then it
expresses a truth?
I cannot respond by doing the same thing all over again with this logical
truth; for that would presuppose logic in the same way, and the procedure
would have to be repeated. The problem would arise yet again. No finite
number of steps would explain my justification, and an infinite number
would not be possible for me, even if it would help. We could thus never
account for knowledge of a given logical truth without presupposing knowl-
edge of one. Since conventionalism presupposes (at least) logical truths of
reason, in order even to begin to account for analytic ones, it cannot show –
and provides no good reason to believe – that either every truth of reason, or
all knowledge of such truths, is grounded in convention.
Conventions as grounds for interpretation
These criticisms should not be allowed to obscure a correct point that
emerges from reflecting on conventionalism. The meaning of ‘vixen’ is
crucial for what proposition is expressed by the sentence ‘All vixens are
female,’ that is, for what one is asserting when (in the normal way) one uses
this sentence to make an assertion. Thus, if ‘vixen’ came to mean the same as
‘wily creature,’ that sentence would express a falsehood, since there are
plenty of wily males. But from the fact that change in what our terms mean
can result in our saying different things in uttering the same words, nothing
at all follows regarding whether what we say in using these words is neces-
sarily true, or true at all. Those matters depend on what it is that we say.
There are, however, insights underlying conventionalism: truths of reason
are associated with meanings; they can be known when meanings are
adequately understood; and they can be shown through pointing out rela-
tions of meanings. Moreover, without conventions, our “words” could not be
said to have meanings: strictly speaking, we would have no words and could
not plausibly call anything true by virtue of (verbal) meaning.
Reason
113

Important as these points about conventions are, they do not support the
conventionalist view that the truths of reason themselves, or even our justifi-
cation or knowledge regarding those a priori propositions, are based on what
words mean or on our conventions for using them. For all that these points
establish, our understanding of word meanings (including sentence mean-
ings) is simply a route to our grasping of concepts and shows what it does
about the truths of reason only because of that fact.
Some difficulties and strengths of the classical view
Of the accounts just considered, then, the classical view of the truths of
reason and our knowledge of them apparently stands up best. But there are
other accounts and many variants on the ones discussed here. Moreover, I
have sketched only the main lines of the classical view and only some of the
challenges to it. There are still other difficulties for it.
Vagueness
Recall the problem of vagueness. Perhaps the concept of being red, as well as
the term ‘red,’ is vague. Is it, then, an a priori truth that nothing is red and
(any shade of) orange all over? And how can we tell?
One answer is that although words are by and large vague, concepts are
not, and what is red (i.e., what instantiates the concept of redness) is never
orange even though we have no non-arbitrary way of precisely specifying the
limits of colors. Thus, we might confront a sentence, say ‘That painting has
a patch that is at once red and orange,’ which we cannot assess until we see
whether it implies the necessary falsehood that the patch is two different
colors all over at once or, because of the vagueness of its terms, expresses
(say) the possible truth that the patch has a single color that can be consid-
ered red just as appropriately as orange.
This answer is only the beginning of a solution to the problem of how to
deal with vagueness and is less plausible for highly complex concepts such as
that of a work of art. The more vague our terms, the harder it is to discern
what propositions are expressed by sentences using those terms, and thus the
harder it is to decide whether these sentences express truths of reason. None
of this implies, however, that there are not some clear cases of synthetic a
priori truths. Perhaps the proposition that nothing is round and square,
taken to belong to pure geometry, is an example. (There may also be exam-
ples in the moral domain, a possibility considered in Chapter 9.)
Meaning change and falsification
A related problem for the classical view emerges when we consider the close
connection (which some regard as an equivalence) between what a term
means and the concept it expresses. With this connection in mind, notice
114
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

too that meaning can change gradually, as where we discover things about
vixens a little at a time and thereby almost imperceptibly come to mean
something different by ‘vixen’. A point may then come at which it is unclear
whether the term ‘vixen’ expresses the concept it now does or not and, corre-
spondingly, whether what is then expressed by ‘All vixens are female’ is
analytic or not.
This unclarity about what concept ‘vixen’ expresses does not give us
reason to doubt, regarding the proposition which that sentence now
expresses, that it is analytic; but it does show that it may be difficult to
decide whether or not an utterance or sentence we have before us expresses
an analytic proposition. That difficulty may drastically limit the usefulness
of the notion of the analytic in understanding philosophical and other prob-
lems.
It might be argued, moreover, that on reflection the distinction between
meaning change (semantic change) of the kind illustrated and falsification of
the proposition we started with simply does not hold. This point is espe-
cially likely to be pressed by those who think that the basic epistemological
standard, the fundamental standard for judging whether a belief is justified
or constitutes knowledge, is what is required for an overall account of our
experience. This broad standard is compatible both with many versions of
empiricism and with some versions of rationalism.
To understand the difference between meaning change in a sentence and
falsification of what the sentence is used to assert, it is helpful to contrast
two kinds of case. Compare the following states of affairs: (1) scientists’
discovering that despite appearances vixens have such significant male char-
acteristics that they are not really female – an outcome the classical theory
says is impossible – and (2) scientists’ making discoveries about vixens so
startling that we come to use ‘vixen’ in a new sense, one such that, while
scientists deny that “vixens” in this new sense are always female, what they
are thereby saying provides no reason to doubt that what we now mean by
‘All vixens are female’ is true. Is there really a clear difference between (1)
and (2) – roughly, between falsification of the belief about vixens we now
hold and a change in the meaning of the terms we use to express it?25
Classical theorists take (2) to be possible and tend to hold that it is only
because possibilities like (2) are not clearly distinguished from (1) that (1)
seems possible. They regard the difference between (1) and (2) as clear enough
to sustain their view and tend to conclude that what may seem to be a falsi-
fication of an analytic proposition is really only a change in meaning that
leads us to substitute, for an analytic truth, what looks like a proposition
inconsistent with it, yet is actually compatible with it. Other philosophers
think that the difference is not clear at all and that future discoveries really
can weigh against what the classical view calls analytic propositions.26
It is difficult to doubt, however, that there are some truths of reason, such
as elementary logical principles, and such simple analytic propositions as
that all vixens are female, which are both a priori and necessarily true.
Reason
115

Whether some truths of reason are also synthetic is more controversial, but
it looks as if some of them are. Whether, if some of them are, those synthetic
truths are also necessary is also very controversial. I see no good reason to
deny that they are necessary, but there may be no clearly decisive argument
to show this.
If synthetic truths of reason are necessary, perhaps one must simply see
that this is so by reflecting on the examples. In any case, our capacity of
reason, our rational intuition, as it is sometimes (perhaps misleadingly)
called, is a source of beliefs of simple truths of reason, such as the self-
evident truth that if the spruce is taller than the maple, then the latter is
shorter than the former. We can know the truth of these intuitively, even if
more is required to know their status as, say, necessary or contingent, a priori
or empirical. Moreover, reason, applied in our contemplating or reflecting
on certain a priori truths, can yield both situational justification – hence
justification for holding beliefs of them – and actual justified beliefs of
them. Clearly, reason can also yield knowledge of them.
The possibility of empirical necessary truth
It is one thing to say, with the classical view, that every a priori truth is
necessary; the thesis that every necessary truth is a priori is less plausible.
Consider the truth that sugar is soluble in water. Ordinarily this is thought
to be a law of nature and as such something that must (of necessity) hold.
Yet it is apparently not a priori: one could adequately understand it without
thereby being justified in believing it, nor does it seem to follow self-
evidently from anything self-evident. Indeed, it seems to be the kind of
truth that can represent an empirical discovery. Proponents of the classical
view would maintain that the necessity in question is not “logical” in the
sense of absolutely precluding falsehood, but nomic (from the Greek nomos,
for law), in roughly the sense characterizing laws of the natural world as
opposed to every possible world or situation.
It does appear that one can clearly conceive of a lump of sugar’s failing to
dissolve in water, whereas one cannot clearly conceive of something that is
(in overall shape) both round and square (if this is conceivable at all). But
perhaps once the idea of solubility in water is properly qualified (in ways
sketched in Chapter 9), there may no longer seem to be any more than a
difference of degree between the two cases. I am inclined to doubt that the
difference is only one of degree, but let us leave the matter open and proceed
to cases that pose a greater challenge to the classical view.
The truth that gold is malleable is arguably more basic to what gold is
than solubility in water is to what sugar is. Is it even possible for something
to be gold without being malleable? Compare the question whether a vixen
could turn out to be male. This also seems impossible, but one difference is
that whereas there are good ways of identifying specimens of gold without
selecting them in part on the basis of malleability, there are no comparably
116
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

good ways of identifying vixens without selecting them in part on the basis
of being female. Still, even classical theorists will grant that taking the
proposition that gold is malleable to be necessary does not commit one to
considering it analytic, as is the proposition that all vixens are female.
Critics of the classical view will maintain that it is surely not obvious that a
specimen of gold could turn out to lack malleability, yet it is equally far
from obvious that adequately understanding the proposition that gold is
malleable is sufficient to justify it.
If we move to a theoretical identification statement, such as that water is
H2O, it seems even less likely that we have a proposition that is contingent
rather than absolutely necessary, yet it also appears that the proposition is
not a priori. The basis of our knowledge of it is scientific theorizing, not
understanding. To be sure, there is “heavy water,” but its existence bears on
the kind of hydrogen atom, not on whether water is necessarily H2O. In any
case, a different kind of example may more strongly support this conclusion
that some necessary truths are empirical. This time we turn to the domain of
biology.
Essential and necessary truths
As the identity of human beings is normally understood, who they are is
essentially tied to their parents. It is simply not possible that I might have
had (biologically) different parents. Anyone otherwise like me but born of
different parents is only a fortuitously identical “twin,” Here, then, is an
empirical proposition (that I am the son of R and E) which is apparently
necessary.
Notice, however, that the proposition that I have the parents I do is
singular and existential, implying the existence of the particular thing it
concerns (me), whereas all the clear cases of necessary truth we have consid-
ered are general and non-existential. To say that nothing is both round and
square, for instance, does not entail that there is anything round or square: it
says roughly that anything which is round is non-square, and it would be
true even if all the round and square things in the universe had been
destroyed (and presumably even if there never had been any except perhaps
in the mind of someone contemplating creating them).
What a proponent of the classical view might say of the parentage case is
that the proposition that I have the parents I do is an essential truth – one
attributing to a thing a property absolutely essential to it, roughly in the
sense that it could not exist without it – but not a necessary truth. The idea
is roughly this: a necessary truth holds in any possible world or situation; an
essential truth holds in, but only in, those possible worlds or situations in
which what it is about exists.27
One trouble with this view is that even in a world without them, we
could talk of water and H2O, as we can of what is round or square.
Perhaps the best the classical view can do here is, first, to distinguish
Reason
117

between two kinds of necessary truth, those applicable to entities that
must exist, such as (arguably) numbers, and those applicable to entities
that need not exist, and second, to argue that the former truths are a
priori. The idea might be that necessary truths are grounded in the nature
of things, and that the nature of the kinds of things that must exist is
knowable through the use of reason. The nature of water must be discov-
ered by scientific inquiry; that of the abstract property of roundness is
apparent to adequate reflection.
The idea that necessary truths are grounded in the nature of (the relevant)
things has some plausibility. At best, however, it does not in any obvious
way apply to purely formal necessary truths, such as that if some As are Bs,
then some Bs are As, where ‘A’ and ‘B’ are variables and do not stand for
anything in particular.
There is, moreover, a further objection to extending the idea to imply
the apriority of all necessary truths. A theorem might follow from a neces-
sarily true proposition and thereby be a necessary truth – since what
follows from a necessary truth is itself necessarily true – yet not be a priori
because there is no way to know it simply through adequately under-
standing it or through adequately understanding its entailment by
self-evident steps from something that is self-evident. We must not simply
assume that every such theorem is self-evidently entailed by a self-evident
proposition, or that some proof of it must proceed by self-evident steps from
a self-evident proposition. This assumption is not self-evident, and the
classical view must establish it by argument. It is not clear that a cogent
one can be found.
Moreover, even apart from those points, the only possible proof by self-
evident steps from a self-evident axiom might be long and complicated; this
would put the theorem a long inferential distance from the self-evident
axiom(s). Granted, a theorem like this would still be provable from what is
self-evident. But simply being thus provable entails only being what I called
ultimately a priori. That status is consistent with the possibility that, for
finite minds, knowledge of the proposition depends on memory. The status
is thus not sufficient for an uncontroversial kind of apriority.
It appears, then, that there can be necessary truths knowable only
through the work of empirical investigation or of arduous mathematical
proof of a kind that cannot ground what we might call strictly a priori
knowledge. Those truths, to be sure, might be both provable and knowable
just on the basis of a use of reason – though knowledge based on a long
proof also seems to depend on memory. Not just any use of reason, however,
qualifies knowledge reached through it as a priori.
From the falsity of the classical thesis that every necessary truth is a
priori, it does not follow, of course, that the classical view is mistaken in
positing synthetic a priori knowledge or in claiming that every a priori
proposition is necessary. (See Figure 4.1 for a brief representation of the clas-
sical and revised views of the a priori.)
118
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

Reason, experience, and a priori justification
Reason – conceived roughly as our mental capacity of understanding, espe-
cially in conceptual reflection or in inference – is a basic source of belief,
justification, and knowledge. Like introspective consciousness and unlike
perception and memory, it is an active capacity, in that we can, within limits,
employ it successfully at will. I can, simply because I want to, reflect on
logical and mathematical propositions. But although I can look around me
just because I want to, whether I perceive anything depends on there being
something there: trees and roses and books are not available to the eye in the
same unfailing way that concepts are numbers are available to thought.
Through reflection on the huge range of objects of thought, we can acquire a
vast amount of justified belief and significant knowledge.
To maintain that there is a priori knowledge and justification does not
commit one to denying that reason has a genetic dependence on experience.
Reason yields no knowledge or justified belief until experience, whether
perceptual, reflective, or introspective, acquaints us with (or develops in us)
concepts sufficient for grasping a priori propositions. But despite this
genetic dependence of reason on experience, in one way reason may be an
even firmer basis of justification and knowledge than experience. If experi-
ence is the ground from which reason grows, it is not the sole determinant
of the range or power of reason. The view from the top of the tree may be
more comprehensive than the view on the ground.
Reason
119
The classical view:
A priori propositions
analytic a priori
 
Necessary propositions
synthetic a priori
The revised view:
Necessary propositions
analytic a priori
A priori propositions
synthetic a priori
Synthetic propositions
synthetic empirical
^^
Figure 4.1   The a priori, the analytic, and the necessary

A priori beliefs
The following plausible principle of justification for a priori belief is a partial
indication of the justificatory power of reason: normally, if one believes a
proposition solely on the basis of (adequately) understanding it – believes
it in an a strictly a priori way, as we might describe it – this belief is justi-
fied.28 (I have in mind rational persons, of course, not just any possible
believer.)
There is a counterpart plausible epistemic principle – call it a principle of
knowledge for correct a priori beliefs – to the effect that normally, if one believes
a true proposition in the a priori way just described, one knows that it is
true. The first principle says roughly that a belief held (by a rational person)
in an a priori way is normally (prima facie) justified; the second says roughly
that true beliefs thus held normally constitute knowledge. Believing in this
a priori way is appropriate to (and typical for) beliefs of a priori propositions
(though they may often be believed on the basis of testimony), but it does
not entail that the object of belief is a priori (or a necessary truth or neces-
sary falsehood).
It may also be true that normally, if one believes a proposition solely on
the basis of one or more premises that self-evidently entail it and are them-
selves believed in the a priori way just described, this belief is justified.
Again, such a proposition need not be a priori, but this principle is highly
appropriate to what is a priori in the broad or the ultimate sense – not self-
evident but either self-evidently entailed by something that is, or provable
by self-evident steps from a self-evident proposition. What the principle
expresses is the idea that normally self-evident entailment transmits the
kind of justification that is based solely on understanding: specifically it
carries that justification across a self-evident entailment. Hence, normally, if
you believe a proposition on the basis of believing, with this kind of justifi-
cation, a second one which self-evidently entails the first, then your belief of
the first is also justified.
If these principles seem too permissive, note that we do not normally
believe propositions in the strictly a priori way in question unless they are a
priori and thus can be known on the basis of understanding them. We
normally have no tendency whatever to believe, solely on the basis of under-
standing them, propositions about the state of the weather or of the objects
in our environment or of the well-being or plans of others. Philosophers
commonly say of such propositions that we cannot “determine a priori” (or
tell or know a priori) whether they are true, and here ‘a priori’ designates an
a priori way of believing rather than the status of the propositions in ques-
tion. Compare how much we believe on the basis of perception, memory,
and introspection; not only is this far more than is normally believed on the
basis of conceptual understanding, it is also quite different in the kind of
grounding of the resulting beliefs.29
120
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

Loose and strict senses of ‘a priori justification’ and 
‘a priori knowledge’
So far, I have been speaking of knowledge and justification arising from
believing in a strictly a priori way. This is not necessarily a priori knowledge
or a priori justification, just as not everything perceptually believed is
perceptual knowledge or perceptually justified. When such knowledge or
justification is not strictly speaking a priori, one might still call it a priori
knowledge or a priori justification in the loose sense. Let us consider justifi-
cation first.
Consider the proposition that people tend to feel offended when they are
insulted. This is vague, but not too vague to enable us to see that it is not an
a priori truth (it seems empirically true or false, since it concerns what
psychological reaction a kind of conduct in fact tends to elicit). Still,
imagine someone who thinks that insulting someone self-evidently entails
being offensive to the person and that feeling offended is necessarily appro-
priate to what is offensive and tends to occur when one takes a person to be
insulting one. Such a person might argue that, on the basis of understanding
it, we can believe the proposition that people tend to feel offended when
insulted, and that we may, on this basis, be justified in believing that. If one
might be so justified, then we might speak of a priori justification in the
loose sense. We may also say that the belief itself is a priori in the loose
sense, since it is grounded in an a priori way: if it is not grounded in the
strictly a priori way (based solely on an adequate understanding of the
proposition), it is at least believed in an a priori way – it is based solely on
an understanding of the proposition. Just as a perceptual belief can be justi-
fied and false (as where one first sees a straight stick half submerged in water
and thinks it is bent), this belief can be also.
Another case of a priori justification in the loose sense can occur when,
although one believes a proposition that is a priori, one believes it on the
basis of an inadequate understanding of it, hence in an a priori way, though
not a strictly a priori way. One might, for instance, overlook a subtlety or
confuse one notion with a similar one, such as believing a proposition and
being disposed to believe it. Suppose that, on the basis of my understanding
of it, I believe a mathematical theorem that is a priori in the broad sense.
Suppose further that this understanding, although inadequate, is reasonable
(say because it represents a reasonable though subtly misguided interpreta-
tion of the theorem). Then my belief may be justified. This is a second case
of a belief held in an a priori way and exhibiting a priori justification in the
loose sense. Here the proposition is a priori, but the justification, though
based on a reasonable understanding, is defectively grounded. In the other
case of a priori justification in the loose sense, the belief is also held in an a
priori way, but the proposition is not a priori.
If a belief that is a priori justified in the loose sense constitutes knowl-
edge and is based on understanding the relevant proposition(s), we might
Reason
121

speak of a priori knowledge in the loose sense. But since both our examples
of such justification exhibit a defective (though reasonable) understanding in
the basis of the justification, they are not plausibly considered instances of
knowledge. If one believes something (wholly) on a basis embodying
conceptual error, this belief is not plausibly taken to constitute knowledge.
(This seems so even if the conceptual error is justified.)
Suppose, however, that I believe a mathematical theorem on the twofold
basis of a self-evident axiom (which I adequately understand) and the justified
true belief that the theorem is entailed by the axiom (we may assume the
second belief to be grounded wholly in my mathematical knowledge and
understanding). Suppose further that the theorem is entailed, but not self-
evidently entailed nor self-evident. It is not self-evidently entailed because
adequately understanding the conditional proposition that if the axiom holds,
then the theorem does is not sufficient to justify believing this conditional. To
see the truth of this conditional proposition, I must note several intermediate
steps from the axiom to the theorem, so that I do not see its truth (or the entail-
ment it expresses) on the basis of adequately understanding the proposition.
Still, the entailment is provable, and by proving it I may know the theorem.
This is surely a broadly a priori way of knowing it, and the proposition itself is,
in my terminology, ultimately a priori. Correspondingly, we may speak of a
priori knowledge in the loose sense here. But my knowledge of the proposition
is not a priori, in the strict sense; for the theorem is not a priori, even in the
indirect sense. By valid deduction, I can prove it using the a priori procedures
illustrated, but such provability of a proposition is not sufficient for its being
self-evident or even knowable a priori in the strict sense of that phrase.
By contrast, a priori knowledge in the strict sense is not only more than
true belief held in a strictly a priori way, it is also more than knowledge of
an a priori proposition. I could know a simple logical truth on the basis of
testimony, even if it can be known on the basis of understanding alone. This
would be knowledge of an a priori proposition that is not even a priori
knowledge in the loose sense. Its grounding in testimony does not prevent
its being knowledge, but testimonial grounding of a belief does preclude its
constituting a priori knowledge of any sort. Again, the analogy to percep-
tion is helpful. Just as perceptual knowledge is knowledge based on
perception and thus more than knowledge about a perceptible, a priori
knowledge is knowledge based on understanding and thus more than
knowledge of an a priori proposition.
To achieve a more specific characterization of a priori knowledge we do
well to begin with a crucial constituent of it – a priori justification. In the
strict sense (the sense that mainly concerns us), this is justification based
directly or indirectly on understanding a self-evident proposition (the justi-
fication will be only situational if the person in question does not believe the
proposition). A priori justification (in the strict sense) thus divides into two
kinds, depending on whether it is directly or indirectly based on under-
standing some self-evident proposition. (1) A priori justification for
122
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

believing a proposition is based directly on such understanding where the
justification depends only on understanding that proposition itself. This is a
priori justification in the strict and narrow sense. (2) A priori justification
for believing a proposition is based indirectly on such understanding where
the justification depends on understanding a self-evident entailment of that
proposition by some self-evident proposition. This is a priori justification in
the strict but broad sense.30
If this outline is correct, then a priori knowledge, in the strict sense, might
be plausibly taken to be knowledge that is based, directly or indirectly, in
the way just indicated, on understanding one or more self-evident proposi-
tions. There is, then, in addition to a division between a priori justification
and a priori knowledge in the strict and loose senses, a division between
direct and indirect (non-inferential and inferential) a priori justification, and
direct and indirect a priori knowledge, in both senses.31 (See Figure 4.2 for a
brief representation of the dimensions of the a priori I have been describing.)
The power of reason and the possibility of indefeasible
justification
We have seen that, and perhaps to some extent how, the justificatory and
epistemic power of reason enables it to ground a priori knowledge and a
priori justified beliefs of a priori propositions. We have also seen its power to
provide such knowledge and justification, in loose senses of ‘a priori knowl-
edge’ and ‘a priori justification,’ for propositions that are not a priori but
invite belief on the basis of their conceptual content. These senses are espe-
cially appropriate for propositions that are provable from what is a priori. Is
the power of reason such that it provides for something that even introspec-
tive experience apparently does not – indefeasible justification? It will help
to focus on a concrete example.
There may be truths of reason that are so simple and luminously self-
evident that they cannot be unjustifiably believed, at least at a time when
one comprehendingly considers them. Could one comprehendingly
consider, yet unjustifiably believe, that if Shakespeare is identical with the
author of Hamlet, then the author of Hamlet is identical with Shakespeare?
This is doubtful. One could perhaps believe it partly on the basis of a bad
argument; if one did, there would be something unjustified in the way one
believes it. But if one believes it, one has some understanding of it, and if
one understands something this simple to the extent required for believing
it, it is at best difficult to see how one could fail to have an understanding
of it adequate to yield justified belief of it, at least at a time when one
comprehendingly considers it. Perhaps, then, a belief held under these
conditions would be – or at least could be – indefeasibly justified.
If there are propositions like this, then there can apparently be indefea-
sible justification: justification so secure that those possessing it cannot be
unjustified in believing the proposition in question.32 But not all a priori
Reason
123

justification (even in the strict sense) should be considered indefeasible.
Justification for believing even certain logical truths can be defeated by
plausible skeptical arguments.
124
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth
Figure 4.2   Outline of a four-dimensional conception of the a priori

Perhaps, moreover, not all presumptively indefeasible justification need
be a priori. Consider my justification for believing that I exist, a proposition
that is neither a priori nor necessary but is arguably such that I cannot
unjustifiably believe it. If there is indefeasible justification, this is important
in dealing with skepticism (as Chapter 10 will), but plainly such justifica-
tion is not a characteristic mark of either a priori or empirical justification.
If, on the other hand, there is no indefeasible justification (something I leave
open here), at least our understanding of simple self-evident truths of reason
gives us both very secure justification for believing those truths and, when
we do believe them on the basis of adequately understanding them, knowl-
edge of them.
In summarizing some apparently warranted conclusions regarding the truths
of reason, we might focus on how much seems plausible in the classical view
that the a priori is coextensive with the necessary but includes the analytic
as a subcategory: that any proposition that is a priori is necessary and
conversely, but not every a priori proposition is analytic. Apparently, it is
true that not all propositions knowable on the basis of adequately under-
standing them are analytic: we have seen good reason to think that not
everything a priori is analytic. The classical view seems correct in this. It
seems mistaken, however, in the idea that every necessary proposition is a
priori, though probably not in the plausible idea that every a priori proposi-
tion is necessary.
More positively, in addition to our having a priori knowledge of self-
evident propositions, on the basis of such knowledge we may know many
truths that are at least ultimately a priori: not themselves self-evident but
self-evidently entailed by, or provable by self-evident steps from, some
proposition that is. Many of our beliefs, most clearly certain logical and
mathematical ones, are grounded in understanding in the indicated way, i.e.,
on the basis of understanding their content. Reason, then, as manifested in
our capacity for understanding, is one of the basic sources of belief, justifica-
tion, and knowledge; and, in a way that the other three sources we have
explored do not, it enables us to know truths that hold not only in the world
of our experience but in any circumstances whatever.
Notes
1 Adequacy of understanding of a proposition cannot be merely partial understanding, and
it is more than simply getting the general sense of a sentence expressing it, as where one
can analyze the grammar of the sentence, indicate something of what it means through
examples, and perhaps translate it into another language one knows well. Adequacy here
implies not only seeing what the proposition says but also being able to apply it to (and
withhold its application from) an appropriately wide range of cases. This matter is
treated in some detail in my ‘Self-Evidence,’ Philosophical Perspectives (1999). Note also
that there is no appeal here to understanding the necessity of the propositions (though the
characterization lends itself to taking them to be necessary). In this respect my notion of
the self-evident is simpler and more moderate than the traditional one common in much
Reason
125

of the literature. See, for example Laurence BonJour, ‘Toward a Moderate Rationalism,’
Philosophical Topics 23, 1 (1995), 47–78, esp. section 3.
2 For a helpful discussion of obviousness related to (but quite different from) the one in my
‘Self-Evidence’ and connected with the theory of the a priori in general, see Robin
Jeshion, ‘On the Obvious,’ Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 60, 2 (2000).
3 Two points are appropriate here. (1) A fourth case is one in which a concept is not only
exercised in a belief but explicitly figures in it, as where one believes that the concept being
taller than is instantiated by the spruce and the maple. (2) The analogy between percep-
tion and conception I am developing is meant to leave open what concepts are and what
it is to understand one. As will later be apparent, philosophers differ in their under-
standing of the truths of reason in part because of their different understandings of the
nature of concepts.
4 One reason for the normality qualification is to make room for the possibility that one
can consider and adequately understand a self-evident proposition yet fail to believe it.
Brain manipulation might cause such failure. We should also make room for the possi-
bility that, especially with more complex self-evident propositions – say that if p entails q
and q entails r and r entails s, and s is not true, then p is false – it may take a person time
to form the belief.
5 Temporal immediacy, unlike epistemic immediacy, is a property not primarily of beliefs as
such but of their formation. A belief is temporally immediate when its formation occurs
“without delay” upon the person’s considering the proposition in question. One could
also say that propositions are temporally immediate in a derivative sense when they are so
obvious that one normally believes them immediately on (comprehendingly) considering
them. Many self-evident propositions are like this. But when I consider some self-evident
propositions, such as that if there never have been siblings, then there never have been
first cousins, it may or may not take me a moment to see their truth. Still, when one does
see such a truth, the belief one forms will (at least normally) be epistemically immediate,
not inferential. So, this proposition and my coming to believe it may or may not be
temporally immediate. By contrast, the proposition that I am now seeing print is tempo-
rally immediate (for me) but is not self-evident. It is evident not in itself, but through
what I see.
6 Kant’s most detailed presentation of his views on these matters is in his Critique of Pure
Reason (first published in 1781), but a short presentation is provided in the Preamble to
his Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics (1783).
7 There has long been controversy about whether such thought is possible without using
language, or at least having a language. Donald Davidson is among those to argue for a
strong dependence of thought on language. See, for example his Inquiries into Truth and
Interpretation (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984). Relevant critical discussion of
Davidson is provided by Ruth Barcan Marcus in ‘Some Revisionary Puzzles About Belief
and Believing,’ Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, supplement to vol. 50 (1990),
133–53, which brings out serious problems for the view that beliefs must have sentence-
like objects. There is no need to take a stand on this issue for my main purposes in this
book.
8 One way to conceive this is as follows: if the concept of F is part of the concept of G, then
having the property (of) F is entailed by having the property (of) G.
9 This is plausible if (1) the correct analysis of a key concept in an analytic proposition, say
that of a vixen, is discoverable, without reliance on anything beyond understanding that
concept, by anyone with an (adequate) understanding of the proposition, and (2) given a
correct analysis of that concept, the truth of the analytic proposition is appropriately
evident. However, some analytic propositions are not understandable in this way; some
might be provable only by a lengthy process from one that is (a notion discussed on page
122). Further, it is by no means clear that every analytic proposition is self-evident in the
very common sense that implies a fairly high degree of obviousness. If, as seems plau-
sible, the self-evidence of a proposition simply implies that some kind of adequate
126
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

understanding is sufficient for justification for believing it, then we might plausibly
distinguish between the immediately and the mediately self-evident and allow that the
latter propositions may be understandable (to normal persons) only on the basis of
considerable reflection. Cf. Thomas Aquinas’s view (which Kant might have known) that
Any proposition is said to be self-evident in itself, if its predicate is contained in
the notion of its subject … Man is a rational being, is, in its very nature, self-
evident, since he who says man says a rational being; and yet to one who does not
know what a man is, this proposition is not self-evident … some propositions are
self-evident only to the wise, who understand the meaning of the terms of the
propositions.
(Summa Theologiae Question 94, Article 2)
This seems to anticipate Kant’s containment notion of the analytic and largely accords
with the conception of the self-evident I have introduced.
10 There are philosophers who regard colors as subjective in a way that might seem to
undermine the example here. I do not see that taking the proposition that nothing is red
and green all over at once to be necessary, synthetic, and a priori entails any particular
analysis of color properties, and I doubt that the example fails. If the example should
depend on a mistaken realist account of color and for that reason fail, anti-realism about
shape properties is less plausible, and the proposition that nothing is round and square
might serve as well. For accounts of the status of color see C. L. Hardin, Color for
Philosophers, Unweaving the Rainbow (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1988), and Edward Wilson
Averill, ‘The Relational Nature of Color,’ Philosophical Review 101 (1992), 551–88. For a
detailed discussion of color properties, with application to the apparently synthetic a
priori proposition that nothing is red and green all over at once and with a defense of the
view that color properties supervene on (and so are determined by) dispositional proper-
ties of physical objects, see Colin McGinn, ‘Another Look at Color,’ Journal of Philosophy
XCIII, 2 (1996), 537–53.
11 This allows that such propositions can also be known empirically, say through testimony,
though there are restrictions (discussed in Chapter 5) on how this may occur. The charac-
terization suggests that an a priori proposition is knowable non-inferentially even if only
on the basis of considerable reflection, but the exact mode of the appropriate reflection is
not something that need be settled here. A full account of this conception of the a priori
would explicate the kind of possibility of knowledge in question; it is presumably not
mere logical possibility in the sense that no contradiction is formally entailed by the
occurrence of the relevant knowledge, but a conceptual possibility, roughly in the sense
that such knowledge is provided for by the concept of the relevant kind of knowledge:
the kind grounded in understanding propositions of the sort in question. My preference
is to characterize the a priori in terms of self-evident propositions and leave open what
kind of possibility there has to be of the sort of understanding that grounds justification
for believing those propositions. For a valuable treatment of possibility and necessity
arguing that such modal notions are irreducible, see Scott A. Shalkowski, ‘Conventions,
Cognitivism and Necessity,’ American Philosophical Quarterly 33 (1996), 375–92.
12 Kant’s Section 2b of his Preamble to the Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics (trans. by
Lewis White Beck, New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1950) opens with ‘The Common
Principle of All Analytical Judgments is the Law of [non]Contradiction’ and almost
immediately continues: “For the predicate of an affirmative analytical judgment is
already contained in the concept of the subject, of which it cannot be denied without
contradiction.”
13 In a broader usage, a falsehood can be called an a priori proposition provided it is an a
priori truth that it is false. This less common usage raises no special problems but
presents a terminological complication I ignore in the text.
Reason
127

14 There is a subtlety here that needs comment: imagine that a self-evident axiom, A, self-
evidently entails a theorem, t, which in turn self-evidently entails a second theorem, t.
Self-evident entailment (as opposed to entailment in general) is not transitive: A can self-
evidently entail t and t can self-evidently entail t without A’s self-evidently entailing t.
Here one could understand the conditional proposition that if A, then t, quite
adequately without thereby having justification for believing it. One might need the
intermediate step, t, to achieve that justification, and it need not be discerned simply in
adequately understanding the conditional itself. This possible limitation does not
preclude there being some kind of understanding of that conditional and related concepts,
such as a perfectly omniscient being might have, in virtue of which the proposition that
if A, then t, can be seen to be true. This shows that – as Aquinas saw in the quotation
from him above – there is a related notion – self-evidence for a particular person (or mind)
– which must be distinguished from self-evidence in its basic, non-relativized form,
making reference only to anyone’s understanding. Still, even if what is self-evident for
God might not be self-evident for us, some propositions are unqualifiedly self-evident.
The case also shows that not every proposition provable by individually self-evident steps
from a self-evident premise may be assumed to be a priori in the (moderately) broad sense
of being self-evidently entailed by a self-evident proposition; for (as just explained) such a
proposition might not be self-evidently entailed by a self-evident proposition.
15 There is much difference in judgment about how to classify the analytic. It might be
considered a semantic concept by those who think of it as truth by virtue of the meanings
of the relevant terms. It might be regarded as ontological by those who think such truths
are basic to the structure of reality. For epistemology the notion of the a priori is the
more important of the two. For an immensely influential paper arguing that neither
notion is clear see W.V. Quine, ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism,’ in his From a Logical Point
of View (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1953). Among the widely noted
replies is H.P. Grice and P.F. Strawson, ‘In Defense of a Dogma,’ Philosophical Review 55
(1956), 114–58.
16 See Bertrand Russell, The Problems of Philosophy (1912), Chapters 8–10 (these chapters are
reprinted in Huemer, op. cit.).
17 See especially J.S. Mill, A System of Logic (first published in 1843), particularly Book II,
Chapters 5–7. For a much more sophisticated critique of a priorism in mathematics and
an empiricist account of mathematical truths, see Philip Kitcher, Mathematical Knowledge
(Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1984).
18 Granting it is at best not obvious how logical truths are knowable by any analysis that
reveals containment relations, their negations can be clearly seen to entail contradictions.
19 How broad this is depends on the notion of entailment used. I have in mind a notion for
which the negation of a proposition entails a contradiction provided the use of formal
logic, supplemented only by (correct) definitions, renders a contradiction deducible.
20 Someone might think all truth is a priori on the ground that it is true a priori that (1)
God exists; (2) a certain universe specifiable in every detail is the best of all possible
universes; and (3) God creates the best of these universes. Then, with sufficient intellec-
tual power, one could (arguably) reason one’s way to any truth. Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz (1646–1716) has been read as holding a view close to this (but there are reasons
to doubt that he did, including considerations about divine freedom).
21 The proposition that 1+1+ 1= 3 might be held to be more intuitive than the proposition
that 7 + 5 = 12. But, first, in practice we might need to rely on less intuitive or much
more complicated arithmetic to get a good case for the possible falsehood of the original
proposition; second and more important, the simpler proposition that 1 + 1+ 1 = 3 will
also do as a case of a necessary mathematical truth.
22 For discussion of the status of the a priori in connection with geometry, see the Appendix
to Laurence BonJour, In Defense of Pure Reason (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1998). That book is also of interest for its criticism of Kant, who in BonJour’s view is less
a rationalist about – and less plausible concerning – the a priori than is often thought.
128
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

23 For discussion of vagueness and its bearing on epistemological matters (as well as refer-
ences to his own and others’ earlier work on vagueness) see Timothy Williamson,
Knowledge and Evidence (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000).
24 At least in his classic ‘Two Dogmas of Empiricism,’ in his From a Logical Point of View
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1961), W.V. Quine sometimes talks as if
he thinks that a knowledge of synonymy (sameness of meaning) of words is necessary for
any possible knowledge of analytic propositions. See, for example, section 4, on seman-
tical rules. One important comment is that “definition turned out to be a
will-o-the-wisp, and synonymy turned out to be best understood only by dint of a prior
appeal to analyticity”. In the overall context, the suggestion may be that only an inde-
pendent conception of synonymy would clarify analyticity.
25 Cf. W.V. Quine’s remark that “truth in general depends on both language and extra-
linguistic fact. The statement ‘Brutus killed Caesar’ would be false if the world had been
different in certain ways, but it would also be false if the word ‘killed’ happened rather to
have had the sense of ‘begat”’ (Two Dogmas, section 4). Compare saying that the sentence
‘Brutus killed Caesar’ would have expressed a different, and false, proposition (which is
what defenders of the classical view would likely say). Has Quine provided any reason to
think that the statement in question – understood as the historical truth we express using
the sentence – would have been false if the English word ‘killed’ had meant ‘begat’?
26 For a valuable discussion of the notion of the analytic in relation to the conceptual, see
M. Giaquinto, ‘Non-Analytic Conceptual Knowledge,’ Mind 105, 418 (1996), 249–68.
One of his major conclusions bears on the status of such cases as the proposition that all
vixens are female:
What the liberated position [Quine’s, freed of behaviorism] maintains is that any
belief may be rationally rejected in the light of future findings; what it has to
accommodate is that some beliefs may be rationally retained even when their
customary linguistic expressions become unacceptable. These [positions] are not
inconsistent.
(p. 266)
27 The terminology of possible worlds traces especially to Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz and
has been influentially discussed in relation to a number of the issues concerning necessity
and the a priori by Saul Kripke in Naming and Necessity (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1980). Kripke offers a different kind of example of empirical necessi-
ties: true identity statements formed using proper names, as in ‘Hesperus is identical
with Phosphorous’ (both being names of Venus). He also argues, using the example of the
standard meter stick in Paris, that an a priori truth, say that the length of the standard
meter stick in Paris at time t is 1 meter, may not be necessary. This is a highly controver-
sial example (more often attacked than defended), which I cannot take time to discuss
here. For detailed criticism, see Albert Casullo, ‘Kripke on the A Priori and the
Necessary,’ Analysis 37 (1977), 152–9. Casullo also usefully distinguishes knowledge of
the truth value (truth or falsity) of a proposition from knowledge of its modal status (its
being necessarily true or false, or contingently true or false), and argues that the classical
view could be mistaken in holding that the truth value of necessary propositions is
always knowable a priori yet correct in holding that their modal status is knowable a
priori.
28 Two comments are needed here. First, it might be desirable to widen the characterization
to allow beliefs based at least predominantly on understanding the proposition in question
(which requires understanding the concepts figuring in the proposition); but I want to
avoid here the complications that arise from considering multiple bases; thus I shall not
generally qualify ‘based on’ and similar terms. The main points in question will hold if it
is taken as equivalent to ‘essentially based on’. Second, although the relevant beliefs
might be thought to be always prima facie justified, there is at least one difficulty with
Reason
129

this: perhaps there could be an abnormal case of a kind that prevents any justification
from arising. This is not obviously possible, since if understanding is a sufficient basis for
the belief, that might arguably carry some degree of justification. In any case, the
normality formulation is significantly strong.
29 The quantitative comparison may be challenged by those who think we have infinite sets
of mathematical beliefs (e.g. that 2 is even, 4 is even, and so on) and of beliefs based on
others by trivial operations, such as forming new beliefs by adding an ‘or,’ as where,
given my belief that I am seated I form, as I just did, the belief that either I am seated or
I am flying to the moon. That this conception of belief is mistaken will be argued in
Chapter 7, which also notes relevant literature. In any case, the contrast I am drawing
here would be adequately strong even without its quantitative dimension.
30 This implies that even if one justifiedly believed, and knew, an a priori proposition on
the basis of a self-evident axiom, but not on the basis of a self-evident entailment of the
former by the latter (say, by a chain of non-self-evident inferences instead), the justifica-
tion and knowledge would still not be a priori in the strict sense – though they might be
very close to it.
31 Four comments are needed here. First, for one’s justification to be a priori, at least in the
strict sense, it must not depend (epistemically) on memory. Thus, suppose there are too
many self-evident premises for me to hold in mind at the same time as I understand some
conclusion’s following from them. Or, suppose there are so many self-evident steps
linking a single self-evident premise to a conclusion that I cannot hold them all in mind
in a way that assures understanding the utimate entailment of that conclusion by the
premise. Then my justification for believing this conclusion is not a priori (though I may
be able to prove the conclusion). Second, and related to this, so long as there can be a
mind sufficiently capacious to understand the entire set without dependence on memory,
a priori justification for someone’s believing it is possible. Third, although there is both
direct and indirect a priori knowledge in the strict sense, there may be only indirect a
priori knowledge (as opposed to justification) in the loose sense; this is because defective
understanding may be required for the non-inferential cases of a priori justification, in a
way that prevents the relevant belief from being knowledge at all. Fourth, as in this book
generally, I regard the justification referred to as defeasible (a notion considered in this
chapter and again in Chapter 8) unless otherwise specified.
32 It might be argued, however, that if one believed such a simple self-evident proposition
essentially on the basis of a bad argument, one would not justifiedly believe it, though, by
virtue of adequately understanding it, one would still have a justification for believing it
which simply fails to serve as a sufficient ground of one’s belief. I leave open whether one
could believe such a proposition both fully comprehendingly and essentially on the basis
of a bad argument (as opposed to one’s being only influenced by such an argument).
130
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

5
Testimony
• The nature of testimony: formal and informal
• The psychology of testimony
The inferentialist view of testimony
Inferential grounds vs. constraints on belief-formation
The direct source view of testimony
• The epistemology of testimony
Knowledge and justification as products of testimony
The twofold epistemic dependence of testimony
• The indispensability of testimonial grounds
Conceptual versus propositional learning
Testimony as a primeval source of knowledge and justification
Non-testimonial support for testimony-based beliefs

5
Testimony
If our only sources of knowledge and justified belief were perception,
consciousness, memory, and reason, we would be at best impoverished. We
do not even learn to speak or think without the help of others, and much of
what we know depends on what they tell us. Children in their first years of
life depend almost entirely on others to learn about the world. In talking
about our dependence, for knowledge and justification, on what other people
say to us, philosophers have commonly spoken of our reliance on their testi-
mony.
If perception, memory, consciousness, and reason are our primary indi-
vidual sources of knowledge and justification, testimony is our primary
social source of them. This is why it is a primary concern of social episte-
mology. The distinctive situations in which testimony yields knowledge and
justification are social: in each case one or more persons convey something to
one or more others. There are various kinds of testimony, however, and there
are many questions about how one or another kind yields knowledge or
justification.
The nature of testimony: formal and informal
The word ‘testimony’ commonly evokes images of the courtroom, where
formal testimony is given. Someone sworn in testifies, offering information
supposed to represent what the person knows or believes. Often such testi-
mony recounts what was witnessed first-hand, but our testimony can be an
expression of what we believe about something we did not witness, such as
the implications of a scientific theory or the potentials of human character.1
Formal testimony is not the basic kind (if indeed there is any basic kind).
To see that it is not the basic kind, notice that if we could not rely on what
people say outside of court, there would be no point in having courtroom
testimony or other formal kinds. Formal testimony differs from the informal
kind in the conditions under which it is given, but not necessarily in being
more credible. Testimony of the wider kind – roughly, saying something in
an apparent attempt to convey (correct) information to someone else – is
what plays the large role in our lives that raises the question of the impor-
tance of testimony for knowledge and justification.2
Even for the informal giving of information, for instance in telling
someone where one was last night, ‘testimony’ is too heavy a word. We
could speak of ‘informing,’ but this is also too narrow, both in suggesting a
prepared message (as in ‘Yesterday she informed me of her plan to attend’)

and in (normally) implying that what is conveyed is true. We might regard
all testimony as a kind of saying. But not all saying – even apart from what
is said in fiction – is testimony. Someone who says, ‘Ah, what a magnificent
tree!’ is expressing a sense of the magnificence of the tree, but not giving
testimony that it is magnificent, as where an arborist cites features of shape
and color in supporting a claim that the tree is magnificent and worth the
high cost of pruning and feeding.
It can help to speak of much conveyance of information as attesting. This
covers both formally testifying that something is so and simply saying, in
the relevant informational way, that it is so, for instance in telling someone
the time. It also captures the idea of saying something to someone.
Testimony is always given to one or more persons (to oneself, perhaps, in the
limiting case), whether actual or hypothetical, as where a diarist describing
atrocities for posterity does not know whether anyone will read the testi-
mony. In any event, what we must understand here is the role of testimony
of all these kinds – roughly, of people’s telling us things – in accounting for
our knowledge and justification. I begin with how testimony yields belief.
The psychology of testimony is both intrinsically interesting and epistemo-
logically important.
The psychology of testimony
If we start thinking about testimony by focusing on formal cases, we might
conclude that as a source of belief, testimony is quite unlike perception in
that testimony produces in us only inferential beliefs of what is said, whereas
perception produces non-inferential beliefs about what is perceived. The idea
that beliefs based on testimony arise by inference from one or more premises
is probably a natural result of concentration on formal testimony. When I
hear courtroom testimony, I appraise the witness, place the testimony in the
context of the trial and my general knowledge, and accept what is said only
if, on the basis of this broad perspective, it seems true. I do not just believe
what I hear, as I may just believe that a bat flew by if I see one zigzag across
the evening sky. Rather, given the premises that (for example) the witness
seems credible and that the statement in question – say that the accused
dined in a certain restaurant on New Year’s Eve – fits what I know about the
case, I may thereby come to believe this statement. Let us assess the idea
that testimonially based beliefs in general arise in this way.
The inferentialist view of testimony
If this inferentialist picture of testimony is correct, then testimony is a less
direct source of belief than perception: it yields belief only through both the
testimony itself and one or more premises that support the proposition
attested to or the attester’s credibility. If that is so, testimony is also not as
direct a source of knowledge or justification; for one would know, or be
Testimony
133

justified in believing, what is attested only if one knows, or is at least justi-
fied in believing, one’s premise(s). One could not know simply from
testimony, but only from premises about it as well.
There is a different, and I think more plausible, account that can also
explain the psychological role of background beliefs. On this account, beliefs
about the credibility of the attester and beliefs pertinent to the attested
proposition play a mainly filtering role: they prevent our believing testi-
mony that does not “pass,” for instance because it seems insincere; but if no
such difficulty strikes us, we “just believe” (non-inferentially) what is
attested. These filtering beliefs are like a trapdoor that shuts only if trig-
gered. Its normal position is open, but it stays in readiness to block what
should not enter.3 The open position is a kind of trust. The absence or laxity
of filtering beliefs yields credulity; excessively rigorous ones yield skepticism.
It could very well turn out that, in different circumstances, each of these
accounts – the inferentialist account and the non-inferential filtering-belief
account – applies to the formation of beliefs of what we are told. The
psychological possibilities here are numerous. Fortunately, we need not
describe them all. For now, it is enough to see that we need not consider
belief properly said to be based on testimony to be inferential, say grounded in
a further belief that the attester has spoken plausibly.
In the case of informal testimony – the most common kind – the beliefs
it produces in the hearer are surely not inferential. Certainly when trusted
friends speak to us on matters we have no reason to think are beyond their
competence, we normally “just believe” what they tell us. Indeed, if I am
sufficiently credulous, or simply very trusting of people’s word, then
normally, when people tell me something, my belief system stands ready to
be stocked. I will hesitate or draw cautionary inferences only if (for instance)
a would-be new belief conflicts with one or more beliefs already in my
inventory. If you look vigorous and tell me you once swam the English
Channel, I may readily believe you, whereas in the absence of special
evidence I would not believe someone claiming to have climbed Mount
Everest without using rope. For on the basis of my relevant background
beliefs about climbing, I take that feat to be impossible. I have filtering-
beliefs that prevent the testimony’s passing into my belief system.
Inferential grounds vs. constraints on belief-formation
These points about how testimony produces belief need expansion. Just as it
is misleading to try to build an account of the psychology of testimony from
the formal cases, it is a mistake to take a static view of how testimony
produces belief. Our beliefs and even our belief-forming processes may
change in the course of our receiving testimony. I meet someone on a plane.
She tells me about a conference in which a speaker I know lost his temper.
Initially, I suspend judgment about whether he did so, since the incident is
of a rare kind and I do not know her. Then, as she describes the conference
134
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

further, other details begin to fit together very well, and she notes informa-
tion I already know, such as who was there. Soon I am listening in an
accepting attitude, forming beliefs of each thing she says as fast as she
proceeds. At the end, I find that I now believe that the speaker did in fact
lose his temper.
Even at the beginning, I need not have inferred that I should suspend
judgment on the initially unlikely statement about the speaker.
Suspending judgment may be a non-inferential response to the constraints
set by my independent beliefs. Moreover, her testimony is blocked, but not
overridden, by my antecedent beliefs and impressions. That is, they prevent
my believing what she attests to, but do not lead me to disbelieve it. They
do not overturn a testimonially grounded belief I formed and then gave up
because of what I later came to believe, as where I discover it is inconsis-
tent with apparent facts.
What happens is apparently this. As her narrative progresses, the
constraints set by my independent beliefs relax, and, regarding each state-
ment she makes, I form beliefs not only non-inferentially, but even
spontaneously, in the sense that any constraints that might have operated do
not do so. Her statements no longer have to be tested by passing through
the gaze of my critical scrutiny, nor are any filtered out by the more nearly
automatic checking the mind routinely does when people offer information.
The most difficult thing to explain here is why, at the end, I believe the
proposition on which, at the beginning, I suspended judgment. One might
posit an unconscious inference, say from the general credibility of her
account to the conclusion that this proposition, as an essential part of it, is
true. But in what sense can an inference, as a mental process, be uncon-
scious? This is far from clear. In any case, perhaps the cognitive influence of
my standing beliefs, such as a newly formed belief that she is credible, need
not proceed through an inference from them. It might be like this: even apart
from my forming beliefs about her credibility, her eventually becoming, in
my eyes, a quite credible person, can in some fairly direct way produce in me
a general disposition to believe her. This disposition is strengthened as she
speaks with an evident credibility; and at the end it overcomes the resistance
to belief which was exercised earlier by my constraining beliefs. On the
subject she is addressing, I have come to trust her.
The direct source view of testimony
There are still other possibilities that support the conclusion that the infer-
entialist view of testimony is too narrow. Perhaps people (or some of us)
have a credibility scale on which attesters acquire – commonly without our
conscious attention to the matter – a place that can change, also without
our conscious attention. This is an interesting empirical hypothesis that I
cannot pursue, but all that is crucial here is that we see how beliefs grounded
in testimony – testimony-based beliefs – can be constrained by other beliefs
Testimony
135

without being inferentially based on them and how beliefs based on testimony
can be formed later than the attestation that is their ultimate source.
Perception, too, can produce belief after it has begun or, with the help of
memory, even after it has ceased. One may look at a shape for a long time
before believing that it is a tree stump and not a stroller who stopped to
gaze at the night sky. This same belief could also arise much later, from
vividly recalling the image a day later when one is questioned about the
scene. The connection in virtue of which a belief is based on a source need
not be direct or simultaneous or a result of inference from premises.
Is the analogy with perception sufficient to warrant concluding that, like
perception, testimony is a basic source of belief, in the sense, roughly, that it
can produce belief without the cooperation of another source of belief?
Consider perception. If I see a tree, this can produce in me a belief that there
is a tree before me without my having a potentially belief-producing experi-
ence of any other sort, such as a separate consciousness of an image of a tree.4
But I cannot form a testimony-based belief unless I hear (or otherwise
perceive) the testimony. Perception is crucial for the formation of testimony-
based beliefs in a way that no other belief source is crucial for the formation
of perceptual beliefs.5
Granted, perception does not produce belief without appropriate back-
ground conditions, nor does its being a basic source of belief imply that
antecedent beliefs are irrelevant. If I firmly believe I am hallucinating the
moon, then even if I actually see it I may withhold judgment on whether it
is out. A basic source does not derive its generative power from another
source, but it need not operate in complete independence of other sources or
their outputs. It can produce belief without the help of another source; but
it may also cooperate with other sources in producing it, and they may
suppress some of its would-be products or undermine the justification of
some of the beliefs it does produce.
Since testimony-based beliefs need not be inferential, and so need not be
grounded on a belief that the attester is sincere or even on a belief that
someone is speaking to one (though one must be at least disposed to believe
this), one may be puzzled by the point that testimony is not a basic source of
belief. The puzzlement may arise from failing to see that perception itself is
required for the formation of belief based on testimony, even if perceptual
belief is not a requirement.
Granted, I may have to be disposed to believe someone has said that the
speaker lost his temper to acquire a belief of this based on testimony; but
that seems to be only because I must have comprehendingly perceived this
being said, not because I must have formed the belief that it was said, just as
perception of a sentence in a convincing article one is reading can produce
belief of what it says without one’s forming the belief that the sentence says
that. There is surely no reason to think the mind must keep such semantic
double books. It is my perception of what is said, typically my hearing or
reading it, that is required for formation of a testimony-based belief of the
136
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

proposition attested to. There is a sense in which I must know – having
taken in – what was said; but this is a kind of understanding and does not
require forming such specific beliefs as that Juan said that Jane is reliable.
We could speak of recognitional knowledge here; but if we do, we can see that
such knowledge need not be expressed in beliefs.
There is also a positive point here. It is that testimony can be a source of
basic beliefs, in the sense of beliefs not based on other beliefs. The beliefs it
evokes need not be based on premises at all, much less on premises grounded
in another belief source. The kind of non-inferential belief that testimony
typically produces, the kind I am calling testimony-based belief, can also be
basic knowledge if it meets the conditions for non-inferential knowledge
(and so is not based on premises). It can certainly be basic for a person in the
everyday sense of being central in the person’s life.
A major epistemological point that the case of testimony shows nicely
here is that a basic belief – roughly, one basic in the order of one’s beliefs,
and so not premise-dependent – need not come from a basic source of belief
– roughly, one basic in the order of cognitive sources and so not source-
dependent. A belief that is not based on, and in that sense does not depend
on, another belief may come from a source of beliefs that does depend on
another source of them.
The epistemology of testimony
In the light of what has emerged about how testimony produces belief, we
are now in a good position to ask two further questions. How does testi-
mony yield knowledge and justification, and does it ever yield basic
knowledge or basic justification in the way perception and reflection, for
instance, apparently do? The case of knowledge is in some ways easier to
deal with than that of justification, and I want to start with knowledge. As
with perceptual knowledge and justification, testimony-based knowledge
and justification turn out to differ.
Knowledge and justification as products of testimony
Testimony can give knowledge to its hearers only under certain conditions.
If I do not know that the speaker at yesterday’s conference lost his temper,
then you cannot come to know it on the basis of my attesting to it.6 This is
obvious if I am mistaken and he in fact did not lose his temper. But suppose
I make a lucky guess and am right. Then I give you correct, conjectured
information which I do not know; but you are also lucky to be correct and
also do not know that he lost his temper. It is a fluke that I get it right; it is
even more of a fluke that you get it right, since in your case there are, in
addition to the chance I have taken of making a mistake, the other liabilities
you escape: of my having distorted the truth, of your having misheard me, of
your adding a false detail to what you take from my testimony, and so forth.
Testimony
137

There is a more common defect in testimony that prevents its producing
knowledge in the hearer. Imagine that I do not guess at, but incautiously
accept, the proposition that the speaker lost his temper, from someone I
know often lies about others. Again, I lack knowledge that he lost his
temper, even if this time the proposition is true; and again, you cannot know
it on the basis of my testimony, which is now ill-grounded in another way.
What I do not have, I cannot give you.
The case with justification is quite different. Even if I am not justified in
believing that the speaker lost his temper, I can be credible to you in such a
way that you can become justified in believing this on the basis of my
attesting it to you. To see this, consider the two facets of testimonial
credibility: the sincerity dimension, concerning the attester’s honesty, and,
second, the competence dimension, concerning the attester’s having experience
or knowledge sufficient to make it at least likely that if the attester holds a
belief of the proposition in question or of closely related ones, then they are
true. Surely you can justifiedly regard me as credible on the topic of whether
the speaker lost his temper if you have good reason to believe that I am
honest, possess normal acuity and memory, and was present and reasonably
attentive on the occasion.
It may now seem that there is a further asymmetry: I cannot give you
testimony-based knowledge that something is so without having knowledge
that it is so, yet I can give you justification without having it. But this
conclusion is at best misleading; and it is false if I cannot give what I do not
have. In the case of my credible but false testimony that gives you justifica-
tion for believing what I attest to, I do not give you justification for
believing what I say – that the speaker lost his temper – without having that
justification (as I do not). Rather, the way I attest to the proposition,
together with your background justification regarding me and the circum-
stances, gives you this justification, independently of whether I have it.
Now consider a normal case in which you credibly attest to something
you know. You do not provide me with justification in the way you give me
knowledge. Testimony-based knowledge is received by transmission and so is
dependent on whether the attester knows the truth of the proposition in
question – call it p. It is natural to say that in the first case you would gain
knowledge through my testimony, whereas in the second you would gain
justification from my testimony, but not through it. Testimony that p can
convey the attester’s knowledge that p; it can produce in the hearer a justifica-
tion for believing p, but it does not convey the attester’s justification for
believing it – the attester need not even have such justification. My testi-
mony that p, then, is not my giving you justification in the way one gives
knowledge. Such knowledge is testimonially passed on by transmission.
This contrast between conveying knowledge and providing justification
helps to explain the original asymmetry: if I do not know that a proposition
is true, my attesting to it cannot transmit to you testimony-based knowl-
edge that it is so (I have no knowledge to give here); but even if I am not
138
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

justified in believing it, my attesting to it can provide you with justification
for believing it, through providing the main materials for your becoming
justified in believing it.7 One might claim that this is still not testimony-
based justification, but I think it can be, in the clearest sense in which there
is such a thing. To see this, compare testimony with memory.
The contrast between how testimony produces knowledge and how it
produces justification in the recipient is reminiscent of a contrast applicable
to memory (drawn in Chapter 2). Just as we cannot know that p from
memory unless we have come to know it in another way, say through percep-
tion, we cannot know that p on the basis of testimony unless the attester (or
someone from whom the attester comes to know it) has come to know it (at
least in part) in another way; whereas we can become justified in believing p
through memory impressions, whether or not p is true or known,8 and we
can become justified in believing p on the basis of testimony, whether or not
the attester has true belief or knowledge of it or even justification for it.
With testimony-based knowledge, as with memorial knowledge, there
must apparently be a certain kind of unbroken chain from the belief consti-
tuting that knowledge to a source of the knowledge in some other mode,
such as perception; but with testimony-based justification, as with memorial
justification, what is essential is apparently a matter of the present epistemic
situation of the subject or recipient, such as the contents of apparently
memorial consciousness and the content and justifiedness of background
beliefs. Memory and testimony can both generate justification (though in
different ways); but they are not generative with respect to knowledge: char-
acteristically, the former preserves knowledge, the latter transmits it.9
There is another way in which justification and knowledge apparently
differ in their relation to testimony. Suppose I am justified in believing p,
but you have no justification of your own for believing p or for taking me to
be credible on the topic. To vary the conference example, imagine that in
passing, and without giving evidence, I say that three speakers lost their
tempers, and your background information neither disconfirms nor supports
this claim or my credibility in the matter. Here justification follows your
lights rather than mine: my would-be contribution to justifying you in
believing p is undermined by your lack of justification for thinking my testi-
mony is credible or for believing p on some other basis. Receptivity to
testimony-based justification sometimes requires already having some
measure of justification: for believing the attester credible or for believing p,
or for both.
Knowledge seems somewhat different on this score: to know something
through my attesting to it in expression of my own knowledge, you do not
have to know that I am credible; it is quite enough that you have some
reason to believe I am and no reason to doubt it. It is probably enough that
you presuppose it and have no reason to doubt it. Surely you can know that
it is nine o’clock on the basis of my knowing this and telling it to you, even
if you simply find me a normal-seeming person with a normal-looking
Testimony
139

watch and take me to be credible.10 And why indeed must you meet any
more than a negative condition: not having any reason to doubt my credi-
bility? After all, we are talking about a case where I know that it is nine
o’clock, attest to this from my knowledge of it, and thereby produce your
(true) belief that it is nine.
A natural objection to this credible-unless-otherwise-indicated view of
testimony as a ground for knowledge is that in our example one’s evidence is
so scanty that one would at best have only some reason to believe it is nine
o’clock. But is this true? Granted, my having some reason to believe the
proposition may be all I can show from my evidence or from what I feel
certain of. Still, on the assumption that I in fact do know the time and
sincerely tell it to you, it would seem that you can thereby know the propo-
sition I have attested to you. That appears to hold even where you simply
have no reason to doubt my credibility.11
These points suggest a principle of testimony-based justification: At least
normally, a belief based on testimony is thereby justified (that is, justified on
the basis of the testimony) provided the believer is adequately justified in
taking the attester to be credible regarding the proposition in question. A
principle of testimony-based knowledge is also plausible: At least normally, a
belief based on testimony thereby constitutes knowledge provided that the
attester knows the proposition in question and the believer has no reason to
doubt either this proposition or the attester’s credibility regarding it.12
Neither principle is unqualified, but there are at most a very few cases in
which abnormal conditions prevent testimony from yielding justification or
knowledge (or both) when the specified conditions are met.
The twofold epistemic dependence of testimony
Whatever we say about the exact conditions under which testimony grounds
knowledge or justification in its recipient, we have so far found no reason to
doubt that under many conditions testimony is a source of both knowledge
and justified belief on the part of someone believing what is attested. It has
seemed so far, however, that testimony cannot be a basic source of knowl-
edge, since one cannot know something on the basis of testimony unless the
attester knows it. This is why testimony does not, as such, generate knowl-
edge though it may be described as transmitting it.
Testimony may, of course, generate knowledge incidentally, as where, by
attesting in a surprised tone that it is 4 a.m., I give a fellow insomniac
knowledge that I am awake. This knowledge is grounded not on my testi-
mony but on the mere hearing of it. That kind of knowledge could as easily
have been conveyed without testimony, by my sitting down nearby and
opening a book.
Testimony, like inference, can exist in indefinitely long chains. An
attester might know the proposition in question on the basis of a third
person’s testimony, and the third might know it on the basis of testimony by
140
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

a fourth, rather than from a generative source such as perception. But how
far can this go, with each attester informed by a prior one? There is surely
some limit or other in each situation, as opposed to an infinite regress (diffi-
culties with infinite regresses will be pursued in Chapter 7).
That brings us to a second respect in which testimony cannot be a basic
source of knowledge. Surely if no one knew anything in a non-testimonial
mode, no one would know anything on the basis of testimony either. More
specifically, testimony-based knowledge seems ultimately to depend on
knowledge grounded in one of the other sources we have considered: percep-
tion, memory, consciousness, and reason. To enable others to know
something by attesting to it, I must know it myself; and my knowledge
must ultimately depend at least in part on non-testimony-based knowledge,
such as knowledge grounded in seeing that the clock says five.
One might try to reinforce this view as follows. Even if someone had
previously attested to a proposition, I would have to perceive this and to know
some supporting proposition, say, that someone had credibly said it is five
o’clock. Once the point is put this way, however, it is evident that it cannot
stand without qualification. The required kind of perceiving does not entail
forming a belief of this sort, perhaps not even the specific perceptual belief
that someone said it is five o’clock. The case shows, then, only that testi-
mony is operationally dependent on perception, not that it is inferentially
dependent on perceptual belief. It requires perceptual raw materials, but not
beliefs of premises about those materials.13
If, as seems to be the case, testimonial knowledge and justification do not
depend on premises that support the testimony-based belief – say, premises
confirming the credibility of the attester – this explains how such a belief
can be basic. Testimony as a source of knowledge and justification need not
be basic relative to other sources of knowledge and justification in order for
beliefs grounded in it to be basic in the order of beliefs.
The point that testimony-based beliefs can be basic is entirely consistent
with the point (made earlier) that the attester’s knowledge that is the ground
of the hearer’s (potentially basic) knowledge cannot ultimately be based on
testimony. Knowledge that is directly and wholly based on testimony for the
recipient cannot be ultimately based wholly on testimony for the giver. The
first would have no “right” to transfer it to the second, just as I would have
no right to give someone what I had merely borrowed from someone else,
who had merely borrowed it from a third person, and so on to infinity.
The point that testimony-based beliefs can be non-inferential and in that
way not dependent on premises is important. But the operational depen-
dence of testimony has both epistemological and conceptual significance.
For if one did not have perceptual grounds for knowledge, or at least for justi-
fied belief, that someone has attested to the proposition in question, one
could not know it on the basis of the testimony. This is an epistemic depen-
dence not paralleled in the case of perception.14 It shows that even if
testimony-based knowledge need not inferentially depend on having
Testimony
141

knowledge grounded in another mode, it does epistemically depend on having
grounds, from another mode, grounds for knowledge in that other mode.
Testimony-based knowledge thus depends on – and in this sense presupposes
– the availability, or one might say the potential cooperation, of another
source of knowledge, even if such knowledge does not require the actual
operation of that source in yielding beliefs of the premises it stands ready to
supply.
The case with justification is similar on this point. I cannot acquire
justification for believing something on the basis of testimony unless I
have justification for believing that the testifier is credible, as well as for
certain other propositions, such as that I heard the testimony correctly.
This justification cannot come entirely from testimony. Suppose Jane
assures me about Bert, but I am not justified in taking Jane to be credible.
Juan now tells me that Jane is utterly reliable. But how can this help
unless I am justified in trusting Juan? Non-testimonial grounds of justifi-
cation, such as perception of Juan’s conduct or a memory of his guiding
me in the past, must at least tacitly play some role in giving me justifica-
tion for believing him. But their role need not be inferential: they need
not produce in me beliefs of premises from which I infer that he is cred-
ible; they simply give me a justification that I could appeal to in framing
such premises if I needed them.
It may help to describe one of my overall conclusions – that testimony is
not a basic source of knowledge or justification – as reflecting a disparity
between the superficially simple psychology of testimony and its even more
complex epistemology. Often, when we hear people attesting to various
things, we just believe these things, non-inferentially and even unreservedly.
But this natural psychological process yields knowledge and justification in
the recipient only when certain epistemic conditions are met. In the case of
testimony-based knowledge, there must be knowledge, even if not neces-
sarily justification, on the part of the attester, whereas in the case of
testimony-based justification there must be justification, even if not knowl-
edge, on the part of the recipient. The first requirement concerns the
attester’s epistemic situation with respect to the proposition attested to; the
second concerns the recipient’s epistemic situation with respect to the
attester, or the proposition, or both.15
The indispensability of testimonial grounds
The epistemic dependence of testimony on other sources of belief must be
squared with the plain fact that tiny children learn from what others tell
them even before they are properly said to have grounds for justification.
Consider teaching a child color words. After a time, the child has learned
that the sofa, say, is red. But the tiny child has no concept of credibility or
other notions important in gaining justification from testimony and,
initially, insufficient experience to be justified in believing that its adult
142
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

teachers are credible. On the view developed here, however, this point is
quite compatible with the child’s acquiring certain kinds of knowledge.
Conceptual versus propositional learning
The first thing to note in explaining this compatibility is that there are at
least two ways to learn from testimony: one can learn (in the sense of coming
to know) the content attested to, and one can learn something shown, but
not stated, by the testimony itself. The first case is learning that, i.e., that
something is so. The second is learning of or about something (and may
extend to learning how to do something). A tiny child just learning the
basic colors is not, primarily, learning that (say) the sofa is red, but, above
all, becoming aware of redness as the color of the sofa. This is learning colors
and may be learning at least something about them.
In introducing the word ‘red’ to the child, then, the parent is only inci-
dentally attesting to the proposition that the sofa is red. The point is to pair
the word with an instance of what it stands for, with the aim of teaching the
child that word (or, say, what the color red is), and the child can learn the
main lesson without conceptualizing the sofa as such at all (something
required for propositionally believing that the sofa is red). The former case
of attestation – the propositional testimony – commonly results in propositional
knowledge; we would thus have propositional learning. The parental introduc-
tion of vocabulary by attestation – demonstrative testimony – commonly results
in conceptual learning.
It is important to see that the success conditions for the introductory
function of language apparently require that for the most part the attesta-
tions are at least approximately true. A child cannot learn ‘red’ unless, in
teaching the child English, a goodly proportion of the samples to which
‘red’ is applied are in fact red.16 This does not of course show that most
testimony is true, but it does imply that if communication is occurring
when testimony is given to the children, then one may reasonably assume
that both attester and recipient have at some point benefited from a back-
ground in which a substantial proportion of attestations of a certain sort
were true. How else can children be plausibly thought to have learned the
language in which the communication occurs? This in turn supports the
reasonableness of taking testimony to be normally credible.17
At the time concepts are initially grasped in childhood, it may not be
necessary that (propositional) belief and knowledge are acquired in every
case. Conditions sufficient for conceptual learning may not be automatically
sufficient for propositional learning. Belief and knowledge are, however,
normally acquired at the time that concepts are initially grasped, even if
conditions for mere conceptual learning are not necessarily sufficient for
propositional learning.18 Testimony easily produces both together. But if it
cannot produce the conceptual learning without propositional learning, it
can produce the latter without the former. It can be concept-producing,
Testimony
143

belief-producing, or both. The former case seems to be the more primitive,
and the conditions for its possibility should not be taken as sufficient for the
possibility of the latter.
It is very difficult to say when a child begins to form beliefs, as opposed
to mimicking its elders by saying things that, in adults, would express
beliefs. Let us suppose both that belief-formation comes very early in life
and that many of the first beliefs formed are based on what adults tell the
child is the case. The child’s defenseless credulity is a precondition for
learning. Must this pose a problem for the epistemology of testimony
suggested here? Again, it will help to consider knowledge and justification
separately.
Testimony as a primeval source of knowledge and justification
Very early in their lives we speak of babies and children as knowing things.
One might object that this kind of talk is simply projective: we would know
in their situation if we behaved in the relevant way, so why not say the child
does? This is a defensible line of response, but suppose for the sake of argu-
ment that at least by the time children begin to talk they do know certain
things. After all, we may surely speak of their learning – that the milk spills
when tipped, that the stove is hot, and so on – and learning (in general)
implies knowledge. At about the same time, children begin to learn on the
basis of testimony, for instance that steaming tea is hot and that when the
doorbell rings, someone is outside.
If, as seems a reasonable assumption, gaining testimony-based knowledge
requires only having no reason for doubt about the credibility of the attester,
then the view proposed above encounters no difficulty. If a tiny child
perhaps can have no reason for doubt, at least the child has none; nor need
there be any reason, since much testimony is unassailably credible.
Suppose, however, that a stronger requirement must be met: that the
child must have (possibly in a preconceptual way) some ground for taking
the speaker to be credible, for instance a series of experiences repeatedly
corresponding to what the speaker says. Perhaps we could sketch a case of
having such a correlational ground that would be elementary enough to fit
the rudimentary character of the child’s knowledge. I doubt, however, that
such a ground is required for testimony-based knowledge.
With justification, there may be greater difficulty in accounting for the
case of tiny children. But the first thing to notice is that we do not use the
vocabulary of justification, as compared with that of knowledge, for concep-
tually undeveloped creatures. For a child to be justified in believing that the
sofa is red, the child would have to be capable not only of having a ground
for believing this but, correspondingly, of failing to have one and yet
believing this proposition anyway, thereby being unjustified.
It is arguable that by the time we may properly speak of children in this
two-sided way as justified and also as unjustified – which is sometimes not
144
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

long after they can speak – they do have a sense of the track record of adults
in giving them information that their experience confirms. They have
learned that if parents say it is cold outside, it is; and so forth. Children will
not, of course, use the notion of credibility; but they will be able to compre-
hend related concepts, such as those needed for understanding that Mommy
is right about things and baby brother must be corrected.
With testimony-based knowledge, by contrast, not even this unselfcon-
scious kind of justification seems required. The conditions by which
knowledge is testimonially transmitted seem not to depend on justification
in the recipient in the same way as does testimony-based justification. To be
sure, testimony may be defeated – prevented from producing knowledge in
the recipient – by justified beliefs of some proposition contrary to the one
attested to. But in the absence of such contrary beliefs, the recipient acquires
testimony-based knowledge.
If this were not so – if testimony were not, so to speak, innocent unless
shown guilty – it would be at best difficult to explain how children learn
language in the way they do. Are we to suppose that, without having
learned a language, tiny children somehow have the justified beliefs needed
for acquiring the linguistic knowledge?
Another possibility for explaining how, very early in life, children may
acquire an elemental kind of justification for accepting testimony is that at a
very early stage they acquire a sense that they themselves generally give informa-
tion only when they have gotten it themselves, say through perception or
sensation, as where they see that it is snowing outside or they feel hungry. For
misinformation we commonly and sometimes sternly correct children, whereas
we patiently instill habits of correct reporting. This correlational sense that
children apparently develop, it might be argued, provides a kind of analogical
justification for taking others to be providing, when they give testimony,
information they have obtained. A related and compatible hypothesis is that
children have a rudimentary understanding of others in terms of what appar-
ently explains their observed behavior. And what would explain Mommy’s
saying that it is snowing outside as well as her having seen that it is?
None of this is to say just when knowledge or justification enters the
scene in human development, whether through the basic sources or through
testimony. These are psychological questions; a philosophical theory need
only leave room for plausible answers to them. The theory given here
suggests that knowledge may arise before justification, but it does not entail
even that. Moreover, it has at least this much harmony with the most
familiar data about human development: the more natural it is, and the less
figurative it seems, to speak of growing children as acquiring knowledge
and justification based on testimony, the easier it is to find some elementary
way in which they can satisfy the epistemic and justificational conditions set
out above, such as making discriminations that enable them to assess what
they are told and gaining some sense of the track record of those around
them who offer information.
Testimony
145

To say that testimony is not a basic source of justification or knowl-
edge is not to imply that it is any less important in normal human life
than a basic source. A source of knowledge and justification can be indis-
pensable in life even if it is not basic. It may be that no normal human
being would know anything apart from dependence on receiving testi-
mony.19 If there is no innate knowledge, and if one knows nothing before
learning a language (something I here assume for the sake of argument
but wish to leave open), then unless one could acquire linguistic compe-
tence without the help of others, they would be essential in one’s coming
to know anything at all.
If we try to imagine what would be left if we gave up all the knowledge
and beliefs we have acquired on the basis of testimony, we would be quite
unable to accomplish the sorting in the first place. But even beginning the
task of trying to put aside what one knows on the basis of testimony
suggests that one would at best be thrust back to a primitive stage of
learning. I want to pursue this idea in relation to David Hume.
Non-testimonial support for testimony-based beliefs
If one ponders Hume’s view of testimony as capable of grounding knowl-
edge only on the basis of a kind of legitimation by other sources, one may
want to know to what extent testimonial knowledge and justification, even
taken item by item, can be backed up by other kinds. For Hume, our “assur-
ance” in any matter depending on testimony “is derived from no other
principle than our observation of the veracity of human testimony, and of
the usual conformity of facts to the reports of witnesses.”20
Let us ask whether, for each proposition one justifiedly believes (wholly)
on the basis of testimony, one has a justification from other sources. Call this
the focal justification question for testimony-based beliefs. We must immedi-
ately acknowledge a complicating factor. These other sources would include
propositions one justifiedly believes on the basis of memory; and although
one’s justification for these propositions would not depend on the testimony
needing support, one’s beliefs of them might have been originally based on
testimony. Much of what we have stored in memory we came to believe
through what others have told us in person or in writing. Still, if what was
testimonially learned and is memorially preserved may justify believing a
proposition someone attests to, then it could be that we do have some degree
of independently grounded justification for everything we justifiedly believe
on the basis of testimony.
Given that memory is a basic source of justification, we might indeed
have memorial justification for beliefs which only seem to be grounded in
actual past experience. In any case, many of our beliefs about conditions
under which people are credible are preserved in our memories; thus, even if
I have no evidence regarding p I may have reason to think the attester’s
saying it is some reason to believe it.
146
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

Some of the memorially justified beliefs in question, however, would not
be justified unless I had been at some point justified in believing something
on the basis of testimony, as where I believe one person’s testimony,
remember the proposition attested to, and use it in checking on another
person’s testimony. There may be a kind of circularity here, since testimony
plays a role in checking on the credibility of testimony. But notice two
points. First, there are two attestations, normally by different attesters.
Second, it might be argued that since memory is a basic source of justifica-
tion, it may yield justification that supports testimony but is not
testimony-based. Even if a memorially justified belief is originally justified
on the basis of other testimony, it may later be justified without dependence
on that initial justification.
To illustrate some of these points about justifying a belief based on testi-
mony, take a case regarding a country I do not know first-hand. Consider a
radio news program announcing an earthquake in Indonesia. I have – though I
may never have articulated it – a sense of the track record of the network in
question and of the geological situation in Indonesia, a sense of how often
errors of that kind are made, and so forth. One could always say that this is a
very weak justification, especially since I rely on some beliefs acquired through
testimony (though that testimony may be independent of the credibility of the
network in question). Certainly such a justification is far from conclusive. But
there is still no good reason to think it must be inadequate.
It is natural here to raise a further question, a global justification question
for testimony-based beliefs. Could one fashion an overall justification of the
entire set of the propositions one believes, or originally believed, on the basis
of testimony? There are at least two questions one could be asking here. If
the reference is to all the propositions one believes conjoined together – to
the long proposition consisting of the first and the second and the third
item, etc. – then one cannot even imagine contemplating such a
monstrosity, much less justifying it. If, however, the reference is to the set of
one’s testimony-based beliefs considered in the abstract, it is still not clear
how to conceive justifying it. Suppose we take it to be a matter of showing
that “by and large” testimony-based beliefs are justified. If we do not allow
some testimony-based beliefs to justify others and we try to suspend judg-
ment on all such beliefs we hold (assuming such massive suspension of
judgment is even possible), I do not see that this corporate global justifica-
tion project would work.21 Let me explain.
Whatever might be possible in principle, it is doubtful that we can
always avoid relying on testimony, at least indirectly, in any actual appraisal
of testimony. Even one’s sense of an attester’s track record, for instance, often
depends on what one believes on the basis of testimony. Think of how one
news source serves as a check on another: in each case, testimony from one
source is tentatively assumed and checked against testimony from another.
How, then, can we globally justify testimony if we can never rely on it in the
process?
Testimony
147

There seems, moreover, not to be any general procedure by which one
can produce a global justification for the proposition that the whole set of
one’s testimony-based beliefs (or even a major proportion of its elements) is
justified. Fortunately, that project of global justification is not one we need
attempt, and the epistemology of testimony I have sketched implies on this
matter at most that justified testimony-based beliefs are individually justifi-
able for the believer in terms of the basic sources of belief.22
Some are thus justifiable, even if it turns out that not all of them are.
Sometimes one person can confirm another’s testimony simply by
observing the scene described in the testimony. Indeed, the reliability of
testimony in general can be checked through the basic sources. This is
significant, for it appears that no parallel point holds for the basic sources.
For instance, I cannot check on the reliability of perception without
appealing that very source, as where I look at something again in better
light to check my color judgment. (One can use data from one sensory
mode to justify a belief arrived at in another, but this is still relying on one
perception to check on the reliability of perception.) Nor can I check on
the reliability of memory, say by revisiting the scenes of past experiences,
without presupposing that I remember the original judgments I seek to
confirm by my visitation. Similar points hold for self-consciousness and
(intuitive) reason. This contrast is one reason testimony is not fully on a
par with the basic sources. The contrast does nothing, however, to suggest
that in human life as we know it, testimony is not essential for at least a
huge amount of what we know.
Testimony is a pervasive and natural source of beliefs. Many testimony-based
beliefs are justified or constitute knowledge. They may even constitute basic
knowledge or basic belief, both in the sense that they are not grounded in
premises and in the sense that they play a pivotal role in the life of the
believer. We might thus say that testimony-based beliefs not only constitute
some of our basic knowledge but are also psychologically and existentially
basic.
These beliefs are, however, not unqualifiedly basic epistemically. They
are basic only in the sense that they are not inferentially dependent on
knowledge or justified belief of prior premises. They are epistemically depen-
dent, in a way perceptual beliefs are not, on one’s having grounds for
knowledge or justification, and they are psychologically dependent on one’s
having some ground – such as hearing someone speak – in another, non-
testimonial experiential mode. Testimony-based beliefs are, then,
source-dependent though not premise-dependent. As a source of knowledge
and justification, testimony depends both epistemically and psychologically
on other sources. This is entirely consistent, however, with its playing an
incalculably important role in the normal development of our justification
and knowledge.
148
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

Notes
1 For a wide-ranging, historically informative account of what constitutes testimony and
numerous epistemological problems surrounding it see C.A.J. Coady, Testimony (Oxford:
The Clarendon Press, 1992).
2 Not all testimony is verbal, much less, oral. Consider someone’s asking of a person who
requested testimony on a crime, ‘What did he say?’ A perfectly good answer would be
‘That Mack the Knife did it,’ even if this was affirmed by sadly nodding when asked
whether Mack is the one who did the deed. The concept of testimony allows many
different ways of telling people things; certainly any symbolic behavior rich enough to
count as affirming a proposition can serve.
3 Thomas Reid spoke eloquently on this topic; he said, for example, “The wise author of
nature hath implanted in the human mind a propensity to rely upon human testimony
before we can give a reason for doing so. This, indeed, puts our judgment almost entirely
in the hands of those who are about us in the first period of life.” See Essay on the
Intellectual Powers of Man in Thomas Reid’s Inquiry and Essays, ed. by Ronald Beanblossom
and Keith Lehrer (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1983), p. 281.
4 Granted, I must have (and so must memorially retain), a concept of a tree; but this
merely conceptual memorial state is not a potential source of belief (which is not to deny
that it can play any other kind of causal role in belief-formation).
5 Three points may help here. First, telepathic or otherwise strange reception of testimony
may, at least for our purposes, be construed as some kind of perception. Second, granting
that one cannot form perceptual beliefs without having whatever additional beliefs may
be needed to possess the concepts required to understand what is believed perceptually –
for instance the concept of a star-gazing stroller in my example earlier – this does not
imply the kind of dependence on any other belief source exhibited by that of testimony
upon perception. One can perceive, though not interpret, such a stroller without having
these concepts; one cannot even receive testimony, and so cannot begin to interpret or
learn from it, without perceiving it. Third, supposing perception cannot occur without
some manifestation in consciousness (which is itself a source of beliefs), here conscious-
ness is an element in perception in a way that perception by an audience is plainly not an
element in testimony.
6 You might come to know it on the basis of something about my testimony: perhaps, for
example, I give it nervously and you know that the nervousness is an after-effect of my
being shaken by the fit of temper which I have since half forgotten and attest to conjec-
turally. This would be a case of belief caused by testimony but not based on it (not an easy
distinction to explicate; but it was illustrated in Chapter 2 in showing how a belief that a
past event occurred need not be a memory belief even if caused by that event; and it will
be developed further in Chapter 8). One requirement for a belief to be based on testi-
mony is the believer’s holding the proposition because it was attested to, as opposed, for
example, to holding it because of how or from what motive it was attested to. There
have, however, recently been challenges to the idea that testimony-based belief consti-
tutes knowledge only if the attester knows the proposition in question. Some of these are
cited and briefly answered in my ‘Testimony, Veracity, and Credulity,’ forthcoming in a
collection edited by Andrew Chignell and Andrew Dole.
7 The qualifier ‘testimony-based’ is crucial: suppose I attest, in a baritone voice, that I have
a baritone voice, but do not know this because I falsely believe I have a tenor voice; then
you come to know, from my testimony, but not on the basis of it (its content), that the
proposition to which I attest is true. The same point holds for justification in place of
knowledge. One might also say that you come to know it through my testimony in a weak
sense of ‘through’ not implying that the content of what I attest is crucial.
It is also possible that the content, but not my attesting it, is essential, as where I
present an argument you know I barely understand, and you come to know its conclu-
sion, not because I attest to it or to the premises, but on the basis of yourself realizing, by
Testimony
149

bringing to bear your background knowledge, that they are true and entail the conclu-
sion. This would be knowledge based on the content of testimony, but it would not be
what we call ‘testimony-based knowledge’.
8 I develop and defend this contrast in ‘Memorial Justification,’ Philosophical Topics 23
(1996). Particularly interesting from the point of view of the thesis that the attester
must know that p are two examples given by Peter Graham, ‘Conveying Information,’
Synthese 123 (2000). I will mention just one here. A teacher who disbelieves the theory
of evolution but teaches it conscientiously tells his students, on the basis of his correct
reading of the theory and his observation of a fossil, that there were homo sapiens in the
place in question. Since we may suppose he is giving his students correct information on
a sound basis, we may tend to conclude that testimony-based belief (theirs) can be
knowledge without the attester’s knowing the proposition in question. This is an inter-
esting case, since the hearers do have a testimony-based true belief that seems
adequately grounded. But is it, if the teacher would have taught a false theory in the
same way, had it been required by his job? Even if the theory itself is (an item of)
“knowledge” (as some would say if it is known), he isn’t a reliable link in the chain from
the fossil through the theory, since he neither knows it nor even believes it on the kind
of ground that would protect him from error in the way the (truth-conducive) grounds
of knowledge do. It isn’t that the theory he uses just happens to be right, but – from the
point of view of genuine evidence – he just happens to use it. If, on the other hand, we
suppose that the school would not require anyone to teach a theory that is not well
evidenced and that the students believe something to this effect, then perhaps an essen-
tial part of their basis for believing him is that background belief. Their belief would
then be bolstered by background beliefs rather than a genuinely testimony-based one. It
would be as if they had to believe something to the effect that this is what the school is
teaching in order to believe what he says. Chapter 8 will discuss knowledge in a way
that supports this analysis.
9 I leave open whether knowledge transmitted by testimony can be as well-grounded as that
of the attester (though I am inclined to think it can be, say where the attester is “abso-
lutely” reliable, a property that in principle could perhaps belong to memory in some
cases). By contrast, so far as knowledge goes, “a testimonial chain is no stronger than its
weakest link,” as Alvin Plantinga puts it in Warrant and Proper Function (Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press, 1993), p. 84. He is speaking of what he calls warrant,
which he views as roughly what makes true belief knowledge; and if, as I am inclined to
think, the point holds there too, then justification contrasts with warrant on this score as
it does with knowledge. It should be added, however, that if knowledge cannot be
stronger than its weakest link, it probably need not be any weaker.
10 If this is so, it may show something else: on the assumption that you cannot know a
proposition on the basis of premises you do not also know, this case would show that your
testimony-based knowledge is not inferential, since the would-be credibility premise is
not known but only permissibly assumed.
11 One possibility raised here is that of knowledge without justification. This will be
considered in some detail in Chapter 8.
12 These principles are formulated cautiously in several ways: for instance, they allow for
abnormal circumstances to provide exceptions; they allow that the resulting justification
not be strong but only “adequate” for what might be called reasonable belief; they allow,
but do not entail (what I think plausible but leave open) that the testimony-based belief
always acquires prima facie justification from the testimony; and they permit the recip-
ient to have justification or knowledge of the proposition in question from some other
source as well. The epistemic principle might well be broadened by specifying that the
recipient has no overall reason for doubt, but I offer that as a suggestion without adopting
it.
13 Here I differ from Elizabeth Fricker, who (in one place) holds that the recipient must
perceptually believe “that the speaker has made an assertion with a particular content …
150
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

capable of being knowledge … I have been convinced by John McDowell’s contention
that hearers’ perceptions of speakers’ utterances are … a case of perceptual knowledge.”
See ‘The Epistemology of Testimony,’ Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 61 (1987), 70.
The reference to McDowell is to ‘Anti-realism and the Epistemology of Understanding,’
in H. Parret and J. Bouveresse (eds) Philosophical Subjects (Oxford: The Clarendon Press,
1980).
14 John Greco (in correspondence) has raised the question why consciousness is not related
to perception as perception is to testimony. The beginning of an answer may be that
(sensory) consciousness is a constituent in perception, whereas perception is not a
constituent in testimony (but only in the perception of it). More important, perceptual
justification and knowledge depend on having consciousness of the perceptual object
which the justification or knowledge concerns, but not on a separate exercise of
consciousness, whereas testimony-based justification and knowledge do not depend on
perception regarding what the justification concerns – namely, the proposition attested
to or even its subject matter. Testimony-based justification, moreover (though not testi-
monially based knowledge), also normally depends on perception (or at least on sensory
experience) separate from that required to receive the testimony; for (on the view I am
taking in this chapter) justification for accepting the credibility of the testimony
normally requires perception (or at least sensory experience) as part of the background
one needs to acquire testimony-based justification. (Note 19 indicates why the normality
qualification is needed here.)
15 The epistemology of testimony suggested here may perhaps be more stringent than that
of Thomas Reid. For an interpretation and defense of the apparently Reidian view that
testimony-based beliefs need not depend even for their justification on other sources of
justification see Mark Owen Webb, ‘Why I Know About as Much as You: A Reply to
Hardwig,’ Journal of Philosophy 90 (1993), 260–70.
16 Strictly, they need only look red, as where white objects are flooded by red light; and
arguably, one could even teach ‘red’ by producing only hallucinations of the color.
17 It can be connected with arguments such as we find in Donald Davidson’s work for the
conclusion that most of our beliefs must be true, but it does not imply that stronger
conclusion. For discussion of this and other Davidsonian hypotheses, see Coady, Testimony,
esp. Chapter 9. Cf. Tyler Burge’s view that “We are a priori prima facie entitled to accept
something that is prima facie intelligible and presented as true.” See his ‘Content
Preservation,’ Philosophical Review 102 (1993), 472. Some explication and discussion of
this view is provided in my ‘Testimony, Veracity, and Credulity,’ cited above.
18 It is difficult to see how one could, through testimony, produce conceptual learning
without producing some belief. Could a child become acquainted with what redness is in
connection with being told the sofa is red, yet not acquire a belief of some sort, for
example objectually believing the sofa to be red? There is no need to settle this matter
here; nor can I pursue related questions concerning conceptualization in higher animals.
19 One reason this point is restricted to normal human beings is that it seems possible for a
human being to be created, as a full-blown adult, artificially, in which case much knowl-
edge of abstract propositions and perhaps of other sorts, such as knowledge of the
perceptible external environment in which the person is made, can occur before any testi-
mony enters the picture. The story of Adam and Eve is a theological version of creation at
the adult stage. There are also evolutionary conceptions of how knowledge first arises in
human history, but these genetic questions would take us too far from our main ques-
tions.
20 An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, ed. by L. A. Selby-Bigge (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1902), section 88.
21 We would certainly not be able to appeal to any significant segment of scientific knowl-
edge, for there we are heavily dependent on testimony, written and oral. A plausible case
that this dependence is even greater than it seems is made by John Hardwig in
‘Epistemic Dependence,’ Journal of Philosophy LXXXII (1985), 693–708.
Testimony
151

22 For supporting considerations favoring the possibility of the local justification and
opposing that of a global one, see Elizabeth Fricker, ‘Telling and Trusting: Reductionism
and Anti-Reductionism in the Epistemology of Testimony: C.A.J. Coady’s Testimony: A
Philosophical Study’, Mind 104 (1995), 393–411.
152
Sources of justification, knowledge and truth

Part Two
The structure and growth of
justification and knowledge


6
Inference and the extension
of knowledge
• The process, content, and structure of inference
Two related senses of ‘inference’
Reasoned belief and belief for a reason
Two ways beliefs may be inferential
The basing relation: direct and indirect belief
• Inference and the growth of knowledge
Confirmatory versus generative inferences
Inference as a dependent source of justification and knowledge
Inference as an extender of justification and knowledge
• Source conditions and transmission conditions for
inferential knowledge and justification
Deductive and inductive inference
Subsumptive and analogical inference
• The inferential transmission of justification and
knowledge
Inductive transmission and probabilistic inference
Some inferential transmission principles
Deductive transmission of justification and knowledge
Degrees and kinds of deductive transmission
• Memorial preservation of inferential justification and 
inferential knowledge

6
Inference and the extension
of knowledge
As I sit reading, I hear knocking. I wonder whether someone is at the
door. I then hear extended, very rapid knocking. It now occurs to me that
it is a pecking sound, and I conclude that there is a woodpecker nearby.
This way of coming to believe something differs from the way I came to
believe there was a knocking in the first place. That belief was perceptual;
it arose from my hearing the knocking. My belief that there is a wood-
pecker nearby is not perceptual. It arises not from, for instance, seeing the
bird, but from a further belief, namely my belief that the rapid knocking
sounds like the pecking of a woodpecker. I hear the rapid knocking, recog-
nize its character, and come to believe that it sounds like the pecking of a
woodpecker. On the basis of this belief, I naturally conclude that there is a
woodpecker nearby.
Some beliefs, then, arise from other beliefs and are based on them,
rather than directly on the sources described in Part One: perceptual,
memorial, introspective, rational, and testimonial. This occurs with
abstract matters as well as with perceptibles. Take mathematical proof; on
the basis of knowledge of an axiom, we may infer a theorem. An inference –
which we may think of as a kind of reasoning – may also proceed by way of
something general to something quite specific. Studying a speech, one
may determine that it is largely copied from someone else’s article; given
the general point that so representing someone else’s work as one’s own is
plagiarism, one reluctantly concludes that this speech is an instance of
that.
If we had only the beliefs arising from perception, memory, self-
consciousness, reflection, and testimony, we could not – by ourselves, at least
– build theories to explain our experience or our own view of the world. It is
largely because we can inferentially build on what we already believe, that
there is no limit to the richness and complexity of the ideas and theories we
can construct.
The nature of the inferential processes in which one belief is formed on
the basis of other beliefs is a major question in the philosophy of mind and
the psychology of cognition. The way those processes can extend justifica-
tion and knowledge is a major question in epistemology. Not just any
inference that begins with truth ends with truth; some embody poor
reasoning. We can best pursue the second, epistemological question – how
inference extends knowledge and justification – by starting with the first,
concerning what inferential belief is.

The process, content, and structure of inference
What sort of process is it by which my belief that there is a woodpecker
arises from my belief that there is a knocking which sounds like its pecking?
One clue is the naturalness of saying that on the basis of my belief that the
knocking sounds like such a woodpecker’s pecking, I conclude that there is a
woodpecker nearby. I infer that there is one nearby from what I believe about
the knocking: that it sounds like the pecking of a woodpecker. In inferring
this, I conclude something on the basis of something else I believe. (Other
propositions may also constitute premises for me; I cite the central or at least
most salient one.)
What I conclude – the conclusion I draw – I in some sense derive from
something else I believe. The concluding and the beliefs are mental. But
neither what I conclude, nor what I believe from which I conclude it, is
mental: these things are contents of my beliefs, as they might be of yours.
They are not properties of anyone’s mind, as in some sense beliefs themselves
are. Such contents of beliefs – also called objects of beliefs – are commonly
thought to be propositions (or statements, hypotheses, or something else
that can be considered to be true or to be false, but is apparently not itself a
mental entity).1
Two related senses of ‘inference’
There are, then, two sorts of things involved when I draw a conclusion. One
is the mental process of my concluding it on the basis of one or more of my
beliefs or assumptions, as where I conclude that Alberto has been bitten by a
deer tick on the basis of my belief (just acquired) that he has Lyme disease
and my background belief that this is caused by deer tick bites. The other
element in my drawing a conclusion is the set of two or more propositions
which are my conclusion and my ground for it. Call the first element the
inferential process; it is a mental episode of reasoning. Call the second its infer-
ential content; it is abstract and not a process.
The inferential content indicates what is inferred from what, and it does
this in a way that shows how my inferring that there is a woodpecker nearby
is drawing the same inference as you would make if you inferred this from
the proposition that there is knocking which sounds like that of a wood-
pecker. Our inferrings are two different processes, one in me and one in you.
But their content is the same. Sometimes ‘inference’ is used for the content
of the process. I want to talk about inference in both of these senses: as a
process and as a structure consisting of propositions.
If inferring is a process corresponding to a conclusion and one or more
premises for it, should we then suppose that in drawing my inference I said
to myself something like, ‘Those knocks sound like a woodpecker’s; hence,
there is a woodpecker nearby’? This might apply to someone just learning to
recognize woodpecker knocking, but not to me. I do not need to concentrate
Inference and the extension of knowledge
157

on the proposition that there are those sounds, much less to say to myself
something like ‘hence there is a woodpecker’. I quickly realize, through
hearing the sounds – and knowing from memory how woodpeckers sound –
that they are its sounds; and on the basis of believing this proposition, I
draw my conclusion without signposting my doing so by a silent ‘hence’.
Reasoned belief and belief for a reason
My drawing the inference is something I do; it is a kind of reasoning. But it is
not necessarily self-conscious, as in some cases of engaging in reasoning with
the aim of proving a theorem from axioms. We need not introspect or even
be focally conscious of our reasoning. We may instead simply draw our
conclusion when our ground for it registers in our consciousness in an appro-
priate way. Thus, in response to wondering what I hear, I conceive the
sounds as a pecking, and I then infer that there is a woodpecker. My
resulting belief that there is one is, then, arrived at by reasoning and based
on it. The belief may on that ground be called a reasoned belief; but we should
also speak of a reasoned belief where such a reasoning process becomes the
same kind of basis for a previously held belief. A belief arising from intuition
or even guesswork can later become reasoned.
Compare this with a case in which, as I am reading on an unusually still
morning, a vehicle backfires in the distance. I go on reading without
thinking about the noise, though I do have the thought that someone drove
by. Have I inferred, while reading, that someone drove by, say on the basis of
believing that I heard a vehicle backfire? Surely I need not have. I am not like
someone who must think about whether the sound had certain qualities and,
only after determining that it does, concludes that a vehicle passed. Being
familiar with backfires, I might simply have recognized the sound as a back-
fire and, on the basis of this together with my standing belief that backfires
are from (driven) vehicles, automatically formed the belief that someone
drove by. The former belief (at least in relation to the two taken together)
expresses my reason for holding the latter, which is thus a belief for a reason.
It is not also a reasoned belief, however, because it is not arrived at by a
process of reasoning. A reasoned belief is always held for a reason – one
expressed by the premise(s) of the reasoning – but a belief (held) for a reason
need not be a reasoned belief – one that is also arrived at by reasoning.2
This contrast between a belief for a reason and a reasoned belief may lead to
the objection that I did not even form the belief that a vehicle backfired but
only automatically believed, upon hearing the noise, that a vehicle passed.
This is a possible case, and it lies at the other end of the spectrum from the
case in which one cautiously forms the belief that the noise is a backfire, and
then self-consciously infers that a vehicle passed. But my case is intermediate:
I am neither so familiar with backfiring vehicles that I “just hear” vehicles
pass when I hear those sounds, nor so unfamiliar with backfires that I must go
through a process of inferring that conclusion when I hear the sounds.
158
Structure of justification and knowledge

Similarly, suppose we are presented with premises that obviously imply a
conclusion and left to infer or, on the other hand, “just see” it, as the case
may be. In Shakespeare’s Julius Caesar we have the lines:
Yond Cassius has a lean and hungry look.
He thinks too much, such men are dangerous.
(Act 1, Scene ii)
If we just see the implication that Cassius is dangerous, we acquire a belief
for a reason, but it is not reasoned; if we need to consider these premises and
draw the conclusion as they lead one to it, we have a reasoned belief. In both
cases one belief is based on another; but there are different ways this occurs,
both for different people and for the same person at different times.
People differ in the background knowledge and belief they bring to
their experiences, and this in turn influences how those experiences
produce new beliefs in them, say directly versus inferentially. Thus, in the
very same situation, one person’s inference may be another’s perception. In
literary interpretation or in art criticism, for instance, what the novice
must realize through drawing inferences, the professional can “just see.” It
is an important point in the psychology of cognition that what one person
believes only inferentially another believes directly. For instance, what the
first must arrive at by steps from one or more items of information to a
conclusion from them, the other grasps as a whole, say perceptually. Both
cases may occur almost instantaneously, and their difference is easily
missed. It is in part the failure to distinguish the cases that apparently
leads some people to think that perceptual belief as such is inferential.
In seeing the difference between reasoned belief and (non-reasoned) belief
for a reason, it may help to notice that the contexts of the backfire and wood-
pecker noises differ significantly. The backfire is a kind of noise that can
make it obvious that someone is driving by, whereas the pecking, far from
coinciding with a flutter of wings that clearly mark the presence of a bird, is
an isolated stream of sounds in the quiet of the afternoon, and it can be asso-
ciated with many sources, natural and mechanical. Certainly there is an
event of belief formation when I hear the bang and come to believe that
someone drove by. The point is that such a belief need not be reasoned: one
need not form it by drawing an inference.
The contrast between a reasoned belief and a belief for a reason must not
be allowed to obscure something important that is shared by the two kinds
of belief formation. In both cases, I believe one thing on the basis of another
thing I believe; for instance, I believe that someone drove by on the basis of
believing that a vehicle backfired. In both instances, then, there is an infer-
ential (roughly, argumental) structure corresponding to my beliefs. It consists
of a proposition we might think of as a conclusion and at least one we might
think of as a premise on which the conclusion is based. This similarity helps
to explain why there is an inclination to regard my coming to believe that
someone drove by as somehow inferential.3
Inference and the extension of knowledge
159

Two ways beliefs may be inferential
There is a way to describe our two examples that helps to remind us of
both their similarities and their differences. Call my reasoned belief that
there is a woodpecker nearby – considered at the time I form it – episodi-
cally inferential, since (at the time) it arises from a process or episode of
inferring, of explicitly drawing a conclusion from something one believes.
Call my belief that someone drove by (also considered at the time I form
it) structurally inferential, since, as a belief for a reason, it is based on another
belief in much the way one belief is based on a second when the first does
arise from the second by inference, but is not episodically inferential.
Being so based implies (among other things) that my holding the second
belief, the basis (or premise) belief, is at least part of what explains why I
hold the first (presumably in a causal sense of ‘explain’). Yet my belief that
someone drove by is not at the time episodically inferential, because it is
arises, not from my drawing an inference, but in an automatic way not
requiring a process of reasoning.
In short, episodically inferential beliefs – which are at the time reasoned –
are beliefs for a reason and hence are inferential, but not every belief for a
reason is episodically inferential. Beliefs for a reason are, however, roughly
equivalent to those that are structurally inferential. Reasons, one might say,
can lead to inferential belief by two different paths, one requiring reasoning,
the other not.4
In both instances there is an inferential structure (which is no doubt
reflected in the brain) corresponding to my beliefs: I believe the conclu-
sion because I believe the premise(s), even though the beliefs are related by
an inferential episode in one case and by an automatic process of belief
formation in the other. In the first case, I do something – I infer a conclu-
sion. In the second, something happens in me – a belief arises on the basis
of one or more other beliefs I hold. The resulting structure is much the
same. Hence, a belief that is episodically inferential at the time it is
formed will become structurally inferential when it is retained after the
inference is drawn if, as is common, it remains based on the reason
expressed by the premise(s). The difference is that the two beliefs arise in
different ways. Only the belief that there is a woodpecker nearby is (at the
time it is formed) episodically inferential.5
The basing relation: direct and indirect belief
We can also see how a belief can be inferentially based on a second without
being episodically inferential if we consider a case – a kind especially
important in understanding knowledge and justification – in which one
first believes something perceptually and then the belief comes to be based
on a premise. Suppose you see someone you take to be Alasdair. You do not
get a good look, but believe in any case that it is Alasdair. When a friend
says that she has just met Alasdair’s wife at the train station, you now
160
Structure of justification and knowledge

believe (in part) on the basis of her information that you saw him. But you
need not, at any point, have inferred this from her information. The testi-
mony-based belief – or indeed any new belief you form that expresses
evidence that it was Alasdair you saw – can become a structurally inferen-
tial basis of your belief without your using it as a premise by drawing an
inference. It is like an additional pillar placed beneath a porch after it is
built: the pillar adds support but otherwise leaves the porch as it is. The
addition of this support can justify the belief it supports. If that belief is
already justified, it is now doubly so. If the belief is not previously justi-
fied, it may now be justified or even constitute knowledge.
Another way to bring out what the two kinds of inferential belief have in
common is to call them indirect. For in each case we believe one thing on the
basis of, and so in a sense through, believing another. Indirect beliefs are medi-
ated by other beliefs, whether through inference or not. I refer, of course, to
particular beliefs held by specific people at particular times. People differ in
their inferential patterns, and these may change over time. Like backfires,
woodpecker knocks could become so familiar that when one hears them, one
just believes (non-inferentially) that they are occurring, rather as, on seeing
green grass in good light, I may just believe, perceptually, that there is grass
before me.
Such effects of increased familiarity show that one person’s indirect belief
may be another’s direct belief, just as one person’s conclusion may be
another’s premise. Similarly, my conclusion at one time can later become a
basic premise, or vice versa: a proposition I believe indirectly at one time I
may believe directly at another, as where I forget the premise I originally
had, but I retain the proposition in memory.
There is a wide-ranging point illustrated here that is important for epis-
temology, psychology, and the philosophy of mind: we cannot in general
specify propositions which can be believed only inferentially or only non-
inferentially. Nor can we determine whether a person’s belief is inferential
by considering just the proposition believed.6 To be sure, it would be
abnormal to believe (wholly) indirectly that if some dogs are pets, then some
pets are dogs – in part because one does not normally believe, on the basis of
a premise, what is luminously self-evident – or to believe (by sight) directly
that there are seventeen cats eating scraps of beef in the backyard, since
normally one would have to arrive at this on the basis of counting.7 But
strange cases like these are possible.
Inference and the growth of knowledge
The examples I have given represent one way in which we learn through
using our senses in combination with our rational powers. Through making
inferences and through forming beliefs that are reason-based but not episod-
ically inferential, we acquire not only new beliefs, but new justified beliefs
and new knowledge. Indeed, much of our knowledge and a great many of
Inference and the extension of knowledge
161

our justified beliefs arise in this way. The woodpecker case illustrates how
this process works. In a single moment I come to believe, among other
things, that no one is at the door and that there is a woodpecker nearby. I
also acquire situational justification for these beliefs (justification for holding
them, whether I do or not), I justifiedly hold them, and I know the truths
which, in holding them, I believe.
Much of life is like this: through the joint work of perception and our
rational powers, particularly our inferential capacities, we acquire new
beliefs, our justification is extended, and we gain new knowledge. We also
forget, cease to be justified in believing certain things when we acquire
evidence to the contrary, and sometimes infer conclusions we are not entitled
to infer. But let us first concentrate on the way belief, justification, and
knowledge develop.
Confirmatory versus generative inferences
Inference is typically a source of new beliefs. But as we have seen, it need not
be. Recall the backfire, and suppose I am so familiar with such sounds that
no categorization of them is necessary for me to recognize them. Then I may
well directly – i.e., non-inferentially – believe that a vehicle backfired. But now
imagine that, realizing firecrackers have lately been set off nearby in honor
of Guy Fawkes Night, I wonder whether the sound might perhaps have been
that of a firecracker, though I do not give up, but only reconsider, my belief
that it was a backfire. I recall the sound, remember that it had a muffled,
not a popping, quality, and infer from its having that quality that it was
indeed a backfire. Here I infer something I already believe. It is as if you
arrived at a place without noticing your route and, wanting to be sure you
are where you think you are, consider what route you must have taken there.
Finding a plausible route can confirm our sense that all is well, whether or
not it is the route we in fact took.
My inference, then, is not a source of new belief, though it does in a way
alter my belief that the sound was a backfire; the belief now becomes infer-
ential. This is not a change in its content, but in its basis. The inference does
not produce a new belief but instead adds to my belief system a new ground
for something I already believe. The inference is confirmatory, but not, as in
typical cases, generative. Like an inference drawn in doing certain logic book
exercises, it is not a belief-forming inference; but unlike many such cases (which
often concern fictitious people or places), it has a conclusion that is already
believed.
Inference as a dependent source of justification and knowledge
Even when inference is not generative and hence is not a source of belief, it
may still be a source of both justification and knowledge. Again, suppose I
know that lately there have been firecrackers exploding nearby. I now
162
Structure of justification and knowledge

might not know, or be justified in believing, that there was a vehicle back-
fire, until I recall the quality of the sound, rule out its being that of a
firecracker, and infer in this light that a vehicle backfired. I might thus
have neither justification for believing a vehicle backfired, nor knowledge
that it did, until I draw the inference. Similarly, scientists who believe a
hypothesis might not come to know it until, through investigating and
ruling out certain alternatives, they reason their way to it, thereby inferring
it, from new premises.
On the other hand, suppose I am unjustified, in believing that the
muffled sound in question represents a backfire. My situation might be this:
in my whole life I have heard only one backfire; I have, however, heard many
firecrackers with that sort of sound; and my belief that this sound represents
a backfire is based on testimony from someone I think is usually unreliable.
Here I do not become justified, inferentially or testimonially, in believing
that there was a vehicle backfire. For a crucial premise of my inference – that
this kind of noise represents a backfire – is one I am unjustified in believing.
The same would hold if I had been unjustified in believing my other
premise: that there was a muffled sound.
Now imagine a different case, this time regarding knowledge. Suppose I
am justified in believing my premise that the muffled sound is from a back-
fire, since my previous experience adequately justifies my believing this. But
suppose that, through no fault of my own, I have somehow failed to discover
that there are common firecrackers which sound precisely the same. Then,
although I am still correct in believing my conclusion – that there is a back-
fire – I am mistaken in believing, and so do not know, my premise that this
muffled sound represents a vehicle backfire. For it might just as well represent
a firecracker. Thus, I infer a true conclusion, but using a premise which,
though I justifiedly believe it, is false. This example shows something
important (which will be considered from a different point of view in
Chapter 8): that I may be justified (and even correct) in believing that there
was a vehicle backfire, yet not know that. My would-be knowledge that there
was a backfire is defeated by my false premise, though my justification for
believing this is not defeated.
This last case is not typical. Perhaps more often than not, inference on the
part of rational persons is a source of beliefs that are both justified and
constitute knowledge. If inference is often a source of justification and of
knowledge, is it a basic source? Our example suggests it is not. If, for
instance, I am not justified in believing my premises that there was a
muffled sound, and that such a sound represents a backfire, then my infer-
ring that there was a backfire does not yield justification for my believing
this conclusion, and I do not justifiedly believe it. Apparently, my inference
justifies me in believing my conclusion only if I am justified in believing its
premise (or premises). And apparently (though this is a controversial point
to be examined in Chapter 7) that belief is justified only if it is grounded
directly or indirectly in a basic source.
Inference and the extension of knowledge
163

Inference as an extender of justification and knowledge
Points like this suggest that inference is not a basic source of justification or
knowledge, but rather transmits and thereby extends them, in appropriate
circumstances, from one or more premises to the conclusion inferred from
them. We can extend our justification and knowledge by inference, but it
appears that if we have none to start with, inference, unlike, say, perception, can
give us none. Even careful and amply justified inferences – roughly, inferences
one is justified in drawing given the assumption of the truth of the premise(s) –
do not create justification or knowledge where there is none to start with,
because one neither knows nor has justification for one’s premise(s).8
Our examples show two kinds of inferential extension of knowledge and
justification. The first is acquisition of new knowledge and new justified beliefs,
say the knowledge that Cassius is dangerous; the second is increase in our justifi-
cation for believing something we already hold or a buttressing of our
knowledge of it, as where we infer that a vehicle backfired from a newly discov-
ered premise to the effect that no firecrackers were used. The first kind of
inferential extension yields an increase in the content of what we know or are
justified in believing. The second yields an increase in the quantity of our justi-
fication regarding the same content, or in the strength of our grounds for
knowledge regarding the same content. (This second case may also, and perhaps
better, be considered strengthening rather than extending knowledge.)
There is a third kind of extension of justification and knowledge that can
be a variant of either sort. Consider a belief that arises by inference from two
or more independent sets of premises, such as evidence of Cassius’s being
dangerous presented at the same time by two independent observers. Here
we get new content by two or more pathways. In the same way, we may also
acquire more justification (or stronger grounds) for what we already believe
or know, as where we believe a vehicle backfired. Thus, we may have better
justification for believing (or better grounds for our knowledge of) what the
witnesses jointly attest to than we have for believing that on the basis of the
evidence of any one of them alone.
Moreover, our experience often leads to inferential extension of all three
sorts without our making any particular effort to draw inferences. For the
formation of structurally inferential beliefs, and even of many episodically
inferential beliefs, occurs quite often and spontaneously. As a timber can be
silently and unobtrusively placed beneath a porch in a way that supports it,
one belief can, without our noticing it, provide support for another that is
already in place, or even lead to the formation of a belief one did not previ-
ously hold.
Source conditions and transmission conditions for
inferential knowledge and justification
If inference is not a basic source of justification and knowledge, but trans-
mits it, it must meet two kinds of conditions. One kind concerns the
164
Structure of justification and knowledge

premise(s) of the inference – its foundations, so to speak – the other concerns
the relation of the premise(s) to the conclusion – how well those evidential
pillars support what is built on them, for instance whether or not they
express strong evidence for believing it. Let us take these in turn.
First, there are source conditions, as our examples show: one needs justifica-
tion or knowledge in the first place. To see what the second kind of
condition is, suppose I do know that the muffled sound I hear represents a
vehicle backfire and I infer that a truck backfired. But imagine that I really
cannot tell the difference between car and truck backfires. Then I do not
know, in virtue of my inference, that a truck backfired. I started with
knowledge, but it was not transmitted to my belief of my conclusion, since I
drew a conclusion from it which it did not justify. There was, we might say,
no evidentially adequate pillar to ground my conclusion in my premises.
There are, then, transmission conditions, as well as source conditions, that an
inference must satisfy in order to yield knowledge of its conclusion.
Chapters 1 through to 5 in effect deal with source conditions in some detail,
for example with how perception yields non-inferential knowledge that can
provide premises for inference. Thus, I say little about source conditions
here and concentrate on transmission conditions.
Deductive and inductive inference
We can best understand transmission conditions if, as is common in discus-
sions of logic, we divide inferences into two categories, deductive and
inductive. The usual basis of this division is an interpretation of the char-
acter of the inferential structure underlying the process of inference, or at
least a choice of the kind of standard appropriate for assessing that structure.
We can simplify matters by calling these structures arguments, even though
they need not represent anyone’s actually arguing for something or with
anyone.
In this abstract sense of ‘argument,’ an argument is discernible even
where, simply to assure myself that I was correct in believing that there was
a vehicle backfire rather than a firecracker blast, I inferred, from reconsid-
ering the kind of noise I heard, that there was indeed a backfire. I relied on
the argument from propositions about the character of the noise to the
conclusion that a backfire occurred, even though I was not trying to
convince anyone, even myself, of anything. Instead, I was trying to justify
something I believed. I did this by tapping a justified source that trans-
mitted its justification to my belief that a vehicle backfired. A natural
interpretation of the case is this: I reasoned from the premises that (1) the
noise represented a backfire and (2) if it did represent that, then there was a
backfire, to the conclusion that (3) there was a backfire.
My argument here, and hence my reasoning – from the premises of the
argument to its conclusion – is (deductively) valid; that is, it is absolutely
impossible (in a logical sense) for the premises, (1) and (2), to be true and
Inference and the extension of knowledge
165

the conclusion, (3), false. For short, the premises of a valid argument, or of
valid reasoning (logically) entail its conclusion. It is of course not in general
impossible for the premises of valid deductive arguments to be false, and
many of these premises are. But it is absolutely impossible that the premises
be true and the conclusion false.9
In the most careful terminology, ‘valid’ applies only to deductive argu-
ments and, correspondingly, to valid deductive reasoning (the kind of
reasoning whose essential content is a valid argument). We might think of
deductive reasoning as the sort that “aims” at validity, in the sense that it is
of a kind best evaluated as valid or invalid. Thus, even though the argument
from hallucination (discussed in Chapter 1) is invalid, the philosophical
reasoning that employs it seems meant to be valid and is appropriately
assessed as deductive.
By contrast, much reasoning that is not valid is simply not meant to be
deductive in the first place. Suppose, for instance, that my reasoning had
run: (a) the noise sounds like that of a backfire; (b) the likeliest explana-
tion of the noise is that a vehicle backfired; probably, then, (c) a vehicle
backfired. As ‘probably’ signals, I do not take my reasoning to be valid or
to be deductive at all: I simply take its premises to provide some reason to
believe its conclusion. Even if I had not used ‘probably,’ it would not be
appropriate to consider this reasoning deductive. For obviously even the
likeliest explanation need not be true or even considered true; it would thus
be a mistake to regard such reasoning – or the person using it – as aiming
at validity.
We could call such probabilistic reasoning “inductively valid,” meaning
roughly that relative to its premises there is a high probability that its
conclusion is true, where high probability is usually taken to be such that it
is reasonable to accept a proposition having it. But to avoid confusion I
simply term reasoning of that sort ‘inductively good’ (or ‘inductively
strong’).
Moreover, it is reasoning processes and not abstract structures that I call
deductive or inductive. I do not take arguments, as abstract structures, to
be intrinsically of either kind, though we speak of them as deductive or
inductive so far as they seem best assessed by deductive or inductive stan-
dards. (The intentions of those presenting them are one among many other
factors determining the appropriate standards for classifying reasoning
processes.)
I want to stress in passing that we should not conceive deductive and
inductive reasoning as they have often been characterized. Deductive
reasoning has been described as “going” from the general to the particular,
say from (a) all human beings are mortal and (b) Socrates is a human being
to (c) Socrates is mortal. But our deductive backfire case, embodying the
valid argument from (1) and (2) to (3), is different; it is about only particular
things. Even in the classical example about Socrates, one premise is partic-
ular, in the sense that it concerns a single individual.
166
Structure of justification and knowledge

Subsumptive and analogical inference
Even those who take deductive reasoning to go from the general to the
particular should recognize that the reasoning from (1) all humans have fears
and (2) all who have fears are vulnerable to (3) all humans are vulnerable is
deductive (and valid). Perhaps they focus on cases in which we draw a
conclusion about something or someone, say Socrates, by subsuming the
person or thing under a generalization about similar entities, say people.
Call such inference subsumptive reasoning – or instantial reasoning, since
Socrates is supposed to instantiate the truth that all humans are mortal. Not
all deductive reasoning is subsumptive.
As for inductive reasoning, it has often been said to “go from” the partic-
ular to the general, as where one infers the conclusion that everyone has fears
from the enumerative premises that Abe does, Beatrice does, Carl does,
Donna does, and so on. This characterization is good so far as it goes. But it
does not apply to reasoning – sometimes called abductive – from a premise
stating the likeliest explanation of a presumed fact, to the conclusion that
the proposition expressing that explanation is true; for instance, from the
premise that the noise is best explained by a vehicle’s backfiring, to the
conclusion that the noise represents such a backfire. Nor does the characteri-
zation do justice to certain reasoning by analogy, such as my concluding that
a plant probably has a property, say hardiness, because it is much like
(highly analogous to) another plant that has that property.
It is better, then, to think of inductive reasoning as reasoning that, first,
“aims” at providing good grounds for its conclusion, but not at validity, and,
second, is best evaluated in terms of the degree of probability of its conclu-
sion relative to its premises. This conception has the further advantage of
applying to all three main kinds of inductive reasoning: generalizational,
explanational (abductive), and analogical.
The inferential transmission of justification and
knowledge
We are now in a position to explore the conditions for transmission of justi-
fication and knowledge.
Clearly the success of transmission is partly a matter of the status of the
underlying argument: the one whose premise or premises are one’s basis for
the belief in question. The natural thing to say initially is that justification
and knowledge are transmitted in deductive inference only if the underlying
argument is valid and, in inductive inference, only if the underlying argu-
ment is (inductively) good (I use ‘inference’ rather than ‘reasoning’ here
because the former is preferable for the wide range of contexts we are
exploring). But these principles, though probably correct, need clarification.
Let us consider the cases of inductive and deductive transmission separately.
Suppose Luigi hastily infers from the propositions (1) all opera lovers
appreciate The Magic Flute and (2) Wilhelm appreciates The Magic Flute that
Inference and the extension of knowledge
167

(3) Wilhelm is an opera lover. This is invalid deductive reasoning, and even
with true premises Luigi is justified in believing it would not transmit
either justification or knowledge from his beliefs of them to his belief of its
conclusion. Bad reasoning cannot realize the evidential potential of good
premises.
Suppose Luigi then produces the better argument from (1) all opera lovers
appreciate The Magic Flute and (2) Wilhelm appreciates it in the way one
would expect of an opera lover, to (3) Wilhelm is an opera lover. Suppose we
conceive his reasoning as deductive, say because Luigi’s underlying principle
– roughly, the one by which his reasoning is actually guided – is not the
expected inductive one – that if all As are Bs and x is an A of a kind that
might well be expected to be a B then probably x is a B – but the false prin-
ciple that if all As are Bs, and x is an A of a kind that might be expected to
be a B, then x is (definitely) a B. Then we must also say that transmission is
blocked because his reasoning is invalid. He adheres to a mistaken (deduc-
tive) logical standard and hence does not acquire a justified belief through
his inference.
Apparently, then, deductive transmission requires validity. Specifically, the
argument underlying an inferential belief – i.e., the argument whose
premise(s) constitute(s) what that belief is inferentially based on – must be
valid if knowledge or justification is to be deductively transmitted to that
belief from the premise belief(s) it is based on. To be sure, I could have inde-
pendent grounds, such as testimony about Wilhelm, on which I know my
conclusion. But if I do not have such grounds, then I cannot come to know
this conclusion through deductive transmission of my knowledge from
premises I have for it if those premises do not entail it, and hence the argu-
ment from them to it is invalid. We cannot build anything solid on weak
supports, even if they themselves rest on a good foundation; the structure is
still defective.
Inductive transmission and probabilistic inference
The case with inductive reasoning is more complicated. For one thing, the
notion of good inductive reasoning is highly vague. It might seem that we
could simply define it as reasoning with premises that render its conclusion
more likely than not to be true. But this will not do, though such reasoning
may be called probable to indicate that it has this specific merit. Two points
are important here.
First, a probability of just over .50 (indicating just over a fifty-fifty
chance of truth) allows that even given the truth of the premises, the false-
hood of the conclusion is almost as likely as its truth (since probabilities
range from 0 to 1, with .50 (taken to represent 1/2) indicating the same
likelihood of truth as of falsehood on the part of the proposition in ques-
tion). One would not want to describe reasoning as good when its premises
give its conclusion a probability of truth of just over 50 percent.
168
Structure of justification and knowledge

Second, judging how good a piece of inductive reasoning is may require
assessing one’s justification for the conclusion in relation to more than the
premises from which one infers it. This holds, at least, where we are viewing
the reasoning as occurring in a context in which various kinds of informa-
tion are accessible to the reasoner. Relative just to the premise that Dave has
a certain kind of cancer, the probability of the conclusion that he will die of
it may be .60, since 60 percent of its victims do; but relative to his youth,
vigor, and good medical treatment, the probability of his death from it may
be .08. Thus, the inductive reasoning from the premise that he has the
particular cancer to the conclusion that he will die of it ignores relevant
evidence and is not good, even though the conclusion does have a proba-
bility of more than .50 relative to its premise.
Given the way in which such inductive reasoning can be negatively
affected by new information it is sometimes called defeasible reasoning. By
contrast, the entailment relation between the premise(s) of valid (deductive)
reasoning and its conclusion is fixed: no additional information affects the
entailment. In the language of probability, the probability of its conclusion
given its premises must be 1 even if further information is added, whereas
adding new information to the premise(s) of inductive reasoning can render
its conclusion improbable relative to the new set of premises, hence defeat
the original reasoning in the way the cancer case illustrates.10
Suppose we assume for a moment that good inductive reasoning has
premises taking account of all the relevant evidence. May we then conclude
that justification and knowledge are inductively transmitted only by inductive
reasoning good in this comprehensive sense? This view is too strong. For it may
often happen that some of the relevant evidence is not needed for such induc-
tive justification of one’s belief because one’s premises already contain sufficient
evidence. Evidence may be relevant to a belief without being needed for its justi-
fication, as where testimony from a twelfth witness who agrees with the rest is
unnecessary though perfectly relevant. The point is important; for even if we
can understand the notion of all the relevant evidence, we at best rarely have all
the evidence relevant to a belief and we may not need it all if we do.
Is good inductive reasoning simply the kind of inductive reasoning that is
sufficient to transmit justification? This is a promising characterization for
single pieces of inductive reasoning, those using a set of premises directly for
one conclusion. But inductive reasoning can occur in chains, with the
conclusion of the first piece of reasoning serving as a premise in the second
piece, and the conclusion of that serving as a premise in the third, and so on.
Unfortunately, in an inductive chain extended through many inferences,
justification may not be transmitted from the conclusion of the first to the
conclusion of the last, even if each piece of reasoning has premises giving
high probability to its conclusion. To see why, notice first that the degree of
justification inductively transmitted from one’s premises to one’s conclusion
may drop, even if nothing new enters the picture, such as someone’s chal-
lenging one’s conclusion the moment one draws it.
Inference and the extension of knowledge
169

If the degree of probability repeatedly drops, the degree of justification
may drop drastically. To see this, notice that even if one starts with excel-
lent justification for one’s premises, if they give a probability of only, say,
0.75 to one’s conclusion, one will have much weaker justification for the
conclusion than for the premises, if they are one’s only basis for it. (I am
assuming, somewhat artificially, that justification admits of degrees in the
way probability does.) Roughly, one should take the chance that the
conclusion is true to be only 75 percent of the chance that the premises are
true. Suppose that I know that Tom said that the weather forecaster
predicted rain. If the chance that Tom (who is biased by optimism and
may have misheard the forecast) is right is only 75 percent and the chance
that the forecaster’s prediction is right is, say, 60 percent, then my warrant
for believing it will rain is presumably just 75 percent of 60, i.e., 45
percent. (The idea is that the probability that the forecast was even made
is only 75 percent, and we would then have a 60 percent chance of rain;
the multiplication takes account of both probabilities.) Such chains of
inference can be indefinitely long, as where I must rely on still other
people for my belief that Tom said the forecaster predicted rain. This
allows for the occurrence of even more reduction of one’s justification for
believing one’s conclusion.
These points should make it apparent how it is possible for good induc-
tive reasoning, carried out through a series of inferences, to fail to transmit
justification from its initial premises to its final conclusion. Even if the
probability that the initial premises give to the first conclusion is 0.9, if one
went on inferring further conclusions, each being a premise for the next
conclusion, then even with the same degree of probability in each case, one
could eventually infer a conclusion for which one has less justification than
0.5. With each case, the likelihood that one’s conclusion is true would be 10
percent less than (90 percent of) the likelihood of the truth of one’s previous
conclusion, which is serving as one’s premise.
In some respects, knowledge differs from justification in relation to trans-
mission conditions. Since knowledge does not admit of degrees (at least
not in the way justification does), it might be transmitted across an induc-
tive inference without diminution in degree even if such transmission does
imply some reduction in one’s justification (other things being equal). If,
for instance, you know that the weather is bad and you inductively infer
that Jane, who is driving, will be late, presumably you could know the
latter proposition on the basis of the former even though there is some
chance that she left early and compensated for the weather: the probability
of this is above zero. Your grounds for your conclusion may not be as good
as your grounds for your premise, which may render the conclusion only
very probable, rather than entailing it; but you may still unqualifiedly
know your conclusion. This knowledge may not be as good, say as securely
grounded, as your knowledge of the premises; for instance, it might not be
as nearly certain. But it can still be knowledge. Although there are kinds
170
Structure of justification and knowledge

of knowledge, apparently a belief either constitutes knowledge or falls
short of that, as opposed to constituting knowledge to a degree.
It can happen, however, that knowledge is not transmitted even across an
inductive inference whose premises give its conclusion extremely high prob-
ability. For example, you might know that you hold just one out of a million
coupons in a fair sweepstakes, which will have one winner. You may induc-
tively infer, with very high probability, 0.999999, that you will lose, since
999,999 of the million coupons will lose. But you do not know you will lose.
You might be lucky. Moreover, you have as good a chance to be lucky as any
other holder of a single coupon – including the possessor of the winning
one. If we said, on this basis alone, that you know you will lose, how could
we avoid having to say it of everyone else – in which case we would be
wrong, since someone wins in this kind of fair lottery? Your knowledge of
your premises, then, is not inductively transmitted to your conclusion. (If
we change the example so that you deduce the qualified statement that the
probability of your losing is 0.999999, you may know that. But that is a
very different conclusion.)11
Some inferential transmission principles
We have seen some important points. Inference transmits justification and
knowledge; it is not a basic source of them. It can generate them only
derivatively, by transmission, from knowledge and justification already
possessed. Inference can originate knowledge or justified belief in the sense
that the beliefs in question are new to the believer, but not – as the basic
sources of knowledge and justification can – from something other than
belief, such as perception. Deductive transmission apparently requires
validity; and inductive transmission apparently requires an inductive coun-
terpart of validity, something like a strong relation of support between
premises and conclusion. But even where the support is strong, the degree
of justification may drop in a way that it need not drop in the deductive
case.
As our examples show, to understand the transmission of justification and
knowledge we must consider two sorts of conditions: necessary conditions for
transmission of knowledge and justification, conditions such that transmis-
sion occurs only if they are met by an inference; and sufficient conditions, those
such that if they are met by an inference, then transmission occurs.
It is by and large even harder to specify sufficient conditions than neces-
sary ones. For a sufficient condition must “cover” all the necessary ones: if it
does not imply that each of them holds, it leaves out something necessary,
and so is not sufficient.12 Let me simply suggest the sort of thing we must
add to what we so far have in order to arrive at sufficient conditions for
inferential transmission.
It will help to take inductive cases first. Might we accept the following
inductive transmission principle: If, by good inductive reasoning, one infers
Inference and the extension of knowledge
171

something from premises which take account of all the relevant evidence,
then if one is justified in believing those premises, one is justified in
believing the conclusion? Even in the sweepstakes case, where one holds
only one of a million coupons, this condition is plausible for justification.
For instance, one may be justified in believing one will lose. Knowledge,
however, is different in this respect. For as the sweepstakes example shows,
even when the probability is very high, the counterpart of this condition,
with knowledge substituted for justification, does not hold.
A different example will show something else about the inductive trans-
mission of justification, and here I return to the case of a chain of two or
more instances of inductive reasoning. Imagine that I enter my house and
find evidence of a burglary, such as ransacked drawers. I infer that valuables
have been stolen. From that I infer that the $20 in my daughter’s piggy
bank is missing. And from that in turn I infer that my daughter will be
upset. At each point I am justified in believing my premise and, it would
seem, make a good inductive inference from it. In most such cases, my justi-
fication would carry right down the inductive chain from my initial premise
to my final conclusion. But it need not. There is a chance that the bank was
overlooked and a chance that my daughter will be calm, if only because she
is so grateful that important things, like the teddy bears, are undisturbed.
Could it not be that at each step my justification for my conclusion drops in
such a way that, unlike my inference that I will lose the sweepstakes, my last
inference fails to produce a justified conclusion?
The general point here is that as inductive inference proceeds, the
crucially relevant evidence, the evidence one must take into account, may
mount up or at least change. For instance, by the time I get to the question
of whether my daughter will be upset about the piggy bank, it becomes
relevant to note that the teddy bears are unharmed before inferring that she
will be upset, whereas this information would not have been relevant if the
disappearance of the piggy bank were the only potential disturbance in the
house. We find, then, that the appraisal of inductive chains cannot be
accomplished by any simple application of the single inference standard.
But how should we decide what is relevant to drawing a conclusion? And
how is one’s justification for believing a conclusion affected by ignoring only
some of what is relevant? These are hard questions, which I can only
partially answer. One positive point is this: whether we are inferentially
justified in holding a conclusion we draw depends on many factors,
including some not expressed in our premises.
My believing the premises of an inference may be the origin of my belief
and a source of my justification. But there are other relevant factors – such
as what I know, or should know, about what will preoccupy the child upon
discovering the burglary. My justification ultimately depends on complex
relations among all the relevant factors. We might say that although justifi-
cation may emerge from a straight inferential line, it will do so only if the
line figures in the right kind of pattern of related beliefs and available rele-
172
Structure of justification and knowledge

vant information. Some patterns contain obstacles on the would-be path to
justification; others have clear, straight passageways.
By contrast with deduction, then, induction is less straightforward: if p
entails q (i.e., q is deducible from p) and q entails r, then p entails r; but if
we put ‘probabilistically implies’ in place of ‘entails,’ we do not get a prin-
ciple that is invariably true. This is not in the least to say that non-entailing
grounds for a proposition can never render it highly probable or yield a
justified belief of it. The point simply expresses a limitation on inductive
chains.
Deductive transmission of justification and knowledge
Let us turn now to deductive transmission. One might think that valid
deductive inference is sufficient as well as necessary for transmitting justifi-
cation and knowledge. Certainly it commonly does transmit them, for
instance when we learn theorems by validly deducing them in doing
geometrical proofs.
I do not mean that whenever, in the abstract, there is a valid inference, in
the sense of ‘a set of propositions constituting a valid argument,’ from some-
thing one believes to a conclusion, then one “implicitly” knows the
conclusion, or even has situational justification for believing it. If that were
so, then simply by knowing the axioms of Euclidean geometry (which, like
the parallel axiom – that for any line and any point not on that line, there
is exactly one line parallel to the first and passing through the point – are
quite simple), one might implicitly know, and be justified in believing, all
its theorems. (This assumes that these theorems are all within one’s
comprehension, since one cannot believe or, at the time, even be justified in
believing, a theorem too complex for one to understand.) The main issue
here is the transmission of justification and knowledge in two ways: first,
from justified beliefs, or from beliefs constituting knowledge, to other
beliefs arrived at by inference; second, from such beliefs to situational
justification for propositions that we could infer from those we know or are
justified in believing.
Even if we restrict our concern to transmission of knowledge across
inference processes, it is at least not obvious that knowledge is always trans-
mitted across valid deductive inferences.13 Recall the backfire. Suppose I am
sufficiently acquainted with the sound to know that it is a backfire. Then,
from what I know, it follows that it is not the sound of a firecracker with a
similar muffled sound. Imagine that, aware that this follows, I infer that the
sound is not that of a firecracker. Do I know that it is not? What if I have no
evidence that there is no one around setting off such firecrackers? Perhaps I
then do not know this. It may well be that from my general experience, the
most I am justified in believing is that this alternative explanation of the
sound is so improbable that it is irrelevant. But it is still not clear that I
know there is no one around setting off such firecrackers.14
Inference and the extension of knowledge
173

Thus, it is not clear that we should accept what might be called the simple
deductive transmission principle for knowledge: that if you validly infer a proposi-
tion from an inferential ground you know, then you know this proposition
(say that the sound is not that of a firecracker with a similar muffled
quality). One might now say that if I do not know my inferred conclusion
here, this just shows that I did not know in the first place that a vehicle
backfired (my premise). But must we say this? It may be equally plausible to
say that because one now realizes that one’s basis for believing this might not
have been decisive, one no longer knows it, yet did know it in the first place.
If that is so, it shows something important: that sometimes reflection on our
grounds can bring into our purview considerations that weaken them or at
least weaken their power to support inferences.
Degrees and kinds of deductive transmission
Consider a different case. I add a column of fifteen figures, check my results
twice, and thereby come to know, and to be justified in believing, that the
sum is 10,952. As it happens, I sometimes make mistakes, and my wife
(whom I justifiedly believe to be a better arithmetician) sometimes corrects
me. Suppose that, feeling unusually confident this time, I now infer that if
my wife says this is not the sum, she is wrong. From the truth that the sum
is 10,952, it certainly follows that if she says it is not, she is wrong. If it is
the sum, then if she denies that, she is wrong. But even though I know and
am justified in believing that this is the sum, can I, on the basis of my
grounds for this belief, automatically know or be justified in believing that if
she says it is not the sum, she is wrong? (I am assuming that I have no other
basis for holding this belief, such as a calculator result that coincides with
mine.) That is far from self-evident. To see why, let us focus mainly on the
principle as applied to justification – call this the simple deductive transmission
principle for justification: If one is justified in believing p, then one is also
justified in believing any proposition that follows from it.15
The force of the case is best appreciated if we suppose that my checking
just twice is enough to give me only the minimum basis for justified belief
and knowledge here. Surely I would then not have sufficient grounds for
believing that if she says the answer is wrong, she is wrong. Given my back-
ground justification for believing that she is the better arithmetician, the
justification-threatening prospect this proposition puts before me seems to
demand that I have more justification than the minimum I do have if I am to
be justified in believing that if she says the sum is not 10,952, she is wrong.
One way to interpret the example is this. To be justified in believing the
proposition that if she says the sum is not 10,952, she is wrong, or to know
or justifiedly believe this about her, I need grounds for believing this propo-
sition that are good enough not to be outweighed by the supposition that
she (the better arithmetician) says that 10,952 is not the sum. In inferring
that if she says this is not the sum, she is wrong, I am making the supposi-
174
Structure of justification and knowledge

tion that she says it. Of course, I need not believe she will say it; but because I
am supposing she will (and in a sense envisaging this in considering the
proposition that if she says it, she is wrong), I am justified in believing that
if she does, she is wrong, only if my justification for believing that the sum is
10,952 is good enough to withstand the supposition that she denies it is the
sum. My supposing this may also be regarded as implicit in my holding the
belief that if she says this, she is wrong, whether I form that belief by infer-
ence or not. In either case, under the supposed conditions, her justification
seems good enough to reduce mine below the threshold which it just barely
reaches.
One might now object that I really do not have justification in the first
place for believing that the sum is 10,952. Depending on my arithmetic
skills, that might be true if I have checked my sum only twice. But suppose
that carefully checking three or four times is required to reach the threshold
of justification and that I have done this. For any reasonable standard of
justification or knowledge, there will be a point where I just meet, and do
not exceed, that standard, and (again assuming I am justified in believing
her to be the better arithmetician) I will then not know or be justified in
believing the proposition that if she says the sum is wrong, then she is
wrong. (This point concerns situational justification. It is also true that if I
infer this further proposition without first getting additional grounds for my
answer, I would not know it or justifiedly believe it, i.e., have a justified
belief of it.)16
The example can be varied to make the same point in a different way. If
the sum is 10,952, then even if there are two mistakes in the calculations I
made to get it, it is still 10,952. This may sound strange, but the mistakes
could cancel each other, say because one mistake yields a 9 instead of the
correct 7, and the other yields a 6 instead of the correct 8 (so an excess of 2 is
offset by a shortage of 2).
Now imagine that I again justifiedly believe that the sum is 10,952 and
know this. I have been careful enough and have not actually made errors.
Still, I have checked only the minimum amount necessary for justification.
Perhaps simply to test my intuitions about deductive transmission, I might
infer that (even) if there are two errors in my calculation, the sum is 10,952.
Surely I am not justified in believing this and – assuming that the same
minimum of checking is sufficient for knowledge – I do not know it (if
more checking is required, then the same point will hold for knowledge if
we build in the assumption that I just reached the required minimum). My
original, minimal justification does not give me situational justification for
believing what I infer or adequate grounds for knowledge of that proposi-
tion. If I had done extra checking, say enough to be adequately justified in
believing (or to know) that I made no mistakes, it might be otherwise; but
that is not my case.
Still another way to conceive the example is this. One might think of (1)
‘If she says the sum is not 10,952, then she is wrong’ as equivalent to (2)
Inference and the extension of knowledge
175

‘Either she doesn’t say this or she says it and is wrong’. Thus, if I am justi-
fied in believing (or I know) (2), I am (arguably) justified in believing (or I
know) (1). It may seem that I would be justified in believing (2), since such
justification can occur in any of these three cases: through my being justified
in believing (a) that she will not say this, or (b) that she says it and is wrong,
or (c) that at least one of those two things is true. Am I, however, justified in
believing any of (a)–(c)? Let us consider them in order.
My justification for believing the sum is 10,952 is (chiefly) my reason-
ably careful calculations’ indicating this. That justification does not extend
to justifying my believing that (a) my wife will not say this is false, and it
surely does not extend to my believing that (b) she (whom I justifiedly
believe to be the better arithmetician) says it is false and is wrong. Thus, it
seems at best unlikely that I should be justified in believing that (c) at least
one of these two things is the case. Nothing I have said requires denying
that in the imagined case I may also have some reason to believe that if she
says the sum is not 10,952, she is wrong. But the point is that I would not
have enough justification for this to know or have a justified belief of it, as I
did know and have a justified belief that the sum is 10,952.17
Cases of this sort strongly argue for at least two points. First, justification
and knowledge need not be transmitted through valid inference from known
or justifiedly believed premises to belief of a conclusion inferred on the basis
of them. Second, situational justification is not automatically transmitted
even to propositions clearly entailed by those we are justified in believing –
hence the deductive transmission of justification principle is not true.
These negative points should be balanced by another. Some degree of (situ-
ational) justification – what we might call some reason for believing – may
automatically transmit: it is not as though I have nothing in the way of
reason to believe that if she says the sum is not 10,952, then she is wrong
(for instance, I did check my sum with some care). Still, merely having some
reason to believe does not imply being justified in believing, any more than
one piece of evidence for a proposition is sufficient for knowledge of it.
The sort of failure of transmission I have noted is probably not common
for inferences rational persons normally draw, and I stress it because such
failure has often been held to be impossible (and is important in dealing
with skepticism, as Chapter 10 will show). A qualified deductive transmission
principle for justification apparently holds: typically, valid reasoning from
justified beliefs transmits justification to its conclusion belief (this holds for
overall justification as well as for some degree of justification, though it
allows that there be some degree of diminution in justification across the
inference). Similarly, we may apparently affirm a qualified deductive transmis-
sion principle for knowledge: typically valid reasoning from known premises
transmits knowledge to its conclusion (where the conclusion belief is based
on the premise belief(s), as would be normal). These principles are of major
importance in epistemology. It is difficult to say under just what conditions
deductive transmission does not occur, but one can see what some of them
176
Structure of justification and knowledge

are from the points that have emerged here. The general conclusion to draw,
however, is that whether one is justified in believing something, or knows
it, depends not only on one’s specific evidence for it but also on a pattern of
factors including one’s relation to the proposition itself and one’s particular
circumstances.
Memorial preservation of inferential justification and
inferential knowledge
Let me conclude by introducing a further point that applies to both deduc-
tive and inductive inferential transmission. Imagine that you learn
something, say a theorem, by validly inferring it from something you know,
say a set of axioms. You may remember the axioms as your grounds; then
your memory preserves both your premises and your conclusion. But eventu-
ally you may forget your grounds, for instance how you proved, and even
how to prove, a theorem. Similarly, you may forget the testimony or book
from which you learned (perhaps by inductive inference partly based on the
premise that the book is reliable) that the Battle of Hastings was in 1066.
Can you still know and justifiedly believe these now premise-less proposi-
tions?
The answer in both cases is surely that you can. Memory can retain beliefs
as knowledge, and as justified beliefs, even if it does not retain the original
grounds of the relevant beliefs. But because in these instances it does not
retain the inferential grounds, and no new grounds need be added, it does
not necessarily retain the beliefs as inferential. Moreover, where the grounds
are not retained and none are added, one might find it at best difficult to
indicate how one knows, beyond insisting that, say, one is sure one remem-
bers, perhaps adding that one certainly did have grounds in the past. But so
long as one did have adequate grounds and does remember the proposition,
surely one can know that proposition. One can also justifiedly believe it,
provided one has an appropriate memory of it, say the sense of memorial
familiarity that goes with many of the beliefs memory preserves.
This example is another illustration of the point that a belief which is
inferential at one time may be non-inferential at another. This may happen
repeatedly with the same belief. Long after a belief – for instance, of a
theorem – has ceased to be inferential, one could acquire new grounds for it,
such as that one has a clear recollection of a mathematical friend’s affirming
the theorem. One could later forget the new grounds also, and simply
remember the theorem or indeed find an altogether new proof of it.
Suppose, however, that one’s memory of the theorem is very weak and one
has no confidence that one has it right. The result might be that one has
merely a belief which not only does not constitute knowledge but also is
only weakly justified, if justified at all. It will certainly not be justified if
one acquires new evidence that clearly counts strongly against it and
nothing happens, such as one’s getting new information, to neutralize this
Inference and the extension of knowledge
177

hostile evidence. Often, however, the new beliefs, justification, and knowl-
edge we acquire through inference may be retained even when their
inferential grounds are long forgotten.
At any given moment in waking life, we have some operative basic source of
belief, if only the stream of our own consciousness. As we experience the
world around us and our own interactions with it, new beliefs arise, both
directly from basic sources and inferentially. As rational beings, we are
almost constantly forming beliefs on the basis of other beliefs, whether
through a process of inference or only through acquiring beliefs that are only
structurally inferential: based on other beliefs and so held for a reason, but
not arising from them (or grounded in them) by a process of inference and so
not reasoned. Both deductive and inductive inference are common. Both
transmit justification and knowledge when they give rise to beliefs on the
basis of inference which meets the appropriate deductive, inductive, and
evidential standards.
Among the transmission principles that have emerged as plausible are these
two broad ones. First, knowledge and justification are inferentially transmitted
only if the underlying argument is good. If we start with false or unjustified
premises or we unreasonably infer a conclusion from them (i.e., infer it
invalidly or in an inductively inadmissible way), it is not to be expected that a
belief based on the argument in question constitutes knowledge or is even
justified. (This does not, of course, prevent it from having an independent
sound basis.) Second, at least typically, if the argument is good, (1) situational
justification is transmitted and (2) belief justification and knowledge are
transmitted provided the subject believes the proposition in question (the
conclusion of the inference) on the basis of its premises (the underlying ones).
The kinds of transmission described in the second principle seem to occur
quite often, and abnormal conditions such as those described in the column
of figures case are surely not common. Given a normally retentive memory,
we have not only a vast store of direct (non-inferential) knowledge and
directly justified belief, but also a huge variety of indirect knowledge and
indirectly justified beliefs. False and unwarranted beliefs arise from some
inferences. But from many inferences we learn something new; and in
making inferences to propositions that we think best explain something that
we take ourselves to know already, we sometimes learn truths that are both
new and important. Through inference, then, we often enlarge, strengthen,
and develop our body of knowledge and justified beliefs.
Notes
1 Two points may add clarity here. (1) I am talking about beliefs that (propositional, not
objectual, beliefs). (2) It is perhaps misleading to call propositions objects of beliefs, if
only because they can express the content of beliefs – their primary role here – whether or
not believing is a relation to a proposition conceived as an object. It could instead be
something like a “contentful” property of persons.
178
Structure of justification and knowledge

2 Two points deserve emphasis here. First, I take a belief arrived at by reasoning to be at
the time grounded in that reasoning; but it should be noted that the belief can be retained
in memory after the premises of the reasoning are forgotten, and in that case we should
speak of a belief that is only a formerly reasoned belief. (It is also possible for a belief not
arrived at through reasoning to be later grounded in it, as where one at last finds
premises to support what one has believed on the basis of a “hunch.”) Second, one might
object to my main distinction here that, from my recognition of the backfire, I must have
inferred, hence reasoned to the conclusion, that someone drove by. Granted, this recogni-
tion is a ground of my belief that someone drove by. Still, I need not do anything that
qualifies as drawing a conclusion from the recognition. I did not even stop reading to
think about the noise, whereas, in the case of the woodpecker, I focused on the question
of whether someone was at the door and, on hearing the distinctive rapid knocking,
inferred that it was that of a woodpecker.
3 Granted, the notion of a process of inference is not sharp; sometimes we cannot get
enough information about how a belief was formed even to make an educated guess about
whether or not it arose from an inference.
4 The notion of a reason is here understood broadly, so that even a “bad reason” counts.
Thus, one could have a belief for a reason even if the reason is a false proposition or one
the person is unjustified in believing. Anyone who finds this usage too broad can substi-
tute the notion or a reason or apparent reason. A defense of the broad terminology is
given in Chapter 2 of my Architecture of Reason (Oxford and New York: Oxford University
Press, 2001). If the terminology is too broad, then an episodically inferential belief need
not be one held for a reason; for people can draw inferences from propositions that, in the
narrow terminology, provide at best an apparent rather than a “real” reason for believing
what they believe on the basis of them.
5 The distinction between episodically and structurally inferential beliefs and the notion of
one belief’s being based on another are discussed in detail in my ‘Belief, Reason, and
Inference,’ in my collection, The Structure of Justification (Cambridge and New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1993).
6 Bertrand Russell is among a number of philosophers who have at least implicitly denied
this: “our knowledge of the physical world is not at first inferential, but that is because
we take our percepts [roughly sense-data] to be the physical world … adults have got
used to the idea that what is really there can only be inferred from what they see …” See
An Outline of Philosophy (London: Allen & Unwin, 1927), Chapters XII–XIII. This is the
kind of view criticized by J.L. Austin in Sense and Sensibilia (Oxford: Oxford University
Press, 1962), esp. Chapter X. Austin subjects A.J. Ayer to criticism on similar counts,
especially in the passages reprinted in Huemer, op. cit. Chapter 7 will show that the
foundationalism introduced there need not deny the point.
7 There is no one way to arrive at a suitable premise, but a typical way would be to count
the cats individually up to seventeen, checking to be sure of overlooking none, and to
believe on that basis that one has arrived at a total of seventeen cats. There may be ways,
however, of passing non-inferentially from counting n things of a kind K to the belief
that there are n Ks. There are certain premises from which one may infer that if some pets
are dogs, then some dogs are pets, e.g. that if, for any A and B, if some As are Bs, then
some Bs are As; but no one who can reason thus would find it natural to believe the
former on the basis of the latter. On the plausible view we might call epistemic particu-
larism, moreover, the former kind of proposition is epistemically prior to the latter, at least
in the sense that justification for the former kind is presupposed by justification for the
latter kind, but not conversely.
8 I say this appears to be so because it is controversial. The issue will be discussed in
Chapter 7.
9 This is a permissive sense of ‘valid’ and ‘entail,’ because both apply where the premise set
is contradictory or the conclusion is a necessary truth (a truth whose falsity is impos-
sible). For it is impossible that a contradiction be true, hence impossible for a
Inference and the extension of knowledge
179

contradictory premise set to be true and the conclusion false; and this is also impossible if
the conclusion is a necessary truth and so cannot be false. Usually, we deal with argu-
ments valid in a narrower sense, their premises being both mutually consistent and
relevant in subject matter to their conclusion. But nothing said in this book should turn
on our using the wider notion of validity that is standard in formal logic.
10 The language of probability seems preferable here to that of defeasibility. For the latter
normally implies a liability to loss of justification or knowledge or both, and on that
point deductive and inductive reasoning do not differ. If we conjoin to a premise in a
valid deductive argument the negation of that premise, the argument and the reasoning
expressing it are still valid (logically indefeasible, one might say); but its premises cannot
all be known nor (presumably) justifiedly believed, and in any case they cannot provide
good reason to believe the conclusion. They would be further from doing so than in the
case of a weak inductive argument. (I thank Claudio de Almeida for questioning the text
in a way that brought out this kind of problem.)
11 The point here is associated with what is called the lottery paradox, introduced into the
literature by Henry E. Kyburg, Jr. and widely discussed. See his Epistemology and Inference
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983).
12 Since a sufficient condition implies all of the conditions that are minimally necessary,
i.e., are the (possibly complex) conditions individually necessary and jointly sufficient for
the phenomenon to occur, some have wondered how a sufficient condition can fail to be a
necessary one as well. The answer is that it can imply something more that is not neces-
sary, as taking a letter to the postbox by car, although sufficient for getting it there, is
not necessary for this, since it implies something not necessary for getting it there,
namely driving it there.
13 I mean, of course, the non-trivial kind, having consistent premises none of which is
equivalent to the conclusion. From inconsistent premises anything may be validly
derived. If, for example, we start with a premise consisting of (1) some proposition, p, and
its negation, not-p (with a contradiction), we may infer that (2) either p or q, for any
proposition q we like (on the ground that if p holds, then either it or anything whatever
holds). But we may now bring in (3) not-p (since we have it as well as p in our premise);
and not-p, together with (2), entails q. Our arbitrarily chosen proposition, q, is thus
validly derived.
14 On some views, a central feature of knowledge is that the belief in question is justified in
a way that allows one to rule out, or itself in some way rules out, relevant alternatives.
For a valuable discussion of this issue see Alvin I. Goldman, ‘Discrimination and
Perceptual Knowledge,’ Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), 771–91. The issue is addressed,
sometimes indirectly, in Chapter 8.
15 This principle should be qualified if the idea is to be maximally plausible. It is not
obvious what the best formulation might be, but we should at least specify that the
person in question can understand the entailment from p to the proposition for which the
person has transmitted justification. There is no reason to think that because I am justi-
fied in believing p I should be justified in believing q, which it entails, when I cannot for
the life of me understand how the former entails the latter. I am also for the most part
simplifying by speaking only of transmission of situational justification as opposed to
belief justification. For transmission of that, as of knowledge, it is presumably required
that the person believe the entailed proposition on the basis of the entailing one.
16 This column of figures example has generated considerable discussion in the literature.
For detailed critical discussion of my case see Catherine Canary and Douglas Odegard,
‘Deductive Justification,’ Dialogue 28 (1989); Richard Feldman, ‘In Defense of Closure,’
Philosophical Quarterly 45 (1995); and Peter D. Klein, ‘Skepticism and Closure: Why the
Evil Demon Argument Fails,’ Philosophical Topics 23, 1 (1995), 213–36. For my replies
published to date see ‘Justification, Deductive Closure, and Skepticism,’ Dialogue 30
(1991), 77–84; and ‘Deductive Closure, Defeasibility, and Skepticism: A Reply to
Feldman,’ Philosophical Quarterly 45 (1995), 494–9. (This paper discussed the example
180
Structure of justification and knowledge

construed as appealing to a subjunctive such as ‘If she were to say the sum is not n, she
would be wrong’.) For related treatments of the transmission problem see Fred Dretske,
‘Epistemic Operators,’ Journal of Philosophy 67 (1970); Robert Nozick, Philosophical
Explanations (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981), Chapter 3; and Gilbert
Harman, Change in View (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1986), esp. Chapters 1–4.
17 No precise notion of justified belief fits all the contexts in which we speak of it; but
when we speak of justification unqualifiedly we usually have in mind a kind and degree
such that it is reasonable, overall, for the person to hold the belief. This is perhaps a kind
and degree such that, if the proposition in question is true (and there are no special prob-
lems of the kind to be considered in Chapter 8), then the belief constitutes knowledge.
Even this high degree of justification, of course, is still best conceived as prima facie
rather than indefeasible or in any sense absolute.
Inference and the extension of knowledge
181


7
The architecture of knowledge
• Inferential chains and the structure of belief
Infinite inferential chains
Circular inferential chains
• The epistemic regress problem
Infinite epistemic chains
Circular epistemic chains
Epistemic chains terminating in belief not constituting knowledge
Epistemic chains terminating in knowledge
• The epistemic regress argument
• Foundationalism and coherentism
• Holistic coherentism
Patterns of justification
A coherentist response to the regress argument
• The nature of coherence
Coherence and explanation
Coherence as an internal relation among cognitions
• Coherence, reason, and experience
Coherence and the a priori
Coherence and the mutually explanatory
Epistemological versus conceptual coherentism
Coherence, incoherence, and defeasibility
Positive and negative epistemic dependence
• Coherence and second-order justification
The process versus the property of justification
Beliefs, dispositions to believe, and grounds of belief
Justification, knowledge, and artificially created coherence
• Moderate foundationalism
The role of coherence in moderate foundationalism
Moderate foundationalism and the charge of dogmatism

7
The architecture of knowledge
On the mountain in the distance before me, I see the huge oak and tulip trees
swaying, with their leaves turned upward revealing the lighter green of their
undersides. Waves of green, light and then dark, seem to cross the surface of
the upper region from west to east as the leaves show the colors of their inner
and outer sides. Parts of the hillside seem almost to breathe in and out as the
trees bend away from me and back. It is a familiar sight and I immediately
realize that there is a wind. My belief that there is a wind is based on my belief
that the trees are swaying. It is also justified on the basis of that belief. And if
I know that there is a wind, I know it on the basis of my belief that they are
swaying. In each case, one belief is inferentially based on another.
To what extent does this relation in which one belief is based on another
represent the structure of our belief systems as a whole? The question is
especially pertinent to epistemology as applied to the common cases in
which our beliefs constitute knowledge, as they so often seem to. Might
perceptual beliefs, for instance, form a foundation on which others are infer-
entially built? Or are the former just a stopping place on the way to
something yet more basic, or perhaps merely a place where we usually stop
pursuing further premises, though we might go on seeking them and find
deeper grounds that support perceptual beliefs?
These questions represent perennial issues, and we shall see many versions
of the foundationalist view – the classical position on them – and various
opposing theories. The questions also take us, as often happens in episte-
mology, into questions about the nature of mind as well as questions directly
about justification and knowledge. This is certainly to be expected where
the central topic is the structure of knowledge and justification; for knowl-
edge is apparently constituted by belief, and, in epistemology, justification
is important chiefly in connection with belief. It is appropriate, then, to
begin an exploration of the structure of knowledge and justification with
some major points about the structure of a person’s body of beliefs.
Inferential chains and the structure of belief
As in discussing inference, it is useful to call the kind of inferential belief,
justification, and knowledge just illustrated indirect. For one has such
beliefs, justification, and knowledge only on the basis of, and thereby
through, other beliefs, justification, or knowledge. By contrast, my belief
that the trees are swaying is direct. I believe this simply because I see it,
not on the basis of something else I believe.

Infinite inferential chains
The natural picture just sketched can be challenged. Perhaps all our beliefs
could be indirect. If they could be, could not all justification of belief, and all
our knowledge, be indirect? An adequate epistemology requires answers to
these questions about the structure of a body of belief, justification, or
knowledge. In exploring them, I will talk above all about knowledge and
justification, and especially about knowledge. But what we know (proposi-
tionally) we believe; and the kind of justification epistemology is chiefly
concerned with is that of belief. The structure of my knowledge and justifi-
cation, then, is chiefly that of a certain body of my beliefs.
I am not talking about knowledge in the abstract, as we sometimes do.
We speak, for instance about the extent of “human knowledge.” Some of
this knowledge is solely in books, and not remembered by anyone. Thus,
some scientific knowledge might be of propositions no one actually
believes, propositions available to us should we need them, but not objects
of actual belief. We can talk about the structure of such knowledge in the
abstract, say about whether all the propositions of scientific knowledge can
be systematized by certain basic laws of physics and chemistry. Then these
basic laws would be geometrical axioms, and the other laws, like its theo-
rems, would be derivable from the basic laws. But that is not my topic. I
am exploring how people’s beliefs may actually be structured.
I want to start with a simple example. When I am being very cautious,
my belief that the trees are swaying could be based on my belief that I
have a visual impression of swaying. Could the latter belief also be based
on another one? What might that be? Might I now believe that it seems to
me that I have a visual impression of swaying, and base my belief that I
have that impression on this new belief? This is doubtful. I cannot base
one belief on another simply because I want to.
This example shows that the view that what we believe, and certain
relations between our beliefs, are entirely under the direct control of our
wills – a strong version of doxastic voluntarism (voluntarism about belief) –
is a mistake. Suppose, for instance, that I want to believe someone’s testi-
mony. If it seems false, I cannot make myself believe it just by willing to
believe it. I also lack direct voluntary control over what my beliefs are
based on; if I already know first-hand that I am gravely ill, I cannot,
simply by willing it, base my belief of this on someone’s testimony that it
is so.1
Even if one cannot base one belief on another at will, it might still seem
that a sequence of beliefs, each based on the next, could go on without
limit. But could I, for instance, believe what seems the next proposition in
the evidential series, the involuted proposition that it appears to me that it
seems to me that I have a visual impression of swaying? I suppose I could
(though not simply at will). Still, I do not see that I would now come to
hold anything on the basis of believing this strange proposition.
The architecture of knowledge
185

Suppose, however, that I did come to hold, on the basis of this involuted
proposition, that it seems to me that I have an impression of swaying. I
cannot in this way manufacture an inferential chain of beliefs – a chain in
which each belief is based on the next – running to infinity. Nor do I already
have an infinite set of appropriate beliefs as raw material waiting to be
brought to consciousness – if indeed I can have an infinite number of beliefs
(particularly outside mathematics, where it may seem that I can have an
infinite number corresponding to the series 2 is even, 4 is even, 6 is even,
etc.).2
Circular inferential chains
So far, however, I have ignored another way in which it might be thought
to be possible that every belief is indirect: by virtue of lying not at the
origin of an infinite chain, but instead in a circular chain. Imagine that I
could hold one belief on the basis of a second and a second on the basis of a
third, and so on, until we come full circle and get to a belief I hold on the
basis of the first. Then all my beliefs would be indirect, yet I need not have
infinitely many. To assess this, recall my belief that there is a swaying.
Might there be a circular chain of beliefs here? For instance, could my
belief that it appears to me that it seems to me that I have a visual impres-
sion of swaying be based on my belief that there is a swaying? This is far
from clearly possible.
Suppose for the sake of argument that I do have a circular chain of
beliefs, each based on the next. This raises a problem. First, there is good
reason to think that (a) one belief is based on a second only if the second is
at least in part causally responsible for (one’s holding) the first. For
instance, if I believe there is a wind, on the basis of my believing that the
trees are swaying, then I believe that there is a wind, at least in part because
I believe that the trees are swaying. Second, there is good reason to think
that (b) if one thing is in part causally responsible for a second and the
second is in part causally responsible for a third, then the first is in part
causally responsible for the third. But together these two points imply
that (c) in a circular chain of beliefs, each based on the next, every belief is
in part causally responsible for, and thus a partial cause of, itself. That
seems impossible. To see why, let us explore how such a circle might go in
a simple case.
Imagine a circle of three beliefs, each based on the next. (1) I believe there
is a wind. I believe this on the basis of (2) my believing there is a swaying of
the trees; I believe that there is this swaying, on the basis of (3) my
believing I have an impression of such swaying; and I believe that I have this
impression, on the basis of believing there is a wind. This case would be a
circular causal chain, one whose last link is connected to its first in the same
way that each is connected to its successor. For, given point (a), belief (1) is
in part causally responsible for belief (3), and, given point (b), (3) is in part
186
Structure of justification and knowledge

causally responsible for (1). This implies, however, given (b), that (1) is in
part causally responsible for itself. That is apparently impossible. The belief
would be holding itself up by its bootstraps.
If the bootstraps problem shows that circular causal chains of this kind
are not possible, then there cannot be a circular chain of beliefs each based
on the next; for on the highly plausible assumptions, (a) through (c), this
would have to be a circular causal chain. (We have not assumed that the
imagined chain implies that some belief must be based on itself, only that
such chains imply a belief’s being in part causally responsible for itself; this
basis relation implies more than a causal connection.)
It may seem that a wheel is a model of a circular causal chain of the
relevant kind and that something must therefore be wrong with the
reasoning just noted. Consider a wheel standing on the ground in a line
running east and west, and imagine the wheel having eight equal sections
and an axle, each section consisting of a pie-slice segment with its apex at
the axle. Does each section not support the next, so that each is “based on”
or rests on the others and ultimately (in the eighth link) on itself?
If we distinguish between the relation of being connected with and that of
supporting, the answer no longer seems clear. Granted that if one section is
connected to a second, it will support the second if a force is applied to the
second in the direction of the first. But a wheel with eight such connected
sections can exist in empty space with no such forces acting on it. Mere
connectedness between segments does not imply any actual support rela-
tions, only a readiness to enter them.
Consider, then, the realistic case in which the wheel is on the ground.
Gravity exerts a downward force on the entire wheel. Here, however, the
ground supports the entire wheel, and each segment of the wheel that has a
segment above it supports that segment, with the two top sections (whose
common seam, we may assume, runs straight up from the center of the
wheel to its highest point) being the only ones plausibly said to support
each other directly. But notice that each of the top sections supports the
other with respect to a different force. There is a westward force in the case of
the western section’s support of the eastern one (which would fall backwards
to the east if disconnected from its western counterpart because all the seams
become unfastened); and there is an eastward force in the case of the eastern
section’s support of the western one (which would fall backwards to the west
if disconnected from its eastern counterpart because all the seams become
unfastened).
Each top section of the wheel, then, pulls on the other in the opposite
direction, with the result being a balance. In no case do we get a force in one
direction that goes fully around the circle with the result that any section
supports itself in that same direction. The forces on the two top sections are,
as described in physics, equal and opposite.
Returning to the case of belief, there the support in question – the kind
of cognitive support given by one belief to a second that is based on it – is
The architecture of knowledge
187

also in one direction. It is, in good part, support with respect to three
dimensions: conviction, explanation, and memory. Consider this cognitive
force in relation to a common case, that of a conclusion belief being based on
a belief of a premise for it, such as a point made by a respected friend in
favor of the conclusion. My premise belief tends to increase or buttress my
conviction in my conclusion belief, to explain (in part and in some broadly
causal way) why I hold that belief, and to help me remember my conclusion.
This is not the kind of support relation that a belief may be plausibly
thought to bear to itself.
One might think that a belief of a self-evident proposition can be in part
causally responsible for itself and in that way support itself. But this seems
at best an inaccurate way of saying that such a proposition is not believed
because one believes something else. That is normally so; normally, one
believes it because one grasps the appropriate conceptual relation(s) it
expresses. In any case, our concern is beliefs in general, not just beliefs of
self-evident propositions.
On balance, then, it is reasonable to conclude not only that we have direct
beliefs, such as beliefs about colors before us and beliefs of self-evident
propositions, but also that we could not have only indirect beliefs. Neither
infinite nor circular chains of indirect beliefs are possible for us.
The epistemic regress problem
Is knowledge like belief in this, so that some of it is direct, or could all our
knowledge be indirect, that is, based on other knowledge we have? It may
seem that this is possible, and that there can be an infinite epistemic regress –
roughly, an infinite series of knowings each based on the next.
It is especially likely to appear that indirect knowledge need not always
be based on direct knowledge, if one stresses that, very commonly, ‘How do
you know?’ can be repeatedly answered, and one then supposes that we stop
answering only for practical reasons having to do with our patience or inge-
nuity. Let us explore this issue by assuming for the sake of argument that
there is indirect knowledge and seeing what this implies.
Assume that a belief constituting indirect knowledge is based on knowl-
edge of something else, or at least on a further belief. The further knowledge
or belief might be based on knowledge of, or belief about, something still
further, and so on. Call this sequence an epistemic chain. It is simply a chain of
beliefs with at least the first constituting knowledge, and each belief linked
to the previous one by being based on it.
It is often held that there are just four possible kinds of epistemic chain.
Two kinds are unanchored and do not end; two kinds are anchored and do
end. First, an epistemic chain might be infinite, hence entirely unanchored.
Second, it might be circular, hence also unanchored. Third, it might end
with a belief that is not knowledge, and thus (figuratively speaking) be
anchored in sand. Fourth, it might end with a belief that constitutes direct
188
Structure of justification and knowledge

knowledge, and thus be anchored in bedrock. Our task is to assess these
chains as possible sources of knowledge or justification. This is a version of
the epistemic regress problem.
Infinite epistemic chains
The first possibility is difficult to appreciate. Even if I could have an infinite
number of beliefs, how would I ever know anything if knowledge required
an infinite epistemic chain? To know, and thus to learn, the simplest kind of
thing, such as that there is a green field before me, I would apparently have
to know an infinite number of things.
It is doubtful that, given our psychological make-up, we can know, or
even believe, infinitely many things. It might seem that we can have an infi-
nite set of arithmetical beliefs, say that 2 is larger than 1, that 3 is larger
than 2, and so forth. But surely for a finite mind there will be some point or
other at which the relevant proposition cannot be grasped (the point might
be different for different people or even the same person at different times).
Imagine the “largest” proposition a supercomputer could formulate after
years of work. It could easily be too long to understand and so cumbersome
that one could not even take in a formulation of it. One would be unable to
remember enough about the first part of it when one gets to the end; one
could thus never understand the whole thing. What we cannot understand
we cannot believe; and what we cannot believe we cannot know.3
Even if we could have infinite sets of beliefs, however, infinite epistemic
chains apparently could not account for all, and probably not for any, of our
knowledge. In the case of some beliefs, such as the belief that if some dogs
are pets, some pets are dogs, I cannot even find any belief I hold that yields
another link (a belief this one seems to be based on). The proposition is
luminously self-evident, and it is difficult even to imagine a further proposi-
tion I would consider a good premise on the basis of which I would believe
it if I thought I needed a premise for it. Thus, I find it unclear how this
belief could be grounded, as knowledge, by any epistemic chain, much less
by an infinite one.
In any event, how might infinite epistemic chains help us account for any
other knowledge (or justified belief)? Notice that many kinds of infinite
chain are possible. No one has provided a plausible account of what kind
might generate justification or knowledge. But some restrictions are badly
needed. For any proposition, an infinite chain can be imagined (in outline)
that may be claimed to provide support for the proposition. Thus, even for a
proposition one believes to be obviously false, one would find it easy to
imagine beliefs to back it up; and though one could not continue doing this
to infinity, one could nonetheless claim that one has the infinite set required
to support the original belief.
Take the obviously false proposition that I weigh at least 500 pounds. I
could back up a belief of this by claiming that if I weigh at least 500.1
The architecture of knowledge
189

pounds, then I weigh at least 500 (which is self-evident), and that I do
weigh at least 500.1 pounds. I could “defend” this by appeal to the propo-
sitions that I weigh at least 500.2 pounds, and that if I do, then I weigh at
least 500.1. And so forth, until the challenger is exhausted. A chain like
this can be infinite; hence, no matter how ridiculous a proposition I claim
to know, there is no way to catch me with a claim I cannot back up in the
same way. Given such resources, anything goes. But nothing is accom-
plished.
Circular epistemic chains
The possibility of a circular epistemic chain as a basis of knowledge has been
taken much more seriously. It might seem that if there cannot be a circular
causal chain of indirect beliefs, each based on the next, then there cannot be
a circular epistemic chain either. But perhaps knowledge can be based on
premises in a way that differs from the way belief is based on them; perhaps,
for instance, my knowledge that there is a wind could be somehow based on
my belief that the leaves are swaying, even though my belief that there is a
wind is not based on any further belief. We would then have a circle of
knowledge, but not of belief, and no causal bootstraps problem. If this is
possible, it may turn out to be important. But how realistic is it?
Does any of our knowledge really emerge from circular epistemic chains?
Let us try to go full circle. I know there is a wind. I know this on the basis
of the swaying of the trees. Now I think I know they are swaying because I
see them sway. But it might be argued that my seeing this is only the causal
basis of my belief that they are swaying, and I just do not notice that it is
only on the basis of, say, my knowledge that I have a visual impression of
swaying that I know they are swaying. Perhaps. But how far can this go?
I do not see how to go full circle, unless I think up propositions I do not
originally believe, hence do not originally know. If I do not originally have
any belief of them, then I (originally) have no justified belief or knowledge of
the premise they express, and thus no belief appropriate to serve as a link in
the epistemic chain or play any supporting role toward my original knowl-
edge.
Suppose, however, that I do think up a suitable set of evidential proposi-
tions, come to know them, and make my way full circle. Suppose, for
instance, that I get as far as knowledge that it seems to me that I have a
visual impression of swaying. Might I know this on the basis of knowing
that there is a wind (the first link)? How would knowledge that there is a
wind justify my belief that it seems to me that I have a visual impression of
tree swaying? I apparently know introspectively, not perceptually or inferen-
tially, that I have the impression of swaying. Other difficulties also beset the
circular approach. But these problems alone cast sufficient doubt on it to
suggest that we consider the remaining options.
190
Structure of justification and knowledge

Epistemic chains terminating in belief not constituting knowledge
The third possibility for the structure of epistemic chains, that an epistemic
chain terminates in a belief which is not knowledge, can be best understood
if we recall that in discussing the transmission of knowledge, we noted both
source conditions and transmission conditions. If the third possibility can be
realized, then knowledge can originate through a belief of a premise that is
not known. On the basis of believing that there is a swaying, for example, I
might know that there is a wind, even though I do not know that there is a
swaying. The regress is thus stopped by grounding knowledge on something
else, but not in the way it is normally grounded in experience or reason.
Is this possible? In one kind of case it is not. Suppose that (in foggy
conditions) I simply guess that what I see is a swaying of trees, but happen
to be right. Might I then know there is a wind anyway, provided there is?
Surely not; knowledge cannot be grounded in such guesswork, even when
the guess is correct.
Imagine, however, that although I do not know there is a swaying, I do
hear some sounds that might indicate swaying, and I make an educated guess
and am thereby justified, to some extent, in believing that there is. If, on the
basis of this somewhat justified belief that there is a swaying, I now believe
that there is a wind, and there is, do I know this?
The answer is not clear. But that would be no help to proponents of the
third possibility, who claim that knowledge can arise from belief which does
not constitute knowledge. For it is equally unclear, and for the same sort of
reason, whether my guess that there is a swaying is sufficiently educated –
say, in terms of how good my evidence is – to give me (a weak kind of)
knowledge that there is a swaying. If it is clear that my guess is not suffi-
ciently educated to yield this knowledge, then I also do not know there is a
wind. If it is clear that the guess is educated enough, I apparently do know
that there is a wind, but my knowledge would be based on other knowledge,
hence would not realize the third possibility.
Notice something else. In the only cases in which the third kind of chain
is at all likely to ground knowledge, there is a degree – perhaps a substantial
degree – of justification. If there can be an epistemic chain which ends with
belief that is not knowledge only because the chain ends, in this way, with
justification, then it appears that we are at least in the general vicinity of
knowledge. We are at most a few degrees of justification away. The sand has
turned out to be rather firm; it is at least close to being firm enough to
support knowledge.4
Epistemic chains terminating in knowledge
The fourth possibility is the one apparently favored by common sense: epis-
temic chains end in direct knowledge – in the sense that they have direct
knowledge as their last link. That knowledge, in turn, is apparently grounded
The architecture of knowledge
191

(anchored, if you like) in experience or in reason, and this non-inferential
grounding explains how it is (epistemically) direct: it arises, directly, from
perception, memory, introspection, or reason (or indeed from testimony,
provided this has an appropriate grounding in at least one of the first four).
The ground-level knowledge just described could not be inferential;
otherwise the chain would not end without a further link. To illustrate,
normally I know that there is a swaying just because I see that there is.
Hence, the chain grounding my knowledge that there is a wind is anchored
in my perception.
Such experientially or rationally grounded epistemic chains may differ in
many ways. Here are four. They differ in composition, in the sorts of beliefs
constituting them. They differ in the kind of transmission they exhibit; it
may be deductive, inductive, or combine both deductive and inductive
links. Epistemic chains also differ in their ultimate grounds, the anchors of
the chains, which may be experiential or rational; and epistemic chains may
vary in justificational strength, the degree of justification they give to the
initial belief.
Different proponents of the fourth possibility have held various views
about the character of the foundational knowledge, that is, of the beliefs consti-
tuting the knowledge that makes up the final link of the epistemic chain
that is anchored in experience or reason. Some philosophers, for instance,
have thought that the appropriate beliefs must be infallible, or at least inde-
feasibly justified. But this is not implied by anything said here. All that the
fourth possibility requires is direct knowledge, knowledge not based on other
knowledge (or on justified belief).
Direct knowledge need not be of self-evident propositions, or constituted
by indefeasibly justified belief. Introspective beliefs illustrate this. The
proposition that I am now thinking about knowledge is not self-evident. It
is not even self-evident to me. First, it is evident to me, not in itself, as is the
proposition that if some dogs are pets then some pets are dogs, but on the
basis of my conscious experience. Second, since I realize that my reflections
can sometimes merge into daydreaming, I do not even consider it rock-
solidly true in the way I do self-evident propositions. But surely I do have
direct knowledge of the proposition.
The epistemic regress argument
What we have just seen suggests a version of the epistemic regress argument. It
starts with the assumption that
(1) if one has any knowledge, it occurs in an epistemic chain.
Epistemic chains are understood to include the special case of a single link,
such as a perceptual or a priori belief, which constitutes knowledge by virtue
of being anchored directly (non-inferentially) in one’s experience or reason.5
192
Structure of justification and knowledge

The argument then states that
(2) the only possible kinds of epistemic chain are the four mutually exclu-
sive kinds just discussed: the infinite, the circular, those terminating in
beliefs that are not knowledge, and those terminating in direct knowl-
edge.
Its third, also restrictive premise is that
(3) knowledge can occur only in the fourth kind of chain.
And the argument concludes that
(4) if one has any knowledge, one has some direct knowledge.6
A similar argument was advanced by Aristotle, and versions of this regress
argument have been defended ever since.7
As proponents of the argument normally understand (1), it implies that
any given instance of indirect knowledge depends on at least one epistemic
chain for its status as knowledge. So understood, the argument clearly
implies the further conclusion that any indirect knowledge a person has epis-
temically depends on, in the sense that it cannot be knowledge apart from, an
appropriate inferential connection, via some epistemic chain, to some direct
knowledge that the person has.
Given this dependence assumption, the regress argument would show not
only that if there is indirect knowledge, there is direct knowledge, but also
that if there is indirect knowledge, that very knowledge is traceable to some
direct knowledge as its foundation. One could trace an item of indirect
knowledge to some premise for it, and, if there is a premise for that, to the
next premise, and so on until the chain is anchored in a basic source of
knowledge.
A similar argument applies to justification. We simply speak of justifica-
tory chains and proceed in a parallel way, substituting justification for
knowledge; and we arrive at the conclusion that if one has any justified
beliefs, one has some directly justified beliefs. Similarly, if one has any indi-
rectly justified belief, it exhibits justificational dependence on an epistemic
chain appropriately linking it to some directly justified belief one has, that
is, to a foundational belief.
Foundationalism and coherentism
These two sets of conclusions constitute the heart of the position called epis-
temological foundationalism. The first set, concerning knowledge, may be
interpreted as the thesis that the structure of a body of knowledge, such as
yours or mine, is foundational, where this is taken to imply that any indirect
The architecture of knowledge
193

(hence non-foundational) knowledge there is depends on direct (and thus
in a sense foundational) knowledge. The superstructure, one might say,
rests on the foundations. The second set of conclusions, regarding justifi-
cation, may be interpreted as the thesis that the structure of a body of
justified beliefs is foundational, where this is taken to imply that any indi-
rectly (hence non-foundationally) justified beliefs there are depend on
directly (thus in a sense foundationally) justified beliefs.
In both cases, different foundationalist theories may diverge in the kind
and degree of dependence they assert. A strong foundationalist theory of
justification might hold that indirectly justified beliefs derive all their justi-
fication from foundational beliefs; a moderate theory might maintain only
that the former would not be justified apart from the latter, and the theory
might grant that other factors, such as coherence of a belief with others one
holds that are not in the chain can add to its justification.
None of the foundationalist theses I have stated says anything about the
content of a body of knowledge or of justified belief, though proponents of
foundationalism usually specify, as René Descartes does in his Meditations on
First Philosophy (first published in 1641), what sorts of content they think
appropriate. Foundationalism, as such, thus leaves open what, in particular,
is believed by a given person who has knowledge or justified belief and what
sorts of propositions are suitable material for the foundational beliefs. I want
to talk mainly about foundationalism regarding knowledge, but much of
what I say can be readily applied to justified belief.
Foundationalism has been criticized on a number of points. Let us focus
on the most important objections that stem from the best alternative theory
of the structure of knowledge, coherentism. There are many versions of coher-
entism, including some that seem to be based mainly on the idea that if an
epistemic circle is large enough and sufficiently rich in content, it can
generate justification and account for knowledge. But we have seen serious
difficulties besetting circular chains. I therefore want to formulate a more
plausible version of coherentism.
The central idea underlying coherentism is that the justification (justi-
fiedness) of a belief depends on its coherence with other beliefs one holds.
The unit of coherence – roughly, the range of the beliefs that must cohere in
order for a belief among them to derive justification from their coherence –
may be as large as one’s entire set of beliefs (though of course some may
figure more significantly in producing the coherence than others, say
because of differing degrees of closeness to one another in their subject
matter).
The variability of the unit of coherence would be accepted by a proponent
of the circular view, but the thesis I want to explore differs from that view in
not being linear: it does not construe justification or knowledge as emerging
from an inferential line going from premises to that conclusion, and from
other premises to the first set of premises, and so on, until we return to the
original proposition as a premise.
194
Structure of justification and knowledge

In the circular coherentist view, no matter how wide the circle, there is a
line from any one belief in a circular epistemic chain to any other. In practice
we may never trace the entire line, as by inferring one thing we know from a
second, the second from a third, and so on, until we re-infer the first. Still,
on this view, there is such a line for every belief that constitutes knowledge.
Thus, the kinds of problems we encountered earlier regarding circular epis-
temic chains must be resolved (as I doubt they can be) if the view is to be
sustained.
Holistic coherentism
Coherentism need not be linear. It may be holistic. To see how a holistic
theory of knowledge (and justification) works, consider a question that
evokes a justification. John wonders how I know, as I sit reading, that the
wind is blowing. I say that the leaves are rustling. He then asks how I know
that Sally is not just making this noise by walking in the high grass. I reply
that the high grass is too far away. He now wonders whether I can distin-
guish rustling leaves from the sound of a quiet car on the pebbled driveway.
I reply that what I hear is too much like a whisper to be the crunchy sound
of pebbles under tires.
Patterns of justification
In giving this kind of justification, I apparently go only one step along the
inferential line: just to my belief that the leaves are rustling. For my belief
that there is a wind is based on this belief about the leaves. After that, I do
not even mention anything that this belief, in turn, is based on. Rather, I
defend my beliefs as appropriate in terms of an entire pattern of mutually
cohering beliefs I hold. And I may cite many different parts of the pattern.
For instance, I might have said that walking through high grass sounds
different from windblown leaves. On the coherentist view, then, beliefs
representing knowledge do not have to lie in a grounded chain; they fit a
coherent pattern, and their justification emerges from their fitting that
pattern in an appropriate way.
Consider a different sort of example. A gift is delivered to you with its
card apparently missing. The only people you can think of who send you
gifts at this time of year live in Washington and virtually never leave, but
this is from Omaha. That origin does not cohere well with your hypothesis
that it was sent by your Washington benefactors, the Smiths. Then you open
it and discover that it is frozen steak. You realize that this can be ordered
from anywhere. But it is not the sort of gift you would expect from the
Smiths. A moment later you recall that you recently sent them cheese. You
suppose that they are probably sending something in response. Suddenly
you remember that they once asked if you had ever tried frozen gourmet
The architecture of knowledge
195

steaks, and when you said you had not they replied that they would have to
give you some one of these days.
You now have a quite coherent pattern of beliefs and might be justified in
believing that it was they who sent the package. If you come to believe this
on the basis of the pattern, you presumably have a justified belief. When
you at last find their card at the bottom of the box, then (normally) you
would know that they sent the package.
The crucial things to notice in this example are how, initially, a kind of
incoherence with your standing beliefs prevents your justifiedly believing your
first hypothesis (that the box came from the Smiths) and how, as relevant
pieces of the pattern developed, you became justified in believing, and
(presumably) came to know, that the Smiths sent it. Arriving at a justified
belief, on this view, is more like answering a question in the light of a whole
battery of relevant information than like deducing a theorem by successive
inferential steps from a set of luminous axioms.
A coherentist response to the regress argument
It is important to see how, using examples like those just given, holistic
coherentism can respond to the regress argument. It need not embrace the
possibility of an epistemic circle (though its proponents need not reject that
either). Instead, it can deny the premise that there are only the four kinds of
possible epistemic chains so far specified. There is a fifth: a chain termi-
nating with belief that is psychologically direct, yet epistemically indirect (or, if
we are talking of coherentism about justification, justificationally indirect).
This is in effect to grant foundationalists that they are right about our
psychology, while insisting that they are wrong about epistemology. Let me
explain.
The idea is that although a terminal, direct belief is not psychologically
based on any other, as where it is inferentially grounded on another, its justi-
fication nonetheless is based on other beliefs. Hence, the last link is, as
belief, direct, yet, as knowledge, indirect, not in the usual sense that it is
inferential but in the broad sense that the belief constitutes knowledge only
by virtue of receiving support from other knowledge or belief. This belief is
psychologically foundational but epistemically dependent. Its justification depends
on a pattern of supporting beliefs.
To illustrate all this, consider again my belief that there is a swaying of
the trees. It is psychologically direct because it is simply grounded, causally,
in my vision and is not inferentially based on any other belief. Yet (the
coherentist might argue) my knowledge that there is such a movement is not
epistemically direct. It is epistemically, but not inferentially, based on the
coherence of my belief that there is a rustling with my other beliefs, presum-
ably including many that represent knowledge themselves. It is thus
knowledge through, but not by inference from, other knowledge – or at least
not through justified beliefs. The knowledge is therefore epistemically indi-
196
Structure of justification and knowledge

rect. Hence, it is at best misleading to call the knowledge, as opposed to the
belief expressing it, direct at all.
This coherentist view grants, then, that the belief element in my
knowledge is non-inferentially grounded in perception and is in that sense
direct. But this is just a kind of psychological directness: there is no belief
through which I hold the one in question in the way that I hold a conclu-
sion belief on the basis of premise beliefs. But there are beliefs through
which the belief constitutes knowledge: those with which it coheres even
though it is not based on them. The basis relation between beliefs and the
counterpart premise–conclusion relation between propositions are simply
not the only producers of coherence.
One could insist that if a non-inferential, thus psychologically direct,
belief constitutes knowledge, this must be direct knowledge. But the coher-
entist would reply that in that case there will be two kinds of direct
knowledge: the kind the foundationalist posits, which derives from
grounding in a basic experiential or rational source, say perception or reflec-
tion, and the kind the coherentist posits, which derives from coherence with
other beliefs and not from being based on those sources. Why not classify
the directness of knowledge in terms of what it evidentially depends on and
the directness of belief in terms of what it psychologically depends on? This is
surely a plausible response.
Is the holistic coherentist trying to have it both ways? Not necessarily.
Holistic coherentism can grant that a variant of the regress argument holds
for belief, since the only kind of belief chain that it is psychologically real-
istic to attribute to us is the kind terminating in direct (non-inferential)
belief. But even on the assumption that knowledge is constituted by (certain
kinds of) beliefs, it does not follow that direct belief which is knowledge is
also direct knowledge.
Thus, the coherentist is granting psychological foundationalism, which says
(in part) that if we have any beliefs at all, we have some direct ones, yet
denying epistemological foundationalism, which says that, assuming there is
any knowledge at all, there is knowledge which is epistemically (and
normally also psychologically) direct. Holistic coherentism may grant expe-
rience and reason the status of psychological foundations of our entire
structure of beliefs. But it gives them no place, independently of coherence,
in generating justification or knowledge.8
The nature of coherence
As I have described holistic coherentism, it avoids some of the major prob-
lems for linear coherentism. But there remain serious difficulties for it.
First, what is coherence? Second, what reason is there to think that coher-
ence alone counts toward the justification of a belief, or toward its truth, as
it must in some way if it is to give us the basis of a good account of
knowledge?
The architecture of knowledge
197

It turns out to be very difficult to explain what coherence is. It is not
mere mutual consistency, though inconsistency is the clearest case of inco-
herence. Two propositions having nothing to do with each other, say that 7
+ 5 = 12 and that carrots are nourishing, are mutually consistent but do not
exhibit coherence.
Coherence and explanation
Coherence is sometimes connected with explanation. Certainly, if the Smiths’
sending the package explains why the card bears their names, then my belief
of the first proposition coheres with my belief of the second (other things
being equal). What explains something makes it understandable; and
making understandable is a coherence-generating relation between proposi-
tions (as well as between other kinds of things).
Probability is also relevant to coherence. If the probability of the proposi-
tion that the Smiths sent the steaks is raised in the light of the proposition
that I sent them cheese, this at least counts in favor of my belief of the first
cohering with my belief of the second. But how are we to understand the
notions of explanation and of probability? Let us consider these questions in
turn.
Does one proposition (genuinely) explain another so long as, if the first is
(or at least is assumed to be) true, then it is clear why the second is true?
Apparently not; for if that were so, then the proposition that a benevolent
genie delivered the box explains why it arrived. In any event, if that proposi-
tion did explain why the box arrived, would I be justified in believing it
because my believing it coheres with my believing that I know not what
other source the box might have come from? Surely not.
Even if we can say what notion of explanation is relevant to under-
standing coherence, it will remain very difficult to specify when an
explanatory relation generates enough coherence to create justification. For
one thing, consider cases in which a proposition, say that Jill hurt Jack’s
feelings, would, if true, very adequately explain something we believe, such
as that Jack is upset. Believing Jill did this might cohere well with his
being upset, but that would not, by itself, justify our believing it. There are
too many possible competing explanations we might just as well accept.
Similar points hold for probability. Not just any proposition I believe
which, if true, would raise the probability of my hypothesis that the gift is
from the Smiths will strengthen my justification for believing that it is.
Consider, for example, the proposition that the Smiths send such gifts to all
their friends. Suppose I have no justification for believing this, say because I
have accepted it only on the basis of testimony which I should see to be
unreliable. Then, although the proposition, if true, raises the probability of
my hypothesis (since I am among their friends) and (let us assume) coheres
with what I already believe, I am not entitled to believe it, and my believing
it will not add to my justification for believing that the Smiths sent the box.
198
Structure of justification and knowledge

It might be replied that this belief about the Smiths’ habits does not
cohere well with other things I believe, such as that people do not generally
behave like that. But suppose I believed nothing about the Smiths’ or other
people’s habits of gift-giving that conflicts with the Smiths’ being so
generous, and I happened, without grounds, to believe the Smiths to be
both generous and rich. Then there might be a significant degree of coher-
ence between my belief that the Smiths send gifts to all their friends and my
other beliefs; yet my forming the belief that they give gifts to all their
friends still would not strengthen my justification for my hypothesis that
the steak is from them.
Coherence as an internal relation among cognitions
These examples suggest the second problem. So far as we do understand
coherence, what reason is there to think that by itself it generates any justifi-
cation or counts toward truth at all? Whatever coherence among beliefs is, it
is an internal relation, in the sense that whether it holds among beliefs is a
matter of how those beliefs (including their propositional content, which is
intrinsic to them) are related to one another. It is not a matter of anything
outside one’s system of beliefs, such as one’s perceptual experience. Now why
could there not be a vast number of equally coherent systems of beliefs that
are mutually incompatible, so that no two of them can be without at least
some falsehood? If there can be, why should my having one of these coherent
systems provide any reason to think my beliefs, rather than those of someone
with one of the “opposing” systems, are justified or represent knowledge?
This is part of what might be called the isolation problem: the problem of
explaining why coherent systems of beliefs are not readily isolated from
truth, and thus do not contain knowledge, which implies truth. There is
also a problem of explaining why there is not a similar isolation from justifi-
cation, which seems in some way to point toward truth, roughly in the sense
that what justifies a belief “indicates” its truth, and indicates it in propor-
tion to the degree of justification. Why should coherence by itself imply
that any of the cohering beliefs is justified or constitutes knowledge, when
both justification and knowledge point toward truth as something external
to the belief system? It is not as though coherentists could count on the
implication’s being guaranteed by God; and nothing else seems to assure us
of it.
Consider a schizophrenic who thinks he is Napoleon. If he has a
completely consistent story with enough interlocking details, his belief
system may be superbly coherent. He may even be able to explain quite
coherently why there are coherent belief systems that conflict with his, such
as those of his psychiatrists. If coherence alone generates justification,
however, we must say that each system is equally well justified – assuming
their belief systems are exactly as coherent as his. We need not attribute
knowledge to any of the systems, since any of them might contain falsehood.
The architecture of knowledge
199

But is it plausible to say that a system of beliefs is highly justified even
when there is no limit to the number of radically different yet equally
justified belief systems – even on the part of other people with experience
of many of the same things the beliefs are about – that are incompatible
with it in this thoroughgoing way? The question is especially striking
when we realize that two equally coherent systems, even on the part of the
same person at different times, might differ not just on one point but on
every point: each belief in one might be opposed by an incompatible belief
in the other.
To appreciate the significance of the possibility of multiple coherent
systems of belief that are mutually incompatible, recall the plausible
assumption that a well-justified belief may reasonably be considered true. If,
however, the degree of justification of a belief is entirely a matter of its
support by considerations of coherence, no degree of justification by itself
can carry any greater presumption of truth than is created by the same
degree of support from coherence on the part of a belief of the contradictory
proposition. Thus, if “Napoleon” (unlike his historical namesake) has a suffi-
ciently coherent set of beliefs yielding justification of his belief that he
fought in and won the Battle of Waterloo, this belief may be as well-justi-
fied as his psychiatrists’ belief that he was not even born at the time.
If this coherentist picture of justification is correct, is there any reason to
think that a belief supported solely by considerations of coherence is true or
even justified? And if Napoleon’s and the psychiatrists’ belief systems are
equally coherent, how can we justify our apparently quite reasonable
tendency to regard their belief systems as more likely to represent truths,
and on that count more likely to contain knowledge, than his?
Granted, the psychiatrists’ belief that he was born long after the battle
coheres with our beliefs. But why should our own beliefs be privileged over
equally coherent conflicting sets? And why should agreement even with
nearly everyone’s beliefs, say about Napoleon’s being dead, be a factor, unless
we assume that some element other than coherence, such as perception or
memory, confers justification without drawing on coherence? If coherence is
the only source of justification, it is not clear how perception or memory or
introspection contributes to justification. Moreover, even what seems the
highest degree of justification, such as we have for simple introspective
beliefs and beliefs of self-evident truths, provides us no presumption of truth
or knowledge.
Coherence, reason, and experience
This brings us to a third major problem for coherentism: how can it explain
the role of experience and reason as sources of justification and knowledge?
Certainly experience and reason seem to be basic sources of justification and
knowledge. Coherentists themselves commonly use beliefs from these sources
to illustrate coherent bodies of beliefs that are good candidates for knowl-
200
Structure of justification and knowledge

edge. How can holistic coherentism explain the role of these sources in rela-
tion to justification and knowledge?
Why is it, for instance, that when I have a vivid experience of the kind
characteristic of seeing a green field, I am apparently justified (though prima
facie rather than indefeasibly justified), simply by that experience, in
believing that there is a green field before me? And why do I seem so very
strongly justified, simply on the basis of my rational grasp of the proposi-
tion that if some dogs are pets then some pets are dogs, in believing this?
One thing a coherentist might say here is that in fact many of our beliefs
are causally and non-inferentially based on perception or on the use of reason;
and given these similarities of origin, it is to be expected that they often
cohere with one another. Hence, although we do not, and do not need to,
infer propositions like those just cited from any others that might provide
justifying evidence for them, they do cohere with many other things we
believe, and this coherence is what justifies them.
Coherence and the a priori
This response by way of associating the coherence of beliefs with their causal
basis is more plausible for perceptual beliefs than for beliefs of simple self-
evident a priori truths, at least if coherence is construed as more than
consistency and as related to explanation, probability, and justification. For
notice that, unlike the proposition that there is a green field before me, the
proposition that if some dogs are pets, then some pets are dogs apparently
need not explain, render probable, or justify anything else I believe. Nor is it
obvious that anything else I believe need explain, render probable, or justify
my believing this proposition. Where is the need for coherence as a require-
ment for my justification? I may have other beliefs that cohere with this one,
but my justification for it does not seem to derive from such coherence. Yet
my belief of this proposition is justified to about as high a degree as is any
belief I have.
By contrast, the proposition that there is a green field before me perhaps
does cohere, in a way that might serve coherentism, with other things I
believe: that there is grass there, that I am on my front porch, and so on; and
there appear to be some explanatory and probability relations among these
propositions. For instance, the proposition that there is a green field before
me adds to the probability that I am on my porch; and that I am on that
porch partly explains why I see a green field.
A coherentist might respond to the difference just indicated by quali-
fying the coherence view, applying it only to beliefs of empirical, rather than
a priori, propositions.9 This move could be defended on the assumption that
propositions known a priori are necessarily true and hence are not appropri-
ately said to be made probable by other propositions, or to be explained by
them in the same way empirical propositions are explained. In support of
this it might be argued that although we can explain the basis of a necessary
The architecture of knowledge
201

truth and thereby show that it holds, still, since it cannot fail to hold, there
is no explaining why it, as opposed to something else, holds.
This is plausible but inconclusive reasoning. We may just as reasonably say
that we can sometimes explain why a necessary truth holds and in doing so
explain why a contrasting proposition is false. Imagine that someone mistak-
enly takes a certain false proposition to be a theorem of logic and cannot see
why a closely similar, true proposition is a theorem. If we now prove the
correct one step by step, with accompanying examples, we might thereby
explain why this theorem, as opposed to the other proposition, is true.
So far as explanation is central to coherence, then, coherentism apparently
owes us an account of knowledge of at least some necessary truths. But
suppose that it can account for knowledge of some necessary truths. There
remain others, such as simple, luminously self-evident ones, for which it
cannot offer anything plausibly said to explain why they hold, or any other
way of accounting for knowledge of them as grounded in coherence.
Consider how one might explain why, if it is true that Jane Austen wrote
Persuasion, then it is not false that she did. If someone did not see this, it
would probably not help to point out that no proposition is both true and
false. For if one needs to have the truth of such a clear and simple instance of
this general truth explained, one presumably cannot understand the general
truth either. But suppose this is not so, and that one’s grasp of the general
truth is somehow the basis of one’s seeing the particular truth that instanti-
ates it. Then the same point would apply to the general truth: there would
apparently be nothing plausibly said to explain to one why it is true.
Coherence and the mutually explanatory
It might now be objected that the general truth that no proposition is both
true and false, and the instances of it, are mutually explanatory: its truth
explains why they hold, and their truth explains why it holds; and this is the
chief basis of their coherence with one another. But is it really possible for
one proposition to explain another and the other to explain it? If what
explains why the grass is wet is that there is dew on it, then the same propo-
sition – that there is dew on it – is not explained by the proposition that the
grass is wet (instead, condensation explains why it is wet).
Reflection on other purported examples of mutual explanation also
suggests that two propositions cannot explain each other. It might seem that
a man could say something because his wife did, and that she could say it
because he did. But notice how this has to go to make good sense. One of
them would have to say it first to cause the other to. But then we would
have a case in which something like this occurs: her saying it explains why
he says it, later (this could be so even if her saying it is explained by her
believing he thinks it). His saying it earlier than she does might still explain
her saying it. But then the fact that he says it at a given time does not both
explain and get explained by her saying it at some particular time.
202
Structure of justification and knowledge

When we carefully specify what explains something, we seem to find that
the latter, carefully specified, does not explain the former. In the case where
she says something because he did, earlier, and he says it because she did,
earlier than he did, we would have a kind of reciprocal explanation, wherein a
kind of thing, here spousal affirmation, explains and is explained by another
thing of the same kind. But this is not a mutual explanation, wherein the
very same thing explains and is explained by a second thing. The first may
look like the second, but it is quite different.10
Perhaps mutual explanation of the kind the coherentist apparently needs
– as opposed to reciprocal explanation and other sorts involving two-way
relations – is somehow possible. But until a good argument for it is given,
we should conclude that even if an explanatory relation between proposi-
tions is sufficient for a belief of one of the propositions to cohere with a
belief of the other, coherentism does not in general provide a good account
of knowledge of self-evident truths.
If coherentism applies only to empirical beliefs, however, and not to
beliefs of a priori propositions, then it is not a general theory of justification
or knowledge and leaves us in need of a non-coherentist account of a priori
justification (and knowledge). In any case, it would be premature to
conclude that coherentism does account for empirical justification. Let us
return to the perceptual case.
Epistemological versus conceptual coherentism
It might seem that we could decisively refute the coherence theory of justifi-
cation by noting that one might have only a single belief, say that there is a
green field before one, and that this lone belief might still be justified. For
there would be a justified belief that coheres with no other beliefs one has.
But could one have just a single belief? Could one, for instance, believe that
there is a green field before one, yet not believe, say, that it has any vegeta-
tion? It is not clear that one could; and foundationalism does not assume
this possibility, though the theory may easily be wrongly criticized for
implying it.
Foundationalism is in fact consistent with one kind of coherentism, namely,
a coherence theory of the acquisition and function of concepts – for short, the
coherence theory of concepts. According to this theory, concepts are what they are
partly in relation to one another, and a person acquires concepts, say of (phys-
ical) objects and shapes, and of music and sounds, only in relation to one
another and must acquire an entire set of related concepts in order to acquire
any concept. The concept of an object in some way includes that of shape (if
only the notion of something bounded), as that of music includes the concept
of sound. This may be why any object must have some shape or other, and
why anything that makes music produces some sound. One cannot (fully)
acquire object concepts without acquiring some shape concepts, or (fully)
acquire the concept of music without acquiring that of sound.
The architecture of knowledge
203

If the coherence theory of concepts is sound, foundationalists must
explain how it squares with their epistemology. The central point they may
appeal to is a distinction between grounding conditions for belief and possession
conditions for it. What grounds a belief in such a way as to justify it or render
it an item of knowledge is largely independent of what other beliefs one
must have, and what concepts one must have, to be able to hold the first
belief. Perhaps I cannot believe that music is playing if I do not have a
concept of sound; I may even have to believe sounds with a certain structure
to be occurring. And perhaps I could not have acquired these and other rele-
vant concepts one at a time. Indeed, it may be (as suggested in Chapter 5)
that at least normally we cannot acquire concepts without acquiring some
knowledge or justified belief. Still, what it is that justifies a belief can be a
matter of how the belief is grounded; it need not be a matter of the coher-
ence conditions required for having the belief.
If, however, coherence relations are essential for holding a belief at all,
they are on that ground necessary for, and – in ways that will soon be
apparent – important in understanding, the belief’s being justified. The
point here is simply that we cannot treat conditions for having a belief at all
as doing the more specific job of grounding its justification. By and large
beliefs can be possessed without being justified, and there is commonly a
good distance between meeting the conditions for simply having beliefs and
meeting the standards for justification in holding them.
Coherence, incoherence, and defeasibility
We must directly ask, then, whether my justification for believing that there
is a green field out there derives from the coherence of the belief with others.
Let us first grant an important point by focusing on a line of reasoning that
seems to lead many philosophers to think it does derive from coherence.
Suppose this visual belief turns out to be incoherent with a second belief,
such as that one is standing where one seems to see the field around one yet
feels no grass on the smooth ground beneath one’s feet and can walk right
across the area without feeling any. Then the first belief may cease to be justi-
fied. Incoherence, then, defeats my justification.
This defeating role of incoherence is important, but it shows only that
our justification is defeasible – liable to being outweighed (overridden) or
undermined – should sufficiently serious incoherence arise. It does not show
that justification is produced by coherence in the first place, any more than a
wooden cabin’s being destroyed by fire shows that it was produced by the
absence of fire. In the case in which I feel no grass beneath my feet, the justi-
fication of my visually grounded belief is outweighed: my better justified
beliefs, including the conviction that a field must have a certain texture,
make it more reasonable for me to believe that there is not a field here.
A major lesson that emerges here is that we cannot tell what the basis of
something is just from the range of things that outweigh it, much less
204
Structure of justification and knowledge

conclude that this basis is the absence of the things that destroy it.
Incoherence is absent where there are mutually irrelevant beliefs as well as
where there are mutually coherent ones. Mutual irrelevance between two
sets of beliefs certainly does not make one of them a justificational or epis-
temic basis for the other.
Two important questions arise here. First, could incoherence outweigh
justification of a belief in the first place if we were not independently justified
in believing something to the effect that a proposition incoherent with
certain other ones is, or probably is, false? Second, are the other relevant
propositions not precisely the kind for which, directly or inferentially, we
have some degree of justification through the basic experiential and rational
sources? Foundationalists are likely to answer the first negatively and the
second affirmatively.
There is also a different kind of defeat of justification: our justification
can be simply undermined. We can cease to be justified in believing a propo-
sition, though we do not become justified in believing it false, as one does
where counter-evidence demands a belief contrary to the initial one. Suppose
I cease to see a bird on a branch when, without obscuring my line of sight to
the bird, I move six feet to my left. This could justify my believing that I
might be hallucinating. This belief is incoherent with, and thereby under-
mines the justification of, my visual belief that the bird is there, though it
does not by itself justify my believing that there is no bird there.
Again, I am apparently justified, independently of coherence, in believing
that my seeing the bird there is incoherent with my merely hallucinating it
there. It seems that coherence has the role it does in justification largely
because some beliefs are justified independently of it.
Positive and negative epistemic dependence
Examples like these show that it is essential to distinguish negative epistemic
dependence – which is a form of defeasibility – from positive epistemic dependence
– the kind beliefs bear to the sources from which they derive any justification
they have or, if they represent knowledge, derive their status as knowledge.
The defeasibility of a belief’s justification by incoherence does not imply, as
coherentists have commonly thought, that this justification positively
depends on coherence. If my well is my source of water, I (positively) depend
on it. The possibility that people could poison it does not make their non-
malevolence part of my source of water, or imply a (positive) dependence on
them, such as I have on the rainfall. Moreover, it is the rainfall that explains
both my having the water and its level.
So it is with perceptual experience as a source of justification. Founda-
tionalists need not claim that justification does not depend negatively on
anything else, for as we have seen they need not claim that justification must
be indefeasible. Its vulnerability to defeat can be construed as a kind of
dependence. A belief’s justification is, then, not completely independent of the
The architecture of knowledge
205

justification of other beliefs, actual or hypothetical. But negative depen-
dence does not imply positive dependence. Justification can be defeasible by
incoherence, and thus outweighed or undermined should incoherence arise,
without owing its existence to coherence in the first place.
Coherence and second-order justification
There is something further that may be considered supportive of coherentism,
and in assessing it we can learn more about both coherentism and justification.
If one sets out to show that one’s belief is justified, one has to cite propositions
that cohere with the one in question, say the proposition that there is a green
field before me. In some cases, these are not even propositions one already
believes. Often, in defending the original belief, one forms new beliefs, such as
the belief one acquires, in moving one’s head, that one can vividly see the
changes in perspective that go with seeing a bat in flight.
The process versus the property of justification
More importantly, these new, back-up beliefs are especially appropriate to
the process of justifying one’s belief; and the result of that process is (a kind of)
showing that the original belief is justified, together (in typical cases) with
one’s forming a certain second-order belief – so called because it is a belief
about a belief (such as a perceptual one) which is not itself about any other
belief. In this case the second-order belief is to the effect that the first-order
belief is justified. Thus, coherence is important in showing that a belief is
justified and is in that sense an element in a typical kind of process of justifi-
cation.
The moment we reflect on this point, however, we may wonder why the
beliefs appropriate to showing that a belief is justified are required for its
being justified in the first place. There is no good reason to think they need
be. Indeed, why should one’s simply having a justified belief imply even that
one is (situationally) justified in holding beliefs appropriate to showing that
it is justified? It would seem that just as one can be virtuous even if one does
not know how to defend one’s good character against attack or even show
that one has good character at all, one can have a justified belief even if, in
response to someone who doubts that one has it, one could not show that
one does.
Justifying a second-order belief is a sophisticated process. The process is
particularly sophisticated if the second-order belief concerns a special prop-
erty like the justification of the original belief. Simply being justified in a
belief about the color of an object is a much simpler matter.
Confusion is easy here because of the way we often speak of justification.
Consider the question of how a simple perceptual belief “is justified.” The
very phrase is ambiguous. For all it tells us, the question could be ‘By what
process, say of reasoning, has the belief been (or might it be) justified?’ or,
206
Structure of justification and knowledge

on the other hand, ‘In virtue of what is the belief justified (possessed of the
property of justifiedness)?’ These are two very different questions. But much
of our talk about justification makes it easy to run them together. A belief
said to be “justified” could be one that has justification or one that has been
justified; and asking for someone’s justification could be either a request for
justifying factors or an invitation to recount the process by which the person
has in fact justified the belief.
Does coherentism have any plausible argument, not grounded in the
mistakes just pointed out, for the (positive) dependence of perceptual justifi-
cation on coherence? I do not see that it does, though given how hard it is to
discern precisely what coherence is, we cannot be confident that no direct
argument is forthcoming.
Granted, one could point to the oddity of saying things like, ‘I am justi-
fied in believing that there is a green field before me, but I cannot justify
the belief’. Coherentists might think this is odd because they tend to hold
that if one has a justified belief, one can surely give a justification for it by
appeal to other beliefs one holds that cohere with it. But look closely.
Granted that, commonly, in asserting something I suggest that I can justify
it in some way or other (particularly if the belief I express is not grounded in
a basic source), yet here I deny that very suggestion. Still, it could well be
that it is my asserting that my belief is justified, rather than its being so, that
gives the appearance that I must be able to give a justification to the belief.
In asserting that I am justified, after all, I have not, or not merely, expressed
a first-order justified belief, something a normal child of three can do; I have
ascribed first-order justification to my belief. That requires some sophistica-
tion. More important, even foundationalists who hold that we are typically
directly justified in, say, perceptual beliefs may deny that normally we are
directly justified in these sophisticated ascriptions of justification. To hold
that there are non-inferentially justified beliefs does not in the least commit
one to holding that ascriptions of justification itself are thus justified.
Beliefs, dispositions to believe, and grounds of belief
To be sure, when I say that there is a green field before me, I can give a justi-
fication: for instance, that I see it. But first, giving a justification is not
equivalent to claiming that one has it. The first cites a justifier and need not
employ the concept of justification; the latter employs that sophisticated
concept and need not cite a justifier. Second, note that before the question of
justification arises I need not even believe that I see the field. That question
leads me to focus on my circumstances, in which I first had a belief solely
about the field, not about my own perceptual relation to it.
To be sure, when I said there is a green field before me, I did have a dispo-
sition, based on my visual experience, to form the belief that I see the field,
and this is largely why, in the course of justifying that belief, I then form the
further belief that I do see it. But a disposition to believe something does not
The architecture of knowledge
207

imply one’s already having a dispositional belief of it: here I tend to form the
belief that I see the field if, as I view it, the question whether I see it arises;
yet I need not have subliminally believed this already.
Thus, the justification I offer for my belief that there is a green field
before me is not by appeal to coherence with other beliefs I already hold –
such as that I saw the field and heard the swishing grass beneath my feet –
but by reference to a basic source, sensory experience. It is thus precisely the
kind of justification that foundationalists are likely to consider appropriate
for a non-inferential belief. Indeed, one consideration favoring foundation-
alism about both justification and knowledge, at least as an account of our
justificational practices in everyday life (including much scientific practice)
is that typically we cease offering justification or defending a knowledge
claim precisely when we reach one or more of the basic sources.11
Suppose, however, that I would be dumbfounded if asked, in clear
daylight, what justifies me in believing there is a green field before me.
Would it follow that I am not justified? No, for I might be simply unable
to marshal my quite ample justificatory resources. Coherentism offers no
good argument to show that being justified requires being able to show
that one is, any more than having good character entails being able to
show that one has it.
Justification, knowledge, and artificially created coherence
There is one further point here. If coherentism regards justification as deriving
from coherence alone, then it accords no justificatory weight to experiential or
rational grounding except insofar as they contribute to coherence. Our
examples cast much doubt on this view.
Consider a related implication of coherentism. If I seek the best justified
body of beliefs possible – which is surely a rational goal – then I am free to
consider adopting, or to manipulate my brain to cause myself to form, an
entirely new system of beliefs. Would its coherence alone guarantee that it
contains justified beliefs? It might contain none of the experiential and a
priori beliefs I now have; and for all coherence requires it may contain no
beliefs based on experience or reason at all.
A superbly coherent system of beliefs I might acquire could even run
counter to my experience. Even if I see a square field of green grass before
me, I might coherently believe that there is an oval field of brown shrubbery
there, since my other beliefs might support this. I could, for instance, coher-
ently believe that when I seem to see green grass I am having a hallucination
caused by brown shrubbery. There is no limit to the number of beliefs for
which one might be able thus to rationalize away the states and events that
it is natural to call the evidence of the senses.
We are apparently incapable of changing our belief systems in this way.
But suppose that we could do so by properly setting a neurological machine
to instill an optimally coherent set of beliefs and remove the rest. Would
208
Structure of justification and knowledge

that be rational from the point of view of maximizing the justification of
one’s beliefs? I doubt this, particularly if, in seeking justification, we aim, as
we normally do, at discovering or retaining truths.
A coherentist might reply that if we are talking not only about justifica-
tion but also about knowledge, then we must give some special role to beliefs
(and perhaps dispositions to believe) grounded in experience and reason, for
if we ignore these sources we cannot expect our justified beliefs to be true,
hence cannot expect them to constitute knowledge.12
Now, however, we face what seems an artificial separation between what
justifies a belief and what is plausibly taken to count towards its truth. If,
because it implies truth, knowledge must in some way reflect experience or
reason, should not justification, which seems in some way to count toward
truth, also reflect them? Is it reasonable to suppose that what justifies a
belief may in no way count towards its truth?
It is not reasonable to separate justification and knowledge in this way
(even though in some ways they are very different); nor have coherentists
generally thought that it is (though some have held a justification-based
coherence theory of truth of a kind to be discussed in Chapter 8). Often,
what motivates asking for a justification of a belief is doubt that it is true;
and if so, then the view that what justifies a belief has no tendency whatever
to count toward its truth seems plainly mistaken. Moreover, if we can know
a priori, as I believe may be possible (and will explore in Chapter 10), that
perceptual and rational grounding of beliefs count, in some way, toward
their truth, why may we not know equally well that they count toward
justifying beliefs?
Moderate foundationalism
There is far more to say about both foundationalism and coherentism. But if
what has emerged here is on the right track, then the problems confronting
coherentism are more serious than those confronting foundationalism. The
most serious problems for foundationalism are widely taken to be the diffi-
culties of specifying source conditions for justification and knowledge and,
second, of accounting, on the basis of those sources and plausible transmis-
sion principles, for all that we seem to know. The first of these problems is
addressed in Part One, which describes the basic sources and illustrates how
they generate direct – though not indefeasible – knowledge, and direct
(though again not generally indefeasible) justification. The second problem
is treated in Chapter 6, which indicates many ways in which, even without
actual inferences, knowledge and justification can be transmitted from
beliefs which are justified, or represent knowledge, by virtue of being
grounded in the basic sources, to other beliefs. Both problems are difficult,
and they have not been completely solved here. But enough has been said to
make clear along what lines they can be dealt with in a foundationalist
framework.
The architecture of knowledge
209

The role of coherence in moderate foundationalism
Still another problem for foundationalism is the difficulty of accounting for
the place of coherence in justification. But this is not a crippling difficulty
for the kind of foundationalism I have described, which need not restrict the
role of coherence any more than is required by the regress argument. Indeed,
while (pure) coherentism grants nothing to foundationalism beyond perhaps
its underlying psychological picture of how our belief systems are struc-
tured, foundationalism can account for some of the insights of coherentism,
for instance the point that we need a coherence theory of the acquisition and
function of concepts.
More positively, foundationalism can acknowledge a significant role for
coherence in relation to justification and can thereby answer one traditional
coherentist objection. I have in mind a kind of moderate foundationalism: a
foundationalist view of knowledge or justification which (1) takes the justi-
fication of foundational beliefs to be at least typically defeasible; (2) is not
deductivist, that is, does not demand that principles governing the inferential
transmission of knowledge or justification be deductive (i.e., require entail-
ment as opposed to probability as a condition for transmission); and (3)
allows a significant role for coherence by requiring, not that inferentially
justified beliefs derive all their justification from foundational ones, but
only that they derive enough of it from the latter so that they would remain
justified if any other justification they have were eliminated.13 Some
versions are more moderate than others, but the most plausible ones give
coherence at least two roles.
The first role moderate foundationalism may give to coherence, or strictly
speaking to incoherence, is negative: incoherence may defeat justification or
knowledge, even of a directly justified (foundational) belief, as where my
justification for believing I may be hallucinating prevents me from
knowing, or even remaining justified in believing, that the green field is
before me. (If this is not ultimately a role for coherence itself, it is a role
crucial for explaining points stressed by coherentism.)
Second, moderate foundationalism can employ a principle commonly
emphasized by coherentists, though foundationalists need not grant that the
justification or truth of the principle is based on coherence and will tend to
treat it as a transmission principle accounting for generation of inferential
justification or as a combinatorial principle applying to the simultaneous
testimony of sources of non-inferential justification. I refer to an independence
principle: that the larger the number of independent mutually consistent
factors one believes to support (or to constitute evidence for) the truth of a
proposition, the better one’s justification for believing it (other things being
equal). This principle can explain, for instance, why my justification for
believing that the box of steaks is from the Smiths increases as I acquire new
beliefs, each of which I believe independently supports that conclusion.14 In
part, the idea is that evidential relations generate coherence; hence by giving
the former a justificatory role, foundationalism can account for a good many
210
Structure of justification and knowledge

of the cases in which coherence appears to yield justification. That appear-
ance may be due not to coherence itself, but to its basis in the kinds of
elements foundationalism takes to ground justification.
Similar principles consistent with foundationalism can accommodate
other cases in which coherence enhances justification, say those in which a
proposition’s explaining, and thereby cohering with, something one justifi-
ably believes tends to confer some degree of justification on that proposition.
Moderate foundationalism and the charge of dogmatism
Moderate foundationalism contrasts with strong foundationalism, which, in
one form, is deductivist, takes foundational beliefs as indefeasibly justified,
and allows coherence only a minimal role. To meet these conditions, strong
foundationalists may reduce the basic sources of justification to reason and
consciousness. The easiest way to do this is to take the skeptical view
(considered in Chapter 10) that our only justified beliefs are either a priori
or introspective.
Moreover, since strong foundationalists are committed to the indefeasi-
bility of foundational justification, they would not grant that incoherence
can defeat the justification of foundational beliefs. They would also refuse to
concede to coherentism, and hence to any independence principle they
recognize, any more than a minimal positive role, say by insisting that if a
belief is supported by two or more independent cohering sources, its justifi-
cation is increased at most additively, that is, at most by bringing together
the justification transmitted separately from each relevant basic source.15
By contrast, what moderate foundationalism denies regarding coherence
is only that it is a basic source of justification. Coherence by itself is not
sufficient for justification. Thus, the independence principle does not apply
to sources that have no justification. At most, it allows coherence to raise the
level of justification originally drawn from other sources to a level higher
than it would have if those sources were not mutually coherent.
Similarly, if inference is a basic source of coherence (as some coherentists
seem to have believed), it is not a basic source of justification. It may lead to
justification, as where one strengthens one’s justification for believing
someone’s testimony by inferring the same point from someone else’s. But
inference alone does not generate justification: I might infer any number of
propositions from several I already believe merely through wishful thinking;
yet even if I thus arrive at a highly coherent set of beliefs, I have not thereby
increased my justification for believing any of them. My premises, based in
the way they are on desire, are ill-grounded.
At this point it might occur to one that the main problems faced by
coherentism could be solved by taking coherence with experience to be required
by coherentism as a condition for the coherence of a body of beliefs of the
kind we normally have. This is, to be sure, not how coherence is characteris-
tically understood by coherentists; they typically take it to be a relation
The architecture of knowledge
211

among beliefs or their propositional contents or other items that may be said
to be true or false, or some combination of these.16 Might it be, however,
that leading coherentists misrepresent the resources of their own theory?
Could they claim, for instance, that if my visual experience contains an
appearance of a printed page, then my believing there is one before me
coheres with my experience and is thus justified?
If we think this, we must ask how a coherentist view that gives a crucial
epistemological role to coherence of beliefs with experience differs from a
moderate foundationalism. One would, after all, be insisting that in order to
contain justified beliefs about the world, a person’s belief system would in
some sense depend on experience. This gives an essential role to foundations
of justification (or knowledge) – grounds of belief that are not true or false
and do not themselves admit of justification. It is true that the view would
also require coherence among beliefs as an essential element; but a moderate
foundationalist could agree that coherence is necessary within a body of
justified beliefs such as normal people have, yet insist that this coherence is
not a basic source of justification rather than, chiefly, a product of the
elements, such as grounding in experiential and rational sources, that are
basic.
If coherentists cannot show that coherence among beliefs is a basic source
of justification – as it is far from clear they can – then requiring coherence
with experience to make their theory plausible yields a view that is appar-
ently at least compatible with a moderate foundationalism and may well be
a version of that view. This may be a welcome conclusion for epistemologists
uncommitted on the foundationalism–coherentism issue, but it would be
unwelcome to philosophers in the coherentist tradition.17
Suppose, however, that moderate foundationalism is correct. We must not
suppose that this theory leads easily to an adequate, detailed picture of a
typical body of knowledge or justified belief. Moderate foundationalism as
so far described – mainly structurally – tells us only what sort of structure a
body of knowledge or of justified belief has. It says that if one has any
knowledge or justified belief, then one has some direct knowledge or
directly justified belief, and any other knowledge or justified belief one has
is traceable to those foundations. A belief direct and foundational at one
time may be indirect and non-foundational at another; it may gain or lose
justification; it may have any kind of content; and some foundational beliefs
may be false or unjustified or both.
By leaving this much open, however, moderate foundationalism avoids a
narrow account of what is needed for knowledge and justification and allows
many routes to their acquisition. For similar reasons, it avoids dogmatism, in
the sense of an attitude of self-assured certainty, especially concerning claims
that are neither self-evident nor obvious. In addition to avoiding this attitu-
dinal dogmatism, it rejects, for the same sorts of reasons, at least one version of
epistemological dogmatism – the one ascribing to us indefeasible justification,
epistemic certainty, or the like, where these attributions are unwarranted by
212
Structure of justification and knowledge

our evidence. For moderate foundationalism allows alternative kinds of foun-
dational beliefs for different people and under different circumstances; and,
by acknowledging the imperfect reliability of the experiential sources and of
many inferences from the beliefs they generate, it also explains why it is so
difficult to know that one has knowledge or justified belief, and hence
important to be open to the possibility of mistakes.
Moderate foundationalism even allows that a person may not always be
able to see the truth of a self-evident proposition; one might, for instance,
lack the conceptual resources for adequately understanding it. This should
induce humility about how extensive our knowledge is even regarding what
is in principle readily known. Ignorance can occur where one would least
expect it. The position also treats reason as a fallible source of belief: we can
easily take a false proposition to be true on the basis of a specious sense of its
being a priori. This should induce humility about how confident we are
entitled to be. Error can occur where it might seem impossible.
Foundationalism is committed to unmoved movers; it is not committed to
unmovable movers. It leaves open, moreover, just what knowledge is, and
even whether there actually is any. These questions must still be faced.
Notes
1 Clearly, there could be devices or strategies by which one can manipulate one’s beliefs;
what I deny is that one can control belief “at will” (simply by willing it) the way one can
normally raise an arm at will. The point is not that the will has no power over belief. For
wide-ranging critical discussion of doxastic voluntarism see William P. Alston, ‘The
Deontological Conception of Epistemic Justification,’ Philosophical Perspectives 2 (1983),
257–99; my ‘Doxastic Voluntarism and the Ethics of Belief,’ Facta Philosophica I, 1
(1999), 87–109 and reprinted in Matthias Steup (ed.), Knowledge, Truth, and Duty
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2001); and, for critical discussion of Alston’s position,
Steup’s contribution to that collection.
2 There is dispute about whether people can have infinite sets of beliefs. I have offered
some reasons for doubting this (and cited some of the relevant literature) in
‘Dispositional Beliefs and Dispositions to Believe,’ Nous 28 (1994), 419–34.
3 Granted, one could look at the formulation, say by tracing it along a mile-long print-out,
and believe that it expresses a truth; but the point is that one could not grasp, and so
could not believe, the truth that it expresses. Of course, if we are talking about infinity,
the relevant formulations would approach an infinite number of miles in length. For an
extensive discussion of the prospects for epistemological infinitism, see Peter D. Klein,
‘Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reasons,’ Philosophical Perspectives 13
(1999).
4 In a well-argued and highly instructive paper on the question whether inferential knowl-
edge must be grounded in knowledge of an appropriate premise, Claudio de Almeida
(taking off from an example of Peter Klein’s) argues that there are important exceptions.
Here is a representative case. The trustworthy department secretary told me, last
Thursday (and knew), that I have an appointment this Friday. Now, asked whether I am
free at the relevant time Friday, I say ‘No, the secretary told me on Wednesday that I
have an appointment then’. Plainly, I can know I have the appointment, though the
belief I express now as a basis is false, since I have the wrong day. There is much to say,
but three points must serve. (1), on my account of testimony-based knowledge (ch. 5), I
would know that I have the appointment non-inferentially. The false belief that she told
The architecture of knowledge
213

me on Wednesday is offered as a ground of my belief that I have the appointment on
Friday, but the ground on which I know that is her attesting to it. (2) Suppose my statement
‘She told me on Wednesday that I have an appointment then’ does in a way express my
ground. The ground may be that she told me that I have an appointment then, with ‘on
Wednesday’ functioning like a parenthesis, such as ‘and by the way it was on
Wednesday’. Then I do know my ground. (3) What if I have forgotten her testimony, am
told that she gave it on Wednesday, and infer, apparently from this falsehood, that I have
the appointment. Now we need a theory. One move is to make a distinction useful in any
case, between the ground’s being, as in (2), that she told me that I have an appointment
then, and its being something like: It was on Wednesday that she told me that I have an
appointment then (where the time is important in my thinking). In the latter case I
would not know; in the former I presumably would. Still, do I, in the former case, believe
the true proposition that she told me that I have an appointment then, or am I only
disposed to believe it (actually believing only the larger proposition “containing” it)?
This is just one of the important questions de Almeida forces us to explore. See
‘Knowledge and Benign Falsehoods,’ forthcoming.
5 An item of knowledge can occur in more than one epistemic chain, as where you have
two entirely independent sets of premises showing the same conclusion. The regress
argument requires one chain, but it allows more than one.
6 We may also draw the more general conclusion that if there is any knowledge, there is
some direct knowledge. This more general conclusion follows only on the assumption
that if there is any knowledge, then there is at least one knower who has it. This is self-
evident for the main sense of ‘knowledge’; but if we think of certain books as containing
knowledge and then imagine the possibility that all knowers cease to exist while the
books live on, it may then seem that there would be (residual) knowledge without there
being any knowers (though even here there would have been knowers). Such unpossessed
knowledge is discussed in some detail in Chapter 9.
7 See Aristotle’s Posterior Analytics, Books I and II. His argument is importantly different in
at least one respect: he spoke of the foundational items as “indemonstrable,” which
implies that there cannot be any deeper foundations. The regress argument as stated here
implies only that one’s foundational knowledge is of something that (at the time) one has
not demonstrated. This leaves open that one might later demonstrate it by appeal to
something “deeper.”
8 The possibility of combining psychological foundationalism with epistemological coher-
entism seems quite open to Wilfrid Sellars, a leading coherentist. See, for example, his
‘The Structure of Knowledge,’ in Hector-Neri Castañeda (ed.), Action, Knowledge, and
Reality: Essays in Honor of Wilfrid Sellars (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1975).
9 This is the position taken by Laurence BonJour in The Structure of Empirical Knowledge
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1985). It should perhaps be noted that he
has rejected the coherentist epistemology of this book in, e.g., ‘The Dialectic of
Foundationalism and Coherentism,’ in John Greco and Ernest Sosa (eds), The Blackwell
Guide to Epistemology (Oxford: Blackwell, 1999).
10 Does the fact that the topmost eastern section of the wheel is in place not explain why
the topmost western section, which is contiguous with it, is in place, and isn’t the
converse also true? Only, I suspect, if this comes to saying that given these facts we
can infer that each is in place. Why each is in place is explained by the same thing:
the overall pattern of forces including the support provided by the ground. Each is in
place because the gravitational force pulling it backward and downward is matched
by a gravitational force pulling it forward and holding it up: both phenomena are
indeed explained by the “same thing” – the qualitatively identical forces – but not by
the same thing in the sense of the other, qualitatively identical phenomenon.
Explanation by two phenomena that are “exactly alike” exhibits a kind of mutuality,
but it is not the same as explanation of each of two exactly similar phenomena in
terms of the other.
214
Structure of justification and knowledge

11 On the topic of practices of justification, Ludwig Wittgenstein’s On Certainty (Oxford,
1969) is a valuable source. He is often cited as stressing that there comes a point at which
one says “My spade is turned” (a foundationalist metaphor).
12 This line of thought is suggested by what Laurence BonJour, in The Structure of Empirical
Knowledge, calls “the observation requirement.” For extensive discussion of the theory he
puts forth there and of coherentism in general, especially that of Keith Lehrer, see John
W. Bender (ed.), The Current State of the Coherence Theory (Dordrecht and Boston: Kluwer,
1989).
13 A slightly different formulation may be required if, for the sorts of reasons to be given in
Chapter 8, knowledge does not entail justification; but the formulation given will serve
here. Here and elsewhere the reference to foundational beliefs is to those that are justi-
fied; I also omit an other-things-equal clause appropriate after the ‘if’ in clause (3). For a
highly detailed statement of a moderate foundationalism, see Paul K. Moser, Knowledge
and Evidence (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1989).
14 The independence principle cited here is not the only one that seems sound. For instance,
it is plausible to hold that one’s justification for a proposition also rises (other things
being equal) the larger the number of factors one is appropriately aware of that do support
it, whether or not one believes them to do so. I should add that (as I suggest below) the
independence principle should probably specify factors one justifiedly takes to support the
belief in question. Certainly more justification is conferred (other things equal) by factors
justifiedly taken to support the belief than by those unjustifiedly taken to do so.
15 It is a strong foundationalism, especially the kind found in Descartes’ Meditations, that is
influentially criticized by Richard Rorty in Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature (Princeton,
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1979). Many of Rorty’s criticisms do not hold for the
moderate foundationalism developed in this chapter. His doubts about the very idea that
the mind is a “mirror of nature,” however, may cut against at least the majority of plau-
sible epistemological theories, depending on how much in built into the metaphor of a
mirror. This book as a whole can be seen as a case for some kind of realist epistemology,
and some aspects of Rorty’s challenge are treated at least implicitly in Chapter 10 and in
parts of other chapters, such as the sections on phenomenalism and truth.
16 Keith Lehrer provided an influential statement of this view in Knowledge (Oxford: The
Clarendon Press, 1974): having said that “complete justification is a matter of coherence
within a system of beliefs” (p. 17, emphasis added), he added, “There is no exit from the
circle of ones [sic] own beliefs from which one can sally forth to find some exquisite tool
to measure the merits of what lies within the circle of subjectivity” (pp. 17–18). Such
sensory states as an impression of green grass are among the excluded tools. Further indi-
cations of why a coherentist view disallows appeal to experiential and other
non-truth-valued states as justificatory are given by Wilfrid Sellars, ‘The Structure of
Knowledge,’ in Hector-Neri Castañeda (ed.) Action, Knowledge, and Reality (Indianapolis:
Bobbs-Merrill, 1975); and Donald Davidson, ‘A Coherence Theory of Truth and
Knowledge,’ in Dieter Hendrich (ed.), Kant oder Hegel (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 1983),
432–8. It should be noted that Davidson has written an afterword to this paper. Here he
says, regarding “The main thrust of ‘A Coherence Theory,’” that “the important thesis for
which I argue is that belief is intrinsically veridical.” See ‘Afterthoughts, 1987,’ in Sven
Bernecker and Fred Dretske (eds), Knowledge: Readings in Contemporary Epistemology
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), p. 427. This view bears a foundationalist inter-
pretation: beliefs, being intrinsically veridical, are as such prima facie justified, even if
weakly; hence they are defeasibly foundational. Incoherence would defeat them; but
particularly if, as Davidson says here, “Coherence is nothing but consistency” (p. 427), it
would not be plausible to take coherence to be a basic source of justification.
17 The idea of enriching coherentism by making coherence with experience an essential
element in coherentist justification is proposed and defended by Jonathan L. Kvanvig
and Wayne D. Rigg, ‘Can a Coherence Theory Appeal to Appearance States?,’
Philosophical Studies 67 (1992), 197–217. This paper deserves study. Here I raise just one
The architecture of knowledge
215

difficulty. Although they grant that “coherentism arises historically because of dissatis-
faction with the foundationalists’ picture” (p. 199), they characterize a foundationalist
warranting relation in a way that does not distinguish it from the relation coherentists
take to confer justification.
One such account could claim that a belief is foundationally warranting just in case
the evidence for it is an appearance state involving the same content as that of the
belief. For example … perhaps my belief that something is red is intrinsically
warranting because it appears to me that something is red.
(p. 199)
A foundationalist will not take an appearance state, such as a sensory impression of red,
to have the same content as a belief: a propositional content in virtue of which the belief
is true or false, e.g. “that something is red.” Rather, the experiential content is qualita-
tive; it may be appropriate to certain propositions but is not itself truth-valued. Such a
content might be an appearance of red but not the proposition that “it appears to me that
something is red.” The latter is a candidate to enter into a coherence relation with beliefs
or their contents. Perhaps Kvanvig and Rigg are thinking of experiential justification of
belief as possibly working through beliefs or other states which have propositional
content and truth value; this could explain why they find such justification available to
coherentism. If, however, experiential justification could work that way, then one could
still have a coherent system of beliefs that goes against experience. Beliefs about one’s
states – such as the (appearance) “belief that something is red” – would have to play a
role, but those states would not be any kind of bedrock grounding these beliefs, even if
the beliefs happened to be based on them. The problem, then, is that either the coher-
ence-with-experience approach assimilates coherentism to a kind of foundationalism or it
fails to capture the role of experience, which seems essential for a body of justified beliefs
about the world.
216
Structure of justification and knowledge

Part Three
The nature and scope of
justification and knowledge


8
The analysis of knowledge
• Knowledge and justified true belief
• Knowledge as the right kind of justified true belief
Dependence on falsehood as a defeater of justification
Knowledge and certainty
Knowing and knowing for certain
Knowing and making certain
• Naturalistic accounts of the concept of knowledge
Knowledge as appropriately caused true belief
Knowledge as reliably grounded true belief
• Problems for reliability theories
The specification problem
Reliability and defeat
Reliability, relevant alternatives, and luck
• Knowledge and justification
The apparent possibility of clairvoyant knowledge
Natural knowledge
• Internalism and externalism in epistemology
Some varieties of internalism and externalism
The overall contrast between internalism and externalism
Internalist and externalist versions of virtue epistemology
The internality of justification and the externality of knowledge
• Justification and truth
The correspondence theory of truth
Minimalist and redundancy accounts of truth
The coherence theory of truth
The pragmatic theory of truth
• Concluding proposals

8
The analysis of knowledge
Knowledge arises in experience. It emerges from reflection. It develops
through inference. It exhibits a distinctive structure. The same holds for
justified belief. But what exactly is knowledge? If it arises and develops in
the way I have described, then knowing is at least believing. But clearly it is
much more. A false belief is not knowledge. A belief based on a lucky guess
is not knowledge either, even if it is true.
Can something be added to the notion of true belief to yield an analysis of
what (propositional) knowledge is, that is, to provide a kind of account of
what constitutes knowledge? Plato addressed a similar question. He formu-
lated an account of knowledge (though in the end he did not endorse it)
which has sometimes been loosely interpreted as taking knowledge to be
justified true belief.1
For Plato, ‘belief’ would represent a grade of cognition lower than knowl-
edge. But if we substitute, as most interpreters of Plato would – minimally
– have us do, some related term for ‘belief,’ say ‘understanding,’ then the
account may be nearer to what Plato held and closer to some of the histori-
cally influential conceptions of knowledge. In any case, the notion of belief
is, as we have seen, wide and subtle; and one or another form of the justified
true belief account prevailed during much of this century until the 1960s.2
What can be said for it?
Knowledge and justified true belief
What is not true is not known. When we claim we know something and
later discover that it is false, we sometimes say things like ‘Well, I certainly
believed it’; but we do not seriously maintain that we knew it. One might
say ‘I just knew it,’ but this is usually taken to exhibit an inverted commas
use of ‘know,’ a use in which ‘know’ stands in for something like ‘was
certain’. If we seriously insisted we knew it, others would likely conclude
that (for instance) we do not really believe that it is false, or perhaps that we
are unaware that we are using ‘I knew’ to mean ‘I felt great confidence,’ as in
‘I just knew I’d win – I still can’t really believe I lost’. In cases like the
commonsense ones just described, when truth is subtracted from what
appears to be knowledge, what remains is not knowledge but belief.
These points suggest that knowledge is at least true belief. Admittedly,
people who feel certain of something, for instance that a friend is angry, may
say that they do not believe it, but know it. This is best understood,
however, to mean that they do not merely believe it, but know it.

Similarly, it may be misleading to say ‘I believe he’s angry’ where I think
I also know it – unless I intend, for instance, to indicate caution or perhaps
polite disagreement with someone. But it is often misleading to say less
than one is fully entitled to say; and my saying that I believe he is angry
may be misleading precisely because I am expressing only part of what I am
fully entitled to express, namely that I know he is. For I am thereby
suggesting that I do not know, or perhaps even doubt, that he is. If this
point is what explains why my statement is misleading, that confirms that
knowing implies believing.
Does knowing something also imply justifiedly believing it? If it does,
that would explain why a true belief based on a lucky guess is not knowl-
edge. If, from a distance, I see Jim walk hurriedly down the hall and simply
guess that he is angry, I am not justified in believing that he is angry. If my
belief turns out to be true, it still does not constitute knowledge. That fact
seems explainable by its lack of justification. Now suppose I go by his office
and see him briskly shuffling papers and angrily mumbling curses. At this
point I might come to know that he is angry; and my acquiring knowledge
that he is can be explained by my having acquired evidence which justifies
my true belief that he is.
Still, could a true belief that is not justified constitute knowledge?
Suppose I simply see Jim briskly shuffling papers as I pass his office, but do
not hear any curses. A bit later, I see him walk hurriedly down the hall.
Given that I know his fiery temperament, I might have just enough
evidence so that I have some reason to believe he is angry, even though I am
not quite justified in believing this. Might I now have a kind of low-grade
knowledge that he is angry? This is doubtful. My evidence for believing this
is not firm. But the case does show this much: that as our evidence for a true
belief mounts up in a way that brings us closer to justification for holding
it, we also tend to get closer to knowledge. These and similar points support
the view that justified belief is an element in knowledge. This view is highly
plausible, and – for now – I want to assume it.
We are, then, on the way toward an analysis of knowledge. For it looks as
if we have a very substantive threefold necessary condition for (propositional)
knowledge. Specifically, it seems that knowledge is at least justified true
belief: that we know something only if we believe it, it is true, and our
belief of it is justified. Still, a correct, illuminating analysis, one that
provides a good account of the nature of what is being analyzed, must also
provide sufficient conditions. It might be true that I know something only if
I justifiedly and truly believe it, yet false that if I justifiedly and truly
believe something, I know it.
It apparently is false that if one has a justified true belief, one (always) has
knowledge. Suppose that when I first visit the Wallaces I have no idea that
they have a photographic collection which includes very realistic, life-size
pictures of themselves. When I approach the doorway to their living room
down a long hallway, I see, just twelve feet before me, and constituting all I
The analysis of knowledge
221

can see through the doorway, a life-size picture of Jane, standing facing me
and smiling like the good hostess she is, with the background in the picture
looking just like the living room’s rear wall. I say ‘hello’ before I get close
enough to realize that I see only a photograph of her taken against the back-
ground of that very wall. I discover that the picture is so lifelike that this
happens to everyone who knows Jane and enters unaware that there is such a
photograph. I might thus be quite justified, for a moment, in my belief that
Jane is opposite me. As it happens, however, Jane is standing opposite me –
in the next room, right behind the wall on which the picture is hung. My
belief that she is opposite me is thus true, as well as justified. But I do not
know that she is opposite me.3
This example shows that if we analyze knowledge as justified true belief,
our analysis is too broad. How might we improve it? If we think we are on
the right tracking taking justification to be crucial, we can restrict the kind
or degree of justification involved. We might, however, suspect that justifi-
cation is not so important after all, but only correlated with something that
is central. We might then seek an account of knowledge in which justifica-
tion is not central to understanding knowledge. There are many approaches
of both kinds. I want to consider two of each, starting with the “justifica-
tionist” accounts.
Knowledge as the right kind of justified true belief
In the photographic case, something seems wrong with the kind of justifica-
tion I have. It is sometimes said to be defeated, where this is not to say that
it is undermined or overridden, as in the more common cases of defeated
justification we have so far noted, but rather (in part) that it is prevented
from playing what seems to be its normal role in such a case, namely,
rendering a true belief knowledge. Contrast this kind of defeat of justifica-
tion with the more common kind that undermines or overrides justification
– as where one discovers a witness one had believed was lying and is thus no
longer justified in believing the testimony. Call the former epistemic defeat: it
eliminates the power of the justification to turn a true belief that acquires
that justification into knowledge. In that sense, it vitiates the justification,
eliminating its characteristic power to raise the status of a merely true belief
to that of knowledge. Perhaps, then, with epistemic as opposed to justifica-
tional defeat in mind, knowledge might be analyzed as undefeatedly justified
true belief.4 This idea is well worth exploring.
Dependence on falsehood as a defeater of justification
How is (epistemic) defeat to be characterized? One natural view is that the
justification of a belief is defeated provided the belief depends on a false-
hood. A dependence on falsehood is a bad thing from the point of view of
the candidacy of a belief to constitute knowledge. This is in part because,
222
Nature of justification and knowledge

even where a belief which depends on falsehood is true, that may be just by
good luck. But as the lifelike photograph example shows, a belief true just
by good luck does not constitute knowledge. A belief might depend on
falsehood in either or both of the following ways.
First, a belief might depend on a falsehood in the sense that it would not
be justified except on the basis of one’s being (situationally) justified in
believing a falsehood about the subject in question (say, Jane). This is a kind
of justificational dependence (dependence for justification), which I will call
presuppositional dependence. In the photographic case, my belief that Jane is
opposite me depends presuppositionally on the falsehood that I am seeing
her directly (or at least in a way that does not misrepresent her location).
The point is not that in order to know she is opposite me I would have to
believe the false proposition that I am seeing her directly; rather, my belief
that she is opposite me epistemically depends (depends for its claim to be
knowledge) on this proposition. Not only does it seem to be because this
proposition is false that I do not know Jane is opposite me; it is also the
kind of proposition whose truth is central for the grounding of my would-be
knowledge and whose falsity I would tend to be surprised to discover.
The second case is psychological dependence: a belief might psychologically
depend on a falsehood in the causal sense that one has the belief by virtue of
holding it on the basis of believing a falsehood. In this kind of case my
would-be knowledge is sustained by a false belief, which is a kind of rotten
foundation. My belief about Jane would psychologically depend on falsehood
if, say, I knew about the Wallaces’ life-size photographs, yet trusted my
vision and believed that Jane was opposite me on the basis of concluding
that this time I was viewing her directly. I am not viewing her directly, so
my underlying belief is false.
Unfortunately, the appeal to a false presupposition, or even to other kinds
of dependence on falsehood, may not always explain why a justified true
belief is epistemically defeated and fails to constitute knowledge. Recall the
sweepstakes with a million coupons. You might have a justified true belief
that you will lose, but you do not know that you will. You might win. What
falsehood defeats your justification here? You are not making any mistake,
but simply do not have the right kind of positive ground for knowledge.
It might seem that your belief that you will lose the sweepstakes depends
on the false proposition that the outcome of a chance process can be known
beforehand by merely calculating odds. But does your belief depend on this?
You might reject this and still believe – even justifiedly – that you will lose,
whereas I could not reject the false presupposition that I see Jane directly
and still believe (justifiedly, at least) that she is in front of me.
We cannot plausibly say, then, that in the sweepstakes example either
your belief or its justification depends on the falsehood about foreknowledge
of chance outcomes. Points like these do not show that no version of the
undefeatedly justified true belief analysis of knowledge will work. One
might, for instance, try to explain why justification is epistemically defeated
The analysis of knowledge
223

in the sweepstakes case even though it is based on as high a probability as
one likes. This effort may lead in the direction of the next justificationist
account of knowledge I want to consider here.
Knowledge and certainty
The sweepstakes example suggests that knowledge requires one’s having
conclusively justified true belief: belief justified in such a way that what justifies
it guarantees its truth. For it is plausible to claim that if the evidence guar-
antees that you will lose, say because it includes knowledge of the
sweepstakes being fixed in favor of someone else, then you would know you
will lose. Moreover, conclusive justification is precisely the kind not plau-
sibly thought to be liable to defeat (a point that a defeasibility view of
knowledge can also make use of).
Different theories offer different accounts of a guarantee of truth (as will
be apparent when we discuss skepticism in Chapter 10). The sweepstakes
example supports the view that the right kind of guarantee is not simply a
matter of high probability. After all, we can have as many coupons as we like
and you would still not know yours will lose. Thus, no matter how probable
it is that you will lose, your justification is not sufficient for knowledge.5
This approach would not entail that extremely high probability could never
suffice for knowledge, say where it represents the likelihood of there being
print before us given our present experience of reading this; but in that kind
of case there is apparently no randomizing mechanism whose outcome deter-
mines whether our beliefs are true. That kind of randomness, then, might be
said to rule out conclusive justification.
Another reason to think that knowledge requires conclusive justification
is that knowing is closely associated with certainty. When I wonder if I
know, I sometimes ask myself how I can be certain. I also sometimes wonder
if what I believe is certain. Particularly in the latter case, I am thinking of
the status of the proposition in question, not of psychological certainty, which
is, roughly speaking, great confidence of the truth of what one believes. If I
am confident enough that something is so, I am certain that it is (and
certain of it); and if I am certain of it, I am confident that it is so (and
certain that it is so).
Even ‘How can I be certain?’ does not concern only psychological
certainty. It typically means something like ‘How may I justifiedly be
(psychologically) certain?’ And if I say that it is not certain that your coupon
will lose, I am talking about propositional certainty, roughly, the certainty a
proposition has when there are extremely strong grounds for it, grounds that
guarantee its truth. I want to leave two things open here: first, what kinds of
grounds guarantee truth; second, how readily available the grounds must be,
if readily available at all, for instance whether ordinary reflection on what
evidence one has would reveal them. Saying that something is certain surely
implies that one thinks sufficient grounds are in some sense available, even
224
Nature of justification and knowledge

if only by a careful study of the matter and perhaps consulting others about
it. But for a proposition just to be certain, the kind of availability (if any) is
more difficult to assess.
Given these connections between knowledge and certainty, one might
hold that knowledge is constituted by conclusively justified true belief,
meaning that (1) the believer may justifiedly be psychologically certain of the
true proposition in question and (2) this proposition is so well-grounded as
to be itself propositionally certain. Knowledge constituted by such a justified
belief may be (and has been) called epistemic certainty.6
This analysis of knowledge seems too narrow. It would, for instance,
apparently rule out most knowledge based on testimony. If Jane tells me
that she wants to meet to discuss something, and I know her well and have
no good reason to doubt her word, may I not know that she wants to meet
with me? Yet I do not have conclusive justification nor does her testimony
render it certain that she wants to meet with me. Unlikely though it is,
error is barely possible for me; she could act out of character and deceive me
(or herself).
Knowing and knowing for certain
Does knowing imply, if not conclusive justification of the belief constituting
knowledge, then at least the certainty of the proposition known? In the case
described, I doubt that it is propositionally certain that Jane wants to meet
with me (but the notion of propositional certainty is vague, and it is often
difficult to tell whether it applies). My knowledge here is apparently not
knowledge of something that is certain. Indeed, we sometimes speak of
knowing something for certain, implying a contrast with simply knowing.
Imagine that Tom tells me that Jane has left town, but I believe him to be
mistaken. Someone probing my grounds for thinking Tom mistaken might
ask if I know for certain. This might be asked not from doubt about whether
I know, but to find out if the proposition that he is mistaken is certain,
perhaps because much hangs on it, as in a criminal trial, where I must
testify. It might also be asked from a desire to find out something about the
kind of grounds I have for the proposition. An answer would be that I just
brought her from the station. The existence of such cases suggests that what
is not known for certain still can be known.
It is interesting to compare knowing and knowing for certain with
knowing someone and knowing the person for a practical joker. We can
know a person who is a practical joker without knowing that the person is
one. If the parallel holds, it suggests we can know that p without knowing it
for certain.
Perhaps, however, what can be known at all can always be known for
certain, as I might come to know for certain – provided I do enough
checking into her motivation – that Jane wants to meet with me. But even
if what is knowable can be known for certain, it is doubtful (as examples to
The analysis of knowledge
225

be given will also suggest) that everything that is known is certain. Still, is
it even true that whatever is known must at least be such that it can be
certain? Our example suggests that knowledge need not meet this standard:
I might know that Jane wanted to meet even if she has just died and addi-
tional evidence – such as recollections by third parties, letters by her – on
the basis of which this can be certain, does not exist.
One might reply that knowledge is always of the sort of proposition that
can be certain. But consider propositions about the past, such as that a ship
sank in a certain lonely region in the Pacific Ocean. Perhaps these may be
knowable, yet not even be the sort of thing that can (for human beings, at
least) be certain (the evidence of its apparent traces at the bottom is good
enough for knowledge, but no further evidence, such as eye-witness
accounts, can be obtained regarding where it sank).
Knowing and making certain
Perhaps, however, these points show only that I cannot make certain that
Jane wants to meet with me. There might still be a basis for this proposition
which renders it (propositionally) certain. I will continue to leave open the
question of whether what is known is the sort of thing that can be certain,
since knowledge, not certainty, is my main concern here. But it will help, in
that connection, to explore how an understanding of the notion of making
certain may bear on the view that knowledge requires conclusive justifica-
tion.
If we can make certain of something that we already know, then there is
reason to think that conclusive justification is not required for knowledge.
Suppose I lock the back door and, as I get in my car, have a clear recollection
of doing so. Still, if someone asks me if I am absolutely sure I did, I may
truly believe I know I did, yet still check to make certain I did. Now where
we need to (or even can) make certain of something we know, it would
appear that it need not be either certain or conclusively justified. Getting
conclusive justification seems to be the main point of making certain,
though on some views the latter may be weaker, in that there may be cases
in which we make certain of something but still lack utterly conclusive
justification for it.
It might be replied that in the case where making certain consists in
getting further evidence, ‘make certain’ means not ‘make it certain’ but,
roughly, ‘make sure it is certain,’ and that if I really knew it, it was certain
in the first place. Let us assume for the sake of argument that ‘make certain’
means ‘make sure it is certain’. Now suppose I do not make certain that I
locked the door, because it begins to hail and I must leave before I can check
the door. This does not show that I do not know I locked the door; and, on
later finding that it was locked, I could be correct in saying that I was right
all along to think I knew. So, even if making certain were a matter of
making sure the proposition is certain, it does not seem either that one
226
Nature of justification and knowledge

needs to do this in order to know the proposition, or even that the proposi-
tion must be certain, in order to be known.
Moreover, supposing I did know all along that the door was locked, it
does not follow that this was certain all along. I had good reason, at least at
the time when I could not check, to think it was not certain. All things
considered, the possibility of making certain of what we already know
suggests that knowing a proposition does not entail its being certain.
Further, if, as seems to be the case, we can know something, yet make
certain it is so, then apparently we can also know it without being conclu-
sively justified in believing it.
Notice that similar points apply to what we know from memory. Even on
topics with respect to which our memory is highly reliable, the justification
our memory beliefs have is generally not conclusive. Even if I can recite a
stanza from memory, my justification for believing I have it right need not
be conclusive. Yet I may well know that I have it right, and confirm that I
do when I look it up to make certain I do and I find that it reads just as I
thought.
Naturalistic accounts of the concept of knowledge
Perhaps we should consider a quite different approach. Must we appeal to
the notion of justification to understand knowledge? Suppose we think of
knowing as registering truth, somewhat as a thermometer registers tempera-
ture. Knowledge, so conceived, results from the successful functioning of
our epistemic equipment, which consists above all of finely tuned percep-
tual, memorial, introspective, and rational instruments.
The thermometer analogy holds both for simple knowing – knowing, by
acquaintance as opposed to description, of persons and objects – and for objectual
knowing – knowing something to be a certain way – as well as for proposi-
tional knowing. But propositional knowing is my main topic here; and,
from a study of the chapter on perception, one could largely adapt to the
other cases what emerges about propositional knowledge.7
The view that knowledge consists in suitably registering truth goes
well with the idea that we are biological creatures with sense receptors
that gather information and with mental capacities that integrate it.
Perhaps, then, knowledge can be analyzed naturalistically, that is, using
only the kinds of concepts the sciences, especially the natural sciences, use
in understanding things. This is not by appeal to value-laden notions like
that of justification, but (largely) in terms of physical, chemical, biolog-
ical, and psychological properties, together with causal relations among
these.
I want to consider two naturalistic approaches. The first emphasizes the
role of causation in producing our knowledge, as with perceptual beliefs
caused by the perceived object. The second approach stresses the reliability
of the processes, such as seeing, through which knowledge arises.
The analysis of knowledge
227

Knowledge as appropriately caused true belief
On the causal theory, knowledge is true belief caused by something
connected with its truth in a way that makes it plausible to call the belief
knowledge. Roughly, knowledge is appropriately caused true belief, where
appropriate (causal) production of a belief is production of it in which the
fact, object, event, or other thing in virtue of which the belief is true plays a
certain role in generating or sustaining the belief.
In the examples of knowledge that best support the view, the belief in
question is apparently a case of knowledge because it is caused in a way that
guarantees its truth. Thus, I know that there is a green field before me
because the field itself plays a major part, through my vision, in causing me
to believe there is a green field before me. I know that Jane wants to meet
with me because her wanting to do so plays a major part in causing her to
say she does, and thereby in causing me to believe that she does. I know that
the stanza I recite from memory has four lines because its having them is a
major causal factor, operating through my memory, in my believing that it
does.
The causal view can even accommodate knowledge of the future. I know
that I am going to continue thinking about knowledge for a long time. That
truth (about the future) does not cause me to believe this; but that truth is
causally connected with my belief, and in a way that suggests why the belief
may be expected to be true. For what causally explains both why the proposi-
tion I believe about the future is true and why I believe it, is the same
element: my intending to continue thinking about knowledge. Here my
future-directed belief is knowledge, but not by virtue of being produced by
the thing it is about – my future thinking – for that has not occurred.
Does this view of knowledge of the future show that since the relevant
facts lie in the future, knowledge need not represent “the facts,” as the
commonsense view has it? The case need not be so interpreted. Representing
facts does not require being caused by them. Recall my belief about the
future. This belief constitutes knowledge, but not because what the belief is
about is the way the belief represents it and causes the belief, as where the
green field’s being before me causes me to believe that it is before me.
Rather, such a future-directed belief correctly represents what it is about in
part because the belief itself causes that state of affairs.
Moreover, the causal theory is right about this much: my belief that I will
continue thinking about knowledge is caused by something – my intention
to continue thinking about it – of a kind that makes it at least likely that I
will be as the belief represents me. Roughly, not only can knowledge be
produced by what is known, as in perceptual cases, so that knowledge is
related to what is known as effect to cause; both knowledge of certain facts and
the facts known can also be common effects of the same causes, as in the case of
knowledge of the future.
There are, however, serious troubles for the theory that knowledge is
appropriately caused true belief. One problem is how to apply the basic idea
228
Nature of justification and knowledge

– that what underlies the truth in question is a causal factor in the
grounding of the belief of that truth – to a priori knowledge. How might
what underlies the truth that if one tree is taller than another, then the
second is shorter than the first be causally connected with my believing this
truth? This truth is not (in general) perceptually known, nor is its status
dependent on any particular object in the world, as is the case with the
(empirical) knowledge to which the causal theory best applies.
It may be that the only way a truth can be causally connected with a
belief so as to render it knowledge is through a connection with something
in the world that does at least partly cause (or is at least partly an effect of)
the belief. The truth that there is a green field before me is about an object
that produces visual impressions in me. But the strictly a priori knowledge
just cited does not depend on trees in that way. It does not even depend on
there ever being any trees. It seems to be based simply on a grasp of the
concepts involved, above all that of a tree and that of height. My having this
grasp does not appear to imply causally interacting with those concepts
(supposing it is even possible to interact causally with concepts).8 This is not
to say that the belief has no causal ground, such as the comprehending
consideration of the relevant proposition. The problem is that the belief
seems to lack the kind of ground the causal theory requires.
Knowledge as reliably grounded true belief
There is another serious problem concerning the causal account, this time in
relation to empirical beliefs. When we understand it, we can see the ratio-
nale for a different way of understanding knowledge. As in many instances,
the trouble arises from examples of justified true beliefs that do not consti-
tute knowledge.
Consider a case in which something causes me to have a true belief, yet
that belief is not knowledge. Suppose Tom tells me, on the basis of his
knowing it, that Jim is angry, and as a result of his testimony I believe this.
My belief might be justified and true. But imagine that, although I have no
reason whatever to believe this about Tom, he is in general highly unreli-
able, and sometimes lies, in what he says about Jim. The mere fact of Tom’s
unreliability prevents me from knowing through his testimony that Jim is
angry. Even if Tom knows Jim is angry, and knows it because he observes
Jim acting angrily, his knowledge is not transmitted to me. For he might
well have said this even if Jim had merely acted, say, hurriedly, and was not
angry. (This shows that even if, as argued in Chapter 5, testimony transmits
knowledge to a belief based on it only if the attester knows the proposition
in question, it need not do so even when the attester does know it.)
It is important to see that although the causal connections here seem to
be what they usually are in testimony cases, I do not acquire knowledge
from Tom’s testimony. Jim’s anger causes Tom to believe him angry; Tom’s
belief (partly) causes his telling me that Jim is angry; his telling me this
The analysis of knowledge
229

causes me to believe it. But, though I have a justified true belief that Jim is
angry, I do not know it. For while Tom has it right this time, he is in
general unreliable regarding Jim.
The testimony example brings out something very revealing. It suggests
that the reason I do not know on the basis of Tom’s testimony is that it is
not reliable. By contrast, perception normally is reliable. Normally, at least,
we may justifiedly count on the beliefs it typically produces to be true.
Presumably perception is also reliable in the sense that the vast majority of
beliefs it produces are in fact true. Where there is a photograph that we are
unaware of, however, our perception through it is typically not reliable.
Cases of these sorts suggest that we might plausibly analyze knowledge as
reliably grounded true belief.9
Even a priori knowledge might well be accommodated on this view. For
it is at least normally produced by grasping concepts and their relations, or
by certain simple valid inference on the basis of beliefs grounded in such a
grasp; and these processes of producing belief seem reliable. It appears, then,
that in both the empirical and a priori cases, when we know, we have reli-
ably registered the truth.
To see how this approach works, recall Tom’s testimony about Jim.
Suppose that Tom is only very occasionally mistaken about Jim. Then might
I acquire knowledge on the basis of Tom’s testimony? A crucial question is
how reliable a belief-producing process, such as testimony, must be in order
to yield knowledge. The theory gives us no precise way to answer this.
The theory can be defended on this point, however, by noting that the
concept of knowledge is itself not precise. This means that there will be
times when, no matter how much information we have, we cannot be sure
whether someone knows or not, just as, because the term ‘bald’ is vague, we
cannot always be sure whether it applies, no matter how much information
we have (including the number of hairs on the person’s head). It might be
added that as the reliability of Jim’s testimony goes up, so does our inclina-
tion to say that I know on the basis of it. This seems to confirm the
reliability theory.
Problems for reliability theories
The reliability theory apparently does receive support from the kind of
correlation illustrated here: the tendency to count my true belief about Jim
as knowledge apparently varies with the tendency to regard the belief’s testi-
monial basis as reliable. But perhaps our underlying thought in so speaking
about the belief is that the more reliable Tom is, the better is my justifica-
tion for believing what he says. If so, then the reliability theory might give
the right results here because it draws on the role of justification as a
constituent in knowledge.
To be sure, neither reliabilists nor their justificationist critics need hold
that I must believe anything specific about Tom’s reliability in order to
230
Nature of justification and knowledge

acquire justified beliefs from his testimony. But it might be argued that my
knowledge has a presuppositional dependence on the proposition that he is
sufficiently reliable to justify my accepting his testimony, and that it is
either because this presupposition is false, or because I lack justification for
believing it, that my justification for believing his testimony is defeated in
the first place. Thus, it might be argued that even if the reliability account
is correct about the conditions a belief must meet to constitute knowledge,
its success may be due to its tacit dependence on the justificationist concepts
it seeks to abandon.
The specification problem
There is a different kind of problem that must also be faced by the relia-
bility theory. This difficulty is deeper than the question of how reliable a
process has to be in order to ground knowledge. It concerns how to specify
what is reliable in the first place. It will not do to say, for instance, simply
that the reliable processes we are talking about are mainly those by which
the experiential and rational sources of knowledge produce belief. This is
not obviously wrong, but it leaves too much undetermined.
Consider vision. Its reliability varies so much with conditions of observation
that it would be wrong to say without qualification that it is a reliable belief-
producing process. It might seem that we may say this. It is reliable in
producing beliefs in good light with the object of vision near enough rela-
tive to the visual powers of the perceiver. But this claim will not do
without qualification either. It does not rule out external interferences like
deceptive photographs, such as the one of Jane. It also fails to rule out
internal interferences like hallucinogenic drugs. These interferences might
produce false beliefs about objects which one clearly sees and concerning
which one also has many true beliefs, as where, because of brain damage,
one hallucinates a dark blight on a green tree which one otherwise sees
plainly as it is.
There are, moreover, so many possible factors that affect reliability that it
is not clear that we can list them all without using blanket terms such as
‘too far away’ as applied to the object, and ‘insufficiently attentive’ or ‘not
acute enough’ as applied to the perceiver. These terms are not only quite
vague; the more important point is that they may be argued to come to
something like ‘too far to be reliably (or justifiedly) judged,’ ‘too inattentive
to form reliable (or justified) beliefs,’ and ‘not acute enough for reliable (or
justified) judgment of the features of the object’. If so, their interpretation
may well depend on our already having a good philosophical understanding
of reliability (or justification), and they are thus unlikely to help us much in
clarifying reliability, or if they do, it is because we are relying on a different
theory.
Suppose we can devise a vocabulary that overcomes these problems.
Another, related difficulty may persist. Belief-production might be reliable
The analysis of knowledge
231

described in one way and unreliable described in another. Hence, even if we
are able to specify what, in general, a reliable belief-producing process is, we
need a way of deciding what reliable-process description to use in order to
understand a particular case. Recall my seeing Jane in the photograph and
thereby believing that she is opposite me. Suppose we say – what seems
correct – that my belief arises from a process of seeing someone in a photo-
graph that accurately shows the person’s features and general location. Then
my belief presumably should constitute knowledge. For the picture shows
her to be where she is: opposite me.
Suppose, on the other hand, we say something else that is true about
the grounding of my belief that Jane is opposite me: that the belief-
producing process is one of seeing a person in a picture which gives the
false impression that the person is directly in front of one. Then my belief
arising from the process is not reliably produced – since usually in such
cases the person is not opposite one at all – and the belief should thus not
be knowledge. The trouble is that both descriptions apply to the produc-
tion of my belief. Using one description, the theory says I know; using the
other, it says I do not.
How can the theory enable us to choose between the two correct reliable-
process descriptions, or justify our choosing whatever kind of description it
accepts? Call this the specification problem (or description problem; it is also
called the generality problem, since a major issue is how general the descriptive
terms should be). If we first have to decide whether I know that Jane is in
front of me by relying on some quite different understanding of knowledge
and only in that light can we frame a description, the theory would seem to
give us very limited help in understanding knowledge. For the theory itself
can apparently be put to work only insofar as we already understand knowl-
edge in the light of some alternative view, at least well enough to be in a
position to tell systematically, in a vast range of cases of true belief, whether
or not the belief constitutes knowledge.10
This point, however, might be said to show no more than that to use the
reliability view we need a good intuitive grasp of the concept of knowledge.
That seems acceptable. Let us accept it for the sake of argument.
The deeper point is that if we seek to clarify knowledge (or justification)
by appeal to reliable belief-grounding processes naturalistically understood,
then we need a way of explaining what those processes are without inadmis-
sibly appealing, in our explanation, to the concept of knowledge (or
justification). A belief that is knowledge should be such because it is reliably
grounded true belief; a reliable belief-grounding process should not be char-
acterized as the kind that yields, say, perceptual knowledge.11
Similarly, if we have to find the right reliable-process description in terms
of what I am justified in presupposing, say that I have direct visual access to
what is before me, then the theory works only insofar as it can exploit some
justificationist principles. In that case, it would be more accurately
described as a reliabilistic justification theory.
232
Nature of justification and knowledge

Reliability and defeat
Even when the degree of reliability of a belief-grounding process or state
seems very high and the process or state is normal, there can be a defeat of
would-be knowledge. On this score, the sweepstakes example also challenges
reliability theories of knowledge, as it does justificationist theories, and it,
too, illustrates the specification problem. Granted, we can characterize the
process grounding my belief that I will lose as one in which chance is
crucial, and thus claim that the process is not reliable. But since I hold just
one out of a million coupons, we might also truly describe it as a process that
yields true beliefs virtually 100 percent of the time – and we can get as high
a percentage as we like by increasing the number of coupons. Under this
description, the process sounds very reliable indeed; yet it does not produce
knowledge.
Moreover, if something like the former description of the belief-
grounding process is what the theory would have us use, say, ‘process in
which chance plays a crucial role in determining the truth of the belief,’ why
is that? A good answer cannot be that unless we call a process in which
chance plays a role unreliable, we cannot account for knowledge; for that
would just assume the reliabilist view that knowledge must be reliably
grounded.
In any event, even in perceptual knowledge chance may play a role. It
might be by chance that I see you on a passing train: you just happened to
be visible to me at the window as the train rushed past. This role of chance
leaves untouched whatever it is by virtue of which my vision yields knowl-
edge. So how are we to specify just what kind of role chance may play in the
grounding of knowledge?
There could well be a way around these problems. For one thing, we
might say that we often acquire knowledge when the belief constituting it is
acquired by chance, as where we just happen to be reminded of something
that enables us to finish a crossword puzzle or as in the case of seeing
someone on a passing train; but it may not be just a matter of chance that,
given one’s believing a proposition, it is true, as where we make a lucky
guess. Moreover, we might also point out that in the photographic case my
belief about Jane’s location does not causally depend on where she is, since I
would believe she is before me even if she were not behind the picture. But
this is only the beginning of a solution. For suppose I see her in a mirror,
again without knowing that I am not seeing her directly, perhaps because I
do not realize that there are trick mirrors at the yard party I am attending.
Imagine that she happens to be opposite me, behind the mirror in which I
see her, and is reflected into it by other mirrors I do not see (and have no
reason to think are there). Here my belief about where she is would depend
on where she is, since her movements would be reflected in the mirror in
which I see her; yet I would still not know that she is opposite me.
The case of my belief that I will lose the sweepstakes is similar. It
depends on my beliefs about, and in that way may indirectly depend on, the
The analysis of knowledge
233

mechanisms that actually result in my losing; but still the belief is not
knowledge. The dependence is of course not of the required kind. But now
we have another specification problem: how to describe the right kind of
dependence, often called a functional dependence. If there is a straightforward
and illuminating way to specify the right kind of dependence, it is not
obvious what it is. A useful metaphor for capturing it, however, is tracking.
As we track a person in the snow, causally guided by the path, our belief
system can be sensitive to the changing evidences that indicate the truth.12
Reliability, relevant alternatives, and luck
Even when the appropriate dependency is present, our would-be knowledge
can be defeated. To see this, we can alter the deceiving portrait case in which
my belief that Jane is before me, though justified and true, does not consti-
tute knowledge. We can change the case so that my belief that she is before
me does have the normal kind of dependence on her location, yet I still do
not know she is before me. Imagine that I do see her standing twelve feet
before me and recognize her as I always have, but this time her identical
twin, of whose existence I had no inkling, is a few feet to her right and
walking toward the very spot where I see Jane. If I have not learned to tell
them apart and would have taken Jane’s sister to be Jane had I been ten
seconds later, then I surely do not know that Jane is before me.
One way to see that I do not know it is Jane before me is to say that when
one knows something, it cannot be just good luck that one is right in
believing it, as it is here. But it is not easy to say what constitutes good luck
without resorting to something like the notion that you do not have a true
belief by mere good luck when your belief is reliably produced – or perhaps,
sufficiently reliably produced, or undefeatedly justified. Any of these ways of
solving the problem will take us back to problems not yet solved.
Some philosophers have dealt with such cases by arguing that the
problem in the identical twin case is the existence of a “relevant alternative”
to the situation that in fact renders one’s belief true, an alternative such that
one cannot discriminate between the truth of the proposition in question
(here, that Jane is before me) and the alternative situation (her sister’s being
before me). What makes this non-discriminable alternative relevant is the
twin’s moving toward my field of vision when I first enter, so that I am
about to be deceived. Knowledge is reliably grounded in roughly the sense
that the knower can discriminate any relevant alternative from the situation
known to exist.
In cases like this we could say that context is crucial. In the context in
which my friend’s identical twin whom I cannot tell from the friend is
present, I do not know that it is my friend before me. In the context in
which the twin is on another continent, I do. Hypothetical circumstances
can also create different contexts. Ordinarily I may be said to know that I
locked the door when I have the usual recollection of doing so. But what if
234
Nature of justification and knowledge

someone says that there have been burglaries recently and asks if I know I
did? Here the imagined problem creates a context in which the standard for
achieving knowledge is higher.
The two cases differ, however. Where a “relevant” alternative is actually
present and the person cannot discriminate it from the case truly believed to
obtain, that person does not have knowledge. Where, on the other hand, an
ascription of knowledge occurs in a context in which such a relevant alterna-
tive is simply envisaged, there may be no question about the person’s
exhibiting the reliability necessary for knowledge as ordinarily understood,
but an implication that greater reliability is needed to warrant ascribing
knowledge. The view that ascriptions of knowledge invoke different stan-
dards in different contexts is often called contextualism.13 But the reliabilist
view of knowledge that takes account of changes in reliability in different
contexts is also a kind of contextual position. Both views would have us be
cautious about claiming to know. But neither view entails that we do not in
fact have knowledge in some core sense in the kinds of cases in which we
unselfconsciously ascribe it to people.
To develop either contextual view, we must have a way of deciding what
alternatives are relevant; the mere possibility of Jane’s having a twin in the
indicated situation is apparently not – or we would never know our friends
are before us (a skeptical view we shall consider in Chapter 10). But suppose
Jane has a twin who never sees her, or is currently abroad, or on the way to
the party? And does it matter whether we realize there is such a person?
These are difficult questions of a kind that a good reliability theory should
adequately answer.14
I do not present any of these problems facing reliability theories of
knowledge as insurmountable. But reliability theories do face serious diffi-
culties, as do the other theories we have considered. One conclusion that
might be drawn here is that knowledge is simply unanalyzable. But that
certainly should not be inferred from the difficulties I have brought out.
They may be resolvable; and I have of course not discussed all the promising
lines of analysis of knowledge there are.15
One might also conclude that the concept of knowledge is simply so vague
that we should not hope for an account any more precise than, say, the view
that knowledge is appropriately justified true belief or, if one prefers a natu-
ralistic account, suitably produced true belief. But that conclusion would be
premature, particularly so far as it favors a justificationist account of knowl-
edge. Indeed, it is time to consider some very special cases that raise the
question of whether justification is even strictly necessary for knowledge.
Knowledge and justification
So far, I have spoken as if, although not all justified true belief constitutes
knowledge, all knowledge is at least justified true belief. But if the relia-
bility view is correct in any of its plausible forms, it should be possible for a
The analysis of knowledge
235

belief to be reliably grounded without the subject’s having grounds of the
right kind to yield justification. Let us explore some cases in which knowl-
edge without justification seems possible.
The apparent possibility of clairvoyant knowledge
Imagine a man who foretells the results of horse races. He always gets them
right, even though he never inspects the horses or their records, but merely
looks at them and their jockeys closely as they amble about and line up. He
has no idea why he believes what he does about the results; and after the
races he does not even check his accuracy. He does not bet nor especially care
who wins. He does, however, have definite conviction, and we can suppose
that it seems natural to him to believe what he does and that there is
nothing in his state of mind that would lead him to mistrust himself or
think he is guilty of wishful thinking or “crazy.” It is not clear just how such
a thing is possible; but it clearly is possible. There could be a way, for
instance, in which both his belief that a horse will win and its actually
winning are common effects of the same causes, so that his getting the right
answers is not lucky accident, but prophetic in a way, or perhaps sixth-
sensory.16
Now it appears that this man knows who will win the races. But he
surely does not have justified beliefs as to who will win. He would have them
if he kept track of his record and noted how well his forecasts turn out. But
he does not bother to check on his predictions regularly and has no idea that
he is constantly getting the results right. Perhaps we may also assume that
(as may be thought to be essential in the case) he also has no good justifica-
tion for thinking he is not reliable or not justified.17
One might protest that he has a kind of foresight which generates
directly justified beliefs on the basis of certain experiences, somewhat in the
way perception does. But is there any reason to say this, other than to
preserve the view that knowledge implies justified belief? There is no candi-
date for a sense organ, nor need he have sense impressions representing the
victorious horse crossing the finish line; and although we assume that there
is some causal process by which he receives the crucial information, we have
no idea what it is and cannot plausibly regard it as conferring justification,
particularly since the man is puzzled by his having the predictive beliefs at
all and has no good reason to think they are justified.
Natural knowledge
Another kind of case (and a more realistic one) argues for the same point. In
some of the literature of psychology we read of the idiot savant. Such people
are considered mentally deficient, yet they have, by nature, as it seems, some
extraordinary abilities. We may assume that they understand enough to
count and to use elementary mathematical concepts. Some of them can
236
Nature of justification and knowledge

apparently just reel off the answers to arithmetical problems that normally
require calculation in writing. Let us assume that they regularly get the
answers right, yet have no idea how they do so: it is not, for instance, by
rapidly doing in their head what we would laboriously do in our heads if our
memories enabled us to solve the problem mentally. Nor is it by rational
insight into the truths in question, such as one has for certain simple logical
or arithmetic propositions. It is not known how they do it, and let us assume
they have no sense of why they believe the answers in question.
Now consider the first time one of these people – Pip, let us say – reels
off the answer to a multiplication problem involving two three-digit
numbers. There is no time for him to realize he has a built-in ability or to
note a series of successes. (We may make a similar assumption about the
horse race predictor’s initial success.) But he believes the answer and might
also know it. For one thing, the belief is a manifestation of an arithmetic
ability that is stable and reliable. Again, one can say that there is a mathe-
matical sense that yields directly justified beliefs. But this seems an ad hoc
move, designed only to save the view which the example counters: the view
that knowing entails justifiedly believing.
If we all turned out to have this mathematical ability under certain
conditions, such as an impression of the proposition as true (if only in the
form of an image of it written in boldface), then we might come to believe
that there is an arithmetic sense which generates such directly justified
beliefs. Perhaps that shows that our concept of justification might evolve;
but it does not show that the arithmetic beliefs now in question are justi-
fied.
If, as seems likely, these beliefs and those of the horse race predictor are
knowledge, they are special cases. We might call at least the latter natural
knowledge, since it seems rooted in the nature of its possessors and does not
depend on their having been trained, or having learned much beyond what
is needed to have the concepts required for holding the relevant arithmetic
beliefs, or on their using either their senses or, so far as we can tell, their
powers of reason. But even if natural knowledge is rare, its possibility would
show that justified belief is not necessarily a constituent in knowledge.
If there can be natural knowledge, that possibility may show something
important about both knowledge and justification. What inclines us to
grant that Pip knows the answer is chiefly the regularity of correct results
and apparent stability of the mechanism yielding them. The accuracy of the
results cannot, we suppose, be accidental; it must be rooted in some inner
arithmetic process which regularly – and reliably – yields the right results.
On being presented with the problem, he registers the truth. There need be
no sense of calculating or even an appearance of truth or self-evidence, such
as one may have where one directly grasps an a priori proposition.18
There is, then, no mental process of arithmetic calculation of which the
person is aware, or anything else that seems of the right sort to ground justi-
fication, as visual impressions can ground it even when one is (unknowingly)
The analysis of knowledge
237

having a vivid hallucination. The calculator cannot point to anything to
justify the sum, even in the elementary way we can cite how things look to
us to justify believing there is a green field before us. This contrast suggests
that there may be a major difference between knowledge and justification
that explains why the former seems possible without the latter. Let us
explore this.
Internalism and externalism in epistemology
Could it be that justification and knowledge are grounded in quite different
ways? Perhaps there is a difference between them connected with the basic
contrast between them in relation to truth. Apart from self-knowledge,
knowledge is at least true belief about the external world (or external
matters, such as those of logic). Insofar as it is true belief about the external
world, one might expect its grounds to be essentially in that world. The
justifiedness of a belief, by contrast, does not entail its truth and seems to
many philosophers to rest on a source “inside” the mind.
Some of our examples suggest that what justifies a belief – the ground of
its justification – is something internal to the subject. The internal, in the
relevant sense, is what we might call the (internally) accessible: that to which
one has access by introspection or reflection, where introspection can be
simply focusing on what is in consciousness and reflection can be as brief as
considering a proposition. The accessible includes what is actually in
consciousness – such as thoughts and visual and other sensory impressions –
though here it can be misleading to say that the subject has access, since the
phenomena are present to the mind and thus, as it were, being accessed. The
accessible also includes dispositional mental phenomena, such as beliefs and
desires. To have (internal) access to something is either to have it in
consciousness or to be able, through self-consciousness or at least by reflec-
tion, whether introspective or directed “outward” toward an abstract subject
matter, to become aware of it, in the (phenomenal) sense that it is in one’s
consciousness.
Call the view that justification is grounded in accessible elements inter-
nalism about justification. By contrast, some of the same examples, such as
those of the predictor and the calculator, suggest that knowledge is
grounded entirely in what is external to the mind, and hence not internally
accessible to the subject in that way – a view we might call externalism about
knowledge.
There are counterparts of these views: externalism may be maintained for
justification, and a kind of internalism may be held to apply to knowledge.
The plausible counterparts are not (I believe) pure (or unrestricted) exter-
nalism about justification and pure (or unrestricted) internalism about
knowledge. For one thing, if knowledge entails truth it cannot be under-
stood entirely in terms of internal variables, since no combination of these,
however well it may justify a belief about the external world, entails the truth
238
Nature of justification and knowledge

of that belief. And there appears to be some respect in which justification is
internally grounded, even if it must also imply (say) some objective proba-
bility that a justified belief is true.19 I propose to say, then, that internalism
about knowledge is the restricted internalist view that knowledge is at least
in part grounded in elements internal to the mind; and externalism about
justification is the restricted externalist view that justification is at least in
part grounded in elements external to the mind.
Consider beliefs based on sense-experience as plausible support for inter-
nalism about justification. My justification for believing that there is a green
field before me is grounded in my sense impressions, and I can become
directly aware of them (so have access to them) by simply “looking within”
or by appropriate reflection on my experience. By contrast, the grounds of
my knowledge of something through Lizzie’s testimony are not thus acces-
sible. I cannot become aware of her reliability – which is a crucial ground of
my knowing anything through her testimony – without doing more than
considering the contents of my mind. To become aware of the grounds for
my knowledge of the truth of what she says, I need evidence of her relia-
bility, say through checking her testimony by making observations over
time.
Justificationist views of knowledge (roughly those that construe it as
essentially embodying justification of a kind that is not analyzable in terms
of reliability) typically embody an internalist conception of justification.
Reliability views of knowledge typically embody an externalist conception
of knowledge; and if they appeal to the notion of justification, they conceive
it too as grounded in ways that are not necessarily accessible to conscious-
ness, above all to introspection or reflection. (Reflection need not be
introspection and is important for the internalist account of our internal
access to the grounds of a priori justification: above all to our understanding
of concepts and their relations.)
Some varieties of internalism and externalism
Internalism about justification and externalism about knowledge are, in
their qualified forms, compatible, whereas pure internalist and externalist
views cannot both hold, either for justification or for knowledge. There are
many versions of internalism and externalism, whether they are restricted as
I have suggested or meant to apply unrestrictedly to both justification and
knowledge.
An important respect in which internalist views differ among themselves
concerns how readily the justifiers are accessible to consciousness. An impor-
tant and parallel way in which externalist views differ among themselves is in
the kind of non-introspective knowledge or justified belief they take to be
possible regarding the grounds of knowledge: one might, for instance, think
that commonsense observation is enough to ascertain how reliable perception
is, or one might take scientific evidence to be necessary for determining this.
The analysis of knowledge
239

Many points underlie the contrast between internalism and externalism.
My concern is chiefly with what seem the most plausible internalist and
externalist views: internalism about justification and externalism about
knowledge. To simplify matters, let us consider these views mainly in rela-
tion to the nature of the grounds of justification and knowledge, not as
applied to either how, or how strongly, those sources justify. This is, however,
a further respect in which internalist and externalist views differ among
themselves as well as from one another, and I will note some points about it.
The imagined internalist about justification holds only that the grounds
of one’s justified beliefs are internal, for instance sensory states of the kind
present in perception or beliefs, of which we can be conscious by virtue of
their manifestations in consciousness, such as an assenting thought of the
believed propositions. The view does not say that how, or how strongly, those
grounds justify beliefs based on them must (say, by guaranteeing their truth)
be an internal matter and thereby, in principle, accessible to introspection.
Similarly, the imagined externalist holds that what grounds knowledge –
reliable grounding of the constituent true belief – is not wholly internal,
and so not altogether accessible to consciousness, even if part of the ground,
say sensory experience, is. If what grounds knowledge is not wholly internal,
then how it does so is not either.
It is of course natural to think (as reliabilists tend to) that how such belief
production grounds knowledge is less likely to be accessible to consciousness
than what elements ground knowledge. The former is, for one thing, more
complex. Similarly, internalists may hold (plausibly) that our access by
introspection or reflection to what grounds our justification is better than
our access to how it grounds that justification.
The overall contrast between internalism and externalism
If these internalist views about justification and externalist views about
knowledge are roughly correct, then the main point of contrast between
knowledge and justification is this. Apart from self-knowledge, whose
object is in some sense mental and thus in some way internal, what one
knows is known on the basis of one’s meeting conditions that are not (at least
not entirely) internally accessible, as states or processes in one’s conscious-
ness are. By contrast, what one justifiedly believes, or is simply justified in
believing, is determined by mental states and processes to which one has
internal (introspective or reflectional) access: one’s visual experiences, for
instance, or one’s memory impressions, or one’s reasoning processes, or one’s
beliefs of supporting propositions. All of these are paradigms of the sorts of
things about which we can have much introspective knowledge.
It is significant that for the externalist about knowledge, even introspec-
tive knowledge, whose object is mental, is based partly on what is not
accessible to consciousness, namely on the appropriate kind of functional
relation between the thing known, say my imaging, and the beliefs about it
240
Nature of justification and knowledge

that constitute self-knowledge, in this case my believing that I am imaging.
Roughly, because my imaging process reliably grounds my believing that I
am imaging, I know I am; but I have no internal access (and ordinarily none
at all) to the reliability of this process. Even if I can be aware of some of the
presumably causal connections between imaging and believing I am
imaging, I would apparently need inductive, partly external evidence to
become aware of the reliability of the process grounding such belief.
What is central for knowledge, in the externalist view, is that the beliefs
constituting it register truth, and this objective connection between the
grounds of a belief and its truth is understood in a way implying that the
belief-grounding factors are not internal in the crucial way: they are not
necessarily accessible to consciousness. Perhaps I can become directly
conscious of my imaging, in a way that, even on an externalist view, gives
me a kind of internal access to the imaging; but I have no such access to the
reliability of the process by which imaging produces true beliefs that one is
doing it. I can become aware of that reliability only through a study of how
well imaging works in producing true introspective beliefs. This requires at
least making observations, some of which are external, and relying on
memory of one’s results; nor would this awareness be introspective or reflec-
tional.
On the other hand, what is central for internalism about justification is
that justified beliefs be those that one is in some sense in the right in
holding, given the sensory impressions, rational intuitions, and other
internal materials introspectively accessible to one. In very broad terms, the
strongest contrast may be this. Insofar as we may appropriately use the
language of rights, we might say that the internalist regarding justification
tends to conceive justification, in accordance with certain justificational
standards, as a matter of having a right to believe, and of knowledge as occur-
ring when justification is combined with truth in a certain way; the
externalist about knowledge tends to conceive knowledge, in accordance
with certain epistemic standards, as a matter of being right and of justifica-
tion as occurring when one’s belief is, in a certain way, likely to be right.20
This terminology can be misleading if one thinks of having a right as
always applicable to actions; for beliefs are not actions, nor can we in general
(if ever) bring it about at will that we believe something, the way we can
move our limbs at will. But there are rights to property, and that is not
action either. The terminology is also misleading if one thinks that being
within one’s rights puts one beyond criticism. It does not: one might have a
right to punish a child but because of special circumstances be criticizable
for doing it. Similarly, one could be criticizable for holding a justified belief,
say because there is a better case for a contrary. But where one holds a justi-
fied belief there are certain kinds of criticisms one is not liable to, such as
that of making a groundless assumption or being intellectually sloppy.
The central internalist idea about justification is that of meeting a certain
justificational standard that one can conform to on the basis of a kind of
The analysis of knowledge
241

response to accessible elements. Internalists strongly associate having justifi-
cation for belief and a readiness to justify it: roughly, to give one’s ground(s)
for it. This readiness presupposes that the grounds are accessible. This
conception of justification contrasts with the reliabilist notion of justifica-
tion as having, on the right kind of ground, a true or at least probably true
belief. The difference might be described as roughly between a kind of
permissible belief and a kind of successful belief. Moving further from the
language associated with rights (as I think wise), we might say that the
contrast is between belief that is internally and justificationally well-grounded
and belief that is externally (in an objective way) truth-conducively well-
grounded. One appeal of the externalist conception of justification is that it
links grounds of justification closely with grounds of knowledge, which in
some sense seem to be clearly truth-conducive.
Internalist and externalist versions of virtue epistemology
Internalist and externalist approaches in epistemology represent a basic divi-
sion. The contrast between them can help in understanding any
comprehensive epistemological theory, and applying them to a sample
theory can also help in understanding them. Consider, for instance, virtue
epistemology, which is roughly the position that knowledge and justified
belief are to be understood as expressions of epistemic virtue, taken roughly
as a capacity, such as observational acuity, apt for arriving at truth.
Virtue epistemology is in part modelled on virtue ethics, which takes the
concept of moral virtue to be the basic moral concept and construes moral
actions as the kinds that express that capacity, say by being grounded in the
virtuous character traits of honesty or justice. For instance, Aristotle said of
the virtues of justice and self-control, “actions are called just or temperate
when they are the sort that a just or temperate person would do. But the just
or temperate person is not [defined as] the one who [merely] does these
actions.”21
Different theories analyze and divide epistemic virtue in different ways,
say into observational and a priori virtues and further into perceptual versus
introspective virtues and (on the a priori side) into logical and mathematical
ones. On an internalist virtue theory, justified belief would (roughly) be belief
based on internally accessible grounds understood in terms of, and connected
in the person with, an epistemic virtue. For instance, a justified belief might
be based on sensory experiences taken as the kind of thing an epistemically
responsible person relies on for the kind of proposition in question. On an
externalist virtue theory, justified belief would be roughly belief based on
processes that are connected with a virtue and reliably lead to truth. Accurate
observations producing perceptual belief would be an example of such a
process, and making them is a typical manifestation of epistemic virtue.22
For either kind of virtue theory, knowledge would imply truth; but
whereas the internalist would also require its resting on accessible grounds,
242
Nature of justification and knowledge

the externalist would not. To see the difference better, recall Macbeth’s
hallucination of the dagger. For an internalist virtue theorist, if his sensory
experience is normal enough and he has no accessible reason to doubt his
acuity (say because he sees the dagger as hanging on a peg on the wall,
rather than – incredibly – as in midair), his belief that there is a dagger
before him may be justified: it is the kind of belief a person with virtuous
intellectual character would form in the circumstances. For a reliabilist
(hence externalist) virtue theorist, the relevant process grounding his belief
is presumably not reliable and his belief is not an expression of epistemic
virtue.23 (On neither view would he know there is a dagger, since there is
none before him.) Similarly, the idiot savant would lack epistemic virtue on
the internalist account but might, on the externalist account, have it – in
the form of a specific arithmetic virtue.
The chief difference is that virtue is defined in terms of internal standards
in the first case and external ones in the second. Both views, however, are
virtue approaches to justification because they construe it as an expression of
epistemic virtue, as opposed to defining epistemic virtue (as many episte-
mologists would) as the sort of character feature that tends to produce
justified belief.
This contrast between externalist and internalist virtue theories can be
developed in many ways. For instance, on externalist lines, the crucial
feature of the relevant epistemic virtue would be producing a favorable ratio
of true to false beliefs; on internalist lines, the crucial feature would be
either producing such a ratio on the basis of internally accessible grounds or
– if justification rather than knowledge is the epistemic target – producing a
suitable ratio of beliefs that are internally justified.
At this point, we can discern an apparent problem confronting epistemic
virtue theories. Precisely how can we specify the kind of character feature we
wish to call an epistemic virtue without already having at least a rough
account of justified belief and knowledge? One answer would be that we
need only an intuitive sense of what count as instances of justification and of
knowledge; we can then construct a trait-based account of what they are.
It is true that we may be able to devise a set of conditions for belief
rooted in good epistemic character such that virtuously formed belief is
equivalent to justified belief (or, when true, to knowledge). The question is
whether we do not do better to try to understand the relevant character
traits, such as insight and rigor, by appeal to non-virtue-theoretic accounts
of justification and knowledge, rather than proceed in the other direction,
trying to understand justification and knowledge in terms of intellectual
character.
For most theorists, the natural approach is first to understand justified
belief and knowledge in some non-virtue-theoretic way and then to explicate
epistemic virtue as the kind of character trait suited to producing them, a
kind, indeed, that can be cultivated by internalizing the more basic stan-
dards for appraising belief. Roughly, the idea is that an epistemic virtue is to
The analysis of knowledge
243

be analyzed as a trait apt for producing knowledge or justified belief; knowl-
edge is not to be analyzed as, say, true belief reliably produced by an exercise
of an epistemic virtue, or justified belief as the kind grounded in an epis-
temic virtue.
There are various approaches to solving this kind of problem. Quite apart
from whether they succeed, the notion of epistemic virtue provides a distinc-
tive perspective on both knowledge and justification. Moreover, knowledge
and justified belief could usefully be understood as equivalent to notions
rooted in virtue theory, even if the best way to analyze the former is along
the kinds of internalist or externalist lines we have been exploring.
The internality of justification and the externality of knowledge
Regardless of whether we focus on virtue theories or on the more common
epistemological positions we have been considering – individual belief
accounts of justification and knowledge as opposed to intellectual char-
acter accounts – the idea that knowledge is externally grounded and
justification internally grounded would help to explain why reliability theo-
ries are, in the ways I have indicated, as plausible as they are for knowledge,
yet less plausible for justification.
It is true that the sources of justification of belief seem generally to be
sources of true belief. But must they be? Could not my apparently normal
visual experience in hallucinating a green field where there is none some-
times justify me in believing there is one quite as strongly as an ordinary
seeing of it? Surely it could. Moreover, though I would not know that there
is a green field before me, the internalist would hold that my justification
for believing there is could be quite as good as it would be if I did know it.
To be sure, if I justifiedly believe I may be hallucinating, then I am
unlikely to be justified in believing there is a green field there. But my
beliefs, including beliefs about possible hallucinations, are themselves
internal. We thus have one internal factor affecting the way another bears on
justification, not an external factor preventing the generation of justification
by a basic source of it. Here, then, internalism can do justice to the
phenomenon of defeat of justification.
Moreover, notice how the clear cases of highly reliable belief production
illustrated by the predictor and the lightning calculator do not appear to
generate justification, though they do appear to generate knowledge.
Furthermore, no matter how reliable my perceptual processes are, say in
giving me impressions of birds flying by, and thereby true beliefs that they
are flying by, if I confidently and reflectively believe that my vision is unre-
liable, and especially if I also justifiedly believe this, then it is doubtful that
I am justified in believing that birds are flying by. The more confident and
reflective my justified belief that my vision is unreliable, the less the justifi-
cation, if any, of my belief that birds are flying by. Thus, in addition to
reliable grounding alone not producing justification, its apparent capacity to
244
Nature of justification and knowledge

produce justification in common circumstances is vulnerable (at least) to
justified beliefs that the beliefs it produces are unjustified or their underpin-
nings unreliable.
If knowledge and justification do contrast in the suggested way, why is
justification important to knowledge at all, as it certainly seems to be? Part
of the answer may be that first, the sources of justified belief – experience
and reason – are generally (if in a different way) sources of knowledge, and
second, virtually the only knowledge we can conceive of for beings like
ourselves is apparently grounded, at least indirectly, in those sources,
broadly understood. If these points are correct, then we can at least under-
stand how knowledge typically arises if we think of it as (in part) justified
belief. If, moreover, we think of it as appropriately justified true belief, then,
conceiving knowledge under that description, we can at least pick out the
vast majority of its instances.
Justification and truth
There may be a further, perhaps deeper, point implicit in what has been said
about justification and knowledge. Justification by its very nature has some
kind of connection with truth. One can see this by noting that there is
something fundamentally wrong with supposing that a belief’s being justi-
fied has nothing whatever to do with its truth. This in turn can be seen by
considering how the process of justifying a belief, conceived as showing that
the belief has the property of being justified, is always taken to provide
grounds for considering the belief true. Justification of our beliefs is by its
nature the sort of thing we do when their truth is challenged; justifiedness
of those beliefs – which entails justification for taking them to be true – is
what this process of justification shows when it succeeds.
The connection between justification and truth is perhaps most readily
seen in the case of a priori justification. Consider such paradigm cases as a
priori justified beliefs of self-evident propositions and of what self-evidently
follows from them, as do some very simple theorems of logic. Here, our
having a priori justification apparently entails the truth of the beliefs so
justified.24 These cases are unlike perceptual ones in that if a belief claimed
to be a priori justified turns out to be false, there is at least normally a defect
in the purported justification, say a misunderstanding or a careless error in
reasoning, whereas a false perceptual belief can be strongly justified.
Justification of empirical beliefs also seems connected with truth. If, for
instance, I am justified, by a clear visual impression, in believing there is a
field before me, then I may take it to be true that there is one. If, on the
other hand, we discovered that a certain kind of empirical belief is always
false, we would not consider a belief of that kind justified. Imagine that the
smell of onions ceased to indicate their presence and that beliefs grounded in
it no longer correspond to the facts (thus to truth) as determined by other
sources of belief, such as vision and touch. Then we would have good reason
The analysis of knowledge
245

to cease to regard these olfactory impressions as a source of justification. As
we cease to take a ground of belief as indicating truth, we tend to cease to
take beliefs thus grounded to be justified.
These points about the relation of justification to truth suggest that even
if it is an internal matter whether a belief is justified, the standards we use
for determining justification are responsive to our considered judgments
about which internal sources tend to produce true beliefs. The way we
conceive justification, then, makes it well suited to help us understand
knowledge, in at least this respect: when a belief is justified, it has the sort
of property which, by its very nature as apparently grounding the belief in
the real world, we take to count toward the truth of the belief, hence (other
things being equal) toward its being knowledge.
Justified true belief need not be knowledge, and knowledge apparently
need not be justified belief. But normally knowledge arises from the same
sources as justification: normally, the internal states and processes that
justify our beliefs also connect our beliefs with the external facts in virtue of
which those beliefs are true.
The notion of truth has been discussed voluminously by philosophers and
is more a problem of metaphysics than of epistemology. But it may help to
outline some of the main positions on the nature of truth. This will add
definiteness to the major theories of knowledge we have considered; more
important, it will enable us to see that they can be largely neutral on the
difficult question of precisely what account of truth is sound.
The correspondence theory of truth
The way of speaking of the truth that seems most natural in epistemology
suggests that truth, like knowledge, is external (apart from propositions
with such internal content as that I am thinking about knowledge). That is
indeed the view I am taking. Whether there is a green field before me is
not a matter of states of my mind. It seems to be an objective matter inde-
pendent of anyone’s mind and the green seems to be present or not
regardless of whether we believe it is. Indeed, whether my belief is true is
determined by whether the field is actually there; the truth of such obser-
vational beliefs depends on external reality, which does not in turn depend
on what we believe.
Sometimes this is put by saying that in general the truth of our beliefs is
not mind-dependent. If truth is not mind-dependent (unless it is about mind,
say that I am silently reciting a line of Shakespeare), and if truth is at least
in that sense objective, then we have a version of realism, roughly the view
that there are external things which are as they are independently of how we
take them to be. I am thinking of true propositions, and of truth as
expressed in them, whether believed or not, along the lines of a version of
the correspondence theory of truth. Its central thesis is that true propositions
“correspond” with reality. It is usually added that they are true in virtue of
246
Nature of justification and knowledge

that correspondence. Thus, the proposition that there is a green field before
me is true provided that in reality there is a green field before me; and it
might also be said that it is true in virtue of there really being such a field
before me.25
An expression apparently equivalent to the first, modest formulation of
the correspondence view would be this: to say that the proposition is true is
to say that it represents reality. This, in turn, is commonly taken to mean
that it expresses a fact. How else could we even think of truth, one might
wonder? What else could it mean to say that a proposition is true other than
that things (or the facts) really are as the proposition has it?
Agreement on this, however, leaves room for much diversity. One can
think of facts metaphysically or, in an ideal sense, methodologically. An
important example of the latter view is the idea (articulated by the nine-
teenth-century philosopher C.S. Peirce) that truth is what scientific
investigators would ultimately agree on. On the most common version of
the metaphysical view, by contrast, there can be truths that would evade
inquiry for ever, and so the concept of truth is not analyzable even in terms
of an ideal method.
Minimalist and redundancy accounts of truth
One answer to the question of how to conceive truth makes use of the
schematic idea that ‘p’ is true if and only if p; for instance, ‘Grass is green’ is
true if, and only if, grass is green.26 One might now argue that to say some-
thing is true is equivalent to asserting it, in the way illustrated here, and go
on to hold that this equivalence is at least the main thing we need to under-
stand about truth. This approach is associated with a minimalist account of
truth; the idea is roughly that there is no more to understanding what
constitutes truth than understanding this equivalence. For instance, we
know what it is for people to assert propositions; we normally know what
kinds of considerations confirm or disconfirm the propositions; and we
know, in very general terms, under what sorts of conditions to agree or
disagree.
If the minimalist account is correct, then either asserting the correspon-
dence of true propositions with “reality” or with “the facts” is either nothing
more than an equivalent of endorsing the schema, or it goes too far. One
might think that to give such a minimalist reading of the correspondence
view is to abandon it altogether. Perhaps that is so, but at least the schema
expresses a kind of correspondence: an equivalence between calling a proposi-
tion true and asserting it. There is a sense, moreover, in which each of these
affirmational acts can itself correspond to facts.
One might go even further than the minimalist account and say that, for
instance, ‘“Grass is green” is true’ is not just equivalent to ‘Grass is green’
but essentially the same in meaning. The relation would thus be like that
between ‘circle’ and ‘locus of points equidistant from a given point’ rather
The analysis of knowledge
247

than like that between ‘circle’ and ‘shape whose circumference is equal to its
diameter times pi’. This identity of meaning, unlike the equivalence asserted
by the minimalist view, would make the phrase ‘is true’ redundant in predi-
cating it of a proposition. Saying ‘It is true that p’ would add nothing to the
meaning of simply asserting that p, though it might be an emphatic way to
assert it. On that basis, one might speak of a redundancy account of truth. On
this view, saying ‘That is true’ is another way, perhaps a sometimes more
emphatic way, of saying the thing in question. But it has exactly the same
content.27
The coherence theory of truth
There are other alternatives to the correspondence view. The most widely
known is perhaps the coherence theory of truth. Though it takes many
forms, its central idea, expressed very broadly, is that a true proposition is
one that coheres appropriately with certain other propositions. (The theory
may also be expressed in terms of what it is for beliefs to be true, but that
formulation invites confusion of the coherence theory of truth with the
coherence theory of knowledge, which, though knowledge is constituted by
belief, is a quite different theory and does not depend on the coherence
theory of truth.)
I cannot discuss truth in detail here, but let me indicate how a coherence
theory of truth might go if justification is its central concept. In outline, the
theory might say that a true proposition is one which is fully justified by
virtue of coherence with every other relevant justified proposition, where a
justified proposition is, minimally, one that at least someone is (or anyway
might be) justified in believing.28
There are serious difficulties in determining what propositions are both
justified and relevant to the truth of another proposition which is plausibly
thought to be true in virtue of coherence with them. Perhaps a plausible
example of how truth can be based on coherence would be a proposition I
am perceptually justified in believing, say that there is a maple tree before
me, which coheres with what I justifiedly believe on the basis of memory,
introspection, inference, and so on, as well as with what I or others would be
justified in believing in these ways. This proposition would be true in virtue
of coherence with others, such as that I seem to remember a maple there. To
say that it is false, by contrast, would be to call it incoherent with certain
others, such as the proposition that I fail to have a visual impression of a tree
in the relevant place.
The propositions for which I now have justification are not the only ones
that matter. If they were, then if I visually hallucinated a maple tree systemati-
cally enough, say with accompanying tactual hallucinations and supporting
memory impressions, it would be true that there is one before me. By
making the set of relevant propositions indefinitely large, the theory seeks to
prevent such embarrassing results. Thus, if I am hallucinating, there is
248
Nature of justification and knowledge

surely some proposition I could come to be justified in believing, say that
the “tree” will not burn – something I might discover by trying to ignite
it – which is not coherent with the proposition that there is a maple there.
Suppose, however, that owing to some quirk of nature – or to some evil
genius of the kind Descartes imagined in describing the power of skepti-
cism – there is no proposition I could come to be justified in believing that
is incoherent with there being a tree before me. If, for instance, I take a
torch to the “foliage,” I hallucinate flames. If the deceiving genius unde-
tectably ensures that every such test is positive, the coherence theorist seems
forced to conclude that in this case it is true after all that there is a tree
before me. But surely it is still possible that I am merely hallucinating and
that it is false that there is a tree there, despite the unending series of justi-
fied beliefs I have, or can have, confirming that there is one.
This kind of possibility has led critics of the coherence theory to say that
the truth of a proposition is simply not exhausted by our coherent beliefs or
potential beliefs supporting that proposition, even when they are justified.
Another way to put it is to say that truth is not a construct out of evidence,
even excellent evidence that produces a coherent body of beliefs. We can
better understand this point if we consider a related theory of truth.
The pragmatic theory of truth
There is also a negative motivation for the coherence theory of truth. When
we try to understand what correspondence means, we seem thrown back on
some kind of coherence. To say that the proposition that the tree is green
corresponds with reality seems to come to little more than saying that in
testing this proposition, say by examining the tree in good light, one will
always get (or will at least in the main get) confirming results, that is (one
might argue), discover propositions that cohere well with the original one.
For instance, boiling its leaves will produce a green broth.
This kind of point has led some thinkers to go further and hold a prag-
matic theory of truth, on which true propositions are simply those that
“work,” in the sense that they are successful in practice – pragmatically.
What this comes to is chiefly that believing them, acting on them, and
otherwise confirming them, leads (at least in the long run) to positive
results, such as spectrographic confirmation of the tree’s color.29
Certainly we do not expect a genuine truth to fail us. If, for instance,
there really is a maple there, then I can find shade under it, cut wood from
it, and expect others to verify its presence. And we do expect falsehoods to
fail us eventually. With enough testing, we tend to think, there will (in
principle) be disconfirmation. What more is there to truth as correspon-
dence or, for that matter, truth as coherence, than such pragmatic success –
especially if we consider it over a sufficiently “long run”?
Correspondence theorists have replied that points made by proponents of
coherence (and pragmatic) theories of truth confuse the criteria of truth,
The analysis of knowledge
249

roughly, the standards for determining whether a proposition is true, with
the nature of truth, what it is. Turning blue litmus paper red is a criterion of
acidity, but it is not what acidity is; that must be characterized in theoretical
terms involving, say, atomic structure. In support of this, they often argue
that a false proposition could cohere with all propositions that are ever justi-
fied, including those discovered in attempted confirmation of it. We might,
after all, be permanently unlucky in testing it – or permanently foiled by an
evil genius (a possibility pursued in Chapter 10) – so that we never discover
its falsity; or an ingenious demon might always prevent us from discovering
our mistake.
These points parallel some made against phenomenalism, which may
(though it need not) be held by proponents of either a coherence or a prag-
matic theory of truth. In general, a sufficiently powerful evil genius might
prevent one from discovering that a stable, recurring set of sense-data which
coheres with one’s other sense-data derives from hallucination and does not
represent a concrete object. If it is possible for coherence to be systematically
misleading in this way, then neither coherence with justified propositions
nor any other kind of pure coherence can be what truth is.
I cannot pursue this issue, but it should be plain that it is crucial to
assessing the pragmatic and coherence theories of truth. I want to add only
that despite the similarities between the coherence theory of truth and the
coherence theory of justification, neither theory entails the other. The anal-
ysis of knowledge, moreover, can be discussed within either framework for
conceiving truth.
It appears, however, that particularly if one favors a reliability theory of
knowledge, the correspondence view of truth, even on a minimalist interpre-
tation, seems most appropriate. This is in part because the notion of reliable
production is at least not readily analyzed along coherentist or pragmatic
lines, especially if the notion of justification is central in that of truth as the
coherence and pragmatic theories of truth conceive truth. For then the
apparently value-laden notion of justification would be required for under-
standing reliability, which is characteristically conceived by reliabilists in
naturalistic terms, in part as a property belonging to processes that produce
true beliefs. None of this implies that what has been said here refutes coher-
ence or pragmatic theories in every form, but perhaps enough has been said
to suggest some presumption in favor of some version of the correspondence
theory.
Concluding proposals
Is there no analysis of knowledge that we may tentatively accept as correct
and illuminating? There certainly may be; the ones I have discussed are only
a representative sample of the available analyses, and even they can be
refined in response to problems of the kind I have raised. But there may be
no simple and straightforward analysis of knowledge which is both illumi-
250
Nature of justification and knowledge

nating and clearly correct. Much depends on how detailed an account must
be to count as an analysis.
We may be able to formulate what is at least a sound conception of knowl-
edge, and this should help in seeking a full-dress account. We might say
that knowledge is true belief based in the right way on the right kind of ground.
This conception leaves a great deal open, but what we have seen in this
chapter and earlier ones indicates many ways in which one might develop
the conception into a detailed account.
The conception leaves open that it may, but need not, turn out that the
right kind of basis of knowledge is in part causal. It may, but need not, turn
out that the right kind of ground always justifies the belief. It may, but need
not, turn out that the right kind of ground is accessible to consciousness, or
is a reliable producer of true beliefs, or is an epistemic virtue. And it may,
but need not, turn out that ultimately epistemic chains terminate in experi-
ence or reason, or in some other kind of ground of knowledge which is direct
in the way foundationalism maintains it is.
In a similar vein, we might conceive justified belief as well-grounded belief.
Like knowledge, it must be based in the right way on the right kind of
ground. We have seen what at least some of the appropriate kinds of
grounds are: most basically, perceptual, memorial, introspective, and
rational, but also testimonial and inferential. However, the conception leaves
open the same kinds of things as the conception of knowledge: whether the
right kind of ground is in part causal, whether it is accessible to conscious-
ness or is instead a reliable producer of true beliefs, whether it is an
epistemic virtue, and whether, ultimately, justificational chains terminate in
experience or reason, or in some other kind of ground of knowledge, that is
direct in the way foundationalism maintains it is. In exploring justification
and knowledge, I have made a case for some of these options being prefer-
able to others, but here my point is simply that the suggested conceptions of
knowledge and justification provide a good focus for inquiry regardless of
what position one takes on these options.
Quite apart from how these broad questions about knowledge and justifi-
cation are resolved, then, the conceptions just sketched indicate where a great
deal of the work in understanding knowledge and justification must be done.
We need an account of how knowledge and justification are based on whatever
it is in virtue of which they count as knowledge or justification, for instance
perception, introspection, and reason; and this will require an account of the
inferential transmission of knowledge and justification as well as of their non-
inferential grounding. Here I have suggested a partly causal account of both
inferential and non-inferential grounds and a moderately holistic account of
inductive and deductive transmission of justification and knowledge. We need
an understanding of whether the appropriate bases of knowledge must ground
it through generating justified belief, or may yield knowledge indepen-
dently of justification. Here I have suggested that an internalist account
seems preferable for justification and a qualifiedly externalist one seems
The analysis of knowledge
251

preferable for knowledge. We also need a general understanding of what it is
for a belief constituting knowledge to be true. And we need an account of
whether the ultimate grounding of knowledge and justification is some kind
of coherence among one’s beliefs or, as seems more likely on the basis of
what has emerged in this book, anchoring in experiential and rational foun-
dations.30
Notes
1
The most important passages are probably those in Plato’s Theaetetus, 201c–210b.
2
The defeat of this account, which set a spate of detailed critiques in motion, was due to
Edmund L. Gettier’s now famous ‘Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?,’ Analysis 23
(1963), 231–3.
3
If I had believed that she is directly opposite me, in the sense that there is no obstacle
between us, my belief would have been false; but I would not normally have believed
that here, where I have no reason even to imagine obstacles.
4
The idea that we can learn much, and perhaps the most important things, about the
nature of knowledge by determining what renders a true belief knowledge is also used by
Alvin Plantinga. In place of undefeated justification he puts a different concept – warrant
– which in at least one place he characterizes functionally as (in rough terms) whatever it
is that renders true belief knowledge. For his detailed analysis see esp. Warrant and Proper
Function (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1993), particularly Chapters
1–3. Extensive critical discussion of this book, and his replies to it, are found in Jonathan
L. Kvanvig (ed.) Warrant in Contemporary Epistemology: Essays in Honor of Plantinga’s
Epistemology (Lanham, Md: Rowman and Littlefield, 1996).
5
This of course assumes that we rule out a probability of 1, which is commonly reserved
for necessary truths. For a brief and plausible statement of the view that only beliefs
based on conclusive (truth-guaranteeing) grounds constitute knowledge, see Fred
Dretske, ‘Conclusive Reasons,’ Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49 (1971), 1–22.
6
For a valuable treatment of certainty particularly relevant to the one given here see G.E.
Moore, ‘Certainty,’ in his Philosophical Papers (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1959). Cf.
Peter Klein’s Certainty (Minneapolis, 1981), cited earlier. I should note that, more than
most writers on certainty in epistemology, I am working with the notions central in
everyday discourse and not with, e.g., the notions associated with Cartesian episte-
mology.
7
The thermometer analogy, and some of the impetus for naturalism in recent episte-
mology, comes from D.M. Armstrong. See esp. his Belief, Truth and Knowledge
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), though some of the relevant ideas are
suggested in his (and others’) earlier work.
8
The idea that abstract objects, like concepts and propositions as standardly construed, are
altogether causally inert should not be taken uncritically. For discussion of this issue and
a case that no plausible causal requirement undermines the possibility of a priori knowl-
edge, see Alvin Plantinga, Warrant and Proper Function, pp. 113–17.
9
It seems better to call it reliably grounded than reliably produced (as many call it), since I
could have a belief that is not knowledge until I get appropriate evidence (such as testi-
mony from someone who is reliable), and here the belief is not produced by what makes
it knowledge, but rather becomes grounded therein. Some writers speak of knowledge as
true belief that is reliably produced or sustained to capture what I am calling reliable
grounding. A further advantage of the wider terminology I use is that it covers both
process reliabilism, which takes the reliability of process of belief production or sustenance
to be crucial for knowledge, and indicator reliabilism, which simply requires that the belief
be suitably connected with something that indicates it is true.
252
Nature of justification and knowledge

10 Plantinga’s recently developed approach would suggest that the crucial factor in deciding
what description to use is how the faculty in question, say vision, is designed (whether by
God of by evolution or in some other way) to function, for example, in judging the iden-
tity of persons directly or despite the presence of impervious objects. Since our visual
faculties are not designed to judge in the latter way, the relevant process is not one in
which believing someone is in a given place results from seeing the person in a photo-
graph that accurately indicates her whereabouts. One difficulty here is how to determine
the design of a faculty. For a detailed presentation of this view see Plantinga, Warrant and
Proper Function.
11 For an approach to solving this specification problem, see William P. Alston, ‘How To
Think about Reliability,’ Philosophical Topics 23, 1 (1995), 1–29. This paper is in part a
response to Richard Feldman’s presentation of the problem – under the description ‘The
Generality Problem’ – in ‘Reliability and Justification,’ The Monist 68 (1985), 159–74.
12 The metaphor of tracking is usually credited to Robert Nozick, Philosophical Explanations
(Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1981). The most relevant passages are
reprinted in Huemer’s collection, cited above, pp. 475–90.
13 For discussion of contextualism see, e.g., Keith DeRose, ‘Contextualism and Knowledge
Attributions,’ reprinted in Huemer, op. cit. He considers two cases in which he is asked
if the bank is open. In one, the matter is routine, in the other, of great importance. He
knows it is open in the first, but in the second he does not know without getting further
evidence. For “Attributor factors set a certain standard the putative subject of knowledge
must live up to in order to make the knowledge attribution true” (p. 497). This is why
he can know in one case – in which the context does not demand a high standard for
truly attributing knowledge to someone – and not in the other. The implications of this
position for skepticism, as well as for understanding knowledge in ordinary cases (on
almost any analysis of knowledge we might plausibly give), are significant. Cf. his
‘Solving the Skeptical Problem,’ Philosophical Review 104 (1995); David Lewis, ‘Elusive
Knowledge,’ Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74 (1996); and (for a critique of Lewis’s
paper) Stewart Cohen, ‘Contextualist Solutions to Epistemological Problems: Scepticism,
Gettier, and the Lottery,’ Australasian Journal of Philosophy 76 (1998).
14 For a detailed and plausible approach to such questions see Alvin I. Goldman,
‘Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge,’ Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), 269–82.
15 On Plantinga’s notable theory referred to earlier, knowledge is roughly a true belief that
results from our cognitive faculties functioning properly in the relevant situation, which
is a matter of their functioning as they were designed to function in such a situation.
This idea can be adapted to a naturalistic view by construing proper function in biolog-
ical and psychological terms drawn from a theory of human design, but it is also
consonant with a theistic view of our design as determined by divine plan. Plantinga’s
approach provides a different way of dealing with a number of the problems posed in this
chapter (though they remain significant problems), but there is not space to discuss it or
other recent theories separately.
16 This example is a variant of the central case described in D.H. Lawrence’s story, ‘The
Rocking Horse Winner’. If the case presented seems too far from real possibility, the
same point can be made using one in which it is easier to imagine relevant causal mecha-
nisms, say where someone foresees rain by the effect of sensations that in effect measure
meteorological conditions.
17 One might argue that it is obvious that such a belief must be unjustified. I can see a case
for its being so, but I do not find it compelling. I also doubt that his having justification
for believing his predictive belief unjustified must prevent its constituting knowledge.
18 As this description suggests, I am not thinking of the relevant knowledge as a priori even
in the loose sense, but perhaps a case can be made that a kind of understanding of the
relevant proposition, as opposed to, say, a subliminal calculation, grounds the knowledge.
19 For two quite different externalist compromises with internalism see Alvin I. Goldman,
‘Strong and Weak Justification,’ Philosophical Perspectives 2 (1988) 51–69, and William P.
The analysis of knowledge
253

Alston, ‘An Internalist Externalism,’ in his Epistemic Justification (Ithaca, NY and London:
Cornell University Press, 1989).
20 A.J. Ayer is widely known for having taken knowledge (and I think the kind of justifica-
tion appropriate for it as well) to entail a “right to be sure.” See The Problem of Knowledge
(Harmondsworth, Middlesex: Penguin Books, 1956), esp. ch. 1. For further discussion
see R.M. Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edn. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall,
1977), and Carl Ginet, Knowledge, Perception, and Memory (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1978),
esp. Chapter 3.
21 Nicomachean Ethics 1105b6–8. trans. by Terence Irwin (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1999). The
bracketed ‘defined as’ is my insertion, the bracketed ‘merely’ Irwin’s.
22 Virtue epistemology, despite its roots in ancient Greek philosophy, has received attention
in epistemology only in recent years. See esp. Ernest Sosa, ‘Knowledge and Intellectual
Virtue,’ in his Knowledge in Perspective (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press, 1991); Jonathan L. Kvanvig, The Intellectual Virtues and the Life of the Mind
(Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1992); James Montmarquet, Epistemic Virtue and
Doxastic Responsibility (Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1993); Linda Zagzebski,
Virtues of the Mind (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1996); John
Greco, Putting Skeptics in Their Place (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2000); and Abrol Fairweather and Linda Zagzebski (eds), Virtue and Duty (Oxford
and New York: Oxford University Press, 2001), which contains papers by most of the
philosophers mentioned as well as my ‘Intellectual Virtue and Justified Belief , ’ which
develops ideas about virtue epistemology that I suggest here.
23 I say ‘presumably’ because it might be that sensory experience is a reliable ground, owing
to how rarely it misleads, say because hallucinations are either uncommon or (because
they do not feel normal) do not produce belief.
24 This entailment thesis is obvious if we adopt the conceptions of the self-evident and of
strict a priori justification proposed in Chapter 4. But simply working with the intuitive
notions of the self-evident and the a priori, the entailment claim has some plausibility.
25 A classical statement of the correspondence theory of truth is found in Aristotle’s
Metaphysics. For a study of the correspondence view and a defense of realism concerning
truth in general, see William P. Alston, A Realist Conception of Truth (Ithaca, NY and
London: Cornell University Press, 1996); and for a wide-ranging scholarly treatment of
the theory of truth, see Richard Kirkham, Theories of Truth (Cambridge, Mass: MIT Press,
1992).
26 The schema in question is commonly called (Alfred) Tarski’s T schema or the disquotation
principle, since in the way illustrated it provides for eliminating quotation marks. For
minimally technical discussions of its bearing on our understanding of truth see W.V.
Quine, Pursuit of Truth, revised edn. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992),
Chapter V; Mark Sainsbury, ‘Philosophical Logic,’ in A.C. Grayling (ed.), Philosophy: A
Guide Through the Subject (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1995); and Kirkham, Theories
of Truth.
27 The literature on truth, even on any one account of it, is immense. For a brief defense of
the redundancy view see Quine, Pursuit of Truth, and for brief criticism of it see Alston, A
Realist Conception of Truth. One might, like Quine in many places, speak of (declarative)
sentences as true or false, and the minimalist and redundancy approaches have been taken
to apply primarily to sentences. For reasons I cannot detail, so construing them may have
some advantages over the standard terminology in the text, but it also raises serious
problems.
28 Although G.W.F. Hegel (1770–1831) is often regarded as the leading historical propo-
nent of the coherence theory of truth, a clearer statement is probably to be found in
Brand Blanshard, The Nature of Thought, vol. 2 (London: Allen & Unwin, 1940). Cf.
Donald Davidson, ‘A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge,’ cited in Chapter 7.
254
Nature of justification and knowledge

29 William James argued that truth is what works. See esp. his Pragmatism: A New Name for
Some Old Ways of Thinking (New York: Longman, Green, 1907). Cf. John Dewey,
‘Propositions, Warranted Assertibility, and Truth,’ Journal of Philosophy 38 (1941).
30 I have not presented these conceptions of knowledge and justification as analyses, in part
because of how much they leave unspecified. But it may be argued that they do consti-
tute analyses and indeed say as much as an analysis, as opposed to a full-blown theory
meant to foreclose options an analysis should leave open, ought to say. For a case to this
effect regarding the proposed conception of knowledge, see James E. Taylor, ‘Conceptual
Analysis and the Essence of Knowledge,’ American Philosophical Quarterly 30 (1993).
The analysis of knowledge
255


9
Scientific, moral, and
religious knowledge
• Scientific knowledge
The focus and grounding of scientific knowledge
Scientific imagination and inference to the best explanation
The role of deduction in scientific practice
Fallibilism and approximation in science
Scientific knowledge and social epistemology
Social knowledge and the idea of a scientific community
• Moral knowledge
Relativism and noncognitivism
Preliminary appraisal of relativist and noncognitivist views
Moral versus “factual” beliefs
Ethical intuitionism
Kantian rationalism in moral epistemology
Utilitarian empiricism in moral epistemology
Kantian and utilitarian moral epistemologies compared
• Religious knowledge
Evidentialism versus experientialism
The perceptual analogy and the possibility of direct theistic knowledge
Problems confronting the experientialist approach
Justification and rationality, faith and reason
Acceptance, presumption, and faith

9
Scientific, moral, and religious
knowledge
In perceiving the world around us we constantly acquire knowledge: of
colors and shapes, objects and events, people and their doings. We also
acquire knowledge as we look into our own consciousness. By thinking
about things we already know and by drawing inferences from those propo-
sitions, we extend some of our knowledge. And through memory, we retain
much of our knowledge. Justification is acquired, extended, and retained in
much the same way.
But how far does our knowledge extend? We have explored how knowl-
edge is transmitted once we have some, but not just how much we have in
the first place or the range of subjects and questions to which it extends. I
want to explore three important domains in which we are widely thought to
have knowledge of truths that are central in guiding our lives: the scientific,
the moral, and the religious. We should consider how knowledge and justifi-
cation may occur in these domains. The task is immense; here I will simply
try to show how the framework laid out so far can clarify knowledge and
justification in relation to some important aspects of science, ethics, and
religion. The focus will be more on knowledge than on justification. But
much of what comes to light regarding knowledge will apply to justifica-
tion, and some of it may hold in other domains, such as that of art or history
or literature.
Scientific knowledge
If we knew nothing through perception, we would have no scientific knowl-
edge or even everyday observational knowledge. And however much
scientific knowledge one can acquire by instruction and testimony from
someone else, the discoveries that this knowledge represents must be made
partly on the basis of perceptual experience. Perception is obviously crucial
for laboratory work and observations of nature. Scientific work done without
such first-hand experience, for instance by theorizing about nature or mathe-
matizing current information, still depends, directly or indirectly, on
someone’s perceptions.1
The focus and grounding of scientific knowledge
How does scientific discovery fit into the framework I have developed? If we
start with the idea that perception is basic for scientific knowledge, the
picture which readily comes to mind is that one makes observations, induc-

tively generalizes from them, and, through the inductive transmission of
knowledge from one’s premises to one’s conclusion, comes to know the truth
of a generalization. Imagine Galileo rolling balls down his famous inclined
plane. He measures their acceleration, collects the individual items of
knowledge he thereby acquires, arrays them as premises, and generalizes (in
a special way) to his formula (Galileo’s Law), which gives the rate of accelera-
tion for such balls in general. What does a case like this show?
First, the example rightly suggests that scientists tend to be interested in
the nature and the behavior of kinds of things, such as accelerating objects,
and that what is typically considered scientific knowledge is of generaliza-
tions: for instance, propositions about all freely falling bodies, not about any
particular one. Knowledge of particulars is needed to obtain such general
knowledge, but the former may be just ordinary perceptual knowledge.
Granted, knowledge which is of a particular thing, but derived from a scien-
tific generalization, say knowledge that a parachutist will land at a specific
time, is scientific in the sense that it is scientifically based. Still, it is not the
sort of knowledge regarded as paradigmatically scientific, or the kind scien-
tists directly seek in trying to understand nature.
The second point suggested by the example is that scientific knowledge is
inductively, not deductively, grounded. For instance, the generalization
Galileo discovered concerning acceleration does not follow from the premises
he formulated in expressing his data, say that ball 1 accelerated at a certain
rate, that ball 2 accelerated at that rate, and so on. The generalization is
strongly confirmed by such premises, but not entailed by them. Because it is
not entailed by such premises, regardless of how well they justify it, they do
not prove it. Proof of a proposition requires either a premise that entails it, or
– in one ordinary use of the term – at least an event whose occurrence estab-
lishes it, as where one proves that someone is in town by introducing him.
In the former case a proof is a conclusive deductive argument; in the latter it
is a kind of active showing. Call the first proof in the argumental sense, the
second proof in the behavioral sense.
The same point holds for premises of other scientific reasoning that
yields, from knowledge of data, knowledge of a generalization. Thus, it is
best to avoid calling the reasoning that supports a scientific generalization
“scientific proof,” as some people do. It is not even deductively valid, much
less the kind of reasoning exemplified by a geometrical proof of a theorem
from axioms.2
A third aspect of this case, however, may mislead. The example portrays
Galileo simply observing and then generalizing, yet says nothing about why
he is observing. But he made his observations for a reason. This is to be
expected; scientific knowledge normally does not arise simply from
haphazard observations. Normally there is a question, such as whether
falling objects speed up, that leads to observing a particular kind of thing.
Moreover, there is normally a tentative answer to such a question – a
hypothesis – which both guides observation and sets the epistemic goal of the
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
259

observations or the experiments that lead to scientific discovery. For
instance, one might hypothesize that the balls speed up 100 percent in a
given time interval and then observe their speed at each such interval to see
whether the initial speed doubles, quadruples, and so on. The goal here is to
show that the hypothesis is true and thereby come to know it, or, if it is not
true, to find a hypothesis that does account for the behavior of the balls.3
The central point here is that scientific knowledge does not automatically
arise as we observe our surroundings. Normally, we must first raise questions
about the world; they direct our inquiry. Only in the light of such questions
are we in a good position to formulate hypotheses. These, in turn, are the
raw material of scientific knowledge. Some are rejected, some are confirmed,
and some that are confirmed may become known.
Scientific imagination and inference to the best explanation
Scientific knowledge does not develop, then, simply by inferential extension
of what we already know. Normally, it emerges only after we use some imag-
ination, both in formulating questions and in framing hypotheses to answer
them. This is one place where scientific invention occurs. It is not only
machines and devices that are invented but also hypotheses and theories.
Invention and discovery may, however, coincide: if you invent a theory that
is true, you may be said to discover the truth it states.4
The essential place of imagination in developing scientific knowledge is
also illustrated by discoveries that result not from coming to know a gener-
alization, but from apparent refutations of a proposition thought to be
already known. The planet Neptune was discovered because the observed
orbit of Uranus (the planet nearest to it on the Earth’s side) was not as
expected according to the laws of planetary motion, the principles
astronomers use in describing the motions and paths of the planets. Partly in
order to avoid having to revise well-confirmed laws, it was hypothesized that
the deviation of Uranus from its expected orbit was caused by the gravita-
tional effect of a more distant planet. The observations made to test this
hypothesis revealed Neptune.
If the Neptune hypothesis was considered the best available explanation of
the data, we could speak here of an inference to the best explanation (an abductive
inference): roughly, an inference to a hypothesis on the ground that it best
explains one or more other propositions taken to be known or justifiedly
believed – or at least taken to need explanation and to be candidates for justi-
fied belief or knowledge if the hypothesis turns out to be true. If two or more
hypotheses are equally good explanations, we may justifiably choose between
them as we see fit, though simplicity is generally taken to be a major consid-
eration in making a rational choice in such cases – if indeed it is not taken to
be an element in a good explanation in the first place.5
Once again, through the use of imagination, a hypothesis is formulated,
and through testing it, a discovery is made and new knowledge acquired.
260
Nature of justification and knowledge

And again, the basis of the new knowledge is inductive, though unlike
Galileo’s knowledge about freely falling bodies, it is not a result of general-
ization. The pattern here is a successful case of inference to the best
explanation. One imaginatively hypothesizes a gravitational influence by
another planet as best explaining the deviation, tentatively infers that there
is such a planet, tests the hypothesis, and, through positive results of the
test, comes to know that the hypothesis is true.
We have already seen, in discussing the structure of knowledge and justi-
fication, that a proposition’s explaining one or more others can count toward
its justification, and that this point can be accounted for in either or both of
two ways. First, one might note the role of explanation in increasing the
coherence of the patterns to which the explaining and explained propositions
belong. Second, we might take, as a principle of the transmission of justifi-
cation from justified premises to a conclusion drawn from them, that if we
are justified in believing the premise that a proposition explains one or more
others, then we tend to have some justification for believing the proposition
itself. The point here, however, is not mainly about justification but about
discovery. We discover a great deal by seeking explanations and positing one
or another hypothesis to explain the puzzling data. What we discover in this
way commonly constitutes knowledge.
The role of deduction in scientific practice
These examples do not imply that deduction (valid deductive reasoning) has
no substantial role in the development of scientific knowledge. Far from it.
Once we have a hypothesis, we typically need deduction to determine how
to test it. For instance, one needs deductive mathematical reasoning to
predict where to look for an as yet undiscovered planet, given a certain devi-
ation in the orbit of Uranus.
Moreover, from very general laws, such as Newton’s laws of motion, one
may deduce less general laws, for instance the laws of planetary motion and
Galileo’s law of acceleration. (Actually, the best that one may be able to do is
deduce generalizations which these laws only approximate; e.g., Galileo’s
law, which represents increase in acceleration as uniform, does not take
account of slight changes in acceleration that are due to minute increases in
gravitational attraction as the falling object nears the Earth. But this deduc-
tion still helps to explain why we should get approximately the results we
do in testing or applying that law.)
Deduction may, then, not only take one from a hypothesis and auxiliary
assumptions, such as propositions about conditions of observation and the
power of one’s telescope, to a proposition about a single event, say the
sighting of a planet. Deduction may also take one from general laws or
wide-ranging theoretical principles to less general laws or narrower princi-
ples. There is virtually no limit to the number of deductions we may make
in search of subsidiary results or new hypotheses.
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
261

Deductions of the second kind help to unify scientific knowledge. For
example, they enable us to exhibit all the special laws of motion – for
planets, for falling bodies, for projectiles, and so on – as instances of the
general laws of motion. Even the behavior of gases, conceived as collections
of molecular particles, can be explained by appeal to the general laws of
motion. Their pressure in a container of air, for instance, is explainable in
terms of how hard the particles hit its walls. This pressure, in turn, is
connected with their temperature viewed as explainable by their average
speed of movement. Thus, the laws of motion provide an understanding of
what determines both pressure and temperature and indeed a model for
visualizing their relationship. They also give us, by appropriate deductive
inferences, a subsidiary law (Boyle’s Law) correlating the temperature of a
gas with pressure at a constant volume.
Can we, then, have scientific proof after all, where we validly deduce a
special law of, say, motion, from more general ones? No; for even if we
might prove the special law relative to the more general ones, our knowledge
of the more general laws is ultimately inductive. That knowledge is based
on inference to the best explanation or on generalization from observed data
or, more likely, on a combination of these procedures. It might seem that we
could at least speak of “relative proof” of scientific laws. But a proof must
decisively establish what it proves; and since the generalizations that are our
premises are not thus established, it is at best misleading to say that what
we deduce from them is. Even a valid deduction from a true proposition is
not necessarily a proof.
If our scientific premises in a deduction of one law from a more compre-
hensive one is not proved, and if indeed such premises stand to be revised as
new discoveries are made – a common fate of generalizations in science –
then what we know only through deduction from those premises is not
proved either. These premises are indeed exposed to possible disconfirmation
through the discovery of counter-evidence to what we deduce from them. If
what is deducible from a set of propositions turns out to be false, then the
premises that entail it are false as well: as presumptive guarantors of its
truth, they must share in its falsification.
Fallibilism and approximation in science
So far, I have sketched some of the ways in which what we call scientific
knowledge develops, and I have criticized certain stereotypes of science. It is
not, for instance, a domain in which hypotheses are proved conclusively. Nor
are they typically discovered by simply generalizing from observations we
happen to collect. These points, however, imply nothing about whether
scientific generalizations are true, or can be known.
If a common fate of generalizations in science is their eventual revision, one
might now wonder whether we should not also reject the idea that there is
scientific knowledge at all. Even the incomparable Sir Isaac Newton, as he was
262
Nature of justification and knowledge

was called, turned out to be mistaken on some important points. Even if
discovering this took centuries, is there good reason to believe that any other
scientific generalizations are, strictly speaking, true, in the sense that they
describe the world both correctly and timelessly, and apply to its past, present,
and future? If some are true, that may not be typical. Very commonly, what
we call scientific knowledge is regarded by scientists as needing refinement
and as possibly mistaken. Quite properly, their attitude is fallibilistic.
If scientists accept fallibilism regarding scientific beliefs – the view that
these beliefs may be mistaken and the accompanying rejection of dogmatic
attitudes – they nonetheless tend to hold a kind of objectivism: the position
that there is an objective method for ascertaining whether beliefs about the
world are true, that is (roughly speaking), a method which can be used by
any competent investigator and tends to yield the same results when prop-
erly applied by different competent investigators to the same problem.
Scientific method is widely taken by scientists and philosophers alike to be a
paradigm of an objective method.
Since we cannot know propositions that are not true, one might conclude
that we should really not speak of scientific knowledge at all, but only of
relatively well-confirmed scientific hypotheses. This is a defensible position.
We may prefer, however, to account for the apparent facts in a way that
allows us to maintain that there is scientific knowledge. One possibility is
that in speaking of scientific knowledge we are often speaking a bit loosely
of what might be called approximate knowledge: well-grounded belief which
holds true up to a certain level of precision in measurement – apart from
“minor inaccuracies,” one might say. Newton’s laws have not, after all, been
found to be completely inaccurate. In building bridges, as opposed to
dealing with astronomical distances or elementary particles, they seem an
adequate guide, and their being only approximately true need cause no
trouble in such practical applications.
One can insist that what is not precisely true is simply not known. But
we could also say that what is approximately true in the scientific domain
may be an object of approximate knowledge, and that beliefs of such propo-
sitions are both fallible and should be held with an openness to their
revision in the light of new discoveries. I prefer the latter way of speaking.
Why must we say it is false, rather than approximately true, that the
circumference of a circle is its diameter times 3.1416, simply because pi can
be worked out so much further? Indeed, given that pi can be carried out
infinitely, how could we ever say truly what the circumference of a circle is if
only absolutely precise propositions could be true?
There is, however, a second way to account for the apparent falsity of
certain scientific generalizations. It seems that often their formulations are
not properly taken to be absolutely precise, and that, rightly interpreted, they
are true within the appropriate limits. Consider the general law that metals
are conductors of electricity. Perhaps this should be interpreted with the
understanding that certain abnormal (or for practical purposes impossible)
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
263

conditions do not obtain. If metals should fail to conduct electricity at abso-
lute zero, would this show the generalization false or simply that its
appropriate scope of application is limited? The latter view seems more plausible.
These points in defense of scientific generalizations against the charge of
wholesale falsity do not imply that none of those generalizations can be
shown to be simply false. The point is that in some cases, instead of saying
that scientific generalizations are not really true and hence do not represent
genuine knowledge, it is preferable to speak either of approximate knowl-
edge of a precisely formulated, but only approximately true, generalization
or, as in this case, of unqualified knowledge of an imprecisely formulated
truth. The difference is roughly that between approximate knowledge and
knowledge of an approximation. In practice, however, there may be no easy way
to decide which, if either, of these cases one is confronted with, or which
indicates the better way to represent the state of one’s knowledge in a given
scientific area.
Scientific knowledge and social epistemology
I have so far spoken mainly about knowledge as individual belief. There is,
however, scientific knowledge in journals no one entirely remembers. This
can be called virtual knowledge since, although no one has it, many of us can
easily acquire it. It is as accessible as our connections to our libraries; and a
day could come when much information of that kind is more readily acces-
sible by computer than are items of information we must carefully draw
from long-term memory.
A natural assumption, however, even for such knowledge in the public
domain, is that individuals have generated it and that only one or more indi-
viduals can acquire it. This is not an uncontroversial assumption. Science is
often said to be a social enterprise, and some thinkers, including some
proponents of feminist epistemology, hold that science is often unwarrantedly
represented as “individualistic” and even atomistic.6 One writer in feminist
epistemology maintains that scientific knowledge is “produced by cognitive
processes that are fundamentally social” and even goes so far as to say that
scientific observation is “dialogic in nature”.7
Some feminist epistemologists, moreover, hold that “the gender of the
inquirer influences the character of knowledge itself,” and “some people
claim that women have gender-typical ‘ways of knowing’,”8 But the last two
claims are not widely defended by feminist epistemologists. They are inde-
pendent of the view that scientific knowledge is social. They are not
implied, moreover, by the thesis that the gender of a researcher may affect
what is actually known, for instance because in survey research “subjects
give different answers to questions depending on the perceived gender of the
interviewer”.9 This point is important for gathering knowledge, but it does
not contribute to understanding the nature of knowledge or what constitutes
evidence or justification.
264
Nature of justification and knowledge

Issues of these sorts are concerns of a subfield of epistemology that over-
laps feminist epistemology at many points: social epistemology. If individual
epistemology is roughly the theory of knowledge and justification as applied
to individual persons – the enterprise we have been engaged in – social epis-
temology is roughly the theory of knowledge and justification as applied to
groups of people.10 The field of epistemology has traditionally been
concerned with individuals taken one at a time, apart from the notable
exception of the status of testimony as a source of grounds for belief. Why
should there be this individual emphasis, if indeed there should be?
It seems quite possible that a single individual could have both knowl-
edge and justification even if no group does, whereas it is not possible that
there be a group that has actual knowledge or justification when no indi-
vidual member of that group has knowledge of or justification for the
proposition in question. We cannot know anything unless it is known by you
or me or some other individual – though there are things we cannot learn by
ourselves. Thus, in the case of a map of the world, knowledge by many
people is needed to build the resulting social representation of geographical
knowledge. Nonetheless, one of us could survive the rest and retain knowl-
edge, or an omnipotent God could have created just one finite person with
the capacity for knowledge and an environment in which it is exercised. In
this respect, individual knowledge and justification are apparently logically
prior to their social counterparts: the former is possible without the latter,
but not conversely.
Virtual knowledge is an exception: “we” can have it in our libraries,
though no one in particular has it. There is still another, quite different case
in which we can have virtual knowledge of something that no individual
literally knows. You and I might each know one of two things that obvi-
ously imply a third, and, if we work together, we might thus be said to
“know” the third but to have not quite articulated it. Perhaps I know that
the assailant wore a full-length cape and you know the identity of the only
person near the crime scene who did so; between us we have a solution to the
crime. This might be considered a kind of unrealized social knowledge.
Social knowledge and the idea of a scientific community
Both examples of virtual knowledge are instances of what might be called
social knowledge. But the first kind of virtual knowledge (illustrated by the
library case), though only socially accessible, is individually realizable, whereas
the second kind of virtual knowledge (illustrated by the detective case) is in
a sense socially constituted. Any competent individual can get the former; only
cooperating individuals can get the latter. One concern of feminist episte-
mology has been to emphasize the role of cooperation, not only in
generating knowledge but in characterizing human knowledge conceived in
the kind of overall way that encompasses both individual and social
instances.
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
265

The priority of individual over social knowledge by no means implies
that given an adequate understanding of individual epistemology, one can
easily construct a social epistemology. That is not so. It is an interesting and
difficult question what relation must hold between a group and its members
in order for its knowledge or justification regarding a proposition to reside
in one or more of those members. This brings us to a related kind of priority
of the individual over the social.
As the metaphor of residing suggests, what a group knows or justifiedly
believes is constituted by what one or more members knows or justifiedly
believes. If we (human beings) know that wet grass is slippery, for instance,
then some of us must have appropriately grounded true beliefs of that
proposition (I leave aside unrealized social knowledge here). Not all of us
have to; but if only a few of us do, then it would be wrong to say that we
know, as opposed to, for instance, ‘It is known,’ referring to the group as the
context in which the knowledge occurs.
Where a subgroup is intended by ‘we,’ the situation may be different. If
the ‘we’ designates the scientific community, then it is permissible that only
a few members know in order for the group to know. It can be true that
“we” now know the mass of a proton even if only a very few have the appro-
priate information. This may be precisely because scientific knowledge is
social in the sense of socially sharable (in a way introspective knowledge of
one’s own sensations is not sharable). It is also both publicly accessible, at least
in the sense that it is normally open to public testing and proper use by any
competent investigator, and, typically cooperatively generated, in that most of
it arises from team efforts.
These three points about the social character of scientific knowledge in
part explain what it is to say that there is a scientific community. It is arguable,
moreover, that some kinds of knowledge are (empirically) impossible
without cooperation, as in the case of knowledge of a theory whose develop-
ment and confirmation require a team effort.11 Indeed, a measure of
scientific cooperation is commonly required even to maintain scientific
knowledge once it is acquired. For given the problems and challenges facing
scientific hypotheses and theories as new information is acquired, the
grounds on which they are maintained will often be eroded unless new
evidences or arguments are found to explain away new data found by
opposing theorists or new investigations.
What the relevant examples of social knowledge seem to suggest is, on
the one hand, the genetic priority of the social over the individual in the devel-
opment of our scientific knowledge – with testimony as well as scientific
cooperation playing a crucial role in producing that knowledge – and the
constitutive priority of the individual over the social in epistemological
matters: social knowledge, justification, and indeed belief, are constituted
by individual knowledge, justification, and belief, respectively. The consti-
tutive priority in question applies both to actual knowledge and
justification, as I have illustrated, and (with such qualifications as are indi-
266
Nature of justification and knowledge

cated by the detective case that illustrated unrealized knowledge) to virtual
knowledge (and virtual justification).
The notion of virtual knowledge is implicit in the idea of “scientific
knowledge” as the scientifically grounded “knowledge” accessible to us
within a certain degree of readiness – for instance in journals that are widely
available – but not residing in any person’s belief. It is because there is no
belief of the relevant propositions that there are scare quotes around ‘knowl-
edge’. What is not believed (or in any way held in someone’s mind) is not
literally known. Nonetheless, the constitutive priority of the individual
clearly applies to virtual knowledge: plainly, we would not have access to the
relevant knowledge unless some individual(s) among us did, at least in the
sense of having access to crucial premises, as in the detective case.
Even if we do not take individual knowledge to be logically prior to social
knowledge, we still have the question of the status of apparent scientific
knowledge (and any other social knowledge). If we consider science in histor-
ical perspective and do not idealize it, it turns out that there is no unqualified
answer to the question of whether what is called scientific knowledge is
knowledge as I have been conceiving it in this book. If we assume that there
are some scientific propositions which are strictly true – and I see no cogent
reason to doubt that there are some – then we apparently have no good ground
for thinking that they cannot be known (or at least believed with ample justi-
fication). But the history of science indicates much change and extensive,
apparently ceaseless correction of previously accepted hypotheses. For all the
progress it exhibits, it also gives us cause to wonder whether even at this
advanced stage in scientific development we grasp many scientific truths
about the world that future investigation will never show to be inaccurate.
I am inclined to say that in spite of both scientific error and the fallibility
of scientific attitudes, we do have much scientific knowledge, even if it is all
only approximate knowledge, or knowledge of approximations. But even if
we have a great deal of scientific knowledge, if much of it is approximate or
is knowledge of approximations, we are quite some distance from the artifi-
cial picture one might have of scientific knowledge as a set of beliefs of
precisely formulated and strictly true generalizations, arrived at by inductive
transmission of knowledge from its basic sources in experience and reason.
Those sources remain basic, and scientific method provides an objective way
of building on them. But there is no straightforward transmission, or, when
transmission occurs, any clearly final destination toward which it proceeds.
Moral knowledge
The possibility of moral knowledge raises rather different sorts of questions
from those just explored. Moreover, whereas there is a widespread tendency
to take for granted that there is much scientific knowledge, there is a
widespread inclination to take moral judgments to be at best culturally
conditioned assertions with no claim to genuine truth.
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
267

Consider the judgment that cruelty to children is wrong. A clear applica-
tion of this principle might be the more specific judgment that it is wrong
to thrash a three-year-old for accidentally spilling milk.12 We accept this,
but do we know it? Suppose someone denies it or simply asks us to justify it.
It does not appear that we can establish it scientifically. It is apparently not a
scientific judgment in the first place. Furthermore, it is not in any obvious
way a judgment grounded in perception; and if it is grounded in reason, it
does not seem to be so in the straightforward way the representative a priori
truths discussed in Chapter 4 apparently are. Many people find it natural to
consider this judgment to be grounded in our culture and to be accepted
simply as part of the social fabric that holds our lives together. It would then
be a case of a judgment socially accepted but nonetheless not expressing social
knowledge.
Relativism and noncognitivism
There are at least two major variants of the view that moral judgments are
somehow grounded in our culture. One of them allows that they are true,
but only in a qualified sense that reflects their being tied to the culture in
which they occur. The other takes them not to belong to truth-stating
discourse at all. Let us consider these views in turn.
The first view – a kind of relativism – says roughly that moral judgments
are true relative to our culture (or even some subculture), but not unquali-
fiedly true, as judgments of fact, such as that a green field lies before me,
may be. This is not to say merely that moral judgments are relativized – true
in relation to certain circumstances, as where ‘We should not kill’ is said to
be true relative to non-self-defensive conditions. This relativization view
does little more than restrict moral judgments, often uncontroversially, to
the circumstances in which they properly apply. Virtually all writers in
ethics are “relativizationists.” Relativism, by contrast, is the thesis that there
are, say, American moral truths, British moral truths, Chinese moral truths,
Danish moral truths, and so on, but no universally valid moral truths (or
standards) – even if some moral principles are universally held.
The second view that (in a way) takes moral truths to be culturally
grounded – the attitudinal view, also called expressivist – says roughly that
such judgments are not literally true at all; rather, they are expressions of
moral attitudes, not assertions of a proposition, hence not “cognitive.”
Normally, these are attitudes rooted in the culture of the person judging,
but a noncognitivist might allow a subgroup or even a single individual
alone to qualify as having a morality in the sense relevant to providing the
basis of moral judgment.
On one version of the attitudinal view, to say that cruelty to children is
wrong is like uttering ‘Cruelty to children!’ in a tone expressing revulsion
and adding, ‘I (hereby) condemn it!’ The attitude is moral both because of
what it concerns and because it represents a certain kind of cultural stance.
268
Nature of justification and knowledge

Such attitudes may be reasonable or unreasonable and may be defended with
reference to what is true or false; but attitudes are not themselves true or
false.
On both views, there is no moral knowledge, since either there are no
moral propositions at all (the negative claim of the attitudinal view), or
there are at least none that are true or false unqualifiedly (the negative claim
of the relativist view in question), whereas propositions expressing empirical
or a priori truths are unqualifiedly true or false. The attitudinal view is thus
committed to (ethical) noncognitivism, which is roughly the claim that there
are no moral propositions to be known, or otherwise “cognized.” The
(ethical) relativist position in question need not endorse noncognitivism.
But doing so can clarify a relativist view, since, as will be evident in some
examples, it is not clear precisely how propositions can be true in a way other
than the way in which empirical and a priori truths are, and it is clear (at
least in outline) how moral attitudes can be rooted in a culture.
The attitudinal interpretation of moral judgments is on the surface the
more radical view. It implies that there simply are no moral truths – or
moral falsehoods either. There are no moral propositions to be known, or to
be justifiedly or even mistakenly believed in the first place. What makes
this apparently radical view plausible?
Suppose one is very impressed with the basic sources of knowledge as our
only routes to knowledge, and one notes that apparently no propositions
known on the basis of sense experience seem to entail the truth of any moral
judgment. For instance, even the proposition that cruelty to children causes
them pain does not entail that cruelty is wrong. Needed surgery, after all,
may cause them pain yet not be wrong.
When we judge something to be wrong we apparently go beyond the
evidence of the senses, and indeed beyond scientific evidence. For example,
suppose that (as is surely possible) we know scientifically that in fact cruelty
to children commonly breeds brutality in its victims. Unless we already
know or are justified in believing that breeding brutality is wrong, the fact
that cruelty to children breeds brutality does not justify us in believing that
cruelty to children is wrong.
It seems to noncognitivists, then, that we cannot know that cruelty to
children is wrong just on the basis of the fact that it causes brutality; this
fact would (deductively) ground that knowledge for us only if we already
knew that brutality is wrong. Now suppose we also assume that nothing
known a priori entails that cruelty to children is wrong: no logical truth
surely, and not even a synthetic proposition like the truth that nothing is red
and green all over at once. These points serve as premises for the negative
conclusion that there is no moral knowledge. For if knowledge is grounded
in the basic sources and moral judgments are not grounded in them, then
moral judgments do not constitute knowledge.
There is also a positive thesis held by the attitudinal theory: that (even
though moral judgments do not express propositions) moral judgments do
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
269

express significant attitudes. A main reason for saying they express attitudes
is that we are not neutral in making moral judgments; we are (normally) pro
or con regarding the things we morally judge. Normally, we at least indi-
rectly commend or condemn when we make a positive or negative moral
judgment.
Now suppose we combine the positive view that moral judgments express
attitudes with the negative view that there are no moral propositions, which
itself implies that there is no moral knowledge. It is now plausible to
conclude that the point of making a moral judgment is not to assert some-
thing – one’s assertion could not be true (or false) – but to express a positive
or negative attitude and thereby to influence human conduct, if only by
endorsing or condemning one or another kind of behavior. Many noncogni-
tivists hold this third position.
Noncognitivism must not be taken to imply that in moral matters
“anything goes.” It is still possible to hold an unreasonable moral attitude,
say one based on misinformation or prejudice. The view can thus allow that
there are even moral mistakes. But mistakes that are specifically moral are
mistakes in attitude, not about what is true or false.
The relativistic view that moral judgments are culturally grounded
endorses the first argument just set out, based on the premise that those
judgments are not anchored in the basic sources of knowledge, but not neces-
sarily the second, attitudinal argument. On this relativist view, although
moral judgments are not rooted in those basic sources, they are learned as we
absorb (or react against) our culture, and they may thus share with judgments
that do represent knowledge a wide social acceptability. Still, we are at best
entitled to expect them to be accepted within our society (or one that morally
agrees with it), and they are at best true for one or another society. They are
not unqualifiedly true, hence not genuinely known in the sense that implies
cross-culturally valid standards of evidence. If they express propositions, those
propositions are assertable in our culture, but not unqualifiedly true.
Preliminary appraisal of relativist and noncognitivist views
To assess the relativist and noncognitivist views, consider first the part of
each position not shared with the other one. Let us start with the attitudinal
aspect of noncognitivism and proceed to the cultural groundedness thesis
characteristic of relativism.
Is there an alternative explanation of the attitudinal aspect of moral judg-
ments? Might they be true or false and still have, for instance, the
commendatory or condemnatory force they do? Take the utterance, ‘The
curtains are on fire!’ If sincerely uttered by any normal person, this would
commonly express alarm and be meant to evoke action. But it is clearly
factual, and it can be unqualifiedly true.
Moreover, it seems to be because of its factual content that the judgment
that the curtains are on fire expresses the kind of alarm it does. Perhaps
270
Nature of justification and knowledge

certain statements of those facts that are significantly and obviously linked
to human concerns are no more attitudinally neutral than are typical moral
judgments. For this reason (among others), one might resist the idea that
the only distinctive function or the major function of moral judgments is to
express attitudes, as opposed to asserting propositions. It might just be that
the facts supporting moral judgments are socially important in a certain
way, as is the curtains’ being on fire.
As to the point that moral judgments are, in some cases, culturally tinged
and differ from one culture to another, there are at least two related ways to
explain this. One concerns the content of such judgments, the other the
social origins of their acceptance.
First, cultures differ in what they accept as a moral judgment. Whereas
contemporary Western societies might construe binding the feet of young
girls to keep them from becoming large and “indelicate” as cruelty, the prac-
tice was not considered wrong by at least certain segments of Chinese society
in the past. It might be replied that ‘cruel’ is a moral term, and hence there
might be a moral disagreement after all – not about whether cruelty to chil-
dren is wrong, but about whether this practice is cruel. Suppose there is
disagreement about that. Why might it not be resolvable by appeal to non-
moral facts? Disagreements about whether certain punishments are morally
permissible may turn on whether they have a certain effect in deterring
crime. Here a moral disagreement about what counts as morally permissible
punishment does turn on the parties’ view of relevant non-moral facts.
Second, we must distinguish – even if we must also interconnect – genetic
and justificatory considerations. The beliefs we express in making moral
judgments may be learned through absorbing a culture, even if what justifies
those beliefs or renders them knowledge does not depend on a particular
culture, for example on its customs or prejudices. Clearly, the origin of a
belief need not be what justifies it, nor need it reflect the truth of the propo-
sition believed, if it is true. Thus, we might learn a moral principle through
something characteristic of our culture (such as our moral education), even
though what justifies it is not grounded in our culture but, perhaps, some-
thing pertaining to human life as such. Our moral education might reflect
this universality; but one could first learn a moral truth from an unreliable
source – say, someone who deceitfully calls another person unfair – and later
get a good justification for it.
Suppose that our moral beliefs do arise from our education and culture,
and are in this sense culturally and historically “conditioned,” as it is some-
times put by theorists working in the sociology of knowledge, a field that
overlaps both social epistemology and feminist epistemology. There is good
reason to say that at least many of our scientific beliefs are also culturally and
historically conditioned. If we need not thereby regard the relevant scientific
beliefs as culturally relative, why should we so regard moral beliefs?
One might think that unless they are scientifically justified, moral judg-
ments are merely true for those who hold them. But both moral and scientific
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
271

judgments, moreover, are “true for” the social groups that hold them, at least
in the sense that the people in question believe them. Does that not indicate
a kind of relativity in both cases? That is doubtful: anything we believe is in
that sense true for us: it is believed by us to be true. If this is how moral
judgments are relative to those who make them, their “relativity” character-
izes even simple self-evident truths. Isn’t it true for all of us that if the spruce
is taller than the maple, then the maple is shorter than the spruce?
Is there some other sense of ‘true for’ that discriminates between the sense
in which anything we believe is true for us and the elusive sense in which
moral judgments are, according to some relativists, true for some people and
not others? One might try taking ‘true for’ as equivalent to ‘true from the
(cultural) point of view’; but what does this come to beyond saying that ‘It
is true for my culture’ means ‘My culture believes it’?
Another possibility is that ‘true for’ means something like ‘successfully
works for’ or alternatively ‘conforms to the practices of’. This would be illus-
trated by ‘One ought to drive on the left side of the road’ is true for the
British but not (many) others. But this does not yield a general relativism or
at least not one that sets ethics apart from science. It is equivalent to some-
thing like ‘In Britain one ought to drive on the left,’ and that simply
specifies circumstances in which the judgment applies, just as ‘at sea level’
specifies when the air pressure on Earth is 14.7 pounds per square inch.
This circumstantial relativism – as we might call it – is simply the plausible
view that what we ought to do depends on the circumstances we are in. It
says nothing about the status or the nature of the truth of moral principles
once they are stated in relation to – relativized to – the circumstances they
apply to. It leaves open that they might then be seen to be true or false in
the usual sense appropriate to propositions about the empirical world.
There are certainly different kinds of circumstances in different cultures,
and there may be important moral principles true for one society and not
another, in the sense that in one of the societies, but not the other, people
generally believe them. But, as the analogy to scientific disagreement indi-
cates, that would show nothing about whether moral principles or
judgments are relative in any sense implying that they cannot be known or
justifiedly believed.
Moral versus “factual” beliefs
We are now getting close to the heart of the issue concerning the possibility
of moral knowledge. Recall the objection that we can use experience and
reason, say perceptual facts and deductive logic, to test scientific beliefs, but
not to test moral judgments, which are still relative in a way scientific judg-
ments are not. We are back to the argument which the relativist and
attitudinal views commonly share: that since experience and reason do not
ground moral judgments, those judgments cannot express knowledge. This
argument must be squarely met.
272
Nature of justification and knowledge

The first thing to be stressed is that from the premise that moral judg-
ments are not formally deducible – derivable by the standards of deductive
logic – from facts, it simply does not follow that they are not justifiable by
appeal to facts. That this conclusion does not follow seems evident from our
discussion of scientific knowledge, which (assuming that there is some such
knowledge) illustrates that knowledge can arise through inductive transmis-
sion from evidential premises. Scientific generalizations, for example, are
inductively known (if known at all) on the basis of the facts, such as observa-
tional data, which we use to confirm them. If there can be scientific
knowledge on this basis, then there can be knowledge based on inductive
grounds, grounds that do not entail the proposition we know on the basis of
them. Why, then, should there not be inductively grounded moral knowl-
edge even if no moral knowledge is deductively grounded?13
The obvious reply to this argument is that moral generalizations are not
even inductively supported by the facts. But is that true? We certainly
appeal to facts to justify moral judgments. I might justify my judgment
that I ought to meet with Jane by citing the simple fact that I promised to.
This does not prove that I ought to meet with her, but it surely provides a
good reason for the judgment that I ought to. There is, moreover, a third
possibility we should examine: that even if such a fact does not imply a
moral judgment by the rules of logic, it implies it in a different kind of a
priori way.
Ethical intuitionism
This brings us to a major account of moral knowledge, one quite different
from the deductive and inductive ones so far specified. Suppose someone
asks why I should keep my promises in the first place. I could perhaps
explain why I believe this. But suppose that I cannot justify it by appeal to
anything more basic. This would not show that I do not know or justifiably
believe it. At some point or other in defending a factual judgment I may be
equally incapable of giving a further justification. It would not follow that
the judgment I am defending does not express knowledge or justified belief.
The issue before us should be explicitly considered in the light of what we
saw concerning the structure of knowledge. A foundationalist may say that
(with some special exceptions) the principle that one should keep one’s
promises, or at least some more general principle, such as that people should
be treated with respect, is self-evident, hence knowable a priori, and needs no
defense by derivation from prior principles. This intuitionism does not claim
that everyone who considers the relevant principle will find it obvious; but
that same point will hold for certain truths of logic which, when they are
finally understood, are comfortably accepted as self-evident. The crucial thing
is that the principle can be seen to be true through intuitive reflection.14
Foundationalists will tend to argue that such a response is legitimate
when we get to certain stages in a process of justification, because some
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
273

beliefs (including many that are not self-evident) are foundational in a way
that warrants our holding them without doing so on the basis of prior
premises. If that were not true, then we could not be justified in holding
anything.
This is not in the least to suggest that the foundationalist must cut off
discussion or simply reassert the proposition in question. Clarifying exam-
ples may be adduced. Misguided objections may be refuted. An unexpected
premise might be found after all. That is possible even for a self-evident
proposition; being evident in itself, such a proposition does not stand in need
of a premise, but is not necessarily incapable of being evidenced by one.
Coherentists will certainly be willing to go on arguing by appeal to
propositions that provide support by appropriately cohering with the one in
question. They might point out that if we do not keep our promises, life
will be unbearable, and then, for each thesis attacked, defend it with respect
to one or more others. The objector may not be pacified by this approach
either. But neither approach can simply be rejected out of hand. To be
warranted in rejecting either approach, one must have a plausible alternative
conception of knowledge and justification. What would it be? That is far
from evident, as we shall soon see in exploring skepticism.
These responses in support of the possibility of moral knowledge do not go
as far as one might like. They rest on limited analogies and on simply showing
that the case against moral knowledge is inconclusive. But there are two other
important responses we should consider. One, defended perhaps most power-
fully by Kant and later Kantians, as well as by intuitionists, construes
knowledge of moral principles as a priori. The other, defended perhaps most
powerfully by Mill and later utilitarians, represents moral principles as empir-
ical. In either case, moral knowledge and moral justification are grounded in
the basic experiential and rational sources I have been discussing.
Kantian rationalism in moral epistemology
To understand the first, broadly Kantian, response, consider another applica-
tion of the principle that cruelty to children is wrong: the proposition that
flogging infants for pleasure is wrong. There is some plausibility in saying
that we know this. Intuitionists would tend to say we know it (or can know
it) non-inferentially; Kantians would likely hold that we know it as an
obvious application of Kant’s famous categorical imperative, which, in one
form, says that we are to act only on principles that we can (rationally) will
to be universal laws of nature obeyed by us all.15
The proposition that flogging infants for pleasure is wrong seems plausible
on even brief reflection about what it is to flog infants. It is difficult to
conceive exceptions, and it is certainly difficult to conceive circumstances
that would lead rational persons not to endorse it provided they are taking
either the point of view of universalizability or the equally Kantian point of
view of commitment to treating people as ends in themselves and never
274
Nature of justification and knowledge

merely as means. To be sure, perhaps such cruelty as flogging an infant could
in special cases be excusable, even if not morally right. Terrorists might electri-
cally manipulate my brain so that I change in personality and am somehow
brought to flog an infant (perhaps even to do so for pleasure); but even then I
would be doing something wrong, though doing it in an excusable way.16
Consider another example, a modest version of something more powerful:
we ought to treat people equally in matters of life and death, say in regard to
wartime military service, unless they differ in some relevant way (and not
merely in being different people). This is a kind of principle of consistency,
not logical consistency, but something like consistency in roughly the sense
of using a principled policy or procedure in making decisions. It says that
such prima facie inconsistent treatment is wrong and that differential treat-
ment in these mortal matters must be justifiable by a difference.
Granted, the principle does not specify what kind of difference is rele-
vant, for example that the health of candidates for organ transplant is
relevant and their skin color is not. Specifying relevant differences is a
further step. But the principle is still a moral one, and it commits us to the
important requirement that there be a reason to justify the indicated differ-
ences in treatment. Particularly since it is a kind of consistency principle,
there is some reason to believe that if it is true, it is knowable a priori,
though defending this idea would be a major task.
As this perspective on the principle of equal treatment suggests, it is
natural to take the Kantian view to be internalist in its moral epistemology:
it is by the use of reason, and hence through grounds accessible to reflection,
that we know and can justifiedly believe sound moral principles. We may
need much experience to understand moral concepts; but once we under-
stand them, sufficient reflection on them provides justification for basic
principles of action and thereby for moral principles.
Utilitarian empiricism in moral epistemology
The second response to relativist and noncognitivist views in moral episte-
mology, the response of Mill’s utilitarianism, is very different. It says that (1)
our moral judgments are knowable on the basis of factual knowledge of how
our acting in accordance with them would contribute to producing some-
thing intrinsically good: good in itself, independently of what it leads to.
Mill maintained that (2) only pleasure and freedom from pain are good in
themselves. He apparently believed that if these two premises can them-
selves be known (as he thought they could be), they justify holding, as one’s
fundamental moral principle, something like this: that precisely those acts
are right which contribute at least as favorably to pleasure (and freedom
from pain) in the world as any alternative available to the agent in question.
(I leave aside the points Mill raises later about qualities of pleasure.)17
Since, on Mill’s view, we can determine what these optimal acts are, that
is, what acts have the most utility, by a combination of common sense and
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
275

scientific procedures, moral judgments are knowable in the same way as
common sense and scientific statements. By contrast with Kant’s moral epis-
temology, Mill’s (and that of at least the majority of utilitarians) is
externalist: we have access to grounds of moral truths only through consider-
ations about the consequences of actions for pleasure and pain, and those
considerations require observational or other kinds of inductive evidence.
(Given the central role of consequences in determining what is right, utili-
tarianism is also called consequentialism, though there are other forms of that
general view.)
A question that now arises is how we know that pleasure or anything else
is intrinsically good. Mill argued that (for one thing) we can know this by
determining what people by nature actually desire for its own sake. But the
utilitarian approach is by no means committed to that view (which many
commentators on Mill find implausible). For instance, it might be argued
instead that what is intrinsically good is what people want or would want
for its own sake provided their wants are adequately rational, say held in the
light of reflection that is logically and scientifically rational, vivid, and
appropriately focused on the nature of the thing wanted.18
Kantian and utilitarian moral epistemologies compared
The Kantian and the Millian utilitarian responses to challenges to moral
knowledge are nicely parallel to Kant’s and Mill’s views of the truths of
reason. On Kant’s rationalistic view (only part of which was introduced in
Chapter 4), moral principles are (synthetic) a priori. On Mill’s empiricist
view (only part of which I have stated), moral principles are empirical.
There is a further epistemologically interesting contrast here. On Kant’s
approach, or at least in some approaches of the same rationalistic kind, such
as most versions of intuitionism, there can be direct (non-inferential) moral
knowledge. For on these views there are moral principles that are basic in a
sense implying that knowledge of them need not be inferentially grounded
in knowledge of any other propositions. On the utilitarian approach, there
cannot be direct moral knowledge except in special cases. The main and
perhaps only cases seem to be these. First, some direct moral knowledge is
only memorially direct, that is, direct as preserved in memory but originally
indirect and now direct just by virtue of one’s forgetting one’s evidential
grounds for it, as one forgets the steps in proving a theorem and remembers
only the theorem. Second, some moral knowledge is testimonially direct, that
is, non-inferentially grounded in testimony, where (for the utilitarian) this
requires that at some time someone (say, the attester) knew the truth inferen-
tially.
Both of these memorial and testimonial cases would be secondary
knowledge, since the knowledge depends on other knowledge of the same
proposition and is not primary in the way that, say, perceptual knowledge is.
Secondary knowledge need not, however, be inferential, since it need not at
276
Nature of justification and knowledge

the time in question be based on other knowledge. For Mill, knowledge
that, say, keeping one’s promises is obligatory would ultimately depend on
someone’s knowing a good deal about the effects of promise-keeping on
happiness. One could know the principle through parental teaching given in
the course of one’s moral education, and one could establish it for oneself by
studying human behavior and then retain one’s knowledge of it after forget-
ting one’s grounds. But no one could know it directly unless someone knew
it inferentially, through evidence.
This difference between Kant and Mill – the former providing, as do
intuitionists, for direct moral knowledge and the latter not – is no accident.
Implicit in Mill’s utilitarianism is the view that moral properties, such as
being obligatory, are unlike sensory properties in not being directly experi-
enced or otherwise directly knowable. As an empiricistic, and thus
experience-based, moral theory, it must treat knowledge of moral truths as
ultimately indirect (unless, as has occasionally been done, it posits moral
experience as a source of knowledge that grounds knowledge rather in the
way perception does). Thus, even if, by memory, I have some direct moral
knowledge, no moral knowledge is independently basic, in the sense that it
need not at any time be grounded in another kind of knowledge. If I know
that cruelty to children is wrong, it is by virtue of my (or someone’s)
knowing that it does not contribute optimally to happiness in the world.
For a broadly Kantian view, on the other hand, we can rationally grasp
this principle, at least as a consequence of a more general principle. For intu-
itionism, we can sometimes even directly grasp a moral principle, for instance
that arbitrarily unequal treatment of persons in matters of life and death is
wrong. On both these views, then, we can have moral knowledge which is
direct and independently basic. But even if Kant is best interpreted as
construing the most general moral knowledge as depending on non-moral
premises, he took all general moral knowledge to be deductively derivable
from (and only from) a priori premises and thus itself a priori (at least in the
provability sense).
Should Kantian or utilitarian or intuitionist views convince us that there
is moral knowledge? From what I have said about them, it is not obvious
that they should. But, when carefully developed, they are each plausible, and
each may be held with the attitude of objectivistic fallibilism that is also
appropriate to scientific views. Each view certainly seems to warrant the
conclusion that there can be moral knowledge; and apparently there is some,
despite the sorts of relativistic and attitudinal arguments I raised to indicate
why some thinkers deny its possibility.
There are, of course, other issues that should be explored in deciding
whether moral principles or judgments can be known, or even justifiably
believed. There may, for instance, be sources of moral knowledge, such as a
special moral faculty analogous to perception, which are not in the end
rooted in experience or reason as conceived in Part One. But I see no reason
to believe there are. Suppose, however, that we have a special moral faculty.
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
277

Presumably, it is a kind of rational capacity whose insights are rational ones
capable of being known or at least justifiedly believed. Whatever the prob-
lems that remain, perhaps enough has been said to connect those problems
with the epistemological framework developed in this book. Certainly,
locating moral judgments in that framework is at least a good way to
approach the question of whether they can constitute knowledge.
Religious knowledge
The case of possible religious knowledge is different in many ways from that
of possible moral knowledge, but it can still be clarified in the light of some
of the concepts and principles introduced in this book. Again, I want to be
brief and to start with the negative view, in this case that religious proposi-
tions are simply beyond the scope of human knowledge. I have in mind
propositions about God, such as that God exists, brought order out of chaos
(or even created the universe without any antecedent matter), and loves us:
propositions that do not merely have a religious subject matter but also
imply that God (or some other spiritual reality worthy of a central place in a
religion) exists.
Why would it be thought that no religious propositions are known? The
most common basis for holding this view is probably much like the most
common reason for holding that there is no moral knowledge, namely, that
religious propositions, such as that God exists, cannot be known either a
priori or on the basis of experience, say by inferring God’s existence from the
premise that God’s designing the universe is the best explanation of the
order we find in it.
Both aspects of this negative claim have been discussed by philosophers
and theologians at great length, and there are well-known arguments for the
existence of God meant to provide knowledge that God exists. Some of these
make use only of a priori premises; others use only empirical propositions as
premises. For instance, the ontological argument, in one form, proceeds
from the a priori premises that God is supremely perfect (has all perfections
in the highest degree), and that existence is a perfection, to the conclusion
that God exists. By contrast, the argument from first cause (in one form)
uses the empirical premise that there is motion, together with the general
premise that there cannot be an infinite chain of causes of motion, and
concludes that God, as an unmoved first mover, exists.
There is a vast literature about these and all the other historically impor-
tant arguments for the existence of God.19 I am not concerned here with
arguments for God’s existence. All I want to say about those arguments is
that nothing in the framework I have developed implies either that there can
or that there cannot be cogent arguments for God’s existence. For instance,
nothing said about the basic sources of knowledge or about its transmission
implies that those sources could not in some way lead to arguments yielding
knowledge of God or of some other spiritual reality. The same point applies
278
Nature of justification and knowledge

to justification of beliefs about God or some spiritual reality, and both
points hold within either a foundationalist or a coherentist epistemology.
Evidentialism versus experientialism
But what about the possibility – less often discussed than arguments for
God’s existence – of direct (non-inferential) knowledge of God? Does the
framework of this book rule out that possibility? General epistemological
considerations have sometimes been thought to do so, but they do not.
Indeed, if there can be what I have called natural knowledge, as in the case
of direct knowledge of arithmetical results ordinarily knowable only
through lengthy calculation, then there is some reason to think that knowl-
edge can be built into a person in such a way that the person could have
direct knowledge of God. (The kind of knowledge in question was counte-
nanced by John Calvin and dubbed the sensus divinitatis.)20 To be sure there
may be less mystery about how a mere calculational mechanism could be
built into the brain than about how knowledge of an external, spiritual
reality could be. But a mystery is not an impossibility.
If, however, it is even possible that there is an all-powerful (omnipotent)
God, then that God could create such direct theistic knowledge. If there can
be such knowledge, then one form of what is called evidentialism is mistaken,
namely, evidentialism about theistic knowledge, the view that knowledge of God
is impossible except on the basis of adequate evidence. (The kind of evidence
intended is not the non-inferential “evidence of the senses,” such as we have
for there being a printed page before us, but the sort ordinarily called
evidence, which one would have in the form of premises from which one
may infer theistic conclusions).21
How might evidentialism apply to justification? Recall the prima facie
cases of direct knowledge of something that is ordinarily knowable only
through evidence or inference, such as the result of multiplying two three-
digit numbers. If there is direct knowledge here, it need not be a case of
justified belief. So we cannot use such examples to refute evidentialism about
theistic justification: the view that justified beliefs about God are impossible
except on the basis of evidence.
Could one be directly justified in believing such religious propositions as
that God exists? Would this require one’s having a sixth sense, or some kind
of mystical faculty? And even if there should be such a thing, would it
generate justification directly, or only through one’s discovering adequately
strong correlations between its deliverances and what is believed through
reason or ordinary experience, for instance through one’s religious views
enabling one to predict publicly observable events? In the latter case, the
mystical faculty would not be a basic source of justification. Before it could
justify the beliefs it produces, it would have to earn its justificational
credentials through a sufficient proportion of those beliefs receiving confir-
mation from other sources, such as perception and introspection.
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
279

There is, however, a way to resist evidentialism and argue for the possi-
bility of direct justification of certain religious beliefs without assuming
that there are any sources of justification beyond reason and normal experi-
ence. In particular, this approach need not posit either mystical
apprehensions, such as overpowering, ineffable, otherworldly experiences, or
special divine revelations, whether in those experiences or in the presence of
apparently miraculous changes in the external world.
I call the position I have in mind experientialism, since it grounds the
justification of some very important religious beliefs in experience rather
than in evidential beliefs or direct rational apprehension. Religious people
sometimes say that, in perfectly ordinary life, God speaks to them, they are
aware of God in the beauty of nature, and they can feel God’s presence.
Descriptions of these sorts might be considered metaphorical. But if God is,
as many think, properly conceived as a (divine) person, these avowals might
have a literal meaning.
It is natural to object that all one directly hears in such experiences is a
special kind of voice (presumably in one’s mind’s ear), that all one directly
sees is the natural beauty which one takes to manifest God, and that one
simply feels a spiritual tone in one’s experience. From these moves it is easy
to conclude that one is at best indirectly justified in believing one is experi-
encing God. After all, one believes it inferentially; for instance, on the basis
of one’s belief that the voice one hears is God’s, one might believe that the
beauty one sees is a manifestation of divine creation; and so forth.
The perceptual analogy and the possibility of direct theistic
knowledge
To assess the case just made to show that theistic beliefs are inferential and
so not candidates to be directly justified (or direct knowledge), compare
perception. Suppose it is argued that one is only indirectly justified in
believing there is a green field before one, since one believes it on the basis
of believing that there is grass, a green textured surface, and so on. Must we
accept this? I think not. I do not normally even have these beliefs when I
believe there is a green field before me, even if I do see it by seeing its grassy
surface.
The matter is far more complicated than this, however. It may be argued
that since God is both infinite and non-physical, one cannot be acquainted
with God through experience. But this argument will not do. Even if a
stream were infinitely long, I could still see it by seeing part of it. Seeing an
infinite thing is not seeing its infinity.
But, if seeing the stream is not seeing its infinity, then how can seeing it
be a basis for knowing that the stream is infinite? Similarly, if God is expe-
rienced, how can the experience reveal that it is God who is experienced?
The problem is not that God is non-physical. The non-physical can be
quite readily experienced, and indeed in a direct way. Thus, my experience
280
Nature of justification and knowledge

of my own thinking presumably need not be of something physical, even if
in fact it is of something physical, say a brain process; and even if it must
be (because of some necessary connection that might hold between the
mental and the physical), it is not experience of, say, my thoughts as phys-
ical.
The problem, then, is not that there cannot be experience, even quite
unmystical experience, of God. It is (in part) that if experiencing, say, God’s
speaking to one, is possible, it is not clear how one could know (or justi-
fiedly believe) that it is God speaking. How would one know that one was
not having a merely internal experience, such as talking to oneself in a voice
one thinks is God’s, or even hallucinating a divine voice? (Some of these are
skeptical questions of a kind to be discussed in the next chapter.)
In part, the question is how one might recognize God. Plainly, this
requires having a concept of God. But that is acquirable without already
having knowledge of God’s existence. One also needs a concept of, for
instance, a sonata to recognize one. These concepts are very different, but
either one can be acquired without actually knowing of the existence of (or
experiencing) what it represents.
Here it is important to recall the perceptual analogy. Why would it be
less likely that my experience of looking toward the green field is hallucina-
tory? It is true that there is a difference: we can, with all the other senses,
verify that we see a grassy field, whereas God seems perceptually accessible
at most to sight and hearing – presumably indirectly, since God is seen in
appropriate things and heard through hearing voices, perhaps inner voices,
that are not literally God’s (at least if a being’s voice must be physically
grounded in a physical embodiment, though even in that case, some would
argue that God’s voice was physically embodied in Christ).
Even if God is accessible to sight and hearing only indirectly, it does not
follow that knowledge and belief about God are indirect. As we saw in
exploring the sense-datum theory, we can know one thing through another
without inferring facts about the first from facts about the second. Thus, the
force of this difference between the possible perceptual accessibility of God
and that of physical objects can be exaggerated. Surely it is not true that
sense experience can be trusted only when verification by all the other senses
is possible. If that were so, we could not justifiably believe we see a beam of
light that is perceptually accessible only to our vision.
Problems confronting the experientialist approach
There are many other relevant questions. Take first a psychological one of
the kind relevant to epistemology. Do people ever really believe directly
that, say, God is speaking to them, or is such a belief based – even if not self-
consciously – on believing that the voice in question has certain
characteristics, where one takes these to indicate God’s speaking? Second,
how is the possibility of corroboration by others – what we might call social
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
281

justification – relevant? Does it, for instance, matter crucially, for experiential
justification for believing in God, that not just any normal person can be
expected to see God in the beauty of nature, whereas any normal person can
be expected to see a green field? Or is this contrast blunted by the marked
differences in perceptual acuity we find among clearly normal people, partic-
ularly in complicated matters such as aesthetic perception in music and
painting, where what is directly heard or seen nevertheless cannot be seen or
heard without both practice and sensitivity?
A related question is the possible role of testimony as a social source of
direct justification. If it is true that (as argued in Chapter 5) beliefs based on
testimony are commonly direct, then perhaps certain theistic testimony by
some provides knowledge of God to others. Even if one supposed that very
few people have theistic knowledge or justified theistic belief (at least “first-
hand”), one might argue that the relevant testimonial chains can extend to
many people – either during a given period of time or, where there is a
community of believers, across time extending as long as thousands of years.
To be sure, justification seems different from knowledge here, at least
insofar as one must have justification for believing someone in order to
acquire justification for what is attested. But perhaps religious believers
often have this justification for accepting testimony in religious matters; it
is at least not obvious, for instance, that in order to be justified in religious
beliefs on the basis of testimony they must have a kind of justification that
is out of their reach as rational persons.
Whatever the place of testimony in providing theistic knowledge or
justification, one might expand the possibilities for direct experience of
God. Might God be seen, not necessarily in the ethereally direct way mystics
have sometimes imagined, but in a more ordinary, if no less direct, fashion?
If so, there is more ground to testify from as well as less need for testimony as
a source of theistic knowledge or justification. Might God be seen, for
instance, in nature, rather than so to speak inferred from it? Here is one of
Gerard Manley Hopkins’s poetic expressions of that idea:
The world is charged with the grandeur of God.
It will flame out, like shining from shook foil;
It gathers to a greatness, like the ooze of oil
Crushed …
And for all this, nature is never spent;
There lives the dearest freshness deep down things …22
After all, if nature is God’s work – perhaps God’s ongoing work – might
there be a sense in which God is seen in it by those with the appropriate
sensitivity? A special sensitivity is needed even for seeing the beauty in a
painting. To be sure, the relation of beauty to a painting that has it is
different from the relation of God to nature conceived as revealing God. The
point, however, is only that special sensitivity may be required for theistic
perception, not that it is exactly like aesthetic perception.
282
Nature of justification and knowledge

The suggestion is not that nature is partly constitutive of God, at least
not in the way that the shape and texture by which I perceive a spruce tree
are in part constitutive of it. Still, could nature, as some views apparently
have it, be partly constitutive of God? If it is (as it in some sense would be
on the view that the physical universe is God’s body), then directly
perceiving God may in a way be too easy, or at least quite easy to do
without directly perceiving the divinity in what one sees. One could not
see a beautiful landscape without seeing God, though one could see it
without seeing it as manifesting God.23
The dimensions of these questions quickly widen, and even the many
points that have come to light do not enable us to determine with any
confidence whether there can be directly justified religious beliefs. It has
so often been taken to be obvious that there cannot be, however, that it is
important to see why it is really not obvious. It is at best very difficult to
establish absolute restrictions on what sorts of beliefs can be directly justi-
fied. This holds even if the only way in which beliefs can be directly
justified is by virtue of their grounding in the basic sources of justifica-
tion.
A parallel point holds for absolute restrictions on what we can justi-
fiedly believe (or know) on the basis of one or more arguments. It is
particularly difficult to determine what can be justifiedly believed (or
known) through a combination of plausible but individually inconclusive
arguments for the same conclusion. As both coherentists and moderate
foundationalists are at pains to show, there are times when a belief is justi-
fied not by grounding in one or more conclusive arguments, but by its
support from – which implies some degree of coherence with – many sets
of independent premises none of which, alone, would suffice to justify it.24
The arguments that may work together here are not limited to the tradi-
tional kind proceeding from premises about the external world. Where one
has non-inferential justification, say from a perceptual experience, one may
formulate an argument that proceeds from premises describing the occur-
rence and character of the experience. Such arguments from experience can
be combined with the traditional kind.
It must be granted, however, that it is often hard in practice to distin-
guish, even in our own case, between beliefs that are grounded directly in
one of the basic sources and beliefs that are grounded in those sources
through other beliefs of which we may not even be aware, or through infer-
ences we do not realize we are making from propositions which we are aware
we believe. This means that what we take to be direct belief, such as a belief
that God has called on one to make sacrifice for someone else, may really be
based on at least one other belief and may depend for its justification on the
evidence or grounds which some other belief expresses. Still, even if we
cannot tell whether a belief is inferential, we may be able to determine what
further beliefs it is based on if it is inferential, and we may then be able to
defend its justification on the basis of those.
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
283

Suppose for the sake of argument that there cannot be directly justified
religious beliefs of the kind we have been discussing. It is important to see
that there can still be direct knowledge of such propositions, if (as I have
argued) one can know certain kinds of things by virtue of a connection with
them even if one does not have justification for believing them. For some
religious people, even knowledge without justification might be considered
very precious in this case. It would, perhaps, be one kind of faith.
Justification and rationality, faith and reason
Our topic in these passages about theistic justification is sometimes called
the question of faith and reason. In discussing that question, reason – above
all rationality in holding religious beliefs – is commonly thought to be
roughly equivalent to justification. I take it, however, that although a justi-
fied belief must be rational, a rational belief, while it perhaps cannot be
patently unjustified, need not be positively justified.25 Consider a belief that
someone likes you. It can be rational on the basis of a vague “intuitive” sense
before it is justified by evidence.
Moreover, justification seems tied more to specific justifiers than ratio-
nality is to any analogue of a justifier. If I justifiedly believe there is a cold
glass in my hand, my justification is (chiefly) my tactual sensations; if I
rationally believe that a painting is beautiful, there need be nothing compa-
rable in the way of a sensory ground. I must have color sensations, but there
is no sensation specifically of beauty as there is of the cold glass.
Perhaps rationality belongs for the most part to beliefs that are broadly
consonant with reason and contrast chiefly with those that are irrational,26
whereas the justified contrasts chiefly with the unjustified. An unjustified
belief – as many philosophers have discovered in their own case – need not
be irrational. Moreover, justification not only contrasts with irrationality but
seems always to trace to some kind of specific, adequate ground.
Moreover, there is at least one respect in which justification represents a
less permissive normative standard than rationality. Mere absence of condi-
tions that would make a belief unjustified does not imply that it is justified,
but at most that one may suspend judgment on its negation as opposed to
being justified in disbelieving the proposition in question (believing it
false). But in a rational person, absence of conditions that would make it
irrational to hold a belief, together, at least, with certain experiential or
social patterns favoring it, does tend to imply that it is rational. I may ratio-
nally believe a painting is beautiful if it seems so to me and I can find no
reason to the contrary; I cannot justifiedly believe this without some ground
(though the ground may be only a sense that it is like others widely consid-
ered beautiful by competent observers).
If rationality is a weaker – i.e., more permissive – normative notion than
justification, it still provides a significant positive status that a theistic
belief can have even if it is not justified. This is an important point.
284
Nature of justification and knowledge

Scientific, moral, and other kinds of beliefs may also achieve rationality
more readily than justification, even if, when they do, it is commonly a stage
on the way to justification.
In any case, if rationality is possible without justification yet is implied by
it, a plausible conclusion is that the experiential and rational grounds that,
when sufficiently weighty, produce justification may, even when not quite
weighty enough to yield justification, still render a belief based on them being
rational. A theistic belief might then be rational even if not justified. There
might, to be sure, have to be some consideration weighing in the direction of
justification, and one could speak here of some degree of justification; but as
examples we explored earlier show, one can have some degree of justification
for a proposition without having overall justification for believing it.
These points about the difference between justification and rationality do
not show that anyone does hold rational theistic beliefs, or even that scien-
tific or moral beliefs are ever rationally held. But if rationality is a weaker
notion than justification, there would at least be better reason to think that
this is so than there would be if the requirements for rationality were as
strong as those for justification. In particular, whatever the weight of the
considerations we have seen favoring the possibility of justification for scien-
tific, moral, and theistic beliefs – and I think the weight is substantial –
those considerations weigh more heavily in favor of the possibility of
rational scientific, moral, and theistic beliefs.
Acceptance, presumption, and faith
One further line of thinking should be introduced here. We need not explore
either justification or rationality in these three domains only in terms of
belief. Belief has been utterly dominant in most epistemological discussions
of cognition, but it is not the only cognitive attitude that raises epistemo-
logical questions or is appraisable in relation to justification or supporting
grounds. There are attitudes weaker than belief in the degree of conviction
they imply, yet strong enough in that psychological dimension to guide
thought and action. Some philosophers have taken acceptance in this way.
Accepting a scientific hypothesis, in this terminology, does not imply
believing it, but it can commit one to using the hypothesis – say, that a
certain illness is caused by a particular chemical – as a premise in (tentative)
reasoning and in guiding one’s day-to-day actions.
Similarly, in ethics one might presume the truth of a moral proposition, say
that a certain job would involve one in a conflict of interest, without
believing it. And in theology, one might have faith that, for instance, God is
sovereign in the universe, without unqualifiedly believing this – though of
course one may not have faith that this is so if one disbelieves it. In all three
cases – acceptance, presumption, and faith – one cannot have extremely
strong doubts about the proposition; but one can have or entertain some
degree of doubt, in a way one cannot if one genuinely believes it.27
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
285

It seems clear that the weight of evidence or grounding required for either
justification or rationality will be less for these non-belief-implying atti-
tudes than it is for belief. For instance, faith that a friend will recover from a
disease can be rational when the situation is too bleak for justified (or even
rational) belief that the recovery will occur. I might be perfectly reasonable,
so far as the evidence goes, in having faith where I would be unreasonably
underplaying the facts if I believed the recovery will occur. And I can accept a
hypothesis, at least for purposes of determining how to think and act in an
urgent matter, when it would be premature to believe it. To be sure, reli-
gious faith differs in significant ways from the kind just described, but the
main point still applies: whatever the grounds needed for justified theistic
belief, weaker grounds will suffice for theistic faith with the same content,
say that God is sovereign.
It turns out, then, that epistemology broadly conceived may consider not
just the scope of our knowledge and justified belief but also the scope of our
rational belief and even of other rational attitudes toward propositions, such as
certain kinds of acceptance, presumption, and faith. This extension of episte-
mological appraisal to other, weaker attitudes provides more scope for
rationality than there would be if belief were the only object of rationality. The
same strength of evidence or grounding may take us further in the domain of
attitudes like acceptance, presumption, and faith than in that of belief.
The question of how far our knowledge and justification extend beyond our
beliefs grounded directly in experience or reason turns out to be complicated.
We at least have warrant for rejecting the stereotypic view that whereas there
obviously exists scientific knowledge as an upshot of proof, it is at best
doubtful that there is any moral knowledge, or even can be religious knowl-
edge. It seems a mistake to talk of scientific proof at all if that means
(deductive) proof of scientific hypotheses or theories from observational or
other scientific evidence. Moreover, scientific knowledge does not often repre-
sent uncontroversial beliefs of precise generalizations, but is commonly either
approximate knowledge, often known to need refinement, or knowledge of
approximations, formulated with the appropriate restrictions left unspecified.
There is good reason to think that we also have, and certainly have not
been shown not to have, moral knowledge. And there is apparently no
cogent reason to deny the possibility of religious knowledge. The same holds
for moral and religious justification; and in all three instances, the scientific,
the moral, and the religious, the case for the possibility of rational beliefs
seems undefeated and, beyond that, stronger than the case for justification.
Both cases appear stronger still as applied, not to beliefs, but to attitudes
like acceptance, presumption, and faith conceived as in a certain way weaker
than belief. There are, of course, important skeptical arguments we have not
considered, arguments that attempt to undermine all these positive conclu-
sions and many views about the scope of knowledge, justification, and
rationality. It is time to examine some of those arguments.
286
Nature of justification and knowledge

Notes
1 Cf. W.V. Quine’s point that “Observation sentences [such as ‘Rain’ (for ‘It is raining’)
and ‘Milk’ (for ‘That is milk’)] are … the vehicle of scientific evidence … But they
are also the entering wedge in the learning of language.” See Pursuit of Truth, revised
edn. (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992), p. 5.
2 The point that scientific theories are not proved, nor even, strictly speaking
disproved, by the kinds of observations that confirm or disconfirm them is developed
by Pierre Duhem in The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, Philip P. Wiener, trans.
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1954); and the idea which explains this –
that theories are tested in conjunction with a number of related hypotheses and
assumptions rather than in isolation – is often called the Duhem–Quine thesis (or some-
times the Quine–Duhem thesis, given Quine’s more detailed development of the view).
For a short statement of the view see Quine, op. cit., and Carl G. Hempel, Philosophy
of Natural Science (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966).
3 For a good non-technical discussion of scientific inquiry and confirmation, see Carl G.
Hempel, ibid.
4 I assume here, that one can unknowingly discover a truth, as one can unknowingly
discover a diamond, taking it to be paste. Discovering that p does not entail knowing
it and is compatible with thinking it is just a hypothesis to be tested. One could
presumably make a great discovery that is recognized as a discovery only by others.
5 My characterization of inference to the best explanation quite properly does not
require that the inferred hypothesis be true. If, however, we make the plausible
assumption that only true propositions are (genuine) explanations, then the term
‘inference to the best explanation’ is misleading: the idea is roughly that of inference
to what seems the (or a) best explanation.
6 Feminist epistemologists have emphasized the social and cultural “situatedness” of
knowers and their interdependence. They have also challenged the claims to scientific
objectivity that many philosophers have made for scientific work properly carried out.
For wide-ranging essays in and about feminist epistemology, see Kathleen Lennon and
Margaret Whitford (eds) Knowing the Difference: Feminist Perspectives in Epistemology
(London and New York: Routledge, 1994); and The Monist’s special issue, Feminist
Epistemology: For and Against, vol. 77, 4 (1994).
7 See Helen E. Longino, ‘The Fate of Knowledge in Social Theories of Knowledge,’ in
Frederick Schmitt (ed.), Socializing Epistemology: The Social Dimensions of Knowledge
(Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1994), reprinted in Jack S. Crumley II (ed.),
Readings in Epistemology (Mountainview, CA: Mayfield, 1999), pp. 158, 159.
8 See Elizabeth Anderson, ‘Feminist Epistemology: An Interpretation and a Defense,’
Hypatia 10 (1995), reprinted in Crumley, op. cit., p. 505.
9 Ibid., p. 505.
10 For a representative collection of essays in this field, see Frederick Schmitt (ed.)
Socializing Epistemology (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1994). The field is
interdisciplinary, particularly in raising issues for philosophers, sociologists, psycholo-
gists, and others. For a wide-ranging study see Steve Fuller, ‘Recent Work in Social
Epistemology,’ American Philosophical Quarterly 33, 2 (1996).
11 The paper by Hardwig cited in Chapter 5 notes an example of a scientific article with
scores of co-authors, each of whom may be presumed essential for some item of
knowledge important to the overall knowledge the article presents.
12 The wrongness is prima facie, not absolute, but this need not be made explicit, since
it is ordinarily presupposed – and is certainly presupposed here.
13 That there is such moral knowledge is a major thrust of what is sometimes called
‘Cornell Realism,’ since so many philosophers at or associated with Cornell University
have defended it. For some of the seminal papers and other relevant studies see
Geoffrey Sayre-McCord (ed.), Essays in Moral Realism (Ithaca, NY, and London:
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
287

Cornell University Press, 1988); and for a wider treatment of these issues see Walter
Sinnott-Armstrong and Mark C. Timmons (eds.), Moral Knowledge? (Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press, 1996).
14 This is the kind of thing W.D. Ross and other intuitionists have said about basic
moral principles: they are intuitively knowable and self-evident, though seeing their
truth may take a good deal of reflection. See, for example, Ross’s The Right and the
Good (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1930), esp. Chapter 2.
15 See esp. Immanuel Kant, Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. by Lewis
White Beck (New York: Liberal Arts Press, 1959), section 2. Kant offered other
formulations of the imperative, but nothing will turn on that here.
16 The wrongness in question is prima facie: this allows that excuses are possible but is
compatible with the prohibition being very strong, so that, for example, inexcusable
violation is a grave moral offense.
17 In Chapter 2, shortly after introducing his utilitarian principle, Mill contends that
some pleasures are preferable to others, offers an empirical way to determine which of
two pleasures is better (paragraph 5), and attempts to provide a similar way to weight
quality of pleasure against quantity (paragraph 8). All this complicates his moral epis-
temology but does not alter the basic features in question here. A further
complication is the possibility that he is best read as holding that the maximization
of happiness standard applies to rules rather than individual acts. No major epistemo-
logical point made here turns on these issues of interpretation.
18 Mill’s attempted proof that pleasure is good is given in Chapter 4 of his
Utilitarianism; for an account of the view that goodness is to be determined by seeing
what one would desire given adequate information and suitable reflection, see Richard
B. Brandt, A Theory of the Good and the Right (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1979).
19 For an assessment of some of the most important arguments and an indication of the
relevant literature see Keith Yandell, Philosophy of Religion: A Contemporary Introduction
to the Philosophy of Religion (London and New York: Routledge, 1999).
20 For detailed discussion of the sensus divinitatis and an epistemology that gives it a
substantial role, see Alvin Plantinga, Warranted Christian Belief (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2000).
21 A more modest form of evidentialism, holding only that there is in fact no actual
direct knowledge of God, would be unaffected by the bare possibility of the existence
of an omnipotent God, but that evidentialist view is not our focus here.
22 From Gerard Manley Hopkins’s ‘God’s Grandeur,’ in A.J.M. Smith (ed.) Seven
Centuries of Verse, 2nd edn (New York: Scribner’s, 1957), p. 529.
23 For an extensive treatment of the possible ways in which God may be perceived, with
much general epistemology as context for demonstrating this possibility, see William
P. Alston, Perceiving God: The Epistemology of Religious Experience (Ithaca, NY, and
London: Cornell University Press, 1991).
24 It should be noted that noncognitivism can be applied to the philosophy of religion as
to ethics. For many contemporary theological views, religious language is construed
noncognitively, say as expressing reverent attitudes about people and their world,
rather than as asserting metaphysical propositions about the ultimate origin and
nature of the universe.
25 I have compared and contrasted justification and rationality in ‘Rationality and the
Practice Conception of Justification,’ in Thomas D. Senor (ed.), The Rationality of
Belief and the Plurality of Faith (Ithaca, NY, and London: Cornell University Press,
1995).
26 Bernard Gert has defended in detail the wider view that rationality is simply the
contradictory of irrationality, which he takes as the prior notion. He might not
accept, however, the use I make of a similar view here. See esp. Morality (Oxford and
New York: Oxford University Press, 1988).
288
Nature of justification and knowledge

27 A detailed discussion of one of these non-belief cognitive attitudes is provided in my
‘The Dimensions of Faith and the Demands of Reason,’ in Eleonore Stump (ed.), Reasoned
Faith (Ithaca, NY, and London: Cornell University Press, 1993).
Scientific, moral and religious knowledge
289


10 Skepticism
• The possibility of pervasive error
Perfectly realistic hallucination
Two competing epistemic ideals: believing truth and avoiding falsehood
Some dimensions and varieties of skepticism
• Skepticism generalized
Skepticism about direct knowledge and justification
Inferential knowledge and justification: the problem of induction
The problem of other minds
• The egocentric predicament
• Fallibility
Three kinds of epistemic infallibility
Knowledge and fallibility
• Uncertainty
Knowing, knowing for certain, and telling for certain
Entailment as a requirement for inferential justification
Knowing and showing
Negative versus positive defenses of common sense
• Deducibility, evidential transmission, and induction
Epistemic and logical possibility
Entailment, certainty, and fallibility
• The authority of knowledge and the cogency of its grounds
Epistemic authority and cogent grounds
Grounds of knowledge as conferring epistemic authority
Exhibiting knowledge versus dogmatically claiming it
• Refutation and rebuttal
• Prospects for a positive defense of common sense
A case for justified belief
The regress of demonstration
A case for knowledge
A circularity problem
• Skepticism and common sense

10 Skepticism
I think that we all know many things. I believe I know many facts about my
immediate surroundings, much about myself, something about the past, and
a little about the future. I believe that we also have scientific knowledge,
that we know some general moral truths, and that it is certainly possible
that many of us know some religious truths. But there are reasons to doubt
much of this. There are reasons to think that at best we know very little,
perhaps just self-evident truths, for instance that if no vixens are males then
no males are vixens, and a few propositions about our present consciousness,
say that I am now thinking about the scope of human knowledge.
The possibility of pervasive error
As I consider these matters, I look back at the green field. I reassure myself
that I see it vividly. I certainly cannot help believing it is there. But an
inescapable belief need not be knowledge, or even justified. Suppose I am
hallucinating. Then I would not know (through vision, at least) that the
field is there.
Perfectly realistic hallucination
I find it impossible to believe that I am hallucinating. But I might find that
impossible even if I were, provided the hallucination was as vivid and steady
as my present visual experience. I begin to wonder, then, whether I really
know that I am not hallucinating. If I do not know this, then even if I am in
fact not hallucinating, can I know that there is a green field before me?
Similarly, if I do not know that I am not simply having a vivid dream in
which it seems to me that there is a green field before me, can I know that
there is one there?1
Remembering that we can justifiedly believe something even if we do not
know it, I think that at least I may justifiedly believe that there is a green
field before me, even if I do not know that I am not hallucinating one (or
merely “seeing” one in a dream). Moreover, if I justifiedly believe that there
is a green field before me, how much does it matter whether I also know
this? It matters whether the belief is true. But the likelihood that it is true, so
far as that likelihood is something I can discern, depends on how probable
the presence of the field is, given the sensory experience on which my belief
is based; and in my attentiveness and caution as an observer, I have
contributed all I can to that probability. Despite the possibility of hallucina-

tion, then, it appears that my belief remains justified, and it is as likely to be
true as I can make it by any steps in my power, such as more carefully
observing the texture of what I see. Internally, in my own consciousness, I
am being perfectly reasonable in continuing to believe that there is a green
field there. So far as justification is concerned, I am beyond reproach.
These points about justification are plausible, but they give false comfort.
Doubtless, we can have beliefs which, though they do not constitute knowl-
edge, are justified, and we can have such a belief even if its basis is
hallucinatory. But it is now not merely possible that I am hallucinating: I
am also quite aware that I could be. Given this awareness, am I still justified
in believing that there is a green field there? Should I not regard this belief
as unjustified, suspend judgment on whether the field is there, and merely
hope that it is?
Two competing epistemic ideals: believing truth and avoiding
falsehood
These questions produce a tension. I want to believe that the field is there if
it truly is, for I have a deep-seated desire to believe as many significant
truths as I can. But I also want to avoid believing that it is there if it is not,
for I have a deep-seated desire to avoid believing falsehoods. For most of us,
these two desires are important; and they represent ideals that govern much
of our thinking. But the two ideals pull against each other. The former
inclines us to believe readily, since we may otherwise miss believing a truth;
the latter inclines us to suspend judgment, lest we err by believing a false-
hood.
The former ideal, calling on us to believe truths, pushes us toward
credulity: believing on grounds that evidentially are too thin – or without
grounds at all – and thereby believing too much. The latter ideal, calling on
us to avoid believing falsehoods, pushes us toward a kind of skepticism:
believing only on absolutely conclusive grounds, and thereby – if common
sense is right about the matter – believing too little.
How can we balance these ideals with each other? So far in this book, I
have spoken more about how we fulfill the ideal of believing as many signif-
icant truths as we can, than about how we might fulfill the ideal of avoiding
belief of falsehoods. Clearly, the easiest way to fulfill the latter would be to
suspend judgment on every proposition one entertains, or at least on all
those which, unlike certain self-evident truths, do not have a luminous
certainty that tends to compel assent. This is the kind of response character-
istic of Pyrrhonian skepticism, an ancient variety tracing to Pyrrho of Ellis (c.
360–275 BC).2
These reflections about possible error through hallucination, about the
apparent vulnerability of justification in the face of such possibilities, and
about the ideal of avoiding error suggest why philosophers have been so
concerned with skepticism. In very broad terms, skepticism is most
Skepticism
293

commonly conceived by philosophers roughly as the view that there is little
if any knowledge. Call this knowledge skepticism.
A related kind of skepticism is constituted by an attitude or feature of
temperament, such as a disapproval of believing without conclusive
grounds. This is not our direct concern. But if philosophical skepticism is
not justified, then some common skeptical attitudes are not either, and some
people who go through life with a skeptical attitude lack the kind of intel-
lectual balance that goes with epistemic virtue. One reason, then, for
studying skepticism is to approach a mean between two cognitive traits –
intellectual vices, in the language of virtue epistemology. One is excessive
credulity, which is too weak a disposition to doubt or withhold belief; the
other is excessive skepticism, which is too strong a disposition to doubt or
withhold belief.
Skepticism may also concern justification. Typically, skeptics do not take
our justified beliefs to be significantly more numerous than our beliefs
constituting knowledge. Call the view that we have little if any justification
for belief justification skepticism. How far-reaching might a plausible skepti-
cism of either kind be, and how is skepticism to be assessed? I want to
pursue these questions in that order and at some length.
It may seem that skepticism offends so blatantly against common sense,
and so lopsidedly prefers the ideal of avoiding falsehood over that of
believing truths, that it should be dismissed as ridiculous. But it will soon
be evident that skepticism is a serious, perhaps even irrefutable, challenge to
common sense. Moreover, even if skepticism turns out, as phenomenalism
apparently does, to be quite implausible, we learn a great deal about knowl-
edge and justification from studying it.
A serious exploration of skepticism, whether or not we finally accept some
form of it, also tends to help us to avoid dogmatism about our own personal
views and a self-satisfied assurance that our collective outlook as rational
observers of the world embodies knowledge of the sorts of things we think it
does: facts about ourselves, our surroundings, and the ways of nature.
Some dimensions and varieties of skepticism
To understand a skeptical view we should locate it in relation to at least four
dimensions: (1) subject matter, say the past or the future or physical objects
or other minds; (2) epistemic attitude, such as knowledge, suspended judg-
ment, and justified belief; (3) modality, above all contingency or necessity, or
the empirical versus the a priori; and (4) the kind of being it purports to
limit, say human, subhuman, or superhuman. Regarding subject matter, my
concern is wide-ranging. As for (2)–(4), my concern is with human beings
and mainly with knowledge and justification regarding contingent empir-
ical propositions.
Much skepticism, whether about knowledge or about justification, is
restricted to a given kind of subject, for instance to propositions about the
294
Nature of justification and knowledge

world outside oneself, or about the past, or about the future, or about
ethics, religion, or science. Skeptical views also differ markedly in the
status of the knowledge, and in the degree of the justification, they
concern. A strong skepticism regarding propositions about the past, for
instance, might hold that there is no knowledge, or even partially justified
belief, about the past. A weaker skepticism might hold that although some
beliefs about the past are justified to some degree, there is neither certain
knowledge of the past nor any beliefs about it that are sufficiently justified to
make it more reasonable to hold them than to suspend judgment on them.
Still another difference between skeptical views concerns their order. The
usual skepticism is first-order, in the sense that it concerns the sorts of
beliefs or knowledge we have discussed as typical of the kinds grounded in
experience or reason, and not beliefs or knowledge about such beliefs or
knowledge, say beliefs that ordinary perceptual beliefs often do constitute
knowledge. First-order skepticism might deny, then, that I know there is a
cold glass in my hand, even when I have the seemingly familiar experience I
would describe as smelling the mint in my iced tea and feeling the cold
glass in my hand. Second-order skepticism might say that even if I do know
this, I do not know that I know it.
It is natural, however, for a first-order skeptic also to maintain second-
order skepticism, holding, for instance, that there is no second-order
knowledge to the effect that there is (first-order) knowledge, for example
that no one knows that there is knowledge of people, places, and things.
This second-order skepticism is obviously true if there is in fact no first-
order knowledge – since from that it would follow that then no one knows
there is. But a second-order skeptic can hold that even if there is first-order
knowledge, no one knows this.
It is, moreover, natural for skeptics to hold their main views as necessary
truths, since, for one thing, they commonly believe that for fallible creatures
like us there cannot be knowledge or justification of certain kinds. I do not
intend to discuss skepticism in detail in each of the many forms described,
but what follows will apply to a very wide range of cases.
Skepticism generalized
The skeptical challenges I have brought forward can be directed against all
our beliefs about the external world, all our memory beliefs, all our beliefs
about the future, and indeed all our beliefs about any subject provided they
depend on our memory for their justification or for their status as knowl-
edge. Memory is, after all, at least as liable to error as vision.
Skepticism about direct knowledge and justification
Plainly, if all of the senses can deceive through hallucination, then beliefs
grounded in any of the senses may be justificationally or epistemically
Skepticism
295

undermined in the same way my belief that there is a green field before me
may be undermined by a realization that I might have been hallucinating.
Quite apart from whether perceptual beliefs are true, skeptics tend to claim
that either the possibility of such hallucinations prevents them from being
justified or, even if they are justified, it precludes their constituting knowl-
edge.
Suppose, for instance, that I might be having an auditory hallucination of
bird songs. Then my present experience of (apparently) hearing them may
not justify my believing that there are birds nearby and is certainly not a
sufficient basis for my knowing there are, even if it is true that there are.
Similarly, there is a counterpart of hallucination for memory beliefs: memorial
hallucination, we might call it. I may have the memorial impression that
when I was four I saw my parents kissing under the mistletoe, but this could
be just a romantic fantasy masquerading as a memory.
Beliefs about the future are rather different from memory beliefs. The
former concern future events and hence are not grounded in experiential
states that we think of as in some way causally deriving from things about
which we have knowledge (as with past events). But even if there is no coun-
terpart of memorial hallucination here, there are equally undermining
possibilities. For instance, a confident belief that I will talk with Jane could
be a product of wishful thinking, even when in fact it is grounded in my
long-standing intention to talk with her. Perhaps the belief could be an
anticipatory delusion. Even my belief that I will live to discuss skepticism
could be mistaken owing to many sorts of reasons, including dangers to me
of which I am now unaware.
Now consider what we take to be our general knowledge, whether a
priori or scientific, say of arithmetic truths or scientific laws. Since it is
possible to misremember propositions, or to seem to remember them when
one does not, or to have a kind of memorial hallucination that gives rise to a
completely groundless belief, it would seem that the only secure beliefs of
general propositions are of the relatively few that we can know directly
without needing any evidence. This apparently leaves none of our general
scientific beliefs, and only our a priori knowledge of self-evident proposi-
tions, epistemically unscathed.
Inferential knowledge and justification: the problem of induction
Even if we leave aside problems about perceptual and memory beliefs, there
is a difficulty for the commonsense view that justification or knowledge
grounded (directly or indirectly) in a basic source can be transmitted induc-
tively. The classical statement of this problem of induction – the problem of
how to justify such inductive inferences – comes from David Hume.3 Hume
showed that one cannot know a priori that if the premises of a specific piece
of inductive reasoning are true, then its conclusion is also true. One can
clearly conceive the former being true while the latter is false, whereas one
296
Nature of justification and knowledge

cannot conceive its being true that (1) all human beings are mortal and
Socrates is one of them, and yet false that (2) Socrates is mortal. Thus, no
matter how good the inductive reasoning is, it is always (deductively)
invalid.
Consider the inductive reasoning from the premise that the sun has always
risen each twenty-four hours to the conclusion that it will rise tomorrow. Of
all such reasoning – reasoning “concerning matter of fact and existence” –
Hume says “That there are no demonstrative [roughly, valid, evidentially
conclusive] arguments in the case seems evident, since it implies no contra-
diction that the course of nature may change and that an object, seemingly
like those which we have experienced, may be attended with different or
contrary effects.” Hence, even if I do know that the sun has risen every day
since time immemorial, and even allowing that I have such an extensive basis
for believing that it will rise tomorrow, I could be mistaken in believing this,
and it seems questionable whether I am justified in believing it.
More generally, Hume’s arguments lead us to ask whether, if our premises
could be true yet our conclusion false, we have any reason at all, on the basis
of the premises, for believing the conclusion. And how can we ever know the
conclusion on the basis of such premises? Indeed, how can we even be mini-
mally justified in believing the conclusion on the basis of such premises?
The problem of induction, as most often understood, is largely the difficulty
of adequately answering these questions.
The problem can also be put in terms of probability. We normally operate
on the commonsense presumption that when one thing is associated with
another, say a sunrise with the passage of twenty-four hours, and the two have
never failed to be associated in the same way, then the greater the number of
cases of association, the greater the probability that the association will occur
in a new case – for instance that the sun will rise tomorrow.4 We also operate
on the related commonsense presumption that for natural phenomena, such
an association can occur sufficiently often to yield justification for believing,
and even knowledge, that the association will occur in a new case.
From a Humean perspective, it will not do to argue as follows: I am justi-
fied in believing my conclusion on the basis of inductive support for it, such
as the past regular behavior of the sun, since past experience has shown that
reasoning like this, which has had true premises, has also had true conclu-
sions. For this way of defending an inductively based conclusion simply
relies on yet another inductive argument – it gives a kind of inductive
reasoning to support the view that certain kinds of inductive arguments
justify one in believing their conclusions. It just inductively generalizes
about inductive arguments themselves, using as a guide past experience in
which we seem to have found out that by and large their conclusions turned
out true when their premises were true.
That reasoning, then, apparently begs the question against Hume.5 For it
assumes, without independent evidence, part of what he regards as false,
namely, that inductive inference constitutes reasoning that either can ground
Skepticism
297

knowledge of its conclusion, or can at least justify its conclusion, in the sense
of providing good reason for it. We have taken the battle to a different field
– that of inductive argumentation rather than sunrises – but we have added
no new weapons nor enhanced our forces.
The problem of other minds
One of the major points that Hume so powerfully defended – roughly that
non-deductive inferences are fallible – is by no means restricted to beliefs
about the future. Such beliefs are, however, so prominent in his discussion of
inductive inference that sometimes the problem of induction is narrowly
conceived as that of how we can show that we have any reason to believe the
future will be like the past. This conception is unduly narrow. Recall my
observing Jim briskly shuffling papers and angrily mumbling curses. I cannot
help believing, on this basis, that he is angry. But this reasoning leaves my
belief clearly fallible: even if I know my premises (through perception), it does
not follow that he is angry, and that could be false. He could be pretending.
The case of Jim’s anger is alarmingly representative. Everything I believe
about what is occurring in the inner lives of others seems to rest on grounds
that are inductive in this way: what I observe – above all, their behavior –
does not entail anything about their minds. They could be pretending, or
psychologically abnormal; or some other source of error could occur. So if I
cannot have knowledge of people’s inner lives from their behavior, appar-
ently I can never have it.
Worse still, if I cannot know anything about the inner lives of others, can
I even know that there are others, as opposed to mere bodies controlled
externally, or by hidden microscopic machinery, rather than directed
through beliefs and intentions of the kind that I take to animate me?
There is, then, a problem of other minds. Can we know, or even justifiedly
believe, that there are any? If our experiences would be just as they are if the
human bodies we interact with are controlled from outer space and have no
inner life of their own, how can we know that those bodies are, as most of us
cannot help thinking, animated by minds like ours?6
The problem is compounded when we realize that we can never directly
verify, as we introspectively can in our own case, what is occurring in
someone else’s consciousness. Thus, all I can do to check on my inductively
grounded beliefs about the inner lives of others is obtain further inductive
evidence, for instance by observing whether they behave as one would expect
if I am right in thinking them to be, say, angry. I cannot, as in my own case,
introspectively focus on the events in their consciousness. How can I know
anything about the mental and emotional life of others if I am in principle
debarred from decisively verifying my beliefs about the contents and events
of their consciousness? Even if I am sometimes right, I can never tell when.
It may be replied that by far my best explanation of why other bodies
behave as if they were animated by a mind is that they are so animated. The
298
Nature of justification and knowledge

other hypotheses, such as control from outer space or by a machine, are far-
fetched. The suggested reasoning sounds plausible, but notice that it is still
a kind of induction: inference to the best explanation (abduction).
The indicated inference to propositions about other minds as best
explaining observed behavior is, however, supported by a strong argument
from analogy: again and again, when my body behaves in a certain way under
certain conditions, I am in a certain mental state, say in pain when I am
burned and cry out; so (surely) the same behavioral pattern in another body
is accompanied by a similar mental state. Other bodies are so much like
mine in structure and behavior that they are very probably animated by
minds like mine.
There is no need to deny either that positing other minds best explains
what we seem to know about other bodies or that the analogical argument
just sketched is strong. Still, from one proposition’s best explaining another
it does not follow that the first is true; and the analogies between my body
and others at most render probable, rather than entailing, that some other
body is associated with mental states as mine is with my mental states. For
one thing, there are other possible explanations (such as the hypothesis of
control of other bodies from outer space, or by a powerful and clever evil
genius); these explanatory alternatives, if true, would leave my experience
exactly as it is. For another thing, some of these alternative hypotheses can
well explain the analogies that otherwise seem compelling.
Another way to see the power of these skeptical hypotheses is to note that
our experience does not discriminate between the skeptical scenario and the
commonsense one. Our experience would be just what it is if we were stead-
fastly hallucinating the external world, including even the human bodies we
seem to see. The same holds if we are not hallucinating but the human
bodies are externally controlled. How, then, can our experience justify us in
believing that there is an external world or that there are other minds?
Putting the problem somewhat differently, if our experience underdeter-
mines the truth of propositions we commonly believe about the external
world, roughly in the sense that it does not decisively indicate their truth as
opposed to the truth of skeptical (or other) alternative hypotheses that can
explain our experience, how can our experience justify our believing such
commonsense propositions? If it cannot, and if, as Hume plausibly argued,
we also cannot know that proposition, how can we be justified in believing
anything at all about the external world?7
It is only a short step from this full-scale attack on inductive inference to
a problem of the body. If, as a skeptic might well hold, our apparent knowledge
of our own bodies is inductively grounded, being based on perceptions and
bodily sensations somewhat as beliefs about external objects are, then can we
know, or even justifiedly believe, that we have a body? Could we not be
steadily hallucinating even our own flesh?
It might be replied that thoughts, including my reflections on skepti-
cism, necessarily require an embodied thinker. But that point would only
Skepticism
299

imply that I have some kind of body, not that I can know anything about it.
The point is also far from self-evident and is indeed denied by philosophers
in the powerful tradition of Descartes. They hold that we (persons) are essen-
tially mental (or spiritual), hence non-physical, substances.
In any case, even if it should be true that thoughts can occur only in an
embodied thinker, the only embodiment necessary might be a brain. Hence,
on the skeptical view imagined, the most one could know is that one is
embodied in some way, say in a brain. Whether that brain is itself
embodied, or ever interacts with anything else, would be beyond one’s
knowledge. Why, then, could I not be alone in the world, and perhaps even
a “brain in a vat,” a brain kept alive in a nurturing liquid and subjected to
hallucinations that falsely convey the impression of a normal life?8 We could
dub this the envatment problem.
The egocentric predicament
In this way, skepticism can drive us into an egocentric predicament: a position
that makes it seem clear that all we can (empirically) know about the world,
perhaps all we can justifiedly believe about it as well, concerns our own
present experience. Perhaps, for all I know, I am a lone conscious ego vividly
hallucinating a physical world that has no external reality.
Most skeptics have tended to push no further, or at least not to express
very much doubt about our capacity to know propositions of two specific
kinds: those about what is currently going on in our minds and at least
those a priori propositions that are luminously self-evident. But skeptics can
push further. Descartes, in the first of his Meditations, raised the possibility
that there was nothing of which he could (justifiedly) be certain. Recall
introspectively grounded beliefs, such as that I am thinking about skepti-
cism. It seems possible that this belief is mistaken. If that is possible, how
can I know that I am thinking about skepticism? If I know, I cannot be
wrong. But here error is possible. Perhaps I do not even have knowledge of
my own conscious states.
To make this sort of argument work with beliefs of self-evident proposi-
tions we must, I think, strain. Descartes may perhaps be read as seriously
entertaining the question of whether it is possible that God, being omnipo-
tent, could have brought it about that even propositions of the sort I am
calling self-evident might be false. Could an omnipotent being bring it
about that while some dogs are pets, no pets are dogs? I see no reason to
think so. As St Thomas Aquinas and many other philosophers have main-
tained, omnipotence is simply not the power to “do” things that are
absolutely impossible.9 Power is exercised within the realm of the possible:
impossible “deeds” are not candidates for any being to do.
If one accepts this point, one might argue that there is no act of bringing
it about that while some dogs are pets, no pets are dogs. Calling this an act
misuses the vocabulary of action. Hence, the impossibility that an omni-
300
Nature of justification and knowledge

potent being can bring it about does not imply that there is any act which
that being cannot perform. This point, in turn, deprives the skeptic of a way
to argue that beliefs of necessary truths could be false.
This reasoning may not settle the matter, but it is sufficiently plausible to
warrant leaving aside skepticism concerning beliefs of luminously self-
evident propositions. These propositions seem not only incapable of
falsehood, but also incapable of even being believed without justification, at
least when carefully and comprehendingly considered. Leaving such skepti-
cism aside takes little from the skeptic in any case. If these are the only
propositions we can know, then we can know nothing about our world, not
even anything about our innermost consciousness. We are at best in an
egocentric predicament.
Fallibility
In appraising skepticism, I want to formulate some of the main principles
that underlie it in what seem its most plausible forms. If they can be shown
to be unreasonable, then the skeptical threat to the commonsense view that
we have a great deal of knowledge and justification can at least be blunted.
In formulating and assessing these principles, it is well to distinguish skep-
tical threats to the generation of knowledge (or of justification) from
skeptical threats to its transmission. It is natural to start with questions
about its generation. If no knowledge is generated, there is none to be trans-
mitted.
Three kinds of epistemic infallibility
Is there really any reason to doubt that, normally, introspectively grounded
beliefs constitute knowledge? It may be true that such beliefs could be
mistaken, but what is a skeptic entitled to make of this? The skeptical argu-
ment that comes to mind here is based on what I will call the infallibility
claim about knowledge: if you know, you cannot be wrong. If we simply add the
premise that you can be wrong in holding a given introspective belief, say
that you are thinking about skepticism, it would seem to follow that such
beliefs do not represent knowledge. This kind of argument from fallibility, as
we might call it, can be applied to just about every sort of proposition we
tend to think we know.
If, however, we look closely, we find that the infallibility claim is
multiply ambiguous. There are at least three quite different things it might
mean, and hence really three different infallibility principles.
The claim, ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong,’ might have the meaning of
(1) It must be the case that if you know that something is true, then it is
true (i.e., you cannot know something that is false).
Skepticism
301

Call (1) the verity principle, since it says simply that knowledge must be of
truths (verities). Knowledge can never have a falsehood as its object. The
claim might, on the other hand, have the meaning of
(2) If you know that something is true, then it must be true, that is, the
proposition you know is necessarily true (i.e., you can know only neces-
sary truths).
Call (2) the necessity principle, since it says simply that knowledge is of neces-
sary truths. Knowledge never has among its objects any propositions that
could possibly fail to hold.10 The claim ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’
might also have the meaning of
(3) If you know that something is true, then your belief of it must be true,
in the sense that your believing it entails or guarantees its truth (i.e.,
only beliefs that cannot be false constitute knowledge).
Call (3) the infallibility principle proper, since in saying that only infallible
beliefs constitute knowledge it connects with skepticism more closely than
(1) or (2). Knowledge, it says, is never constituted by fallible beliefs, those
that can have falsehoods among their objects.
Unlike (2), (3) implies nothing about the propositional or other objects of
knowledge; instead, it restricts the kind of belief that can constitute knowl-
edge. And by contrast with (2), (3) also allows for knowledge of contingent
(non-necessary) truths, such as that I exist. This proposition can be false
(that I exist is not a necessary truth); but my belief of it is infallible and
therefore cannot be false. If I now believe that I exist, then it follows that I
do now exist.
Knowledge and fallibility
We can now assess the skeptical reasoning that employs the infallibility
claim in one or another interpretation. I will be quite brief in discussing the
first two; the third is the most controversial and most important for skepti-
cism.
The verity principle, (1), is plainly true: one cannot know something that
is false. In this sense, knowledge is infallible. If it is false that the maple is
taller than the spruce, then I do not know it is. But if this is all the infalli-
bility claim comes to, it provides no reason to conclude that I do not know
that I am thinking (or that anything else I believe is not genuine knowl-
edge). Granted, it must be true that if I know I am thinking, then I am. But
that tells us nothing about whether I do know I am. The verity principle is
itself a verity, but it does not advance the skeptical cause.
The necessity principle, on the other hand, principle (2), seems mistaken.
Surely I know some propositions that are not necessary, such as that I exist
302
Nature of justification and knowledge

(as noted earlier, it is not a necessary truth that I exist, as it is that vixens are
female). Even the skeptic would grant that I cannot falsely believe this, since
my believing it entails that I exist (non-existent things cannot have beliefs
at all, true or false). It may indeed be impossible for me even to be unjusti-
fied in believing the proposition that I exist when I comprehendingly
consider it (Descartes seems to maintain in Meditation II that this case is
impossible). The same holds, of course, for you in relation to your belief that
you exist.11
It might seem that we may grant the skeptic that the only kinds of propo-
sition that cannot be falsely believed are necessary. But that would also be a
mistake: any proposition entailed by there being at least one belief is inca-
pable of being falsely believed. Anyone’s believing it would entail that it is
true – though it might be possible, given certain logical deficiencies, to
believe such a proposition without having justification for it, as is certainly
possible for necessary truths of mathematics. Such cases suggest that there is
no simple relationship between the kind of proposition believable with
infallibility and the conditions for knowing or justifiedly believing it.
Even if the necessity principle were true, however, a skeptic could not
reasonably use it, without first defending it by adequate argument, against
the commonsense view that introspective or even perceptual beliefs normally
constitute knowledge. For clearly they are not beliefs of necessary truths,
and defenders of common sense do not take them to be; hence, invoking the
necessity principle against common sense, without first arguing for the prin-
ciple, would be in effect a flat denial that such beliefs constitute knowledge.
That would beg the question against the commonsense view.
Suppose, for instance, that a skeptic says that if you know, you cannot be
wrong, where this means (2), then notes that introspective and perceptual
beliefs (which are of propositions that are not necessary) can be false, and
concludes that such beliefs do not constitute knowledge. This would not be
presenting a good reason to believe the conclusion, but just asserting,
disguisedly given (2), that the commonsense view that we have introspective
and perceptual knowledge is mistaken. There may seem to be a good argu-
ment here, because it is so easy to take ‘If you know, you can’t be wrong’ as
asserting the verity principle. But that principle is acceptable to common
sense, whereas the necessity principle is not. To argue for the latter by
allowing the plausibility of the former to serve as support for it is to trade
on an ambiguity. It masks poor reasoning – or the absence of any argument
or support at all.
The infallibility principle proper, (3), in effect says that only infallible
beliefs can be knowledge. Now as we have seen some beliefs of contingent
propositions are infallible. Consider my belief that I now exist, and my more
specific belief that I have a belief. Just as my believing I exist entails that I do
exist, if I believe I have a belief, it follows that I have one: I have at least that
very belief even if I have no other beliefs. Beliefs like these might be called self-
grounding, since their possession constitutes a sufficient ground for their truth.
Skepticism
303

The infallibility of these two contingently true, but self-grounding,
beliefs shows that despite appearances, (3) is not equivalent to (2), since (3),
the infallibility principle, but not (2), the necessity principle, allows knowl-
edge of propositions that are not necessary (contingent propositions). But
why should we accept (3)? What reason can the skeptic give for it? Not that
if you know, you cannot be wrong; for when we look closely, we find that
when plausibly interpreted as meaning (1), that is no help to the skeptic,
and when interpreted as (2) or (3) it just asserts the skeptical position
against common sense.
What makes the infallibility claim seem to give the skeptic an argu-
ment against common sense is the way skepticism can trade on the
ambiguity of that formulation: one finds the argument from fallibility
attractive because its main premise, conceived as equivalent to (1), is so
plausible; yet the argument succeeds against common sense only if (2) or
(3) are legitimate premises, and I think it is doubtful that the skeptic has
a cogent argument for either of them. It will help to consider first the
bearing of the concept of uncertainty, one closely related to the notion of
infallibility.
Uncertainty
Like fallibility, uncertainty has seemed to many skeptics to leave us with
little, if any, knowledge. Recall the possibility that I am hallucinating a
green field before me when there is none there. Can it possibly be certain,
then, that there is one there? And can I ever tell for certain whether or not I
am hallucinating a field? Skeptics tend to answer these questions negatively
and to contend that if we cannot tell for certain whether we are halluci-
nating, we do not know we are not hallucinating. They also tend to argue
that if one does not know that one is not hallucinating, surely one does not
know that there is a field there.
Moreover, in a way uncertainty cuts deeper than fallibility: for even if I
believe a theorem of logic that cannot be false and so have an infallible
belief, I may not be justified in taking my proof to be sound and hence
cannot be justifiedly certain. Uncertainty arises where one’s grounds are not
conclusive, and it can arise, as with beliefs of theorems, even when one’s
belief is infallible. Thus, even infallibility is not enough to render a belief
knowledge. At least two important principles are suggested here.
One principle suggested by reflection on these questions about possible
error is the certainty principle: if one cannot tell for certain whether something
is so, then one does not know it is so. This principle is plausible in part
because, typically, ‘How can you tell?’ and ‘How can you be certain?’ are
appropriate challenges to a claim to know something. Moreover, ‘I know,
but I am not certain’ sounds self-defeating, in a way that might encourage a
skeptic to consider it contradictory. Further support for the certainty prin-
ciple can be derived from the idea that if our grounds for a belief
304
Nature of justification and knowledge

underdetermine its truth – as where a skeptical possibility such as the
Cartesian demon hypothesis can also explain our having those grounds –
then one cannot tell for certain that the belief is true.
Another principle suggested by our questions about the possibility of
hallucination is the back-up principle: if one believes something, say that there
is a field before one, which is inconsistent with a further proposition – such
as that one is merely hallucinating a field where none exists – then one’s
belief constitutes knowledge only if it is backed up by one’s knowing, or at
least being in a position to know, that the further (undermining) proposition
is false.
The back-up principle is plausible in part because one is in a sense
responsible for the implications of what one claims to know. If, for instance,
I claim to know that there is a green field before me, and that proposition
implies that the field is not a pavement textured and painted to look just
like a green field, it would seem that I had better know that it is not such a
pavement. This, in turn, is commonly taken to imply that I must at least be
justified in rejecting that strange possibility.
The upshot of this skeptical reasoning is that if I know that there is a
green field before me, I apparently must be prepared to back that up by
justifiedly rejecting exactly the sorts of possibilities that the skeptic reminds
us are always there, in abundance. But must I be thus prepared? Let us
consider the certainty and back-up principles in turn.
Knowing, knowing for certain, and telling for certain
Chapter 8 argued that knowing does not imply knowing for certain. This
conclusion suggests that the kind of certainty in question, epistemic
certainty, is not required for knowledge, and that having such certainty may
be something quite different from simply knowing. Still, from the point
that knowing need not be knowing for certain, it does not follow that one
can know without being able to tell for certain. Thus, the skeptic may still
maintain that the certainty principle undermines the commonsense view
that we have perceptual knowledge.
Let us first ask what it is to tell for certain. A skeptic may mean by this
acquiring knowledge, in the form of an infallible belief, of a proposition that
entails the truth of what one can tell is so. Thus, to tell (for certain) that one
is not hallucinating a green field one might, like Descartes in the
Meditations, prove that there is a God of such goodness and power that –
since it would be evil for God to allow it – one could not be mistaken in a
belief properly based on such a vivid and steadfast perception as one now has
of a green field. We can tell for certain that there is an object before us
because we can prove that God would not allow us to believe this under the
present conditions unless it were true.
Some thinkers might embrace Descartes’s theistic solution here. But one
might also reject the skeptical principle in question, the infallibility principle.
Skepticism
305

To require that a belief can be knowledge only if – whether in Descartes’s
way or a similar fashion – it can be conclusively shown to be true would
again beg the question against the commonsense view that a belief can
constitute knowledge without being infallible (a belief that can be abso-
lutely conclusively shown to be true is infallible). Thus, if skeptics have no
good argument for the principle of infallibility proper, they should not
assume that principle in defending the view that we can know only what we
can “tell for certain” in this strong sense of the phrase.
Perhaps, on the other hand, telling for certain is simply a matter of ascer-
taining the truth in question by some means that justifies one in being
(psychologically) certain of what one can tell, even if not maximally certain
(if there is a maximum here). If so, perhaps we normally can tell for certain
that we are not hallucinating, for instance by seeing whether the senses of
touch and smell confirm our visual impression. To be sure, the confirming
experiences do not entail that there is a green field before me. But we still
have no good argument that certainty (or knowledge) may arise only from
entailing grounds (another controversial view, shortly to be discussed). Thus,
this point does not establish that confirming experiences cannot enable us to
tell for certain that we are not hallucinating.
Moreover, suppose that we interpret telling for certain in the modest way
just suggested, and that we can tell for certain in this sense that what we
know is true. In that case, perhaps there is a weak sense in which beliefs
constituting knowledge are infallible. They need not be such that it is abso-
lutely impossible (logically impossible, in a broad sense) that they be false,
as in the case of my belief that I exist. There need only be something about
our grounds for them in virtue of which they (empirically) cannot be false,
say because it would violate the laws of nature. Water cannot flow (as
opposed to being pumped) uphill, but this is empirically impossible, not
absolutely so, as it is impossible for some pets to be dogs without any dogs
being pets.
It may be true that grounds of what is commonly considered to be
knowledge are typically such that, given those grounds, the belief consti-
tuting that knowledge cannot be false (at least cannot be false within the
laws of nature). Suppose this is true. Should we now say to the skeptic that
the beliefs commonsensically considered knowledge, such as many percep-
tual ones, are empirically certain? We may say this only if we keep in
mind what was wrong with inferring the necessity principle from ‘If you
know, you can’t be wrong’. There surely might be causal laws of nature
which guarantee that if one is situated before a field in good light, as I am,
and one has visual experiences like mine caused by the field as mine are,
then one sees it, and hence cannot falsely believe that it is there. But this
does not imply that my belief is empirically necessary, as a law of nature at
least commonly is, any more than the “logical” law that it is necessary that
if one knows that p, then p is true, implies that p itself is necessary. A
guarantee of truth is not a guarantee of even empirically necessary truth,
306
Nature of justification and knowledge

much less of epistemic certainty, any more than a guarantee of payment is
a guarantee of payment in gold or in some medium that cannot be
devalued.
If the existence of causal laws and associated causes of many of our beliefs
implies the truth of many of our beliefs grounded in experience, such as my
belief that there is a green field before me, it does not follow that those true
ones cannot be mistaken, in the sense of being epistemically certain, or
conclusively justified, or of any other epistemic status high enough to satisfy
a skeptic. What follows is only that given the laws of nature and their causal
grounding, they are true. This seems more than enough for common sense.
The skeptic gives us no good argument to show that there are no such laws
or that such law-based truth is not quite sufficient to render a belief knowl-
edge whether it represents certainty or not.12
Entailment as a requirement for inferential justification
The back-up principle fares no better than the infallibility principle proper.
For one thing, it depends on the assumption, which defenders of common
sense stoutly reject, that in order to know that something is true, one must
have grounds that entail its truth. To see that the back-up principle depends
on this, consider first a very simple case. Take the proposition that it is false
that there is a green field before me. This is inconsistent with what I believe,
namely, that there is one before me. Hence, the back-up principle requires
that I at least be in a position to know that this is false.
The back-up principle may seem true because one may think: How else,
besides being able to know the falsity of propositions incompatible with
what I believe, can I be adequately armed against the threat of falsehood? If
I am not in a position to know that propositions plainly incompatible with
what I believe are false, I cannot properly back up what I believe. But the
falsity of the negative proposition that there is not a green field before me
entails that there is one before me; for if it is false that it is false that there is
one, then it is true that there is one. Thus, if, by virtue of how I must be
able to back up my original claim, I do know that this negative proposition
is false, then I thereby have (and know) an entailing ground for the truth of
what I originally believed – that there is a green field before me.
Now take a case in which backing up what I think I know is more
complicated. Consider the proposition that what I take to be a green field is
really a pavement with such a realistic-seeming grassy green texture that I
cannot tell (perceptually) that it is really not a field. Must I be in a position
to know that this is false in order to know that there is a green field before
me? The very description of the case suggests that I cannot know, at least by
using the senses unaided by experimentation or specialized knowledge, that
the field is not a textured pavement. But why must I be able to tell this at
all? Is there any reason to think that the field might actually be dyed pave-
ment? (Is that a relevant alternative, some philosophers would ask?) Must I,
Skepticism
307

in order to know, not only have a well-grounded true belief but also grounds
for knowing, of every possible explanation of how my belief could be false,
that this explanation is incorrect? I do not see that I must.
One might object that in order to know a proposition I must be in a posi-
tion to know whatever follows from it (or at least obviously follows from it).
After all, if something does follow from what I know, I could infer it by
valid steps from what I initially know, and thereby come to know it, too.
This is an important objection. But in discussing the transmission of
knowledge and justification, we considered cases that apparently undercut
the objection. I can apparently know the sum of a column of figures even if I
cannot, without further checking, know something which obviously follows
from it: that if my wife (whom I justifiedly believe to be a better arithmeti-
cian) says this is not the sum, then she is wrong. If this can be true of me,
then neither knowledge nor justification is automatically transmitted across
valid deductive inference.
It apparently will not do, then, to say that we can always count on the
transmission of knowledge from propositions we know or justifiedly believe
to those they entail, even when the entailment is, as in our example,
obvious. Thus, even though my seeing a green field plainly entails (for
instance) that I am not seeing a pavement with a textured grassy-looking
surface, I presumably do not have to be in a position to know or justifiedly
believe (by inferring it) that this proposition is false.
Suppose, however, that this view is mistaken, and that knowledge and
justification are always transmitted across valid deductive inference. It may
be plausibly argued that I do have justification for rejecting the skeptical
hypothesis that there is a pavement before me textured to look just like a
green field. It is not just that it appears to me that there is a green field
before me; I also have no reason to think there is anything abnormal in the
situation, and some reason to think that, in cases like this, large, nearby
familiar kinds of things are as they appear to me in such vivid and careful
observation. Thus, I may reject the skeptical hypothesis and I do know or
justifiedly believe that there is a green field before me. We could also stress
that the kinds of grounds I have for believing there is a green field before me
are plainly sufficient for knowing this proposition and then that very propo-
sition is my premise for the entailed conclusion that there is not a pavement
before me textured to look like grass. On this view, the point is that by
virtue of perceptual justification we gain (commonsense) knowledge of a
conclusive ground for rejecting the skeptical hypothesis.13
There are other factors one might cite, indeed, too many to discuss here.
My point is simply this. Since the skeptic has not provided good reasons for
the principles I have already rejected (or for comparably strong principles),
even if knowledge and justification are always transmitted across valid infer-
ence, there may be good reason to say that skeptical hypotheses, such as that
the “field” is a cleverly painted and textured pavement, may be justifiedly
rejected.14
308
Nature of justification and knowledge

Knowing and showing
There is something we may grant to the skeptic that will help to justify my
rejection of the certainty and back-up principles. Admittedly, in order to
show the skeptic that my original belief is knowledge, in the face of the
suggestion that one of those explanations of its falsity holds, I may have to
know that, and perhaps why, this explanation does not hold. Showing some-
thing, after all, commonly requires invoking premises for it, and one must
presumably know or justifiedly believe those premises if one is to show a
conclusion from them.15 The question ‘Do you know?’ tends to move
discussion to a second-order context in which one seeks not simply to offer
grounds for what one takes oneself to know, but grounds for the second-order
proposition that one knows it. After all, a direct answer to, for instance, ‘Do
you know that she missed the train?’ is something like, ‘Yes, I know because
I just checked the station,’ rather than ‘I just checked the station’. The latter
reply provides a ground on which one may know that she missed the train
and only indirectly implies that I do know it. A skeptic would not grant
this evidential power to such a ground, however, and would indeed not take
my citing the schedule to provide an adequate answer to ‘Do you know that
she missed the train?’
Still, we may ask, why, in the absence of the need to show that I know,
must I, in order simply to have knowledge, have the capacity to show that I
have it, as the back-up principle would require? Surely I need not. I can
know that if some dogs are pets then some pets are dogs, even if I cannot
show this self-evident truth – perhaps simply because I can think of nothing
more obvious to use as a reasonable premise from which to show it. And if
my wife raises no question of whether my arithmetic answer is correct, I can
know that answer even if I cannot show – without obtaining further grounds
for the answer – that I do know it. (If my original justification were good
enough to enable me to show that if she says the sum is wrong, then she is
wrong, perhaps it would also enable me to know, even without showing it,
that if she says this, she is wrong.)
The point that one can know without being able to show that one does
drastically weakens the case for the back-up principle. Moreover, if, as seems
quite possible, I can know the sum on the basis of my calculations without
being able to show that I do – apart from gaining new evidence – then I can
know it without being able, given my evidence from careful calculation, to
tell for certain whether it is true. That would require new calculations and
hence new evidence. This second point directly cuts against the certainty
principle as well as against the back-up principle.
Examining the relation between knowing something and being able to
show it also indicates that the converse of the certainty principle – the show-
know principle, we might call it – should also be rejected: being able to show
something one believes, even being able to prove it, does not entail knowing
it. This can be seen from our example. Suppose I can now show that if she
says the sum is wrong, she is mistaken, by doing a more careful calculation
Skepticism
309

twice over. Does it follow that I now know this proposition for certain? I do
not see that it does. From the fact that I now have the ability to show some-
thing I believe, it does not follow that I now know it at all. Having the raw
materials to create something – here grounds for knowledge – does not
entail already having it. Moreover, suppose that, as sometimes happens, I am
lucky in a mathematical hunch; I might still be capable of constructing a
proof I myself would not have expected to discover. We may by good fortune
have raw materials to create a foundation for something we have fabricated
by a stroke of luck.
My examples of showing something are cases of deductive demonstration.
But it would be a mistake to think that all instances of showing require
deductive demonstration or proceed from absolutely conclusive grounds.
Both points were discredited by our discussion of how propositions are
established through scientific reasoning.
Negative versus positive defenses of common sense
In the context of thinking about skepticism, it is easy to forget that
knowing something does not require being able to show that one knows it.
For in thinking about skepticism we are likely to be trying to defend,
against a skeptical onslaught, the commonsense view that there is much
knowledge, and we easily think of defending this view as requiring us to
show that there is knowledge. There is, however, more than one kind of
defense. The two kinds I have in mind are analogous to standing firm as
opposed to attacking.
A negative defense of common sense, one that seeks to show that skeptical argu-
ments do not justify the skeptic’s conclusion, does not require accomplishing
the second-order task of showing that there is knowledge or justified belief.
That achievement is required by a positive defense of common sense, one that seeks
to show that we have the kinds of knowledge and justified beliefs common
sense takes us to have. A negative defense requires only contending that skep-
ticism provides no good argument against common sense.
It does not appear that skepticism as so far examined provides a good
argument against common sense. Why, for instance, should the skeptic’s
merely suggesting a possible explanation of how there could be no green
field before me, without giving any reason for thinking the explanation is
correct, require me to know, or be in a position to know, that it is not
correct? All things considered, then, I reject the skeptical case as so far
described.
Deducibility, evidential transmission, and induction
When we come to the problem of induction, it seems clear that one assump-
tion the skeptic is making is that if we believe something on the basis of one
or more premises, then we can know it on the basis of those premises only if
310
Nature of justification and knowledge

it follows from them, in the sense that they entail it. Call this the entailment
principle. It says in effect that knowledge can be transmitted only deductively.
Why should we accept this principle? Not simply because inductive
reasoning is “invalid”; for that term may be held to be improperly applied to
it: inductive reasoning is strong or weak, probable or otherwise, but it does
not even “aim” at (deductive) validity. Even if it may be properly said to be
(deductively) invalid, however, that may be considered an uncontroversial
technical point about its logical classification. It is a point of logic, not of
epistemology. So conceived, the point does not imply either that knowledge
of the premises of inductive reasoning cannot ground knowledge of its
conclusions, or that justified beliefs of those premises cannot ground justi-
fied beliefs of their conclusions.
One might, on the other hand, accept the entailment principle and argue
that when properly spelled out inductive reasoning can be replaced by valid
deductive reasoning. For instance, suppose we add, as an overarching
premise in inductive reasoning, the uniformity of nature principle, which says
that nature is a domain of regular patterns, in the sense of patterns that do
not change over time. From this together with the premise that the sun has
always risen each day it apparently does follow that it will rise tomorrow.16
But what entitles us to the premise that nature is uniform? Hume would
reply that it is not knowable a priori, and that to say that we know it
through experience – a way of knowing it that would depend on inductive
reasoning – would beg the question against him. (On the Humean view, if
our belief of the uniformity principle is grounded wholly in premises that
only inductively support it, we do not know it.) I believe that this Humean
response is highly plausible. The problem of induction must be approached
differently.
Epistemic and logical possibility
What perhaps above all makes the entailment principle plausible is the
thought that if our premises could be true and yet our conclusion might be
false, then we cannot know (or even justifiedly believe) the conclusion on the
basis of those premises. At first, this thought may sound like just another
formulation of the entailment principle. It is not; it is different and consid-
erably more plausible. That is partly why, when it is conflated with the
entailment principle, it seems to support that principle. The ‘might’ in
question is epistemic; it is like a farmer’s in ‘That wood dust might mean
carpenter ants’ or a physician’s in ‘Those abdominal pains might mean
appendicitis’. This ‘might’ suggests not only that for all we know (or may
take ourselves to know) the pains do mean appendicitis, but also that there
is reason for at least some degree of suspicion that there is appendicitis and
perhaps some need to rule it out.
The statement that certain abdominal pains might mean appendicitis is
not merely an expression of a bare logical possibility of appendicitis – a
Skepticism
311

statement that appendicitis is possible without contradiction – based, say, on
no one’s being absolutely invulnerable to it. If that very weak and general
statement represents all we know about the case, we are not entitled to say
that the pains might mean appendicitis. It is also not a logical impossibility
that the Tower of London levitate above the City; but we would be quite
unjustified in saying that it might.
This distinction between epistemic possibility – what is expressed by the
epistemic ‘might’ just illustrated – and mere logical possibility – what can be
the case without contradiction or some other kind of necessary falsehood17 –
bears importantly on the problem of induction. It is true that if, no matter
how good inductive reasoning is, its premises could be true and yet its
conclusion might, in the epistemic sense, be false, perhaps we cannot know
the conclusion on the basis of them. But is this generally the case with
inductive reasoning? I cannot see that it is.
Moreover, suppose it could be true that, relative to its premises, the conclu-
sion of inductive reasoning might, in the epistemic sense, be false, what reason
is there to think that this really is true? Skeptics cannot justifiably argue for
this claim as they sometimes do, maintaining, simply on the ground that the
premises do not entail the conclusion, that the conclusion might be false.
Arguing in this way is rather like saying, of just any stomach ache a child gets
after eating too much Halloween candy, that it might mean appendicitis.
It is barely possible that, relative to all we know or are justified in
believing about the child, the stomach ache means appendicitis. But from
that bare possibility we may not automatically conclude that appendicitis is
epistemically possible – roughly, that relative to all we know or are justified in
believing, we are unjustified in disbelieving that the stomach ache might
mean appendicitis. Nor does this bare possibility rule out our knowing, on
inductive grounds, that overeating is the cause.18
Entailment, certainty, and fallibility
There are other reasons for the attractiveness of the entailment principle, at
least from a skeptical point of view. If one embraces the infallibility prin-
ciple, one is in fact committed to the entailment principle. For suppose that,
from known – and hence on this view infallibly believed – premises, one
inductively derives a belief which is not itself infallible, as (empirical) beliefs
which are inferentially grounded typically are not. Since inductive transmis-
sion allows inference of a false conclusion from true premises, the belief one
derives could, as far as sheer logic goes, be false despite the truth of its
inductive premises and one’s infallibly believing them. True premises, even
if infallibly believed, simply do not absolutely guarantee the truth of a
conclusion inductively inferred from them. Hence, beliefs of such induc-
tively inferred conclusions would be fallible (unless they happened to be
self-grounding or to have necessary truths as objects). But then, being
fallible, these beliefs would be capable of falsehood and hence would not
312
Nature of justification and knowledge

constitute knowledge. Thus, knowledge can be inferentially transmitted
only by deductive inference. Only valid deduction inferentially preserves infalli-
bility.19
If one thinks of knowledge as entailing absolute certainty, one might
again be drawn to the entailment principle. For even if a fallible belief can
be absolutely certain, a belief that is only inductively based on it will
presumably be at least a bit less certain and thus not absolutely certain. For
the proposition believed – the conclusion belief – is supported by the orig-
inal belief only with some (perhaps high) degree of probability, rather than
with absolute certainty, as where the conclusion is entailed by the premises.
This would allow that the premise belief be certain and the conclusion belief
not certain (or less so), since it would not inherit from the premise belief the
same degree of protection against falsehood.
To see this, suppose that the premise belief only minimally meets the
standard for absolute certainty. Then a belief inductively grounded on it can
fall below that standard and thereby fail to be knowledge. Putting the point
in terms of probability, we might imagine a case in which our premise meets
the bare minimum conditions for absolute certainty, which we might repre-
sent by a probability of 1. Then, any conclusion that follows only
inductively from this premise will thereby inherit from it only some lower
probability and hence fall below the minimum level for absolute certainty.
Thus, again the skeptic will argue that only deduction is sufficient to
transmit knowledge.
But we have already seen reason to doubt both the infallibility principle
and the view that a belief constitutes knowledge only if its status is abso-
lutely certainty. Indeed, I do not see that skeptics give us good reason to
believe either these principles or the entailment principle. It does not follow
from the absence of good arguments for the principles that they are, as they
appear to be, false; but if there is no good reason to believe them, even skep-
tics would approve of our refusing to accept them.
Absolute certainty is a high, and in some ways beautiful, ideal; but it is
neither adequate to the concept of knowledge nor appropriate to the human
condition.
The authority of knowledge and the cogency of 
its grounds
There is one further principle we should consider, one rather different from
those examined so far and apparently more modest. It derives in part from
the idea that if you know something, you have a certain authority regarding
it, an authority presumably due to your being in a position to see the truth
which you know. This authority is in part what accounts for the possibility
of knowledge through testimony: if you know something, you have an
authority about it such that normally I can come to know it, as well as to
acquire justification for believing it, from your testimony.
Skepticism
313

Epistemic authority and cogent grounds
Indeed, if you tell someone that you know something – especially where you
are asked whether you really know it – you put yourself on the line. It is as if
you gave your firmest assurance – an epistemic promise, as it were – that it
is true. If it turns out to be false, your position is somewhat like that of a
person who has broken a promise. You are open to a kind of criticism and
may have to make amends. A good theory of knowledge should account for
this epistemic authority that seems to go with knowing.
A stronger, but closely associated view is that if you know that a proposi-
tion is true, then you must be able to say something on behalf of it. After
all, the question how one knows is always intelligible, at least for beliefs
that are not of self-evident truths or propositions about one’s current
consciousness (two kinds not in question for the most important kinds of
skepticism); and if one really does know, one should be able to give more
than a dogmatic answer, such as ‘I can just see that it is true’.
The associated principle might be expressed in what I shall call the cogency
principle: with the possible exception of beliefs of certain self-evident propo-
sitions and propositions about one’s current consciousness, one knows that
something is so only if one has grounds for it from which one can (in prin-
ciple) argue cogently for it on the basis of those grounds.
Since the cogency principle requires only that one can argue cogently for
what one knows, temporary inability to mount an argument would not
prevent one’s knowing. Even little children might have knowledge, for
perhaps if they could just find a way to express their grounds they could
provide cogent arguments. And since self-evident propositions and proposi-
tions about one’s current consciousness are knowable even according to most
skeptics, and may be objects of directly justified belief, there is a stopping
place in epistemic chains and no regress need result when one produces a
series of arguments to support a claim. What is known must simply be
either traceable to those secure foundations or otherwise defensible by appeal
to adequate grounds.
If the cogency principle is combined with the entailment principle, it
will immediately preclude anyone’s having knowledge on inductive
grounds; for the entailment principle implies that inductive grounds are
never cogent. But it need not be combined with the entailment principle. If
it is not, it can allow for inductive reasoning of certain kinds to be cogent
and thereby to transmit knowledge.
Even a moderate skeptic, however, is likely to accept at most a restricted
kind of induction, a kind whose premises make its conclusion at least close
to certain. This kind meets a higher standard than is usually applied to
inductive inference. Thus, even though the cogency principle is separable
from the entailment principle, it need not be combined with the entailment
principle to be very hostile to the commonsense view that we can know the
sorts of things I have been suggesting we can know, at least if this view is
understood in a foundationalist framework. For this principle strikes at some
314
Nature of justification and knowledge

of the main sources of knowledge as they are plausibly understood, and it
threatens to undermine our claim to knowledge of the past, the future, and
the external world. Let us pursue this.
It is true that some of our beliefs that constitute direct knowledge (and
are directly justified) can be supported by apparently more secure premises.
For instance, my belief that I see a green field before me can be supported by
premises about how things appear to me, which concern only my present
consciousness. After all, that this is so seems to be the best explanation of
why my visual field contains a green field. But this supportability by
premises need not hold for everything it seems reasonable to regard as directly
known. It may not hold in the case of apparently memorial knowledge. As
we saw in Chapter 2, one might know something through the success of
one’s sheer retentive powers even when the only premises one knows or is
justified in using to support it fail to justify it.
A proponent of the cogency principle would certainly tend to deny that
my memory can be trusted as a source of direct knowledge or direct justi-
fication, in part because memory seems far more liable to error than
perception. Moreover, I might be unable to provide good inductive
reasoning to support the reliability of memory even in cases where it is
very vivid, if only because such reasoning would require my depending on
my memory for my justification in believing its premises, say premises
about how often my past memory beliefs have been confirmed. To summa-
rize their track record, I must remember how things turned out in the past
– or at least remember that I wrote the results down as they occurred. I
would thus be relying on memory in order to vindicate it. Still, even if I
could give no cogent argument to justify my memorial beliefs, it does not
follow that they are not justified, or that they do not constitute knowl-
edge.
Grounds of knowledge as conferring epistemic authority
Must we accept even the apparently modest cogency principle, which
requires that in order to know something, one needs grounds for it from
which one can (in principle) argue cogently for it? I do not see why.
Certainly one can have a kind of authority without being able to defend it
by premises or exhibit it in argumentation. Consider, for instance,
someone who can always tell “identical” twins apart but cannot say how.
Moreover, saying ‘I see it’ need not be a dogmatic answer to ‘How do you
know?’ It may simply specify one’s grounds, as where one says, ‘I see it’ in
answer to ‘How do you know there is still ice on the road?’ It says how one
knows; it need not (though it may) show that one does, particularly if
showing this requires more than exhibiting an appropriate source of the
challenged belief.
There is a general lesson here. When skeptics ask how we know some-
thing, this is typically a challenge to show it. I have already argued that
Skepticism
315

knowing something does not require being able to show it, so this chal-
lenge is not always appropriate. What I now want to stress is that the
skeptical emphasis on ‘How do you know?’ as a request for a demonstration
must not be allowed to obscure the possibility of taking it as just a request
to specify a ground of one’s knowledge and of fulfilling that request simply
by giving an adequate ground. In doing this successfully, one shows how
one knows.
In saying how I know something by citing my ground I may also be
doing something further: exhibiting my knowledge of what the ground
supports and perhaps even of the fact that it does so. But even exhibiting
knowledge need not be showing that one has it; and even if I know that, say,
seeing ice on the roads shows that they are icy, I may not know how to use
this connection to show that I know they are. Still, if my knowledge that
they are carries an authority that can be confirmed by my citing my ground,
why need I be able to go on to the sophisticated task of showing that I have
knowledge? Again the analogy to virtue is pertinent: having it requires
being able to manifest it in appropriate circumstances, but not to be able to
show – in any further way – that one has it.
Exhibiting knowledge versus dogmatically claiming it
One might think this approach licenses dogmatism. Granted, saying ‘I see
it’ could be dogmatic if intended to show conclusively that I know, for
instance by serving as absolutely proving that there is green grass before me.
But the same words can simply indicate the basis for my knowledge. This is
different from flatly claiming that I have knowledge. Indeed, saying it
exhibits a ground for my belief which, if adequate, suggests that I am not
being dogmatic in taking myself to know. Perhaps it is precisely because the
skeptic’s ‘How do you know?’ is commonly meant as a challenge to be shown
conclusively that one knows, and not as a request to specify a source or a
ground of the knowledge, that saying ‘I see it’ seems dogmatic in the context
of discussing skepticism, even when the function of saying this is mainly
explanatory.
If the issue raised by skepticism is whether we can show that we have
knowledge, the point that an appeal to visual experience does not conclu-
sively establish visual knowledge is an important concession. But the issue
here is whether the skeptic succeeds in showing that we do not have
perceptual knowledge. In that context, the point is not a concession. Once
again, we can see how skepticism can gain credibility because skeptics
make it sound as if their case against the existence of one or another kind
of knowledge succeeds if we cannot show that there is such knowledge. In
fact, we need not be able to show that there is knowledge in order to have
it; and the skeptic must give us good reason not to believe that there is
knowledge.
316
Nature of justification and knowledge

Refutation and rebuttal
Have I, then, refuted skepticism, even in the few forms considered here? I
have not tried to. Refutation would require showing that those forms of skep-
ticism are false, which in turn would entail showing that there is knowledge
(and justified belief). What I have tried to do is to rebut skepticism in certain
plausible forms, to show that the arguments for those skeptical views do not
establish that we do not have knowledge (and justified belief). Refutation of
skepticism suffices for its rebuttal; but rebuttal does not require refutation.
Now suppose I have succeeded in rebutting skepticism. Where do we stand?
May we believe that we have knowledge, or may we only suspend judgment
both on this and on skeptical claims that we do not?
I have already argued, by implication, that one can know something
without knowing that one knows it. For instance, in arguing that much of
our knowledge is not self-conscious, I indicated how I can know that there is
a green field before me without even believing that I know this. I do not
even form such self-conscious beliefs in most everyday situations. Moreover,
toddlers, who do not understand what knowledge is – and so are not in a
position to believe they know anything – can apparently know such simple
things as that Mama is before them.
Even if I did have the second-order knowledge that I know the field is
there, I surely would not possess (if it is even possible for me to possess) the
infinite series of beliefs required by the view that knowing entails knowing
that one knows – the KK thesis, as it has often been called – the series that
continues with my knowing that I know that I know; knowing that I
know, that I know that I know; and so forth. There is no plausibility in
thinking that if I know that (for example) the field is there, I must know
that I know that I know … this, up to the limit of my capacity. I never
have such a repetitive thought. Moreover, I do not think that I believe (or
disbelieve) the proposition in question (I have not tested my memory here);
and I cannot imagine a good use for it.20 Given these points (among
others), it would be a mistake to think, as some skeptics might like us to,
that if we do not know that we have knowledge, then we do not.
For similar reasons, it seems possible that we might be justified in
believing that we have knowledge even if we are properly unwilling to claim
that we know we do, and perhaps even if we are properly unwilling to claim
justification for believing that we do. Let us explore these possibilities.
If foundationalism is correct, then if one can know anything, one can
know at least something directly. Moreover, some of the sorts of things that
a plausible foundationalism says we know directly – for instance, self-
evident truths and some propositions about our present consciousness – are
the kinds of things which, simply on the basis of reflection on the examples
involved, it is plausible to think we know. Perhaps, of course, this reflection,
even if it does not involve arguing from premises, shows that we have
knowledge. In any case, I think that we are justified in believing that we
Skepticism
317

have some knowledge even if we cannot show that we do; and I am aware of
no good argument against the view that we have some knowledge.
Might there be a way, however, to give a cogent, positive defense of
common sense: to show that we have knowledge, even of the external world?
And could we establish this second-order thesis even to the satisfaction of
some skeptics? There is no satisfying a radical skeptic, one who denies that
there can be any knowledge or justified belief (including justification of that
very claim, which the skeptic simply asserts as a challenge). For a radical
skeptic, nothing one presents as a reason for asserting something will count
as justifying it.
Could anything be said, however, to show that there is knowledge that
might be plausible to a moderate skeptic: one who holds, say, that although
transmission of justification and knowledge must be deductive, we may
justifiedly believe, and perhaps know, at least self-evident propositions and
propositions about our present consciousness? Even if the answer is negative,
perhaps we can show that there is knowledge, or at least justified belief,
whether any skeptics would find our argument plausible or not.
Prospects for a positive defense of common sense
How might an argument for a positive defense of common sense go? Let us
consider justified belief first, since showing that certain of our beliefs are
justified, unlike showing that some of them constitute knowledge, does not
require showing that the beliefs in question are true.
A case for justified belief
One might view the issue this way: if we are to show that there are justified
beliefs, then one result of our argument will itself be producing justification,
specifically justification for the second-order belief that there are justified
beliefs. For to show something by argument is at least to produce justifica-
tion for believing it.
If we are to provide such second-order justification, we apparently need at
least two things: a general premise expressing a sufficient condition for
justification, and one or more specific premises saying that a particular belief
meets that condition. For instance, the general premise might be the justifi-
cation principle that
(1) An attentive belief to the effect that one is now in an occurrent mental
state, such as thinking, is (prima facie) justified,
where an attentive belief is one based on careful attention to the matter in
question, and where the justification is not absolute but prima facie; it must
simply be strong enough to make it appropriate for a rational person to hold
the belief.21 The particular premise might be that
318
Nature of justification and knowledge

(2) I have an attentive belief that I am now in such a state, namely
thinking.
If I am justified in believing these premises, I would surely be justified in
inferring deductively from them, and thereby in believing on the basis of
them, what they self-evidently entail, namely, that
(3) My belief that I am thinking is (prima facie) justified.
Here I would be inferentially justified in believing (3), at least if I can hold
all three propositions before my mind in a way that avoids dependence on
memory of my premises; and this seems possible for me. (If I needed so
many premises, or such complicated premises, that I could not hold them in
mind at once, then my justification for my conclusion would depend on that
of my memory belief(s) of my premises.) Premises (1) and (2) self-evidently
entail (3), and a moderate skeptic will very likely grant that if, from
premises that I am justified in believing, I infer (without dependence on
memory) a conclusion that self-evidently follows from them, I am justified
in believing that too.
But how am I now justified in believing premises (1) and (2), if I am?
There is some plausibility in holding that the general principle, (1), is justi-
fiable directly (non-inferentially) by reflection, and so my belief of it might
itself be directly justified. This is not to deny that it could be justified by
prior premises; the point is only that it is arguably justified by reflection not
dependent on one’s appealing to such premises. As for the particular
premise, (2), I might be directly justified in holding it by virtue of a justifi-
cation principle similar to the general one, but applying to beliefs, a
principle to the effect that if, on careful introspection, one believes that one
attentively believes a proposition, p, then one is justified in believing one
does (presumably directly justified, if one has introspected carefully).
Now if my belief of my general premise is justified, and if I may justi-
fiedly hold the particular premise, then surely I may justifiedly conclude
that I am justified in my belief that I am thinking. I may justifiedly
conclude this even if my justification in believing my premises is not direct,
as I am tentatively assuming it is. Moreover, if my beliefs of (1) to (3) are
true, they may also constitute knowledge: my justification for each seems
strong enough, and apart from this matter of degree there appears to be no
other kind of bar to knowledge.22
Given the plausibility of the premises just used to try to show that I am
justified in holding a belief about my own mental life, I am inclined to
think that it can be shown that there are some justified beliefs, even some
justified empirical ones. But even if the line of argument I have used is
successful, one might question whether it extends to any beliefs about the
external world. What would be our general principle for, say, visual percep-
tual beliefs?
Skepticism
319

In answer, perhaps we might begin with an instance of a justification
principle stated in Chapter 1. Applied to the green field example, this
would say that:
(a) If one believes, on the basis of a vivid and steady visual experience in
which one has the impression of something green before one, that there
is something green before one, then one is (prima facie) justified in so
believing.
Surely we may say this, particularly since the justification in question is
admittedly defeasible. (It could, for instance, be undermined by my
knowing that I have frequently been hallucinating greens lately.) Suppose
this premise may be believed with direct justification, and we may also
believe (possibly with direct justification) that:
(b) I have a belief (that there is something green before me) grounded in the
way the premise – principle (a) – requires.
Then I may, much as before, justifiedly conclude that:
(c) I am (prima facie) justified in believing that there is something green
before me.
To be sure, my perceptual belief is only prima facie justified – roughly, justi-
fied in the absence of defeating factors. But this is still a significant
conclusion, even if (as seems possible) I could not, by reflection alone, rule
out all of those defeaters.
The regress of demonstration
Supposing this line of argument against the skeptic is sound, have I shown
anything? If showing something is producing a good argument for it from
true premises that one is justified in believing, presumably I have. It is easy,
however, to think that the skeptic would be correct in denying that I have
shown anything. For there is a subtlety here that is easily missed. Even if I
have shown my conclusion, I might not be justified in saying, to the skeptic
or anyone else, that I have shown it, or even in believing I have shown it. For
justification for asserting or believing that second-order proposition about
my beliefs would ordinarily require holding (or at least having justification
for holding) third-order beliefs, such as the belief that my second-order belief
that I believe I am thinking is justified and true (since this second-order
belief has been shown by good argument). And what in my situation would
give me that still higher-order justification?
The general point is that whatever one’s justificational or epistemic
achievement, justifiedly saying or even justifiedly believing that one has
320
Nature of justification and knowledge

succeeded in it requires justification or knowledge at the next higher level.
This higher-order justification or knowledge may or may not be forth-
coming. Initially, this point may seem to doom my original attempt to show
that I have a justified belief. But I do not think it does; it brings out only
that one can show this without automatically showing the higher-order
proposition that one has shown it. Plainly, we can achieve something even if
we are in no way entitled to credit ourselves with achieving it.
What we have encountered here is a counterpart of the regress of justifi-
cation, a regress of demonstration: if one shows anything at all, there will be
some unshown shower (at least one unshown premise). In a sense, there will
always be some point at which self-congratulation – or a final dismissal of
the skeptical challenges – is inappropriate. This is another reason why a
moderate foundationalist perspective should not be thought to lead to
dogmatism.
Still, even if I do not know that I have shown that my belief that I am
thinking is justified, I may yet have shown this; and if I have, then I may
well know the proposition that I have shown: that my belief that I am
thinking is justified. Perhaps, moreover, a similar procedure may be
repeated, with equal success, at each higher level to which one can ascend
without losing track of the progressively more complex issue. Then, with
sufficient patience, one could show any given justification-ascribing proposi-
tion in the hierarchy – that one has shown that one has a justified belief,
that one has shown that one has shown this, and so on, to the limit of one’s
comprehension.
A case for knowledge
The reasoning we have been exploring in connection with justification also
bears on skepticism about knowledge. If the premise beliefs, (a) and (b), are
true, they may constitute knowledge. I may, then, not only be showing that
I am justified in holding a belief about the external world; I also may, as a
result of my reasoning, know that I am justified in holding it. There would
then be at least justificational knowledge: self-knowledge to the effect that
one has justification for some beliefs.
In reasoning from (a) and (b) to (c), however, I do not automatically know
that I am showing that I am justified in believing something about the
external world. Suppose I do not know this. Perhaps I only hope that I am
showing it. Then, even if I do have second-order knowledge that I have a
justified belief about the external world, I may not be justified in holding
the third-order belief that I have (second-order) knowledge that I have this
(first-order) justified belief, the belief that there is something green before
me. I have as yet no principle that would justify me in concluding that I
know or justifiedly believe that I have a justified first-order belief. I lack a
principle stating conditions that generate second-order knowledge or
second-order justified belief.
Skepticism
321

It seems, however, that the sort of justification I apparently have for all
the relevant beliefs, including the belief that I have a justified belief about
the external world, is the kind whose possession by true beliefs is sufficient
for their constituting knowledge. Thus, through reasoning using premises
like (a) and (b) I may well know that I have justified beliefs about the
external world. Certainly I have reason to think that the skeptic does not
know, or justifiedly believe, that I lack justified beliefs about the external
world.
One assumption it is natural to make in using this strategy against skep-
ticism deserves emphasis: the assumption that the crucial principles of
justification are a priori, and believing them is justified by reflection
(directly, or at least on the basis of self-evident steps from directly justified
beliefs of a priori premises). Suppose the principles are empirical. Then our
justification for believing them would presumably be broadly inductive. A
skeptic could plausibly deny that, on an inductive basis, we can justifiedly
believe them. Let us pursue this possibility.
A circularity problem
There would apparently be a circularity problem if we had to justify our
crucial principles inductively. For justifying them by inductive reasoning
would seem to presuppose using just such principles, principles that
specify, for instance, under what conditions inductive inference can
transmit justification or knowledge. We would have to use induction to
develop a track record for such inferences, say by determining, observation-
ally, how often their premises are found true and their conclusions
determined to be false. We would need to rely on perception and memory
to do this – in addition to using induction to infer from a good track record
on the part of a source to its general reliability. To acquire justified beliefs
about the reliability of perception, moreover, we would need to use percep-
tion, for instance in looking at objects again to see if our initial color
perceptions were accurate.
Are the kinds of principles of justification I have been using a priori?
That is certainly arguable; but it is also controversial. On the most plausible
kind of reliability theory of justification, for instance, a belief is justified by
virtue of being grounded in reliable belief-producing processes such as
perceptual ones; and it is apparently not an a priori matter what processes
are reliable, that is, actually produce a suitably large proportion of true
beliefs. This is the sort of thing that must be determined largely by observa-
tion.23
Thus, for reliabilism, in order to know what principles account for justifi-
cation, one must know what processes tend to generate true beliefs. One
could determine that only through considerable experience. Hence, if these
principles are empirical, the circularity problem just mentioned would beset
the attempt, within a reliabilist framework, to justify them.
322
Nature of justification and knowledge

On the other hand, I argued above that reliability theories are less plau-
sible for justification than for knowledge, and I believe that it is more
reasonable, though by no means obviously correct, to suppose that at least
some principles about the conditions for justification are a priori. I would
include various principles expressing ways in which – as described by
Chapters 1 through 4 – justification is produced by its basic sources.
Skepticism and common sense
Where, then, does this chapter leave us with respect to appraising skepti-
cism? To begin with, there are forms of skepticism I have not mentioned,
and I have also not discussed every plausible argument for the skeptical
principles I have addressed: chiefly the infallibility, certainty, back-up,
entailment, and cogency principles. But these principles are in some
important ways representative of those on which even moderate skepticism
rests. I have offered reasons for rejecting them, and on that basis I have
maintained that skepticism, at least insofar as it depends on these and
similar principles, can be rebutted. It can be shown to be rationally
resistible.
We are, then, warranted in refusing to accept skepticism concerning
justification and knowledge of propositions other than those that are self-
evident or attribute to the believer a present occurrent mental property. If it
is not false, it is at least not justified by what seem the main arguments for
it. It is not clear, however, that anything said above refutes the kinds of
skepticism we have considered. For refuting those views entails showing
them to be false, and it is not altogether clear what that requires.
Positively, I have suggested that on one plausible notion of showing
something, namely, validly and justifiably deducing it from true premises
which one justifiedly believes and are good grounds for it, we can show that
there are some beliefs we are justified in holding, probably even some justi-
fied beliefs about the external world (these may perhaps include some about
the inner lives of others).24 I am less inclined to say that we can – by this
strategy – show that there is knowledge, particularly knowledge of the
external world. Much depends on the kind of grounding required for such
premises as that I see a green field before me, which, because simple seeing
entails the existence of the object seen, in turn entails that there is something
external. Much also depends on how rigorous a standard of showing is
appropriate.
I have argued, however, for the commonsense view that we can know that
there is both justified belief and knowledge about the external world, and
can know this even if we cannot show that there is. I also maintain that
there is justified belief and knowledge about one’s own consciousness and
about certain a priori matters. Skeptics certainly do not seem to have shown
that we do not have knowledge and justified belief of these kinds. I believe
that we have both.
Skepticism
323

Moreover, if, as argued in Chapter 9, it is true that rationality is a more
permissive notion than justification, then whatever the anti-skeptical case
for our having justification, it will count more strongly for the counterpart
views concerning the rationality of our beliefs and other epistemic attitudes.
Even if rationality, as applied to beliefs, is significantly weaker than justifi-
cation, it is still the kind of status skeptics tend to deny is ever achieved by
our beliefs about the external world, the past, and many other things.
Perhaps viewing knowledge, justification, and rationality in the way I
have might be thought to be an article of epistemological faith. I do not
think it is; but the difficulty of determining whether it is partly an article of
unverifiable faith, or can be established by cogent argument, or is more than
the former yet less than the latter, is some testimony to the depth and
complexity of skeptical problems.
Notes
1
Some writers on skepticism prefer to raise skeptical possibilities using the dream case
rather than the hallucination one, perhaps in part because Descartes so famously used a
dream argument in his Meditations on First Philosophy. For relevant discussion, esp. of the
dream argument, see, for example, Barry Stroud, The Significance of Philosophical Scepticism
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984); Michael Williams, Unnatural Doubts (Oxford:
Basil Blackwell, 1991); and Robert Fogelin, Pyrrhonian Reflections on Knowledge and
Justification (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1994). Another way to raise
skeptical possibilities is to imagine that one is a “brain in a vat,” i.e., that one’s brain is
kept alive artificially in a liquid and given just the sorts of stimulation it now has, so that
one would presumably experience things just as one now does. This example derives from
Hilary Putnam, who uses it to argue, against skepticism, that the very content of such
sentences as ‘I am a brain in a vat’ prevents their being intelligibly thought in the way
Descartes apparently believed they could be. Owing to how language and conceptualiza-
tion work,
although the people in that possible world [in which they are brains in a vat over
their whole existence] can think and ‘say’ any words we can think and say, they
cannot (I claim) refer to what we can refer to. In particular they cannot think or say
that they are brains in a vat (even by thinking ‘we are brains in a vat’).
See the selection from Hilary Putnam, Reason, Truth and History (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 1981), entitled ‘Brains in a Vat,’ in Huemer, op. cit., pp. 524–38). The
literature contains much critical discussion, including Huemer’s ‘Direct Realism and the
Brain-in-a-Vat Argument,’ reprinted (from Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 61, 2,
2000) in Huemer, op. cit., pp. 575–88.
2
Pyrrhonian skepticism need not imply that suspending judgment is always psychologi-
cally possible; and it may also allow that one can accept a proposition for the sake of
argument, and so, without believing it, act on it as one who believes it would act; but
there is no need to discuss this position here. If what I say about skepticism in general is
sound, it can be readily applied to the Pyrrhonian form.
3
See, for instance, Section IV of Hume’s Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding (first
published in 1748).
4
This formulation is roughly the one given by Bertrand Russell in The Problems of
Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1912). The formulation should be under-
stood to apply only to phenomena of a certain kind, such as we explore in scientific
inquiry and much everyday investigation; it will not hold for certain special cases. For
324
Nature of justification and knowledge

instance, with an increase in the number of instances in which I lose a fair sweepstakes in
which I hold one of a million coupons, there is no change in the probability that I will
lose; the probability remains the ratio of the number of tickets I hold – one – to the total
number: 1 million. To think my good day is now more likely to come is to commit the
gambler’s fallacy.
5 I cannot take time here to consider begging the question in any detail; it is an important
but elusive notion. For a detail treatment see Walter Sinnott-Armstrong, ‘Begging the
Question,’ Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 77, 2 (1999), 174–91.
6 A remark attributed to Bertrand Russell introduces (humorously) the possibility that we
may, perhaps haphazardly, be sometimes right and sometimes wrong about other minds:
“There may be other minds,” he quipped, “but there certainly aren’t many of them.” In
this spirit I might note another twist to the problem of other minds. As usually
conceived, it concerns whether, in effect, there are as many minds as there seem to be. But
reflection on skepticism can also lead us to a converse worry. How do I know that when I
am asleep my body is not taken over by another mind, one connected, perhaps, with a
part of the same brain as goes with my mind? And why might there not be several others
who control this body when I do not? Granted there could be a conflict with another
mind over, say, the movements of my right arm; but I could be built (or programmed) so
as never to be conscious when another mind takes over this body. Call this the problem of
too many minds.
7 There is much recent literature on the extent to which skeptical hypotheses undermine
commonsense views about the extent of our knowledge. See, for instance, Butchvarov’s
Skepticism and the External World (New York, 1998), Moser’s Philosophy after Objectivity
(Oxford and New York, 1993) and the books by Fogelin, Huemer, Klein, Nozick,
Rescher, Sosa, Stroud, and Michael Williams also cited in the bibliography. For a helpful
discussion of skepticism focusing on the underdetermination problem, see Jonathan
Vogel, ‘Dismissing Skeptical Possibilities,’ Philosophical Studies 70 (1993), 235–50.
8 This is the term widely used in recent literature in connection with a debate between, on
the non-skeptical side, Hilary Putnam, who (as quoted in note 1) denies that one really
could be both a brain in a vat and have the mastery of language needed to raise the ques-
tion of skepticism, and, closer to the skeptical side in interpreting such examples, a
number of other philosophers, including Anthony Brueckner, ‘Trying to Get Outside
Your Own Skin,’ Philosophical Topics 23, 1 (1995), 79–111, which contains references to
Putnam’s original discussions of the brain-in-a-vat problem and a number of more recent
discussions. See also the paper by Huemer cited in note 1 and his Skepticism and the Veil of
Perception (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 2001).
9 See, for example, Thomas Aquinas’s Summa Theologica (written in the thirteenth century),
Ia, question 25, a.3.
10 As an epistemic principle, (2) – and indeed (1) and (3) as well – would commonly be
taken by proponents to be necessarily true. Thus (2) would rule out even the possibility of
knowledge of falsehoods, as opposed to the mere occurrence of it. But for our purposes
the formulations as more simply stated will serve.
11 That my thinking entails my existing does not, of course, entail that my existing entails
my thinking. But Descartes’s claim (also in Meditation II) that his essence is to be a
thinking thing, led to the following joke (which I recount as I remember it). Bartender to
customer: Do you want another? Customer: I think not. Outcome: the customer disappears.
12 If there are such laws, then there is empirical grounding that is conclusive in the sense
that it implies the proposition it grounds with “natural necessity”, the kind appropriate
to causal laws. Since those are not absolutely necessary, as are logical laws and necessary
truths as described in Chapter 4, it would not follow that the implication is an entail-
ment.
13 This is the kind of strategy taken by Peter D. Klein in Certainty: A Refutation of Scepticism
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1981); he extends it in the paper cited in
Chapter 6 and reprinted in Huemer’s collection, pp. 552–74. In part, the issue concerns
Skepticism
325

whether we may simply take it as obvious that we do know certain things before we have a
criterion of knowledge, e.g. an account that tells us both what knowledge is and whether
beliefs constituting it must be infallible. For detailed discussion of this problem of the criterion
– the problem of whether cases of knowledge are prior to accounts or vice versa – see R.M.
Chisholm, ‘The Problem of the Criterion,’ in his The Foundations of Knowing (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1982), reprinted in Huemer, op. cit., 590–601; and Robert
Amico, The Problem of the Criterion (Lanham, Md.: Rowman and Littlefield, 1994). For an
examination of Moorean commonsensism in relation to criteria, dogmatism, and skepti-
cism, see James Pryor, ‘The Skeptic and the Dogmatist,’ Noûs 34, (2000).
14 There is a sophisticated and plausible compromise with skepticism that deserves note
here. One could argue that knowledge must be understood not unqualifiedly but in
terms of relativization to “contrast classes”. Thus, relative to the contrast class of near
perfect imitations, I do not know that there is a green field before me; relative to the
contrast class of ordinary green things encountered in the same visual way, such as green
ponds and green canvas laid out for picnicking, I do. For a detailed statement of this view
(which may be regarded as a kind of contextualism), see Walter Sinnott-Armstrong’s
chapter on moral skepticism in Walter Sinnott-Armstrong and Mark Timmons (eds)
Moral Knowledge? (New York: Oxford University Press, 1996). One reply is that knowl-
edge may be understood without relativization provided we at least (1) recognize that
knowledge attributions occur in a context and are in some way relative to it, and (2)
distinguish between the following kinds of things: (a) knowing there is a green field
before one and (b) knowing that there is a green field before one as opposed to a pavement
textured to look just like one. Knowing the former does not entail knowing the latter,
contrastive proposition, but it is easily taken to require that because (i) the latter proposi-
tion apparently follows from the former and (ii) noting the possibility of ignorance of the
latter is an intelligible challenge to a claim to know the former.
15 The ‘presumably’ is meant to allow that there is a sense of ‘show’ in which one need not
have justification for one’s premises: if they are true and are cogent grounds for what one
wants to show, then invoking them may serve to show it. Here, however, one might not
be justified in believing the very thing one shows. This objective, externalist way of
showing – call it de facto showing – something is not the one of interest here, which might
be called dialectical showing, since it figures crucially in philosophical disputation.
16 It does not strictly follow unless we define regularity to preclude the following kind of
thing: the sun rises every day except every trillionth after the Earth came to be, where
tomorrow is the trillionth.
17 As noted in Chapter 4, the synthetic a priori might be necessary without being logically
necessary in the strict sense; similarly, something can be a synthetically necessary false-
hood (thus impossible, as is a round square), but not strictly logically impossible.
18 Epistemic possibility for us is sometimes characterized simply in terms of what is possible
given what we know, but I think it is appropriate to include justification here, if only
because we may be better able to tell by reflection on our current overall cognitive resources
what we are justified in believing than what we know. For an account of the notion and
some of the difficulties confronting it, see David Chalmers’ ‘Epistemic Possibility’ (MS.).
19 This should be taken to apply to non-formal validity: infallibility would be preserved by
the inference from something’s being round to its not being square, but this is a case of
synthetic a priori, as opposed to formal, entailment.
20 Reasons for doubting that we should posit such beliefs are given in my ‘Dispositional
Beliefs and Dispositions to Believe,’ Nous 28, 4, 1994, 419–34.
21 We might perhaps think of the degree of justification in question here as the kind that is
sufficient to render a true belief knowledge, in the absence of the sorts of cases discussed
in Chapter 8 showing that justified true belief need not constitute knowledge.
22 I ignore here the point that I might have only situational justification for my conclusion
if my believing it is not based on my believing my premises. Note 24 comments on this
problem.
326
Nature of justification and knowledge

23 For extensive discussion of the kind of circularity problem in question here see William
P. Alston, ‘Epistemic Circularity,’ Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 46 (1986). Cf.
Ernest Sosa, ‘Philosophical Scepticism and Epistemic Circularity,’ Proceedings of the
Aristotelian Society supplementary volume 68 (1994), followed by a response from Barry
Stroud.
24 I have not directly argued that there are justified beliefs. For I have not argued for the
premise, apparently needed for this conclusion, that we are non-inferentially justified in
believing that the relevant beliefs, such as the belief that there is something green before
me, are based on the visual impressions constituting one’s grounds for it. This basing is
partly causal, and skeptics are likely to argue that justification for attributing causal
propositions requires inductive, hence inferential, grounds. This is not self-evident, and I
have challenged it in ‘Causalist Internalism,’ American Philosophical Quarterly 26 (1989),
reprinted in my The Structure of Justification (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
University Press, 1993). In any case, even if I am not justified in believing that my
external world belief is based on a sense impression, but only that I have the relevant
impression, I am justified in believing that I have this justification for the external world
belief: we might say that I am entitled to hold it even though I may not hold it on the
basis of my entitlement.
Skepticism
327


11 Conclusion
Once again, I look at the grassy green field before me. A haze has obscured
it, but the afternoon sun now streaming down on it puts it in clear view. Its
shape and its shades of color are plainly in my sight. The birds are still
singing. As I look at the spruce tree, I remember cutting the poison ivy vine
from it. I recall its furry stem, and the recollection is so vivid that as the
scene fills my consciousness, I seem almost to re-enter the past.
I cannot help having these experiences of color and shape and sound
unless I deaden my senses to the world; and I cannot help forming beliefs as
I perceive the world or look into my consciousness. I can walk away and
change the external sources of my belief. But as we saw in Chapter 1, in
exploring perception, I cannot entirely resist those sources. If my senses are
open to my surroundings, I perceive them; if I perceive them, I tend to form
beliefs about them: about their colors and shapes, their sounds and scents
and textures, and, if they have found a place in my memory, sometimes
about their history.
These beliefs seem to arise directly from perceptions and through the
recollections that surface from memory; they do not emerge by a process of
inference from anything else I believe. I realize that such beliefs are fallible,
and I understand the profound inclination toward skepticism that we can
experience as we reflect on the significance of that fallibility. Still, I find no
reason to think these everyday beliefs doubtful, and I am convinced that for
the most part they are justified and constitute knowledge.
Our beliefs are countless and varied. A vast proportion of them are stored
in memory, though beliefs do not originate there. As Chapter 2 brought out,
memory preserves, but does not by itself normally produce, belief. It also
preserves, but does not create, knowledge. Once I come to know through
perception that the spruce is taller than the maple, I may know this from
memory even when I have forgotten my evidence for it.
By contrast with its preservative role in relation to knowledge, memory is
a basic source of justification. It can be the only present source of justifica-
tion for many beliefs stored therein, beliefs whose original grounds are long
forgotten. And, like sensory experience, memory can be in a way overgen-
erous in supplying justification. Just as sensory experience can mimic
perception and thereby justify false beliefs about the external world, memo-
rial experience can mimic genuine recollection and thereby justify certain
false beliefs which have the appearance of those retained in memory. I may
later discover that despite their apparent memorial authenticity, they arose
from wishful thinking.

These and other cases of justified false memory beliefs show that our
justification for believing what is, so far as we can tell, grounded in memory,
is defeasible. Nonetheless, it is significantly strong. If we had good reason to
believe it lacked a certain minimal strength, we would not be justified in
trusting our memories without external evidence of their reliability; and it is
doubtful that we could get enough such evidence if we could not trust our
memory directly in at least some cases. To test my memory of the texture of
the maple by going closer to it, for instance, I must retain the belief whose
truth I am trying to confirm. If memory were not a basic source of justifica-
tion, we could never have a large enough store of justified beliefs to yield
premises adequate for significant deductive and inductive extension of our
justification. The scope of our justified belief would be drastically narrowed;
and at least a great deal, and perhaps all, of our knowledge of the past, the
future, and general empirical propositions would also be undermined.
If Chapter 1 concerns what might be called outer perception, Chapter 3
explores what is sometimes called inner perception. When we look into our
own consciousness, we find beliefs also arising in the same natural, seem-
ingly irresistible way in which they arise from outer perception. We have,
however, far more control over the scenes and events that we experience
only inwardly. I can blot out my sensations of color and shape only by
closing my eyes, but I can dismiss my image of the poison ivy vine at will
and, just as directly, call up an image of the friend who helped me to pull it
down. In this respect – in relation to the will – beliefs, even about elements
in our own consciousness, are more like perceptions than like images of
memory and imagination: I cannot help believing that the image of the tree
(or at least my imaging of the tree) itself represents something with a
greenish cast, nor could I have come to believe this at will. The inner
world, like the outer world, produces certain beliefs directly and irre-
sistibly. And these beliefs tend to be both justified and to constitute
knowledge.
If our only sources of knowledge and justification were perception,
whether inner or outer, and memory, we would be at best impoverished. We
can also turn our attention to abstract matters, even while our senses
bombard us with impressions. Looking at the spruce and the maple and then
further to the right where there is an apple tree at the side of the field, I
realize that they are so far apart that I cannot see by direct comparison
whether the spruce is taller than the apple tree. But I can see that it is taller
than the maple and that the maple is taller than the apple tree. Clearly, then,
the spruce is taller than the apple tree. As stressed in Chapter 4, reason
makes it obvious that if the spruce is taller than the maple and the maple is
taller than the apple tree, then the spruce is taller than the apple. This belief
is as natural, and would be at least as difficult to resist when I vividly
consider its propositional content, as my belief that there is something blue
before me when I squarely see the spruce. Clearly, this a priori belief is also
justified, and it constitutes knowledge.
330
Conclusion

The experiences and reflections of individuals, even when well-preserved
in their memories, are limited. There is a great deal we cannot know about
the world without relying on others. Much of what we justifiedly believe
and much of what we know is, in a sense, socially grounded: based on what
others have said to us, whether in person or impersonally in their writings.
Testimony, the central concern of Chapter 5, is a special source of justifica-
tion and knowledge. It often yields direct belief; yet unlike perception,
perhaps its closest analogue among basic sources of knowledge, it is not a
basic source of belief. It does not yield belief apart from perception, since it
must be received through sensory stimulation, as in listening or reading.
Testimony is, however, like memory and unlike perception in being
unlimited in the scope and subject matter of the propositions we can learn
from it. To be sure, we might gain no justification from testimony if we had
none deriving from a basic source. But we would have, at best, far less justi-
fication than we do if our only knowledge and justification came from basic
sources, or even from basic sources and inferences from the propositions we
believe on the basis of those sources.
Once we have beliefs directly grounded in one of the five sources of non-
inferential knowledge and justification – perception, memory, consciousness,
reason, and, secondarily but indispensably, testimony – we are in a position to
extend whatever justification and knowledge we then have. To take a simple
case, on the basis of my beliefs that the spruce is taller than the maple and that
the maple is taller than the apple, together with my belief that if those things
are so, then the spruce is taller than the apple, I infer that the spruce is indeed
taller than the apple. I began with non-inferential beliefs grounded directly in
basic sources of knowledge: perception and reason. By a spontaneous deductive
inference, I extended both my knowledge and my justification. And when, on
another occasion, I heard rapid knocking, believed it to sound like that of a
woodpecker, and inferred that there was a woodpecker nearby, I extended my
knowledge by inductive inference. Chapter 6 indicates how knowledge and
justification can grow indefinitely in these ways. Inference has a virtually
unlimited capacity to extend our outlook.
A picture has emerged. We are in almost constant interaction with the
world, external and internal. We are regularly bombarded by sensation,
often immersed in the stream of our consciousness, and sometimes occupied
with the testimony of a friend or with reflection on abstract matters, such as
questions of philosophy, mathematics, or science. Beliefs are a natural
product of these engagements. They arise in perception, introspection,
reflection, and testimony; they are preserved in memory; they are multiplied
by inference. Many beliefs are grounded in the basic sources, or preserved, as
non-inferential beliefs, in memory; many others are inferentially grounded
in these direct beliefs, in the ways detailed in Chapter 7.
This picture portrays two interconnected structures. One is constituted
by foundational beliefs anchored in the bedrock of experience and reason,
whether directly or through testimony that ultimately rests on it as well.
Conclusion
331

The other is a superstructure of vast complexity erected from the founda-
tions by the building blocks of inference. The theory associated with this
picture of our beliefs in relation to the world is psychological foundation-
alism. The picture is natural; and there is much to be said for the theory.
Once our psychology is understood in this way, another natural picture,
similar to the first, emerges. The theory associated with it is epistemological
foundationalism. I know that the spruce is taller than the apple tree. I know
this on the basis of knowing that the spruce is taller than the maple and the
maple is taller than the apple tree, together with the proposition that if this
is so, then the spruce is taller than the apple tree. I know that proposition
directly, through rationally comprehending it, and I know the other
premises by sight.
I do not readily see how to go any further in grounding my knowledge
here; and even if I can go on, it is not clear how I could have knowledge at
all if there were not some point or other at which my belief is connected
with the reality in virtue of which it is true: the trees with their woody
skeletons and colorful foliage; the apparently unchanging abstract relations
grasped by reason.
Metaphorically, this epistemological picture portrays both knowledge and
justification as grounded in looking and thereby in seeing. Perception looks
outward, and through it we see the physical world. Memory looks backward,
and through it we see the past, or at least some of our own past.
Introspection looks inward, and through it we see the stream of our own
consciousness. Reason looks beyond experience of the world of space and
time, and through it we see concepts and their relations. Testimony, our
chief social source of knowledge, looks to others and thereby draws on all of
these individual sources in those who convey their knowledge to us.
Testimony enables us to see – though at one remove, through the attester’s
eyes – virtually anything that an accurate and credible person attests to. By
attending to testimony we can look through any of the basic sources of
knowledge and justification, as they have informed others, upon any subject
matter they can accurately describe to us.
The foundational pictures, both in epistemology and in psychology, have
their appeal; yet we can imagine going further in the process of justification
than they suggest we should. It may be natural to think that, at any given
time, a chain of justification or knowledge will be anchored in the bedrock
of experience or reason, just as its constituent beliefs apparently are –
though, to be sure, the chains may be interconnected and, where one of
them puts stress on another, broken or torn from their moorings.
Coherentism challenges the foundationalist picture. Its proponents may
grant that the picture fits our psychological make-up. But their view of the
structure of our knowledge and justified belief is different.
Coherentists see the structure of our knowledge and justified belief as
something like a vast fabric of interlocking fibers. Some of these may be
connected to experience, but those are not privileged in generating knowl-
332
Conclusion

edge or justification. True beliefs constitute knowledge when they are suit-
ably woven into the whole fabric, which, in turn, must hold together in a
systematic way. Justification is also a matter of how beliefs are connected
with the rest of the fabric. A belief that is a largely isolated strand, for
instance one that is not inferentially based on any other belief or even signif-
icantly connected with any other in subject matter, would not be justified.
This and other coherentist pictures can also have powerful appeal, partic-
ularly in understanding the process of justification, in which we commonly
try to show that a belief is justified by connecting it with others that
support it and thereby cohere with it. But the process of justification should
not dominate our understanding of what it is for a belief simply to be justi-
fied – to have the property of being justified. Moreover, when it comes to
knowledge, which entails truth, the coherence picture is less plausible. For
indefinitely many fabrics can have internally coherent patterns; and coheren-
tism – unless alloyed with foundationalist elements – does not require that
any of the strands be anchored to the world, whether in perception or intro-
spection or in any other way. Why, then, should we expect a coherent set of
beliefs to contain truths that represent the world, and thereby to embody
knowledge?
Indeed, if a belief’s being justified counts in some way towards its truth,
then why should coherence alone be the basis of justification, given that
coherence by itself implies nothing about truth? Furthermore, self-evident
propositions, say that if no vixens are males, then no males are vixens, seem
such that we need only understand them to be able to know or justifiably
believe them. How does this knowledge or justification derive from coher-
ence at all? There are plausible attempts to provide answers, but I am not
aware of any clear success in doing so.
Whether the structure of my knowledge is foundational or not, I may
know such things as that there is a cold glass in my hand and that there is
rapid knocking nearby. Coherentists and foundationalists alike agree that I
know this only if it is true, and they tend to agree that at least this sort of
knowledge requires justified belief. But what is knowledge?
This dauntingly simple question is the focus of Chapter 8. My knowing
that, say, there is rapid knocking may seem to be simply my justifiably and
truly believing this. But it is not. Through some remarkable coincidence, I
could be hallucinating such a knocking while my ears, quite unbeknownst
to me, are temporarily blocked. I could then have a justified true belief
which is not knowledge. The suggested account of knowledge as justified
true belief is, then, too broad. It also seems too narrow. For there might be
knowledge without justification, as with someone who, by virtue of a stable
cognitive capacity, unerringly computes difficult arithmetic results with
lightning speed, but is unaware of the success and is not (at first) justified in
believing the answers.
We can strengthen our requirements on justification to deal with the true
belief based on hallucination, and we can weaken them to deal with the
Conclusion
333

lightning calculator. But it is not evident that this strategy will yield a
correct and illuminating account of knowledge. We can bypass the concept
of justification as a central element in understanding knowledge and try to
account for knowledge by appeal to the notion of reliably grounded true
belief. But it is not clear that this approach will fully succeed either, and it
certainly leaves us with the problem of explaining why justification, which
need not figure in the approach, has the close connection to knowledge
which it apparently does have.
Moreover, justification is epistemologically important in its own right,
and reliability theories seem less likely to succeed in accounting for justifica-
tion than for knowledge. This is at least in part because the grounds of
justification seem internal in a way the grounds of knowledge, or at least
some of them, do not. We may say at least this, however: that knowledge is
true belief based in the right way on the right kind of ground. Justification
or reliability or both may be essential to adequately filling out this idea; and
although it is not clear just how it is to be filled out, many of the important
elements can be gathered from what we have seen in this book concerning
the sources, development, structure, and analysis of knowledge.
However we analyze what knowledge is, there remains the question of
how much of it, if any, we have. The question is particularly important as it
bears on the major domains that concern Chapter 9: the scientific, the
ethical, and the religious. It is sometimes thought that we have a wealth of
scientific knowledge, as well as knowledge of certain moral principles and
some knowledge of religious truths. But if what passes for scientific knowl-
edge is often not, strictly speaking, true – or might be utterly rejected in the
future – may we really say that there is scientific knowledge? If moral prin-
ciples should turn out to be neither clearly grounded in experience nor
plausibly regarded as a priori, on what basis might they be known? And if,
as many philosophers think, there are no cogent arguments for God’s exis-
tence and, in addition, God is not directly knowable through the
experiential or rational sources that ground knowledge, how can there be
knowledge of God?
These questions are very difficult. But we are warranted in giving some
partial answers to them. Consider the scientific, moral, and religious
domains in turn.
First, although some of what is termed scientific knowledge is no doubt
mistakenly so called because it is far from the truth, there may be some
precisely true propositions that are scientifically known, and in any case we
may speak of approximate scientific knowledge where the proposition in
view is not precisely accurate, but also not grossly inaccurate. Moreover,
perhaps we may sometimes speak unqualifiedly of scientific knowledge, even
if this knowledge is only of approximations. We may apparently speak so
when the truth known is not precisely formulated, but holds within the
limits of its intended application. The degree of inaccuracy within which we
may speak in these ways is not sharply specifiable. But particularly where a
334
Conclusion

scientific proposition yields true predictions, helps to explain other appar-
ently true propositions, and approximates a more accurate, true proposition,
we may be justified in thinking we know it and correct in calling it approxi-
mate knowledge.
Second, although even our most plausible moral principles are neither
obviously knowable a priori nor obviously knowable empirically, rationalist
and empiricist conceptions of moral knowledge are each defensible for
some moral principles. Indeed, neither conception of moral knowledge has
been refuted despite sustained ingenious attempts to discredit them.
Moreover, once we cast aside the common stereotype of scientific knowl-
edge as representing chiefly a body of facts and laws discoverable by simple
inductive generalization, or rigorously provable by observations, the
contrast between well-confirmed scientific beliefs and reflectively
grounded moral beliefs appears less sharp. It now becomes far more diffi-
cult to discredit the view that there is moral knowledge by unfavorably
contrasting moral beliefs with scientific ones, as if scientific generalizations
were straightforwardly “hard” and moral principles unalterably “soft.” We
should not conclude, then, that there is no moral knowledge. And if it is
not obvious that there are some basic moral principles that are intuitively
knowable, it is far from clear that we should adopt the noncognitivist view
that there are no moral propositions to be known or justifiedly believed in
the first place.
Third, in the religious domain the possibility of knowledge and justifica-
tion may also be defended. Even if it is true that no argument for a theistic
view of the world is decisive, it should be remembered that a diverse group
of independent but individually inconclusive arguments may, if they are
mutually supporting and if each provides some degree of justification for a
conclusion, together justify that conclusion even if none by itself does. It has
not been established that this point could not apply in the case of arguments
for the existence of God. In any event, discussions of the question of justified
religious belief and possible religious knowledge should not simply assume
the evidentialist view that such propositions can be known or justifiedly
believed only inferentially, on the basis of further beliefs expressing evidence
for the theistic propositions in question. One or another kind of religious
experience might provide non-inferential grounds of justification, or of
knowledge, or of both, somewhat in the way perception does.
There are, to be sure, many important differences between the religious
and perceptual cases, and what we have seen does not show either that there
is or that there is not some direct knowledge of theistic propositions or
direct justification for believing some of them. But apparently, even if there
cannot be directly justified beliefs of them, there could be direct knowledge
of them. Even supposing, however, that there could be neither theistic
knowledge nor justified theistic beliefs, there might be rational theistic
beliefs: beliefs a rational person with a certain range of experience may hold,
even without having the kinds of specific grounds needed for justification.
Conclusion
335

The case for the possibility of rational theistic beliefs, then, seems stronger
than the case for the possibility of their justification.
Powerful skeptical arguments threaten the view that our knowledge
might have such wide scope, and even the commonsense view that we have
any knowledge of the external world, the past, the future, or the inner lives
of others. Chapter 10 is devoted to appraising some major skeptical argu-
ments. When we realize that our beliefs concerning these domains are
clearly fallible, we can begin to appreciate skeptical views. Even our sense
that, whether or not we have knowledge, we do have justified beliefs
weakens if we take seriously the possibility that what we accept as justifica-
tion is no final guarantee of truth. But the common skeptical commitment
to the ideal of infallible belief as central to knowledge is not warranted by
careful inquiry into the nature of knowledge.
Infallibility may be a reasonable ideal for proof, conceived as decisively
demonstrating a conclusion from rock-solid premises, such as self-evident
truths or, on the empirical side, propositions about the believer’s immediate
consciousness. For one cannot decisively prove something – or demonstrate
it, to use a term that sometimes has wider scope – from insecure premises, or
by making merely inductive and hence fallible steps from even the most
trustworthy premises. But why should proof be our standard of the kind of
justification (or perhaps certainty) appropriate to knowledge? We are not
talking about what is required to show conclusively that there is knowledge,
but about whether there in fact is any.
If, however, we think that there is knowledge, and the skeptic challenges
us, we want to show that there is. But we must not confuse – or allow skep-
tics to confuse – the requirements for showing that there is knowledge with
the requirements for the existence of it. Perhaps it can be shown that there is
knowledge. Certainly, if we want to argue for this, we need not accept the
idea that showing something to be true is equivalent to proving it. But even
if it cannot be shown that there is knowledge or justified belief, it does not
follow that there is none. It also does not follow that we do not have some-
thing less difficult to achieve than justified belief, though significant in
most of the same ways: belief that is rational.
But there surely is knowledge and justified belief. I justifiedly believe,
indeed I know, that that green field lies before me. Those bird songs are not
fantasy. My stream of thoughts is in unmistakably clear focus. Even my
recollection that I cut a vine from the spruce tree is clear and steadfast. I am
justified in believing that I did, and surely I know this. We all have a huge
store of beliefs of these and other kinds, including countless beliefs origi-
nally formed through testimony. These beliefs form a structure of great
complexity, with innumerable changing elements that reflect our continuing
experience and thought, our actions and emotions, our learning and forget-
ting, our inferring and accepting, our revising and rejecting, our speaking
and listening. That structure is grounded in us: in our memories, our habits
of thought, our mental and perceptual capacities, our rational nature.
336
Conclusion

Knowledge of the truths of reason arises within the structure itself, once we
have the needed concepts. Through our consciousness of what is inside of us,
and our perceptual engagement with what is outside of us, with the social
world as well as our physical environment, this structure is anchored, both
internally and externally, to the world. That vast and various reality is at
once the ultimate source and the object of our empirical knowledge.
Conclusion
337


Short annotated bibliography of 
books in epistemology
Alston, William P., Epistemic Justification, Ithaca and London, 1989. A collection of papers
centering on justification and knowledge in a way that unites internalist and externalist
elements. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 3, and 7–10.
——, Perceiving God, Ithaca and London, 1991. A major study in religious epistemology, also
containing much general epistemology, particularly in the theory of perception. Highly
relevant to Chapters 1, 8, and 9.
Aristotle, Posterior Analytics, trans. by G.R.G. Mure, Oxford, 1928. A major text of immense
influence. Especially relevant to Chapter 7.
Armstrong, D.M., Belief, Truth and Knowledge, Cambridge, 1973. A wide-ranging epistemo-
logical essay influential in the reliabilist tradition. Especially pertinent to Chapters 1, 3,
and 6–9.
Audi, Robert, The Structure of Justification, Cambridge and New York, 1993. A collection of
mainly recent papers covering most of the topics in Chapters 4, 6–8, and 10.
——, The Architecture of Reason, Oxford and New York, 2001. A comprehensive theory of
rationality, practical as well as theoretical; explicates in detail the nature of justification by
comparison with rationality; offers an account of the role of experience in grounding both;
and applies some of its epistemological results to the foundations of ethics. Particularly
pertinent to Chapters 1, 4, and 7–10.
Aune, Bruce, Knowledge of the External World, London and New York, 1991. A historically
oriented, integrated treatment of empirical knowledge. Bears particularly on Chapters 1,
7, and 10.
Austin, J.L., Sense and Sensibilia, Oxford, 1979 (reprint). A study of perception particularly
pertinent to the appraisal of sense-datum theory and of relevance to understanding foun-
dationalism. Especially relevant to Chapters 1 and 7.
Ayer, A.J., The Problem of Knowledge, Harmondsworth, 1956. An epistemological survey in the
empiricist tradition. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 2, 8, and 10.
Baergen, Ralph, Contemporary Epistemology, Fort Worth, TX, 1995. A textbook addressing
most of the topics treated here, with something of relevance to each chapter.
Berkeley, George, A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge, New York, 1929
(originally published in 1710). Perhaps the most important statement of phenomenalism,
and of an idealist worldview in general, in the empiricist tradition. Bears particularly on
Chapters 1, 3, 9, and 10.
Boghossian, Paul, and Peacocke, Christopher, New Essays on the A Priori, Oxford, 2000. A
collection of professional papers on epistemological, metaphysical, and logical and
semantic aspects of the a priori, with an introduction by the editors and separate chapters
by each. Pertinent above all to Chapter 4.
BonJour, Laurence, The Structure of Empirical Knowledge, Cambridge, Mass., 1985. A detailed
and widely discussed statement and defense of coherentism regarding empirical knowl-
edge. Especially pertinent to Chapters 1, 4, 7, 8, and 10.

——, In Defense of Pure Reason, Cambridge and New York, 1998. An account of a priori justi-
fication and knowledge, with detailed critical discussions of Kant’s position on them and
of Hume on induction. Highly pertinent to Chapters 4 and 10.
Brandt, R.B., and Nagel, Ernest (eds), Meaning and Knowledge, New York, 1965. A large,
historically informed assembly of classical and recent readings in epistemology. Bears on
all the chapters.
Butchvarov, Panayot, The Concept of Knowledge, Evanston, Il, 1970. A metaphysically oriented,
foundationalist inquiry into the nature of knowledge. Especially pertinent to Chapters 1,
4, 7, 8, and 10.
——, Skepticism in Ethics, Bloomington, IN, 1989. A detailed study of the possibility and
possible extent of justification and knowledge in ethics. Particularly relevant to Chapters
9 and 10.
——, Skepticism and the External World, New York, 1998. An account of skepticism and its
implications for a realist metaphysics, with a distinctive theory of the role of decision in
determining the extent of our knowledge. Most closely pertinent to Chapters 8 and 10.
Chisholm, R.M., Theory of Knowledge, 2nd and 3rd edns, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1977 and
1989. A rigorous treatment of many basic topics in the field, and an introduction to
Chisholm’s own epistemological views. Relevant to each chapter.
——, The Foundations of Knowing, Minneapolis, 1982. A collection of essays, on topics rele-
vant to each chapter, by one of the major epistemologists of this century.
Chisholm, R.M., and Swartz, Robert (eds), Empirical Knowledge, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1973.
A large collection of influential epistemological writings. Especially pertinent to Chapters
1, 2, 3, and 7–10.
Coady, C.A.J., Testimony, Oxford, 1992. A comprehensive, historically wide-ranging treatment
of testimony that links it at many points with the philosophy of language and the views of
Wittgenstein. Pertinent above all to Chapter 5.
Craig, Edward, Knowledge and the State of Nature, Oxford, 1990. A sophisticated but lucid and
concrete treatment of the problem of analyzing knowledge, with considerable attention to
skepticism and far more on testimony than most general books on epistemology. Particu-
larly relevant to Chapters 5, 8, and 10.
Crumley, Jack S. II, An Introduction to Epistemology, Mountainview, CA, 1999a. A wide-
ranging but concise introduction to both the problems and literature of the field.
Pertinent to nearly every chapter.
––––, Readings in Epistemology, Mountainview, CA, 1999b. A wide-ranging collection of
contemporary readings in the field, with introductions to each section. Bears on each
chapter.
Dancy, Jonathan, Contemporary Epistemology, Oxford, 1985. A general introduction to episte-
mological literature. Bears on each chapter.
Dancy, Jonathan, and Sosa, Ernest (eds), A Companion to Epistemology, Oxford, 1992. A
comprehensive reference work of short, encyclopedia-style articles. Highly pertinent to
every chapter.
Danto, Arthur C., Analytical Philosophy of Knowledge, Cambridge, 1968. A broad epistemolog-
ical essay with special focus on the structure of knowledge. Especially relevant to Chapters
6–10.
DePaul, Michael R., and Ramsey, William (eds), Rethinking Intuition: The Psychology of Intu-
ition and Its Role in Philosophical Inquiry, Lanham, MD, 1998. A collection of papers by
philosophers and psychologists on the nature of intuition, with pertinent discussion of
recent psychological studies of reasoning. Especially relevant to Chapter 4, but also useful
in understanding philosophical method in general.
340
Bibliography

DeRose, Keith, and Warfield, Ted A., Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader, Oxford and New
York, 1999. A collection of recent writings that concern skepticism particularly in the
context of questions about contextual variables, meaning, self-knowledge, and transmis-
sion of justification. Highly pertinent to Chapters 6, 8, and 10.
Descartes, René, Meditations on First Philosophy, in vol. 2 of The Philosophical Writings of
Descartes, trans. by John Cottingham, Robert Stoohof, and Duglad Murdock, Cambridge,
1984 (originally published in 1641). One of the greatest and most influential works in
modern epistemology, and a powerful statement of both rationalism and foundationalism.
Bears on every chapter.
Dretske, Fred I., Seeing and Knowing, London, 1969. An intensive study of perception and its
relation to empirical knowledge, with an influential defense of the notion of non-epis-
temic seeing. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 3, 8, and 10.
——, Knowledge and the Flow of Information, Cambridge, Mass., 1981. A major statement of a
reliabilist, information-theoretic account of knowledge. Particularly pertinent to Chapters
1, 8, and 10.
Everitt, Nicholas, and Fisher, Alec, Modern Epistemology, New York, 1995. A high-level intro-
ductory textbook with special attention to mathematical and logical knowledge and
detailed discussions of Quine (a major influence on the authors) and Rorty. Pertinent to
most chapters, but especially 4 and 8.
Fales, Evan, A Defense of the Given, Lanham, MD, 1966. A defense of the view that justifica-
tion is conferred by what is given in immediate experience, with detailed applications to
the foundationalism conceived as a plausible theory that makes use of the given.
Fogelin, Robert, Pyrrhonian Reflections on Knowledge and Justification, Oxford and New York,
1994. An intensive and sympathetic inquiry into skepticism, from a distinctively Pyrrho-
nian point of view. Relevant above all to Chapter 10.
Foley, Richard, The Theory of Epistemic Rationality, Cambridge, Mass., 1987. A detailed devel-
opment of a subjectivistic theory of justification. Pertinent to every chapter.
——, Working without a Net, Cambridge, Mass., 1993. A development and generalization of
his theory of epistemic rationality. Especially relevant to Chapters 7–10.
Fumerton, Richard A., Metaphysical and Epistemological Problems of Perception, Lincoln, NE,
1985. A study of both the nature of the objects of perception and the way perception
yields justification and knowledge. Especially pertinent to Chapters 1, 3, and 7.
——, Metaepistemology and Skepticism, Lanham, MD, 1996. A systematic treatment of skepti-
cism with special reference to the controversies between internalism and eternalism and
foundationalism and coherentism. Highly relevant to Chapters 7, 8, and 10.
Ginet, Carl, Knowledge, Perception, and Memory, Dordrecht and Boston, 1975. A rigorous high-
level study of these three notions in relation to each other. Particularly relevant to
Chapters 1–3, 7, 8, and 10.
Goldman, Alan H., Empirical Knowledge, Berkeley, CA, 1988. A detailed presentation of a
theory of knowledge and evidence with special emphasis on inference to the best explana-
tion. Pertinent above all to Chapters 1, 6, and 8–10.
Goldman, Alvin I., Epistemology and Cognition, Cambridge, Mass., 1986. A presentation of
reliabilism for justification and knowledge, with much discussion of related developments
in cognitive psychology. Particularly relevant to Chapters 1, 2, 6, and 8.
——, Knowledge in a Social World, Oxford and New York, 1999. A wide-ranging treatment of
epistemology in the context of social elements in its development, with much discussion
of the nature and structure of knowledge in such domains as science, law, and education.
Bears on many chapters, particularly 5 and 9.
Bibliography
341

Greco, John, Putting Skeptics in Their Place, Cambridge and New York, 2000. An examination
of the structure of skeptical arguments which contends that taking account of them
requires an externalist epistemology and that a version of virtue epistemology deals best
with knowledge and skepticism. Particularly pertinent to Chapters 1, 8, and 10.
Greco, John, and Sosa, Ernest, The Blackwell Guide to Epistemology, Oxford, 1999. A book of
commissioned papers aimed at providing high-level examinations of the current status of
major epistemological issues. Pertinent to every chapter.
Haack, Susan, Evidence and Inquiry, Oxford, 1993. An attempt to combine the best elements
in foundationalism and coherentism, with special attention to the connections between
epistemology and philosophy of science. Bears especially on Chapters 7, 9, and 10.
Hamlyn, David, Understanding Perception, Aldershot, 1996. A monograph on perception and
its relation to belief, learning, consciousness, and other notions important in this book.
Highly relevant to Chapter 1.
Harman, Gilbert, Thought, Princeton, NJ, 1975. A broad, influential study of the nature of
knowledge, with much attention to defeasibility conditions, inferential transmission of
knowledge, and the role of coherence in justification. Bears especially on Chapters 1, 2, 6,
8, and 10.
——, Change in View, Cambridge, Mass., 1986. A detailed study of evidence and justification
as bearing on changing, as opposed to simply holding, a position, with special emphasis
on the conditions for coherence in one’s overall view. Especially relevant to Chapters 6–9.
——, Reasoning, Meaning, and Mind, Oxford and New York, 1999. A collection of papers
presenting large-scale conceptions of the a priori, reasoning, and knowledge that helpfully
contrast with the perspectives in Chapters 4, 6, and 8.
Heatherington, Stephen Cade, Knowledge Puzzles, Boulder, CO, 1996. A brief but comprehen-
sive introduction to epistemology with emphasis on the puzzles generated by many of its
central questions. One or another section bears on any given chapter.
Heil, John, Perception and Cognition, Berkeley, CA, 1983. A study of perception in relation to
belief, with discussions linking epistemology to philosophy of mind. Especially pertinent
to Chapters 1, 3, and 8.
Hintikka, Jaakko, Knowledge and Belief, Ithaca, NY, 1962. A rigorous, advanced study in epis-
temic logic. Particularly relevant to Chapters 6 and 8.
Huemer, Michael, Skepticism and the Veil of Perception, Lanham, MD, 2001. A critical, histori-
cally informed analysis of skepticism about perceptual knowledge, with a detailed
response in the foundationalist, realist tradition. Highly pertinent to Chapters 1, 6, 8, and
10.
——, Epistemology: Contemporary Readings, London, 2002. A large, wide-ranging collection of
classical and contemporary papers and book selections. It is designed to complement this
book and has at least several readings pertinent to every chapter, as well as introductions
to each major section by Huemer and useful study questions for each reading.
Hume, David, A Treatise of Human Nature, Oxford, 1888 (originally published in 1739). One
of the greatest and most influential works in modern philosophy, and a powerful state-
ment of empiricism. It bears on every chapter.
——, An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding, Indianapolis, 1977 (first published in
1748). A major work in modern epistemology, particularly for the topics of causation,
induction, and skepticism. Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 4, 6, and 10.
Kant, Immanuel, Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysics, trans. by Lewis White Beck, New
York, 1950 (originally published in 1783). A short presentation of the ideas in Kant’s
monumental Critique of Pure Reason, one of the greatest texts in modern philosophy. The
Prolegomena bears particularly on Chapters 1, 4, 8, and 9.
342
Bibliography

Kitcher, Philip, The Nature of Mathematical Knowledge, New York and Oxford, 1984. A wide-
ranging, historically informed treatment of mathematical knowledge, with a sustained
critique of various apriorist conceptions of it and a positive account of a “defensible
empiricism.” Particularly relevant to Chapter 4.
Klein, Peter, Certainty: A Refutation of Scepticism, Minneapolis, 1981. A rigorous treatment of
the nature of knowledge, certainty, and skepticism. Especially pertinent to Chapters 5, 8,
and 10.
Kvanvig, Jonathan L., The Intellectual Virtues and the Life of the Mind, Lanham, MD, 1992. A
detailed statement and critical appraisal of a virtue epistemology, relevant mainly to
Chapters 1 and 7–10.
——, (ed.), Warrant in Contemporary Epistemology: Essays in Honor of Plantinga’s Epistemology,
Lanham, MD, 1996. A collection of commissioned papers on the warrant approach devel-
oped by Plantinga and related topics. Bears particularly on Chapters 8 and 10.
Kyburg, Henry E., Jr., Epistemology and Inference, Minneapolis, 1983. A collection of advanced
papers, of which several are especially pertinent to Chapters 6–9.
Landesman, Charles, Epistemology: An Introduction, Oxford, 1996. A nearly comprehensive
introduction, with historically informed discussions making it particularly relevant to
Chapters 1–4, and 8–10.
Lehrer, Keith, Knowledge, Oxford, 1974. A critique of foundationalism and development of
the author’s own coherentist theory of knowledge, with a detailed, non-causal account of
justification. Particularly relevant to Chapters 1, 3, and 7–10.
——, Theory of Knowledge, Boulder, CO, 1990. A successor to his Knowledge that presents a
revised theory and is also relevant to Chapters 1, 3, and 7–10.
Lewis, C.I., An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation, La Salle, IL, 1946. A systematic study, in
the foundationalist tradition, of many major epistemological and metaphysical questions.
Especially relevant to Chapters 1–4 and 6, 7, and 9.
Locke, Don, Memory, New York, 1971. A concise but wide-ranging treatment of memory and
memorial knowledge. Bears mainly on Chapter 2.
Locke, John, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, New York, 1928 (originally
published in 1689). A major text in modern epistemology, and a powerful statement of a
commonsense empiricism. Bears on each chapter.
Luper-Foy, The Possibility of Knowledge: Nozick and His Critics, Lanham, MD, 1987. A set of
papers discussing above all Nozick’s tracking account of knowledge and its bearing on
skepticism. Relevant especially to Chapters 6, 8, and 10.
Lycan, William, Judgment and Justification, New York, 1988. An account of justification and
of aspects of knowledge, with emphasis on their connection with the notion of explanation
and with selected topics in the philosophy of mind. Especially relevant to Chapters 1 and
6–10.
Malcolm, Norman, Knowledge and Certainty, Ithaca, NY, 1975. A collection of epistemological
essays by a leading proponent of the philosophy of Wittgenstein. Especially relevant to
Chapters 1, 2, 3, 8, and 10.
McGrew, Timothy J., The Foundations of Knowledge, Lanham, MD, 1995. A systematic defense
of foundationalism (strong as opposed to moderate) relevant to Chapters 1, 4, 7, and 8.
Mill, John Stuart, A System of Logic, London, 1843. The leading nineteenth-century statement
of radical empiricism. Especially relevant to Chapters 4 and 6–9.
Montmarquet, James A., Epistemic Virtue and Doxastic Responsibility, Lanham, MD, 1993. A
statement and appraisal of a virtue epistemology with special emphasis on the relation
between justification and intellectual responsibility. Especially relevant to Chapters 1 and
7–10.
Bibliography
343

Morton, Adam, A Guide Through the Theory of Knowledge, 3rd edn, Oxford, 2002. A brief but
moderately comprehensive introduction, with more on probability and induction than
many short books of the same range. Pertinent to nearly every chapter.
Moser, Paul K., Knowledge and Evidence, New York, 1993a. A rigorous and detailed presenta-
tion of an account of knowledge and the nature and scope of its supporting grounds.
Especially pertinent to Chapters 1, 4, and 7–10.
——, Philosophy after Objectivity, Oxford and New York, 1993b. A rigorous treatment of the
relation of realism to skepticism and of both to semantic questions about meaning and
epistemological questions about evidence, reasons, and justification. Especially pertinent
to Chapters 4, and 7 to 10.
Moser, Paul K., Mulder, Dwayne H., and Trout, J.D., The Theory of Knowledge, Oxford, 1998.
A brief introduction that ranges over many of the topics in this book and is especially
pertinent to understanding the relation between epistemology and philosophy of science.
Bears on most of the chapters.
Moser, Paul K., and van der Nat, Arnold (eds), Human Knowledge, 2nd edn, New York, 1995.
An extensive set of classical and contemporary readings, with editors’ introductions to
each section. Pertinent to every chapter.
Nathan, N.M.L., The Price of Doubt, London and New York, 2000. A systematic treatment of
skepticism, with much examination of the notion of evidence and rational belief. Perti-
nent especially to Chapters 8 and 10.
Nozick, Robert, Philosophical Explanations, Cambridge, Mass., 1981. Contains a book-length
epistemology section bearing on Chapters 6–8 and 10.
O’Connor, D.J., and Carr, Brian, Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge, Minneapolis, 1982. A
general introduction bearing on each chapter.
Pappas, George S., and Swain, Marshall, Essays on Knowledge and Justification, Ithaca, NY,
1978. A collection of papers, many influential, mainly from professional journals. Espe-
cially relevant to Chapters 1 and 6–10.
Peacocke, Christopher, Being Known, Oxford, 1999. A philosophical treatment of knowledge,
especially self-knowledge, in relation to central issues in philosophy of language and
metaphysics, particularly intentionality, representation, and truth. Highly pertinent to
Chapters 2, 3, 6, and 8.
Plantinga, Alvin, Warrant and Proper Function, New York, 1993a. A systematic development
of a theory of warrant as to what renders true belief knowledge and of key epistemic
concepts related to warrant. Particularly relevant to Chapters 1, 4, and 7–10.
——, Warrant: The Current Debate, New York, 1993b. A critical study of many major episte-
mological theories. Highly relevant to Chapters 7–10.
Plato, Theaetetus, trans. by F.M. Cornford, Cambridge, 1934. A major text in the history of
epistemology. Especially relevant to Chapter 8.
Pojman, Louis P., Knowledge: Classic and Contemporary Readings, Belmont, CA, 1993. A large
collection, with introductions to each section. Relevant to every chapter.
——, What Can We Know?, 2nd edn., Belmont, CA, 2001. A wide-ranging, highly readable,
historically informed introduction with attention both to basic issues and to classical and
contemporary literature. Pertinent to every chapter.
Pollock, John L., Knowledge and Justification, Princeton, NJ, 1974. A systematic, wide-ranging
treatment of these notions which develops a foundationalist account of both. It bears on
all the chapters.
——, Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, Totowa, NJ, 1986 (later edn with Joseph Cruz, Lanham,
MD, 1999). A treatment of some leading current theories in epistemology that also presents
its own account of some key concepts. Bears especially on Chapters 1, 4, 7, 8, and 10.
344
Bibliography

Price, H.H., Perception, Oxford, 1932. A detailed major study of the topic, with important
discussions of sense-data. Especially relevant to Chapters 1 and 10.
Quine, W.V., The Pursuit of Truth, revised edn, Cambridge, Mass., 1992. A short statement of
many of Quine’s epistemological views, with valuable discussions connecting epistemology
with the philosophy of science. The chapters devoted to evidence, meaning, perception, and
truth (respectively) make it especially pertinent to Chapters 1, 4, 5, 6, 8, and 9.
Quine, W.V., and Ullian, Joseph, The Web of Belief, 2nd edn, New York, 1978. An introduc-
tory treatment of the development of commonsense and scientific knowledge. Bears
particularly on Chapters 1, 4, and 8–10.
Quinton, Anthony, The Nature of Things, London, 1973. A survey of problems in metaphysics
and epistemology, with much discussion of the foundationalism–coherentism controversy.
Especially relevant to Chapters 1, 7, and 8.
Reid, Thomas, Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, London, 1869 (originally published in
1785). An important critique of other modern philosophers, rationalist and empiricist,
and an original development of a commonsense epistemology. Especially relevant to Chap-
ters 1–4, 7, 8, and 10.
Rescher, Nicholas, Skepticism, Oxford, 1980. A detailed critical survey of many of the argu-
ments for skepticism. Especially relevant to Chapters 8 and 10.
Robinson, Howard, Perception, London and New York, 1994. A historically detailed defense of
the sense-datum theory in the philosophy of perception. Bears on Chapters 1–3.
Rorty, Richard, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature, Princeton, NJ, 1979. A widely discussed
critique of the foundationalist tradition in epistemology (and indeed of aspects of episte-
mology itself), with special attention to strong foundationalism as deriving from
Descartes. Pertinent especially to Chapters 1, 7, and 10.
Russell, Bertrand, The Problems of Philosophy, London, 1912. An influential introductory and
highly readable survey of epistemology and metaphysics. Particularly pertinent to Chap-
ters 1, 3, 4, and 8–10.
——, An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, London, 1940. An articulation of an overall episte-
mological position by one of the twentieth-century’s major epistemologists. Especially
relevant to Chapters 1 and 7–9.
Sellars, Wilfrid, Science, Perception, and Reality, London, 1963. A collection of advanced episte-
mological papers by a major contemporary philosopher and leading coherentist. Especially
pertinent to Chapters 1, 3, 4, and 7–9.
Shope, Robert, The Analysis of Knowing, Princeton, NJ, 1983. A highly detailed study of
major kinds of analysis of knowledge. Especially relevant to Chapter 8.
Sosa, Ernest, Knowledge in Perspective, Cambridge and New York, 1991. A wide-ranging collec-
tion of papers intensively exploring most of the topics treated in Chapters 1, 4, and 7–10
and introducing a sophisticated and influential version of virtue epistemology.
Sosa, Ernest, and Kim, Jaegwon (eds), Epistemology: An Anthology, Oxford, 2000. A wide-
ranging set of mainly recent writings on justification, knowledge, and skepticism. Highly
pertinent to Chapters 1, 6, 8, and 10.
Steup, Matthias, An Introduction to Contemporary Epistemology, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1966. A
comprehensive and systematic introduction to epistemology, with close attention both to
theoretical and conceptual issues and to major statements in the literature. Pertinent to
every chapter, but above all to Chapters 1, 4, 6–8, and 10.
——, Knowledge, Truth, and Duty: Essays on Epistemic Justification, Responsibility, and Virtue,
Oxford and New York, 2001. A collection of recent papers focusing largely on the relation
between belief and will and on how that relation bears on knowledge and justification in
general and on virtue epistemology in particular.
Bibliography
345

Stroud, Barry, The Significance of Philosophical Scepticism, Oxford, 1984. An intensive study of
skepticism, particularly as set out by Descartes. Particularly relevant to Chapters 1, 8, and
10.
Swain, Marshall, Reasons and Knowledge, Ithaca, NY, 1981. A rigorous statement of an account
of knowledge that unites justificationist and reliabilist elements. Especially relevant to
Chapters 1, 6, and 8.
Swinburne, Richard, Epistemic Justification, Oxford, 2001. A wide-ranging epistemological
treatise with close attention to the distinction between internalist and externalist
approaches; it emphasizes the role of probability in understanding justification and
stresses the relation between how a belief is arrived at and its epistemic standing. Particu-
larly pertinent to Chapters 6, 8, and 9.
Unger, Peter, Ignorance, Oxford, 1975. A full-scale case for skepticism. Bears particularly on
Chapters 1, 6, 8, and 10.
Vinci, Thomas, Cartesian Truth, Oxford, 1998. An interpretation of Descartes’s epistemology
that rigorously defends some main Cartesian ideas. Bears especially on Chapters 1, 4, 6, 8,
and 10.
Will, Frederick L., Induction and Justification, Ithaca, NY, 1974. A critical study of a founda-
tionalist approach to justification, with much attention to the problem of induction.
Especially relevant to Chapters 7–10.
Williams, Michael, Unnatural Doubts, Oxford, 1991. A detailed diagnostic account of skepti-
cism and some major issues concerning the possibility of foundations of knowledge.
Pertinent especially to Chapters 1, 7, 8, and 10.
——, Problems of Knowledge, Oxford, 2001. A broad treatment of many of the problems of
epistemology, with particular attention to skepticism. Pertinent to nearly every chapter.
Williamson, Timothy, Knowledge and its Limits, Oxford, 2000. A rigorous defense of the idea
that knowledge is a state of mind and should be taken as a basis for understanding other
notions important in epistemology, such as evidence, rather than analyzed in terms of
allegedly more basic notions. Especially pertinent to Chapters 1, 6–8, and 10.
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, Philosophical Investigations, trans. by G.E.M. Anscombe, Oxford, 1953.
Wittgenstein’s most wide-ranging work, spanning topics in epistemology, metaphysics,
and other philosophical areas. Its remarks and examples bear on every chapter.
——, On Certainty, trans. by Dennis Paul and G.E.M. Anscombe, Oxford, 1969. An impor-
tant discussion of the topic by one of the major twentieth-century philosophers. Especially
relevant to Chapters 8 and 10.
Zagzebski, Linda, Virtues of the Mind, Cambridge and New York, 1996. A new statement of
virtue epistemology distinctive for its background account of virtue ethics as the counter-
part on which virtue epistemology should be based. Pertinent above all to Chapter 8.
346
Bibliography

a posteriori (empirical) propositions 103
a priori justification 119–24
a priori knowledge 101, 119–24, 228–9
a priori proposition 101–3
abduction see inference, to the best
explanation
abstract entities 108–9
acceptance 285; see also belief
accessibility: internal 238–40, 275;
perceptual 280–1; public 265–7
accidentality 29; see also chance
adverbial theories: applied to hallucination,
41–2, 44–5; applied to memory 65–6; of
perception 38–41; of sensory experience
41–2
Alston, William P. 53 (n. 16), 213 (n. 1),
253 (n. 11), 253–4 (n. 17), 254 (nn. 25,
27), 288 (n. 23), 326 (n. 23)
Amico, Robert 326 (n. 13)
analysis 100
analytic proposition 97 –8; as independent
of experience 101
Anderson, Elizabeth, 287 (n. 8)
anti-realism 44, 80
appearance state 216 (n. 12)
Aquinas, St Thomas 127 (n. 9), 128 (n. 14),
300, 325 (n. 9)
argument from analogy 299
Aristotle 110, 193, 214 (n. 7), 242, 254 (n. 25)
Armstrong, D. M. 52 (n. 10), 252 (n. 7)
attesting 133
Austen, Jane 202
Austin, J. L. 179 (n. 6)
Averill, Edward Wilson 127 (n. 10)
Ayer, A. J. 179 (n. 6), 254 (n. 20)
Barnes, Winston H. F. 54 (n. 22)
basic belief 137, 148, 184
basic knowledge 137, 148, 277
basic source 72, 90–91, 119, 136, 137, 142,
283
basing relation 159–61, 186–7, 327 (n. 24)
begging the question 297, 325 (n. 5)
belief: and acceptance 285; about perceptibles
16 (see also belief, perceptual); a priori 6,
120–21; as dispositional 77; basic see basic
belief; episodically vs. structurally
inferential beliefs 160; dispositional vs.
disposition to believe 22–4, 52 (n.8), 53
(n.10), 136–7, 207–8; direct, 162; for a
reason 158–9, 160–1; foundational 331
(see also basic belief); genesis vs.
justification 107; indirect 161; inductive
6; infallible 302–4; inferential 133–5,
158–60, 177; inferential development of
162–77 (see also belief, inferential); innate
59, 73 (n. 3); introspective 6; memorial 6,
57; non–inferential 162; objects of 157;
objectual 18–19, 51 (n. 2); perceptual 6,
17; propositional 18, 19, 51 (n. 2);
reasoned 158–9; retained 59;
second–order 206; self-grounding 304;
testimony-based 149 (nn. 6, 7)
Bender, John W. 215 (n. 12)
Berkeley, George 44, 45, 54 (n. 24)
Bernecker, Sven 215 (n. 16)
Blanshard, Brand 254 (n. 28)
blind sight 49
BonJour, Laurence 125 (n.1), 128 (n. 22),
214 (n. 9), 215 (n. 12)
brain in a vat, 300, 324 (n. 1)
Brandt, Richard B. 288 (n. 18)
Brueckner, Anthony 325 (n. 8)
Burge, Tyler 151 (n. 17)
Butchvarov, Panayot 325 (n. 7)
Calvin, John 279
Canary, Catherine 180 (n. 16)
Castaneda, Hector-Neri 215 (n. 16)
Casullo, Albert 129 (n. 27)
categorical imperative 274–5
causal dependence 47, 223, 233
causal theory of perception see perception,
causal theory of
certainty 218–21, 304–7, 312; certainty
principle 304; epistemic 225, 305;
propositional 218–19; psychological
224
Index
Page numbers in bold show where a term is defined

Chalmers, David 326 (n. 18)
chance 233, see also accidentality
Chisholm, R. M. 54 (n. 20), 54 (nn. 22, 23),
254 (n. 20), 326 (n. 13)
circularity problem 322–3
clairvoyance 236–8
Coady, C. A. J. 149 (n. 1)
Cohen, Stewart 283 (n. 13)
coherence 194–205; with experience, 211; see
also coherentism
coherence theory of concepts 204–4
coherentism 194–7, 332–3; holistic
195–200; isolation problem for 199;
linear 194, 195; see also coherence
common sense 6, 294, 296, 301; negative
defense of 310; positive defense of 310,
318–24
conative attitudes 52 (n. 5)
conception 19–21
consciousness 76–91
consequentialism 276
content 157, 178 (n. 1)
contingent proposition 96
contrast class 326 (n. 14) see also relativism,
relevant alternative
conventionalism 111–13
correspondence theory of truth see truth,
correspondence, theory of
credibility, testimonial 138, 145
credulity 293–294
criterion, problem of the see problem of the
criterion
Crumley, Jack S. II 287 (n. 7)
Davidson, Donald 126 (n. 7), 151 (n. 17),
215 (n. 16), 254 (n. 28)
de Almeida, Claudio 180 (n. 10), 213 (n. 4)
de dicto 51 (n. 3)
deductive reasoning 165–7; and entailment
166; and proof 165, 259; and scientific
knowledge 261–2
deductive transmission 171–77
defeasibility 89–90, 180 (n. 10), 204, 205,
222–3, 232; see also justification,
indefeasible
definition, truth by 111–13 see also meaning
dependence see causal dependence; epistemic
dependence; evidential dependence;
functional dependence; genetic
dependence; inferential dependence;
justificational dependence; operational
dependence; presuppositional dependence;
and psychological dependence
de re 51 (n. 3)
DeRose, Keith 253 (n. 13)
Descartes, René 73 (n. 3), 84, 90, 194, 215
(n. 15), 249, 300, 303, 305, 306, 324 (n.
1), 325 (n. 11)
design 253 (nn. 10, 15), 278
Dewey, John 255 (n. 29)
Dickinson, Emily 34
disposition to believe see belief, dispositional
vs. disposition to believe
dispositional belief see belief, dispositional
vs. disposition to believe
dispositional properties 77–8
disquotation principle 254 (n. 26)
dogmatism 212, 294, 316, 321
doxastic attitudes 52 (n. 5)
doxastic voluntarism 185
dream argument 324 (n. 1)
Dretske, Fred 53 (n. 11), 181 (n. 16), 252
(n. 5)
Duhem, Pierre 287 (n. 2)
Duhem-Quine thesis 287(n. 2)
egocentric predicament 300
Einstein, Albert 107
empirical see a posteriori proposition
empiricism 105, 106
entailment 166, 179 (n. 9)
epistemic 7
epistemic authority 314–15
epistemic chains 188–93
epistemic dependence 142, 193, 223;
negative 205; positive 205; see also causal
dependence, presuppositional, and
psychological, dependence
epistemic directness 65
epistemic entitlement 241–2, 327 (n. 24)
epistemic grounding see grounding, epistemic
epistemic immediacy see immediacy, epistemic
epistemic indirectness see indirectness
epistemic particularism 179 (n. 7)
epistemic possibility 312, 32 (n. 18)
epistemic principle 27, 29, 323
epistemic priority 179 (n. 7)
epistemic regress argument 192–3
epistemic regress problem 188–97
epistemic virtue 242–3, 294
epistemology 1, 265; naturalistic see
naturalistic epistemology
essential truth see truth, essential
Euclidean geometry 173
evidence of the senses 27, 51, 208
evidential dependence 197
evidentialism 279, 289 (n. 21)
excluded middle, principle of the 109–10
348
Index

excusability 70, 275
experientialism 279–83
explanation 198, 201–3; mutual 202–3, 214
(n. 10); reciprocal 203; see also inference
to the best explanation
externalism 238–45, 276; about justification
239; about knowledge 238
factive attitudes 22, 57–8
faculties, active vs. reactive 91
Fairweather, Abrol 254 (n.22)
faith 284–6, 324
fallibilism 263
fallibility 8–9, 301–4; argument from 301
Feldman, Richard 180 (n. 16), 253 (n. 11)
feminist epistemology 264, 265, 271, 287
(n. 6)
Fogelin, Robert 324 (n. 1), 325 (n. 7)
foundationalism (epistemological) 193–4,
203, 273–4, 332; moderate 194,
210–11, 321; psychological 197, 332;
strong 194, 211
Freud, Sigmund 92 (n. 8)
Fricker, Elizabeth 150 (n. 13), 152 (n. 22)
Fuller, Steve 287 (n. 10)
functional dependence 47–9, 233–4
Galileo 259
gambler’s fallacy 325 (n. 4)
generality problem see specification problem
genetic dependence 119
Gert, Bernard 288 (n. 26)
Gettier, Edmund L. 252 (n. 2)
Giaquinto, M. 129 (n. 26)
Ginet, Carl 74 (n. 7), 254 (n. 20)
Goldman, Alvin I. 180 (n. 14), 253 (nn. 14,
19)
Graham, Peter 150 (n. 8)
Grayling, A.C. 254 (n. 26)
Greco, John 151 (n. 14), 254 (n. 22)
Grice, H. P. 128 (n. 15)
grounding 3, 7–8, 203, 240, 251; causal
7–8; deductive 259; epistemic 7–8;
inductive 259; internal 240;
justificational 7, 240; memorial 58;
perceptual 16; reliable 230, 240, 252 
(n. 9); truth–conducive 240
hallucination 28, 31–2, 35–6, 84; argument
from 33–8; empty 33, 40; memorial 296;
and the problem of the body 299; and
skepticism 282–3
Hannay, Alastair 92 (n. 5)
Hardin, C. L. 127 (n. 10)
Hardwig, John 151 (n. 21), 287 (n. 11)
Harman, Gilbert 181 (n. 16)
Hegel, G. W. F. 254 (n. 28)
Heil, John 53 (n. 18)
Hempel, Carl G. 287 (nn. 2, 3)
Hopkins, Gerard Manley 282
Huemer, Michael 74 (n. 10), 324 (n. 1), 326,
(nn. 7–8)
Hume, David 83, 146, 296–8, 299, 311
idealism 44
illusion 22, 31
imagination 260
imaging 76–7; second–order 79
immediacy, epistemic 96, 126 (n. 5);
epistemic vs. temporal 95, 126 (n. 5)
indefeasibility 95, 123, 125; see also
defeasibility
independence principle 210
indirectness: causal 36; epistemic 36, 196–7;
inferential 36; justificational 196;
objectual 36
induction see inference, deductive and
inductive; problem of induction
inductive reasoning 166–7; analogical 163;
explanational 167; generalizational 167;
and probability 166, 168–71;
subsumptive 167; see also inference to the
best explanation
inductive transmission 168–73
infallibility 83, 302–4; restricted view of 85;
thesis of 83
inference 156–78; analogical 167; to the best
explanation 59, 260–1, 278, 287 (n. 5),
299; belief-forming 162; confirmatory
vs. generative 162; content vs. process of
157; deductive and inductive 165–7;
subsumptive 167; vs. perception 159;
unconscious 135
inferential chains 184–8, 186
inferential dependence 141
instantial reasoning 167
intentional object 92 (n. 3)
internalism 238–45, 275; about justification
238; about knowledge 239
introspection 78–82, 88; and perception 76,
81–2; as a basis of justification and
knowledge 90–91
intrinsic goodness 276
intuition 6, 98, 116
intuitionism (ethical), 273–74, 277
irrealism, direct 44; indirect, 62; see also
anti–realism
isolation problem see coherentism
Index
349

James, William 255 (n. 29)
Jession, Robin 126 (n. 2)
justification 1, 53 (n. 13), 145; belief
justification 2–3 (see also justification,
situational); conclusive 224; defeasible see
defeasibility; degrees of 70–7, 176, 181
(n. 17), 191, 199; doxastic see belief vs.
justification; for believing see
justification, situational; global vs.
individual 146–8; in believing see
justification, situational; indefeasible
125; introspective 89–90; and knowledge
4, 29, 244–5; and memory 70, 177;
prima facie 27–8, 90; process of 2,
206–7, 245; property of 2, 6–7, 20, 245;
second–order 320–1; situational 2–3, 8,
25, 27, 95, 175, 176; social 281–2 (see
also testimony); transmission of 171–7;
and truth 245–6; (see also knowledge)
justificational dependence 193
Kant, Immanuel 96, 97, 105, 106, 126 (n.
6), 127 (nn. 9, 12), 274–7, 288 (n. 15)
Kirkham, Richard 254 (n. 26)
Kitcher, Philip 128 (n. 17)
KK thesis 317
Klein, Peter D. 180 (n. 16), 213 (nn. 3–4),
252 (n. 6), 325 (nn. 7, 13)
knowledge 220–45; in the abstract 185;
approximate 263; a priori see a priori
knowledge; basic see basic knowledge;
by acquaintance vs. description, 227;
causal account of 228–9; and certainty
224–6; clairvoyant 236–8; defeat of
163, 233, 234; direct 192–4;
foundational 192; general conception of
251; indirect 196–7 (see also inference);
introspective 88–9; justified true belief
account of 222–4; memorial
preservation of 71–2; memorially direct
276; moral 271–8; natural 231–7, 279;
perceptual 28–30; recognitional 137;
religious 278–84; scientific 258–67 (see
also inductive reasoning); second–order
317; secondary 276; social 265 (see also
testimony); sociology of see sociology of
knowledge; testimonially direct 276;
transmission of 138, 167–77; virtual
264, 265, 267; see also justification
Kripke, Saul 129 (n. 27)
Kvanvig, Jonathan L. 215–16 (n. 17), 252
(n. 4), 254 (n. 22)
Kyburg, Henry E., Jr. 180 (n. 11)
Lawrence, D. H. 253 (n. 16)
learning 142–4
Lehrer, Keith 209 (n. 16), 215 (n. 12)
Lennon, Kathleen 287 (n. 6)
Lewis, C. I. 54 (n. 23)
Lewis, David 253 (n. 13)
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm 128 (n. 20), 129
(n. 27)
Locke, John 35, 73 (n. 4)
logical possibility 312
logical truth 106, 110, 115, 128 (n. 18)
Longino, Helen 287 (n. 7)
lottery paradox 180 (n. 11)
Marcus, Ruth Barcan 126 (n. 7)
McDowell, John 150 (n. 13)
McGinn, Colin 127 (n. 10)
meaning: change of and falsification 114–15;
truth by virtue of 111, 113
memory 56–73; adverbial conception of
64–6; epistemological centrality of
69–72; modes of 60; phenomenalist
conception of 64; representative theory of
62–4; see also belief; justification;
knowledge
mental properties and states 76–8; see also
privileged access
Mill, John Stuart 45, 105, 106, 128 (n. 17),
274–7, 288 (nn 17, 18)
mind-dependence 246
Moore, G. E. 252 (n. 6)
moral knowledge see knowledge, moral
Moser, Paul K. 215 (n. 13), 325 (n. 7)
naive realism see realism, naive
naturalistic epistemology 227–38
necessary truth 96, 97–8, 116–18; see also
analytic proposition, logical truth
necessity, empirical 116–18, 129 (n. 27)
necessity, logical see logical truth
necessity, natural 325 (n. 12)
necessity, nomic 116
Newton, Isaac 107, 262
nomic necessity see necessity, nomic
noncognitivism 269–71, 288 (n. 34)
Nozick, Robert 175 (n .13), 181 (n. 16), 325
(n. 7)
objectivism 263
observation 47, 258, 259–60
occurrent properties 77–8
Odegard, Douglas 180 (n. 16)
omniscience, thesis of 84–6
350
Index

ontological argument 278
operational dependence 141
other minds, problem of see problem of other
minds
Peirce, C. S. 247
Pendelbury, Michael 51 (n. 3)
percept 25
perceptible 16, 43–4
perception 16–17; aspectual 25–64; basic
elements in 16–17; and belief 17–24;
causal theory of 31; epistemic 52 (n. 6);
indirect 35, 36; inner and outer 76, 330;
and introspection 81–2; objectual 16, 20;
propositional 20–1; simple 17, 21; vs.
inference 158; see also adverbial theories;
belief, dispositional vs. disposition to
believe; realism, naive; phenomenalism;
sense–datum theories; theory of
appearing
perceptual hierarchy 24
phenomenal property 92 (n. 2)
phenomenalism 41–7, 250; adverbial 44–5;
sense–datum version of 43–4
Plantinga, Alvin 150 (n. 9), 252 (nn. 4, 8),
253 (nn. 10, 15), 288 (n. 20)
Plato 73 (n. 3), 106, 220, 25 (n. 1)
possibility, conceptual 127 (n. 11)
possibility, epistemic vs. logical 312
possibility, logical 127 (n. 11), 312
presuppositional dependence 223
privileged access 83–8; strong doctrine of
84; see also infallibility; and omniscience,
thesis of
probability 166, 167, 168–70, 198, 201,
224, 297
probable reasoning 166, 168
problem of the criterion 326 (n. 13)
problem of induction 296–8, 310
problem of other minds 298–9
problem of too many minds 325 (n. 6)
proof 102, 118, 259, 262, 336
property attribution 52 (n. 4)
property, dispositional 77, occurrent 79
proposition 157
provability 118, 122
Pryor, James 326 (n. 13)
psychological dependence 223
psychological foundationalism see
foundationalism, psychological
Putnam, Hilary 325 (n. 8)
Pyrrho of Ellis 293; see also skepticism,
Pyrrhonian
qualities, primary 35
qualities, secondary 35
Quine, W. V. 52 (n. 7), 128 (n. 15), 129
(nn 24, 25), 254 (n. 26), 247 (n. 27),
287 (n. 1)
Quine-Duhem thesis see Duhem-Quine
thesis
rationalism 105–6, 274–5
rationality 284–5, 323
Reid, Thomas 149 (n. 3), 151 (n. 15)
realism 246; direct 33; indirect 60; naive
30–1; perceptual 30, 33; representative
35
reason 119; to believe 2, 176; see also truths
of reason
reasoning 156, 157, 158, 160; by analogy
167; probabilistic 166; see also deductive
reasoning; inductive reasoning; inference;
subsumptive reasoning
recalling 60, 63, 67–8
regress argument see epistemic regress
argument
regress of demonstration 320–21
relativism (ethical), 268–72; circumstantial,
272; vs. relativizationism, 268
relevant alternative 234, 307; see also contrast
class
reliabilism: indicator 252 (n. 9); process 252
(n. 9); see also reliability theories
reliability theories 229–35, 250, 322
remembering 60–2; active (occurrent) 65;
event 60–1; how 60; indirect 57;
objectual 60; passive (dispositional) 65;
propositional 60, 65, 70–1
representative realism see realism
Rescher, Nicholas 325 (n. 7)
Rigg, Wayne D. 215 (n. 17)
Robinson, Howard 53 (n. 17)
Rorty, Richard 215 (n. 15)
Ross, W. D. 288 (n. 14)
Russell, Bertrand 105, 128 (n. 16), 179 (n.
6), 324 (n. 4), 325 (n. 6)
Sainsbury, Mark 254 (n. 26)
Sayre-McCord, Geoffrey 288 (n. 13)
Schmitt, Frederick 287 (n. 7)
scientific knowledge see knowledge,
scientific; proof; testimony
seeing 21–30; as a causal relation 31; by 26;
direct vs. indirect 47; and light 48
self–deception 92 (n. 6)
self–evidence 94, 101, 126 (n. 9), 188, 202;
Index
351

direct vs. indirect, 124; relativized notion
of 128 (n. 14)
self-grounding belief see belief, self-
grounding
self-knowledge principle 88
Sellars, Wilfrid 214 (n. 8), 215 (n. 16)
Senor, Thomas D., 288 (n. 25)
sense–data 34–8, 44; and introspection 79;
and memory 62; see also phenomenalism;
sense–datum theories
sense–datum theories: of non–perceptual
sensory experience 42; of perception
33–8
sensory experience 41–2; see also adverbial
theories; phenomenalism; sense–datum
theories
Shakespeare 39, 49, 78
Shalkowski, Scott A. 127 (n. 11)
showing (a proposition) 336; de facto 326 (n.
15); dialectical 326 (n. 15)
show-know principle 309
Sinnott–Armstrong, Walter 288 (n 13), 325
(n. 5), 326 (n. 14)
situational justification see justification,
situational
skeptical principles 301–13; back–up 305;
certainty 304; cogency 314; entailment
311–13; infallibility 302; necessity 302
skepticism 292–324; attitudinal 294;
first–order 295; justification skepticism
294; knowledge skepticism 294;
moderate vs. radical 318; and the
positive defense of common sense
318–24; Pyrrhonian 293, 324 (n. 2);
refutation vs. rebuttal of 317–18, 323;
second–order 295
Smart, J.J.C. 54 (n. 21)
social epistemology 266, 271
sociology of knowledge 271
Sosa, Ernest 254 (n 22), 325 (n.7), 327 (n 23)
source conditions 165; see also transmission
conditions
specification problem 232–3
Steup, Matthias 213 (n. 1)
Strawson, P. F. 128 (n. 15)
Stroud, Barry 324 (n. 1), 325 (n. 7), 327 (n.
23)
Stump, Eleonore 289 (n. 27)
subsumptive reasoning 167
suspended judgment 5, 135
synthetic a priori 99–101
synthetic propositions 99–101
Tarski, Alfred 254 (n. 26)
Taylor, James E. 255 (n. 30)
testability 107–8
testimony 132–48, 229–30, 282;
demonstrative vs. propositional 143;
formal and informal 132–3
theory of appearing 32, 38, 39, 43
Timmons, Mark C. 288 (n. 13)
tracking 234
transmission conditions 164–77; and
probability 168–71; and testimony
138–40; see also source conditions
trust 134, 135
truth 245–50; coherence theory of 248–9;
correspondence theory of 246–7; criteria
vs. nature of 249–50; essential 117; for
a person or culture 271–2; and
justification 245–62; and knowledge
220–1; logical see logical truth;
minimalist account of 247; pragmatic
theory of 249–50; redundancy account
of 248; see also justification; knowledge;
meaning; necessary truth
truths of reason 96–125
uncertainty 304–5; see also certainty
underdetermination 299, 325 (n. 7)
understanding 94–6, 97, 100, 104, 125 
(n. 1), 127 (n. 14)
uniformity of nature principle 311
vagueness 23, 110, 114
validity 165–6, 173, 179 (n. 9)
van Gogh 26
verity principle 302
virtue epistemology 242–4
visual experience principle, the 28
visual justification principle, the 27
Vogel, Jonathan 325 (n. 7)
voluntarism, doxastic see doxastic
voluntarism
warrant 252 (n. 4)
Webb, Mark Owen 151 (n. 15)
Whitford, Margaret 287 (n. 6)
Williams, Michael 324 (n. 1), 325 (n. 7)
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 215 (n. 11)
Yandell, Keith E. 288 (n. 19)
Zagzebski, Linda 254 (n. 22)
352
Index

