
Banned Mind Control
Techniques Unleashed
 
Learn the Dark Secrets of
Hypnosis, Manipulation,
Deception, Persuasion,
Brainwashing and Human
Psychology
 
By Daniel Smith
 
Copyright 2014 by Make Profits Easy
LLC
profitsdaily123@aol.com
 


Table of Contents
 
Introduction
Chapter 1: Types of Mind Control
Brainwashing
Hypnosis
Manipulation
Persuasion
Deception
Chapter 2: Brainwashing
What is Brainwashing?
Steps Used
Breaking Down of Self
Assault on Identity
Guilt

Self-betrayal
Breaking Point
Possibility of Salvation
Leniency
Compulsion to Confession
Channeling of Guilt
Releasing of Guilt
Rebuilding of Self
Harmony
Final Confession and Starting
Over
Brainwashing as Court Defense
Lee Boyd Malvo Case
Common Tactics Used in
Brainwashing

Chapter 3: Hypnosis
What is Hypnosis?
Induction
Suggestion
Susceptibility
Applications
Hypnotherapy
Military Applications
Self-hypnosis
Stage Hypnosis
Types of Hypnosis
Traditional Hypnosis
Ericksonian Hypnosis
Embedded Technique
Nero-Linguistic Programming

NLP Anchoring
NLP Flash
NLP Reframe
Video Hypnosis
Subliminal Hypnosis
Chapter 4: Manipulation
What is Manipulation?
Requirements to Successfully
Manipulate
How to Control Victims
Harriet Braiker
Simon
Techniques of Manipulation
Blackmail
Emotional Blackmail

Putting Down The Other Person
Lying
Creating an Illusion
Chapter 5: Persuasion
What is Persuasion?
Elements of Persuasion
Modern Persuasion
Methods of Persuasion
Usage of Force
Weapons of Influence
Reciprocity
Commitment and Consistency
Social Proof
Liking
Authority

Scarcity
Persuasion Techniques
Create a Need
Appealing to Social Needs
Using Loaded Images and Words
Chapter 6: Deception
What is Deception?
Types of Deception
Motives for Deception
Detecting Deception
Main Components of Deception
Camouflage
Disguise
Simulation
Research on Deception

Social Research
Psychological Research
Philosophy
Conclusion

Introduction
 
Mind control is an idea that has
fascinated people for many years.
Stories have been told by the media
and in movies about groups of people
who have been brainwashed or
hypnotized into doing things that they
would have never done otherwise.
There are people on both sides of the
issue; some believe that there is no
such thing as mind control and that it is
all just made up while others believe
that they could be manipulated by mind
control at any moment. This guidebook
is meant to explain some of the
different types of mind control, how
they work, and whether or not they can

have a daily life application.
Chapter 1 starts out talking about the
different types of mind control that are
available and which will be discussed
in more detail throughout the book.
These mind control techniques involve
brainwashing, hypnosis, manipulation,
persuasion, and deception. This chapter
is meant to give a nice introduction to
each of these types of mind control in
order to set the stage for the later
chapters.
Chapter 2 continues on with talking
about brainwashing. Topics such as
what brainwashing is, the steps that are
used during brainwashing, how

brainwashing has been used as a court
defense throughout history, and some
of the common tactics that can be used
during the brainwashing process. Much
of this chapter is devoted to discussing
the different steps that are used during
the brainwashing processes such as the
three stages; the breaking down of the
self, the possibility of salvation, and
the rebuilding of the new self.
Next, chapter 3 discusses the mind 
control technique of hypnosis. The first 
section spends some time talking about 
what hypnosis is and includes 
information on the induction, 
suggestion, and susceptibility stages. 
Other topics that are discussed in this 

chapter include the applications of 
hypnosis, such as hypnotherapy, and 
the different types of hypnosis ranging 
from traditional hypnosis to video 
hypnosis and even subliminal hypnosis.
Chapter 4 changes course a little to
describe some of the mind control
techniques that might be occurring in
daily life. While the first two
techniques would require isolation of
the subject and the subject to be
willing, these other forms can
sometimes occur without the subjects
consent or even knowledge. Chapter 4
talks about the first of these which is
manipulation. This chapter will spend
some time discussing what

manipulation is and some of the
techniques that will be used in
manipulation.
Chapter 5 spends some time discussing
the mind control technique of
persuasion. It will delve into what
persuasion is including the different
elements of persuasion along with the
methods used to persuade the subject
and different persuasion techniques.
Chapter 6 is the final chapter of this
guidebook and will take a look at the
mind control technique of deception.
Deception is something that many
people are familiar with although many
might not recognize it as a form of
mind control. In this chapter, topics

about deception including what is
deception, the main components of
deception, and the uses of deception
will be discussed.
There is a lot of information provided
in the world about the various forms of
mind control. While some of them will
require a lot of time and effort to
change the mind of the subject, such as
in the case of brainwashing, others will
occur throughout daily life, such as
with deception, manipulation or
persuasion. Understanding these
different forms of mind control can
help to make it easier to be in control
of your own mind and limit the
influence that others have on your own

belief systems and identity. Also by
understanding these various mind
control techniques you will be able to
apply some of the methods. However,
if you decide to take this path make
sure you do so with extreme caution,
because mind control if applied
maliciously can be a dangerous thing
and get you into serious trouble. So
without further ado let’s begin and
explore the fascinating topic of mind
control.

Chapter 1: Types of Mind
Control
 
The idea of mind control has been
around for many years now. People
have had both fascination and fear of
what would happen if someone where
able to control their minds and make
them do things against their will.
Conspiracy theories run abound about
government officials and other people
of power using their talents to control
what small groups of people are doing.
Even some court cases have been
brought up using the excuse of
brainwashing as an explanation for why
they committed the crime they are
accused of. Despite the dramatization

of mind control that has been portrayed
in the media and the movies, there is
little that is known about the different
types of mind control and how each of
them work. This chapter will explore a
little bit about the most common types
of mind control as an introduction to
explaining more about this interesting
topic.
While there are many different types of
mind control that can be used to
control the intended victim, there are
five that are most commonly thought
of. These include brainwashing,
hypnosis, manipulation, persuasion,
and deception. These will all be
discussed below.

Brainwashing
Brainwashing is the first type of mind
control to discuss. Brainwashing is
basically the process where someone
will be connived to abandon beliefs
that they had in the past in order to take
new ideals and values. There are a lot
of ways that this can be done although
not all of them will be considered bad.
For example, if you are from an
African country and then move to
America, you will often be forced to
change your values and ideals in order
to fit in with the new culture and
surroundings that you are in. On the
other hand, those in concentration
camps or when a new dictator

government is taking over, they will
often go through the process of
brainwashing in order to convince
citizens to follow along peacefully.
Many people have misconceptions of
what brainwashing is. Some people
have more paranoid ideas about the
practice including mind control devices
that are sponsored by the government
and that are thought to be easily turned
on like a remote control. On the other
side of things, there are skeptics who
do not believe that brainwashing is
possible at all and that anyone who
claims it has happened is lying. For the
most part, the practice of brainwashing
will land somewhere in the middle of

these two ideas.
During the practice of brainwashing,
the subject will be convinced to change
their beliefs about something through a
combination of different tactics. There
is not just one approach that can be
used during this process so it can be
difficult to put the practice into a neat
little box. For the most part, the subject
will be separated from all of the things
that they know. From there, they will
be broken down into an emotional state
that makes them vulnerable before the
new concepts are introduced. As the
subject absorbs this new information,
they will be rewarded for expressing
ideas and thoughts which go along with

these new ideas. The rewarding is what
will be used in order to reinforce the
brainwashing that is occurring.
Brainwashing is not something that is
new to society. People have been using
these techniques for a long time. For
example, in a historical context, those
who were prisoners of wars were often
broken down before being persuaded to
changes sides. Some of the most
successful cases of these would result
in the prisoner becoming a very fervent
convert to the new side. These
practices were very new in the
beginning and would often be enforced
depending on who was in charge. Over
time, the term of brainwashing was

developed and some more techniques
were introduced in order to make the
practice more universal. The newer
techniques would rely on the field of
psychology since many of those ideas
were used to demonstrate how people
might change their minds through
persuasion.
There are many steps that go along
with the brainwashing process. It is not
something that is going to just happen
to you when you walk down the street
and talk to someone that you have just
met. First off, one of the main
requirements that come with
brainwashing being successful is that
the subject must be kept in isolation. If

the subject is able to be around other
people and influences, they will learn
how to think as an individual and the
brainwashing will not be effective at
all.
Once the subject is in isolation, they
will undergo a process that is meant to
break down their own self. They are
told that all the things they know are
false and are made to feel like
everything they do is wrong. After
months of going through all of this, the
subject will feel like they are bad and
the guilt is going to overwhelm them.
Once they have reached this point, the
agent will start to lead them towards
the new belief system and identity that

is desired. The subject will be led to
believe that the new choices are all
their own and so it is more likely to
stick.
The whole process of brainwashing can
take many months to even years. It is
not something that is going to happen
in just a conversation and for the most
part it will not be able to happen
outside of prison camps and a few
isolated cases. Chapter 2 will go into
more detail of what occurs during the
three main stages of brainwashing and
how the whole process occurs.
For the most part, those who undergo
brainwashing have done so when

someone is just trying to persuade
them of a new point of view. For
example, if you are in an argument
with a friend and they convince you
that their ideas make sense, you have
technically gone through brainwashing.
Sure, it might not be evil and you were
able to think about it all logically, but
you were still convinced to change the
beliefs that you held before. It is very
rare that someone undergoes true
brainwashing where they will have
their whole value system replaced. It
will usually occur during the process of
coming around to a new point of view,
regardless of whether the tactics used
were forcible or not.

Hypnosis
The next type of mind control that is
well-known is hypnosis. There are a lot
of different definitions of what
hypnosis is. According to the American
Psychological Association, hypnosis is
a cooperative interaction where the
hypnotist will provide suggestions that
the participant will respond to. Many
people have become familiar with the
techniques of hypnosis thanks to
popular performances where
participants are told to do ridiculous or
unusual tasks. Another form of
hypnosis that is gaining in popularity is
the kind that uses this practice for its
therapeutic and medical benefits,

especially when it comes to the
reduction of anxiety and pain. In some
instances, hypnosis has been able to
reduce dementia symptoms in a few
patients. As you can see, there are a lot
of different reasons that hypnosis that
can be used. The point where it starts to
become mind control is when the
hypnotist is able to recommend
suggestions that can be harmful or
change the way that the participant acts
in their surroundings.
For most people, when they hear about
hypnosis they think about a person on
stage who is swinging a watch back and
forth in order to put the participant in a
trance. If you have been to a stage

show for entertainment, you may have
some images in your head of the
ridiculous acts that the participants
performed. In reality, those who are
going through what is considered real
hypnosis are going through a process
that is very different from this image.
“The hypnotist does not hypnotize the
individual. Rather, the hypnotist serves
as a sort of coach or tutor whose job is
to help the person become hypnotized,”
said John Kihlstrom. This means that
the hypnotist works to get the
participant into an altered state of mind
so that they are more open to
suggestions that are given.
Many of the people who undergo

hypnosis say that they are in a sleep-
like trance kind of state. Despite these
thoughts, while under hypnosis the
participant is in a state that includes
vivid fantasies, heightened
suggestibility, and focused attention.
This new state makes them more
susceptible to the suggestions that the
hypnotist will be giving to them.
It is hard to detail the effects that
hypnosis can have on subjects since the
experiences will vary quite a bit for
each person who undergoes it. Some
subjects will report feeling like they
are detached from the whole
experience, some will feel extremely
relaxed during the hypnosis, and still

others will feel that the actions they are
doing will occur outside of their
conscious choices. On the other side of
things, individuals will state that they
are fully aware of their surroundings
and will even be able to carry out
conversations during their hypnotic
state.
Some experiments that have been done
by Ernest Hilgard shows that hypnosis
can be used in order to alter the
perceptions of the subjects. The
experiment conducted by Hilgard
included an instruction of the subject to
not feel any pain in their arm. After
they were told this, the subject had
their arm placed in some ice water.

Those who did this experiment and
were not hypnotized needed to take
their arms out of the water in just a few
seconds since they felt pain. Those who
were hypnotized were capable of
leaving their arms in the water for a
few minutes without experiencing pain.
While more research will need to be
done, this study shows how strong
mind control can be when using the
technique of hypnosis.
There are many different applications
demonstrated through research that
hypnosis can be used for including:
Treating chronic pain such
as that found with

rheumatoid arthritis.
Treating and reducing the
pain that comes during
childbirth.
Reducing the symptoms that
are associated with
dementia.
Some ADHD patients have
seen reduction in their
symptoms after using
hypnotherapy.
Reducing cases of vomiting
and nausea in chemotherapy
patients.
Controlling of pain during
dental procedures.
Eliminating and reducing
skin conditions such as

psoriasis and warts.
Alleviating symptoms that
are associated with Irritable
Bowel Syndrome.
These are just a few of the uses that
have become common with hypnosis.
While many people are under the 
misconception that using hypnosis is 
used to control the subject and make 
them perform horrific acts or denounce 
their own beliefs, the most common 
uses are those for improving the health 
of the individuals.  
Most experts are in agreement that the
effect of hypnosis as a form of mind
control is not really a reality. While it

may be possible to convince the mind
to make a few changes in the habits and
behavior of the subject, it is not likely
that the subject will change their whole
system of beliefs just through this
process. Many of the people who are
certified in this profession will use it to
assist the subject in self-improvement
and pain management rather than for
trying to take over their minds.

Manipulation
Manipulation is another form of mind
control that can be used in various
ways to determine the way the
individual will think. In this
guidebook, manipulation will refer to
psychological manipulation. This is a
type of social influence that works to
change the behavior or perception of
others. This is done using abusive,
deceptive, and underhanded tactics.
This form of mind control is used to
advance the interests of the one
manipulating, often at the expense of
others. The methods that are used are
often considered deceptive, devious,
abusive, and exploitative. Many people

will recognize when they are being
manipulated or when others are being
manipulated around them, but they do
not recognize this as a form of mind
control. This can often be a difficult
form of mind control to avoid due to
the fact that the manipulation will
usually occur between the subject and
someone they know well.
Manipulation leaves the subject feeling
like they have no choice in the matter.
They will have been told outright lies
or half-truths and did not realize the
full extent of the situation until it is too
late. If they find out about the situation
ahead of time, the agent will be able to
blackmail and use the subject in order

to get to the final goal. The subject
essentially becomes stuck because the
agent will have crafted everything out
in such a way that they will not get in
trouble, the subject can take the blame
or get hurt if it comes to that, and the
agent will make it to their final goal.
The most difficult thing about this is
that the agent is incapable of feeling
the needs of their subject or any other
person; they are not going to care if the
subject gets harmed in the process
whether it is emotional or physical
harm. While the subject will be
emotionally invested in the situation,
the agent will be able to walk away (as
long as they meet their final goal)

without feeling any remorse or regret
at what occurred along the way. This
can be a dangerous form of mind
control because the agent is going to be
an expert at it, being able to blackmail,
threaten, and do whatever else is
necessary; at times they may even be
able to turn things around so the
subject feels like they are going insane.

Persuasion
Persuasion is another form of mind
control that is similar to manipulation
in that it works in order to influence
the behaviors, motivations, intentions,
attitudes, and beliefs of the subject.
There are many different reasons that
persuasion could be used in everyday
life and often it is a necessary form of
communication in order to get people
of differing ideas on the same page.
For example, in business, the process
of persuasion will be used in order to
change a person’s attitude toward some
object, idea, or event that is going on.
During the process, either written or
spoken words will be used in order to

convey reasoning, feelings, or
information to the other person.
Another time that persuasion can be
used is to meet a personal gain. This
would include trial advocacy, when
giving a sales pitch, or during an
election campaign. While none of these
are considered bad or evil, they are still
used in a way to influence the listener
to act or think in a certain way. One
interpretation of persuasion is that it
uses one’s positional or personal
resources to change the attitudes or
behaviors of others. There are also
several different types of persuasion
that are known; the process of changing
the beliefs or attitudes through appeals

to reason and logic is known as
systematic persuasion; the process
where beliefs and attitudes are changed
because of an appeal to emotions or
habits is known as heuristic persuasion.
Persuasion is a form of mind control
that is used in society all of the time.
When you talk to someone about
politics you might try to persuade them
to think the same way that you do.
When you are listening to a political
campaign, you are being persuaded to
vote a certain way. When someone is
trying to sell you a new product, there
is a lot of persuasion that is going on.
This form of mind control is so
prevalent that most people do not even

realize that it is occurring to them at
all. The issue will occur when someone
takes the time to persuade you into
believing ideals and values that do not
match up to your own system of values.
There are a lot of different kinds of
persuasion that are available. Not all of
them have an evil intent, but all of
them are going to work to get the
subject to change their minds about
something. When a political candidate
comes on television, they are trying to
get the subject, or the voter, to vote a
certain way on the ballot on election
day. When you see a commercial on
television or online, the company who
presented that advertisement is trying

to get the subject to purchase that
product. All of these are types of
persuasion that are bent at trying to get
the subject to change the way that they
think.

Deception
Finally, deception is also considered a
form of mind control because of the
effect that it can have on the subject.
Deception is used in order to propagate
in the subject beliefs in events and
things that just are not true, whether
they are complete lies or just partial
lies. Deception can involve a lot of
different things including sleight of
hand, propaganda, and dissimulation,
concealment, camouflage, distraction.
This form of mind control is so
dangerous because the subject often
does not know that any mind control is
going on at all. They have been
convinced that one thing is true when

the complete opposite is right. This can
get dangerous when the deceit is hiding
information that could keep the subject
safe.
Often, deception is seen during
relationships and will usually lead to
feelings of distrust and betrayal
between the two partners. When
deception occurs, there has been a
violation of the relational rules and can
make it difficult for the partner to trust
the other for a long time. It can be
particularly damaging because most
people are use to trusting those around
them, especially relational partners and
friends, and expect them to be truthful
to them for the most part. When they

find out that someone they are close to
is deceiving them, they may have
issues with trusting others and will not
have the sense of security that they are
used to.
Deception can cause a lot of issues in a
relationship or within the agent and
subject. The subject will have a lot of
issues trusting the agent in the future
once they find out about the deception.
There will be times when the deception
will be done in order to help out the
relationship. These would include
things such as not telling a spouse
when someone says something mean
about them. Other times the deception
is more spiteful or harmful in nature

such as when the agent is hiding
important information from the subject
or is even deceiving in the person that
they really are. No matter what type of
deception is being deployed, most
people agree that deception is harmful
and should not be done.

Chapter 2: Brainwashing
 
This chapter is going to focus on the
process of brainwashing and all the
components that come with it. Through
the media and the movies that are seen,
many people see brainwashing as an
evil practice that is done by those who
are trying to corrupt, influence, and to
gain power. Some who really believe in
the power of brainwashing believe that
people all around them are trying to
control their minds and their behavior.
For the most part, the process of
brainwashing occurs in a much more
subtle way and does not involve the
sinister practices that most people
associate with it. This chapter will go

into a lot more detail about what
brainwashing is and how it can
influence the subject’s way of thinking.

What is Brainwashing?
Brainwashing in this guidebook will be
discussed in terms of its use in
psychology. In this relation,
brainwashing is referred to as a method
of thought reform through social
influence. This kind of social influence
is occurring all throughout the day to
every person, regardless of whether
they realize it or not. Social influence
is the collection of methods that are
used in order to change other people’s
behaviors, beliefs, and attitudes. For
example, compliance methods that are
used in the workplace could technically
be considered a form of brainwashing
because they require you to act and

think a specific way when you are on
the job. Brainwashing can become
more of a social issue in its most
severe form because these approaches
work at changing the way someone
thinks without the subject consenting
to it.
For brainwashing to work effectively,
the subject is going to need to go
through a complete isolation and
dependency due to its invasive
influence on the subject. This is one of
the reasons that many of the
brainwashing cases that are known
about occur in totalistic cults or prison
camps. The brainwasher, or the agent,
must be able to gain complete control

over their subject. This means that they
must control the eating habits, sleeping
patterns, and fulfilling the other human
needs of the subject and none of these
actions can occur without the will of
the agent. During this process, the
agent will work to systematically break
down the subject’s whole identity to
basically make it not work right
anymore. Once the identity is broken,
the agent will work to replace it with
the desired beliefs, attitudes, and
behaviors.
The process of brainwashing is still up
for debate whether or not it will work.
Most psychologists hold the beliefs
that it is possible to brainwash a

subject as long as the right conditions
are present. Even then, the whole
process is not as severe as it is
presented in the media. There are also
different definitions of brainwashing
that make it more difficult to
determine the effects of brainwashing
on the subject. Some of these
definitions require that there must be
some sort of threat to the physical body
of the subject in order to be considered
brainwashing. If you follow this
definition, then even the practices done
by many extremist cults would not be
considered true brainwashing as no
physical abuse occurs.
Other definitions of brainwashing will

rely on control and coercion without
physical force in order to get the
change in the beliefs of the subjects.
Either way, experts believe that the
effect of brainwashing, even under the
ideal conditions, is only a short term
occurrence. They believe that the old
identity of the subject is not
completely eradicated with the
practice; rather, it is put into hiding
and will return once the new identity is
not reinforced anymore.
Robert Jay Lifton came up with some
interesting thoughts on brainwashing in
the 1950s after he studied prisoners of
the Chinese and Korean War camps.
During his observations, he determined

that these prisoners underwent a
multistep process to brainwashing.
This process began with attacks on the
sense of self with the prisoner and then
ended with a supposed change in
beliefs of the subject. There are 10
steps that Lifton defined for the
brainwashing process in the subjects
that he studied. These included:
1. An assault on the identity of
the subject
2. Forcing guilt on the subject
3. Forcing the subject into self-
betrayal
4. Reaching a breaking point
5. Offering the subject
leniency if they change

6. Compulsion to confess
7. Channeling the guilt in the
intended direction
8. Releasing the subject of
supposed guilt
9. Progressing to harmony
10. The final confession before
a rebirth
All of these stages must take place in
an area that is in complete isolation.
This means that all of the normal social
references that the subject is used to
coming in contact with are unavailable.
In addition, mind clouding techniques
will be employed in order to expedite
the process such as malnutrition and
sleep deprivation. While this might not

be true of all brainwashing cases, often
there is a presence of some sort of
physical harm which contributes to the
target having difficulty in thinking
independently and critically like they
normally would.

Steps Used
While Lifton separated the steps of the
brainwashing process into 10 steps,
modern psychologists organize it into
three stages in order to better
understand what goes on for the subject
during this process. These three stages
include the breaking down of the self,
introducing the idea of salvation to the
subject, and the rebuilding of the self
of the subject. Understanding each of
these stages and the process that
happens with each of them can help
you to understand what is going on to
the identity of the subject with this
process.

Breaking Down of Self
The first stage of the brainwashing
process is the breaking down of the
self. During this process, the agent
wants to break up the old identity of
the subject in order to make them feel
more vulnerable and open to the
desired new identity. This step is
necessary in order to continue on the
process. The agent is not going to be
very successful with their endeavors if
the subject is still firmly set in their
resolve and their old identity. Breaking
up this identity and making the person
question the things around them can
make it easier to change the identity in
the later steps. This is done through

several steps including assault on the
identity of the subject, brining on guilt,
self-betrayal, and then reaching the
breaking point.
Assault on Identity
The assault on the identity of the
subject is basically the systematic
attack on the subjects’ sense of self, or
their ego or identity along with their
core system of belief. It makes the
subject question who they are by
making them think that everything they
have ever known is wrong. The agent
will spend a great deal of time denying
everything that the subject is. In
prisoner camps, for example, the agent
will say things like “You are not

defending freedom,” “You are not a
man,” and “You are not a soldier.” The
subject will be under attacks like these
constantly for days up to months. This
is done in order to exhaust the subjects
so that they become disoriented,
confused, and exhausted. When the
subject reaches this kind of state, their
beliefs will start to seem less solid and
they might start to believe the things
that they are told.
Guilt
Once the subject has gone through the
assault on their identity, they will enter
the stage of guilt. The subject will be
constantly told that they are bad while
going through this new identity crisis

that has been brought on. This is done
in order to bring a large sense of guilt
on to the subject. The subject will be
constantly under attack for any of the
things that they have done, regardless
of how big or small the acts may be.
The range of the attacks can vary as
well; the subject could be criticized for
their belief systems to the way that
they dress and even because they eat
too slowly. Over time, the subject is
going to start to feel shame around
them all of the time and they will feel
that all the things they are doing are
wrong. This can help to make them feel
more vulnerable and likely to go along
with the new identity the agent wants
to produce.

Self-betrayal
Now that the subject has been led to
believe that they are bad and that all of
their actions are undesirable, the agent
is going to work to force the subject to
admit that they are bad. At this point,
the subject is drowning in their own
guilt and feeling very disoriented.
Through the continuance of the mental
attacks, the threat of some great
physical harm, or a combination of the
two, the agent will be able to force the
subject to denounce his old identity.
This can include a wide variety of
things such as getting the subject to
denounce their own peers, friends, and
family who share the same belief

system as them. While this process
may take a while to occur, once it does,
the subject will feel like he betrayed
those that he feels loyal to. This will
also increase the shame as well as the
loss of identity that the target is
already feeling, further breaking down
the identity of the subject.
Breaking Point
By this point, the subject is feeling
very broken down and disoriented.
They may be asking questions such as
Where am I? Who am I? and What
should I do? The subject is in an
identity crisis at this point and is going
through some deep shame. Since they
have betrayed all of the beliefs and the

people that he has always known, the
subject is going to go through a
nervous breakdown.
In psychology, this just means a
collection of severe symptoms that
often indicate a large number of
supposed psychological disturbances.
Some of the symptoms can involve
general disorientation, deep depression,
and uncontrolled sobbing. The subject
may have the feelings of being
completely lost along with having a
loose grip on reality. Once the subject
reaches this breaking point, they will
have lost their sense of self and the
agent will pretty much be able to do
whatever they want with them at this

point since the subject has lost their
understanding of what is going on
around them and who they are. Also at
this point, the agent will set up the
various temptations that are necessary
in order to convert the subject towards
a new belief system. The new system
will be set up in a way to offer
salvation to the subject from the
misery that they are feeling.
Possibility of Salvation
After the agent has been effective at
breaking down the self of the subject, it
is time to move on to the next step.
This step involves offering the subject
the possibility of salvation only if they

are willing to turn away from their
former belief system and instead
embrace the new one that is being
offered. The subject is given the chance
to understand what is around them, are
told that they would be good again and
that they would feel better if they
would just follow the new desired path.
There are four steps that are included
in this stage of the brainwashing
process; leniency, compulsion to
confession, channeling of the guilt and
releasing of the guilt.
Leniency
Leniency is the “I can help you” stage.
The subject has been broken down and
forced to turn away from the people

and the beliefs that they have held on
to for so many years. They have been
told that they are bad and that
everything they do is wrong. The
subject is going to feel lost and all
alone in the world, shameful at all of
the bad things that they have done and
wondering which way they can turn.
When they reach this stage, the agent is
able to offer them some form of release
by offering to help them.
This will often be in the form of a
reprieve from the abuse the subject has
incurred or some other small kindness.
For example, the agent can offer a little
extra food or a drink of water to the
subject or even take a few moments to

ask the subject personal questions
about home and loved ones. In the
subject’s current state, these small acts
of kindness will seem like a big deal,
resulting in the subject feeling a big
sense of gratitude and relief towards
the agent. Often these feelings are way
out of proportion in comparison to the
offering that has been made. In some
instances, the subject may feel like the
agent has done the act of saving their
life rather than just offering a small
service. This distortion of events works
in the favor of the agent as the subject
is now going to gain ties of loyalty
with the agent rather than things of the
past.
Compulsion to Confession

Once the agent has been able to gain
the trust of their subject, they will try
to get a confession out of the process.
This stage is often known as the “You
can help yourself.” During this stage of
the brainwashing process, the subject
starts to see the differences between
the pain and guilt that they felt during
the identity assault and the relief that
they are feeling from the sudden
leniency that is offered. If the
brainwashing process is effective, the
subject may even start to feel a desire
to reciprocate some of the kindness
that has been offered to them by the
agent. When this occurs, the agent will
be able to present the idea of

confession as a possible means to
relieving the subject of the pain and
guilt that they are feeling. The subject
will then be led through a process of
confessing all of the wrongs and sins
that they have done in the past.
Of course, these wrongs and sins will
be in relation to how they affect the
new identity that is being created. For
example, if the subject is a prisoner of
war, this step will allow them to
confess the wrongs that they did by
defending freedom or fighting against
the regime of the other country. Even if
these are not necessarily wrongs or
sins, they go against the new ideology
that the regime is always right and so

they must be confessed.
Channeling of Guilt
Once the subject enters the channeling
of guilt step, they have been
undergoing the assault of their self for
many months. By the time the subject
reaches this point in the brainwashing
process, they are able to feel the guilt
and the shame that has been put on
them, but it has pretty much lost its
meaning. They are not able to tell you
exactly what they have done wrong to
make them feel this way; they just
know that they are wrong.
The agent will be able to use the blank
slate of the subject in order to explain

why they are in the pain that they are
feeling. The agent will be able to attach
the sense of guilt that the subject is
feeling to whatever they want. If the
agent is trying to replace a system of
beliefs, they will take the old system
and convince the subject that those
beliefs are what are making them feel
the guilt. This is the stage where the
contract between the old beliefs and the
new beliefs are established; basically,
the old belief system has been
established to correspond with the
psychological agony that the subject
has been feeling while the new belief
system has been established to
correspond with the ability to escape
that agony. The choice will be the

subjects’, but it is pretty easy to see
that they would choose the new system
in order to start feeling better.
Releasing of Guilt
In this step, the subject has come to
realize that their old values and beliefs
are causing them pain. By this time
they are worn down and tired of feeling
the guilt and shame that has been put
on them for many months. They start to
realize that it is not necessarily
something that they have done that
makes them feel this way; rather, it is
their beliefs that are causing the guilt.
The embattled subject is able to feel
some relief from the fact that there is
something that they can do about the

guilt. They will also feel relieved
because they now have come to the
understanding that they are not the bad
person, rather it is the people that they
have been around and their belief
system that is the true culprit that is
causing the malaise which is something
that they can fix in order to become
good again. The subject has learned
that they have a means of escape
simply by escaping the wrong belief
system that they have held and
embracing the new one that is being
offered. All that the subject will have
to do in order to release the guilt that
they are feeling is to denounce the
institutions and people that are
associated with the old belief system

and then they will be released from the
guilt.
The subject now has some control over
this stage. They will be able to realize
that the release of guilt is up to them
completely. All the subject will need to
do for this stage in order to be released
from the wrongness is to confess to any
of the acts they have committed that
are associated with the old belief
system. Once the full confession is
done, the subject will have completed
the full psychological rejection of their
former identity. The agent will need to
step in at this point in order to offer a
new identity to the subject and help
them to rebuild their identity into the

desired one.
Rebuilding of Self
By this step, the subject has gone
through a lot of steps and emotional
turmoil. They have been put through an
ordeal that is meant to strip them of
their old identity, told that they are bad
and need to be fixed, and slowly come
to the realization that their belief
system is the cause of their wrongness
and that it needs to be changed. Once
all of this has been reached, the subject
is going to need to learn how to rebuild
their self, with the help of the agent.
This stage allows the agent the freedom
to implant the ideas of the new system

since the subject is a clean slate and
very eager to learn how to be and feel
better. There are two steps that are seen
during this stage including harmony
and the final confession before starting
over.
Harmony
The agent will use this step in order to
convince the subject that it is their
choice to make a change. They might
tell the subject that they have the
choice to choose what is good and
make a change that will help them to
feel better. The agent will then
introduce the new belief system and
present it in a way that makes it the
good or the right choice. During this

stage, the agent will stop the abuse and
instead make a point of offering the
subject mental calm and physical
comfort. The point of doing this is to
align the old beliefs with the pain and
suffering while aligning the new
beliefs with happiness and relief.
This stage is set up so that the subject
is given the choice of which road to
take, even though it really is not up to
them. The subject must use this stage
to choose between the old beliefs and
the new beliefs, effectively
determining how they are going to feel
for the rest of their lives. By this point,
the subject has already gone through
the process of denouncing their old

beliefs due to the leniency and torment
that they have gone through. Because
of this, it is fairly likely that they are
going to make the choice for the new
system of belief in order to relieve
their guilt. The new identity that has
been presented is desirable and safe
because it is completely different than
the old identity that led to the
breakdown in earlier steps. Using logic
and considering the state of mind that
the subject is in, it is easier to see that
the only identity that the subject is
going to choose for their own peace of
mind and safety is the new one.
Final Confession and Starting Over

Even though the choice is really not
theirs at all, the agent has strategically
worked the whole time to lead the
subject to feeling like they have the
free will to choose the new identity. If
the brainwashing process is done
correctly, the subject will think
logically about the new choices and
determine that the best one is to take
up the new identity. They have been
conditioned to think this way and in
their new state of mind, it is the one
that makes the most sense. There are
no other choices; choosing the new
identity allows them to be relieved
from the guilt that they feel and leads
to happiness while choosing the old
identity leads to pain and guilt. If for

some reason the subject did deny the
new identity, there would be a
backtracking in the whole
brainwashing process and they would
be forced to undergo it all again in
order to end up with the desired results.
During this stage of the process, the
subject gets to decide that they will
choose good, which means that they get
to choose to go with the new identity.
When the subject contrasts the agony
and pain of their old identity with the
peacefulness that comes with the new,
they are going to choose the new
identity. This new identity is like a
form of salvation. It is the thing that
helps them to feel good and not have to

deal with guilt and unhappiness
anymore. As this stage completes, the
subject is going to reject their old
identity and will go through a process
of pledging allegiance to their new one,
knowing that it is going to work at
making their life better.
Many times, there are ceremonies and
rituals that occur during this final
stage. The conversion from the old
identity to the new identity is a big deal
since much time and energy has been
used on both sides. During these
ceremonies, the subject will be
inducted into the new community and
embraced with the new identity. For
some brainwashing victims there is the

feeling of rebirth during this period.
You are allowed to embrace your new
identity and are welcomed with open
arms into the new community that is
now your own. Instead of being
isolated and alone, you have many new
friends and community members on
your side. Instead of feeling the guilt
and pain that has plagued you for many
months you are going to feel happiness
and peacefulness with everything that
is around you. The new identity is now
yours and the brainwashing
transformation is complete.
This process can take place over a
period of many months to even years.
Most people are set in their identity

and the beliefs that they have; it is not
possible to change all of this in just a
few days unless the person was already
willing to change and that would make
the brainwashing techniques
unnecessary. Isolation would also be
necessary because outside influences
will prevent the subject from relying
on the agent during this process. This is
why most of the brainwashing cases
occur in prison camps and other
isolated instances; the vast majority of
people will not have the chance of
encountering brainwashing due to the
fact that they are always surrounded by
people and technology that would
hinder the whole brainwashing process.
Once the person is in isolation, the

process takes a long time due to the
many steps that must be taken in order
to change the ideals held by the
individual for many years so that they
will embrace the new identity as their
own while also feeling that the choice
has always been theirs.
As can be seen, there are quite a few
steps that must be taken in order to go
through the brainwashing process. It is
not something that is going to happen
just by running into someone on the
street and exchanging a few words. It
requires the isolation and time to
convince the subject that everything
they know is wrong and that they are a
bad person. It then continues on with

trying to force out a confession that the
subject is bad and that they want to
renounce all of the things that they
have done that are bad due to their old
identity. Finally, the subject will be led
in the direction of believing that they
can change for the better if they just
abandon their old ideas and instead
embrace the peacefulness and rightness
that comes with the new identity that is
presented. All of these steps must
occur for the brainwashing to be
effective and the new identity to be put
in place.

Brainwashing as Court Defense
Throughout history, people have been
claiming that they committed terrible
wrongs because they had been
brainwashed. It was an excuse that
many would claim hoping to save their
own lives or to get away with a mass
murder or some other crime against
humanity. It might even be something
as simple as stealing from another
person. Whatever the action was,
brainwashing was an easy defense
because it took the responsibility of the
action away from the accused and it
was difficult to prove whether someone
had been brainwashed or not.

Whether brainwashing pleas can be
used as a defense in the courtroom is
up to some debate. Many experts feel
that by allowing this defense into the
courtroom, the courts would become
overwhelmed with false claims of
brainwashing and the resources for
proving or disproving this defense
would be more than the courts could
handle. Despite this, there have been
some cases brought to court that may
show the validity of brainwashing as a
defense for crimes committed.
The first example of this happened in
1976. Patty Hearst, the heiress to a
large publishing fortune, used the
defense of brainwashing when she

stood trial for a bank robbery. In the
early 1970s, Hearst was kidnapped by
the SLA, the Symbionese Liberation
Army, and ended up joining this group.
During the trial, Hearst reported that
she had been locked up in a closet for
at least a few days after she had been
kidnapped. While in the closet, Hearst
stated that she was afraid of her life,
brutalized, tired, and was not fed while
members of the SLA bombarded her
with their ideology against a capitalist
country. Within the two months of her
kidnapping, Patty had changed her
name while also issuing a statement
saying that her family were “pig-
Hearsts” and then appeared on the
security tape of a bank robbing it along

with those who had kidnapped her.
In 1976, Patty Hearst stood trial for
this bank robbery and was defended by
F. Lee Bailey. In the defense, it was
claimed that Hearst had been
brainwashed by the SLA. This
brainwashing had forced Hearst to
commit a crime that she would have
never done under any other
circumstance. In the mental state that
she was under with the brainwashing,
she was not able to tell the difference
between right and wrong and therefore
should not be found guilty of the bank
robbery. The court did not agree with
this analysis and instead found her
guilty and placed her in prison for

seven years. Just a few years later,
President Carter commuted her
sentence so she only ended up spending
two years in total in prison.
Lee Boyd Malvo Case
Another well-known brainwashing
defense is the Lee Boyd Malvo case.
This case used the defense of insanity
by brainwashing and it ended up in the
courtrooms about 30 years after the
Patty Hearst case. In 2002, Lee Boyd
Malvo was on trial for the role that he
played in the sniper attacks that
occurred around and in Washington
D.C. Malvo, who was 17 at the time,
and John Allen Muhammad, 42, ended

up killing 10 people and wounding
three during the killing spree. The
defense that was used for this case was
that the teenage Malvo had been
brainwashed by Muhammad so that he
would commit the crimes. Just like in
the Hearst case, the defense claimed
that Malvo would not have committed
these crimes if he had not been under
the control of Muhammad.
According to the background story
used by the defense, Malvo had been
abandoned by his mother on the island
of Antigua in the Caribbean when he
was 15 years old. Muhammad met the
boy and brought him into the United
States in 2001. Muhammad was an

army veteran at the time and worked to
fill the head of the teen with visions of
a race war that was impending. To that
end, Malvo was trained to be an expert
marksman. In addition to sharing these
ideas with Malvo, Muhammad isolated
Malvo from others while being steeped
in the vitriolic and idiosyncratic brand
of Islam that Muhammad followed
along with a strict exercise regimen
and diet. All of this is believed to have
been a part of the brainwashing process
on the young Malvo.
The defense argued that because of his
time spent with Muhammad, Malvo
had been brainwashed and because of
this, he was not capable of telling what

was right from what was wrong.
Despite the efforts of the defense,
Malvo was found to be guilty and had a
sentence of life in prison without any
chance of parole. In a separate trial,
Muhammad was sentenced to the death
penalty.
So far, it does not seem like
brainwashing will gain much ground as
a form of defense in the courtroom. To
start with, it is much too difficult to
prove that a defendant has been
brainwashed in the first place. Next, it
is very unlikely that someone has been
brainwashed and instead the defense is
just using it as a means to get a lighter
sentence or the actions of their client

forgiven. In addition, many juries seem
to find the idea of brainwashing
completely ridiculous. Overall, this
defense will probably not see much
strength growing in the courtroom.

Common Tactics Used in
Brainwashing
Brainwashing is not always as intense
as what has been described so far in
this chapter. The methods described are
used for “true brainwashing” and are
rarely done to the subject. There are
many other types of brainwashing that
actually happen on a day to day basis.
They might not work to make you
completely give up your old identity in
favor of a new one, but they do work to
help shift your thoughts and ideas on
what is going on around you. This
section is going to focus on some of the
tactics that are often used during the
brainwashing process, regardless of

whether it is true brainwashing or not.
Hypnosis-hypnosis, which will be
discussed in more detail in the next
chapter, is a form of brainwashing in
some circumstances. Hypnosis is
basically the induction of a high state
of suggestibility. This state is often
disguised thinly as meditation or
relaxation. During the process of
hypnosis, the agent is able to suggest
things to the subject in hopes of getting
them to act or react in a certain way.
Many people are familiar with
hypnosis from the stage shows they
have seen. It is also often used as a way
to improve health.

Peer Pressure-everyone has an innate
need to belong. This could be with a
particular group, their family, friends,
and the community. With the peer
pressure tactic there is a suppression of
the doubt that the subject feels along
with getting rid of their resistance to
new ideas by exploiting this strong
need to belong. If done right, the
subject may be more willing to try out
new things, be less shy around new
people, and may have an easier time
making new friends.
Love Bombing—the sense of family is
very strong in people. This is the group
that you were born into and that you
have supposedly been around for your

whole life. They know you better than
anyone and those who have missed out
on this kind of relationship may find
that they are feeling alone and
unwanted. With love bombing, the
agent is able to create a sense of the
family by the use of emotional
bonding, feeling and through sharing
and physical touch. This allows the
agent and the subject to bond in a
familial way, making it easier to trade
in the old identity for the new one.
Rejecting Old Values—as mentioned
a little bit earlier in this chapter, the
agent is working to convince the
subject to denounce all of their own
values. This process is accelerated

through the process of intimidation,
physical threat, and other means. At the
end, the subject will denounce the
values and beliefs that they once held
close and will begin to accept the new
lifestyle that is presented to them by
the agent.
Confusing Doctrine—in this tactic,
there will be an encouragement to
blindly accept the new identity while
rejecting other logic that the subject
will have. In order to do this, the agent
will go through a complex set of
lectures about a doctrine that is going
to be incomprehensible. The subject
will learn to blindly trust what the
agent is saying through this process,

whether it is about the doctrine or
about the new identity that is being
formed.
Metacommunication—this tactic is
employed when the agent works to
implant subliminal messages into the
mind of the subject. This will be done
when the agent stresses certain words
or phrases that are key to the new
identity. These phrases and key words
will be implanted into confusing long
lectures that the subject will be forced
to sit through.
No Privacy—privacy is a privilege that
many subjects will lose until they have
converted over to the new identity that

is provided to them. Not only is this
taken away as a method to make the
guilt and wrongness more apparent to
the subject, but it also takes away the
ability the subject has to logically
evaluate the things that they are being
told. If the subject is allowed to have
privacy, they will have time to
privately contemplate the information
they are given and may discover that it
is untrue or does not hold up to what
they already believe. Taking away this
privacy means that the agent or agents
are always around and the subject is
always being led to the new identity.
Disinhibition—during this tactic, the
subject is encouraged by the agent to
give childlike obedience. This makes it

easier for the agent to shape the mind
of the subject.
Unbending Rules—the rules that are
put in place by the agent are often strict
and will never be changed. These rules
are meant to make it difficult for the
subject to think and act on their own;
rather, they will spend their time doing
exactly what they are told to do by the
agent. There are many different rules
that could fit into this category such as
the rules that will be followed for the
disorientation and regression process
all the way to how the subject is
allowed to use medications, take
bathroom breaks, and eat meals. These
rules are put in place in order to
completely control the subject during

the brainwashing process.
Verbal Abuse—verbal abuse is one of 
the tactics that is used during the 
breaking down stage. Often the subject 
will become desensitized when they are
bombarded with abusive and foul 
language all of the time. At times, 
physical abuse may supplement or 
replace verbal abuse.  
Sleep Deprivation—when a person is
not getting the amount of sleep that
they require they will often become
vulnerable and disoriented. This can
help create the ideal environment that
the agent is looking for during the
breaking down and confession stages of
the brainwashing process. In addition,
many times the subject will be required

to do prolonged physical and mental
activities on top of the inadequate sleep
in order to hurry the process even
more.
Dress Codes—enforcing a dress code
further removes any individuality that
the subject may have as well as the
choice they are used to of picking out
their own clothes. Often during the
brainwashing process, the subject will
be demanded to wear the dress code
held by the rest of the group.
Chanting—the agent will work to
eliminate any non-cult ideas that may
be present in the mind of the subject.
One way to accomplish this is through
chanting or repetition of the phrases
that are used by those who follow the

new identity.
Confession—confession is deeply
encouraged in those who are
transforming from their old identity to
the new identity. During this process,
the subject will destruct their own
individual ego by confessing all of
their innermost feelings of doubt and
personal weaknesses to the agent. Once
they are able to let go of these things,
the introduction of the new identity is
able to occur.
Financial Commitment—in some
cases, there will be financial
contributions which must be met. This
can help the agent in several ways.
First, the financial commitment allows
an increased dependence of the subject

on the group because the subject may
be burning bridges to their past. They
will donate different assets, whether it
is their car, house, money, or some
other financial contribution in the
hopes that they will be able to get over
their shame and guilt. Now they are
financially attached to the new identity.
In addition, the agent will be able to
use these financial contributions to
further their own needs.
Pointing the Finger—when you are
able to point the finger at someone
else, you will feel a sense of
righteousness. This is your way of
telling the world that you are good
simply by pointing out some of the
shortcomings that are going on in the

world. The agent may point out all of
the killing, racism, and greed that are
in the world before contrasting it to the
good of the new identity that the
subject is being led to.
Isolation—if you are isolated from
everything that is around you, it
becomes difficult to get outside
opinions that might change your mind.
This is what the agent will strive for
because they do not want all of their
work to go away. Those who are being
brainwashed will be separated from
society, friends, family, and any other
rational references that would change
their way of thinking.
Controlled Approval—the agent is
going to work in order to maintain the

confusion and vulnerability of the
subject during the breaking down
period. One method of doing this is
through controlled approval. The agent
will alternately punish and reward
similar actions, making it difficult for
the subject to know what is right and
what is wrong.
Change of Diet—changing the amount
of food the subject is allowed to
consume is another tactic used to
create disorientation while increasing
the susceptibility of the subject to
emotional arousal. When the agent
dramatically decreases the amount of
food that the subject is allowed to
consume, they are depriving the
subject’s nervous system of the

nutrients that are necessary to thrive.
Adding drugs to the mix may also be
added into this category.
Games—games are sometimes used in
order to induce more dependence on
the group. Games will be introduced
and most of them will have really
obscure rules that the subject will not
understand. In some instances, the
subject will not be told the rules and
they must figure them out or the rules
will constantly change. This tactic
allows the agent to gain more control.
No Questions—during the
brainwashing process, the subject is not
allowed to ask questions. Questions
promote individual thinking and this is
dangerous to the brainwashing practice.

When no questions are allowed, it
helps the agent accomplish an
automatic acceptance from the subject
to the new identity.
Guilt—the subject has been told that
they are bad and that everything they
do is bad. Guilt is a common tactic that
is used by the agent in order to make
the subject question their beliefs and
what is going on around them. The sins
of the subject’s former lifestyle will be
exaggerated in order to bring about the
guilt and reinforce the need of
salvation in the subject.
Fear—fear is a powerful motivator and
can accomplish a lot more than the
other tactics that have been listed.
Agents may use fear in order to

maintain the obedience and loyalty that
are desired to the group. To do this, the
agent may threaten the limb, life, or
soul of the subject for anything that is
against the new identity that is being
presented.
These are just a few of the tactics that
can be used during the brainwashing
process. The point of each of them is to
instill the idea that the old identity of
the subject is wrong and convince them
that the new identity is preferable.
There are many different ways that this
can be done and many will be more
effective when used as a combination.
While it is possible that brainwashing
can alter the way that someone thinks
and act, most experts believe that true

brainwashing is exaggerated and
cannot be done. While little examples
of brainwashing may occur in everyday
life, the majority of people will not
find that their whole belief systems
have been changed through this
process.

Chapter 3: Hypnosis
 
While brainwashing is a well-known
form of mind control that many people
have heard of, hypnosis is also an
important type that should be
considered. For the most part, those
who are familiar with hypnosis know
about it from watching stage shows of
participants doing ridiculous acts.
While this is a type of hypnosis, there
is a lot more to it. This chapter is going
to concentrate more on hypnosis as a
form of mind control.

What is Hypnosis?
To start with is the definition of
hypnosis. According to experts,
hypnosis is considered a state of
consciousness that involves the focused
attention along with the reduced
peripheral awareness that is
characterized by the participant’s
increased capacity to respond to
suggestions that are given. This means
that the participant is going to enter a
different state of mind and will be
much more susceptible to following the
suggestions that are given by the
hypnotist.
It is widely recognized that there are

two theory groups that help to describe
what is happening during the hypnosis
period. The first one is known as the
altered state theory. Those who follow
this theory see that hypnosis is like a
trance or a state of mind that is altered
were the participant will see that their
awareness is somewhat different from
what they would notice in their
ordinary conscious state. The other
theory is the non-state theories. Those
who follow this theory do not think that
those who undergo hypnosis are
entering into different states of
consciousness. Rather, the participant
is working with the hypnotist to enter a
type of imaginative role enactment.

While in hypnosis, the participant is
thought to have more concentration and
focus that couples together with a new
ability to intensely concentrate on a
specific memory or thought. During
this process, the participant is also able
to block out other sources that might be
distracting to them. The hypnotized
subjects are thought to show a
heightened ability to respond to
suggestions that are given to them,
especially when these suggestions
come from the hypnotist. The process
that is used in order to place the
participant into hypnosis is known as
hypnotic induction and will involve a
series of suggestions and instructions
that are used as a type of warm up.

There are many different thoughts that
are brought up by the experts as to
what the definition of hypnosis is. The
wide variety of these definitions comes
from the fact that there are just so
many different circumstances that
come with hypnosis and no one person
has the same experience when they are
going through it. Some of the different
definitions of hypnosis by experts
include the following:
1. “A special case of
psychological regression,”
Michael Nash.
 
2. Ernest Hilgard and Janet
Hilgard have written in great

depth about hypnosis and
describe it has a way for the
body to dissociate from
itself in another plane of
consciousness.
3. Sarbin and Coe, two well-
known social psychologists,
have use the term of role
theory to describe hypnosis.
Under this definition, the
participant is playing the
role of being hypnotized;
they are acting like they are
hypnotized rather than
actually being in that state.
 
4. According to T.X. Barber,
hypnosis is defined based on

the different nonhypnotic
behavioral parameters.
Under this definition, the
participant will define the
task motivation and label
the situation that they are in
as hypnosis since they have
no other thing to call it.
 
5. Weitzenhoffer wrote in
some of his earlier writings
about hypnosis. He
conceptualized that hypnosis
is a state of enhanced
suggestibility. In more
recent writings, he went on
to define the act of hypnosis
as “a form of influence by

one person exerted on
another through the medium
or agency of suggestion.
 
6. Brenman and Gill used the
psychoanalytic concept of
“regression in the service of
the ego,” to help describe
what hypnosis was all about.
Under this definition, the
participant is willing to go
under hypnosis and into the
altered state because it helps
out their ego and makes
them to feel better.
 
7. According to Edmonston a
person who has undergone

hypnosis is simply in a deep
state of relaxation.
 
8. Spiegel and Spiegel have
stated that hypnosis is
simply something that
happens because of the
biological capacity of the
participant.
 
9. Erickson states that
hypnosis is an altered, inner-
directed, and special state of
functioning. The participant
is still able to function and
is conscious of things
around them, but they are in
an altered state compared to

their normal state.
There are many different views and
statements that have been made about
hypnosis. Some people believe that
hypnosis is very real and are paranoid
that the government and others around
them will try to control their minds.
Others do not believe in hypnosis at all
and think that it is just sleight of hand.
Most likely, the idea of hypnosis as
mind control falls somewhere in the
middle.
There are three stages of hypnosis that
are recognized by the psychological
community. These three stages include
induction, suggestion, and

susceptibility. Each of them is
important to the hypnosis process and
will be discussed further below.
Induction
The first stage of hypnosis is induction.
Before the participant undergoes the
full hypnosis, they will be introduced
to the hypnotic induction technique.
For many years this was thought to be
the method used to put the subject into
their hypnotic trance, but that
definition has changed some in modern
times. Some of the non-state theorists
have seen this stage slightly
differently. Instead they see this stage
as the method to heighten the

participants’ expectations of what is
going to happen, defining the role that
they will play, getting their attention to
focus in the right direction, and any of
the other steps that are needed in order
to lead the participant into the right
direction for hypnosis.
There are several induction techniques
that can be used during hypnosis. The
most well-known and influential
methods is Braid’s “eye fixation”
technique or “Braidism.” There are
quite a few variations of this approach
including the Stanford Hypnotic
Susceptibility Scale (SHSS). This scale
is the most used tool for research in the
field of hypnosis.

To use the Braid induction techniques
you will have to follow a couple of
steps. The first one is to take any object
that you can find that is bright, such as
a watch case, and hold it between the
middle, fore, and thumb fingers on the
left hand. You will want to hold this
object about 8-15 inches from the eyes
of the participant. Hold the object
somewhere above the forehead so that
it produces a lot of strain on the eyelids
and eyes during the process so that the
participant is able to maintain a fixed
stare on the object at all times.
The hypnotist must then explain to the
participant that they should keep their

eyes always fixed on to the object. The
patient will also need to focus their
mind completely on the idea of that
particular object. They should not be
allowed to think of other things or let
their minds and eyes wander or else the
process will not be successful.
After a short time, the participant’s
eyes will begin to dilate. With a little
more time the participant will begin to
assume a wavy motion. If the
participant involuntarily closes their
eyelids when the middle and fore
fingers of the right hand are carried
from the eyes to the object, then they
are in the trance. If not, then the
participant will need to begin again;

make sure to let the participant know
that they are to allow their eyes to
close once the fingers are carried in a
similar motion back towards the eyes
again. This will get the patient to go
into the altered state of mind that is
known as hypnosis.
While Braid stood by his own
technique, he did acknowledge that
using the induction technique of
hypnosis is not always necessary for
every case. In fact, researchers in
modern times have usually found that
the induction technique is not as
important to the effects of hypnotic
suggestion as previously thought. Over
time, other alternatives and variations

of the original hypnotic induction
technique have been developed,
although the Braid method is still
considered the best.
Suggestion
The next stage of hypnosis is known as
the suggestion stage. When hypnosis
was first described by James Braid, the
term of suggestion was not used.
Instead, Braid referred to this stage as
the act of having the conscious mind of
the participant focus on one central and
dominant idea. The way that Braid did
this was to stimulate or reduce the
physiological functioning of the
different regions on the participant’s

body. Later on, Braid began to place
more and more emphasis on the use of
different non-verbal and verbal forms
of suggestion in order to get the
participant into the hypnotic state of
mind. These would include using
“waking suggestions” as well as self-
hypnosis.
Another well-known hypnotist,
Hippolyte Bernheim, continued to shift
the emphasis of the physical state of
the process of hypnosis over to the
psychological process that contained
verbal suggestions. According to
Bernheim, hypnotism is the induction
of a psychical condition that is peculiar
and which will increase the
susceptibility of the suggestion to the

participant. Often, he stated, the
hypnotic state that is induced will help
to facilitate the suggestion, even
though this might not be necessary to
start the susceptibility in the first
place.
Modern hypnotism uses a lot of
different suggestion forms in order to
be successful such as metaphors,
insinuations, indirect or non-verbal
suggestions, direct verbal suggestions,
and other figures of speech and
suggestions that are non-verbal. Some
of the non-verbal suggestions that may
be used during the suggestion stage
would include physical manipulation,
voice tonality, and mental imagery.

One of the distinctions that are made in
the types of suggestion that can be
offered to the participant includes
those suggestions that are delivered
with permission and those that are
more authoritarian in manner.
One of the things that have to be
considered in regards to hypnosis is the
difference between the unconscious
and the conscious mind. There are
several hypnotists who view the stage
of suggestion as a way of
communicating that is directed for the
most part to the conscious mind of the
subject. Others in the field will see it in
the opposite direction; they see the
communication occurring between the

agent and the subconscious or
unconscious mind.
Proponents of the first class of thought
included Bernheim, Braid, and other
pioneers of the Victorian age. They
believed that the suggestions were
being addressed straight to the
conscious part of the subjects mind,
rather than to the unconscious part. In
fact, Braid goes further and actually
defines the act of hypnotism as the
focused attention upon the suggestion
or the dominant idea. The fear of most
people that hypnotists will be able to
get into their unconscious and make
them do and think things beyond their
control is simply impossible according

to those who follow this train of
thought.
The nature of the mind has also been
the determinant of the different
conceptions about suggestion. Those
who believed that the responses given
are through the unconscious mind, such
as in the case of Milton Erickson, bring
up the cases of using indirect
suggestions. Many of these indirect
suggestions, such as stories or
metaphors, will hide their intended
meaning in order to conceal it from the
conscious mind of the subject.
Subliminal suggestion is a form of
hypnosis that relies completely on the
theory of the unconscious mind. If the

unconscious mind were not being used
in hypnosis, this kind of suggestion
would not be possible. The differences
between the two groups are fairly easy
to recognize; those who believe that the
suggestions will go primarily to the
conscious mind will use direct verbal
instructions and suggestions while
those who believe the suggestions will
go primarily to the unconscious mind
will use stories and metaphors with
hidden meanings.
In either of these theories of thought,
the participant will need to be able to
focus on one object or idea. This allows
them to be led in the direction that is
needed in order to go into the hypnotic

state. Once the suggestion stage has
been completed successfully; the
participant will then be able to move in
to the third stage, susceptibility.
Susceptibility
Over time, it has been observed that
people will react differently to
hypnosis. Some people find that they
are able to fall into a hypnotic trance
fairly easily and do not have to put
much effort into the process at all.
Others may find that they are able to
get into the hypnotic trance, but only
after a prolonged period of time and
with some effort. Still others will find
that they are not able to get into the

hypnotic trance and even after
continued efforts will not reach their
goals. One thing that researchers have
found interesting about the
susceptibility of different participants
is that this factor remains constant. If
you have been able to easily get into a
hypnotic state of mind, you are likely
to be the same way for the rest of your
life. On the other hand, if you have
always had difficulty in reaching the
hypnotic state and have never been
hypnotized, then it is likely that you
never will.
There have been several different
models developed over time to try and
determine the susceptibility of

participants to hypnosis. Some of the
older depth scales worked to infer
which level of trance the participant
was in through the observable signs
that were available. These would
include things such as the spontaneous
amnesia. Some of the more modern
scales work to measure the degree of
self-evaluated or observed
responsiveness to the specific
suggestion tests that are given such as
the direct suggestions of arm rigidity.
According to the research that has been
done by Deirdre Barrett, there are two
types of subjects that are considered
highly susceptible to the effects of
hypnotism. These two groups include

dissociaters and fantasizers. The
fantasizers will score high on the
absorption scales, will be able to easily
block out the stimuli of the real world
without the use of hypnosis, spend a lot
of their time daydreaming, had
imaginary friends when they were a
child, and also grew up in an
environment where imaginary play was
encouraged.
On the other side of things are the
dissociaters. This group will often
come from a background of trauma or
childhood abuse, found ways to forget
the unpleasant events that are in their
past, and can escape into a numbness.
If a person in this group does

daydream, it is more in the terms of
going blank instead of creating
fantasies. Both of these groups scored
high on the tests of hypnotic
susceptibility. The two groups that
have the highest rates of
hypnotizability include those suffering
from posttraumatic stress disorder and
dissociative identity disorder.

Applications
Hypnosis as a field and as an idea has
been around for a long time. Due to
this, various applications have begun to
emerge that help to put the process of
hypnosis to good use. In fact, the
various applications of using hypnosis
cross many fields such as
entertainment, self-improvement,
military uses, and medical uses. Other
areas that have recently begun to use
hypnotism include rehabilitation,
physical therapy, education, sports, and
forensics. Even artists have begun to
employ hypnotism in order to reach
certain creative purposes. This is
shown the most by Andre Breton, a

surrealist artist, who has employed
hypnosis among other techniques for
his own creative purposes. One of the
growing uses of hypnosis is in the field
of self-improvement; many people
have chosen to do self-hypnosis in
order to help them lose weight, reduce
stress, and quit smoking.
The following sections will discuss
some different fields where hypnosis
has been growing as well as how the
process of hypnosis is working in those
fields.
Hypnotherapy
Hypnotherapy is the use of hypnosis as
a form of psychotherapy. It is used as a

method to help the patient or subject
through troubling issues that are
plaguing them, especially when other
methods of self-control are not
effective. Licensed psychologists and
physicians might perform a form of
hypnotherapy on willing patients in
order to help them treat posttraumatic
stress, compulsive gambling, sleep
disorders, eating disorders, anxiety,
and depression.
It is also possible to visit with a
certified hypnotherapist to assist you in
treating issues such as weight
management and the cessation of
smoking. If you go to a certified
hypnotherapist, it is important to

remember that they are not
psychologists or physicians so they
will just be able to assist you with
reaching the hypnotic state and not
with curing your more serious
ailments. It is best that you make sure
whoever you are working with has been
certified to provide you with these
services, whether you choose a
hypnotherapist or a physician.
The process of hypnotherapy has been
seen in many different forms in
modern history. All of them have had
varying degrees of success depending
on the issue faced and the participants.
Some of the forms that have been used
include:

Cognitive-behavioral
hypnotherapy—this is a
combination of clinical
hypnosis along with
different elements of the
Cognitive-Behavioral
Therapy.
Hypnoanalysis—this is also
known as age regression
hypnotherapy.
Hypnosis to assist with
dealing with phobias and
fears.
Ericksonian hypnotherapy.
Hypnotherapy to assist with
addictions.
Hypnotherapy to assist with

habit control.
Hypnotherapy to assist with
pain management in those
who suffer from chronic
pain.
Hypnotherapy to assist in
the psychological therapy
the patient is already dealing
with.
Hypnotherapy to assist with
relaxation.
Hypnotherapy to assist with
skin diseases.
Hypnotherapy to assist with
soothing patients who are
anxious about undergoing
surgery.
Hypnotherapy to assist with

the performance of athletes
before a competition.
Hypnotherapy to assist with
weight loss.
Military Applications
In addition to assisting people who deal
with various health issues and
addiction, people have long wondered
if hypnosis has been used by military
and governmental officials in order to
change the way citizens think about
things. So far, there has been little
proof that the American military is
capable or has used hypnosis to reach
their goals. In fact, a declassified
document that was obtained out of the

Freedom of Information Act archive
recently shows that the process of
hypnosis has been investigated for the
use in military applications. Despite
the research that has been done, the
study concluded that there really
wasn’t any evidence that the process of
hypnosis would be useful in a military
application. In addition, there was not
any evidence that clearly showed that
hypnosis actually exists in regards as
an actual phenomenon outside of
subject expectancy, high motivation,
and ordinary suggestion.
The document further goes on to
explain how it would be nearly
impossible for hypnosis to be used in a

military application. It states:
“The use of hypnosis in intelligence
would present certain technical
problems not encountered in the clinic
or laboratory. To obtain compliance
from a resistant source, for example, it
would be necessary to hypnotize the
source under essentially hostile
circumstances. There is no good
evidence, clinical or experimental, that
this can be done.”
The document goes on to explain that it
has been difficult to study the effects
and application of hypnosis to be used
in the military because no one is able
to say with certainty whether hypnosis
is a unique state with some conditioned
responses or just a form of suggestion

that has been induced as a result of the
positive relationship between the
subject and the hypnotist.
Self-hypnosis
There are some instances, such as when
a certified hypnotherapist or other
professional is not available, when you
may decide to use the process of self-
hypnosis. This process occurs when a
person is able to hypnotize themselves,
often using the tactic of
autosuggestion. The primary use for
this technique is for self-improvement
and many people will perform it in
order to reduce their stress levels, quit
smoking, or to get the motivation they

need to go on a diet. While some
people may be able to self-hypnotize
themselves, many find that they need
some sort of assistance in reaching the
altered state. This could include
hypnotic recordings or even mind
machine devices to help them reach
that state. Other areas that you could
use self-hypnosis for include your
overall physical well-being, to relax,
and to get over stage fright.
Stage Hypnosis
When most people think of hypnosis,
they think of stage hypnosis. This is a
form of entertainment that will occur
in a theatre or a club in front of an

audience. The hypnotist is often shown
as a great showman and this helps to
encourage the idea that hypnosis is
completely about mind control. In the
beginning of the act, the hypnotist will
attempt to put the whole audience
under the altered state before selecting
certain individuals who meet the
criteria to come up on the stage and go
through different embarrassing acts
while the rest of the group watches.
It is unknown why stage hypnosis is so
effective although it is commonly
thought to be a combination of
trickery, stagecraft, physical
manipulation, suggestibility,
participant selection, and psychological

factors. For the most part, experts 
believe that the participant is just 
playing along in a way with the 
hypnotist and providing a good show. 
These individuals may be willing to do 
this because they desire to be in the 
middle of all the attention, the pressure 
to please others, and the excuse to go 
against their own suppressors of fear 
make it easy to get the participants to 
perform.  Some of the books that have 
been written by former stage hypnotists
reinforce the idea of trickery and 
deception and some are entirely 
composed of fake hypnosis where 
private whispers where used the whole 
time. 

Types of Hypnosis
There are a lot of different types of
hypnosis that the subject will be able to
undergo. Each of them will work in
slightly different ways and some of
them work to help with various issues.
Some may be more fit to helping the
subject to relax while others can help
more with weight loss or pain
management. This section will talk in
more detail about the different types of
hypnosis that are available.
Traditional Hypnosis
The most common type of hypnosis
that is used is known as traditional
hypnosis. During this process, the

agent is simply making suggestions
directly to the subject’s unconscious
mind. This type of hypnosis will work
the best on a subject who is known for
accepting the things that they are told
and they do not ask a lot of questions.
If you go and visit a certified hypnotist
or purchase a tape to do the process of
self-hypnosis, you will be going
through the process of traditional
hypnosis. The reason that this type of
hypnosis is so popular is because it
does not take that much experience or
training to learn how to do. The
hypnotist is just going to have to write
a simple script and tell the subject what
to do. While this technique will work
very well on those who accept what is

going on around them, it is ineffective
for those who think critically and
analytically.
Ericksonian Hypnosis
The next type of hypnosis to be
discussed is Ericksonian Hypnosis.
This one is a little more in depth
because it is going to require the use of
metaphors and little stories. These are
used in order to present the ideas and
suggestions that are required to the
unconscious mind. Even though this
method will require a little more
experience and training to do, it is a
very effective and powerful method to
use. The reason that it works so well is

because it is able to eliminate the
resistance and blockage that the subject
may have to the suggestions.
There are two main types of metaphors
that will often be used in this kind of
hypnosis; isomorphic and interspersal.
For the metaphor that is interspersal in
nature, the command that is explained
has been imbedded into the story and
would not be easily discovered by the
subject outside of their unconscious
mind. The other type, isomorphic
metaphor, is a little more common and
offers directions to the unconscious
mind simply by presenting a story to
the subject that will offer a moral at the
end. The unconscious mind will be able

to draw a one to one relationship
connecting the elements that come
from the story and the elements that
come with the behavior or problem
situation.
An example of an isomorphic metaphor
is the story “Boy Who Cried Wolf.”
Many parents will use this story to
teach their children about lying,
especially if their child tells a lot of
lies. After hearing the story, the
unconscious mind of the subject would
see a parallel between the telling of lies
and the boy who is in the story. They
would see that telling lies might lead to
a disaster and the child might be more
willing to stop lying in the process in

order to prevent that disaster from
occurring.
Embedded Technique
Another type of hypnosis is called the
embedded technique. During this
process, the hypnotist will tell the
subject an interesting story. This story
is meant to help distract and engage the
conscious mind of the subject. It will
also contain indirect suggestions that
are hidden within the story but which
will be accepted into the unconscious
mind of the subject. Through this story
the hypnotist will use process
instructions in order to direct the
unconscious mind of the subject to find

the memory that is needed. This
memory is usually about learning
experience that is appropriate from the
past. The hypnotist will then be able to
apply that learning experience to help
them to make changes to their present.
Nero-Linguistic
Programming
With Neuro-Linguistic Programming,
or NLP, hypnotists have a great
selection of the methods that they are
able to use in the hypnosis process.
When using the process of NLP, the
hypnotist will be able to use the same
thought patterns that are creating the
problem in the subject. This can save a

lot of time compared to going through
the process of suggestion. For example,
the thought patterns that are used with
stress or excessive appetite will be
used to help eliminate the problem that
the subject is dealing with. If used with
a certified hypnotist or psychologist,
NLP has been shown to be very
effective. There are many different
types of NLP programming that have
been utilized by hypnotists. Some of
the most commonly used forms of NLP
include NLP Anchoring, NLP Flash,
and NLP Reframe.
NLP Anchoring
The first type of NLP that will be
discussed is NLP Anchoring. A good

way to think about how anchoring
works is thinking about an old song
that you know. Have you ever sat in a
car and heard a song that you have not
heard in a long time? Did that song
trigger some sort of feeling in you that
came from the past? The first time you
heard that song, or sometime down the
road when you heard it, you were going
through these feelings and the
unconscious mind attached these
feelings to that particular song.
Through this process, the song would
become the anchor for these feelings.
Now, each time that you hear this
particular song, you will trigger the
brain to have these feelings all over
again. This is a good example of

anchoring.
Many hypnotists have found that
anchoring is a useful technique for
them to use in hypnotizing their
subjects. For example, if you have a
memory of being rewarded for doing
something right in the past, the
hypnotist will be able to get into that
particular memory and help you to
recreate the feelings that you were
going through at the time. At the same
time, the hypnotist will have you do
some sort of action, such as touching
your two fingers together during the re-
creation of the process. Now each time
that you touch your fingers together,
you will be able to feel those same

happy feelings again.
The process of anchoring can work in
order to motivate you to accomplish
something by associating good feelings
with it. For example, this method is
often used to help people find the
motivation they need to stick to losing
weight and maintaining a diet. The
hypnotist will work with the subject to
create a positive anchor that is
associated with the mental image of the
subject—in this case it will be the
subject thinking about themselves in a
thin and sexy body. When the subject
pictures this image again, they will
trigger the anchor and get the positive
motivation that they need. In fact, there

is a dramatic increase in the motivation
for weight loss in those who undergo
hypnosis compared to those who do
not. The process of anchoring can be
used in a variety of different instances
to assist in self-improvement of the
individual.
NLP Flash
NLP Flash is another form of hypnosis
that is considered to be extremely
powerful and only done by a certified
professional. It is often used in order to
change thoughts and feelings around in
the unconscious mind of the subject. It
can be a good way to help those who
feel chronic stress or are addicted to a
substance. In this process, the hypnotist

will switch the feelings of the subject
around, instead of a certain act
bringing pleasure, that act will start to
bring pain or instead of a certain act
bringing stress, it will bring the subject
relaxation. For example, someone who
is addicted to a substance, such as
cigarettes or alcohol, will find a feeling
of pleasure and happiness when they
consume that substance. Through the
technique of NLP flash, these feelings
will get switched around resulting in
the subject feeling discomfort or pain
when they consume the substance. This
can help them to get over their
addiction more effectively.
Those who are undergoing a lot of

stress have also found the technique of
NLP Flash to work well for them.
When a person is feeling chronic
stress, they may have difficulties in
controlling their blood pressure and
their tempers and are going to feel
uncomfortable a lot of the time. Since
stress is so hard on the body, there are
many patients willing to undergo the
NLP Flash hypnosis in order to assist
them in relaxing. With this technique,
the subject will learn their triggers of
stress and redirect them so that those
triggers start to release feelings of
relaxation in their minds instead.
This technique has also been shown to
be effective in extinguishing the

conditioned responses in the mind of
the subject. An example of this is with
smoking. If you are a smoker that
enjoys a cigarette while having a cup of
coffee in the morning, your
unconscious brain is going to start
pairing these two behaviors together.
This means that the subject will get a
craving to have a cigarette anytime
they enjoy a cup of coffee, especially
in the morning. When the subject goes
through the NLP Flash technique, they
will learn how to dissociate the two
events from each other. This allows the
smoker to have a cup of coffee without
also getting the urge to smoke at the
same time. This makes it an even more
effective technique to use when trying

to stop smoking.
NLP Reframe
The third form of NLP that has been
used in hypnosis is known as NLP
Reframe. This technique is really
potent because it works so well in
assisting the subject to change the way
that they behave. To do this process,
the hypnotist must understand that
there is a secondary gain, or a positive
outcome, that is accomplished by each
of the behaviors that a person
accomplishes. The outcome that occurs
from the behavior is important since
that is the reason the subject is acting
in the first place. Despite the
importance of the outcome, the

behavior that is chosen to accomplish
the outcome is really not that
important.
During the process of reframe, the
hypnotist works to negotiate and reason
with the unconscious mind of the
subject. The goal is to get it to take
over the responsibility for making the
subject substitute in some new
behavior that is available and effective
at accomplishing the required
secondary gain. While this is all going
on in the subconscious, the new
behavior will be more acceptable to the
subject in their conscious mind. For
example, if the person is in the habit of
eating when they are sad in order to

make themselves feel better, the
hypnotist is going to perform this
method to teach the unconscious to do
some other activity. The act of eating
might be replaced with exercise or
reading a nice book, helping the subject
to lose weight, eat healthier and feel
better all around.
Video Hypnosis
While the other forms of hypnosis have
been extremely popular in assisting
subjects to overcome obstacles and
change the way that they think in order
to live better lives, new forms of
hypnosis are always being developed.
One of the newest forms of

hypnotherapy that has been developed
is video hypnosis. This form is offered
through commercial means so that
people are able to purchase them and
use at their own convenience. The
techniques that are used in some of the
brands of video hypnosis are also based
on the Neuro-Linguistic Programming
technology that was discussed earlier.
This means that the video hypnosis
technique will work based on utilizing
the existing thought processes that the
subject has rather than using hypnotic
suggestion like traditional methods.
The reason why video hypnosis has
grown so rapidly is that more than 70%
of people have found that they learn

things easier and more quickly when
they see things compared to when they
only hear the information. The
subject’s mind will learn to change the
feelings that it is having as well as its
visual associations automatically on
the conscious level while watching the
visual movies that are presented.
While there are many different kinds of
video hypnosis programs that are
available, Neuro-VISION is one of the
most popular because it has been
developed using some of the best
techniques in the industry. This type of
video method works to train the
unconscious mind of the subject
through digital optics, which is a high

tech simulation process on the
computer. This will free the subject of
their tensions, urges, and compulsions.
Through this process, the smoker will
find that stopping smoking is easy, the
dieter will lose their appetite, and those
who feel stress will begin to relax
more. It will often take at least a few
sessions of video hypnosis to see
results, although there are those who
find that just one viewing will start to
show some of the results that they
want.
Subliminal Hypnosis
The final type of hypnosis that will be
discussed in this chapter is subliminal

hypnosis. Often the subliminal
hypnosis messages will be placed on a
recording for the subject to listen to.
The recording will have two tracks and
each one will talk to a different part of
the mind. One track will contain a
cover sound that will be heard through
the conscious mind of the subject. The
cover sound is often something that is
easy for the brain to listen to such as
nature sounds or music. The other track
will contain direct suggestions that will
be heard through the unconscious mind
of the subject. These suggestions
present on the second track will be
repeated over and over throughout the
whole session.

Subliminal programs have the ability
to be played at any time and in any
place. You could be listening to these
messages while you are working or
even while watching TV. The best part
is you will not have to stop the task
that you are doing and sit down and
relax like what is required with NLP or
traditional hypnosis. In some cases,
subliminal programs will be added to
your regular hypnotic programs.
The use of subliminal programming is
not that prevalent. Most people will not
choose this method to change their
habits and behaviors. Research has
shown that subliminal programs are not
really that effective and so they will

not be able to replace NLP or hypnosis.
By some accounts, it could take more
than 80 hours of listening to the
subliminal message before it has an
effect and many times even that will
not be enough for most people.
According to Joel Weinberger, a
professor at the Adelphi University and
a psychologist, regular audio
subliminal tapes that can be purchased
at stores or online just do not work.
Subliminal psychodynamics may work
as long as there is some form of visuals
present. The popular options available
only contain auditory components. The
auditory is not enough to make this
method work on its’ own. Subliminal

suggestion will need to be paired with
other forms of hypnotherapy in order to
have the effectiveness that is desired.
Despite the portrayal of hypnosis by 
the media, it is not an evil plot that is 
meant to take over the minds of 
unwilling subjects. In fact, if the 
subject is not willing to undergo 
hypnosis, it is pretty much impossible 
to get them to go into the altered state. 
Often, the use of hypnosis is to help 
others improve their lives. This could 
be in the form of weight management, 
stopping smoking, improving other 
health conditions, and assisting with 
chronic pain management. Each of the 
techniques is also important in helping 

the subject to get to their overall goal. 
While all of them can be effective, the 
professional that you choose to work 
with as well as the issue at hand will be 
used to determine which of these 
methods will best fit your needs and 
assist in improving your life.  

Chapter 4: Manipulation
 
Brainwashing and hypnosis are the two
forms of mind control that easily come
to mind. While these two are important
to understanding the functioning of
mind control and how it all works, they
are not the only options that are
available. In fact, there are others that
can be used and are often more
effective in the short term than either
brainwashing or hypnosis. These
particular tactics are ones that can be
used in everyday situations, for
example like in normal conversations a
person may have with others. While it
is not likely that a person will be
manipulated or persuaded to change

major beliefs through normal
conversations, they can be convinced to
change little things such as being
persuaded to purchase cookies from a
local girl scout or to vote a certain way
in an election.
The main thing to remember about the
next three forms of mind control is that
they are more likely to occur in a
persons’ daily life with the people that
they know and trust. Obviously, a
person is not going to put their subject
into isolation or force them into an
altered state of mind as with
brainwashing. Instead they will employ
different techniques in an effort to
change the way their subject thinks.

The three types of mind control that fit
into this category include
manipulation, persuasion, and
deception.
This chapter is going to discuss
manipulation and how it can work to
change the way “the subject” thinks.
While manipulation may not put the
person who is employing the tactic in
harms’ way or cause any immediate
danger, it is set up to work in a
deceptive and underhanded way to
change the behavior, viewpoint and
perception that the intended subject has
in regards to a particular topic or
situation.

What is Manipulation?
The first question that is often asked is
what manipulation is? In this
guidebook we will discuss
manipulation in the terms of
psychological manipulation, which is a
social influence that works to change
the behaviors or perception of others,
or the subject, through abusive,
deceptive, or underhanded tactics. The
manipulator is going to work to
advance their own interests, usually at
the expense of another, so most of their
methods would be considered
deceptive, devious, abusive, and
exploitative. While social influence
itself is not always negative, when a

person or group is being manipulated,
it has the possibility of causing them
harm.
Social influence, such as in the case of
a doctor working to persuade their
patients to start adopting healthy
habits, is usually perceived to be
something that is harmless. This is true
of any social influence that is capable
of respecting the right of those
involved to choose and is not unduly
coercive. On the other hand, if
someone is trying to get their own way
and is using people against their own
will, the social influence can be
harmful and is generally looked down
upon.

Psychological or emotional
manipulation is seen as a form of
persuasion and coercion. There are
many components that can be included
in this form of mind control such as
bullying and brainwashing. For the
most part, people will see this as
abusive or deceptive in nature. Those
who decide to employ manipulation
will do so in order to attempt to control
the behavior of those around them. The
manipulator will have some end goal in
mind and will work through various
abuse forms in order to coerce those
around them into helping the
manipulator get to the final goal. Often
emotional blackmail will be involved.

Those who practice manipulation will
use mind control, brainwashing, or
bullying tactics to get others to
complete the tasks for them. The
subject of the manipulator may not
want to perform the task, but feel that
they have no other option due to the
blackmail or other tactic used. Most
people who are manipulative lack the
appropriate caring and sensitivity
towards others so they may not see an
issue with their actions.
Other manipulators just want to get to
their final goal and are not concerned
with who has been bothered or hurt
along the way. In addition,

manipulative people are often afraid to
get into a healthy relationship because
they are afraid others will not accept
them. Someone who has a manipulative
personality will often have the inability
to take responsibility for their own
behaviors, problems, and life. Since
they are not able to take the
responsibility for these issues, the
manipulator will use the tactics of
manipulation to get someone else to
take over the responsibility.
Manipulators are often able to use the
same tactics that are found in other
forms of mind control in order to get
the influence they want over others.
One of the most commonly used tactics

is known as emotional blackmail. This
is where the manipulator will work to
inspire sympathy or guilt in the subject
they are manipulating. These two
emotions are chosen since they are
considered the two strongest of all
human emotions and are the most
likely to spur others into the action that
the manipulator wants. The
manipulator will then be able to take
complete advantage of the subject,
using the sympathy or guilt that they
have created to coerce others into
cooperating or helping them reach their
final goal.
Often, the manipulator will not only be
able to create these emotions, they will

be able to inspire degrees of sympathy
or guilt that are way out of proportion
for the situation that is going on. This
means that they can take a situation
such as missing out on a party seem
like the subject is missing out on a
funeral or something that is actually
important.
Emotional blackmail is just one of the
tactics that is employed by
manipulators. One of the other tactics
that has been successful for many
manipulators is to use a form of abuse
that is known as crazy making. This
tactic is usually aimed with the hope of
creating self-doubt in the subject being
manipulated; often this self-doubt will

become so strong that some subjects
may start to have feelings that they are
going crazy. At times, the manipulator
will use forms of passive-aggressive
behavior in order to bring about crazy
making. They might also choose to
show support or approval of the subject
verbally, but then give non-verbal cues
that show contradictory meanings. The
manipulator will often actively try to
undermine certain events or behaviors
while showing their support out loud
for that same behavior. If the
manipulator is caught in the act, they
will use denial, justification,
rationalization, and deception of ill
intent in order to get out of the trouble.

One of the biggest issues with
psychological manipulators is that they
are not always able to recognize what
others around them may need and they
will lose the ability to meet or even
consider these needs. This does not
excuse the behavior that they are doing,
but often the needs of others are not
considered or are not a priority to the
manipulator so they are able to perform
manipulative tasks without feeling
guilt or shame. This can make it
difficult to stop the behavior and
explain in a rational way why the
manipulator must stop.
In addition, the manipulator may find
that it is difficult for them to form

meaningful and long lasting
friendships and relationships because
the people they are with will always
feel used and will have difficulty in
trusting the manipulator. The issue
goes both ways in the formation of
relationships; the manipulator will not
be able to recognize the needs of the
other person while the other person
will not be able to form the required
emotional connections or trust with the
manipulator.
Requirements to
Successfully Manipulate
A successful manipulator must have
tactics at hand that will make them

successful at using people to get to
their own final goal. While there are
several theories on what makes a
successful manipulator, we will take a
look at the 3 requirements that have
been set out by George K. Simon, a
successful psychology author.
According to Simon, the manipulator
will need to:
1. Be able to conceal
their aggressive
behaviors and
intentions from the
subject.
2. Be able to determine
the vulnerabilities of
their intended subject

or victims in order to
determine which
tactics will be the
most effective in
reaching their goals.
3. Have some level of
ruthlessness readily
available so that they
will not need to deal
with any qualms that
may arise due to
harming the subjects if
it comes to that. This
harm can be either
physical or emotional.
The first requirement that the
manipulator has to accomplish in order

to successfully manipulate their
subjects is to conceal their aggressive
behaviors and intentions. If the
manipulator goes around telling
everyone their plans or always acts
mean to others, no one is going to stick
around long enough to be manipulated.
Rather, the manipulator needs to have
the ability to conceal their thoughts
from others and act like everything is
normal. Often, those who are being
manipulated will not realize it, at least
not in the beginning. The manipulator
will be sweet, act like their best friend,
and perhaps help them out with some
issue or another. By the time the
subject is aware of the issue, the
manipulator has enough information on

them to coerce the subject into
continuing on.
Next, the manipulator will need to have
the capability of determining what the
vulnerabilities of their intended victim
or victims are. This can help them to
determine which tactics need to be
used in order to reach the overall goal.
Sometimes the manipulator may be
able to do this step through a little bit
of observation while other times they
are going to need to have some kind of
interaction with the subject before
coming up with the full plan.
The third requirement is that the
manipulator needs to be ruthless. It is

not going to go well if the manipulator
puts in all their work and then worries
about how the subject is going to fair in
the end. If they did care about the
subject, it is not likely that they would
be going through with this plan at all.
The manipulator is not going to care
about the subject at all and does not
really care if any harm, either physical
or emotional, befalls the subject as
long as the overall goal is met.
One reason that manipulators are so
successful is that the subject often does
not realize they are being manipulated
until later on in the process. They may
think that everything is going along
just fine; perhaps they think that they

have made a new friend in the
manipulator. By the time the subject
realizes they are being used or no
longer wants to be a part of the process,
they are stuck. The manipulator will be
able to use many different tactics,
including emotional blackmail to get
their way in the end.
How to Control Victims
One of the things that the manipulator
needs to be able to accomplish to see
success is to control their subjects.
There are several different theories that
are available to help explain how the
manipulator will be able to do this.
Two of the theories that will be

discussed in this section include those
started by Harriet Braiker and Simon.
Harriet Braiker
Harriet Braiker is a clinical
psychologist who has written a self-
help book. In her book, she has defined
five basic ways that the manipulator is
able to control their subjects. These
include:
Positive reinforcement
Negative reinforcement
Partial or intermittent
reinforcement
Punishment
Traumatic learning that only

provides one trial
The first two tactics that are discussed
include positive reinforcement and
negative reinforcement. In positive
reinforcement the manipulator will use
a variety of tactics such as public
recognition, facial expressions (like a
smile or a forced laugh), attention,
gifts, approval, money, excessive
apologizing, superficial sympathy
which may include crocodile tears,
superficial charm, and praise. The
point of utilizing this kind of
reinforcement is to give the person a
reason to want to be your friend. If you
give someone a gift or some money,
they might be more willing to help you

out when the time comes. If you can
make the subject feel sorry for you,
then they will have the required
sympathy to be on your side later. The
other type of reinforcement that can be
used is negative reinforcement. In this
tactic the manipulator will remove the
subject from a situation that is negative
as a reward for doing something else.
An example of this would be “You
won’t have to do your homework if you
allow me to do this to you.”Each of
these has particular strengths and
weaknesses that allow the manipulator
to get what they want out of the
subject. Often, the manipulator will use
a combination of different tactics in
order to get the things that they want.

Partial or intermittent reinforcement
can also be used by a manipulator. This
form of reinforcement is used in order
to effectively create a climate of doubt
and fear in the subject. An example of
this comes in gambling. While the
gambler may win at times, they are
still going to lose some form of money
overall, especially if they play for a
long time. But the winning is often
enough to keep the subject persisting
on the same path, long after they are
not able to do so. The manipulator will
use this tactic to provide reinforcement
to the subject at enough intervals to
keep the subject coming back.

Punishing is another method that is
used in order to control the subject of
the manipulator. There are a lot of
different actions that can fit into this
category. They include playing the
subject, crying, sulking, using the guilt
trip, emotional blackmail, swearing,
threats, and intimidation, using the
silent treatment, yelling, and nagging.
The point of using this method is to
make the subject feel like they have
done something wrong. The subject
will feel bad and want to make things
right, falling right back in with the
manipulator.
Finally, the last method that Braiker
mentions in her work is the traumatic

one trial learning. This is where the
manipulator will explode for the littlest
things in the hopes of conditioning or
training the subject into not wanting to
contradict, confront, or upset the
manipulator. Some of the tactics that
might be used in this method include
explosive anger, verbal abuse, and
other behavior that is intimidating and
used to establish superiority and
dominance over the subject.
Simon
Simon has also come up with a list of
tactics that manipulators must use in
order to successfully control their
victims. Some of these are similar to
those listed by Braiker but with some

more details. These would include:
Lying: manipulators are
really good at lying to their
subjects. Often, the subjects
will find that it is difficult to
tell when they are being lied
to at the time. When the
subject finds out about the
apparent lie, it is usually too
late to do anything about it.
The only way that the
subject can make sure that
they are reducing their
chances of being lied to are
watching out for different
personality types that are
experts in the art of cheating

and lying. The manipulator
will lie about anything in
order to get their way and
for the most part their
subjects will not have any
idea that it is going on until
it is too late to do anything
about it.
 
Omission lying: this one is
similar to the method listed
above with a few slight
differences. Omission lying
is a little more subtle
because the manipulator will
tell some of the truth but
will withhold certain key
issues that should have been

revealed. In some cases this
might be called propaganda.
The manipulator might say
that they need to borrow
some money to get gas to go
buy groceries when in
reality they need the money
to go pick up some drugs or
other illegal substance.
While they did use the
money to purchase gas, just
like they said, they left out
an important part. The
subject probably would not
have given the money if
they knew the end of the
story and now they may be
caught up in something

illegal.
 
Denial: manipulators are
experts at denial. None of
them will admit that they
have done something wrong,
even when all of the
evidence is pointing towards
them. They will always deny
everything and often make
the subject look to be the
one at fault.
 
Rationalization: this is when
the manipulator will make
up an excuse that makes
them look good. They might
say they only did the act

because they were trying to
help the subject. This tactic
is also related to the
technique of spinning.
 
Minimization: this is a
blend of the rationalization
and the denial tactics. The
manipulator will tell
everyone that their behavior
is really not as irresponsible
or harmful as the subject
thought. An example of this
would be when the
manipulator says that an
insult or taunt they
performed was just a joke
and that the subject should

not take it so seriously.
 
Selective attention or
inattention: during this
tactic, the manipulator
works to avoid giving
attention to anything that
will distract them from their
final goal. They will
trivialize it and make it
seem not that important to
them, which it really isn’t.
An example of this would be
when the manipulator says
“I don’t want to hear it.”
 
Diversion: manipulators are
not only good at lying to

their subjects; they are also
experts at avoiding giving
straight answers to questions
that are given to them. If
someone asks them a
question that they do not
like or wants to know
outright if they are lying to
them, the manipulator will
try to push the conversation
in another direction. Often
the manipulator will briefly
give a vague answer to the
question before moving the
conversation to another
topic.
 
Evasion: this tactic is very

similar to diversion with a
few differences. In this
tactic, the manipulator will
answer the questions that are
given to them, but they will
use weasel words, vague
responses, ramble, and
provide irrelevant responses
to the question. They will
leave the subject with more
questions than answers when
they are done.
 
Intimidation: The
manipulator will always try
to keep the victim on the
defensive in order to make
sure that they remain on the

same team throughout the
process. Often this is done
by using veiled, implied,
indirect, or subtle threats to
the subject.
 
Guilt Trip: manipulators
like to use the guilt trip as a
form of intimidation in
order to get the subject to do
what they want. The
manipulator will try to make
the subject feel guilty in
some way, such as by saying
that the subject has it too
easy, is too selfish, or just
does not care about the
manipulator enough. This

will result in the victim
starting to feel bad for the
manipulator. The subject
will then be kept in a
submissive, anxious, or self-
doubting position, making it
easier for the manipulator to
still use them.
 
Shaming: the whole goal of
the manipulator is to make
the subject feel bad or have
sympathy for them so that
the subject keeps going
along with the plan. One
way that the manipulator
can do this is by using put-
downs and sarcasm in order

to shame the subject. This
tactic will make the subject
feel unworthy. Most of the
shaming tactics used will be
very subtle and would
include things such as subtle
sarcasm, rhetorical
comments, unpleasant tone
of voice, or a fierce glance.
 
Playing as a victim: no
matter what, the
manipulator wants to look
like they are the victim,
even though they are the one
in control. When the
manipulator acts like they
are the victim of their

circumstances or the
behavior of someone else,
they will be able to evoke
compassion, sympathy, and
pity. Most people will not be
able to stand by and watch
as someone suffers and the
manipulator will find that it
is easy to get these same
people to cooperate with
them.
 
Vilifying the subject: this is
one of the most powerful
tactics that can be used
because it will almost
instantly put the subject on
the role of defense while at

the same time hiding the
manipulators aggressive
intents. The manipulator
will try to turn the
circumstances around so
that the subject looks like
they are the villain and the
one who has caused all of
the trouble. The subject will
then want to find ways to
change this outlook and get
on the side of the
manipulator again, making
it easy to be used.
 
Servant role: manipulators
will often hide their own
agendas by making it look

like the work they are doing
is for some noble cause.
They only said the mean
thing about your outfit
because the principal wants
to start sprucing up the look
of the school and they
wanted to help out. The term
“just doing my job,” would
also fit under this category.
 
Seduction: manipulators can
use seduction to get the
things that they want. Some
tools that fit into this
category would include
intense support, flattery,
praise and charm. This is

done in order to get the
subject to lower their
defenses. After time, the
subject will begin to give
their loyalty and trust to the
manipulator who will use it
as they please.
 
Projecting the blame: the
manipulator will spend a lot
of time blaming others for
the problems they are
having. Often it is hard to
detect when this is going on
so no one is able to call
them out on it.
 
Feigning innocence: if the

manipulator is caught in the
act of reaching their own
agenda, they will try to
suggest that if harm was
done, it was completely
unintentional. They may
even completely deny that
they did anything in the first
place. When caught, the
manipulator will place a
look of indignation or
surprise on their faces. The
point of this tool is to make
the victim question their
own sanity and judgment
since it looks like they were
wrong.
 

Feigning confusion: another
thing that might happen if
the manipulator is caught is
that they might play dumb.
This will happen if the
manipulator tries to pretend
that they do not have any
idea what the subject is
talking about. They might
also act like they are
confused when a critical
issue is brought up to them.
 
Brandishing anger: when the
manipulator uses anger, it is
to get the subject to feel
sorry or sympathy for them.
If done in the right way, the

manipulator will be able to
shock their subject back into
submission. Often, the
manipulator is not really
angry; they are just putting
on an act in order to get
what they want.
As can be seen, there are a lot of tools
that the manipulator can use in order to
get to their final goals. Often, these
tactics will be used in such a way that
the subject will not realize what is
going on in the beginning and it will
take some time for them to catch on.
Once they do, the manipulator will be
able to employ some of the techniques
that will be discussed in the next

section in order to keep the subject
going in the right direction. The
manipulator is skilled at using a
combination of these skills to get the
things that they want and it does not
matter to them how much they harm
the other person in the process.

Techniques of Manipulation
As discussed before, a manipulator is
going to work in order to reach their
final goal. In order to reach this final
goal, the manipulator will use any
technique that they can in order to get
people to do what they want. The five
most common techniques that will be
used by a manipulator to reach their
final goals include blackmail,
emotional blackmail, putting down the
other person, lying, and creating an
illusion. These will each be discussed
in the preceding sections.
Blackmail
Blackmail is the first technique that

would be utilized by a manipulator.
Blackmail is considered an act that
involves threats that are unjustified in
order to make a certain gain or cause a
loss to the subject unless the
manipulator’s demand is met. It can
also be defined as the act of coercion
that involves threats of prosecution as a
criminal, threats of taking the subject’s
property or money, or threats of
causing physical harm to the subject.
There is a long history of the word
blackmail; originally it was a term that
meant payments that the settlers
rendered to the area that was bordering
Scotland to the chieftains in charge.
This payment was made in order to
give the settlers protection from the

marauders and thieves that were going
in to England. It has since changed to
mean something else and in certain
instances it is an offense in the United
States. For the purposes of this section,
blackmail is more of a threat, either
physical or emotional, to the subject in
order to coerce them into doing what
the manipulator wants.
Blackmail is also considered extortion
in some cases. Although there are
times when the two are considered
synonymous, there are some
differences. For example, extortion is
when someone takes the personal
property of another by threatening to
do future harm if the property is not

given. On the other hand, blackmail is
when threats are used in order to
prevent the subject from engaging in
lawful activities. At times, these two
events are going to work together. The
person may threaten someone and
require money in order to be kept at
bay and not cause the subject harm.
The manipulator is going to be able to
use this technique in order to get what
they want. They are going to take the
time to learn things of personal nature
about their subject and then they can
use that as a form of blackmail against
them. They might blackmail their
subject by threatening to spill an
embarrassing secret or by ruining their

chances of getting a new job or
promotion. Or the manipulator might
work in a more menacing way by
threatening to physically harm their
subject or the subject’s family if they
do not agree to go along with the
manipulator. Whatever the blackmail
may be, it is used to help the
manipulator to get to their final goal
with the assistance of the subject.
Emotional Blackmail
Another similar tactic that may be used
by the manipulator is known as
emotional blackmail. During this
technique, the manipulator will seek to
inspire sympathy or guilt in their

subject. These two emotions are the
strongest ones for humans to feel and
they will often be enough to spur the
subject into the action that the
manipulator wants. The manipulator is
going to take advantage of this fact in
order to get the thing that they want;
they will use the sympathy or the guilt
that they inspire in order to coerce the
subject in to cooperating or helping
them. The degree of sympathy or guilt
will often be blown out of proportion,
making the subject even more likely to
help out in the situation.
The point of using this type of
blackmail is to play more on the
emotions of the subject. In regular

blackmail, the subject has a threat to
deal with, mostly in terms of physical
harm to themselves or someone they
love. With emotional blackmail, the
manipulator will work to inspire
emotions that are strong enough to
incite the subject to action. While the
subject may think that they are helping
out of their own free will, the
manipulator has worked to ensure that
they subject is assisting and will bring
out the emotions again whenever it is
needed.
Putting Down The Other
Person
There are other options available to the

manipulator if they would like to get
their subject to assist in reaching the
final goal. One technique that has quite
a bit of success is when the
manipulator is able to put down their
subject. In normal cases, if the
manipulator uses verbal skills in order
to put their subject down, they will run
a high risk of making the subject feel
as if a personal attack has been placed
on them. When the subject feels like
they are attacked, they will bristle and
not be willing to assist the manipulator
in the way that they want. Instead, the
subject will not like the manipulator
and will stay as far away from them as
possible, making it very difficult for
the manipulator to reach their final

goal.
This is why the manipulator is not
going to just go around and put down
their subject. They have to be more
discreet about the process and find a
way to do it without raising red flags or
making the subject feel like they are
being attacked. One way that this can
be done is through humor. Humor is
able to lower barriers that might
otherwise show up because humor is
funny and makes people feel good. The
manipulator is able to turn their insult
into a joke. Despite the fact that the put
down has been turned into a joke, it
will work just as effectively as if the
joke were not present without leaving

the visible scars on the subject.
Often, the manipulator will direct their
put down into the form of third person.
This helps them to mask what they are
saying more easily along with
providing an easy way to deny causing
harm if it comes back to haunt them
later on. For example, they might start
their put down with “Other people
think…” If the subject is still able to
guess that the comments were made at
them, then the manipulator would end
it with a throwaway line that might
include something like “present
company excepted, of course.”
The idea of the put down is to make the

subject feel like they are somehow less
than the manipulator. It raises the
manipulator up to a new level and
leaves the subject feeling like
something is wanting. The subject is
more likely to want to make things
better and to fix any wrong that they
have done. This will put the
manipulator in a position of power, and
they will be able to more easily get the
subject to assist them.
Lying
No matter what the end goal of the
manipulator is, lying is something that
they are an expert in and which they
will do all of the time to get what they

want. There are several different types
of lies that can be used by the
manipulator that will help them to
reach their final goals. One is that they
tell complete lies and others include
omitting parts of the truth from their
subjects.
When the manipulator lies, it is
because they know that the lie is going
to further their agenda much more
effectively than the truth would.
Telling someone the truth might make
them not want to help the manipulator
out and that would go completely
against their plans. Instead, the
manipulator will tell a lie to get the
subject convinced to do something for

them and by the time the subject finds
out about the lie, it is too late to fix the
issue.
The manipulator might also decide to
omit part of the truth in the stories that
they are telling. With this method, they
are going to tell parts of the truth, but
will keep certain things out that are
unsavory or which might hinder the
progress that is being made. These
kinds of lies can be just as dangerous
because it will become increasingly
difficult to tell what the truth of the
story is and what the lie is.
It is important to realize that when you
are dealing with the manipulator,

anything that they tell you may be a lie.
It is not a good idea to trust anything
that the manipulator is saying since
they are just trying to abuse and use
their subjects in order to reach that
final goal. The manipulator is going to
do and say anything possible, even
lying, to get what they want and they
are not going to feel sorry about it. As
long as they get what they want, they
are not too concerned about how it is
affecting the subject or others around
them.
Creating an Illusion
In addition to lying, the manipulator is
going to be an expert at creating

illusions that are capable of bringing
about their final goal more effectively.
They will work to create a picture that
they want and then convince the
subject that this illusion is actually
reality; whether or not it is does not
matter to the manipulator. In order to
do this, the manipulator is going to
build up the evidence that is needed to
prove the point that works to their goal.
To start the illusion, the manipulator is
going to plant the ideas and the
evidence into the minds of the subject.
Once these ideas are in place, the
manipulator will be able to step back
for a few days and let the manipulation
occur in the subjects mind over that

time. After that time the manipulator
will have more of a chance of getting
the subject to go along with the plan.
Manipulation is a form of mind control
that is difficult for the subject to avoid.
Unlike brainwashing and hypnosis that
was described in the previous chapters,
manipulation is able to occur in daily
life and in some instances it can occur
without the subject having much
knowledge or control of it. The
manipulator is going to work discretely
in order to reach their final goal
without getting the subject suspicious
and derail the process. The manipulator
will not worry about who they are
hurting or how others might feel and

most of them are not capable of
understanding the needs of their
subjects. They just know that they want
something and that the subject they
have chosen is going to help them to
get to their goal.
The techniques that are discussed in
this chapter are meant to help explain
what goes on during the process of
manipulation and how the mind of the
manipulator will work. It is often best
to attempt to steer clear of anyone who
might be a manipulator so that you are
able to avoid this kind of mind control.

Chapter 5: Persuasion
 
Persuasion is another form of mind
control that is going to be discussed.
While there might not be as much
media hype about this form of mind
control as there is with brainwashing
and hypnosis, it can be just as effective
if done correctly. The issue with this
form is that there are just so many
different forms of persuasion that are
present in daily life that it can be
difficult for any one source to get
through to the subject and make a
difference.
 
While persuasion works to change the
thoughts and the beliefs of the subject

like the other forms of mind control, it
seems like everyone is trying to
persuade you about something so it
becomes easier to ignore the
persuasion that is coming towards the
subject. For example, the commercials
on television, when an argument is
going on, or even when a conversation
is going on there is some form of
persuasion that is occurring. People
will often use persuasion to their
advantage without noticing. This
chapter is going to go into more details
about persuasion and how it can be
effectively used as a form of mind
control.

What is Persuasion?
To start with is the definition of
persuasion. When people think about
persuasion, they will often come up
with many different answers. Some
may think of the commercials and
advertising that they see all around
them that urge the purchase of a certain
product over another. Others may think
about persuasion in the terms of
politics and how the candidates may try
to sway the voters’ opinion in order to
get another vote. Both of these are
examples of persuasion because the
message is trying to change the way
that the subject is thinking. Persuasion
can be found in daily life and it’s a

very powerful force as well as major
influence on the subject and society.
Advertising, mass media, legal
decisions, and politics all will be
influenced by how persuasion works
and in turn it will work on persuading
the subject as well.
As can be seen, there are some key
differences between persuasion and the
other forms of mind control which
have been discussed so far in this
guidebook. Brainwashing and hypnosis
will require the subject to be in
isolation in order to change their minds
and identity. Manipulation will also
work on just one person to get to the
final goal. While persuasion can be

done on just one subject to change their
mind, it is also possible to use
persuasion on a larger scale in order to
persuade a whole group or even society
to change the way that they are
thinking. This can make it even more
effective, and perhaps dangerous,
because it has the ability to change the
minds of many people all at once rather
than the mind of just a single subject.
Many people fall under the false
impression that they are immune to the
effects of persuasion. They think that
they would be able to see any sales
pitch that is thrown their way, whether
the agent is actually selling a product
or some new idea, and then be able to

comprehend the situation that is going
on and find the conclusion through
their own logic. In some scenarios this
is going to be true; no one falls for
everything they hear all of the time
when they use logic, especially if it
goes completely against their beliefs,
no matter how strong the argument
may be. In addition, most subjects will
be able to avoid the messages about
purchasing televisions and fancy cars
or the newest product on the market.
Many times the act of persuasion is
going to be much more subtle and it
can be more difficult for the subject to
form their own opinions about what
they are being told.

When the act of persuasion is brought
up, most people are going to see it in a
negative light. They will think of a
salesman or a conman who is trying to
convince them to change all of their
beliefs and who is going to push and
bother them until the change occurs.
While this certainly is one way to think
about persuasion, this process can often
be used in a positive way rather than
just a negative way. For example,
public service campaigns can urge
people to quit smoking or recycle can
be forms of persuasion that are able to
improve the lives of the subject. It is
all in how the process of persuasion is
used.

Elements of Persuasion
As with the other forms of mind
control, there are certain elements to be
watched out for when it comes to
persuasion. These elements help to
define exactly what persuasion is so
that it is more recognizable. According
to Perloff in 2003, persuasion is
defined as “A symbolic process in
which communications try to convince
other people to change their attitudes
or behaviors regarding an issue through
the transmission of a message in an
atmosphere of free choice.”
This is one of the things that make
persuasion different from the other

forms of mind control; the subject is
often allowed to make their own free
choices in the matter even if the tactics
of persuasion are going to work to shift
the subject’s mind in a particular
direction. The subject is able to choose
which way they want to think, if they
want to purchase a product or not, or if
they think the evidence behind the
persuasion is strong enough to change
their minds.
There are a few elements that are
present in persuasion that help to
define it even further. These elements
include:
Persuasion is symbolic

which means that it utilizes
sounds, images, and words
to get the point across.
Persuasion will involve the
agent deliberately
attempting to influence the
subject or group.
Self-persuasion is a key part
of this process. The subject
is usually not coerced and
instead they are given the
freedom to choose their own
decision.
There are many ways that
persuasive messages can be
transmitted including face to
face, internet, radio, and
television. The

communication can also
occur nonverbally or
verbally.
Let’s look at each of these points in a
little more detail. The first element of
persuasion is that it needs to be
symbolic. In order to persuade
someone to think or act in a certain
way, you need to be able to show them
why they should change their thoughts.
This is going to include the use of
words, sounds, and images to get the
new point across. You can use words to
start up a debate or argument to show
your point. Pictures are a great way to
show the evidence that is needed to
persuade someone to go one way or the

other. Some nonverbal cues are
possible, but they are not going to be as
effective as using the words and
images.
The second key is that persuasion is
going to be used in a deliberate way in
order to influence the way others are
acting or thinking. This one is pretty
obvious, if you are not purposely trying
to influence others, you are not using
persuasion to get them to change. The
persuader is going to try different
tactics in order to get the subject to
think the same way that they do. This
could be something as simple as just
having a debate with them or
presenting evidence that supports their

point of view. On the other hand, it
could get much more involved and
include more deceptive forms to
change the subject’s mind. More about
the techniques that are used in
persuasion will be discussed later in
this chapter.
The unique thing about persuasion is
that it allows the subject to have some
form of free will. The subject is
allowed to make their own choice in
the manner. For the most part, no
matter how hard someone tries to
persuade them of something, they do
not have to go for it. The subject might
listen to a thousand commercials about
the best car to purchase, but if they do

not like that brand or are not in need of
a new vehicle at that time, they are not
going to go out and purchase it. If the
subject is against abortion, it is not
going to matter how many people come
out and say how great abortion is, the
subject is not likely to change their
mind. This allows much more freedom
of choice than what is found in the
other forms of mind control, which
might explain why many people do not
see this as a type of mind control when
asked.
Persuasion is a form of mind control
that can occur in many different ways.
While brainwashing, hypnosis, and
manipulation have to occur on a face to

face basis, and in some cases in
complete isolation, persuasion is
capable of occurring in other ways.
You can find examples of persuasion
all over the place including when you
are talking to people you know, on the
Internet, and through radio and
television. It is also possible to provide
persuasive messages through nonverbal
and verbal means; although it is much
more effective when verbal techniques
are used.
Modern Persuasion
Over time, persuasion has been able to
evolve and change from its original
beginnings. Persuasion has been around

for many years; in fact it has been
around since the time of ancient
Greece. This does not mean that the art
and process of persuasion is exactly the
same as it was way back then. In fact,
there have been quite a few changes
made to the art of persuasion and how
it is used in modern times. Some of the
key elements of modern day persuasion
will be discussed in this section.
Richard M. Perloff has spent quite a bit
of time studying modern persuasion,
how it is used, and how it can affect
society as a whole. He wrote a book
called The Dynamics of Persuasion:
Communication and Attitudes in the
21st Century, which outlines the five

ways that the use of modern persuasion
is different from how it was used in the
past. These five ways include:
The number of messages
that are considered
persuasive has grown by
leaps and bounds: In the
times of ancient Greece,
persuasion was used just in
writing and in debates
among the elites. The
occurrence of persuasion
was not a big thing and you
would not see it very often.
In modern times, it is
difficult to get anywhere
without some message of

persuasion following you
around. Think of the
different types and sources
of advertisements that are
out there; the average adult
in the United States will
come across up to 3000 of
these each day. In addition
to that, there are always
people knocking on your
door trying to get you to buy
something, believe their
ideas, or try something new
out. Persuasion is much
more a part of modern life
than it has been at any other
time in history.
 

Persuasion travels really
quickly: back in the times of
ancient Greece, it could take
weeks or longer for a
persuasive message to get
from one point to another.
This limited the impact of
persuasion because most
people would not be able to
get the message. Most acts
of persuasion had to be done
in the context of face to face
communication. In modern
times, persuasive messages
can cover a large distance in
hardly any time at all thanks
to the use of the internet,
radio, and television.

Political candidates can
reach constituents all at
once in just seconds and any
message can be spread
easily. Persuasion takes on a
much larger role when it can
be spread so quickly.
 
Persuasion can mean a lot of
money: now that companies
have discovered the power
of persuasion, they are doing
everything they can to make
it work for them. The more
effective they are at
persuading consumers to
purchase their products the
more money they will make.

Some companies are in
business solely because of
the persuasive process, such
as public relations
companies, marketing firms,
and advertising agencies.
Other companies will be
able to use the persuasive
techniques offered by these
companies in order to reach
and surpass the sales goals
that they set.
 
Persuasion has become more
subtle than in the past: in the
beginnings of persuasion,
the agent would announce
their views out loud for the

whole group to hear in the
hopes of getting them all to
change their minds. Those
days are over and the
process of persuasion has
become much more discrete.
While it is possible to find
acts of persuasion that are
still very loud and in your
face, such as in some forms
of advertising, many others
are following a more subtle
route.
 
An example of this is when
businesses craft a certain image
of themselves, such as being
family friendly, in order to get

consumers to purchase their
products. You might also notice
that instead of getting into a
debate with your friend over
going to a party, they will use
peer pressure or just list a few
facts to try and get you to come
with them. Despite being more
subtle, persuasion is still as
effective today as it has ever
been.
The process of persuasion
has become more complex:
along with persuasion being
more subtle and sometimes
harder to point out, it is also
going along the road of
becoming more complex.

The subject being targeted is
more diverse than in the past
and they have a lot more
choices to make. For
example, where once a
person just went to the one
store in town to purchase
everything they need, now
they are able to pick from
different stores for their
needs from the hardware
store to the grocery store
and the clothing store. On
top of that, there is often
more than one option
available for each of these
shopping categories in the
area. All these choices make

it more difficult for the
agent to find a good
persuasive message for the
consumer or any other
subject.
 

Methods of Persuasion
Persuasion methods can often go under
other names and be referred to in such
ways as persuasion strategies and
persuasion tactics. There is not just one
method that can be used to persuade
someone to think or act in a certain
way. The agent may be able to talk to
the subject while presenting evidence
in order to switch the subject’s mind,
they may be able to use some sort of
force or pull they have against the
subject, and they can perform some
sort of service for the subject, or use
another tactic. This section will go into
more details about the different
methods of persuasion that are

available and how each of them might
be effective in the process of
persuasion.
Usage of Force
Depending on the situation, the agent
may decide it is a good idea to use
some force in order to persuade the
subject to think their way. This may
happen if the ideas do not match up
correctly, regular talking is not
working, or when the agent is
becoming frustrated or upset with the
turn of the conversation. Often force is
used as a type of scare tactic because it
gives the subject less time to think
logically about what is going on

compared to when a normal
conversation occurs. Usually force will
be used when the agent has had less
success using the other means of
persuasion that are available, although
starting with the use of force is
sometimes done as well. At other
times, force may be used if the agent
feels like they are losing control or
when the subject is able to present
contradictory evidence to the agent and
the agent becomes angry.
Often it is not the best idea to use force
when it comes to the process of
persuasion. This is because many
subjects will see the use of force as a
threat due to the fact that the agent will

not give other options to the request
that they are making. The whole appeal
of persuasion is that it offers the
subject the choice of paths, but once
force is brought into the mix, that
freedom of choice is gone and the
subject is more likely to feel
threatened. Once the subject feels
threatened, they are less likely to listen
and consider anything that the agent is
saying and so the process will not go
any further. Due to these reasons, the
use of force is generally discouraged
and avoided in the art of persuasion;
unlike the other forms of mind control
discussed.
Weapons of Influence

Another method that can be used in
order to persuade the subject to lean a
specific way is to use the weapons of
influence that are available. These six
influences were developed by Robert
Cialdini in his book Influence. This
book discusses the art of persuasion
and defines the six weapons of
influence that can make the agent
successful in their goals. The six
weapons of influence are reciprocity,
commitment and consistency, social
proof, liking, authority, and scarcity.
These six weapons of influence are
very important to the agent since they
are a part of the process of change in
their subjects. Each of these six

weapons will be discussed below.
Reciprocity
The first weapon of influence is the
principle of reciprocity. This principle
states that when one person, the agent,
provides the other person, the subject,
with something of value, the subject is
going to attempt to repay the agent in
kind. This basically means, when the
agent performs some type of service to
the subject, the subject will feel that
they have an obligation to perform a
similar service to the agent at some
time. While the two services might not
be identical, they have the same kind of
value so that the obligation of each is
equaled out.

The act of reciprocation ends up
producing a sense of obligation in the
subject, which the agent will then be
able to use as a powerful tool when
they want to use persuasion. The rule
of reciprocity is very effective because
it helps the agent get the subject into
the right frame of mind for the act of
persuasion by instilling and
overpowering the subject with a sense
of obligation. The agent may be more
likely to get the subject convinced to
do or act a certain way because the
subject will have that sense of
obligation hanging over them.
Another added benefit for the agent in

using reciprocity is that it is not just a
moral standing that will put the
obligation on the subject; it is also a
standing that is held up by social codes.
The agent is not going to need to worry
about whether the subject has the right
moral code to return the favor. If the
subject does not feel the need to do so,
the agent has some tools available to
spur them into action.
As a society, people do not like
individuals who are negligent in
returning a favor or payment when they
are offered a free gift or service. If the
agent does not feel like the subject is
going to reciprocate to them, they will
be able to turn them in to their social

group. They can do this by telling other
friends or coworkers about how they
did a favor for the subject but the
subject never returned it when it was
needed. Now the agent has forced
social standards on the subject through
the telling of the favor, making it even
more likely that they will be able to
persuade the subject into doing
something.
For the most part, the subject will be
happy to reciprocate to the agent
without needing any outside forces.
When the favor is granted, the subject
will begin to look for ways that they
can repay the agent so that the score is
even and they do not seem greedy or

selfish. The agent will then be able to
provide an easy solution to the subject
on how to repay this debt; the subject
will feel gratitude at having this easy
solution and will be more likely to go
the way that the agent wants.
Commitment and Consistency
The next weapon of influence that is to
be discussed is that of commitment and
consistency. The agent is going to need
to use both of these if they wish to
persuade anyone to change to their
point of view. When things are
consistent, they are easier to
understand and can help the subject to
make their decisions better. It does not
do well for the agent to always change

the facts that they are using or to
change other information that is needed
in order to help the subject process the
information. Rather than helping with
the process of persuading, constantly
keeping away from consistency is
going to make the agent look like a liar
and someone who cannot be trusted,
resulting in the failure of the
persuasion process.
Consistency is one of the most
important aspects of the persuasion
process. This is because:
Consistency is valued highly
in society: people like to
have things stay a certain

way most of the time. While
there is a lot of variety in
daily life, people feel safe
knowing that overall things
will stay pretty consistent. It
allows them to remember
what has gone on, know
what to expect, and be
prepared if any changes do
happen to occur. If
consistency were not
available, things would be
very difficult to plan and
there would always be issues
of chaos going around. If
you wish to persuade a
subject of a particular thing,
then you must make sure

that your facts are consistent
and make sense to them.
 
Consistency results in
benefiting the daily life
approach of most people.
Have you ever tried to plan a
day out when something
unexpected comes up? It can
make things almost
impossible to do and will
end up feeling like a
disaster. People like
consistency because it
allows them to know what to
expect and what to do. They
know when it is time to eat,
when it is time for work, and

when other things will
happen throughout the day.
 
Consistency provides a
shortcut that is very
valuable through the
complications present in
modern existence. Life is
difficult enough without
having to add in other things
that do not make since.
When people are able to
have consistent lives, it
makes things a whole lot
easier.
Consistency is a great tool because it
allows the subject the ability to make

the right decisions and to process
information. If the agent wants to be
successful in their endeavors of
persuading the subject, they need to
make sure that their message is
consistent. There is no room for false
evidence that can show up later and
ruin the whole process. Keep the facts
truthful and concise and it is much
better for persuading the subject.
Something that ties in with consistency
is the act of commitment. In order to
know that the subject is actually
persuaded and that the effort has paid
off, it is important to have some kind
of commitment in place. In advertising,
this can mean that the subject is going

to purchase the product or in politics it
can mean that the subject will vote for
a particular candidate. The
commitment that is made will vary
depending on the nature of the
persuasion. According to the concept of
consistency, if a person commits,
either in writing or orally, they are
much more likely to honor the
commitment that they have made.
It has been found that this is even more
true in terms of written commitments
since the subject will be more concrete
psychologically and there is some hard
proof that they agreed to the
commitment. This makes a lot of
sense; many people will promise orally

that they will fix something or do
something, just to turn around and not
do it. Sure, some people will do what
they said, and they are more likely to
do it if promising orally than not
promising at all, but often it is still
difficult to get the results that you want
in this way. In addition, there is no way
to back it up since an oral agreement
will just become a he said she said
disagreement and no one will win. On
the other hand, if the agent is able to
produce a written commitment from
the subject, they have the proof they
need that the thing has been done.
The reason that it is so important for
the agent to get the subject to agree to a

commitment is because once the
subject has committed to the new
stance, they have more of a tendency to
act in a way that is fitting to that
commitment. After that point, the
subject will continue on and begin to
engage in self-persuasion for the cause.
They will provide themselves along
with others with various justifications
and reasons to support the commitment
in order to avoid any issues with the
agent. If the agent is able to get the
subject to that point, the agent will
have a lot less work to deal with.
Social Proof
Persuasion is a form of social
interaction and therefore is going to

need to follow the social rules where it
is occurring. The subject is going to be
influenced by the people who are
around them; they are going to be more
likely to want to do what others are
doing rather than do their own thing.
The subject will base their beliefs and
action according to what others are
doing around them, how these same
people act, and how they believe. For
example, if the subject grows up in a
city, they are more likely to act like
others who are from that area; on the
other hand, those who grow up in a
community that is very religious may
spend a lot of their time praying,
learning, and helping others.

Under this belief the saying “the power
of the crowd,” can be very effective.
The subject is going to want to know
what other people around them are
doing at all times. It has become
almost an obsession in this country to
be able to do what others are doing in
order to fit in, despite the fact that
people will say how they want to be
different and be an individual.
An example that is given about how
people will do something because
others are doing it can be found with a
phone-a-thon. If the host says
something like “Operators are waiting,
please call now,” the subject may feel
like there are operators who are sitting

around with nothing to do because no
one is calling them. This will make the
subject less likely to call because they
figure if someone else isn’t calling
then they shouldn’t either. If the host
just changes up a few words and
instead says “If operators are busy,
please call again,” there can be a very
different result. The subject is now
going to assume that the operators are
busy with the calls of many others
subjects so the organization must be
good and legitimate. The subject will
be much more likely to call in whether
or not they get through right away or
have to be put on hold.
The persuasion technique of social

proof is the most effective in situations
where the subject is uncertain of what
they will do or when there seem to be
many similarities in the situations. In
ambiguous or uncertain situations that
have multiple choices or possibilities
to be made, the subject will often
choose to conform to what others
around them are doing. This is because
the choices are so similar that any of
them will work, but they will assume
that the choice the others are making is
the one that is right. The other way that
social proof can be used is when there
are some similarities occurring. For
example, the subject is much more
likely to conform and change around
those who are similar to them in some

way. If there is someone who is similar
to the subject that is in charge, the
subject is likely to listen and follow
them more than if the person in charge
is very different from the subject.
The agent will be able to use the idea
of social proof to help with their
process of persuasion. The first way
they can do this is watching the
wording that they are saying. With the
example given of the game show, both
of the quotes were saying the same
thing, but by switching up the wording
they came up with two different
meanings. Neither of them were a lie;
they were just effective at eliciting a
different kind of response. If the agent

is able to watch the way that they word
things, they can elicit the right
response out of their subjects and
convince the subject to follow the same
ideas and beliefs.
In addition, the agent will find that
there is more success if they are able to
get those who are similar to them to
share in the ideas. This is why
politicians will try to campaign to
groups with the similar ideas to them.
If they need to reach a larger group,
they will modify their ideas in order to
make them more appealing to these
new groups.
Liking

The agent is going to work very hard in
order to get the subject to like them.
There is a very simple reason or this; if
the subject likes the agent, they are
much more likely to say yes to them.
There are two main factors that will
contribute to how well the subject likes
the agent. The first one is physical
attractiveness and the second is
similarity.
For the first one, if the agent is more
attractive physically to the subject,
they are going to have the feeling of
being more persuasive since they are
able to get what they want more easily
while also changing the attitudes of
others. This attractiveness factor has

been proven effective in sending
favorable messages and impressions of
other traits that the agent may have
including intelligence, kindness, and
talent. This all works together to make
it more likely that an attractive person
will be able to more easily persuade the
subject.
The second factor, similarity, is a little
simpler. The idea states that if the
subject is similar to the agent, they are
much more likely to answer in the
affirmative to what the agent is asking.
This process is pretty natural and most
of the time the subject will not have to
think about whether it is the right thing
to do when they like and are similar to

the agent.
Authority
One of the ways that the agent will be
successful in persuading the subject is
to become an authority. There is a
tendency in most people to believe that
something an expert says on a subject
is true. The subject is more likely to
enjoy listening to an agent that is
trustworthy and knowledgeable; this
means that if the agent can bring these
two things to the table, then they are
already on the way to getting their
subject to listen and believe them.
There have been studies done to show
how this authority technique can work

in persuading the subject to listen to
what the agent has to say. The study
done was known as the Milgram study
and was actually a whole series of
experiments started in 1961. The
participants consisted of two subjects
and each was placed into different
rooms. The first subject was then
attached to a harness that was electric
and which could administer the shock.
The second subject was instructed by
the agent, who was dressed up in a
scientist’s coat and looked official, to
ask the first subject questions and then
to punish them whenever a question
was answered incorrectly. The second
subject was asked by the agent to
deliver electrical shocks that came

from a panel that was under the second
subject’s control. After delivering a
shock, the second subject had to pick
the next highest voltage to use the next
time and would continue to do this
until the highest voltage of 450 volts
was reached.
One thing that was not known to the
second subject was that the first subject
was simply an actor who was faking
the pain; this first subject was not
actually being harmed in the process.
This experiment was conducted in
order to see how well the second
subject would obey someone in
authority, not to harm someone on
purpose. The statement that went along

with this study was “When an authority
tells ordinary people it is their job to
deliver harm, how much suffering will
each subject be willing to inflict on an
entirely innocent person if the
instructions come from above?”
According to this study, most of the
second subjects were willing to provide
as much pain to the first subject as was
available. This led to the conclusion
that most subjects are willing to place
pain upon others if they are told to do
so by an authority figure of some sort.
Of course, when it comes to 
persuasion, pain is not something that 
is necessary at all times in order to 
change the way that people think. This 

study was just an illustration of how 
the subject is going to react to the 
agent if the agent is able to prove they 
are some sort of authoritarian person. 
Keeping this in mind can help the agent
to reach their own agenda.  
Scarcity
Scarcity is another form of persuasion
that people may be familiar with but
which is often underestimated. When a
product or idea has a limited
availability, it is more likely to be
assigned a higher value. According to
Cialdini “people want more of what
they cannot have.” While this might
sound like it is describing a child who
is trying to get into the cookie jar when

they are told no, it can also describe
how regular adults will act. When there
is the issue of scarcity to consider, the
context is going to matter as well. This
simply means that within specific
contexts, the idea of scarcity might
actually be an advantage.
The agent of persuasion will be able to
use the idea of scarcity to their
advantage. They will need to find a
way to make the subject believe that
the item is scarce by explaining why
that item is so special and what it does
that nothing else is able to do. The
agent is going to have to work their
subject in the right way. The agent can
also choose to go the other way; rather

than explaining what the customer will
gain by the item or idea, they can
explain what they will lose by not
having the item. For example, the agent
could say something like “you will lose
$5” rather than going with “you could
save $5”. This is just another way that
the agent will be able to make
something sound like it is scarcer.
There are two reasons why this
principle of scarcity works. First off,
when items or products are difficult to
obtain, they will usually gain more
value. The more value an item has the
better quality it will seem to have, even
if this is not true. The second thing is
that when something is not as available

as it once was, the subject will begin to
realize that they are going to lose the
chance at acquiring it in the future.
Once this begins to happen, the subject
will begin to assign the service or item
that is scarce a higher value simply
since it is going to become harder to
acquire.
The idea that is behind this principle is
that the subject is going to want the
things that are out of their reach. If
something is easy to get, no one will
want it as much as when the item is
more difficult. If the agent is able to
plant the idea that their thoughts,
beliefs, or items are scarce and
difficult to come by, they will have a

much higher chance of seeing success
in their persuasion efforts.

Persuasion Techniques
If the agent wants to be successful in
persuading the subject into something,
they are going to have to come up with
some techniques that will help them
out. Every day the subject is going to
be confronted with different forms of
persuasion. Food makers will work to
get the subject to purchase the new
products or more of the old while
studios will advertise their latest
blockbusters. Since persuasion can be
found almost anywhere, it is going to
be a big challenge to the agent to find a
way to impress their point of view on
the subject.

The techniques that come with
persuasion have been observed and
studied for many years, all the way
back to ancient times. This has been
done because influence is so useful to a
wide variety of different people. The
formal study of these techniques has
grown starting in the early 20th century.
Since the ultimate goal of using
persuasion is to convince the subject to
take the persuasive argument,
internalize it, and then adopt it as a
new attitude, there is a lot of value in
discovering which techniques of
persuasion are the most successful. The
three persuasion techniques that
provide the most value to the agent and
which will be discussed in this section

are creating a need, appealing to the
social needs, and using loaded images
and words.
Create a Need
One way that the agent is going to be
able to get the subject to change their
way of thinking is to create a need or
they can appeal to a need that already
existed in the subject. This type of
persuasion will appeal to the subject if
done correctly; this means that for the
agent to be successful they will need to
appeal to the fundamental needs of the
subject such as their need for self-
actualization, self-esteem, love, food,
and shelter. The reason that this

method is going to work so well for the
agent is because the subject is actually
going to need these things. Food is not
something that they will be able to
survive without for very long. If the
agent is able to persuade the subject
that their store is the best or by
switching their beliefs they would be
able to get more food or shelter, there
is a higher chance for success.
Appealing to Social Needs
Next, the agent could appeal to the
social needs of the subject. While
social needs are not as effective to use
as the primary needs, they are still an
important tool that can be used. People

like to be wanted and part of the crowd.
They like the prestige that some items
are able to give them and to feel like
they belong in a higher social standing.
The idea of appealing to the social
needs of the subject can be found in
most television commercials that are
on; in these commercials the viewer
will be encouraged to buy an item so
that they can become well-known or be
just like everyone else. When the agent
appeals to the social needs of the
subject, they are able to reach a new
area that might interest the subject.
Using Loaded Images and
Words

When it comes to persuasion, the
choice of words that are made can
make all of the difference. There are
many different ways to say the same
thing but one way might spur the
subject into action while the other will
not. Saying the right words the right
way is going to make all of the
difference when it comes to using
persuasion. The example about the
phone-a-thon earlier in this chapter is a
good example of how words can be
used to persuade subjects to jump into
action.
Persuasion is a powerful tool of mind
control that is often underestimated
and overlooked. Perhaps this is because

it offers more of a choice to the subject
compared to the other forms of mind
control. In the other options, the
subject is forced into submission,
sometimes in isolation, by the agent
and ends up not having much of a
choice in what is going on in the
process. In terms of persuasion, the
facts are presented so that the subject is
able to make up their own mind, even
if the facts are placed in a certain way
to show them in the best light.

Chapter 6: Deception
 
The next type of mind control that will
be discussed is deception. This mind
control technique is going to have
some similarities to manipulation in
the fact that manipulators will use a lot
of deception in order to get to their
final goal. This chapter will go into
more details about how deception
works, the techniques involved in it,
and some of the research that has been
found.

What is Deception?
To start with is the definition about
what deception is. Deception, along
with subterfuge, mystification, bluff,
deceit, and beguilement, is an act used
by the agent to propagate beliefs in the
subject about things that are falsehoods
or which are only partial truths.
Deception can involve a lot of different
things such as concealment,
camouflage, distraction, sleight of
hand, propaganda, and dissimulation.
The agent will be able to control the
mind of the subject because the subject
is going to trust them. The subject will
believe what the agent is saying and
might even be basing future plans and

shaping their world based on the things
that the agent has been telling them.
If the agent is practicing the process of
deception, the things they have been
telling the subject will be false. Trust
can easily be ruined once the subject
finds out, which is why the agent must
be talented at the process of deception
and good at turning things around if
they want to continue on with their
subject.
Often, deception will come up in terms
of relationships and it can lead to
feelings of distrust and betrayal
between the two partners who are in the
relationship. This is because deception

violates the rules of most relationships
and is also seen to have a negative
influence on the expectations that come
with that relationship. Most people
expect to be able to have a truthful
conversation with their partner; if they
have learned that their partner is
deceptive, they would have to learn
how to use misdirection and distraction
in order to get the reliable and truthful
information that they need. The trust
would also be gone from the
relationship, making it difficult to
build the relationship back up to where
it had once been. The subject would
always be questioning the things that
the agent was telling them, wondering
if the story were true or something

made up. Because of this new mistrust,
most relationships will end once the
subject finds out about the deception of
the agent.
Types of Deception
Deception is a form of communication
that relies on omissions and lies in
order to convince the subject of the
world that best fits the agent. Since
there is communication involved, there
will also be several different types of
deception that could be occurring.
According to the Interpersonal
Deception Theory, there are 5 different
types of deception that are found. Some
of these have been shown in the other

forms of mind control, showing that
there can be some overlapping. The
five main forms of deception include:
Lies: this is when the agent
makes up information or
gives information that is
completely different from
what is the truth. They will
present this information to
the subject as fact and the
subject will see it as the
truth. This can be dangerous
since the subject will not
realize that they are being
fed false information; if the
subject knew the
information was false, they

would not likely be talking
to the agent and no
deception would occur.
 
Equivocations: this is when
the agent will make
contradictory, ambiguous, or
indirect statements. This is
done to lead the subject to
get confused and to not
understand what is going on.
It can also help the agent to
save face if the subject
comes back later and tries to
blame them for the false
information.
 
Concealments: this is one of

the most common types of
deception that are used.
Concealments are when the
agent omits information that
is relevant or important to
the context, intentionally, or
they engage in any behavior
that would hide information
that is relevant to the subject
for that particular context.
The agent will not have
directly lied to the subject,
but they will have made sure
that the important
information that is needed
never makes it to the
subject.
 

Exaggeration: this is when
the agent will overstate a
fact or stretch the truth a
little bit in order to turn the
story the way that they
would like. While the agent
may not be directly lying to
the subject, they are going to
make the situation seem like
a bigger deal than it really is
or they may change the truth
a little bit so that the subject
will do what they want.
 
Understatements: an
understatement is the exact
opposite of the exaggeration
tool in that the agent is

going to downplay or
minimize aspects of the
truth. They will tell the
subject that an event is not
that big of deal when in fact
it could be the thing that
determines if the subject
gets to graduate or gets that
big promotion. The agent
will be able to go back later
and say how they did not
realize how big of a deal it
was, leaving them to look
good and the subject to look
almost petty if they
complain.
These are just a few of the types of

deception that might be found. The
agent of deception is going to use any
method that is at their disposal in order
to get to their final goal, much like
what occurs in the other forms of mind
control. If they are able to reach their
goal using another method against the
subject, then they are going to do it so
the list above is in no way exclusive.
The agent of deception can be really
dangerous because the subject will not
be able to tell what the truth is and
what an act of deception is; the agent is
going to be so skilled at what they do
that it will be almost impossible to
determine what is the truth and what is
not.

Motives for Deception
Researchers have determined that there
are three main motives that are present
in deceptions found in close
relationships. These would include
partner focused motives, self-focused
motives, and relationship focused
motives.
Let’s look at the partner focused
motives first. In this kind of motive,
the agent is going to use deception in
order to avoid causing harm to the
subject, or their partner. They may also
use the deception in order to protect the
subject's relationship with an outside
third party, to avoid having the subject

worry about something, or to keep the
self-esteem of the subject intact. Often,
this kind of motivation for deception
will be viewed as relationally
beneficial as well as socially polite.
This kind of deception is not as bad as
some of the others. If the agent hears
about something bad that the subject’s
best friend said about them, the agent
may choose to keep it to themselves.
While this is a form of deception, it
helps the subject keep that friendship
while preventing the subject from
feeling bad for themselves. This is the
form of deception that is found the
most frequently in relationships and
might also not cause that much damage

if found out. Most couples would
choose to utilize this form of deception
in order to protect their partner.
Next is the self-focused motive of
deception. This one is not considered to
be as noble as the first one and is
therefore more looked down upon than
the other methods. Instead of worrying
about the subject and how they are
feeling, the agent is going to just think
about how they feel and about their
own self-image. In this motive, the
agent is using the deception in order to
protect or enhance their own self-
image. This form of deception is used
in order to shield the agent from
criticism, embarrassment, or anger.

When this deception is used in the
relationship, it is usually perceived to
be a more serious issue and
transgression than what is found with
the partner-focused deception. This is
because the agent is choosing to act in
a selfish way rather than working to
protect the relationship or the other
partner.
Finally, the relationship focused
motive of deception. This deception
will be used by the agent in the hope of
limiting any harm that might come to
the relationship simply by avoiding
relational trauma and conflict.
Depending on the situation, this form
of deception will sometimes help the

relationship and at other times it might
be the cause of harming the
relationship because it is going to make
things more complicated. For example,
if you choose to hide how you are
feeling about supper because you do
not want to get in a fight, this might
help the relationship. On the other
hand, if you had an affair and choose to
keep this information to yourself, it is
only going to make things more
complicated in the end.
Regardless of the intention of
deception in the relationship, it is not
recommended. The agent is
withholding information that might be
important to the subject; once the

subject finds out about it, they will
start to lose trust in the agent and
wonder what else the agent is hiding
from them. The subject is not going to
be too concerned for the reason behind
the deception, they will just be upset
that something has been kept from
them and the relationship will begin to
have a crack. It is often best to stick
with the policy of honesty in the
relationship and surround yourself with
people who do not practice deception
in your social group.
Detecting Deception
If the subject is interested in avoiding
deception in their life in order to avoid

the mind games that come with it, it is
often a good idea to learn how to detect
when deception is going on. Often, it is
difficult for the subject to determine
that deception is occurring unless the
agent slips up and either tells a lie that
is obvious or blatant or they contradict
something that the subject already
knows to be true. While it may be
difficult for the agent to deceive the
subject for a long period, it is
something that will commonly occur in
everyday life between people who
know each other. Detecting when
deception occurs is often difficult
because there are not really any
indicators that are completely reliable
to tell when deception happens.

Deception, though, is capable of
placing a large load on the cognitive
functioning of the agent since they are
going to have to figure out how to
recall all of the statements that they
have made to the subject so that the
story remains believable and
consistent. One slip up and the subject
will be able to tell that something is
not right. Because of the strain of
keeping the story straight, the agent is
much more likely to leak out
information to tip off the subject either
through nonverbal or verbal cues.
Researchers believe that detecting
deception is a process that is cognitive,

fluid, and complex and which will
often vary depending on the message
that is being exchanged. According to
the Interpersonal Deception Theory,
deception is an iterative and dynamic
process of influence between the agent,
who works to manipulate the
information how they want it so that it
is different from the truth, and the
subject, who will then attempt to figure
out if the message is valid or not. The
agent’s actions are going to be
interrelated to the actions that the
subject takes after they receive the
message. During this exchange, the
agent is going to reveal the nonverbal
and verbal information that will cue the
subject in to the deceit. At some points,

the subject may be able to tell that the
agent has been lying to them.
It is not always possible to tell when
the agent is being deceptive. According
to Alert Vrij, a noted deception scholar,
there are not any nonverbal behaviors
that are associated with deception
uniquely. While there are some
nonverbal behaviors that can be
correlated with the act of deception,
these cues can also occur when other
behaviors are present so it is difficult
to determine if the agent is using
deception unless they do an outright
lie.
Another scholar of deception, Mark

Frank, proposes another idea of
deception that includes how it can be
detected at the subject’s cognitive
level. When deception occurs, it
requires a conscious behavior that is
deliberate on the part of the agent so
the listening to words and paying
attention to the body language that is
going on are both critical when trying
to determining if someone is deceiving
you. If someone offers up a question
and the agent is not willing to answer it
directly, instead using some form of
disturbance, has a poor structure of
logic, repeats words a lot, and uses less
time talking for that particular
question, they are most likely lying.

Basically, there are not many signs that
can be considered when trying to figure
out when deception is occurring. There
are a few nonverbal signs that might be
present when someone is deceiving, but
they might also have some other issue
such as nervousness or being shy.

Main Components of Deception
While it may be difficult to determine
which factors show when deception is
occurring, there are some components
that are typical of deception. Often the
subject will not realize that these
components have occurred unless the
agent has told an outright lie or been
caught in the act of deceiving. These
are components that will be recognized
later on if the agent is using the process
of deception in the right way. The three
main components of deception include
camouflage, disguise, and simulation.
Camouflage
The first component of deception is

camouflage. This is when the agent is
working to hide the truth in another
way so that the subject will not realize
that they are missing the information.
Often this technique will be used when
the agent uses half-truths when they are
telling information. The subject will
not realize that the camouflaging has
occurred until later when these truths
are revealed in some way. The agent
will be skilled in camouflaging the
truth so that it is really difficult for the
subject to find out about the deception
by chance.
Disguise
Disguise is another component that can

be found in the process of deception.
When this occurs, the agent is working
to create an impression of being
something or somebody else. This is
when the agent is hiding something
about themselves from the subject such
as their real name, what they do for a
job, who they have been with, and what
they are up to when they go out. This
goes further than just changing the
outfit that someone wears in a play or a
movie; when disguise is used in the
process of deception, the agent is
trying to change their whole persona in
order to trick and deceive the subject.
There are several examples that can
illustrate the use of disguise in the

process of deception. The first is in
relations to the agent disguising
themselves, usually as another person,
so that they are not recognizable. The
agent may do this in order to get back
into a crowd of people that does not
like them, change their personalities to
make someone like them, or for
another reason to further their goals. In
some cases, the word disguise can refer
to the agent disguising the true nature
of a proposal in the hopes of hiding an
effect or motivation that is unpopular
with that proposal. Often this form of
disguise is found in propaganda or
political spin.
Disguise can be harmful because it is

hiding the true nature of what is going
on. If the agent is hiding who they are
from the subject, it can be really
difficult for the subject to determine
who they really are. When information
is withheld from the subject, it clouds
the way that they are able to think since
they do not have the right information
to make logical choices. While the
subject may think that they are making
logical choices of their own free will,
the agent has taken away key
information that may change the
subject’s mind.
Simulation
The third component of deception is

known as simulation. This consists of
showing the subject information which
is false. There are three techniques that
can be used in simulation including
distraction, fabrication, and mimicry.
In mimicry, or the copying of another
model, the agent will be unconsciously
depicting something that is similar to
themselves. They may have an idea
that is similar to someone else’s and
instead of giving credit, they will say
that it is all theirs. This form of
simulation can often occur through
auditory, visual, and other means.
Fabrication is another tool that the
agent may use when using deception.

What this means is that the agent will
take something that is found in reality
and change it so that it is different.
They may tell a story that did not
happen or add in embellishments that
make it sound better or worse than it
really was. While the core of the story
may be true, yes they did get a bad
grade on a test, it is going to have some
extra things put in such as the teacher
gave them a bad grade on purpose. The
reality is that the agent didn’t study
and that is why they got the bad grade
in the first place.
Finally, distraction is another form of
simulation in deception. This is when
the agent tries to get the subject to

focus their attention on something
other than the truth; usually by baiting
or offering something that might be
more tempting than the truth that is
being concealed. For example, if the
husband is cheating and thinks the wife
is starting to find out, he may bring
home a diamond ring to distract her
from the issue for a short while. The
issue with this technique is that it often
does not last long and the agent must
find another way to deceive the subject
in order to keep the process going.

Research on Deception
Deception has become a major part of
everyday life. Whether the agent means
to cause harm or not, there are many
instances where deception will creep in
to relationships of all sorts. The agent
may deceive their boss in order to get
more time to finish a project; a spouse
may deceive their partner in order to
not hurt their feelings. While many
cases are not to cause harm, they are
still present in society. Because of this
prevalence, there has been research
done to try and determine why it occurs
and who may be more likely to perform
the acts.

Social Research
Socially there has been some research
done to see the effects of deception on
society. There are several
methodologies found in social
research, such as in psychology, which
deal directly with deception. In these
methodologies, the researchers are
going to intentionally misinform or
mislead their participants in terms of
what is really going on in the
experiment. This keeps the subjects
unaware as to what is going on and will
help to deliver better results.
A study that was done in 1963 by
Stanley Milgram shows how deception

will work on people. The agents told
the subjects that they would be helping
out in a study that dealt with learning
and memory; in reality this study was
looking at how willing the subjects
were to obeying commands of someone
who is in charge, even when that
obeying meant that they would have to
inflict pain upon one of the other
subjects. While the person who was
receiving the pain was just an actor and
did not really get harmed in the
experiment, it was found that the
subjects would inflict the highest
available pain on the actor if told to do
so by the authority. At the end of this
study, the subjects were told what the
study’s true nature was and people

were given assistance in order to insure
they left in a state of well-being.
The use of deception in this role has
raised a lot of issues with research
ethics. Currently it is being regulated
by the American Psychological
Association and other professional
bodies to ensure that the subjects are
being treated fairly and are not
receiving undo harm in the process.
Psychological Research
Psychological research is the branch
that will use deception the most
because this is necessary to determine
the results that would actually happen.
The rationale behind doing this

deception states that humans are very
sensitive to the way that they might
appear to others, as well as to
themselves, and the self-consciousness
that they feel may distort or interfere
with the way the subject would behave
in normal circumstances outside of
doing the research where they would
not feel scrutinized. The deception is
meant to make the subjects feel more
at ease so that the agent is able to get
more accurate results.
For example, the agent might be
interested to find out what conditions
might make a student cheat on a test. If
the agent asks the student outright, it is
not very likely that the subjects would

admit to cheating and there would be
no way for the agent to figure out who
is telling the truth and who is not. In
this case, the agent would have to use
distraction in order to get an accurate
idea of how often cheating occurs. The
agent might instead say the study is to
find out how intuitive the subject is;
the subject might even be told during
the process that they may have the
opportunity to look at someone else’s
answers before they give their own. At
the end of this research that involves
deception, it is required that the agent
tells the subject what the true nature of
the study is and why the deception was
necessary. Also, most agents will also
provide a quick summary of the results

that occurred between all of the
participants when the research is all
done.
Although deception is used a lot in
these kinds of research studies, they are
bound by the ethical guidelines set out
by the American Psychological
Association, there are some debates
about whether deception is something
that should be permitted at all. Some
believe that allowing deception is not
necessary and it is causing harm to the
subjects who are participating. Others
believe that the results would be
skewed if the subjects knew the exact
nature of the study ahead of time.
Often the biggest issue with using

deception in a study is not the actual
deception itself. Rather, it is the
unpleasant treatment that is used in a
study of this sort, as well as the
implications of what is going to happen
in the study that is unpleasant. This is
usually the underlying reason why
some are against using these kinds of
studies and why it is considered to be
unethical in nature.
Another argument against the ethics of
using deception in these kinds of
studies is that the subject has already
given their informed consent to
participate in the study. They have
been read the rules and regulations that
go along with the study and feel like

they are informed enough about the end
results that are wanted in order to sign
a waiver in order to begin. It is argued
that if the agent is deceiving the
subject and leaving out important
information about the study, regardless
of if it is in the best interest of the
study, then the subject really is not
informed to start with. Because of this,
the subject should not be participating
in the study since they did not
explicitly give consent to the actual
study being conducted.
Regardless of the arguments that are
out there on this topic, there have been
some interesting findings when the
subjects are deceived about the nature

of the study. For example, in regards to
the study mentioned above about
cheating; if the subjects had been told
about the true nature of the study it is
not likely that most of them would
have cheated. This would be because
none of them would want to be seen as
dishonest or false to others around
them.
The deception allowed the researchers
to see what would happen in a real
world application. In addition, if the
subjects of the memory test mentioned
earlier in the guidebook knew the true
nature about that study, they would not
have been as likely to listen to the
authority figure and administer the

results that they did.
Despite the objections that have been
formed about using deception in
research, the use of deception has
provided researchers with a lot of
interesting results. These results may
not have been possible without the use
of deception since the subject may
have reacted in a different way to the
study.
Philosophy
Psychology may be the main reason
that deception is used in research, but
there is also a lot of deception that has
shown up in modern philosophy. In
fact, deception is a very regular

occurrence in philosophy. For example,
in the meditations of Descartes that
were published in 1641, the notion of
Deus deceptor was introduced; this
notion was something that was able to
deceive the ego, when it was thinking
logically, about what was going on in
reality. This notion went on to be used
as part of his hyperbolic doubt; this is
where the subject then begins to doubt
everything that is available to doubt
because they have been deceived in the
past. Often, skeptical arguments will
use this Deus deceptor as their
mainstay in order to put into doubt or
question the knowledge of reality that
one person holds. The main part of the
argument states that everything the

subject knows may be wrong since it is
easy to deceive the subject.
This is just one of the cases of
deception found in philosophy. Many
works have been written on this topic
trying to explain exactly what it is, how
it affects the subject, and ways that the
subject may be able to avoid coming in
contact with it. There has also been a
lot of research done trying to determine
when deception may be fine and when
it can be harmful. This is up for
considerable debate; some people
believe that all deception is bad while
others see deception in order to save
someone’s feelings as fine in some
cases such as a husband withholding

the fact that someone said something
mean about their wife.

Conclusion
 
This guidebook took some time to
explore the different types of mind
control that are present in the world
today as well as some of the methods
and techniques that go along with each
kind. Each of the mind control
techniques work in a different way.
Brainwashing works to convince the
subject to change their whole identity
with the use of isolation, shaming, and
eventually offering a way to feel better
that conforms to the new desired
identity. Hypnosis allows the subject to
enter a new altered state of mind where
they will be more likely to be
perceptive and open to new ideas.

On the other hand, manipulation and
deception will alter the current thought
process of the subject using subterfuge
as a primary tactic, while persuasion
involves influencing a person's beliefs,
attitudes, intentions, motivations or
behaviors.
Except for brainwashing and deception,
mind control is a tool that can be used
in a positive way to achieve one's goals
or objectives. It all depends on the type
of mind control that is involved and the
intent of the individual who wants to
apply it. It also depends on whether the
target or subject of mind control will
benefit from it.


Other books available by publisher
on Kindle, paperback and audio
 
Why Is My Partner So Jealous? How
To Identify And Effectively Deal With
Jealousy, Insecurity, Low Self-Esteem
And Trust Issues In Your Relationships
 
Emotional Intelligence: A Guide To
Managing And Understanding
Emotions Within Yourself And Others
To Achieve Happiness, Great
Relationships And Success In Life!
 
Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT):
How To Overcome Phobias,
Addictions, Depression, Anxiety, And
Other Problematic Disorders
 

Anxiety Management And Stress
Relief: An In Depth Guide On How To
Overcome Anxiety, Stress, And
Depression In Your Life
Meditation And Mindfulness: The
Secrets To Raising Your Awareness,
Spirituality And Inner Peace Through
Mindfulness Meditation
Why Women Manipulate Men:
Understanding How And Why Women
Choose To Use Manipulation On Men
Self Confidence, Self Esteem, And Self
Love: How To Build Unbreakable
Confidence Through Self Love And By
Raising Your Self Esteem

Overcoming Codependency: How to
Have Healthy Relationships and Be
Codependent No More
Emotionally Abusive Relationships
Identifying and Effectively Dealing
with Narcissists, Sociopaths,
Psychopaths and Toxic People
Manifesting Abundance: The Secret
Principles Of Using The Law Of
Attraction To Manifest Wealth, Love,
Happiness And Anything You Can
Imagine

