 
 
  
Biological and Psycholinguistic Influences
On Architectures for Natural 
Language Processing
John F. Sowa
8 December 2010
Presented at the BICA 2010 Conference

 
 
Controversies about NLP Technology
Noam Chomsky:  Generative syntax is the essence of language.
Roman Jakobson:  Syntax without semantics is meaningless.
Michael Halliday:  Language is social semiotic.
Sydney Lamb:  Knowledge consists of connections in a network.
Richard Montague:  NL semantics is based on formal logic.
Yorick Wilks:  Semantics is fundamental, but informal.
Roger Schank:  Background knowledge is essential.
Fred Jelinek:  Statistics is key to all language processing.
Combinations and variations of all these methods have been 
proposed and implemented in NLP systems for over 50 years.
What can psycholinguistics and neuroscience tell us?

 
 
VivoMind Cognitive Architecture
Conceptual graphs (CGs) for representation and reasoning:
● Natural languages, logics, and any kinds of formal or informal patterns.
VivoMind Analogy Engine (VAE):
● Encode any graph in a numeric Cognitive Signature™.  
● Store graphs in a high-volume, high-speed Cognitive Memory™.
● Find exact and approximate matches in logarithmic time.
VivoMind Language Processor (VLP):
● Society of distributed, heterogeneous agents operating in parallel..
● Link grammar for translating natural languages to CGs.
● VAE to access background knowledge for interpreting NLs.
● Supports both case-based reasoning and more structured reasoning.
Questions:
● What can we learn from neural evidence and theories?
● What can we contribute to neural theories, models, and simulations?

 
 
Symmetry Hypothesis
Some linguists claim that language generation and understanding 
perform the same processes, but in reverse order.
This diagram is adapted from a version by Jackendoff (2002).
But neural evidence shows that speech generation and 
understanding use different mechanisms in different areas.

 
 
Two Language Areas in the Left Hemisphere
Two areas of the left hemisphere that are involved with language.
Lesions in Broca’s area disrupt syntax in speech production.
Lesions in Wernicke’s area disrupt language understanding.

 
 
A Picture for Diagnosing Aphasia
This is a sample test picture shown to patients with aphasia.
The patients’ descriptions of the scene help diagnose the effects 
of lesions caused by wound, stroke, tumor, or infection.

 
 
Lesions in Broca’s Area
Patients can understand language, they can respond correctly  
to questions and requests, but their speech has no syntax:
The patient B.L. is unable to describe the picture, but he can 
correctly express nouns in short answers to questions:
B.L.:  Wife is dry dishes.  Water down!  Oh boy!  Okay Awright.  Okay …   
Cookie is down... fall, and girl, okay, girl... boy... um...
Examiner:  What is the boy doing?
B.L.:  Cookie is... um... catch
Examiner:  Who is getting the cookies?
B.L.:  Girl, girl
Examiner:  Who is about to fall down?
B.L.:  Boy... fall down!
Patients with Broca’s aphasia also have some impairment in 
understanding complex syntax – especially with verbs.

 
 
Lesions in Wernicke’s Area
Patients have difficulty understanding language, their speech is 
wrong, irrelevant, or nonsensical, but it has syntactic structure.
The patient H.W. is trying to describe the same picture as B.L.:
H.W.:  First of all this is falling down, just about, and is gonna fall down and 
they're both getting something to eat... but the trouble is this is gonna let go 
and they're both gonna fall down... but already then... I can't see well enough 
but I believe that either she or will have some food that's not good for you 
and she's to get some for her too... 
Examiner: That's not real clear.   What do you think she's doing?
H.W.: But, oh, I know.  She's waiting for this!
Examiner: No, I meant right here with her hand, right where you can't figure 
out what she's doing with that hand.
H.W.: Oh, I think she's saying I want two or three, I want one, I think, I think 
so, and so, so she's gonna get this one for sure it's gonna fall down there or 
whatever, she's gonna get that one and, and there...
Note almost no nouns, but many verbs and pronouns.

 
 
Conduction Aphasia
A disruption or break in the neural pathway between the areas.
With Wernicke’s area intact, patients can understand language.
With Broca’s area intact, their speech has fluent syntax.
But the disruption of information transmission causes patients 
to make occasional errors reminiscent of Wernicke’s aphasia.
A German patient, asked to repeat the word Rosenkranz, shows 
their characteristic difficulty in repeating what they hear:
“rosenbrau... rosenbrauch... rosengrau... bro... grosenbrau... grossenlau... 
rosenkranz... kranz... rosenkranz”
Patients can hear what they say and try to correct their errors;  
one patient found an alternate pathway by spelling the word:
“I came into the hospital for some tecs... some secs... some... tesk...             
 T E S... tests.”

 
 
Interconnections Between Areas
Auditory input goes to the primary auditory cortex and then to 
Wernicke’s area, which is close to all the sensory areas.
Broca’s area is connected to Wernicke’s area, but it is closer to 
the motor areas, especially for the face and vocalization.

 
 
Wernicke-Geschwind Model
Norman Geschwind’s updates to Wernicke's hypotheses:
● Wernicke’s area is key to semantic interpretation.
● Input from the primary auditory cortex goes directly to Wernicke’s area.
● That area is closely connected to all the sensory areas.
● It relates words and patterns of words to percepts and mental models.
Broca’s area is key to syntactically correct language generation:
● Directly connected to the motor mechanisms for speech.
● Formats output from Wernicke’s area in language generation.
● Verifies and interprets syntactic details in language understanding.
Reading provides an alternative to speech input:
● Written or printed words are interpreted in the visual cortex.
● The stream of words is sent to Wernicke’s area for understanding. 
● The interpreted forms are sent to Broca’s area for speech generation.

 
 
Role of Right Hemisphere in Language
Aspects for which RH is more active than LH:
●Recognizing synonyms.
●Distinguishing members of the same category:  table, bed, sofa. 
●Distinguishing polysemy:  foot as body part vs. foot as unit of measure.
●Recognizing metaphors.
●Recognizing multiple interpretations.
In Japanese subjects,
●RH is better at reading kanji (Chinese characters).
●LH is better at reading kana (syllabic symbols). 
Coarse grained vs. fine-grained encoding:
●RH is better at coarse encodings that respond to a wide range of inputs. 
●LH is better at fine-grained encodings needed for precise distinctions.
●Fine coding is necessary for phonology, morphology, and mathematics.
But RH can partially compensate for some lesions in LH.

 
 
Updates to W-G Model by Damasio
Many more areas of the brain are involved in language:
● Various syntactic and semantic categories are handled by different areas.
● Right hemisphere is essential for emotional understanding and                   
  expression, especially for intonation and emphasis.
● And processing is far more complex than a simple sequential flow.

 
 
Neurocognitive Network for the Word 'fork'
Network of locations in the LH, adapted from Lamb (2010):
● C:     Concept of a fork in the parietal cortex links to all other areas.
● V:      Visual recognition in the temporal lobe links to the visual cortex.
● T:      Tactile feel of a fork in the somatosensory cortex.
● M:     Motor operations for manipulating a fork in the motor area.
● PR:   Phonology for recognizing the word 'fork' in Wernicke’s area.
● PA:   Phonology for the sound /fork/ in the primary auditory cortex.
● PP:   Phonology for producing the articulation of /fork/ in Broca’s area.

 
 
Neurocognitive Networks
Linguistic, psycholinguistic, and neural evidence:
● Discrete, but interrelated phonemes and morphemes imply graphs.
● Neural connections that can be made, broken, strengthened, weakened,   
  or inhibited imply graphs with weighted links.
● Brain scans show multiple, distributed, parallel processes.
● But brain lesions, probes, and scans indicate localized functions.
Neurocognitive networks by Sydney Lamb (1999, 2010):
● All nodes have direct or indirect links to sensorimotor locations.
● Knowledge is stored and processed in pure network form – no symbols.
● Harrison (2000) implemented Lamb’s hypothesis in the PureNet system.
● The PureNet simulations showed interesting, but inconclusive results.
Lamb’s hypothesis is useful, but other mechanisms are needed:
● Neurons and networks of neurons are highly localized.
● But the brain has fail-soft mechanisms with distributed memories.
● Perception and behavior are organized in patterns of various sizes.

 
 
Boyd’s OODA Loop  
John Boyd drew a four-step diagram for training    
fighter pilots to observe and respond rapidly.
The first two steps – Observe and Orient –  involve      
the same brain areas as language understanding.
The next two steps – Decide and Act – involve the    
same areas as language generation.
The four steps and the associated brain areas:
1. Observe:  Visual input goes to the primary visual cortex (occipital lobe);     
    object recognition involves the temporal lobe (which is used for nouns).
2. Orient:  Parietal cortex relates vision and touch in “cognitive maps.”
3. Decide:  Reasoning involves the prefrontal cortex.
4. Act:  “Action schemata” are overlearned patterns in the premotor cortex;   
    neural impulses from the primary motor cortex go to the muscles.
Tolman’s cognitive maps involve the same area as Lamb’s concepts.
Lashley’s action schemata involve the premotor cortex, which is adjacent to  
Broca’s area.   Hypothesis:  action schemata generate syntax.

 
 
Symbols, Chunks, and Serial Order
Zoosemiotics:  All animals recognize and respond to signs.
● Icons (images), indexes (links), symbols (habits and associations).
● Objection:  a “homunculus” would be needed to decode symbols.
● Yet antibodies (immunoglobulins) store huge amounts of information.
● Hypothesis:  electrical excitations might be “compiled” into “memory        
  globulins” and be distributed at multiple locations.
● Other hypotheses could support similar effects.
Chunks, maps, groups, schemata, and hierarchies.
● Tolman (1948):  “Cognitive maps in rats and men.”
● Perceptual and behavioral patterns form chunks of arbitrary size.
● Miller (1956):  Short-term memory holds about seven chunks.
Time-dependent serial order in all animal behavior.
● Order in walking, flying, hunting, feeding, courting, and nest building.
● Lashley (1951):  Action schemata instead of stimulus-response chains.
● Rhythm seems to be controlled by LH and melody by RH, but the neural    
  mechanisms and interconnections are poorly understood.

 
 
Reasoning
Based on the same kinds of pattern matching as perception:
● Associative access by matching images and patterns.
● Approximate matches for analogies and metaphors in RH.
● Precise, detailed pattern matches in LH.
Analogies support informal case-based reasoning:
● Long-term memory can store large numbers of previous experiences.
● Any new case can be matched to similar cases in LTM.
● Close matches suggest likely outcomes or features of the new case. 
Logic is based on a disciplined application of analogy:
● Induction:  Generalize multiple cases to create rules or axioms.
● Deduction:  Match (unify) a new case with part of some rule or axiom.
● Abduction:  Form a hypothesis based on aspects of similar cases.
But the proof procedures of predicate calculus are not consistent 
with the evidence from psychology and neuroscience.

 
 
“A Moving Picture of Thought”
A brilliant discovery by Charles Sanders Peirce:
● In 1885, Peirce published the algebraic notation for predicate calculus.
● In 1897, he invented existential graphs (EGs) as an equivalent notation.
● EG logic has no variables, no substitutions, and no transformations.
● Peirce claimed that EG rules generate “a moving picture of thought.” 
● The psychologist Philip Johnson-Laird (2002) agreed:  EGs with Peirce’s  
   rules of inference are a good candidate for a realistic neural model.
Extensions to Lamb’s networks for representing EGs:
● A mechanism for treating any graph or subgraph as a single chunk.
● Inhibitory links for negating any chunk.
● Graphs with negated chunks can represent full first-order logic.
Neural mechanisms for supporting Peirce’s rules of inference:
● Analogies for matching graphs and subgraphs.
● Some mechanism for inserting, erasing, or inhibiting links and chunks.

 
 
Peirce’s Cycle of Pragmatism
Peirce’s claim:  This cycle applies to “any scientific Intelligence”         
– i.e., any intelligence that is capable of learning from experience.
Learning occurs at every step of every cycle.

 
 
VivoMind Cognitive Architecture (VCA)
Based on Peirce’s cycle of pragmatism with analogy as default:
● Induction, abduction, and deduction are special cases of analogy.
● The cycle is traversed at every level of size and duration. 
● Milliseconds:  Boyd’s OODA loop (Observe, Orient, Decide, Act).
● Seconds to minutes:  Routine analysis, planning, and problem solving.
● Days to years:  Complex studies, exploration, and research.
Societies of distributed, heterogeneous agents:
● Asynchronous message passing for control and communication.
● Conceptual graphs for the general knowledge representation.
● Language understanding as a knowledge-based perceptual process.
● VAE for rapidly accessing high volumes of knowledge of any kind.
Learning occurs at every step of every cycle:
● Perception and reasoning generate new conceptual graphs (CGs).
● VAE assimilates the CGs into Cognitive Memory™ for future use.

 
 
Integration
High-level integration amid low-level diversity: 
●  A huge diversity of distributed neural mechanisms and functions.
● But they somehow work together to support an integrated personality.
No sharp distinction between emotion and cognition:
● Words in LH and intonation in RH are integrated in speech.
● Speech in a monotone is much harder to understand.
● A great actor is able to integrate and express emotional, cognitive, and     
  multiple sensorimotor aspects in a great performance. 
Society of heterogeneous agents in VCA: 
● Concurrent, asynchronous message passing.
● Messages can be directed, broadcast, or associatively accessed.
● Hierarchies of agents that act as managers, employees, or colleagues.
● A top-level agent can act like the conductor of a symphony.
● The conductor has an integrated “conscious” vision of the whole.
● But agents working behind the scene provide “unconscious” support.

 
 
A Hierarchy of Agents for NLP
The CEO determines the goals and allocates resources to VPs.
Managers and employees are rewarded with resources (space and 
computer time) depending on how well they meet the goals.
Agents at all levels work in parallel and communicate by passing 
messages up, down, and across the hierarchy.

 
 
VivoMind Language Processor
Ideas that influenced the VivoMind Cognitive Architecture:
 1. Generate a dependency graph with a Link Grammar.
Sleator, Daniel, & Davy Temperley (1993) Parsing English with a link grammar,
http://www.cs.cmu.edu/afs/cs.cmu.edu/project/link/pub/www/papers/ps/LG-IWPT93.ps
 2. Enable multiple agents to collaborate during the analysis.
Hahn, Udo, Susanne Schacht, & Norbert Bröker (1994) Concurrent natural language parsing,
http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/summary?doi=10.1.1.50.9457
 3. Let semantic agents contribute background knowledge.
Bröker, Norbert (1999) Eine Dependenzgrammatik zur Kopplung heterogener                            
Wissensquellen,  http://elib.uni-stuttgart.de/opus/volltexte/1999/398/pdf/398_1.pdf
 4. Use a voting scheme to evaluate conflicting options.
Zeman, Daniel, & Zdenek Žabokrtský (2005) Improving parsing accuracy by combining
diverse dependency parsers,  http://www.aclweb.org/anthology-new/W/W05/W05-1518.pdf

 
 
Readings and References
Readings about the VivoMind Cognitive Architecture:
Slides that illustrate applications:  http://www.jfsowa.com/talks/pursue.pdf 
Majumdar, Arun K., John F. Sowa, & John Stewart (2008) Pursuing the goal of language understanding,  
http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/pursuing.pdf
Majumdar, Arun K., & John F. Sowa (2009) Two paradigms are better than one and multiple paradigms are 
even better,   http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/paradigm.pdf   
Sowa, John F. (2002) Architectures for intelligent systems,   http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/arch.htm 
Sowa, John F., & Arun K. Majumdar (2003) Analogical reasoning,  http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/analog.htm  
Sowa, John F. (2006) The challenge of knowledge soup,  http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/challenge.pdf 
Sowa, John F. (2009) Conceptual Graphs for Conceptual Structures,  http://www.jfsowa.com/pubs/cg4cs.pdf  
References:
Peirce, Charles Sanders (1909) Tutorial on existential graphs, MS 514 with commentary by J. F. Sowa, 
http://www.jfsowa.com/peirce/ms514.htm
Johnson-Laird, Philip N. (2002) Peirce, logic diagrams, and the elementary processes of reasoning, Thinking 
and Reasoning 8:2, 69-95.  http://mentalmodels.princeton.edu/papers/2002peirce.pdf 
Lamb, Sydney M. (2010) Neurolinguistics, Class Notes for Linguistics 411, Rice University.  
http://www.owlnet.rice.edu/~ling411
Harrison, Colin James (2000) PureNet: A modeling program for neurocognitive linguistics, 
http://scholarship.rice.edu/bitstream/handle/1911/19501/9969261.PDF 
For other references, see the combined bibliography for this site:  http://www.jfsowa.com/bib   

