Mereological Nihilism and Theoretical
Uniﬁcation
Andrew Brenner
Forthcoming in Analytic Philosophy.
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Nihilism and Theoretical Uniﬁcation (I)
2
3
Nihilism and Theoretical Uniﬁcation (II)
9
4
Composition as Identity to the Rescue?
17
5
Conclusion
21
Abstract: Mereological nihilism (henceforth just “nihilism”) is the thesis that
composition never occurs. Nihilism has often been defended on the basis of
its theoretical simplicity, including its ontological simplicity and its ideologi-
cal simplicity (roughly, nihilism’s ability to do without primitive mereological
predicates). In this paper I defend nihilism on the basis of the theoretical uni-
ﬁcation conferred by nihilism, which is, roughly, nihilism’s capacity to allow
us to take fewer phenomena as brute and inexplicable. This represents a
respect in which nihilism enjoys greater theoretical simplicity than its rivals
which has not yet been explored, and which is immune to many of the objec-
tions which have been leveled against previous arguments for nihilism from
nihilism’s theoretical simplicity. Composition as identity might be thought
to confer a similar degree of theoretical uniﬁcation as nihilism. I end the
paper by arguing that this is not the case.
1

1
Introduction
Mereological nihilism (henceforth just “nihilism”) says that composition never
occurs. So, tables, chairs, dogs, tennis balls, and so on, don’t exist, under
the assumption that these things are composite objects if they exist. Recent
debates over mereological nihilism have largely turned on the alleged relative
theoretical simplicity of nihilism vs its rivals1 (see, e.g., Dorr 2002; Schaﬀer
2007; Horgan, Potrˇc 2008: Ch.7; Bennett 2009; Sider 2013; Cowling 2013,
2014; Kriegel 2013; Woodard 2013; Tallant 2014; Hawley 2014; Korman 2015;
Smid 2015). Nihilism’s relative theoretical simplicity is important because it
gives us some reason to think that nihilism is true.
In this paper I’d like to draw philosophers’ attention to several respects
in which nihilism is simpler than its rivals which have been underappreciated
(in most cases, not acknowledged at all) in extant discussion of the issue, and
their implications for the manner in which we judge the theoretical merits
accrued to nihilism in virtue of its relative theoretical simplicity.
While
extant discussions of nihilism discuss nihilism’s ontological and ideological
simplicity (I’ll say what that means below), I’ll defend nihilism on the basis of
a diﬀerent sort of theoretical simplicity, the theoretical uniﬁcation conferred
by nihilism.
As we’ll see, an argument for nihilism from the theoretical
uniﬁcation conferred by nihilism is immune to the objections which have
been leveled against previous arguments for nihilism.
2
Nihilism and Theoretical Uniﬁcation (I)
The extent to which a theory can oﬀer a unifying explanation of otherwise
unrelated facts is widely regarded as a theoretical virtue. Thus, “science
increases our understanding of the world by reducing the total number of in-
dependent phenomena that we have to accept as ultimate or given. A world
with fewer independent phenomena is, other things equal, more comprehen-
sible than one with more” (Friedman 1974: 15). This theoretical virtue can
arguably be reduced to the virtue of simplicity: insofar as a theory oﬀers
a uniﬁed explanation of otherwise brute phenomena, it oﬀers us a simpler
picture of the world. In particular, unifying explanations of the sort cited by
Friedman increase our “overall understanding of the world” insofar as “our
total picture of nature is simpliﬁed via a reduction in the number of inde-
pendent phenomena that we have to accept as ultimate” (Friedman 1974:
18).
1By nihilism’s “rivals” I mean, of course, any alternative theories according to which
composition occurs.
2

Similarly, rather than oﬀering a unifying explanation of some otherwise
independent phenomena, a theory might remove any need to posit that phe-
nomena, which in turn eliminates any attendant need to explain those phe-
nomena or take them as “ultimate or given.” All other things being equal,
if a theory is capable of eliminating the need to posit otherwise independent
phenomena in this manner, it thereby oﬀers a simpler theory of the world,
just as a theory which oﬀered a unifying explanation of that phenomena
would, other things being equal, oﬀer a simpler picture of the world.
An example might illustrate the sort of distinction I’m getting at. For
decades cosmologists have recognized respects in which our universe appears
to be “ﬁne-tuned” for life (two classic discussions of the subject include
Tipler and Barrow 1986; Leslie 1989). In other words, various features of
the universe (constants, boundary conditions) are such that if they were
even minutely changed, life, as far as we can tell, would be unable to de-
velop. How should we respond to this fact (assuming, for a moment, that
it is a fact)? One very bad response would be to suppose that there is no
need for explanation, to just take the ﬁne tuning as brute and inexplicable.
A much more popular response is to replace the inexplicable ﬁne tuning with
some less surprising brute fact. For example, perhaps there are many uni-
verses (a multiverse), the features of which vary from universe to universe in
such a manner that it would be unsurprising if at least one of the universes
was ﬁne tuned for life. Or perhaps God is responsible for the ﬁne tuning
(this explanation is, of course, compatible with the previous explanation of
the ﬁne tuning in terms of a multiverse). In either case we may still be left
with something brute and inexplicable (a multiverse or multiverse generating
mechanism, or God), but at least we’ll have fewer brute facts than we would
if we oﬀered no explanation for the large combination of features which ap-
pear to be ﬁne-tuned for life.2 So, these are two examples where we replace
2This claim should be qualiﬁed. I say that we will have “fewer” brute facts, but it’s
not obvious that that’s true. As Michael Rea has pointed out to me, perhaps everyone is
committed to positing an inﬁnite number of brute facts, in which case the fact that theory
A avoids positing brute facts which theory B must posit (and doesn’t incur commitments
to additional brute facts which B will not require) will not leave A saddled with fewer
brute facts – whichever theory you adopt, you’ll still be left with an inﬁnite number of
brute facts.
This concern needs to be addressed, since throughout this paper I claim
that nihilists are committed to “fewer” brute facts than their competitors. I have two
responses. First, nihilists (or most nihilists) may very well be committed to only a ﬁnite
number of brute facts, in which case the fact that they manage to avoid positing brute
facts which their competitors will have to posit (without incurring additional theoretical
commitments) will result in the nihilist having to posit fewer brute facts. Second, even
if the nihilist and the non-nihilist will both be stuck positing an inﬁnite number of brute
facts, it is still plausible that if theory A (nihilism, or some nihilist friendly theory) does
3

one set of brute facts with some smaller set of brute facts. An alternative
response to the alleged ﬁne tuning is to show that, as a matter of fact, there
isn’t any ﬁne tuning after all – for example, perhaps intelligent life is com-
patible with a broader range of constants and boundary conditions than we
thought. This way we eliminate the need to believe in the puzzling features
of the world in question, and any need to take them as brute or inexplicable,
or to try to replace them with some smaller, less puzzling, set of brute facts
(a multiverse, or God).
It is in this respect – its ability to eliminate the need to posit several
otherwise independent phenomena, and any attendant need to either explain
them or take them as brute and inexplicable – that I claim nihilism is far
simpler than its competitors, besides its ontological parsimony, and its ideo-
logical parsimony.3
I’ll go into the details in a moment, but in outline what I’m claiming is
this. The mere concept of composition or parthood doesn’t tell us everything
we’d like to know about the way composition works. For example, there is
an ongoing debate regarding the nature of constitution, a relationship that’s
alleged to obtain between two composite objects which share all of the same
proper parts.4 (Whether other conditions must be met as well for us to have
a genuine case of constitution is itself one of the points of contention.)5 The
not require that we posit one or more brute facts, while theory B does require that we posit
those brute facts, and theory A does not incur any additional theoretical commitments
which are not incurred by theory B, then theory A is simpler than theory B.
3I’m really developing a line of thought which is implicit in most peoples’ rejection of
Markosian’s “brutal composition” (Markosian 1998). According to Markosian composition
sometimes occurs, and it sometimes doesn’t occur, but there’s no reason why it occurs in
some circumstances but not others. In other words, when composition does and doesn’t
occur is just a brute fact. Probably the main reason most philosophers think Markosian’s
view is implausible is because it is wildly unparsimonious, precisely because it posits so
many brute facts. It is in this same respect – its ability to do without certain brute facts
– that nihilism is simpler than any of its competitors.
4It is sometimes claimed that “constitution is identity” (see, e.g., Noonan 1993). What
this means is that two objects which are allegedly such that one of them constitutes the
other (for example, the lump and statue mentioned in the footnote below) are in fact
identical with one another – there aren’t actually two objects to stand in a constitution
relationship. Given the way I’m using the term “constitution,” the view which goes under
the slogan “constitution is identity” is just the view that constitution never occurs (while,
of course, identity does occur). “Constitution is identity,” then, is not one view among
several regarding the manner in which constitution works. Rather, it’s just the view that
constitution doesn’t happen. I include this note to forestall confusion below. When I say,
for example, that such-and-such a philosopher doesn’t believe constitution is possible, I
am not suggesting, of course, that he or she thinks identity is impossible, despite the fact
that constitution is sometimes said to “be identity.”
5One of the more famous examples of constitution is in the case of the alleged statue
4

bare concept of parthood does not tell us whether constitution is possible –
it is not analytically true, or true by deﬁnition, that constitution is or is not
possible. Nor does the concept of parthood settle some of the debates regard-
ing the manner in which constitution is alleged to work (details below). So,
if we believe in composition, then in addition to the bare ideological primi-
tive of parthood, we’ll also need one or more attendant principles regarding
the manner in which constitution works, or indeed whether constitution is
possible. This will be a theoretical cost (in particular, a loss of theoretical
simplicity) in addition to that incurred by the acceptance of the primitive
parthood relation and composite objects. I should be clear that the theoret-
ical cost in question will be incurred even by those who do not believe that
constitution is possible. The question for them will be: why is constitution
impossible? It does not appear to be analytically true that constitution is
impossible – that is, it isn’t included in the mere concepts of parthood or
composition that two or more objects cannot share all of the same proper
parts.
There are, in fact, several theoretical costs of this sort (described in
greater detail in the next section below) that will have to be incurred by those
who believe in composition, costs that go beyond the theoretical cost already
incurred by accepting composition in the ﬁrst place. Any theories regarding
the nature of composition that are able to oﬀer a unifying explanation of all of
these otherwise disparate mereological principles/laws/whatever will, other
things being equal, be simpler, and therefore more likely to be true, than
competing theories of composition which leave these disparate phenomena
brute and unexplained. Importantly, nihilism has an edge on every theory
of composition, since nihilism is capable of eliminating the need to posit the
otherwise disparate phenomena in question, and any attendant need to ex-
plain them. This is because, even if some competing theory of composition
is capable of oﬀering a unifying explanation of one or more of the disparate
mereological phenomena in question, such an explanation will not fall out of
the mere concept of parthood – in other words, the explanation in question
will not merely cite the fact that such-and-such features of parthood relations
are by deﬁnition features of any relation worthy of the name “parthood.” So,
the believer in composition will, at best, believe in a primitive parthood rela-
tion, as well as whatever feature of the world is supposed to oﬀer a unifying
explanation of one or more of the items cited below.
Here’s what my argument isn’t. It is sometimes suggested that one moti-
which is coincident with, and shares all of its proper parts with, a lump of bronze. Despite
the fact that the lump and the statue share all of their proper parts, they’re not identical,
since they have diﬀerent historical properties, or modal properties, or whatever.
5

vation for accepting nihilism is that it does away with puzzles and paradoxes
regarding the existence or persistence conditions of composite objects. For
example, accept nihilism and you’ve got an easy solution to the Ship of The-
seus puzzles: there is no Ship of Theseus, and there never was, so there’s
nothing to be puzzled at. This sort of argument for nihilism bears some su-
perﬁcial resemblance to the argument I’m defending in this paper, but it is
not the same argument. For starters, some of the brute facts nihilism helps
us avoid haven’t generally been thought of as puzzles or paradoxes regard-
ing composite material objects. Second, I’m defending nihilism on the basis
of its theoretical simplicity, not on the basis merely of its purported ability
to help us avoid puzzles/paradoxes regarding material objects. The latter
consequence of nihilism might at best amount to a pragmatic motivation for
accepting nihilism. Third, other metaphysical theories are equally capable
of helping us avoid the puzzles and paradoxes in question, even if such views
do not result in the sort of theoretical uniﬁcation oﬀered by nihilism.6
How is my argument for nihilism on the basis of the theoretical uniﬁcation
aﬀorded by nihilism related to other arguments for nihilism? In particular,
how does it relate to arguments for nihilism on the basis of nihilism’s ontolog-
ical or ideological simplicity? Before ending this section I’d like to describe
these distinct arguments for nihilism, with the hope that this will indicate
the manner in which my argument for nihilism diﬀers from these previous
arguments.
First, you might think that nihilism is true because of nihilism’s onto-
logical simplicity (nihilism is defended at least in part on the basis of its
ontological simplicity in Horgan, Potrˇc 2008). There are actually two points
here which might be thought to count in nihilism’s favor. First, adopting
nihilism allows us to quantify over fewer things, since nihilism says there
aren’t any composite objects. A theory which allows us to quantify over
fewer things is, all other things being equal, more likely to be true (cf. Nolan
1997). Second, adopting nihilism allows us to quantify over fewer kinds of
things, since, while nihilists might still quantify over objects, they don’t quan-
tify over composite objects. A theory which allows us to quantify over fewer
kinds of things is, all other things being equal, more likely to be true. The
argument for nihilism from the theoretical uniﬁcation conferred by nihilism
does not cite the relative ontological parsimony of nihilism as a reason to
think that nihilism is true. What’s more, while several objections have been
raised against arguments for nihilism from nihilism’s ontological parsimony
6Sider (2001: Ch.5), for example, defends four-dimensionalism from the purported fact
that it is “the best uniﬁed theory of the paradoxes of coincidence.” Four-dimensionalism
might very well oﬀer a potential solution to these paradoxes. Nevertheless, it does not
give us the sort of theoretical uniﬁcation which nihilism gives us.
6

(see, e.g., Schaﬀer 2009, 2015; Smid 2015), such objections do nothing to un-
dermine the argument for nihilism from the theoretical uniﬁcation conferred
by nihilism.
Here’s an example to illustrate this point. Schaﬀer (2015) commends the
principle “do not multiply fundamental entities beyond necessity” on the
basis of a “get the most bang for the buck” methodological principle. For
Schaﬀer, the “buck” is the number of fundamental entities, while the “bang”
is the number of derivative entities which follow from, or are grounded in,
the fundamental entities. This sort of methodological principle, if it replaces
(as Schaﬀer thinks it should) more general principles commending ontologi-
cal parsimony, might be thought to undermine arguments for nihilism from
nihilism’s ontological simplicity, insofar as nihilists will not enjoy greater
economy than their competitors with respect to fundamental entities (Schaf-
fer 2015: §6; see also Schaﬀer 2009). But “bang for the buck” principles
seem to me to be most appealing when they are construed broadly, to mean
something like “get the most explanatory work (explain as much of what
needs to be explained) out of the least theoretical commitments.” The latter
sort of methodological principle is part of what’s going on in appeals to the-
oretical uniﬁcation as a theoretical virtue (or as a special case of simplicity
as a theoretical virtue). It is in part because we can get more “bang for the
buck” that we should be inclined to accept theories which confer theoretical
uniﬁcation. So, far from counting against nihilism’s total theoretical simplic-
ity,7 Schaﬀer’s methodological inclinations may actually count in nihilism’s
favor.
A second argument for nihilism is from nihilism’s ideological simplicity.
A touchstone of recent discussions of nihilism’s simplicity (vs its rivals) is
Sider’s “Against Parthood” (Sider 2013), wherein Sider’s positive argument
for nihilism consists almost entirely8 in enumerating the respects in which
nihilism is “ideologically” simpler than competing theories. A theory’s ide-
ology is to be contrasted with its ontology (see, e.g., Quine 1951). Sider’s
characterization of the distinction is most relevant here: “A theory’s ontology
consists of the objects that the theory posits – the range of its quantiﬁers,
if the theory is to be true. Its ideology consists of the undeﬁned notions it
employs, both logical and extra-logical” (Sider 2013: 238-239).9
7And I should emphasize that Schaﬀer is speciﬁcally concerned with nihilism’s alleged
ontological simplicity, rather than its total theoretical simplicity.
8On the “almost” qualiﬁcation, see footnote 12.
9The ideology/ontology distinction is intimately related to similar distinctions cited in
discussions of non-empirical theoretical virtues. For example, as Baker (2013) suggests,
we might think of the ideological complexity of a theory as the theory’s “elegance” or
“syntactic simplicity,” and the ontological complexity of a theory as the “parsimony”
7

While Sider recognizes the signiﬁcant ontological simplicity of nihilism,
insofar as nihilists forgo quantiﬁcation over composites, he doesn’t think
this sort of simplicity is much of a theoretical virtue (Sider 2013: 239). By
contrast, however, the ideological simplicity of nihilism is considerable and
noteworthy, insofar as it allows us to do without mereological primitives.10
Recently several philosophers have published objections to Sider’s argument
(see, for example, Bennett 2009; Cowling 2013, 2014; Tallant 2014), but none
of these objections does anything to undermine the argument for nihilism
from the theoretical uniﬁcation aﬀorded by nihilism. For example, Bennett
(2009) and Tallant (2014) argue that the ideological parsimony which nihilism
gains from eliminating mereological primitives is counterbalanced by the fact
that nihilists will need to take on new “arranged F-wise” predicates (for
example, while the nihilist will deny that there are any tables, she will still say
that there are “simples arranged table-wise”).11 This objection does nothing
to undermine my argument for nihilism, since my argument does not rely on
nihilists’ purported ability to make do with fewer primitive predicates than
their competitors.
I hope it’s clear, then, how my argument for nihilism, from the theoretical
uniﬁcation aﬀorded by nihilism, diﬀers from previous arguments for nihilism
on the basis of its theoretical simplicity. My argument for nihilism is from
the theoretical uniﬁcation aﬀorded by nihilism, which in practice amounts
to the brute facts which nihilism allows us to do without. This argument
doesn’t seem to have anything to do with the ontological commitments which
nihilism helps us do without, or with the ideological commitments (construed
as undeﬁned n-ary predicates, or logical apparatuses) nihilism helps us do
without. My argument for nihilism, then, is, as far as I can tell, a genuinely
new argument for nihilism, albeit one which has important similarities to
other arguments for nihilism on the basis of its theoretical simplicity.
exhibited by the theory.
10Sider consistently speaks of nihilism’s ability to eliminate the “parthood” relation,
where presumably the term “parthood” here refers to its standard use among philosophers
discussing composition (so that, for example, everything is trivially a part of itself). But,
of course, there are several interdeﬁnable mereological relations, any one of which we
might choose to take as primitive. These include, for example, parthood, proper parthood,
overlap, and disjointedness (for more details regarding the manner in which these relations
are interrelated/interdeﬁnable, see Simons 1987). It would be more accurate, therefore, to
say that nihilism allows us to get rid of any of these mereological primitives. That being
said, at several points in this paper, for ease of exposition, I’ve followed Sider in writing
simply of nihilism’s ability to do without the “parthood” relation.
11For a response to Bennett’s and Tallant’s objection, see Brenner 2015.
8

3
Nihilism and Theoretical Uniﬁcation (II)
In this section I go into greater detail regarding the respects in which nihilism
oﬀers theoretical uniﬁcation. There are various phenomena which those who
believe in composition will need to take as brute and inexplicable. Nihilism
does without the phenomena, thereby allowing us to avoid having to take
them as brute or inexplicable.
Principles of composition.
Let’s start with what van Inwagen calls “principles of composition,” that
is, “principles ... that govern the ways in which the properties of a compos-
ite object are determined by the properties of and the relations that hold
among its parts” (van Inwagen 1990: 43).12 These include, for example, the
purported facts that wholes weigh as much as the sum of the weight of their
(non-overlapping) parts, have volumes that are the sum of the volumes of
their (non-overlapping) parts, are located where their parts are, etc.13 In
short, properties of composites are very widely regarded as supervening on
the properties of their parts. I argue momentarily that principles of com-
position are brute – they resist further explanation in terms of some other
property instantiated by wholes or parts. Nihilists, however, can do without
principles of composition, since nihilists don’t believe in composite objects.
So, insofar as nihilism allows us to do without brute principles of composition,
nihilism enjoys greater theoretical simplicity than its competitors.
The supervenience relationship between part and whole is sometimes re-
garded as somewhat mysterious. Cameron (2014), for example, asks “Why
are your parts always where you are? ... why does the whole inherit prop-
erties from its parts? ... How can you share exactly the same space as your
parts at the same time?” (Cameron 2014: 90). He comments: “when one
relatum drags along the other(s), it calls out for explanation; when some
facts supervene on others, it calls out for explanation” (Cameron 2014: 91;
see also Sider 2007: 75).
What, then, accounts for the relationship between a whole and its parts?
Cameron gives the following answer:
12You might thinks of principles of composition as mereological laws. Perhaps this is
what Sider refers to when, in a brief parenthetical remark, he writes that nihilism’s ability
to eliminate “the need for fundamental laws of mereology is a further epistemic beneﬁt of
nihilism” (Sider 2013: 242), in addition to the ideological simplicity aﬀorded by nihilism’s
elimination of mereological primitives.
13I don’t mean to suggest that everyone who believes in composition will accept all of
these purported principles of composition. I provide these examples of some purported
principles of composition just to give a sense of what I mean by the phrase “principles of
composition.”
9

Because, in general, a derivative object inherits its properties
from what gives ground to it, in that the properties of the deriva-
tive thing supervene on the properties of the things that ground
its existence. And this is true because the derivative object has
its properties in virtue of the features of its grounds (Cameron
2014: 97)
Of course, some believers in composition will reject grounding (for ex-
ample, van Inwagen 2014). I think this rejection is mistaken, but whether
or not you call it “grounding,” if you believe in composition then you will
almost certainly admit that there’s some relation between parts and wholes
such that the properties of one explain the fact that the other has some of
its properties.14 This is because those who believe in composition invariably
believe in the supervenience in question, and it’s implausible that the prop-
erties of wholes and their proper parts would just happen to correlate with
one another in such a systematic manner.15 What’s important here is the
point Cameron goes on to concede:
Is this just shifting the problem?
Don’t we simply now need
an explanation for why derivative objects have their properties
in virtue of the features of their grounds? Well, te quoque for
composition as identity (Cameron 2014: 97)
I’ll discuss composition as identity below. The important point to note
here is that whether or not believers in composition who accept composition
as identity are, as far as principles of composition go, in the same boat as
those who don’t believe in composition as identity, nihilists are not. Nihilists
don’t need to explain principles of composition because they do not believe
in principles of composition.
There are really two things crying out for explanation here: (i) why does
the supervenience between properties of parts and properties of wholes ob-
tain? and (ii) why does the supervenience obtain in the manner it does?
After all, if, say, some objects ground (or explain more generally, if you’re
not a fan of grounding) the set of those objects, and the properties of the
set supervene on the properties of the objects, this doesn’t tell us how they
supervene. Few people would want to say that the set is located where its
14One exception is if you’re a proponent of composition as identity, which I discuss in
§4 below.
15It’s widely assumed that the direction of explanation here will always proceed from
parts to wholes, although this isn’t universally accepted. According to Schaﬀer’s priority
monism, for example, at least one whole (the cosmos) grounds its parts. See in particular
Schaﬀer 2010.
10

member are, for example. So, there isn’t that sort of supervenience here –
the locations of sets don’t supervene on the locations of their members, and
indeed sets are not supposed to be located at all. By contrast, the locations of
(located) mereological wholes are generally thought to supervene on the loca-
tions of their parts. Interestingly, this latter point isn’t universally endorsed
by philosophers who believe in composition. For example, Saucedo (2011) ar-
gues, on the basis of certain combinatorial principles, that mereological facts
are independent of locational facts. So, for example, its possible that the
region in which a composite object’s proper parts are located entirely fails
to overlap with the region in which the composite is located (Saucedo 2011:
263, 279-280). That Saucedo takes this possibility very seriously underscores
the fact that the manner in which the properties of composites supervene on
the properties of their proper parts is not settled by the mere concepts of
parthood or composition.
So, how should we answer (i) and (ii)? As far as I can tell Cameron
has no answer: it’s just a brute fact that these supervenience relationships
obtain, and that they have the characters that they do. He writes, for ex-
ample,“Plausibly, ... when there are some things, they collectively have the
properties they do in virtue of of the things each having the properties
they have. This in virtue of claim, I think, is of the same status as that
concerning derivative objects having their properties in virtue of how their
grounds are: both claims are massively plausible, and resist further explana-
tion” (Cameron 2014: 98). Cameron is actually talking about composition
as identity here, but in the next sentence he says that this means composi-
tion as identity is “on a par with composition as a superinternal [grounding]
relation,” implying that given a grounding conception of composition, there’s
no explanation for the supervenience relationships between a whole and its
parts – those supervenience relationships “resist further explanation.”
The supervenience relations cited in (i) and (ii), then, will be brute con-
tingent facts, or, if facts regarding composition are necessary, brute necessary
facts. They plausibly aren’t included in the mere concept of composition or
parthood – that is, it is not analytically true, or anything like that, that such
supervenience relations obtain if composition occurs. Nihilism, by contrast,
eliminates the need to posit supervenience relationships between wholes and
their parts, thereby eliminating any need to answer (i) and (ii).
Here’s a related issue. Some philosophers think that the properties of
a whole are not always determined by the properties of its proper parts.
There’s “holism,” for example, which, as van Inwagen (who doesn’t accept
holism) puts it, is
The thesis that the properties of organisms are not wholly deter-
11

mined by, do not wholly supervene upon, the properties of their
parts.... According to holism, even a complete and correct list
of principles of composition would not enable a perfect reckoner
– the Laplacian Intelligence, say – to reckon the properties of
wholes from the complete truth about the intrinsic properties of
and the relations that hold among the parts that compose the
wholes (van Inwagen 1990: 90)
There are other views in the neighborhood of holism, that of Merricks
(2003) among them, since Merricks thinks some composite objects (namely,
us) can cause events which are not causally overdetermined by their proper
parts. Whether or not holism or any view very much like holism is correct is
not settled by the mere concept of composition, a point which van Inwagen
tacitly concedes: “Whether holism is correct, I do not know. Like most of
my contemporaries, I am strongly inclined to think it is not correct, though
I can’t put my ﬁnger on what my reasons for thinking so are” (van Inwagen
1990: 90). I suspect that many philosophers share van Inwagen’s sentiment
here. The important point to note in the present context is that whether or
not holism is true seems as if it would be a brute fact. Again, nihilism can
do without this brute fact, since nihilism settles the issue against holism.
So, to repeat the main claim I’m making in this section, it seems to me
that nihilism is signiﬁcantly simpler than its competitors insofar as nihilism
eliminates the need to posit brute principles of composition. It’s interesting
to compare this point to a similar point that’s often made against mind-body
dualism. Dualism (both property and substance dualism) is often rejected
because it is a less simple theory than its competitors. One of the respects in
which dualism is more complex than its competitors is insofar as dualists will
need to posit psychophysical laws which correlate brain states and mental
states. J.J.C. Smart writes
If it be agreed that there are no cogent philosophical arguments
which force us into accepting dualism, and if the brain process
theory and dualism are equally consistent with the facts, then
the principles of parsimony and simplicity seem to me to decide
overwhelmingly in favor of the brain-process theory. ... dualism
involves a large number of irreducible psychophysical laws ... of
a queer sort, that just have to be taken on trust, and are just as
diﬃcult to swallow as the irreducible facts about the palaeontol-
ogy of the earth with which we are faced on Philip Gosse’s theory
(Smart 1959: 156)
12

(According to “Gosse’s theory” the Earth was created in 4004 B.C. with
all the signs of an old Earth inexplicably present.) So, one reason people
reject dualism is because it requires these brute psychophysical laws.16 When
faced with the prospect of these psychophysical laws, there are two ways you
might respond. First, you might try to simplify the laws, deriving them from
some smaller number of brute laws or correlations (this is a large part of
what Chalmers tries to accomplish in Chalmers 1996: Part 3). A second way
to respond is what the physicalist does: reject psychophysical laws entirely.
This is certainly the more parsimonious route, something the dualist should
concede – what the dualist should claim is that we have reason to be dualists,
and so reason to posit some psychophysical laws, despite the fact that positing
those laws makes dualism less theoretically simple than its competitors. The
nihilist is like the physicalist in this respect, insofar as the nihilist rejects
principles of composition outright.
Modal properties of composite objects.
Moving along, here are some further questions the believer in composi-
tion will have to deal with. Do composite objects (all of them or some of
them?) exist “automatically” when their proper parts exist (Lewis 1986),
or do the proper parts have to instantiate certain properties, for example,
be shaped in a certain manner, in order to compose (Fine 1999; Koslicki
2008)? More generally, does whether or not some xs compose a y supervene
merely on the intrinsic properties of the xs and the relational properties they
instantiate with respect to one another (van Inwagen 1990: 12), or might
it also supervene on relations the xs instantiate with respect to something
else, a sculptor for example (Baker 1997)? What sorts of changes in the
existence or distribution of its parts could some composite object survive?
These are all questions regarding the modal properties (broadly construed)
of composite objects. These questions certainly seem as if they should have
answers, but the mere concepts of parthood or composition do not seem to
16As Bennett puts it: “To refuse to answer the question at all [of how to account for
psychophysical correlations] is to say that every single psychophysical correlation holds as
a matter of brute fact. And that is an awful lot of brute correlations. Physical process
P is reliably accompanied by a sweet taste. Quite similar physical process P* is reliably
accompanied by a slightly less sweet taste. And so forth ... It would be very strange
indeed if each such correlation were a fundamental law! That would commit the dualist to
an enormous stock of fundamental laws and properties beyond those that the physicalist
endorses” (Bennett ms: 8). Perhaps the believer in composite objects will not require
this many principles of composition or mereological laws.
My point is simply that if
you ﬁnd this sort of consideration compelling (dualism is less plausible insofar as it is less
parsimonious insofar as it posits irreducible psychophysical laws which alternative theories
will not need to posit), then you should ﬁnd the same sort of consideration to count against
belief in composition.
13

settle the issues. It is not true by deﬁnition, for example, that the fact that
some xs compose a y supervenes on the intrinsic properties of those xs, as
well as the relational properties they instantiate with respect to one another,
regardless of the relational properties they instantiate with respect to any
other objects. The answers to the sorts of questions posed above, then, seem
as if they would be brute facts, either contingent or necessary. Or at any rate
this is true if nihilism is false. Nihilism, by eliminating altogether the need
to posit composition relations, provides immediate answers to all of those
questions.17
The mereological pairing problem.
Why is it the case that a particular composite object is associated with
these particular proper parts, rather than some other proper parts?
We
might think of this as a mereological pairing problem, in light of its similarity
with so-called pairing problems for substance dualism.18 To give a concrete
example, if I make two qualitatively indistinguishable tables, Table1 and
Table2, which are such that their parts do not overlap, why is it the case
that Table1 is associated with these proper parts, and Table2 is associated
with those proper parts? It seems to me that there can be no answer to
this question,19 and therefore that the tables’ being associated with their
respective parts is inexplicable and brute.
17As Meghan Sullivan has pointed out to me, ontological nihilism (the thesis that noth-
ing exists) would apparently also avoid having to explain, or take as brute, the “modal
properties of composite objects,” but this doesn’t seem like a good reason to be an ontolog-
ical nihilist. My response is that this actually does count in favor of ontological nihilism.
What’s wrong with ontological nihilism is that it’s manifestly false (whereas mereologi-
cal nihilism is not), so that any theoretical virtues exhibited by ontological nihilism are
outweighed by the fact that it conﬂicts with all of the evidence we have that there is
something rather than nothing. That ontological nihilism receives some sort of support
from its theoretical simplicity shouldn’t come as too much of a surprise. After all, the
reason questions like “why is there something rather than nothing?” are so interesting
is because it is commonly thought that it would be simpler or somehow “easier” if there
were nothing. This is why it can strike us as surprising that anything exists.
18In the course of discussing Kim’s (2005) version of the pairing problem for dualism,
Bennett (2007: 321) connects the pairing problem for dualism with a similar problem for
some of those who believe in composition. Her mereological pairing problem, however,
asks, for colocated composite objects, which of those objects enters into any particular
causal relation, and why? The mereological pairing problem I formulate here is diﬀerent.
I do not ask why some particular composite object is a relata in some causal relation.
Rather, I ask why a particular composite object is associated with such-and-such particular
proper parts.
19Actually, I can think of one possible answer, that God issues a decree according to
which Table1 will be associated with these parts, and Table2 will be associated with those
other parts. Some dualists (e.g., Swinburne 1986: 198-199) make a similar move, and think
that God decides which souls are associated with which bodies. If believers in composition
14

Two potential responses to this concern immediately come to mind. First,
the believer in composite objects might suggest that Table1 is associated with
such-and-such parts because it is located where those parts are located.20 But
this doesn’t actually address the concern I raise above, since it replaces one
demand for explanation with two others.
First, we’ll now be left asking
why Table1 is located where such-and-such parts are located, and second,
we’ll be left asking why it is the case that composite objects are always
located where their parts are located (recall the discussion of this latter
subject above). Answers to either of these questions seem as if they will be
inexplicable. A second potential response to the mereological pairing problem
is origin essentialism (Kripke 1972), according to which Table1 essentially
has its origin in these particular proper parts. Even if this sort of origin
essentialism is correct, however, it still leaves us with a brute fact, insofar as
we will now wonder why it’s the case that Table1 is essentially made from
the proper parts of which it is actually composed. (Similarly, if the dualist
claims that each soul is essentially associated with its body, this won’t really
solve the pairing problem for dualism, since we’ll still be able to ask why each
soul is essentially associated with its body.)
Nihilism allows us to sidestep this entire issue. For the nihilist, there is
no mereological pairing problem, and so there’s no need to view the pairing
of these parts to these wholes as mysterious or inexplicable.
Constitution.
Let’s move on to a more detailed treatment of constitution than the one
which I gave above. A point of contention among believers in composition
regards the nature of constitution, and indeed whether constitution ever oc-
curs. One of the more famous examples of such alleged constitution is in the
story of the lump and the clay. Here’s a story we might tell: I want to make
a statue of Goliath. Here’s how I do it. I sculpt Goliath’s upper half with
one piece of clay, his lower half with a diﬀerent piece of clay, and then I ﬁnish
the statue by putting the two halves together. In joining the two pieces of
clay I simultaneously bring into existence a new lump of clay and a statue of
Goliath. A few days later, I smash the statue, simultaneously destroying the
statue and the lump of clay. Here’s one way of looking at the story I’ve just
told: we want to say that the lump is identical with Goliath, since they are
made up of the same proper parts from the moment they are created to the
moment they are destroyed. But we also want to say the lump is not iden-
would like to make a similar claim, ﬁne. Nevertheless, it seems to me that their view will
thereby be more complex, insofar as it will now be committed to theism, as well as a claim
regarding God’s activities.
20A similar point is made by Lycan (2009) in response to the pairing problem for dualism.
15

tical with Goliath, since they have diﬀerent modal properties. For example,
I could squish the lump into a ball, in which case the lump would still exist,
but the statue would cease to exist. In other words there are some changes
the lump could survive that Goliath couldn’t survive. (For variants of the
story given above, and similar commentaries on them, see, for example, Rea
1995 and Baker 1997.)
Let’s say that x constitutes y only if x and y have all of the same proper
parts. It’s controversial whether this represents a suﬃcient as well as a nec-
essary condition for constitution to obtain. Some philosophers, for example,
insist that constitution is asymmetric (Baker 1997), a fact which wouldn’t
be captured if we said that constitution occurs if and only if two objects
share all of the same proper parts. If constitution is asymmetric then we
might say, for example, that the lump constitutes the statue, rather than the
other way around. One way to make sense of asymmetry here is in terms of
ontological dependence or grounding, so that the lump grounds the existence
and properties of the statue. Rea (1995: 527 n. 5), by contrast, maintains
that constitution is symmetric: x can constitute y even if y constitutes x.
More speciﬁcally, two objects can share all of the same proper parts, without
instantiating any sort of asymmetric dependence/grounding/whatever rela-
tionship with respect to one another.
And, of course, other philosophers
maintain that constitution is impossible (for example, van Inwagen 1990: 5).
Those who believe in composition will plausibly be left here with one or more
brute contingent or necessary truths, for example regarding whether consti-
tution is possible, and whether it’s symmetric. Nihilists, by contrast, won’t
be left with any such brute unexplained facts: constitution doesn’t happen,
since composition more generally doesn’t happen.
The Weak Supplementation Principle.
The Weak Supplementation Principle (WSP) is a component of classical
extensional mereology. The WSP states that if x is a proper part of y then
there is a z such that z is a proper part of y and z does not share any parts
with x (Simons 1987: 28). Put more informally, the WSP says that if an
object has a proper part, then it has more than one (non-overlapping) proper
parts. Why should we think that the WSP is true, or, for that matter, false?
It doesn’t seem to be true by deﬁnition, which is why in classical extensional
mereology it is an independent axiom, rather than a deductive result of any
mereological deﬁnitions deﬁned in terms of parthood (or whatever mereolog-
ical primitive one is employing) (Simons 1987: §1.4). So, unless the truth
value of the WSP follows from something other than the meaning of the terms
involved in its deﬁnition, whether or not the WSP is true would seem to be a
16

brute fact.21 Nihilism eliminates the need to attribute a (non-vacuous) truth
value to the WSP, and any attendant need to posit brute facts.
Before ending this section, I’d like to address a reaction I suspect some
readers may have had to some of the material above. I’ve made a number of
claims to the eﬀect that such-and-such an alleged feature of composition is
not included in the mere concept of composition. I’ve claimed, for example,
that the WSP is not analytically true.
These sorts of claims are always
subject to the response that I’m confused about the concept of composition,
and that such-and-such feature of composition is analytically contained (i.e.,
contained by deﬁnition) in the concept of composition. Simons, for example,
says that the WSP is “analytic – constitutive of the meaning of ‘proper part”’
(Simons 1987: 116). Here’s an important point: If Simons is correct about
this, it only renders nihilism’s competitors all the more theoretically complex,
since they’ll all be committed not only to the notion that proper parthood
relations obtain, but also to the notion that such relations satisfy the WSP.
This point generalizes: try to build some alleged feature of composition into
the concept of composition, and any theory according to which composition
occurs will have more content, and so be less theoretically simple. The loss of
theoretical simplicity in such cases seems to me to be a relatively clear case
of loss of ideological simplicity, although the resulting theory will arguably
require fewer brute facts. Still, the important point to notice is that there’s a
trade oﬀfor proponents of any of nihilism’s competitors: build some alleged
feature of composition into the concept of composition, and you may end up
with fewer brute facts (and so more theoretical uniﬁcation), but at the cost
of an attendant increase in the ideological complexity of your theory.
4
Composition as Identity to the Rescue?
I’ve argued that nihilism is capable of eliminating the need to posit several
brute facts and primitive relations which those who believe in composition
are not able to eliminate. Nihilism therefore confers theoretical uniﬁcation
on our overall account of the world, theoretical uniﬁcation consisting (at least
in part) in just this sort of reduction in the number of phenomena we’ll need
to take as brute and inexplicable. In light of the arguments above, we might
wonder whether those who believe in composition might be able to reduce
the complexity of their view by oﬀering one or more unifying explanations of
the brute facts or primitive relations cited above. Earlier I argued that even
21For some defenses of the view that the WSP is not true by deﬁnition, see Smith 2009,
Donnelly 2011, Kleinschmidt 2011.
17

if they’re able to do so, they’ll still end up with a view that is more complex
than nihilism, insofar as they’ll be left with a primitive parthood relation as
well as whatever theoretical commitment they’ll employ to try and unify the
otherwise brute facts or primitive relations cited in the previous section of
this paper (since, as I’ve argued above, none of them seem to be included in
the mere concepts of parthood or composition). Here I’ll provide a further
illustration of this point by considering perhaps the best candidate view of
composition capable of responding to the challenge of the previous section,
composition as identity (CAI). When I refer to “composition as identity”
I mean the thesis that composition really is a variant of identity (i.e., the
“moderate” or “strong” variants of CAI in Cotnoir 2014: 9). Lewis (1991),
by contrast, merely argues that composition and identity are importantly
analogous, although Lewis is nevertheless frequently cited as a proponent of
“composition as identity.”
CAI has the potential to oﬀer a unifying explanation of much of the
phenomena cited in the previous section, insofar as CAI sees composition
as a variant of the identity relation, a relation which everyone should ﬁnd
unobjectionable.22
CAI potentially eliminates the need to oﬀer explanations for the prin-
ciples of composition cited above, or to regard them as brute facts without
further explanation. Why, for example, is a whole always where its parts are?
Because the whole just is the parts – that is, the whole is identical with its
parts. More generally, why does a whole inherit some of its properties from
its parts? Again, because the whole just is its parts. That the instantiation
of some objects’ properties supervene on themselves is not at all mysterious.
Similarly, if a whole is identical with its parts, it is not at all mysterious
that the whole’s properties should supervene on the properties of the parts.
CAI also settles whether or not the properties of the parts, in conjunction
with relevant principles of composition, settle the properties of the whole, or
whether some sort of holism or emergence obtains. If CAI is true, then of
course the properties of the parts settle the properties of the whole, since
the whole just is the parts, and the properties of the parts trivially entail
themselves.23
CAI also might be thought to settle various modal properties of composite
objects, in which case facts regarding the modal properties in question would
22Plausibly, proponents of CAI also have ready responses to arguments for nihilism
from nihilism’s ontological and ideological simplicity, since CAI arguably requires no new
ontological commitments, and for proponents of CAI mereological relations can be reduced
to some combination of the identity and inclusion relations.
23See also McDaniel 2008, for a more detailed argument that CAI is incompatible with
composite objects having emergent properties.
18

not be brute or inexplicable. In particular, CAI promises to tell us what sorts
of changes in the existence or distribution of its parts a composite object
could survive. Since a composite object y will be identical with the xs which
compose it, y could not survive the loss of any of of the xs (in other words,
mereological essentialism would be true). If it could survive the loss of any
of its parts, then the xs (which are identical with y) could continue to exist
even if one of the xs does not continue to exist. That’s not possible. Merricks
gives a more precise rendition of this sort of argument:
...suppose that O, the object composed of O1...On, is identical
with O1...On. From this, the fact that O1...On are identical with
O1...On in every possible world, and the indiscernibility of iden-
ticals it follows that O is identical with O1...On in every pos-
sible world. Therefore, if composition as identity is true, there
is no world in which O exists but is not composed of O1...On.
So composition as identity implies that O–and, of course, every
other composite object–must, in every world in which it exists,
be composed of the parts that actually compose it. Composi-
tion as identity entails mereological essentialism (Merricks 1999:
192-193)24
Whether the whole y could survive a change in the relative positions of
any of its parts, or more generally could survive its parts instantiating dif-
ferent properties from those which they presently instantiate, will be settled
by CAI as well: y can survive any changes the xs can survive.25
Proponents of CAI also avoid the mereological pairing problem. Why do
the xs compose y, rather than z (where y̸=z)? Because the xs are identical
with y, whereas they are not identical with z. (You might as well ask why
the xs are identical with the xs.)
CAI also might remove any need to explain the nature of constitution.
If CAI is correct, then constitution is just impossible, since there won’t ever
be two distinct objects which share all of the same proper parts. Identity is
transitive. Ergo, if some whole y is identical with its proper parts the xs,
then any z which is identical with the xs (and which is composed of the xs)
will be identical with y, in which case y and z will not be two distinct objects
sharing all of the same proper parts.
24See also Cameron 2014 and Wallace 2014.
25Of course, we’ll still be left with questions regarding the modal properties of the xs,
but (arguably) any theory of composition (nihilism included) will have to countenance
such properties. The point I’m making here is that CAI might be able to do without those
distinctive modal properties of wholes regarding those changes to their parts which they
could survive.
19

Finally, CAI seems to settle the truth value of the WSP. Plausibly, if CAI
is true, then we should be able to replace talk of x being a part of y with
talk of x being included in the xs with which y is identical (for details, see
Sider 2014: §6). Consider some x which is a proper part of y. In this case
x̸=y, by deﬁnition. Nevertheless, since x is a part of y, x is included in the
xs with which y is identical. But, since xs=y, and x̸=y, x̸=xs. So, if x is
included in the xs, it can’t be because x=xs. So, there must be a z which
is included in the xs, and such that z̸=x, and z̸=xs (in other words, there’s
another one of the xs which is not identical with x). But since z is included
in the xs, but z̸=xs, z is a proper part of y. So, it looks like, for any x which
is a proper part of some object y, there is some other object z which is also
a proper part of y, and which is such that z̸=x (in other words, if y has a
proper part, then it has more than one proper part). But that’s just what
the WSP says. So, if CAI is true, then the WSP is (non-vacuously) true.
So, in terms of the theoretical uniﬁcation brought about by adopting the
view, CAI is a close competitor to nihilism. Nevertheless, nihilism still seems
as if it will exhibit greater theoretical simplicity than CAI, for at least two
reasons.
First, CAI does not actually settle as many of the modal properties of
composite objects as you might think, nor the modal relationship between
composite objects and their proper parts. Earlier I suggested that those who
believe in composition will have the following questions to deal with: (a)
Do composite objects exist “automatically” when their proper parts exist, or
do the proper parts have to instantiate certain properties, for example, be
shaped in a certain manner, in order to compose? (b) Does whether or not
some xs compose a y supervene merely on the intrinsic properties of the xs
and the relational properties they instantiate with respect to one another,
or might it also supervene on relations the xs instantiate with respect to
something else? Proponents of CAI will have to answer these questions just
like every other believer in composition will have to. Just because some xs
exist, it does not follow automatically that there is any one thing to which
those xs are identical, even if CAI is true.26 If CAI is true then it only follows
that, if some xs compose a y, then those xs are identical with y (this is a
point emphasized in van Inwagen 1994 and Cameron 2012). If the answers
to (a) and (b) are, for those who believe in composition, brute facts, as I’ve
argued earlier in this paper, proponents of CAI will be stuck with those brute
facts as well.
Second, CAI will plausibly require signiﬁcant and otherwise unmotivated
26This is why CAI does not entail mereological universalism, according to which any
disjoint objects compose some further object.
20

revisions of non-mereological logical and metaphysical principles. For exam-
ple, we’ll need one-many identity, as well as, plausibly, a modiﬁed version
of Leibniz’s law, with additional primitive ideology (see Cotnoir 2013). Ac-
cording to Cotnoir’s proposal, for example, we shouldn’t ask merely whether
some xs, and some y which they compose and with which they’re identical,
have all of the same properties (simpliciter – that is, not relative to any sort
of index). If we did, then they clearly wouldn’t have the same properties:
the y is one thing, while the xs are many things. This is a classic problem
for composition as identity. To avoid this problem, we should have a version
of Leibniz’s law which compares the properties of identical objects relative
to a way of counting. (For a couple of ways this might go, see Cotnoir 2013:
§3.2.) So, the same portion of reality will be one thing (y) according to this
(permissible) way of counting, and multiple things (the xs) according to some
other (permissible) way of counting. The “portion of reality” and “ways of
counting” apparatuses may amount to new ideological commitments of the
theory, depending on how exactly they’re spelled out. These additions to
the logical and metaphysical relations/principles we’ll need to employ may
represent a signiﬁcant increase in the ideological commitments required to
make sense of CAI (and in any case will likely be a dialectical setback for the
proponent of CAI, insofar as she’ll have to convince those of us who reject
CAI to accept these other revisions to our conceptual scheme as well).
5
Conclusion
I’ve defended nihilism on the basis of the theoretical uniﬁcation aﬀorded by
nihilism, a point which counts, it seems, in favor of nihilism’s theoretical sim-
plicity. But I’m only interested in nihilism’s theoretical simplicity because,
as I’ve mentioned, I think that it gives us some reason to believe that nihilism
is true. This is an assumption which I do not have space to defend here.27
Where does all of this leave us? In particular, given nihilism’s theoreti-
cal simplicity, should we be nihilists? Simplicity considerations are generally
brought in to decide between competing theories which are equally capable
(or very nearly equally capable) of explaining our evidence.
Is there sig-
niﬁcant evidence counting against nihilism, or in favor of any of nihilism’s
competitors? I don’t think so. This need not have been the case. There might
have been evidence of some sort for composition, but as a matter of fact there
27It’s controversial, of course, whether simpler scientiﬁc theories are more likely to be
true (see, e.g., van Fraassen 1980), but the notion that theoretical simplicity might function
as a criterion of theory choice in metaphysics is even more controversial (see, e.g., Huemer
2009, Kriegel 2013, Willard 2014).
21

isn’t. Given that nihilism and its competitors, then, are at worst on a par
with respect to their prediction of our evidence, nihilism’s (much) greater
theoretical simplicity seems to me to count strongly, and probably decisively,
in its favor. I doubt there is aﬃrmative evidence in nihilism’s favor (it’s not
like composition is just incoherent, for example, or there are experiments
which show that composition does not occur), so the decision in nihilism’s
favor is made on the grounds of the theoretical virtue of simplicity.28
References
[1] Alan Baker. Simplicity. In Edward N. Zalta, editor, The Stanford En-
cyclopedia of Philosophy. Fall 2013 edition, 2013.
[2] Lynne Rudder Baker.
Why constitution is not identity.
Journal of
Philosophy, 94:599–621, 1997.
[3] Karen Bennett. Why i am not a dualist. Manuscript.
[4] Karen Bennett. Mental causation. Philosophy Compass, 2(2):316–337,
2007.
[5] Karen Bennett. Composition, colocation, and metaontology. In David J.
Chalmers, David Manley, and Ryan Wasserman, editors, Metameta-
physics, pages 38–76. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009.
[6] Andrew Brenner.
Mereological nihilism and the special arrangement
question. Synthese, 192(5):1295–1314, May 2015.
[7] Ross P. Cameron. Composition as identity doesn’t settle the special com-
position question. Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, 84:531—
54, 2012.
[8] Ross P. Cameron. Parts generate the whole, but they are not identical
to it. In Donald Baxter and Aaron Cotnoir, editors, Composition As
Identity, pages 90–107. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2014.
[9] David J. Chalmers.
The Conscious Mind.
Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1996.
28Thanks to Peter Finocchiaro, Michael Rea, Meghan Sullivan, Peter van Inwagen, and
an anonymous referee for very helpful comments on earlier drafts of this paper.
22

[10] Aaron Cotnoir. Composition as general identity. In Karen Bennett and
Dean W. Zimmerman, editors, Oxford Studies In Metaphysics, volume 8,
pages 295–322. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2013.
[11] Aaron Cotnoir. Composition as identity. In Donald Baxter and Aaron
Cotnoir, editors, Composition As Identity, pages 3–23. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford, 2014.
[12] Sam Cowling.
Ideological parsimony.
Synthese, 190(17):3889–3908,
2013.
[13] Sam Cowling. No simples, no gunk, no nothing. Paciﬁc Philosophical
Quarterly, 95(2):246–260, June 2014.
[14] Maureen Donnelly.
Using mereological principles to support meta-
physics. The Philosophical Quarterly, 61(243):225–246, April 2011.
[15] Cian Dorr. The Simplicity of Everything. PhD thesis, Princeton Uni-
versity, 2002.
[16] Kit Fine.
Things and their parts.
In Peter French and Howard K.
Wettstein, editors, Midwest Studies in Philosophy XXIII: New Direc-
tions in Philosophy, pages 61–74. Blackwell, Oxford, 1999.
[17] Michael Friedman. Explanation and scientiﬁc understanding. The Jour-
nal of Philosophy, 71(1):5–19, 1974.
[18] Katherine Hawley. Ontological innocence. In Donald Baxter and Aaron
Cotnoir, editors, Composition As Identity, pages 70–89. Oxford Univer-
sity Press, Oxford, 2014.
[19] Terence Horgan and Matjaˇz Potrˇc. Austere Realism: Contextual Seman-
tics Meets Minimal Ontology. The MIT Press, Cambridge, 2008.
[20] Michael Huemer. When is parsimony a virtue? Philosophical Quarterly,
59:216–36, 2009.
[21] Frank J. Tipler John D. Barrow. The Anthropic Cosmological Principle.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1986.
[22] Jaegwon Kim. Physicalism, or Something Near Enough. Princeton Uni-
versity Press, Princeton, 2005.
[23] Shieva Kleinschmidt. Multilocation and mereology. Philosophical Per-
spectives, 25:253–276, 2011.
23

[24] Daniel Z. Korman. Fundamental quantiﬁcation and the language of the
ontology room. Noˆus, 49(2):298–321, June 2015.
[25] Kathrin Koslicki. The Structure of Objects. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 2008.
[26] Uriah Kriegel. The epistemological challenge of revisionary metaphysics.
Philosophers’ Imprint, 13(12):1–30, 2013.
[27] Saul Kripke. Naming and necessity. In Donald Davidson and Gilbert
Harman, editors, Semantics of Natural Language, pages 253–355, 763–9.
D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1972. Revised edition published in 1980 as Naming
and Necessity (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA).
[28] John Leslie. Universes. Routledge, London, 1989.
[29] David Lewis. On the Plurality of Worlds. Blackwell, Oxford, 1986.
[30] David Lewis. Parts of Classes. Blackwell, Oxford, 1991.
[31] William Lycan. Giving dualism its due. Australasian Journal of Philos-
ophy, 87(4):551–563, 2009.
[32] Ned Markosian. Brutal composition. Philosophical Studies, 92:211–49,
1998.
[33] Kris McDaniel. Against composition as identity. Analysis, 68:128–33,
2008.
[34] Trenton Merricks. Composition as identity, mereological essentialism,
and counterpart theory. Australasian Journal of Philosophy, 77:192–95,
1999.
[35] Trenton Merricks. Objects and Persons. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2003.
[36] Daniel Nolan. Quantitative parsimony. British Journal for the Philoso-
phy of Science, 48:329–43, 1997.
[37] Harold W. Noonan. Constitution is identity. Mind, 102(405):133–146,
January 1993.
[38] W. V. O. Quine. Ontology and ideology. Philosophical Studies, 2:11–15,
1951.
[39] Michael Rea. The problem of material constitution. Philosophical Re-
view, 104:525–52, 1995.
24

[40] Raul Saucedo. Parthood and location. In Karen Bennett and Dean W.
Zimmerman, editors, Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, volume 6, pages
225–284. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2011.
[41] Jonathan Schaﬀer. From nihilism to monism. Australasian Journal of
Philosophy, 85:175–91, 2007.
[42] Jonathan Schaﬀer. On what grounds what. In David J. Chalmers, David
Manley, and Ryan Wasserman, editors, Metametaphysics, pages 347–83.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009.
[43] Jonathan Schaﬀer. Monism: The priority of the whole. Philosophical
Review, 119:31–76, 2010.
[44] Jonathan Schaﬀer. What not to multiply without necessity. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy, 93(4):644–664, 2015.
[45] Theodore Sider. Four-Dimensionalism. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2001.
[46] Theodore Sider. Parthood. Philosophical Review, 116:51–91, 2007.
[47] Theodore Sider. Against parthood. In Karen Bennett and Dean W.
Zimmerman, editors, Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, volume 8. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2013.
[48] Theodore Sider. Consequences of collapse. In Donald Baxter and Aaron
Cotnoir, editors, Composition As Identity, pages 211–221. Oxford Uni-
versity Press, Oxford, 2014.
[49] Peter Simons. Parts: A Study in Ontology. Clarendon Press, Oxford,
1987.
[50] J. J. C. Smart. Sensations and brain processes. Philosophical Review,
68:141–56, 1959.
[51] Jeroen Smid. The ontological parsimony of mereology. Philosophical
Studies, 2015.
[52] Donald Smith. Mereology without weak supplementation. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy, 87:505–511, 2009.
[53] Richard Swinburne. The Evolution of the Soul. Oxford University Press,
Oxford, 1986.
[54] Jonathan Tallant. Against mereological nihilism. Synthese, 191:1511–
1527, 2014.
25

[55] Bas van Fraassen. The Scientiﬁc Image. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1980.
[56] Peter van Inwagen. Material Beings. Cornell University Press, Ithaca,
NY, 1990.
[57] Peter van Inwagen. Composition as identity. Philosophical Perspectives,
8:207–20, 1994.
[58] Peter van Inwagen. Dispensing with ontological levels: An illustration.
Disputatio, 6(38):25–43, May 2014.
[59] Megan Wallace. Composition as identity, modal parts, and mereological
essentialism. In Donald Baxter and Aaron Cotnoir, editors, Composition
As Identity, pages 111–129. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2014.
[60] M. B. Willard. Against simplicity. Philosophical Studies, 167:165–181,
2014.
[61] Jared Woodard. Material Composition and Theory Choice. PhD thesis,
Fordham University, 2013.
26

