Mereological Nihilism and the Special
Arrangement Question
Andrew Brenner
Penultimate version of paper. Final version of paper published in Synthese,
May 2015, Volume 192, Issue 5, pp 1295-1314
Contents
1
Introduction
2
2
Do Nihilists Need To Answer the Special Arrangement Ques-
tion?
4
3
Can Nihilists Answer the Special Arrangement Question?
9
4
Can Nihilists Answer the Special Arrangement Question With-
out Undermining Nihilism?
19
5
Conclusion
24
Abstract: Mereological nihilism is the thesis that composite objects – ob-
jects with proper parts – do not exist. Nihilists generally paraphrase talk of
composite objects F into talk of there being “xs arranged F-wise” (for ex-
ample, while nihilists deny that there are tables, they concede that there are
“xs arranged table-wise”). Recently several philosophers have argued that
nihilism is defective insofar as nihilists are either unable to say what they
mean by such phrases as “there are xs arranged F-wise,” or that nihilists are
unable to employ such phrases without incurring signiﬁcant costs, perhaps
even undermining one of the chief motivations for nihilism. In this paper I
defend nihilism against these objections. A key theme of the paper is this:
if nihilists need to employ such phrases as “there are xs arranged F-wise,”
non-nihilists will need to do so as well. Accordingly, any costs incurred by
the nihilist when she employs such phrases will be shared by everyone else.
1

What’s more, such phrases are intelligible when employed by the nihilist, as
well as when they are employed by the non-nihilist, insofar as analyses of
such phrases will not essentially involve mereological concepts incompatible
with nihilism.
1
Introduction
Mereological nihilism is the thesis that composite objects – that is, objects
with proper parts – do not exist.1
There’s no consensus among nihilists
about whether everyday talk of composites (that is, apparent quantiﬁcation
and reference to composites by non-philosophers and philosophers in their
everyday lives) is true, despite the fact that on ﬁrst glance it seems to quantify
over composites (van Inwagen 1990), or whether its false but in some sense
almost as good as true (“correct,” maybe, or “quasi-true,” whatever exactly
these terms amount to – see, for example, Merricks 2003).2 All nihilists seem
to agree, however, that the nihilist denial of the existence of, say, tables,
isn’t as crazy as it might at ﬁrst sound, since the nihilist agrees that there
are “things arranged table-wise,”3 a phrase ﬁrst employed by van Inwagen
(1990). For example, here’s what Sider says on the subject:
Since I accept the existence of [noncomposite subatomic parti-
cles], my denial of an object composed of them isn’t absurd.
Denying that T exists in addition to a, b, and c is no more absurd
than denying that holes exist in addition to perforated things, or
denying that smirks exist in addition to smirking faces. Similarly,
denying the existence of persons, animals, plants, and the rest is
not absurd if one accepts subatomic particles that are “arranged
1Proponents of mereological nihilism (henceforth just “nihilism”) include, among oth-
ers, Dorr (2002), Rosen and Dorr (2002), Cameron (2010), and Sider (2013). Nihilism is
sometimes described as the thesis that only mereological simples exist. That’s not quite
right, since one might be a mereological nihilist, as well as a proponent of a “stuﬀ” on-
tology, or some other sort of ontology according to which there aren’t the sort of discrete
individuals suggested by the term “simples.” Strictly speaking, mereological nihilism is
the thesis that composition never occurs – no composite objects, stuﬀ, etc.
2Peter van Inwagen (1990) and Trenton Merricks (2003) are actually organicists, who
believe that the only composites are living things. van Inwagen and Merricks are frequently
lumped together with nihilists, or described as “semi-nihilists,” since they both deny that
there are very many composite objects. Much of what follows concerns van Inwagen and
Merricks’ work, so for now we might think of them as “honorary nihilists.” Just keep in
mind that, as a matter of fact, they’re not actually nihilists.
3Or “stuﬀarranged table-wise,” but I’ll ignore that option for the rest of this paper.
2

personwise”..., animal-wise, plant-wise, and so on (Sider 2013:
238)
So, when the nihilist denies that, say, the moon exists,4 she’s not en-
dorsing a conspiracy theory with respect to the existence of the moon, or
suggesting that our moon-ish perceptual experiences are a mass delusion or
hallucination, or anything like that. The nihilist agrees that there are “things
arranged moon-wise” in the location generally regarded as the location of a
composite object called “the moon.” The nihilist simply denies that those
objects arranged moon-wise compose some further object, the moon. (If the
moon were composed of n simples, for example, then where we generally
think the moon is there would be at least n+1 objects – namely, the moon,
as well as those objects which compose the moon. The nihilist might believe
in the n objects, even if she denies the existence of the n+1st object.) Let’s
say more generally that, where some alleged composite object F exists, the
nihilist will generally concede that there are “xs arranged F-wise.”
Recently several philosophers have argued that nihilism is defective in-
sofar as nihilists are either unable to provide an account of what it means
for “xs to be arranged F-wise” (Elder 2011, Tallant 2014, Unger 2014),5 or
unable to provide such an account without undermining a chief motivation
for adopting nihilism (Bennett 2009, Tallant 2014), or endorsing otherwise
objectionable consequences of the analysis of the notion of there being “xs
arranged F-wise” (Uzquiano 2004).
We might put the challenge posed to the nihilist like this: how is the
nihilist going to answer what Tallant calls the “Special Arrangement Ques-
tion” (SAQ), which asks, for any composite object sortal F, “under what
circumstances are there xs arranged F-wise?”6 In this paper I mainly discuss
two variants of this challenge: 1.Can the nihilist give an answer to the SAQ?
2.Can the nihilist give an answer to the SAQ which does not undermine any
of her chief motivations for adopting nihilism? I’ll defend nihilism against
4I should mention that it isn’t actually the case that all nihilists deny the existence
of moons, tables, cats, etc. Contessa 2014, for example, suggests that nihilists should
endorse the sentence “the moon exists,” but should take the referent(s) of “the moon” to
be simples arranged moon-wise.
5Strictly speaking, as we’ll see, Unger doesn’t actually think that the nihilist is unable
to say what it means for there to be “xs arranged F-wide.” Rather, he thinks that the
nihilist is unable to give a coherent characterization of such phrases, at least for many
sortal terms F.
6The SAQ is modeled after van Inwagen’s “Special Composition Question,” which asks
“when is it the case that there is a y such that the xs compose y?” (see especially van
Inwagen 1990: 30-31). The Nihilist answer to the special composition question is this:
“there is a y such that the xs compose y iﬀthere is only one x” (van Inwagen 1990: 73).
3

these challenges. The upshot of the paper is that nihilists can make perfect
sense of the notion of some xs being “arranged F-wise,” and so can everyone
else. In fact, nihilists who employ such predicates will make sense of such
phrases as “there are xs arranged F-wise” in pretty much the same manner
as any non-nihilists who employ such phrases.
2
Do Nihilists Need To Answer the Special
Arrangement Question?
In the next section I address arguments to the eﬀect that nihilists are un-
able to make sense of such phrases as “there are xs arranged F-wise.” This
objection to nihilism has been developed independently by Elder (2011), Tal-
lant (2014), and Unger (2014). Before I consider their objections I’d like to
make some general points regarding the SAQ, points which seem to me to
be important.
First, it’s unclear to me why the nihilist is required to give an answer
to the SAQ. The SAQ asks for a general account of what it means for some
xs to be arranged F-wise, for any composite object sortal F. Why should
we think there’s any way to answer that sort of question? Rather, it seems
plausible to me that there will be a variety of answers, corresponding to a
variety of sortal terms F. For example, in answer to the question “under what
circumstances are xs arranged table-wise?” we’ll give one answer (the xs are
arranged table-wise if they’re arranged like this – pointing to a table, a variety
of tables, a table blueprint, whatever), and they’re arranged, say, pig-wise
if they’re arranged like that. I don’t see any reason to suppose that anyone
should expect there to be one way of answering the question “when are some
xs arranged F-wise,” where “F” can refer to any composite object sortal
at all. Of course, the nihilist should, for any particular statement of her’s
involving “xs arranged F-wise,” be able to say something informative about
the arrangement in question. For example, if the nihilist says that there are
“xs arranged baseball-wise,” she will be able to tell you something about the
arrangement: the xs in question are not arranged dog-wise, although they
are more or less arranged sphere-wise; the xs are spread over more or less
such-and-such a volume; etc. What I intend to deny here is simply that there
should be, for any composite object sortal F, one general recipe or formula
for turning talk about the (alleged) composite object F into talk about xs
arranged F-wise.
But more generally, we might be skeptical that a correct fundamental
description of the world will make use of any sort of arrangement predicate
4

(e.g., “arranged F-wise”), regardless of which view regarding composition we
endorse. If that’s right, then nobody – nihilist, as well as non-nihilist – will
need to employ any sort of F-wise arrangement predicate in their fundamental
description of the world. To see why this is important, let’s brieﬂy step back
and look at one of the motivations for nihilism. Nihilism is often motivated
by considerations of theoretical simplicity, insofar as nihilism is simpler than
alternative views regarding the ontological status of composite objects. Since
simplicity is, all other things being equal, generally regarded as an indication
that a theory is true, nihilism’s simplicity would give us some reason to
suppose that it is true.
Of course, there’s more than one respect in which a theory will be more
or less simple. A common distinction, generally attributed to Quine (1951),
is the distinction between the ontological and the ideological commitments of
a theory. Sider puts the distinction like this: “A theory’s ontology consists of
the objects that the theory posits – the range of its quantiﬁers, if the theory
is to be true. Its ideology consists of the undeﬁned notions it employs, both
logical and extra-logical” (Sider 2013: 238-239). Nihilism, of course, has a
simpler ontology than its rivals, but there’s a case to be made that it is ideo-
logically simpler as well, insofar as nihilists can make do without a primitive
parthood relation (and, I suppose, any mereological notions, if there are any,
that can’t be deﬁned in terms of the parthood relation). This latter point
is Sider’s chief argument for nihilism (Sider 2013: §1). In particular, Sider
contends that theories which posit a simpler fundamental ideology are more
likely to be true (Sider 2013: 240), where “fundamental matters” include,
in Sider’s reckoning, physics, mathematics, and “fundamental metaphysics”
(Sider 2013: 241).7
Here’s where F-wise arrangement predicates become relevant. Sider (2013:
240) writes: “it is no objection [to nihilism’s ideological simplicity] that ni-
hilists must use ideology like ‘arranged plant-wise’, ‘arranged dollar-bill-wise’,
‘arranged river-wise’, and so forth to describe reality’s biological, economic,
and geological features – these predicates are not part of the nihilist’s theory
of fundamental matters.” The assumption here seems to be that any sort of
“F-wise” arrangement predicates will be absent from a correct fundamental
description of the world. If Sider’s right about that, then nobody needs to
answer the SAQ, since in principle nobody needs to make use of F-wise ar-
rangement predicates in their fundamental description of the world, whether
or not composition occurs.
It’s unclear what Sider’s motivations are for supposing that a fundamen-
7For the manner in which Sider is conceiving of the relationship between the funda-
mental and the non-fundamental, Sider refers us to his 2011: §7.3-7.8.
5

tal description of the world won’t include F-wise arrangement predicates.
Tallant (2014: §3.1.1) challenges Sider on this point, arguing that a physical
(fundamental) description of chiral molecules requires either quantiﬁcation
over composites (namely, those chiral molecules), or a multi-place arrange-
ment predicate (i.e., simples “arranged chiral-molecule-left-hand-wise” or
“arranged chiral-molecule-right-hand-wise”). Presumably Sider would con-
tend that such predicates are not fundamental.8 I won’t take a stance on this
issue here. My overall point is simply that we shouldn’t take it for granted
that anyone (nihilists or non-nihilists) will need to employ F-wise arrange-
ment predicates.
If such predicates are replaced with more fundamental
non-arrangement predicates then presumably the nihilist can make use of
the latter such predicates in replacements of her paraphrases of composite
object F talk in terms of there being “xs arranged F-wise.”
In any case, for the rest of the paper I’ll assume that nihilists will need to
employ predicates like “are arranged F-wise.” As I’ll argue momentarily, if
the nihilist needs to employ such predicates, then so does the non-nihilist –
the fact that the non-nihilist includes composite objects in his ontology does
not mean he can do without “arranged F-wise” predicates.
So, here’s the second main point I’d like to make in this section: if the
nihilist is unable to answer the SAQ, those who believe in composition are
no better oﬀ. They would be better oﬀonly if they were able to answer
the SAQ by employing resources unavailable to the nihilist. In other words,
they would be better oﬀonly if their proposed answer to the SAQ essentially
involves composition, parthood, or some other notion which the nihilist will
ﬁnd unacceptable. This is in fact just the sort of answer to the SAQ which
Elder endorses.
Elder endorses the following analysis of there being “xs
arranged dog-wise”:
microparticles are dogwise arranged just in case (i) they are among
a plurality of microparticles that between them are such as to
cause the folk to judge that a dog is present, and (ii) they lie
within the region occupied by a dog (Elder 2011: 124)
8There are several ways this might go, although I don’t know which of them Sider
would endorse. Here are two examples. First, you might think that fundamentally the
world contains only one or two physical objects in a high dimensional conﬁguration space,
with our manifest image of the world somehow supervening on what goes on in that con-
ﬁguration space (Albert 1996). If this were true, then a correct fundamental description
of the world presumably wouldn’t mention many (if any) F-wise arrangement predicates.
Or, maybe some variant of monism (existence monism, as in Horgan and Potrˇc 2008, or
priority monism, as in Schaﬀer 2010) is correct, in which case, while we might have funda-
mental arrangement predicates, we wouldn’t have fundamental multi-place arrangement
predicates.
6

This account is, of course, unacceptable to the nihilist, since the nihilist
believes there are xs arranged dog-wise, but there aren’t any dogs. On Elder’s
proposed answer to the SAQ, “The claim that there is a dogwise arrange-
ment in the world would leave open no further question as to whether the
microparticles so arranged compose dogs”9 (Elder 2011: 124). Luckily for the
nihilist, Elder doesn’t actually give us any reason to suppose that this answer
to the SAQ is correct, other than the alleged failure of alternative answers
to the SAQ (or at least those answers which Elder considers). What’s more,
we have at least three good reasons to reject Elder’s answer to the SAQ, as
well as any other answer to the SAQ which essentially involves composition.
First, what should we say about xs arranged F-wise that don’t compose
anything? Elder will either have to give an alternative analysis of the notion
of these xs being arranged F-wise, or he’ll have to contend that it’s not
possible for some xs to be arranged F-wise without composing an F, for any
sortal term F. Many philosophers will not hesitate to endorse the latter option
(this includes, for example, mereological universalists), but I suspect some
philosophers will be uncomfortable doing so. For example, some philosophers
(e.g., Baker 1997) think there can be xs arranged statue-wise which don’t
compose a statue (they won’t compose a statue if they weren’t arranged
with the intention to produce a statue).
Or maybe we could imagine a
complex arrangement predicate F which doesn’t correspond to a composite
object sortal. In that case some xs might be arranged F-wise, and yet fail to
compose anything.
Second, given Elder’s answer to the SAQ, we won’t have anything in-
formative to say about what makes some object fall under some particular
composite object sortal. For example, what makes something a table? Those
who believe in tables would be inclined to say something like “if its parts are
arranged table-wise.” In fact, the xs compose a table because or in virtue
of the fact that those xs are arranged table-wise.10 But someone like Elder
can’t say any of that, since he deﬁnes “being arranged table-wise” in terms
of composing a table. So, it looks like Elder won’t be able to say anything
informative about what makes some object a table – at most he’ll be able to
say something trivial like “it’s a table if its parts compose a table, and its
9Actually this is false, according to Elder’s own analysis of there being “xs arranged
dog-wise.” Even if some xs are “among a plurality of microparticles that between them
are such as to cause the folk to judge that a dog is present,” and even if they “lie within
the region occupied by a dog,” it wouldn’t follow that those xs are parts of dog. Perhaps,
for example, the xs are colocated with, but fail to overlap, the dog and any of the dog’s
parts, yet nevertheless tend to give rise to the folk belief that a dog is present.
10By contrast, if the xs were, say, scattered across the galaxy, then they would almost
certainly not compose a table, even if they composed some object.
7

parts tend to cause the belief that there is a table.”
Third, and the most signiﬁcant problem for Elder’s answer to the SAQ,
is that, as an exercise in conceptual analysis, Elder’s answer to the SAQ
is just clearly wrong. For starters, the ﬁrst conjunct of the analysis – that
the microparticles in question should be such that they cause the folk to
judge that a dog is present – is not a necessary condition for there being
microparticles (or objects more generally) arranged dog-wise. There might
be xs arranged dog-wise, for example, even if there are neither folk nor people
of any sort. Second, the concept of there being xs arranged F-wise does not
include the concept of those xs lying within a region occupied by an F – and,
for that matter, it does not include the concept of those xs composing an F.11
If we need an argument, here it is: the concept of some xs composing an F, or
being located in the region occupied by an F, is not included in the concept
of those xs being arranged F-wise, because it is epistemically possible for
the latter situation to obtain (the xs are arranged F-wise), but the former
situation not to obtain (the xs neither compose an F, nor are located within
the region occupied by an F). More generally, it is epistemically possible for
some xs to be arranged F-wise, tend to give rise to folk belief that there is
an F, and yet nevertheless fail to compose an F.12 In short, (conversational
implicature aside) if I believe or assert that some xs are arranged F-wise, I
don’t thereby believe or assert that those xs compose anything, are located
in a region occupied by an F, or are apt to give rise to any particular sort
of belief. There’s a conceptual gap between the former notion and the latter
11Or perhaps I only need to defend a weaker claim: the two concepts (xs are arranged F-
wise, and xs are located in a region occupied by an F) are distinct “in the ontology room.”
Perhaps, for example, outside the ontology room the sentence “there are things arranged
table-wise” entails or is equivalent to the sentence “there is a table.” Even if this is true,
however, it is certainly false that that entailment or equivalence holds for such sentences
as uttered in the ontology room – that is, when we’re engaged in careful metaphysical
debate, with its attendant linguistic norms. If this is the case, it’s either because, outside
the ontology room, the sentence “there is a table” employs a non-joint carving quantiﬁer,
or, and this is the view I favor, that sentence does not, despite appearances, always quantify
over tables. (For more on the distinction between ontological disputes conducted inside
the ontology room vs. ontological disputes conducted outside the ontology room see van
Inwagen 2014).
12I should emphasize that this is true whether or not it is necessarily true that any such
xs compose an F. The point I’m interested in here is whether or not Elder has given an
adequate characterization of a particular concept, the concept of there being xs arranged
F-wise. I’m arguing here that, as a matter of conceptual analysis, Elder’s characterization
of there being objects “arranged F-wise” is incorrect. So, whether or not Elder is correct
that, say, it is necessarily the case that any xs which are arranged dog-wise compose a
dog, he is not correct that it is somehow true by deﬁnition that any such xs compose a
dog.
8

notions.13
3
Can Nihilists Answer the Special Arrange-
ment Question?
With those preliminary, but (I think) very important, points out of the way,
let’s consider whether Elder (2011), Tallant (2014), or Unger (2014) give us
compelling arguments for the view that nihilists are unable to answer the
SAQ. Again, it’s not obvious to me that the nihilist needs to give an answer
to the SAQ. But supposing she does, is there anything preventing her from
doing so?
I’ll address Tallant’s arguments ﬁrst. Tallant takes his cue from Bennett,
who puts the challenge for the nihilist like this:
The nihilist does indeed a [sic] straightforward answer to the Spe-
cial Composition Question, as well as to the closely related ques-
tion ‘when, if ever, do some things compose an F?’, where F is
a sortal or kind term. In both cases, the nihilist will say ‘never’.
But there is a question closely analogous to the second of those
two, to which the nihilist does not have a straightforward answer–
namely, ‘when, if ever, are some things arranged F-wise?’ Put the
point this way: perhaps the believer has to say something about
what the world has to be like to contain tables. However, the
nihilist equally needs to say something about what the world has
to be like to contain simples arranged tablewise. If the believer
should tell us when and how some simples compose a thing of
kind F, the nihilist should tell us when and how some simples are
arranged F-wise (Bennett 2009: 66)
Bennett merely raises the challenge for the nihilist, while Tallant, by
contrast, contends that the nihilist is unable to meet the challenge.
A natural characterization of such phrases as “the xs are arranged table-
wise” is in terms of a particular sort of counterfactual. So, when the nihilist
13Of course, the claim I’m making in this paragraph isn’t entirely uncontroversial.
Thomasson (2007), for example, contends that it is analytic that where we have xs ar-
ranged table-wise we have a table.
But Thomasson is incorrect: saying there are xs
arranged table-wise just doesn’t involve quantiﬁcation over tables. There isn’t this sort
of analytic entailment here, even if there is a true relevant material or strict conditional
in the neighborhood, something like “if there are xs arranged table-wise then there is a
table” (a conditional which, in any case, the nihilist will reject).
9

says some xs are “arranged table-wise,” what he means is that the xs are
arranged in the manner in which they would be arranged if they composed
a table. This line of thought suggests a straightforward answer to the SAQ,
something like “xs are arranged F-wise iﬀthey are arranged in the manner
in which they would be arranged if they composed an F.” Something like
this sort of counterfactual answer to the SAQ is endorsed by Rosen and Dorr
(2002), and Merricks (2003). There’s actually more than one way to charac-
terize the relevant counterfactuals in detail, but Merricks’ account is pretty
typical: “Atoms are arranged statuewise if and only if they both have the
properties and also stand in the relations to microscopica upon which, if stat-
ues existed, those atoms’ composing a statue would non-trivially supervene”
(this is Tallant’s rendition: Tallant 2014: 1515; see also Merricks 2003: 4).
So, what, according to Tallant, is supposed to be wrong with this sort
of answer to the SAQ?14 Tallant follows Williams (2006) in endorsing the
following principle:
GLOBALIZATION: If F fails to apply to anything in the actual world, then
F has no intension (Tallant 2014: 1515)
GLOBALIZATION is supposed to be an “extension of Kripke’s (1980, p.
24) claim that – issues of mereology to one side – if there don’t in fact exist
any such things as unicorns, then, ‘we cannot say under what circumstances
there would have been unicorns’ ” (Tallant 2014: 1516). GLOBALIZATION
is alleged to be particularly plausible when it comes to purported natural
kinds. If, for example, cats don’t exist, then our term “cat” won’t have an
intension. It follows that we won’t be able to specify the circumstances un-
der which there would be cats. But, as a matter of fact, nihilists deny that
there are any cats. If the nihilist is correct about this, then, given GLOBAL-
IZATION, the nihilist should think that we can’t specify the circumstances
under which there would be cats. If that’s right, however, then a counter-
factual analysis of “there being xs arranged cat-wise,” of the sort Merricks
14Here’s an objection Tallant (and, for that matter, Elder and Unger) does not give: If
nihilism is true, then it is necessarily true. So, if nihilism is true then it’s impossible that
any xs compose a table. So, the sorts of counterfactuals cited by Merricks and others are
actually counterpossibles, in which case any xs would turn out trivially to be arranged
table-wise. Tallant speciﬁcally disavows this objection to counterfactual style answers to
the SAQ (Tallant 2014: note 3), but should the nihilist be worried anyway? I won’t go
into the matter in this paper, but I suppose the nihilist has at least three options, none
of which seem particularly implausible to me: 1.Deny that nihilism is necessarily true
(compare Cameron 2007); 2.Accept some account of counterfactuals according to which
at least some counterpossibles are non-trivially true; 3.Decline to give an answer to the
SAQ which makes use of counterfactuals of the sort in question.
10

might endorse, won’t work.15
This sort of analysis would look something
like this (quoted from Tallant 2014: 1516): “Atoms are arranged cat-wise
if and only if they both have the properties and also stand in the relations
to microscopica upon which, if cats existed, those atoms’ composing a cat
would non-trivially supervene.” If we don’t believe in cats, then we just can’t
specify the conditions under which “if cats existed, those atoms’ composing
a cat would non-trivially supervene.” So, the analysis fails, and similar anal-
yses involving “xs being arranged F-wise” will fail for any other natural kind
term involving a composite object.16
A similar argument will undermine van Inwagen’s analysis of the notion
of some xs being arranged F-wise.17 According to van Inwagen, “The xs are
arranged chair-wise” is true if the xs ﬁll a “chair-receptacle” and “satisfy
certain other conditions”18 (van Inwagen 1990: 109).
What is a “chair-
receptacle”? A chair-receptacle is any region19 of space that, “according to
15As a matter of fact, of course, Merricks (and, for that matter, van Inwagen) does
believe in cats. But, as I mentioned earlier, in this paper I’m treating Merricks as an
honorary nihilist.
16For what it’s worth, Williams (2006) only uses GLOBALIZATION to argue against
contingent nihilism, the thesis that mereological nihilism is contingently true (since the
proponent of this sort of nihilism will be forced to say something like “the proper parthood
relation fails to obtain, but it’s possible that that relation obtain,” although the term
“proper parthood relation” will lack an intension).
17Actually, in van Inwagen 1990, van Inwagen denies that he is capable of giving a
general answer to the SAQ, or, what may amount to the same thing, a general recipe for
paraphrasing talk of composites into talk of xs arranged composite-wise (van Inwagen 1990:
108). However, he does oﬀer paraphrases of particular sentences which make reference to
particular sorts of composite objects (chairs, for example), and, for present purposes, I’ll
follow Tallant in supposing that such paraphrases might oﬀer us a general recipe for most
or all paraphrasis of sentences which refer to composite objects. (Although, as we’ll see,
it will deﬁnitely fail to apply to paraphrasis of talk of non-spatially located composites.)
More recently, in correspondence, van Inwagen says he would endorse a diﬀerent analysis
of some xs being “arranged F-wise,” one inspired by remarks in van Inwagen 1990: 278-279
(remarks on a somewhat diﬀerent subject). Unfortunately I don’t have the space here to
describe the analysis. It’s important to note two points, however. First, van Inwagen’s
new analysis doesn’t make use of the notion of a “chair-receptacle,” to which, as we’ll
see below, Tallant directs his objection.
But second, nevertheless, the analysis makes
use of the notion of some xs composing an F. If Tallant’s objection to van Inwagen’s
earlier analysis is cogent, then he’ll be able to give a structurally similar objection to van
Inwagen’s new analysis, since the phrase “the xs compose an F” will, given nihilism and
GLOBALIZATION, lack an intension. On this latter point see footnotes 16 and 20 of the
present paper.
18What “other conditions” van Inwagen is referencing here doesn’t need to concern us,
since Tallant’s objection focuses on the notion of some xs “occupying a chair-receptacle.”
19Wait a second, aren’t regions composites, in which case nihilists should deny that
there are such things as regions? That’s true, but I don’t think it’s much of a problem in
11

those who believe in the existence of chairs, are occupied by chairs” (van
Inwagen 1990: 105). What’s wrong with van Inwagen’s analysis, according
to Tallant, is that the notion of, say, a “cat-receptacle” will make reference
to the term “cat,” a term which, if the nihilist is correct, has no referent,
and therefore, given GLOBALIZATION, has no intension. So, given van
Inwagen’s analysis of the notion of some xs “being arranged F-wise,” the
nihilist can’t make sense of the phrase “xs arranged cat-wise” (and similar
points apply, mutatis mutandis, with respect to any other natural kind term
involving an alleged composite object).20
I don’t think that Tallant’s argument poses much of a threat toward
nihilism, for two reasons.
First, there must be something wrong with Tallant’s argument, since it
proves too much.
If Tallant’s line of thought is correct, then the nihilist
will be unable to employ phrases like “xs arranged unicorn-wise” or “uni-
corn receptacle,” insofar as for the nihilist the term “unicorn” will lack an
intension since unicorns, if they existed, would be composite objects. But, of
course, since Tallant presumably doesn’t believe in unicorns, Tallant should
concede that for him the term “unicorn” will also lack an intension. But if
the term “unicorn”’s lacking an intension prevents us from employing such
phrases as “xs arranged unicorn-wise” or “unicorn receptacle,” then it should
equally prevent us from employing such phrases as “unicorn statue,” “uni-
corn drawing,” “unicorn painting,” “unicorn movie,” etc. So, Tallant should
contend that there are neither xs arranged unicorn drawing-wise, nor uni-
corn drawings. Since there clearly are either xs arranged unicorn drawing-
wise or unicorn drawings, we should reject Tallant’s argument. (I’ll remain
neutral here with respect to where exactly Tallant’s argument goes wrong –
i.e., whether GLOBALIZATION is false, or whether there’s something wrong
with the manner in which Tallant employs GLOBALIZATION. I should men-
tion, however, that the argument I’ve presented in this paragraph is compati-
ble with the core Kripkean idea that it’s metaphysically impossible that there
be unicorns.)
Perhaps Tallant would respond by oﬀering paraphrases of sentences which
the present context. Perhaps instead of “regions” we should just refer to those points of
spacetime from which some alleged region is made up. Or, following Sider (2013: §11), we
might accept the existence of regions after all, but identify regions with spatially located
sets.
20Tallant’s argument only seems relevant to natural kind composites. Can we make
the argument more general? Sure, just remember my earlier footnote about Williams’
argument: maybe for the nihilist the proper parthood relation fails to have an intension,
in which case she can’t specify when a “proper parthood relation” would counterfactually
obtain.
12

quantify over unicorn drawings or xs arranged unicorn drawing-wise, para-
phrases which don’t make reference to the term “unicorn.” But if such para-
phrases are available in these sorts of cases, it’s unclear why similar para-
phrases would be unavailable for the nihilist who wishes to avoid quantifying
over composite objects. For example, any paraphrase Tallant might employ
to avoid quantiﬁcation over unicorn drawings could presumably be employed
by the nihilist to avoid quantiﬁcation over composite objects (indeed, uni-
corn drawings, if they exist, are themselves composite objects). Similarly,
any paraphrase Tallant might employ to avoid quantiﬁcation over xs ar-
ranged unicorn drawing-wise could again presumably be employed by the
nihilist who wishes to avoid quantiﬁcation over composite objects. Just as
the former paraphrase will presumably not involve quantiﬁcation over ﬂesh
and blood unicorns, so the latter paraphrase will presumably avoid quan-
tiﬁcation over composite objects, in which case the nihilist would be glad
to substitute her present paraphrases of composite talk in terms of “xs ar-
ranged F-wise” with whatever new paraphrases are inspired by Tallant’s own
paraphrases.
The second problem with Tallant’s argument is this. Even assuming Tal-
lant’s argument does not fall prey to the objection above, there may be
alternative characterizations of the phrase “xs arranged table-wise” which
the nihilist might choose to adopt, and it’s not obvious to me that they’re
susceptible to Tallant’s objection. For example, we might characterize the
notion of there being “xs arranged table-wise” in terms of the manner in
which we thought some xs were arranged when we believed they composed
a table (that is, before we became nihilists). This way we only make refer-
ence to a belief about an uninstantiated kind (table), rather than the kind
itself. Or perhaps the nihilist should give a ﬁctionalist answer to the SAQ,
something like “xs are arranged F-wise if they are arranged as they are ar-
ranged according to the ﬁction that there are Fs.”21 Or, perhaps the nihilist
21I am not suggesting that what it is for some xs to be arranged table-wise is for people
to believe that such xs are arranged table-wise. Rather, the suggestion is that what it
means for xs to be arranged table-wise is that those xs are arranged in the manner in
which those who believe in tables actually suppose the parts of tables are arranged. The
belief of those who believe in tables is being used to pick out a certain arrangement. So,
I’m not using the belief in question as a component of what it means for some xs to be in
that arrangement. This point addresses Elder’s objection to ﬁctionalist accounts of what
it means for xs to be arranged F-wise: “That the contents of a given region are dogwise
arranged is supposed to explain why the folk suppose that in that region there is a dog,
and the explanation is supposed to be causal: in virtue of being dogwise arranged, the
contents of such a region are supposed to be such as to cause in folk observers doggish
sensory experiences, and to cause in surrounding regions events that will look to the folk
like the sorts of eﬀect we expect to see dogs produce. So that the contents of a region
13

should say that the xs model the F in the same way a drawing models a
unicorn. (Of course, there are slight disanalogies here. In the case of the
xs, for example, we’d have many things (the xs) collectively modeling rather
than one thing (the drawing) modeling. Plus models might involve someone
having an intention to model, whereas xs can be arranged F-wise without
this sort of intention. Still, the modeling analogy seems to me to be useful
and informative.)
So, I don’t think Tallant’s arguments here are very compelling.
As I mentioned earlier, Elder (2011) also contends that the nihilist is un-
able to answer the SAQ. Here’s Elder’s thought process. People generally
believe that there are, say, dogs. Dogs are, if they exist, presumably compos-
ite objects, so how is the nihilist going to explain widespread belief in such
things? The answer is, of course, that there are xs arranged dog-wise, and
that these xs account for the widespread belief that there are dogs – people
see the xs and incorrectly infer or otherwise come to believe that there is a
dog where in fact there are merely xs arranged dog-wise. This line of thought
is presumably one which a typical nihilist will endorse. But then it looks like
the nihilist endorses the following thought as well:
dogwise arrangement is that by virtue of which the contents of
some region of the world look and act like a dog.
That is, it
is that by virtue of which the contents of some region cause (or
would cause) in conscious subjects certain sensory experiences,
and cause (or would cause) in surrounding regions the sorts of
observable eﬀects that we expect dogs to cause (Elder 2011: 116)
If the bearer of any instance of [dogwise arrangement] is many
microparticles, the microparticles in question will, it seems, be
all and only those that between them are such as to cause in folk
observers (should folk observers be present) the judgment that a
dog is present (Elder 2011: 120)
Elder seems to think this will be the nihilist’s favored answer to the
SAQ,22 but he’s wrong about this. This particular answer to the SAQ isn’t
endorsed by any nihilist (or, for that matter, almost-nihilists like van Inwagen
are dogwise arranged must be a state of aﬀairs distinct from the fact that the folk would
suppose that there exists in that region a dog. The ﬁctionalist position makes dogwise
arrangement be just equivalent to the belief that it is supposed causally to explain” (Elder
2011: 119-120).
22Actually, Elder considers some modiﬁcations of this answer to the SAQ, but a central
component of all of these accounts is that the xs arranged F-wise are those particles which
tend to cause the belief that there are Fs.
14

and Merricks). It’s true that the nihilist will agree that the xs in question
(those that are arranged dog-wise) plausibly cause the belief that there is
a dog. The nihilist should undoubtedly concede that point. But when the
nihilist makes that point she’s not trying to give an answer to the SAQ.
That is, she’s not trying to say what it is for some xs to be arranged dog-
wise. Elder seems to be under the impression that when the nihilist says that
some xs arranged dog-wise are what cause the belief that there are dogs, the
nihilist is saying that those xs are the only causes of that belief, or perhaps
that what it means for some xs to be arranged dog-wise is for those xs to
cause (or tend to cause, or whatever) the belief that there are dogs. Nihilists
shouldn’t endorse either of these ideas, and as far as I’m aware they never
have. So, once again, I don’t think Elder has given a compelling argument
for the view that the nihilist is unable to answer the SAQ.
Recently Peter Unger has suggested that the predicate “is arranged F-
wise” is incoherent, for many sortal terms F. Here’s what he says on the
subject:
Several recent deniers of tables see no serious troubles with hav-
ing there be lots of much simpler things arranged tablewise. ...
(When I was in the business of denying tables, by contrast, I was
just as much in the business of denying, in eﬀect, that any things
could ever be arranged tablewise. For me then, just as ‘table’ was
impossible to satisfy, governed as it was by conﬂicting conditions
of application, so, also, ‘tablewise’ was unsatisﬁable, governed as
it was by conﬂicting conditions ...) (Unger 2014: 14 n.18)
In eﬀect, Unger is suggesting that nihilists are unable to give a coherent
answer to the SAQ, for many sortal terms F. I say “for many sortal terms
F” since, as we’ll see, Unger plausibly doesn’t intend to deny that just any
predicate of the form “is arranged F-wise” is unsatisﬁable.
Unger doesn’t spell out his argument in detail, but he does refer us to
an earlier paper in which he argues against the existence of various sorts of
objects (“ordinary things,” people, etc.) (Unger 1979c; but see also Unger
1979a and 1979b). He seems to think that those arguments can, with little or
no modiﬁcation, represent equally compelling challenges to the coherence of
many “arranged F-wise” predicates. Since Unger says so little on this latter
subject, what follows is my own reconstruction of the line of thought I take
Unger to be endorsing (or at any rate alluding to)23 in the passage above.
23Whether Unger would now endorse the line of thought reconstructed below isn’t a
particularly important question.
15

Let’s take the predicate “are arranged table-wise” as an example, and
let’s suppose that those things which are alleged to be arranged table-wise
are “atoms.” The following propositions are jointly inconsistent:
(1) There are atoms arranged table-wise.
(2) For any things there may be, if they are atoms arranged table-wise, then
they are a ﬁnite number of atoms.
(3) For any things there may be, if they are atoms arranged table-wise (of
which there are many, but a ﬁnite number), then a.the net removal of one
atom, or only a few, in a way which is most innocuous and favorable, or b.a
change in relative positions of any of the atoms with respect to the other
atoms, in a way which is most innocuous and favorable, will not mean the
diﬀerence as to whether there are xs arranged table-wise in the situation.24
These propositions are jointly inconsistent, and here’s why. Assume that
we have some atoms arranged table-wise. The net removal of just one of
these atoms, in a way which is most innocuous and favorable for the con-
tinued satisfaction of the predicate “are arranged table-wise” by the atoms
in question, will not cause those atoms to cease to satisfy that predicate.
Similarly, a change in the relative positions of any of the atoms with respect
to the other atoms, in a way which is most innocuous and favorable for the
continued satisfaction of the predicate “is arranged table-wise” by the atoms
in question, will not cause those atoms to cease to satisfy that predicate. But
now take our atoms which are purportedly arranged table-wise and, bit by
bit, remove one atom at a time and/or change the relative positions of the
atoms. Eventually we’ll be left with one atom, or atoms which are clearly not
“arranged table-wise.” So, at the end of the process we won’t have “atoms
arranged table-wise.” But, since at no point in the process did we go from
having atoms arranged table-wise to not having atoms arranged table-wise,
it must be the case that, despite our initial inclinations to the contrary, we
never had atoms arranged table-wise to begin with. So, (1), (2), and (3) are
jointly inconsistent. Since these propositions are jointly inconsistent, one of
them has to go. Unger recommends that we reject (1). Similar arguments
will purportedly show, for many sortal terms F, that there are not atoms (or
objects more generally) arranged F-wise. These arguments are not supposed
to show that, for any sortal term F, there are no objects arranged F-wise.
Perhaps, for example, there are xs arranged in a very speciﬁc manner such
that the net removal of one of those xs, or any change in the relative position
24The manner in which this argument is worded is modeled after an argument in Unger
1979b: 120.
16

of one or more of the xs with respect to one another, will result in our no
longer having xs arranged in that manner.
So, does Unger’s new sorites argument against there being xs arranged,
say, “table-wise” pose a problem for nihilism? I think not. The fact that
the nihilist can’t coherently speak of there being xs arranged F-wise is only
alleged to be a problem since the nihilist wants to paraphrase talk of some
composite F into talk of there being “xs arranged F-wise,” in order to avoid
quantiﬁcation over Fs. So, if we can be assured that there aren’t any Fs,
the fact that the nihilist can’t oﬀer paraphrases of talk of F into talk of xs
arranged F-wise shouldn’t be a concern. If, for some composite object sortal
F, Unger is correct that there aren’t xs arranged F-wise, there also won’t
be any Fs. This is because, for any composite object F, if there aren’t xs
arranged F-wise, then there aren’t any Fs. To give an example, how could
there be, say, a table, if the table doesn’t have parts that are arranged table-
wise (put informally: doesn’t have parts that are arranged like a table)?25
To reiterate: if (for some composite object sortal F) there aren’t any
xs arranged F-wise, there aren’t any Fs either, in which case the nihilist
shouldn’t be concerned that he is unable to oﬀer a paraphrase of F talk into
talk of xs arranged F-wise – such paraphrasis was only oﬀered in the ﬁrst
place to avoid quantiﬁcation over Fs. So, even if Unger’s new sorites argu-
ments against there being xs arranged F-wise are sound, this won’t provide
any resources for an objection to nihilism. But in any case those arguments
are not sound, even if his earlier sorites arguments against the existence of
ordinary things (as well as animals, people, etc.) are sound. There is an
important disanology between the two sorts of arguments, which render the
former arguments far less plausible than the latter arguments.
There are actually at least two relevant variants of Unger’s earlier sorites
arguments against the existence of ordinary things, people, etc. First, there
are those concerning predicates. For example, we might begin with a rock,
and, removing one atom at a time, ask at each stage of the process whether
we’ve still got a rock. We will ignore the question of whether or not the
composite object before us (if there is a composite object after the removal
of the most recent atom) is identical with the alleged rock with which we
began. (This is, in fact, the sort of sorites argument Unger has in mind for
most of Unger 1979b.) A second sort of sorites argument is this. We begin
25Of course, there might be a table even if there aren’t xs arranged table-wise if the table
in question is a mereological simple. In that case it would perhaps sound odd to say that
the table is arranged in any particular manner (although perhaps this won’t sound quite
as odd given that the table in question would presumably have to be spatially extended).
In any case, I avoid such counterexamples above by restricting the principle in question
(there can’t be an F if there aren’t xs arranged F-wise) to composite objects.
17

with an alleged rock and ask, at the removal of each atom (or bit of rock,
or whatever), whether the alleged object with which we began still exists,
whether or not it is still a rock. (Unger brieﬂy endorses this sort of sorites
argument in Unger 1979b: 149, and his separate arguments against his own
existence in Unger 1979a seem to be of this sort.)
The second variety of sorites argument retains some degree of plausibil-
ity (especially for the nihilist) because it centrally relies on the notion that
existence cannot be vague. This is a point on which most philosophers will
agree. By contrast, an argument against there being “xs arranged F-wise,”
modeled after Unger’s previous arguments against the existence of “ordinary
things,” will turn on the much more controversial notion that there cannot be
any vague predicates. The xs in question will, presumably, exist regardless
of their arrangement. What’s at issue is whether they instantiate a partic-
ular multi-place predicate, “being arranged F-wise.” If Unger’s argument
against their being arranged in that manner is sound, structurally identical
arguments can be constructed against any x or xs instantiating any predi-
cate that isn’t entirely precise. And on this point all philosophers will agree
that objects can satisfy vague predicates. Where philosophers will disagree
is with respect to the nature of that vagueness – whether, for example, the
vagueness in question is an instance of genuine ontic vagueness, or whether
the vagueness in question is merely semantic or epistemic. Similarly, where
exactly we say Unger’s argument goes wrong will depend on what account
of vagueness we endorse.
I don’t need to endorse any particular account
of vagueness here. My main point is simply that Unger’s argument against
there being xs arranged F-wise should be rejected by anyone who accepts
the possibility of an object (or some objects) satisfying a vague predicate.26
26Why is vague existence so much more objectionable than vague predicates?
The
chief diﬀerence stems, I think, from the fact that our linguistic decisions decide which
properties we intend to pick out with certain words or phrases, but they do not decide
what exists. Insofar as our linguistic practices are imprecise, they’ll be incapable of picking
out one precise property in every case. Thus we have vagueness stemming from semantic
indecision.
Again, by contrast, our linguistic decisions do not determine what exists
(other than, perhaps, things like linguistic utterances themselves).
So, we don’t have
a plausible story regarding the origins of vague existence, or even a plausible account
of what vague existence could consist in (whereas vague predicates, by contrast, would
consist in our having a hard time picking out just one precise property when we say a
man is, say, bald). This is, in any case, the important diﬀerence between vague existence
and vague predicates – why the former is far less plausible than the latter – given a
linguistic or semantic theory of vagueness. Similar point could be made, I think, with
respect to other accounts of vagueness. An epistemicist might think, for example, that
our linguistic practices as a community serve to pick out a determinate extension for each
of our predicative expressions, even if we’ll often be unable to tell what that extension
is. Vagueness on such an account is merely epistemic: we don’t know which property,
18

(For what it’s worth, Unger would probably concede this point. A major
theme of Unger 1979c is Unger’s rejection of the coherence of “qualitative
vague discriminative expressions” – that is, expressions which concern qual-
itative features of some objects, which are vague, and which are intended to
distinguish some objects from other objects.27 Probably almost all of the
predicates we employ are expressed using qualitative vague discriminative
expressions.)
4
Can Nihilists Answer the Special Arrange-
ment Question Without Undermining Ni-
hilism?
In the previous two sections I considered the contention that nihilists are
unable to answer the SAQ, to their detriment. I argued that we’ve been
given no convincing reason to suppose that nihilists are unable to answer the
SAQ, it’s not clear that the nihilist needs to answer the SAQ, and, whether
or not the nihilist can or should answer the SAQ, non-nihilists will be in
just the same position as the nihilist – if the nihilist can’t answer the SAQ,
neither can the non-nihilist. A related concern is that, whether or not the
nihilist can answer the SAQ, she can’t do so without undermining one of
her chief motivations for accepting nihilism (Bennett 2009, Tallant 2014),
or accepting otherwise objectionable logical or metaphysical commitments
(Uzquiano 2004).
Let’s begin with the ﬁrst objection, that nihilists are unable to answer
the SAQ without undermining a key motivation for nihilism.
Above I said that nihilism is often motivated by the fact that it is alleged
to oﬀer us a simpler picture of the world. Sider (2013) in particular argues
for nihilism on the basis of nihilism’s alleged ideological simplicity, insofar
as nihilism allows us to do without a primitive parthood relation. Bennett
and Tallant contend that nihilism is not ideologically simpler than its rivals,
since nihilists will have to make use of ideologically extravagant resources to
make sense of such locutions as “xs arranged F-wise.” Tallant puts the point
like this:
the nihilist does require just as much ideological complexity as
exactly, is picked out by some expression of ours. By contrast, our linguistic practices
as a community don’t serve to bring anything into existence (other than, again, perhaps
linguistic expressions themselves).
27“Entity,” for example, will not be discriminative in this manner, even if it turns out
to be a somewhat vague term, insofar as anything whatsoever would be an entity.
19

someone who believes that there is composition because the ni-
hilist replaces talk of ‘the xs compose an F’ with talk of ‘the xs
arranged F-wise’. Thus, this is a [sic] simply a case of replacing
one predicate with another and so does not obviously generate
any greater ideological simplicity (Tallant 2014: 1523)
Actually, matters aren’t even that simple, since the nihilist will need more
than the sort of simple plural predication involved in the sentence “the xs
are arranged F-wise.” As Bennett puts it:
Many (alleged) composites are (allegedly) composed of other (al-
leged) composites.
The nihilist needs to be able to recapture
explanations of, say, how water droplets come together to form
thunderclouds, how molecular bonding works, and the distinction
between single-celled and multicellular organisms. The nihilist’s
translations need to preserve compositional structure.
Making
sense of multicellularity requires making sense of putative organ-
isms that are putatively composed of cells; multicellularity is not
a property directly instantiated by simples. Thus, nihilists need
to be able to say, not just that there are simples arranged multi-
cellularly, but rather something closer to:
((((((there are simples arranged atomwise) arranged molecule-
wise) arranged organellewise) arranged cellwise) arranged organ-
wise) arranged ...) (Bennett 2009: 60)
These sorts of considerations will force the nihilist to adopt ideological
commitments which go beyond mere plural quantiﬁcation and predication:
There are strategies available for dealing with these issues. Ni-
hilists who are willing to countenance sets can supplement plural
quantiﬁcation over simples with plural quantiﬁcation over sets.
Alternatively, they can supplement plural quantiﬁcation over sim-
ples with plurally plural or perplural quantiﬁcation over simples
(Bennett 2009: 60)
In short, “[nihilists’] paraphrase scheme cannot be as simple as they typ-
ically make out” (Bennett 2009: 60), and at the end of the day the nihilist
may end up with a theory (ontology + ideology) at least as complex as those
endorsed by people who believe in composite objects. He “cannot automat-
ically claim victory on the simplicity score” (Bennett 2009: 63).
Here’s my response. I don’t think the nihilist should be concerned by
the arguments just outlined, since those who believe in composition will be
20

forced to accept those very ideological commitments employed by the nihilist
in his talk of “xs arranged F-wise.”28 After all, if the nihilist believes that
there are xs arranged table-wise, but no table, while someone who believes in
composite objects believes in the table, won’t the latter person also believe
that there are xs arranged table-wise? And won’t similar points apply with
respect to the sorts of concerns Bennett raises about xs being “((((((arranged
atomwise) arranged moleculewise) arranged organellewise) arranged cellwise)
arranged organwise) arranged...)”? Won’t someone who believes in organisms
also believe in objects which are arranged in that manner?29
Bennett doesn’t adequately address this point. Here’s what she says:
The believer [in composition] need not countenance either these
highly structured plural predicates, nor any properties that an-
swer to them. She does not need to say that the simples them-
selves directly satisfy any such plural predicate or instantiate any
such property. She can simply say that the simples directly satisfy
‘arranged quarkwise’ – or whatever the smallest items composed
from simples are. Then the quarks satisfy ‘arranged atomwise’,
and so forth on up. It is molecules that get arranged into cells.
So the believer does not need to countenance the highly struc-
tured properties or predicates of simples needed by the nihilist
(Bennett 2009: 64)
Here’s why I’m not convinced by this argument. If, for example, atoms
compose molecules, which in turn compose a dog or something,30 you can’t
28Compare some remarks Cameron makes with respect to Lewis’s reduction of modality:
“If parsimony is what motivates you to seek a reduction then our question should simply
be whether what is in the proposed reductive base are resources that we need anyway. If
I want an analysis of Φ in terms of Ψ on the grounds of parsimony then Ψ had better be
something I need to appeal to whether or not I accept the analysis; otherwise I haven’t
increased my ideological parsimony, merely swapped one bit of primitive ideology for
another. But if we need to take Ψ as primitive anyway, then I can claim an advantage
over those who in addition take Φ as primitive” (Cameron 2012: 18). My response to
Bennett and Tallant is that those who believe in composition will, just like the nihilist,
need to employ and make sense of such phrases as “the xs are (((arranged atom-wise)
arranged molecule-wise) arranged ...).” However, the non-nihilist will also need one or
more mereological primitives, primitives which the nihilist can do without. So, nihilism
still wins the ideological simplicity contest.
29This is all assuming, of course, that the nihilist needs to employ “arranged F-wise
predicates.” See my discussion of this issue in §2 above. Here I’m assuming that the
nihilist will need to make use of such predicates. My point here is that, if the nihilist
needs to employ such predicates, then so does the non-nihilist.
30I’m, of course, using a very simpliﬁed example, but that doesn’t aﬀect the points I’m
going to make.
21

just say that the molecules are arranged dog-wise, while the atoms are merely
arranged molecule-wise.
It seems clear to me that the molecules will be
arranged dog-wise, and the atoms will be ((arranged molecule-wise) arranged
dog-wise). After all, the atoms certainly seem to be shaped like a dog. I don’t
know what else you’d have to do to make the atoms satisfy the “((arranged
molecule-wise) arranged dog-wise)” predicate than to arrange them in this
manner. The fact that they also happen to compose molecules just seems to
me to be irrelevant on this point.
Here’s another way to make this point: let’s suppose that facts about
composition are contingent, and that God can decide of some objects that
don’t compose something that, henceforth, they will compose something. So,
let’s say we have atoms ((arranged molecule-wise) arranged dog-wise), but
they don’t compose molecules or a dog. Now, God decides that henceforth
they will compose molecules and a dog. Do the atoms in question cease
to be ((arranged molecule-wise) arranged dog-wise)? Of course not, since
their arrangement hasn’t changed – they’re just where they were before God
issued his edict. So, it looks like those who believe in composites will need
to countenance just the same sorts of “highly structured plural predicates”
that the nihilist needs.
This conclusion can be strengthened by further arguments, of which I’ll
oﬀer two.
First, for those who believe in composite objects, the fact that some xs
are arranged F-wise is the reason they compose an F. The parts of a table,
for example, are alleged to compose a table because those parts are arranged
table-wise.
Those who believe in some composite object F, then, should
concede that the parts of that object are “arranged F-wise,” and a similar
point applies, mutatis mutandis, to Bennett’s more complex examples.
Second, when the nihilist says something like “hey, I may not believe in
tables, but that’s not as bad as you might think because I do believe in things
arranged table-wise,” she’s not introducing a new predicate (“arranged table-
wise”) which her interlocutor doesn’t employ. Rather, she’s saying, “I don’t
accept one claim that you accept (there are tables), but I do accept this
other claim that you accept, namely that there are xs arranged table-wise.”
The whole point, then, of the paraphrase is to indicate to the believer in
composite objects that the nihilist accepts something that the believer also
accepts. This is, I think, precisely how such paraphrases were intended to
function when they were introduced by van Inwagen (see van Inwagen 1990:
§10-11, especially pp.104-106).
Given the previous discussion, Uzquiano’s (2004) objection to nihilism is
rather easily dealt with. His objection is very similar to the objection de-
veloped by Bennett and Tallant. Uzquiano argues that nihilists can’t para-
22

phrase certain sentences involving plural quantiﬁcation over composites, or
sentences involving “plural predicates collectively satisﬁed by composites”
(Uzquiano 2004: 437), without incurring signiﬁcant costs. Namely, the ni-
hilist will either need to employ perplural quantiﬁcation,31 quantiﬁcation over
plural properties (those involved in relevant monadic second-order quantiﬁ-
cation), or quantiﬁcation over sets of simples arranged in a certain manner.
Unfortunately for the nihilist, perplural quantiﬁcation is currently too poorly
understood or independently motivated to employ with conﬁdence, quantiﬁ-
cation over the sorts of plural properties the nihilist will need is ontologically
extravagant, and relevant paraphrases involving sets of simples will involve
identifying alleged composites with sets (something Uzquiano thinks few ni-
hilists will want to do).32
The chief diﬀerence between Uzquiano’s objection and the objection of-
fered by Bennett and Tallant is that Uzquiano doesn’t cast his objection in
terms of the relative simplicity of nihilism vs. its rivals. Rather, the resources
nihilists will need to employ to make sense of certain sorts of paraphrases
(perplural quantiﬁcation, plural properties, etc.) are themselves objection-
able. My response to Uzquiano is, however, the same response I gave above,
namely that if nihilists need to employ the sorts of (allegedly) objectionable
technical devices cited by Uzquiano (perplural quantiﬁcation, plural prop-
erties, etc.), the non-nihilist will need to employ them as well, even if the
non-nihilist will also endorse corollary sentences (directly involving composite
objects, and the arrangement thereof) which the nihilist will not endorse.33
31Uzquiano calls it “pluplural” quantiﬁcation. I’ll continue to use the term “perplural”
to remain consistent with Bennett’s use of the term above.
32Ironically, at least one recent prominent nihilist (Sider 2013) has identiﬁed alleged
composite objects (chairs, dogs, etc.) with spatially located sets, although not in response
to Uzquiano’s arguments.
33A residual issue, and one which I won’t discuss at length here, is whether perplural
quantiﬁcation would undermine nihilism. For example, if the nihilist is willing to quantify
over, say, multiple pluralities, we might wonder whether the “pluralities” in question would
qualify as composite objects. (One way out of the problem, of course, is for the nihilist to
forgo perplural quantiﬁcation in favor of quantiﬁcation over sets, or monadic second order
quantiﬁcation.) I’m not sure what the nihilist should say here, but a ﬁctionalist construal
of perplural quantiﬁcation of the following sort might resolve the problem: “Perhaps,
we can understand the language [of perplural quantiﬁcation] through a convenient ﬁction
according to which pluralities are real entities over which perplural quantiﬁers range. The
ﬁctional interpretation of the language need not lead to inconsistencies as long as we
stipulate that the plural quantiﬁers of such a language range only over the non-ﬁctional
entities of the universe. The plural quantiﬁers will have their ordinary meaning whereas
the perplurals will have a ﬁctional meaning that merely helps us in our counting” (Spencer
2012: 73 n.10). (For what it’s worth, Spencer isn’t defending mereological nihilism in this
passage.)
23

So, again, it seems that those who believe in composition will need to
countenance those very same locutions (involving “xs arranged F-wise,” and
variants thereof) which the nihilist will employ in those paraphrases she oﬀers
of talk involving composites – again, assuming that even the nihilist needs
to make use of such locutions.34 Of course, the believer in composites might
be better oﬀthan the nihilist if the former can provide an analysis of those
sorts of locutions while the nihilist cannot. This would be the case if, for
example, phrases such as “the xs are arranged F-wise” can only be construed
in a manner which makes use of composition, as Elder suggests. But, as I
argued above, that suggestion doesn’t look very plausible.
5
Conclusion
Nihilists frequently employ such phrases as “the xs are arranged F-wise,”
usually in order to paraphrase away commitments to Fs.
The SAQ is a
challenge toward those who employ such phrases to say exactly what those
phrases mean. In this paper I’ve considered two sorts of objections to ni-
hilism. The ﬁrst was that nihilists are simply unable to answer the SAQ,
while the second was that, whether or not nihilists can answer the SAQ,
they can’t do so without undermining a chief motivation for nihilism, or ac-
cepting otherwise objectionable logical or metaphysical commitments. I’ve
argued that neither of these objections to nihilism are compelling. One key
theme of this paper is the following: any problems faced by the nihilist with
respect to answering the SAQ (if there are any such problems) will be shared
34How has this point escaped Bennett’s, Tallant’s, and Uzquiano’s notice? I suspect
it has to do with the fact that nihilists (as well as almost-nihilists like van Inwagen and
Merricks) are just more likely to actually use such phrases as “the xs are arranged table-
wise.” While someone who believes in tables will, I’ve been arguing, on reﬂection endorse
the sentence “there are xs arranged table-wise” if the nihilist does, it’s diﬃcult to imagine
circumstances in which he would actually need to use that sort of sentence. Nihilists,
however, insofar as they bring to our attention the possibility that there aren’t in fact any
tables, have just the perfect opportunity to employ such phrases as “the xs are arranged
table-wise,” namely in the course of explaining why their view isn’t as crazy as it initially
sounds. (Compare: earlier I suggested that nihilists, while denying that the moon exists,
nevertheless are not thereby suggesting that widespread delusions to the contrary are the
result of a conspiracy theory or something of that nature – they are not suggesting, for
example, that a secret Illuminati-esque cabal is promoting the myth that the moon exists.
It’s diﬃcult to imagine a situation in which someone who believes the moon exists would
have to say something like “I’m not suggesting that there’s a secret Illuminati-esque cabal
promoting the myth that the moon exists.”
Nevertheless, probably most people who
believe in the moon would, on reﬂection, endorse that latter sentence.)
24

by the non-nihilist.35
References
[1] David Z. Albert. Elementary quantum metaphysics. In J. T. Cushing,
A. Fine, and S. Goldstein, editors, Bohmian Mechanics and Quantum
Theory: An Appraisal, pages 277–84. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dor-
drecht, 1996.
[2] Lynne Rudder Baker.
Why constitution is not identity.
Journal of
Philosophy, 94:599–621, 1997.
[3] Karen Bennett. Composition, colocation, and metaontology. In David J.
Chalmers, David Manley, and Ryan Wasserman, editors, Metameta-
physics, pages 38–76. Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2009.
[4] Ross P. Cameron. The contingency of composition. Philosophical Stud-
ies, 136:99–121, 2007.
[5] Ross P. Cameron. How to have a radically minimal ontology. Philosoph-
ical Studies, 151:249–64, 2010.
[6] Ross P. Cameron. Why lewis’s analysis of modality succeeds in its re-
ductive ambitions. Philosophers’ Imprint, 12:1–21, 2012.
[7] Gabriele Contessa.
One’s a crowd:
Mereological nihilism without
ordinary-object eliminativism.
Analytic Philosophy, 55(2):199–221,
2014.
[8] Cian Dorr. The Simplicity of Everything. PhD thesis, Princeton Uni-
versity, 2002.
[9] Cian Dorr and Gideon Rosen. Composition as a ﬁction. In Richard Gale,
editor, The Blackwell Guide to Metaphysics, pages 151–74. Blackwell,
Oxford, 2002.
[10] Crawford Elder. Familiar Objects and Their Shadows. Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge, 2011.
[11] Terence Horgan and Matjaˇz Potrˇc. Austere Realism: Contextual Seman-
tics Meets Minimal Ontology. The MIT Press, 2008.
35Thanks to Justin Christy, Chad McIntosh, Michael Rea, Amy Seymour, Peter van
Inwagen, and two anonymous referees for very helpful comments on earlier drafts of this
paper.
25

[12] Saul Kripke. Naming and necessity. In Donald Davidson and Gilbert
Harman, editors, Semantics of Natural Language, pages 253–355, 763–9.
D. Reidel, Dordrecht, 1972. Revised edition published in 1980 as Naming
and Necessity (Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA).
[13] Trenton Merricks. Objects and Persons. Clarendon Press, Oxford, 2003.
[14] W. V. O. Quine. Ontology and ideology. Philosophical Studies, 2:11–15,
1951.
[15] Jonathan Schaﬀer. Monism: The priority of the whole. Philosophical
Review, 119:31–76, 2010.
[16] Theodore Sider. Writing the Book of the World. Clarendon Press, Ox-
ford, 2011.
[17] Theodore Sider. Against parthood. In Karen Bennett and Dean W.
Zimmerman, editors, Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, volume 8. Oxford
University Press, Oxford, 2013.
[18] Joshua Spencer.
All things must pass away.
In Karen Bennett and
Dean W. Zimmerman, editors, Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, volume 7.
Oxford University Press, Oxford, 2012.
[19] Jonathan Tallant. Against mereological nihilism. Synthese, 191:1511–
1527, 2014.
[20] Amie L. Thomasson. Ordinary Objects. Oxford University Press, New
York, 2007.
[21] Peter Unger. I do not exist. In G. F. Macdonald, editor, Perception
and Identity: Essays Presented to A. J. Ayer with His Replies to Them,
pages 235–51. Macmillan, New York, 1979.
[22] Peter Unger. There are no ordinary things. Synthese, 41:117–54, 1979.
[23] Peter Unger. Why there are no people. In Peter French, Theodore E.
Uehling, Jr., and Howard K. Wettstein, editors, Midwest Studies in Phi-
losophy IV. University of Minnesota Press, Minneapolis, 1979.
[24] Peter Unger. Empty Ideas: A Critique of Analytic Philosophy. Oxford
University Press, 2014.
[25] Gabriel Uzquiano. Plurals and simples. The Monist, 87:429–51, 2004.
26

[26] Peter van Inwagen. Material Beings. Cornell University Press, Ithaca,
NY, 1990.
[27] Peter van Inwagen. Introduction: Inside and outside the ontology room.
In Existence: Essays in Ontology, pages 1–14. Cambridge University
Press, 2014.
[28] J.R.G. Williams. Illusions of gunk. Philosophical Perspectives, 20:493–
513, 2006.
27

