arXiv:1012.5739v1  [cs.SE]  28 Dec 2010
Business Mereology: Imaginative Deﬁnitions of
Insourcing and Outsourcing Transformations ∗
J.A. Bergstra1,2
S.F.M. van Vlijmen1
1 Section Theory of Computer Science, Informatics Institute,
Faculty of Science, University of Amsterdam.
2 Department of Computer Science, Swansea University.
Abstract
Outsourcing, the passing on of tasks by organizations to other organizations, often
including the personnel and means to perform these tasks, has become an important
IT-business strategy over the past decades.
We investigate imaginative deﬁnitions for outsourcing relations and outsourcing
transformations. Abstract models of an extreme and unrealistic simplicity are consid-
ered in order to investigate possible deﬁnitions of outsourcing. Rather than covering all
relevant practical cases an imaginative deﬁnition of a concept provides obvious cases
of its instantiation from which more reﬁned or liberal deﬁnitions may be derived.
A deﬁnition of outsourcing induces to a complementary deﬁnition of insourcing.
Outsourcing and insourcing have more complex variations in which multiple parties are
involved. All of these terms both refer to state transformations and to state descriptions
pertaining to the state obtained after such transformations. We make an attempt to
disambiguate the terminology in that respect and we make an attempt to characterize
the general concept of sourcing which captures some representative cases.
Because mereology is the most general theory of parthood relations we coin business
mereology as the general theory in business studies which concerns the full variety of
sourcing relations and transformations.
1
Introduction
In Delen [16, 17] a survey is given of deﬁnitions of outsourcing, insourcing, outtasking,
intasking, follow-up sourcing, backsourcing, greenﬁeld outsourcing and greenﬁeld insourc-
ing.1 Recently multiple outsourcing has become prominent and geographical aspects have
become crucial.2 For instance, oﬀshoring as a speciﬁc instance of outsourcing where the
insourcer is located ‘oﬀshore’, which means quite distantly, not only in kilometers but also
∗This work has been performed in the context of the NWO project Symbiosis.
Thanks are due to
Guus Delen (Verdonck, Klooster & Associates, Zoetermeer, The Netherlands), Karl de Leeuw (University
of Amsterdam) and Arjen Sevenster (University of Amsterdam) for discussions concerning sourcing.
1As early references concerning outsourcing Delen mentions: [21], [23], [24].
2In [13] multiple outsourcing is subsumed under outsourcing.
1

in terms of native language and, more importantly, business culture.3 Although outsourc-
ing and insourcing often directly or indirectly concern or comprise IT, we understand these
transformations at a general level, so including applications outside IT.
It is customary to view outsourcing and insourcing as a topic in sourcing. But we will
not generalize the theme to sourcing before a deﬁnition of outsourcing, which seems to be
the oldest and most classical of all sourcing transformations, has been worked out. At the
same time we assume that insourcing is complementary to outsourcing to a high degree and
that deﬁnitions provided for outsourcing naturally lead to similar deﬁnitions for insourcing.
Whether or not the entire subject can be treated more symmetrically in terms of sourcing
remains to be seen.
In any case, unlike outsourcing, sourcing can not plausibly be understood as a transfor-
mation and for that reason a theory that takes sourcing as its primitive instead of insourcing
and outsourcing must take a diﬀerent form. Throughout the text occurrences of outsourcing
may often be generalized into insourcing or outsourcing, or even to sourcing once one has
made up one’s mind on the meaning of sourcing. Our overriding objective has been, however,
to clarify at least one form of activities subsumed under sourcing, viz. outsourcing in the
clearest possible way. We cannot at the same time provide deﬁnitions of speciﬁc concepts
and write at the most general level of abstraction.
It appears that a workable though informal view on outsourcing is as follows. Companies,
enterprizes, and organizations all combine human activity, titles of ownership, artifacts,
infrastructure, and structures of command and control into units with a more or less visible
identity. Such units have an internal structure and in some cases:
parts of a unit may be removed from that unit (the outsourcing unit) and in-
corporated in some other unit (the insourcing unit) while the working of the
ensemble of units as seen from some distance remains more or less stable.
This formulation is close to accepted deﬁnitions of outsourcing, a possible diﬀerence being
that we might have abstracted stronger from business rationales and management instru-
ments used (see, e.g., [16]). It seems to characterize (deﬁne) outsourcing and insourcing as
mechanisms in a satisfactory abstract fashion.
However, there are some questions which cast doubt on the suggestion that outsourcing
can be explained with such deﬁnitions. We’ll digress on these questions in Section 2. The
motive of this paper is then to make a step towards a deﬁnition that we hope will be a
starting point to answer these questions. So, we’ll not try to answer them all, we rather take
them as a justifying context to set-out for our approach, which we’ll describe in Section 3.
Given this footing we develop in Section 4 a set of basic terminology and deﬁnitions. These
are basic in the sense that the deﬁnition of outsourcing is postponed to Section 6. Before
reaching that point we present ways to quantify and qualify a sourcing situation, i.e., we
seek for forms of assessment that may be relevant from a business perspective, in Section 5.
A conclusion follows in Section 7.
3Oﬀshoring may be driven by: a quest for cheaper labor, by a quest for more disciplined workforce,
by a quest for better qualiﬁed personnel or by a mere lack of qualiﬁed personnel. Quite diﬀerent motives
are conceivable, however.
Oﬀshore insourcers (service providers) may be very signiﬁcant operators who
are better able to keep up with international competition than any potential local providers. Yet another
motive is that oﬀshore insourcers may force an outsourcer into intended but problematic changes of its
internal processes more quickly and eﬀectively than any local insourcer would ever achieve.
2

Contents
1
Introduction
1
2
Contemplating sourcing
4
2.1
Relative meaning of notions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
4
2.2
Ambiguity in terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5
2.3
Parthood issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
2.4
Behavioral issues and modelling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6
3
Approach
7
3.1
Business mereology and aggregation dynamics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7
3.2
Imaginative deﬁnitions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
3.2.1
A deﬁnition in stages . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
9
4
Neighboring concepts for outsourcing
10
4.1
Units, parts, sources and activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10
4.2
A survey of source types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11
4.3
Sourcing equilibrium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
4.4
Four qualiﬁcation dimensions for outsourcing transformations . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5
A catalogue of titles to sources
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
13
4.5.1
A ranking of titles to sources from the outsourcer’s perspective . . . .
14
4.6
The outsourcing transformation and its precondition . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16
4.7
A postcondition for outsourcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.8
Outsourcing progression . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
17
4.9
Survey of terminology and some derived terminology . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
18
5
Quantiﬁcation and qualiﬁcation of sourcing equilibria
20
5.1
Cost estimation of a source portfolio . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
20
5.2
Sourcing architecture . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3
Internal and external source . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
21
5.3.1
Relative degree of internal and external sourcing . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.3.2
Absolute degree of internal and external sourcing . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4
Internal and external service provisioning
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
22
5.4.1
Relative and absolute degree of internal and external service provisioning 22
6
Outsourcing and insourcing deﬁned
23
6.1
A ﬁrst candidate for outsourcing deﬁnition maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
3

6.2
A second deﬁnitional revision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23
6.3
Unit to unit insourcing deﬁned
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.4
Multiple outsourcing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.4.1
Concurrent existence and activity of units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
6.4.2
Interaction between units . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
24
7
Conclusions
25
References
26
2
Contemplating sourcing
The following survey lists a sample of questions which can hardly be avoided if one con-
templates the concept of out/insourcing.4 There are some questions about the relationships
between notions.
Then, there are several questions that concern the parthood relations
which are assumed between units in order to explain out/insourcing. Other questions stem
from observed ambiguity in the current terminology and from the consequential lack of a
clear approach when one sets out to theorize about out/insourcing.
2.1
Relative meaning of notions
The following questions spring to mind when one contemplates the World Class IT-sour-
cingcycle [15] or the ‘sourcing life cycle’ as deﬁned by Platform Outsourcing Nederland [29].
1. Is it essential to distinguish decision making from other work when deﬁning outsourc-
ing? Can outsourcing take place in a non-deliberate way, or must it necessarily be
carried out on the basis of a preconceived plan? If so, is the planning process at hand
sequential (see [31])?
2. Are outsourcing and insourcing complementary concepts that need to be deﬁned in
one go, or can, say, outsourcing be conceptually ﬁxed while leaving room for variation
in the meaning of insourcing? This question can be made more speciﬁc in several
ways. For instance, is it necessarily the case that if unit A outsources source P to
unit X, then X provides (after insourcing P) additional services to A or can it be the
other way around that X provides fewer services to A? This seems to be possible if
before transformation all or most services provided by P are in fact being delivered
to a third unit C while P makes use of services provided by X, in which case after
the transformation A and X may not even interact anymore. One might claim that
in this situation P hardly constitutes a source for A, but that requires rather precise
deﬁnitions as P (before transformation) is a source inside A and under control of A.
3. If backsourcing denotes the inverse transformation of outsourcing then it is unclear
whether after outsourcing a state is obtained from which the complementary back-
4We use ‘out/insourcing’ to refer to the combination of outsourcing and insourcing both understood in
the narrow sense which will be elaborated in the following sections.
4

sourcing is somehow permanently enabled.
In other words, is the history of orga-
nizational change frozen in such a way that undoing this particular (outsourcing)
transformation has a preferred status? Related questions are:
• If one adopts the ‘sale and lease-back’ view of outsourcing, is the sale (as well
as the lease) undone when follow-up sourcing takes place with another partner
(from the outsourcer’s perspective)?
• Is outsourcing necessarily followed by follow-up sourcing after some time. If not,
what kind of transformation has implicitly taken place?
• Is backsourcing a special case of follow-up sourcing?
2.2
Ambiguity in terminology
We hold that outsourcing is an extremely ambiguous term and this ambiguity may be
considered a weakness of the conceptual framework of sourcing.
The ambiguity is that
out/insourcing serves as a state transition qualiﬁcation and it simultaneously serves as a
qualiﬁcation for a stable operation or state. If A is said to be outsourcing P one simply
cannot tell if the act of outsourcing is ahead or if it has been completed already.
The ambiguity of the term outsourcing can be compared with the ambiguity of the term
diving, which also combines the reference to a visible and audible splash taking place in space
and time with the reference to a less noticeable state of being submerged. Interestingly the
diving state forecasts its termination. For ﬁsh who will stay submerged the term diving is
uncommon.
Perhaps this fundamental ambiguity of the term outsourcing at the same time constitutes
its strength. Nevertheless, we will propose to make a choice. More speciﬁcally we propose
to use outsourcing as a reference to (qualiﬁcation of) a state transformation rather than as
a reference to a state. The argument is that given some sourcing equilibrium (deﬁned in
Section 4.3) with a number of participating units, and in the absence of historical informa-
tion, it is a subjective judgement to state that a certain unit is outsourcing some activity
for say 70%. Making such a judgement requires some sort of reference model.5 For the state
transformation interpretation of outsourcing no general framework is needed to understand
its meaning, provided one is able to point out in functional terms which activities are subject
to outsourcing.
Only if terms can be used systematically with a ﬁxed meaning, further complex forms
of usage can be devised. Thus we claim that disambiguation precedes complex usage. It
may be so that for management consultants the ambiguity of the term is a strategic advan-
tage. That might change, however, if more complex outsourcing transformations need to be
contemplated.
Another way to deal with the ambiguity of outsourcing has been proposed in [35] where a
continuum of meanings for the word is laid down. This continuum is explained in detail by
Michel Troost in [32] which provides an unusually comprehensive survey of the IT-sourcing
literature. At the same time Troost exempliﬁes the ambiguous use of the term outsourcing.
He cannot be blamed for these semantic ambiguities of course, these emerge from existing
5The data collected in the Symbiosis project, which takes a close look at around 25 outsourcing cases,
suggests the tentative conclusion that this historical information is easily, and indeed often, lost. Published
material on Symbiosis is forthcoming at the time of writing (December 2010).
5

literature, but the text of [32] seems to have been rendered more complex than needed
because of these ambiguities.
2.3
Parthood issues
Parthood is studied in its most general form in mereology, a subject that is usually considered
to be a part of philosophy. In [33] one ﬁnds the principles of mereology set out in a concise
and comprehensible way. We’ll get back to mereology in more detail in Section 3.
1. What structure theory of units is needed in order to obtain a meaningful picture of
an outsourcing transformation. Is there a notion of part or component that comprises
states, tools, activities and contracts at the same time?
2. What makes units diﬀerent? In the case of outsourcing, is overlap permitted or un-
derlap (see [33] for these terms).
If the insourcing unit is created as the result of
outsourcing a part of the outsourcing unit, what justiﬁes the assertion that this is a
new unit? In particular, why does the resulting cooperation between outsourcing unit
and insourcing unit after the transformation not qualify them for being considered a
single unit? More speciﬁcally:
• Are units controlled as if they execute a control code [5, 8, 20] or is the assumption
of centralized and codiﬁed unit control immaterial for deﬁnitions of outsourcing
transformations?
• Are diﬀerent units interacting in qualitatively diﬀerent ways from the interaction
between diﬀerent parts within the same unit?
• Is unit identity a matter of structural properties of units, or are units exclusively
(or primarily) determined by means of formal regulations and restrictions issued
by some higher authority?6
2.4
Behavioral issues and modelling
Although the paraphrased deﬁnition in the introduction indicates that ‘seen from some
distance’ the combination of insourcing unit and outsourcing unit ‘remains more or less
stable’, there is no explanation of what diﬀerence may result as the eﬀect of outsourcing.
Which theory of behavior is needed (or helpful) to explain what remains the same and what
is modiﬁed? Diﬀerent theories may come into play at diﬀerent levels of abstraction.
1. Is process algebra [1] applicable or is a far higher level of abstraction needed? And
if a higher level of abstraction is required is thread algebra, an abstract process type
set out in detail in [7], suﬃcient for describing the required form of concurrency in
this case? And in case branching time is considered a hindrance rather than a help
(for specifying the concurrency between insourcing unit and outsourcing unit) are the
progression rings of [11] more useful?
6In the case of money the point of view that money can only be deﬁned in terms of regulations and
restrictions has emerged in the BFH school of economic thinking (based on ideas of Fisher Black, Eugene
Fama and Robert Hall). See also [4].
6

2. A money stream between insourcing unit and outsourcing unit is to be expected. Is a
theory of money presupposed or can outsourcing be conceptualized without any men-
tion of ﬁnancial mechanisms? We mention [9] as an approach to formalizing ﬁnancial
streams.
3. Concurrent units may have diﬀerent roles. Is an insourcing unit after the outsourcing
transformation a service provider to such an extent that the concept of a service needs
to be deﬁned ﬁrst before any attempt to deﬁne outsourcing related concepts?
4. Speciﬁc roles of units may be too complex to be of use for deﬁnitions of out/insourcing.
Indeed, if the concept of a service is too involved to serve as a prerequisite of a deﬁnition
of outsourcing, can it be replaced by making use of the notion of a promise? See [14].
3
Approach
New deﬁnitions for outsourcing are of course primarily useful if that leads to new or improved
applications. But convincing though indirect arguments can be provided for new work on
deﬁnitions in the area of sourcing. Our incentive to suggest a new deﬁnition stems from
observing some problematic conceptual weakness in the current usage of terminology – see
the previous section – rather than from the contemplation of an challenging but yet unsolved
sourcing issue.
In this section we ﬁrst pick a name for the conceptual framework of outsourcing we intend
to develop, see Section 3.1. Next, in Section 3.2, we discuss the ‘tool’ for this project: the
imaginative deﬁnition.
3.1
Business mereology and aggregation dynamics
Parthood is the subject of mereology, a discipline that is usually considered to be a part of
philosophy. We refer to [33] for an overview of mereology.
It makes sense to name our approach because we intend to set-up a line of thinking that
departs from the familiar successful engineering, goal and application oriented style that is,
for good reasons, prominent in many disciplines including IT-outsourcing today. We will use
business mereology for this purpose. Business mereology deals with the static structure of
units and their parts. We use ‘business mereology’ rather than ‘unit mereology’ to indicate
a focus on units in which human activity is prominent.
One may think of many other names for the style of enquiry in the ﬁeld of outsourcing
as we try to put forward here. We discuss one candidates because this ﬁgures in an earlier
joint publication [12]: aggregation dynamics. There, aggregation dynamics is understood as
a general systems theory that studies the behavior and development of aggregates of ‘units’,
which can be aggregates themselves of course. The rules that prescribe what belongs to a
certain unit are extremely liberal relative to commonsense ordering as, for instance, found in
biological taxonomies or business organization charts. The central question is what kind of
transformation principles of matter, information and energy equilibria exist. In particular,
what types of transformation are universal in the sense that they are found at many levels
of complexity.
7

Aggregation dynamics is also a phrase which is used in diverse areas including ﬂuid dy-
namics, colloidal chemistry and biophysics [18]. It has been coined for use in self-organization
[25] and also for use in ethology [19]. However, an elaborate deﬁnition of the term does not
seem to be used in these disciplines, it’s merely a descriptive designation.
Aggregation dynamics may serve as a counterpart of business mereology by having a pri-
mary focus on the dynamics and evolutionary forces that drive the aggregation and disaggre-
gation of packaged human activities with a business (company, enterprize) as a paradigmatic
form of aggregation.
In the context of aggregation dynamics, insourcing and outsourcing are mere instances
of transformation mechanisms. One may ask where in a ranking of transformation mech-
anisms that are explained by aggregation dynamics outsourcing and insourcing should be
positioned. It seems obvious that economy of scale, specialization of labour, market power
and the need to produce increasingly complex artifacts each constitute more important
drivers of aggregation. And anti-cartel policies constitute a most important mechanism for
disaggregation. Shareholder value constitutes a driver for aggregation as well as for dis-
aggregation though often of a lesser sophisticated form than outsourcing transformations.
Insourcing and outsourcing seem to come on a third position only in this ranking.
Looked upon it in this way, aggregation dynamics is a super theory for business mereology,
or business mereology is an instantiated specialized form of aggregation dynamics.
It may well be, however, that in terms of the frequency of occurrence, as opposed to
the visibility per event, out/insourcing are most important mechanisms second to none in
the above listing. Because out/insourcing events are often hidden from the stock market,
as if these imply only minor internal changes of organizational structure, their impact is
found only indirectly, at least in comparison to business takeovers, IPO’s and company
decompositions. Assuming some vague understanding of these forces aggregation dynamic
oriented meta-questions about out/insourcing can be posed.
1. Can outsourcing increase the complexity of a collection of units. If not, are out/insour-
cing transformations better perceived as simpliﬁcations and which complexity increas-
ing transformations are to be found in aggregation dynamics for which out/insourcing
transformations act as balancing simpliﬁcations?
2. Suppose each unit and for each unit all of its subunits are characterized by a family
of arrows where each arrow is labeled with a service which is provided from source
to target together with a quantiﬁcation of the strength of the ﬂow. Money streams
are also depicted as arrows. Now a family of units may be considered a labeled graph
(henceforth network) and outsourcing becomes a network transformation. Suppose
one collects data about such aggregates in practice and measures actually occurring
outsourcing activities. Is there any general statistics to be expected? For instance, is it
conceivable that out/insourcing transformations have a tendency to develop a network
towards a scale free structure [2]? Or might it be the case that nodes act as attractors
for other nodes with a comparable structure but with lesser weights?
3. Aggregation dynamics may provide a language for depicting in intuitively clear and
convincing way the look and feel of transformational events. For instance, the phenom-
enal disappointment that is created if an old company fails, or the sense of pride that
goes along with a new investment. Out/insourcing events have similar but perhaps
weaker psychological eﬀects which nonetheless need careful attention. This is not so
8

clear from the available literature. Putting such eﬀects in a proper perspective may
be easier accomplished in a more general setting.
3.2
Imaginative deﬁnitions
Our objective is not to answer all the questions listed in the introduction. Rather we use this
listing of questions as a context from which to acquire a sense of direction concerning the
development of imaginative deﬁnitions of outsourcing transformations and sourcing relations.
A description of imaginative deﬁnitions can be found in [4]. We refer to [26] and [27] as
evidence that imaginative deﬁnitions may be missing for concepts which have been heavily
used in computing practice such as ‘operating system’ and ‘program testing’. We suggest
[7] (multi-threading) and [6] (instruction sequences) as examples of attempts to provide
imaginative deﬁnitions.
A concept may be provided with a family of imaginative deﬁnitions which vary in level
of abstraction as well as in their degree of reﬁnement.
Any imaginative deﬁnition of
out/insourcing should enable one to work out reasonable answers to a number of the ques-
tions listed above. Such answers may not bring much in practice but they provide a complete
and consistent story which is quite hard to obtain in the context of sourcing.
3.2.1
A deﬁnition in stages
For an imaginative deﬁnition of some concept it is needed to have a context of related
concepts available. This ‘concept under deﬁnition’ can be used already before its deﬁnition
has been completed without creating confusion, provided it is made clear when and where
in the text the ﬁnal stage of a deﬁnitional eﬀort is reached.
The simplest and initial stage of such deﬁnitions (now applied to the speciﬁc case of
out/insourcing) is to state that an outsourcing is an element of the sort of outsourcings.
However circular this may seem to be, it sets a scene where surrounding sorts (categories)
for neighboring notions can be set up. The deﬁnition of outsourcing is completed at some
stage when a suﬃcient amount of information has been collected. Arguably the choice of
this ﬁnal stage of an imaginative deﬁnition is an arbitrary design decision to some extent.
This diﬀers signiﬁcantly from the situation found in mathematics and logic where major
deﬁnitions may become frozen for the duration of centuries.
For the development of additional theory, further reﬁnement and the inclusion of addi-
tional information in a deﬁnition may be needed. In logic and mathematics that process
of deﬁnition maintenance can be avoided in principle by introducing a focus on speciﬁc
subclasses (subsorts) of a concept. In more ﬂuid circumstances it should be admissible to
maintain or upgrade a deﬁnition when additional insights are acquired. We will make use
of this freedom for deﬁnitional maintenance ourselves in Section 6.
Indeed, although a speciﬁc deﬁnition of some concept prepares it for usage in theory
development, letting the speciﬁc concept (e.g., given by means of an imaginative deﬁnition)
stand for and even to some extent replace the informal concept can hardly be justiﬁed. Thus,
all we may possibly achieve in this work is to provide a deﬁnition of outsourcing which can be
referred to as ‘outsourcing as deﬁned by ... in ...’. Moreover, to the extent that our deﬁnitions
below have a non-trivial internal complexity, it is plausible that alternative deﬁnitions can
9

be found. Indeed achieving clarity rather than universality is the objective of developing
imaginative deﬁnitions.
4
Neighboring concepts for outsourcing
Below we will have a focus on outsourcing because that is the most classical and well-known
outsourcing transformation. Simpliﬁed (imaginative) deﬁnitions should provide insight in
the presence, absence or relevance of symmetries, in role (insourcing versus outsourcing) and
in time (outsourcing versus backsourcing).
The following notions will be further detailed in this section in preparation of deﬁnitions
of outsourcing, which is our ﬁnal objective:
• units, parts, sources and activities (4.1);
• source types (4.2);
• sourcing equilibria (4.3);
• dimensions on which to qualify outsourcing transformations (4.4);
• titles to sources (4.5);
• outsourcing transformations and the precondition thereof (4.6);
• postcondition of outsourcing transformations (4.7).
After these neighboring concepts have been speciﬁed subsequent stages of the deﬁnition of
outsourcing can be developed. This results in the deﬁnition of an outsourcing progression
in Section 4.8: a sequence of steps that constitutes a transformation between two sourcing
equilibria. Finally, we will identify outsourcing with carrying out an outsourcing progres-
sion, that is moving through a progression which eﬀects an outsourcing transformation in
Section 6. All key notions and some derived notions will be succinctly presented in Sec-
tion 4.9.
Referring to the issues raised in Section 2.1, we assume that outsourcing and insourcing
are complementary or reciprocal transformations. However, it will appear that backsourc-
ing can’t always be used to indicate the reversal of an outsourcing transformation (see
Section 4.7).
4.1
Units, parts, sources and activities
Units have parts also called subunits. These perform activities which combine into unit
behavior. Parts make use of sources for carrying out their activities. ‘Source’ is a basic
concept that underlies the theory and practice of sourcing but as such it need not be deﬁned.
What matters is that sources can be counted, are physical, can be consumed, but may also
be permanent (tools), sources may or may not require an investment. Access to sources is
structured by legal means as well as by physical means. In an imaginative deﬁnition sources
may be imagined as points from which streams of services emerge. Reverse streams may be
present as well, for instance ﬁnancial streams or feedback streams, or streams that convey
10

inputs which are upgraded by an activity carried out by the source. In any given context
some classiﬁcation of sources is assumed beforehand. Most sources are used exclusively by
a single unit (and a single part of that unit) but shared usage is possible too.
Outsourcing should preferably be deﬁned at a level of abstraction where other details do
not matter. However, below we will discuss the concept of a source in some detail. The
added value of being speciﬁc about sources is that one can investigate whether complete
descriptions of speciﬁc outsourcing transformations can be given in principle. Furthermore
the notion of a source depends on a business intuition which we intend to preserve for the
time being. However, on the long run sourcing theory may become fully independent of its
historical roots.
We leave untouched the question which descriptions of outsourcing transformations can
be called complete. We only notice that completeness is a relative matter with respect to a
level of abstraction which need not be ﬁxed in advance.
4.2
A survey of source types
Although the concept of a source acts as a parameter in the theory of sourcing it may be
informative to spell it out in more detail as argued above. Rather than deﬁning it we will
list a range of forms that sources can take without any claim of completeness.
Real estate. Including land, mines, wells, buildings, roads, harbors, airports, railroads, data
communication network cables, and ﬁxed position infrastructure.
Vehicles. Including ships, airplanes, cars, trains, cycles, satellites.
Works of art and culture. Including paintings, statues, movies, antiquities.
Tools and equipment. Including computers, laptops, mobile phones, tools for mechanical
and chemical engineering, design tools, music instruments.
Control codes. Including computer software used to control real estate components, vehicles
and tools and equipment, provided it can be handled (bought, sold, stored, repaired,
modiﬁed, maintained, reverse engineered) independently from its target entity.
Information bases. Including proprietary data collections that support business operations.
Included are as well access rights to speciﬁc technical and scientiﬁc journals, market
projections, statistics.
Persons. Including the human capital embodied in a workforce, the expertise available via
friendly business connections.
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR). Including proprietary information on designs, descrip-
tions, patented inventions, copyrighted texts, brand names.
Knowledge. Knowledge includes tacit as well as explicit knowledge of personnel about the
trade and craftsmanship of a unit but also about other sources and about business
processes, as well as about other units and their past behavior. Dedicated ontologies
constitute knowledge. There is a continuous transition from knowledge to information
bases.
11

Contracts and goodwill.
Including the portfolio of outstanding contracts and work in
progress, the connections with customer representatives, a quantiﬁed reputation.
Finance. Credit lines, ﬁnancial holdings, equity, insurances.
In this listing the vast information freely available on the internet does not feature as a
source and neither does the oxygen in the air. That may be wrong but such resources7 seem
not be covered by outsourcing deals.
Arguably a core competence is also a source because: it’s preservation inﬂuences business
decisions and it contributes to the binding between a unit and its employees. Moreover, it
may make the unit an interesting business partner because other units might want to tap
the core competence. The business intuition is that by deﬁnition a core competence cannot
be outsourced because by doing so the outsourcing unit changes its identity and this identity
should be kept. However, from our point of view, in a sourcing process some sources are
moved out and others are not. We rather consider a core competence as an element of an
emergent valuation of a such a process. The decision to outsource S instead of P because
the latter is considered a core competence can turn out to be false in retrospect.
4.3
Sourcing equilibrium
We take from economics the term equilibrium instead of state. A sourcing equilibrium refers
to a ﬁxed assignment of sources to all (parts of) units. That is the totality of all units
that make use of a collection of sources in a certain pattern. The relevance of the notion of
an equilibrium is that it refers to a state and at the same time accommodates the normal
functioning of the whole system.
In a sourcing equilibrium the sourcing connections stay unchanged. The activity of various
units may change, however. The usage made of speciﬁc sources may also gradually change
as well. In any case, a sourcing equilibrium is dynamic in the sense that it allows for ongoing
activity, just like an economic equilibrium which is a dynamic state in which price formation
has become stable and all economic activity proceeds at a relatively ﬁxed rate.
Outsourcing and insourcing both denote a progression of steps which lead to a new sourc-
ing equilibrium. This speciﬁcation of outsourcing and insourcing can be made more speciﬁc
of course, we will do so below. But the point is that we conceive of both as transformations
of a sourcing equilibrium rather than as qualiﬁcations of a sourcing equilibrium. We do not
introduce a name for the sourcing equilibrium that results after such a transformation. One
may speak of the transformed equilibrium after an outsourcing transformation.
In order to provide an imaginative deﬁnition of outsourcing we need to capture the dynam-
ics of the transformation involved. Rather than describing or deﬁning such transformations
from their constituent parts, conditions are deﬁned about the state before and after the
transformation in Section 4.6 and 4.7. Before we can come-up with the condition we need to
specify certain dimensions to which the conditions can refer. We’ll discuss four dimensions
in the next section and will elaborate on one of them – titles to sources – in the section
thereafter (4.5).
7We do not distinguish between source and resource, but we use the term source because that has become
customary in sourcing theory.
12

4.4
Four qualiﬁcation dimensions for outsourcing transformations
Below we will denote a unit U after transformation as UR where R stands for ‘retained’.
Assuming that an outsourcing transformation takes place between A and X with subunits
B and Y respectively, then the following aspects or dimensions can be distinguished for
further qualiﬁcation of the outsourcing transformation.
1. Title dimension. The shift in titles to sources and the volume thereof. Two typical
questions here are the following.
First, are some sources of B abandoned?
That
means that Y after the transformation has no title to them. Second, are some sources
new for BR as well as for YR?8
2. Contractual dimension. Contracts deﬁne to what extent and for which period of time YR
will provide services that B used to provide before the outsourcing progression took
place. Such contracts (SLA’s are often parts of these contracts) will deal with pric-
ing, quality of service, responsibility for innovation and continuing focus on eﬃciency,
handling of emergencies and reaction to adverse economic conditions.9
3. Operational dimension. New management and operational methods and structures may
be needed for BR and for YR. So, the services that are delivered in the new sourcing
equilibrium may be produced in diﬀerent ways.10
4. Competitive advantage dimension. We restate a proposition from [3], which constitutes
a remarkably clear and concise insight expressed in sourcing terminology:
A resource provides a sustainable competitive advantage if the following
characteristics are present: the resource is valuable and rare and it cannot
be imitated and it is non-substitutable.
The competitive advantage dimension expresses the extent to which a unit is able to
increase its focus on sources that provide it with a competitive advantage.
4.5
A catalogue of titles to sources
The previous section introduced a set of outsourcing qualiﬁcation dimensions.
Titles to
sources are in this set and in this section these are elaborated. In Sections 4.6 and 4.7
these titels to sources will be used in the speciﬁcation of a pre- and postcondition of the
outsourcing transformation as understood by us.
8Orthodox deﬁnitions of outsourcing suggest that sources should change title to the insourcer rather than
be abandoned. Our deﬁnition of outsourcing is neutral on that matter, and we hold that the degree to which
sources are or are not abandoned is a property (parameter) of any individual outsourcing transformation.
This is comparable to the price of an item at which it is sold, the sale taking place independently of the
price which is being set during the sales progression.
9The conventional deﬁnitions of outsourcing suggest the need for these contracts, however, if B provides
services only to customers of A (outside A) then no SLA between A and X needs to be agreed. It may
also be the case that neither A nor X feel an incentive to regulate service provision from YR to A (or its
customers) by way of a speciﬁc contract. This is the case if YR can deliver a service (that had been provided
by BR prior to the outsourcing transformation) whenever A asks for a service at known market prices, while
YR can cope with the loss of A as a customer at any moment.
10It is plausible that YR provides similar services (to the one’s B was providing to its sister units in A and
to A’s customers) to other customers than units or customers of A. This may provide X with an economy
of scale out of reach for A using B and the original sourcing equilibrium.
13

Again, assume that unit A has subunit B.
B performs some services towards other
(sub)units of A and perhaps also to units external to A. In order to provide these services
B makes use of a number of sources. These sources must be understood in connection with
A. We list some possible connections for the mentioned source types.
Real estate. A may own, lease or rent a collection of real estate items which are ‘used by B’.
Vehicles. A may own, lease or rent vehicles, A may have a contract with a provider of
transportation services.
Works of art and culture. These are often owned and sometimes leased.
Tools and equipment. A may own, lease or rent tools and equipment, A may have a contract
with a provider of technical services.
Control codes. A may own a control code under some license; A may have a temporary
right of usage under some license; A may own a control code together with some or
all underlying IPR (e.g., copyright on source code, copyright on requirements speci-
ﬁcations, design documents, patents on architectures and designs, patents on control
code production methods).
Information bases. A may own the right to maintain the information based on formalized
agreements with parties who have provided these data. A may own the right to use the
information for a speciﬁed time frame and for speciﬁed purposes and with a limited
degree of usage (concurrent users).
Employees and relationships. A may have persons as employees with contracts that prevent
their employment with (speciﬁed) other units. A may have contracted persons not
employed by other means than standardized employment. A may have agreements
with other parties who promise the cooperation of their expert employees for certain
tasks that A expects B to perform.
IPR. IPR can be owned, licenses can be obtained for limited time and purposes.
Knowledge. A may have exclusive access to external expert knowledge. A may have secured
proprietary knowledge in contracts with employees, customers and suppliers.
Contracts and goodwill. Contracts are part of A’s legal position; goodwill may be connected
to brand names (which can be owned).
Finance. Financial sources can be understood as a part of A’s contractual position. Finan-
cial sources can be linked to A in a variety of ways which may be all subsumed under
‘being available to’.
4.5.1
A ranking of titles to sources from the outsourcer’s perspective
Titles to sources can be ranked on a scale which measures a degree of ownership. This can be
done from the perspective of the outsourcer and also from the perspective of the insourcer.
These rankings are inverse of one another. We consider three types of sources mentioned
above, leaving a consideration the other eleven types to the reader’s imagination.
14

From an outsourcer’s (A) perspective we have the following decreasing sequences of titles
for source types Person, Tool, Equipment and IPR:
Personnel. Because in many cases personnel constitutes the most important source the
listing begins with a catalogue of ‘titles’ on personnel. Moving downward in this list of
titles (given a certain resource) is the direction of outsourcing for A and the direction
of insourcing for X. The ordering of titles ranks usage more important than ownership;
this may be less convincing in some speciﬁc case.
The list of titles are symmetric for A and X. The ﬁrst half of titles is considered
positive for A (and negative for X), indicating that a source belongs to A to some
(positive) extent, the second half of the titles is negative for A and positive for X.
Below, unit C is a contractor diﬀerent from A, B, X and Y .
1. P is a permanent employee of A in its subunit B;
2. P is a temporary employee of A in its subunit B;
3. P has been contracted by A from C for a project carried out by or for subunit B;
4. P has been contracted by A from X for a project carried out by or for subunit B;
5. P has been contracted by X from A for a project carried out by or for subunit Y ;
6. P has been contracted by X from C for a project carried out by or for subunit Y ;
7. P is a temporary employee of X in its subunit Y ;
8. P is a permanent employee of X in its subunit Y .
Tools and equipment. For a tool or a piece of equipment titles occur in this order:
1. H is owned by A and used by personnel of A for work in its subunit B;
2. H is leased or rented by A from C and used by personnel of A for work in its
subunit B;
3. H is leased or rented by A from X and used by personnel of A for work in its
subunit B;
4. H is leased or rented by X from A and used by personnel of X for work in its
subunit Y ;
5. H is leased or rented by X from C and used by personnel of X for work in its
subunit Y ;
6. H is owned by X and used by personnel of X for work in its subunit Y .
IPR. For an object L subject to IPR regulations (say copyright), the following order of
titles is plausible:
1. L is owned (including copyrights) by A and used by personnel of A for work in
its subunit B;
2. L is licensed by A from C and used by personnel of A for work in its subunit B;
3. L is licensed by A from X and used by personnel of A for work in its subunit B;
4. L is licensed by X from A and used by personnel of X for work in its subunit Y ;
5. L is licensed by X from C and used by personnel of X for work in its subunit Y ;
15

6. L is owned (including copyrights) by X and used by personnel of X for work in
its subunit Y .
Titles can be weighted in terms of their ﬁnancial impact or in terms of some other degree
of importance. No such attribution of weights can be designed in advance and be valid for
all practical cases. But in a concrete setting and with a speciﬁc unit A and its subunit B at
hand, even if no X and Y have yet been identiﬁed (provider/insourcer selection has not yet
taken place), it is probably doable to assign a weight to each title so that portfolios of titles
can be compared by summing the weight of the title to each of the sources. We’ll investigate
qualitative and quantitative assessments of sourcing equilibria further in Section 5.
4.6
The outsourcing transformation and its precondition
Outsourcing is about: some unit A, a subunit B and sources made use of by B. At this stage
it is assumed that A has an identity (as formulated in its mission statement) which does
not critically depend on any of the legal titles to sources that its subunit B makes use of.
To illustrate this, consider a museum A that has been set up to show and maintain certain
speciﬁc works of art in its division B. These works are sources, but A’s identity cannot be
decoupled from such sources.
Precisely this condition, or rather precondition when taking the order in time in account,
ensures that:
A’s identity can be preserved when titles to B’s sources are changed.
This condition necessitates the distinction between A and B when working towards a spec-
iﬁcation of outsourcing.
An outsourcing transformation for sources of B (from the perspective of the outsourcer
A) comprises a package of modiﬁcations to A’s organization and structure which can be
understood as a partial or complete replacement of B by some other unit – earlier denoted
as BR, the retained unit derived from B – which either delivers or guarantees (manages) the
same services to sister units of B in A and to the external customers of A that were served
by B.
In the case of insourcing an entirely symmetric setting may be assumed. However, if A
is outsourcing it may be the case that some other (or new) unit Y is changing so much
that it is not valid to describe Y ’s modiﬁcation as an insourcing transformation. Indeed,
if Y is newly created in order to perform outsourcing sources from B (in A) then Y is not
insourcing anything. The situation is symmetric: if an insourcer deals with B rather than A
then it may insource B’s sources but there is no outsourcer whose identity is left essentially
constant.11
Assuming that A and X exchange sources for their respective subunits B and Y . Then
after the exchange B and Y have been transformed to BR and YR (for symmetry reasons
the same notation is used). In the simplest case both B and Y keep their identity constant
and BR and YR working concurrently together deliver the same bundle of services as before.
11Indeed, B’s identity is not supposed to be independent from its family of titles to the sources it uses.
16

4.7
A postcondition for outsourcing
Complementary to the precondition which is supposed to apply before an outsourcing trans-
formation, a postcondition captures some requirements on the state after outsourcing. In
this situation A is said to perform outsourcing of sources of A’s unit B to X (and X is said
to insource sources for X’s subunit Y ) if:
1. the family of A’s titles to (non-ﬁnancial) sources of BR is substantially smaller (in
terms of a weighted sum of rankings of titles and preferably as well in terms of ﬁnancial
valuations) than the original family of titles to sources of B, and;
2. A’s titles to ﬁnancial sources may have decreased, while X’s titles to ﬁnancial sources
may have increased;12
3. the family of titles to (non-ﬁnancial) sources of YR is larger (in terms of a weighted sum
of rankings of titles and probably in terms of ﬁnancial valuations) than the original
family of titles to sources of B.
One may wonder whether one should demand as part of the postcondition that an identiﬁable
residu of A should remain. We think we should not. With this point of view we can come
back to the remark made in the beginning of this section (page 10). There we said that it
would appear that backsourcing can’t always be used to indicate the reversal of an insourcing.
Here we can explain why.
The concept of backsourcing indicates an asymmetry between insourcing and outsourcing
because it is performed, if at all, on the initiative of the outsourcing unit. If no outsourcing
unit is left because the insourcing which takes place is a full unit incorporation backsourcing
cannot take place for the obvious reason that there is no unit to which the sources may
return. So, backsourcing is by default a transformation that is better described as reverse-
outsourcing. If reverse-outsourcing is not possible because the outsourcer has evaporated
then a transformation in which the insourcer has the initiative could in principle still be
enabled. Following the same naming scheme one could call this: reverse-insourcing.
With reverse-insourcing a new unit is created that functionally matches the former out-
sourcer. Of course, this calls for a historical reference model that might not be available.
So, the functionality of the created unit may diﬀer considerably. In that case the trans-
formation takes us outside the sourcing realm and into the wider area of organizational
transformations.
4.8
Outsourcing progression
An outsourcing progression is a progression which consists of a number of steps that lead
from one sourcing equilibrium to another sourcing equilibrium and which transforms the
sourcing equilibrium in such a way that a match with the precondition and the postcondi-
tion of an outsourcing transformation can be obtained. In the absence of such a match a
progression still changes the sourcing equilibrium and may be understood as an outsourcing
transformation, though not necessarily one of a known kind.
12In other words: X pays A for the transfer of titles to sources as well as for investments (acquisition of
additional sources) needed to provide the services required to realize service invariance.
17

An outsourcing progression takes place concurrently with the residual activity of units A
and X. As said, the progression itself takes the form of a sequence of steps each of which
can be understood as a modiﬁcation of an outsourcing equilibrium. At this stage we assume
that the extent of the notion of an outsourcing progression step can be inferred from the
description of an outsourcing equilibrium that has been provided.
It should be noticed that although changing the legal title to some source may be con-
sidered a step, it is plausible that in practice it will consist of a thread of steps which may
itself require project management and planning. Even to the point were an outsourcing pro-
gression results from the execution of an outsourcing plan that makes use of multi-threaded
concurrency. Such a plan will be based on estimates for A and X concerning their respective
advantages. Such estimates are made in business plans and according to Guus Delen both
A and X need to understand each other’s business case for the plan to be valid [16].
4.9
Survey of terminology and some derived terminology
In conclusion, we understand outsourcing more restricted than usual by only taking the
transformational meaning into account, while we are more liberal by not requiring the pres-
ence of a target service provision contract, nor any other guarantee that the outsourcing
transformation will not damage A’s operations. The mere outplacement of sources in com-
bination with the insourcer’s ability to compensate for B’s loss of ability (after having
become BR) by providing B’s original services to its sister units in A as well as perhaps
to some clients of A suﬃces for the qualiﬁcation of the sourcing equilibrium as result of an
outsourcing transformation.
Below we sum-up the terminology introduced above and complement it with some addi-
tional terminology (in italics). When an outsourcing transformation between A and X takes
place as speciﬁed above the following terms and phrases are in order:
1. A is the outsourcing unit.
2. B is the outsourcing subunit. It must be suﬃciently small, relative to A, to allow A’s
identity to be preserved when its titles to sources are terminated. And it must be suﬃ-
ciently large to contain all sources which have their titles changed in the transformation
at hand.
3. The service portfolio of B together with that of Y is the invariant service portfolio for
the outsourcing progression.13
4. The services from the invariant service portfolio which were provided by B to sister
units within A or to clients of A and which are provided by YR after the outsourcing
progression took place are referred to as the transferred services.
5. Sources of B for which the title disappears or decreases (say from ownership to rent
or to license) are unsourced, these are also called abandoned sources.
6. Sources of B for which the title is transferred from B to Y are said to be properly
outsourced.
13It may be the case that Y , a subunit of X, needs to divest some of its services (constituting a divesting
transformation involving only X) before the outsourcing progression takes place in order to be able to keep
the combined service portfolios of B and Y invariant.
18

7. If there is a plan for insourcing the properly outsourced sources together with a re-
acquisition plan of unsourced sources in order to reconstruct B’s original functionality
after some time, the outsourcing progression is technically reversible.
8. If in addition to the outsourcing being technically reversible, there is a contract of
A with X which permits A at some stage to terminate the use of services which YR
provides to it (since the outsourcing took place) and also to properly insource (a large
part of) the previously properly outsourced sources then the outsourcing progression
is said to be contractually reversible.
9. If an outsourcing progression is reversed (it need not have been contractually agreed
that this might occur) then we speak of a backsourcing progression. A backsourcing
progression is an outsourcing progression for X and an insourcing progression for A.
However, if the original outsourcing was contractually reversible, backsourcing can
take place even if A cannot see a positive business case for B, unless it takes the
penalty for B’s non-compliance with the reversibility item from its original insourcing
contract into account.
10. X is the insourcing unit.
11. Y is the insourcing subunit.
12. If YR is providing services to A which were not delivered by X, that is if X has
increased its volume of services provided to A, then X is called a provider (relative to
the out/insourcing transaction).
13. Sources of YR which (titles) have neither been inherited from Y nor transferred from
B are acquired sources, also called additional sources.
14. Sources of YR for which the title has been transferred from B to Y are said to be
properly insourced.14
15. If X agrees by contract to provide services S through YR (with help of BR) to other
units of A and clients of A then this contract is called the target service provision
contract.15
16. In the presence of a target service contract, A’s activities concerning the monitoring
and control of the fulﬁllment of the target service provision contract are called client
side contract management. X’s activities concerning the same contract are referred to
as provider side contact management.
17. In the presence of a target service provision contract and after its expiration the
sourcing equilibrium may change in the following ways:
Backsourcing. If the outsourcing was contractually reversible (for A) then A may
choose to seek for a backsourcing transformation. As argued in Section 4.7, a
more systematic name for this activity is reverse-outsourcing.
14Proper insourcing of sources has many variations because an ownership of source S by A may turn into
an ownership of S by X but also into an ownership by yet another unit Z in combination with a lease of S
by X from Z and so on.
15If A takes the initiative for outsourcing then its objective is to sign a target service provision contract
at minimal cost but with good quality of service.
19

Outsourcing prolongation. If A was satisﬁed with the services that X and YR provide
then a prolongation of the target outsourcing contract may be contemplated.
This could be called the trivial outsourcing transformation a transformation in
which the sourcing equilibrium is left unchanged.
Reverse-insourcing. This may be contractually guaranteed in the case that the out/in-
sourcing transformation has entirely removed the unit from which sources were
outsourced. This situation leaves the initiative for a reversal with the insourcer.
Reverse-outsourcing. See ‘backsourcing’ above.
Follow-up sourcing to a third party. If A is less satisﬁed with X’s performance follow-
up sourcing to another party, say Z may be considered by A. In follow-up sourcing
A may need contractually regulated consensus with X that some of the assets
which it has acquired as a result of the outsourcing deal, can be further transferred
to the third party Z.16
Source and service reconstruction. If none of the above applies and A needs to main-
tain its part (the part of which it is a client) of the invariant service portfolio
available A may re-acquire sources (or acquire comparable but diﬀerent sources)
that have been abandoned or transferred to X in the original outsourcing progres-
sion, in order to re-establish the service provision capability for the transferred
services. The terminology is more liberal than backsourcing in the sense that
during source and service reconstruction A need not have BR in the role of the
insourcing subunit.
Multiple follow-up sourcing. A ﬁnds diﬀerent service providers (all diﬀerent from X)
for follow-up provision of distinct parts of the transferred services.
Heterogeneous multiple follow-up sourcing. A combines the mechanisms above for
distinct parts of the transferred services.
5
Quantiﬁcation and qualiﬁcation of sourcing
equilibria
From a rational business perspective it is expected that outsourcing and insourcing take
place because assessment of a sourcing equilibrium reveals the likelihood that a better ar-
rangement can be achieved. Of course, many motives are conceivable, for instance, appealing
management trends, hunches, perceived but false opportunities.
With the terminology from the previous section we can now look at assessing a given
sourcing equilibrium. We contemplate, again, a unit A and its subunit B which may become
involved in outsourcing sources used by B to subunit Y of unit X.
5.1
Cost estimation of a source portfolio
In a sourcing equilibrium state preceding outsourcing B makes use of a portfolio of sources
and for each source A has some legal title for the use of that source which is likely to ﬁt the
16Outsourcing prolongation is a simple case of follow-up sourcing. Backsourcing is potentially more com-
plex than follow-up sourcing to a third party because A may need to introduce new additional sources for
BR (or rather BRR, the incarnation of BR after backsourcing) under the assumption that to implement
backsourcing an attempt is made to reconstruct the original sourcing equilibrium.
20

above listing of source type speciﬁc legal connections. The family of source titles that B
makes use of as well as B’s dependency of A can be quantiﬁed in terms of costs as follows.
1. Capital costs of owned sources.
2. Operational costs of owned, leased, rented or licensed sources.
3. Costs of lease, rent and licenses.
4. Costs of employees and non-employed personnel. (Minus the advantage that lies in
their not having been employed or contracted by A’s competitors in the market of B’s
services.)
5. Insurance policies for owned and leased sources.
6. The cost of A’s management eﬀorts needed to survey and control B’s activities inside
A.
7. Obligations for A to accept modiﬁcations of its sourcing structure due to previous
outsourcing transformations.17
Quantiﬁcation and assessment of costs of outsourcing to support management decisions have
been studied by Chris Verhoef in a theoretical as well as a applicable manner [34].
5.2
Sourcing architecture
A sourcing architecture is a normative description of a sourcing equilibrium. Assuming that
architecture precedes implementation and that an implementation achieves what is intended
we will not make a diﬀerence between sourcing equilibrium and sourcing architecture.18
An outsourcing plan will contain a sourcing architecture for the original composition of
A which may have been found by means of reverse architecting (architecture extraction). In
addition it will contain a sourcing architecture for the new form of subunit B of A and also
for the new form of the subunit Y of X.
5.3
Internal and external source
A source S used by B is internal from the perspective of A if its title on S is positive (see
the ranking in Section 4.5.1) compared to the titles on S by any other unit that makes use
of the services which B creates by means of source S. A source S used by B is external
(from the perspective of A) if it is not internal.
It is plausible that after outsourcing from A its collection (weighted sum) of internal
sources has decreased and its collection of external sources has increased.
17This aspect is needed if backsourcing is to be classiﬁed as an outsourcing transformation, in combination
with the requirement that both parties understand each others business cases.
18Interface groups as deﬁned in [10] have been developed for the description of sourcing architectures and
in particular for the description of unit interfaces that supports their modular composition.
21

5.3.1
Relative degree of internal and external sourcing
For A and B and some source type T it may be possible to determine a benchmark by
inspecting other (competing) units operating in a similar market condition. The benchmark
indicates what proportion of sources of type T used by B are normally external to A. Such
proportions can be related to performance metrics in order to determine a best shape for
the sourcing equilibrium under the assumption that benchmarking with comparable units is
valid. A relative degree of external sourcing can be derived directly from the relative degree
of internal sourcing.
5.3.2
Absolute degree of internal and external sourcing
If all activities of B have been ﬁnancially quantiﬁed it may even be possible to determine
an objective proportion of type-T sources which are internal, thus producing a measure of
internal sourcing which is independent of the sourcing equilibrium of competing units. Such
a measure can be used to analyze the long term evolution of a unit. An absolute degree of
external sourcing can be derived from the absolute degree of internal sourcing.
It is plausible that after outsourcing from A its absolute degree of internal sourcing has
decreased and its absolute degree of external or external sourcing has increased.
5.4
Internal and external service provisioning
A service used by some unit of A is internally provided by B to A if B creates the service
from its underlying sources. Some of these sources may be external to A, in which case some
external unit provides access to the source via an appropriate service. That speciﬁc service
is external to A.
Symmetrically, a service used by another unit C and created by subunit B of A is an
external service of A. A service can be both external and internal at the same time.19 A
service can be served simultaneously to diﬀerent concurrent users.
It is plausible that after outsourcing from A its volume of internal sourcing has decreased
and its volume of external or external sourcings has increased.
5.4.1
Relative and absolute degree of internal and external service provisioning
Under the assumption that unit A is comparable with a family of other units and major
diﬀerences occur mainly in their sourcing architectures, one may compare corresponding
services and determine a relative degree of internal service provision.
A relative degree of external service provision follows at once, as does an absolute degree
of internal or external service provisioning.
19For instance a restaurant catering mainly A’s personnel may also serve external customers, e.g., members
of C’s personnel.
22

6
Outsourcing and insourcing deﬁned
As was probably already clear to the reader, we simply deﬁne outsourcing as an outsourcing
progression.
That is, a sequence of steps which (by deﬁnition) achieves an outsourcing
transformation.
The details of the deﬁnition of an outsourcing progression have been spelled out above
(4.8 and 4.9) for the unit to unit case where complementary to the outsourcing unit there
is an insourcing unit which exists before the progression begins.
For the case that the
outsourcing progression creates a new unit within the insourcing unit the deﬁnitions must
be marginally adapted. Outsourcing can be ahead, in progress, or completed. It can be
started and interrupted, it can be dormant, restarted, and successfully continued.
It may be considered a weakness of our deﬁnition that an outsourcing progression cannot
be unsuccessfully terminated for the simple reason that it fails to qualify as an outsourcing
progression in that case. We’ll digress on this below.
6.1
A ﬁrst candidate for outsourcing deﬁnition maintenance
If once considers it unacceptable that an outsourcing progression cannot terminate unsuc-
cessfully a solution could possibly be found by the introduction of an outsourcing plan.
Moreover, if a business case for an outsourcing transformation must include the cost of per-
forming the outsourcing progression it is necessary to have access to a plan before putting
the progression into action.
Such a plan consists of a (probably multi-threaded) speciﬁcation of a number of threads
of actions (steps) which, when successfully performed (that is: for each of the actions its
precondition was found valid during plan execution), produce an outsourcing progression.
In an exceptional case the plan execution may come to an unsuccessful halt while reporting
that outsourcing has not been achieved.
In practice it is plausible that an outsourcing transformation in the vast majority of cases
results from executing an outsourcing plan, but it cannot be excluded that an outsourcing
transformation takes place as the unintended side-eﬀect of a progression of steps which came
about from executing plans with entirely diﬀerent objectives.
Therefore, we prefer the viewpoint that an outsourcing progression always terminates
successfully by deﬁnition. Thus an outsourcing progression is a completion of the execution
of an outsourcing plan, whatever the outcome. So, we reject this suggestion for a deﬁni-
tion upgrade and we refrain from redeﬁning an outsourcing as the progression produced by
executing an outsourcing plan.
6.2
A second deﬁnitional revision
Suppose one accepts nevertheless the revision of outsourcing just mentioned (and rejected)
and declares it to be the successful execution of an outsourcing plan. In that case it is
plausible to include the planning generation task itself in the deﬁnition of outsourcing.
If performing the outsourcing progression is put in the hands of an external consultant or
operator, this agent will be asked to generate and run-time adapt the relevant plans. The
23

problem with a revision of the deﬁnition of outsourcing in this fashion is that increasingly
aspects are involved which are unspeciﬁc for achieving an outsourcing transformation.
So, to be consistent (having rejected both candidate upgrades of the outsourcing deﬁni-
tion), we must refer to a consultant who will manage and supervise (control) an outsourcing
as an agent who generates an outsourcing plan and who readjusts this plan when necessary
during its execution. Following this approach, the speciﬁcation of the precondition and post-
condition of the outsourcing transformation (Section 4.6 and 4.7) need to adapted in order
to guide the plan generating eﬀorts of this consultant.
6.3
Unit to unit insourcing deﬁned
Given the deﬁnition of unit to unit outsourcing, the complementary phenomenon of unit
to unit insourcing is captured by precisely the same deﬁnition. The case where insourc-
ing terminates the existence of the outsourcing unit requires some marginal adaptations
comparable to the modiﬁcations needed when dealing with outsourcing to a newly created
unit.
6.4
Multiple outsourcing
It is easy to see that outsourcing can take place to two or more units at the same time,
especially if no other unit alone can successfully insource the sources which an outsourcer
intends to outsource. Quite complex structures of service delivery and consumption may
emerge if diﬀerent insourcers work together and in particular if the family of insourcing units
is made responsible for self-organization. Clearly a plurality of insourcing units will operate
concurrently in some fashion.
6.4.1
Concurrent existence and activity of units
Given a sourcing equilibrium diﬀerent units operate concurrently. There seems to be nothing
of any generality that can be stated about the concurrent activity of diﬀerent units before and
after outsourcing. A formal model of concurrency might be used to provide an imaginative
deﬁnition of the concurrent activity of two or more units. A very simple formal model of
concurrent activity is thread algebra as presented in [7]. In that model units produce threads
which represent their sequential behavior and diﬀerent threads are strategically interleaved
(that is: interleaved by means of some plausible strategy).
After an outsourcing progression has been completed (that is the sequence of steps which
constitute the outsourcing transformation in a particular case), outsourcing unit A and
insourcing unit X must operate concurrently. This can be understood in terms of multi-
threading if it is assumed that units (or rather subunits) have some form of centralized
control which makes it plausible to imagine their activity as the run of a sequential program.
6.4.2
Interaction between units
For a description of inter-unit cooperation by means of multi-threading streams of artifacts
and data moving between various units need to be formalized. Technically such formaliza-
24

tions can be taken from any theoretical model of concurrent computation. In the setting of
outsourcing it seems reasonable to work with a global state space.
7
Conclusions
We are conﬁdent that we have provided a fairly detailed description of unit to unit out-
sourcing and insourcing which qualiﬁes as an imaginative deﬁnition following [4]. Many
decisions have been taken with the eﬀect that the concept of outsourcing and insourcing
conceived this way becomes less inclusive. We’ve called our approach to achieve a theory of
outsourcing and insourcing business mereology.
At this stage we cannot provide a signiﬁcant validation of our deﬁnition. In principle
one may validate the deﬁnition by making a survey of acknowledged outsourcing cases and
ﬁnding out to what extent our deﬁnition can be applied. An application then consists of
recognizing a part of the activities involved which qualiﬁes as an (unit to unit) outsourcing
progression.
In a complex organization (unit) insourcing progressions and outsourcing progressions
take place concurrently concerning diﬀerent subunits. An interesting topic for further inves-
tigation which might proﬁt from the precision of the deﬁnitions which we have developed is
the presence of interference or feature interaction between diﬀerent out/insourcing progres-
sions. See, e.g., [22] for a survey of feature interaction theory.
Many other issues can be investigated on the basis of the work in this paper. We mention
some directions for future work.
1. Developing a textual speciﬁcation of a well-known kind of outsourcing transformation
in signiﬁcant detail.
For instance, the outsourcing of desktop support to a shared
service center working for a number of subunits of a given unit.
2. Providing a survey of known outsourcing progressions and ﬁnding a match between
those cases and the elements of the deﬁnitions that have been presented above.
3. Describing the concurrent activity that takes place in outsourcing progressions that
result in a multiple outsourcing transformation.
4. Complementing our deﬁnitions with the additional complexity of legal processes, seen
from the perspective of a prospective outsourcer, that govern the selection of candidate
insourcing units and the decision making that leads to selection of one of them.
5. Complementing our deﬁnitions with strategic aspects that have not been mentioned
above, such as the intended partnership between outsourcing unit and insourcing unit,
and the expectation that an insourcing unit will support innovations envisaged by the
outsourcing unit even in the absence of a compelling contractual basis.
6. Analyzing the speciﬁcation of transformations (of a sourcing equilibrium) which must
be understood as concurrently executed instances of outsourcing and insourcing trans-
formations between a number of units. The introduction of a shared services center is
a relatively simple example of a transformation of this kind.
25

7. Specializing the imaginative deﬁnition of outsourcing to a speciﬁc area of business
activity, for instance LPO (legal process outsourcing, see for instance [28]).
8. Identiﬁcation of the structural, quantitative and qualitative properties of a network of
units as it evolves by sourcing transformations.
References
[1] J.C.M. Baeten, T. Basten and M.A. Reniers. Process Algebra: Equational Theories of
Communicating Processes. Cambridge Tracts in Theoretical Computer Science, vol. 50,
2009.
[2] A-L. Barab´asi and R. Albert. Emergence of Scaling in Random Networks. Science, vol.
286, pp 509 – 512, 1999.
[3] J.B. Barney. How a Firm’s Capabilities Aﬀect Boundary Decisions. Sloan Management
Review, 32 (1), pp 3 – 16, 1999.
[4] J.A. Bergstra. Formaleuros, Formalcoins and Virtual Monies. 2010. arXiv:1008.0616
[cs.CY].
[5] J.A. Bergstra. Informal Control Code Logic. 2010. arXiv:1009.2902 [cs.SE].
[6] J.A. Bergstra and M.E. Loots. Program Algebra for Sequential Code. Journal of Logic
and Algebraic Programming, 51(2), pp 125 – 156, 2002.
[7] J.A. Bergstra and C.A. Middelburg. Thread Algebra for Strategic Interleaving. Formal
Aspects of Computing, 19 (4), pp 445 – 474, 2007.
[8] J.A. Bergstra and C.A. Middelburg. Machine Structure Oriented Control Code Logic.
Acta Informatica, 5 (1), pp 170 – 192, 2009. arXiv:0711.0836 [cs.SE].
[9] J.A. Bergstra and C.A. Middelburg. Tuplix Calculus and the Wesseling and Van den
Bergh Equation. 2009, arXiv:0901.3003 [q-fin.GN].
[10] J.A. Bergstra and A. Ponse. Interface Groups and Financial Transfer Architectures.
2007, arXiv:0707.1639 [cs.PL].
[11] J.A. Bergstra and A. Ponse. A Progression Ring for Interfaces of Instruction Sequences,
Threads and Services. 2009, arXiv:0909.2839 [cs.PL].
[12] J.A. Bergstra and S.F.M. van Vlijmen. Theoretische Software-Engineering: Kenmerken,
Faseringen en Classiﬁcaties. Zeno (The Leiden-Utrecht Research Institute of Philoso-
phy), vol. 28 of Quaestiones Inﬁnitae, in Dutch, 1998.
[13] E.P. Beulen. Beheersing van IT-outsourcingrelaties. PhD Thesis, University of Tilburg,
in Dutch, 2000.
[14] M. Burgess. System Administration and the Scientiﬁc Method. In: J. Bergstra and
M. Burgess (eds), Handbook of Network and System administration, pp 689 – 728,
Elsevier, 2007.
26

[15] G.P.A.J. Delen (ed.).
World Class IT: Van Service naar Business Gericht met Uw
ICT-organisatie. KPMG Consulting & Uitgevrij Tutein Nolthenius, in Dutch, 2000.
[16] G.P.A.J. Delen.
Decision- en Controlfactoren voor Sourcing van IT.
PhD Thesis,
University of Amsterdam, Van Haren Publishing Zaltbommel, in Dutch, 2005.
[17] G.P.A.J. Delen. Decision and Control Factors for IT-sourcing. In: J. Bergstra and
M. Burgess (eds), Handbook of Network and System administration, pp 929 – 946,
Elsevier, 2007.
[18] Y. Farjoun and J. Neu. An Asymptotic Solution of Aggregation Dynamics. In: Progress
in Industrial Mathematics at ECMI 2006, vol. 12 of Mathematics in Industry, pp 368 –
375, Springer, 2008.
[19] T.C. Gard. Aggregation in Stochastic Ecosystem Models. Ecological Modelling, volume
44, pp 153 – 164, 1988.
[20] L.E. Janlert. Dark Programming and the Case for Rationality of Programs. Journal of
Applied Logic, 6 (4), pp 545 – 552, 2008.
[21] T. Kern and L.P. Willcocks. Exploring Information Technology Outsourcing Relation-
ships: Theory and Practice. Erasmus University Rotterdam, management report no.
61-1999, 1999.
[22] K. Kimbler, L.G. Bouma (eds) Feature Interactions in Telecommunications and Soft-
ware Systems V. IOS Press, 1998.
[23] M.C. Lacity. Information Systems Outsourcing: Myths, Methaphors and Realities. Wi-
ley, Chishester, 1993.
[24] L.Loh and N. Venkatraman. Diﬀusion of Information Technology Outsourcing, Inﬂu-
ence Sources and the Kodak Eﬀect. Information Systems Research, 4, pp 334 – 358,
1992.
[25] P. Michiardi, P. Marrow, R. Tateson and F. Saﬀre.
Aggregation Dynamics in Ser-
vice Overlay Networks. In: Proceedings of the First International Conference on Self-
Adaptive and Self-Organizing Systems (SASO ’07), pp 129 – 140, IEEE Computer
Society, 2007.
[26] C.A.
Middelburg.
Searching
Publications
on
Operating
Systems.
2010,
arXiv:1003.5525 [cs.OS].
[27] C.A. Middelburg. Searching Publications on Software Testing. 2010, arXiv:1008.2647
[cs.SE].
[28] L.A. Patterson III. Outsourcing of Legal Services: A Brief Survey of the Practice and
the Minimal Impact of Protectionist Legislation. Richmond Journal of Global Law and
Business, 2, pp 117 – 204, 2008.
[29] Platform Outsourcing Nederland, werkgroep Taxonomie Outsourcing. Outsourcing van
IT. Management Guide. Van Haren Publishing, 2006.
27

[30] A. Ponse and M.B. van der Zwaag. An Introduction to Program and Thread Algebra.
In: A. Beckmann et al. (editors), Logical Approaches to computational barriers: Pro-
ceedings CiE 2006, LNCS 3988, pp 445 – 458, Springer-Verlag, 2006.
[31] H.A. Simon. Theories of Decision-making in Economics and Behavioral Science. The
American Economic Review, 49 (3), pp 253 – 283, 1959.
[32] M. Troost. Sourcing the Retained Organization in IT Outsourcing. MSc Thesis Tech-
nical University of Delft, July 2009.
[33] A.
Varzi.
Mereology.
In:
the
Stanford
Encyclopedia
of
Philosophy.
http://plato.stanford.edu/entries/mereology, 2009.
[34] C. Verhoef. Quantitative Aspects of Outsourcing Deals. Science of Computer Program-
ming, 56 (3), pp 275 – 313, 2005.
[35] D. Wibbelsman and T. Maieiro. Co-sourcing. In: Proc. Outsourcing, Co-sourcing and
Insourcing Conference, Berkely, 1994.
28

