BUZAN
STUDYSKIL 5
THE SHORT CUT TO SUCCESS IN YOUR STUDIES
WITH MIND MAPPING, SPEED READING
AND WINNING MEMORY iTECHNIQUES
(;J(;JSACTIVE


6
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Introduction
The Buzan Study Skills Handbook comprises the unique
BOST® (Buzan Organic Study Technique) programme,
designed specifically to improve any student's
capabilities to prepare for those dreaded higher school,
college and university exams, essays, tests, modules
and coursework generally.
This handbook will help you overcome your quite rational fears
about exams and pressured study, and you will discover in
these pages a new and totally positive way to learn, using your
fantastic brain and mind power.
It is no mere boast. The BOST programme has been honed
from 35 years' experience in the field of study skills, brain
power, recall after learning, Radiant Thinking® techniques,
concentration, and the multi-dimensional memory tool; the
Mind Map®. The structured skills set out here will quite literally
enhance your capabilities in leaps and bounds to:
o Prepare with confidence for study, exams and tests.
o Read far more quickly and efficiently than you thought possible.
o Note-take and note-make even more effectively.
o Memorize and recall what you have learnt far more
successfully.
o Get into a revision mind-set but still enjoy 'time outs' to relax.
o Increase your revising capacity dramatically using Mind
Maps (described as 'the Swiss army knife of the brain').
Incorporating the unique BOST programme, this handbook will
provide you with the confidence and the means to fulfil your
own study potential- whatever your subjects or academic level.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Fear and loathing of exams and revision
If you're sceptical (and why wouldn't you be?), before you even
turn a page, ask yourself this:
o Do I fear exams?
o Am I a reluctant learner?
o Am I daunted about the amount of studying I have to do?
o Do I do everything except getting down to revising?
o Do I displace time rather than plan it?
o Do I find it hard to retain, remember and recall information?
o Do I feel I have to study a reference cover to cover in order
to grasp it?
o Do I work when I'm too tired or distracted?
o Do I believe the best way to absorb information is to read a
text top to bottom, cover to cover?
o Do I learn by rote without really understanding?
My guess is that you have answered yes to at least one (if not
all!) of these questions, making this study skills guide the ideal
tool for perfecting your studying techniques.
Whatever exam you are studying for in higher education,
chances are you are not storing and retrieving information,
data, facts and figures and reference as quickly and effectively
as you have the potential to do.
This may be because of:
o Lack of motivation.
o Accumulation of bad studying habits.
o No 'game plan' for revising and note-taking specific essays,
exams, projects, subjects or papers.
o Apprehension and anxiety about pressures of time and
amount of study.
o No 'Operations Manual' for your brain.
•••••• • • • •• • • • •• • • • • •• ••••• • • • ••• •••• •• • • ••• • • • ••• •• • ••
INTRODUCTION
7

8
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Your fears - and they are entirely rational- and feelings of
negativity are something you look at, you admit, you accept, you
know that everybody else feels them and, by the way, they're
totally unnecessary.
The downward spiral of study fear
Imagine this scenario (if it hasn't happened to you already): the
teacher slams the book 'bang!' on the table and says this is the
book you will be examined on, this is your test book, and if you
don't do well on this book and if you don't understand every
single concept in these pages then you will fail. So take it home
and read it slowly and carefully...
And that's what you do... it weighs a lot physically,
and mentally it is a lot. Then all sorts of evasive actions or
displacement activities kick in: you go to the fridge, you watch
TV, you txt msg friends and finally you sit down with the tome.
What then happens?
If you read for two hours - a long time - at normal study
speeds with habitual breaks in concentration, you're probably
reading a page in maybe five minutes and taking notes, very
often for ten minutes, so after two hours in which you are
already forgetting what you read, you cover a tiny fraction of
the book. And you can physically see how little you've covered:
it's been hard, laborious, you've got eye-ache, ear-ache, head-
ache, neck-ache, back-ache, bum-ache, all the aches, and you've
got.that much to go and you know you're going to forget most
of it. As you go through your horrible linear notes week-in,
week-out, month-in, month-out, forgetting as you go along like
scattering seeds that die as you sew, and the examinations are
looming, you know you're doomed - and your are.
•• ••• • ••••••••••• ••••••• •• • • • •• • • • • • • • • • • ••••••• ••• • • • • • • • • • • • ••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
You get demoralized and say, 'Sod this for a lark,' and you
go and have a beer. And then it's a slippery slide to crib
notes, asking friends, scouring the web, trying to make the
professor or teacher give something away. All this is entirely
rationally based, because you are right: this type of study is
fundamentally a waste of time. You must learn how to do
it properly.
Now you can, if you work through and practise with the
Buzan Study Skills Handbook. Your negative spiral will become a
positive, motivating experience.
How to do it: how to get the most from
this study guide
Every part ofthis book should be the first page - when structuring
this book it became apparent that any chapter could be 'Chapter
l' because everything is vitally important. So I suggest you first
skim through the various chapters of this book to 'get a feel' for
the contents and approach, and then take a closer look at each
chapter. Each one deals with a different aspect of your brain's
functioning and gives you different ways to unlock and harness
it as an exponentially more effective study tool.
Chapter 1: Your brain: it's better than you think, really
shows you what an amazing instrument for study your brain
is and can be for you. Case studies of students who have used
the BOST programme are highlighted to show its application
and versatility in different study scenarios. It explains how you
should never underestimate your own potential, and how you
can unlock the incredible capacity of your brain.
••• • •• •• • • ••• • • •• •• • • • ••• • • • •• • • • •• • • •• • • • • ••• • ••• ••• ••
INTRODUCTION
9

10
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Chapter 2: Obstacles to effective study examines the
mental, emotional and physical 'blocks' and barriers to effective
study so that you can relate to them and not feel intimidated by
the weight of expectation as exams loom. The core skills of the
BOST programme are then set out in the subsequent chapters.
Chapter 3: BOST® gives you the simple-to-follow eight-
point BOST strategy for study Preparation and Application.
Preparation includes the key skills of browsing, time
management, refreshing memory and defining questions and
goals, while Application is divided into the Overview, Preview,
Inview and Review skills.
Chapter 4: Speed reading. Do you read so slowly that you're
falling asleep in the university library? You obviously need
to speed up your reading and comprehension of what you are
studying and revising. This chapter is much more than just
grasping a technique: it also shows you how to concentrate,
how to skim and scan data and, critically, how your studying
environment and posture influence your propensity and desire
to learn. This chapter will help you save time and study more
efficiently. As you bring speed reading skills to the core of your
revision studies alongside Mind Mapping (see Chapters 6 and
7) and harnessing your memory (Chapter 5) your confidence
will also increase.
In Chapter 5: Supercharge your memory I am going to
teach the main techniques you need to use to remember, and
these techniques will support what you go on to learn about
Mind Mapping in Chapters 6 and 7. I explain how you can
improve memory both during and after learning. In addition,
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
two Key Memory Systems to assist your studies are introduced
for the perfect memorization of listed items.
Chapter 6: Mind Maps® lays out this unique memory, recall
and revision method that echoes your mind's internal 'maps'.
The Mind Map is a multi-dimensional memory jogger and
a fantastic revision tool. Understanding the way you think
will help you to use words and imagery in Mind Map formats
for recording, revising, recalling, remembering, organizing,
creative thinking and problem solving in your studies and when
revising for exams. You must also be able to store, recall and
retrieve information and data effectively.
Chapter 7: Revolutionize your study with Mind Maps@
and BOST® is your final step along the pathway to success.
Here you will learn how to apply your finely tuned Mind
Mapping techniques to all aspects of your study. You will learn
how to Mind Map your textbooks, DVDs and lecture notes, and
you will discover the benefits of Mind Mapping in group study.
Remember to revisit the core skills that you feel need refreshing
and not to treat the Buzan Study Skills Handbook in a totally
linear cover-to-cover fashion. I'll stress it again: every part of
this book should be the first page. It is also essential that you
practise if you wish to be able to use effectively the methods
and information laid out in the Buzan Study Skills Handbook.
At various stages in the book are exercises and suggestions
for further activity. In addition you should work out your own
practice and study schedule, keeping to it as firmly as possible.
• • •• • ••• ••• •• • •• • •• •• • ••• ••• • •• •• • •• • •• • ••• • •••• • ••• •• •
INTRODUCTION
11

12
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Having gathered the core components of the BOST programme,
you can then incorporate all these previous areas of knowledge
into a comprehensive study mind set:
o To study hyper-efficiently.
o To organize effectively.
o To read every study book at minimally twice your previous
speed.
o To remember what you have learned twice as well.
o To Mind Map your books and notes in such a way that you
will be able to remember your subjects four to ten times better.
So get ready to fulfil your real potential for effective and
successful study with the aid of the BOST programme -
incorporating speed reading, Mind Mapping and memory recall
- the ultimate combination of study skills tapping in to your
greatest asset, that is, your brain.
Let me know of your success!
c
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••



1
YOUR BRAIN: IT'S BETTER THAN
YOU THINK, REALLY

16
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
Your brain is an extraordinary, super-powered
processor capable of boundless and interconnected
thoughts: if only you know how to harness it, studying
will cease to be a fraught and stressful exercise, and
will be fast, easy and fruitful.
Your amazing brain began to evolve over 500 million years ago,
but it's only in the last 500 years that we've discovered that
it is located in your head, and not your stomach or heart (as
Aristotle and a lot other famous scientists believed). Even more
amazing is the fact that 95 per cent of what we know about
your brain and how it works was discovered within the last ten
years. We have so much more to learn.
Your brain has five major functions:
1
Receiving - Your brain receives information via your senses.
2
Storing - Your brain retains and stores the information
and is able to access it on demand. (Although it may not always
feel that way to you!)
3
Analyzing - Your brain recognizes patterns and likes to
organize information in ways that make sense: by examining
information and questioning meaning.
4
Controlling - Your brain controls the way you manage
information in different ways, depending upon your state of
health, your personal attitude and your environment.
S
Outputting - Your brain outputs received information
through thoughts, speech, drawing, movement, and all other
forms of creativity.
The techniques laid out in the Buzan Study Skills Handbook will
help you utilize these brain skills by helping your brain to learn,
analyze, store and retrieve information effectively and on demand.

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The man with two brains
How your brain manages these superfast processes is even
more astounding. The breakthrough discovery is knowing
now that we have two upper brains rather than one, and that,
they operate in different degrees in the different mental areas.
The two sides of your brain, or your two cortices as they are
called, are linked by a fantastically complex network of nerve
fibres known as the Corpus Callosum, and deal dominantly with
different types of mental activity.
right
left
In most people the left cortex deals with:
o logic, words, lists, lines, numbers and analysis - the so-called
'academic' activities. While the left cortex is engaged in these
activities, the right cortex is more in the 'alpha wave' or resting
state, ready to assist.
The right cortex deals with:
o rhythm, imagination, colour, daydreaming, spatial
awareness, Gestalt (that is, the whole organized picture or, as
you might put it, 'the whole being greater than the sum of its
parts') and dimension.
•• • • •• • • • • ••• •••• • • • • •• • • • • • • • • • • •• • • •• • •• •••• • •• • •••• •
YOUR BRAIN: IT'S BETTER THAN YOU THINK, REALLY
17

18
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Subsequent research has shown that when people were
encouraged to develop a mental area they had previously
considered weak, this development, rather than detracting from
other areas, seemed to produce a synergetic effect in which
all areas of mental performance improved. Moreover, each
hemisphere contains many more of the other side's abilities than
had been thought previously, and each hemisphere also is capable
of a much wider and much more subtle range of mental activities.
Einstein, for instance, failed French at school and
numbered among his activities violin playing, art, sailing, and
'imagination games'. And Einstein gave credit for many of his
more significant scientific insights to those imagination games.
While daydreaming on a hill one summer day, he imagined
riding sunbeams to the far extremities of the Universe, and
upon finding himself returned, 'illogically', to the surface of
the sun, he realized that the Universe must indeed be curved,
and that his previous 'logical' training was incomplete. The
numbers, equations and words he wrapped around this new
image gave us the Theory of Relativity - a left and right cortex
synthesis.
Similarly the great artists turned out to be 'whole-brained'.
Rather than note books filled with stories of drunken parties,
and paint slapped on haphazardly to produce masterpieces,
entries similar to the following were found:
Up at 6 a.m. Spent seventeenth day on painting number
six of the latest series. Mixed four parts orange with
two parts yellow to produce a colour combination which
Iplaced in upper left-hand corner of canvas, to act in
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

visual opposition to spiral structures in lower right-hand
corner, producing desired balance in eye of perceiver.
Telling examples of just how much left-cortex activity goes into
what we normally consider right-cortex pursuits.
The other Da Vinci Code
One man in the last thousand years stands out as a supreme
example of what a human being can do if both cortical sides of
the brain are developed simultaneously: Leonardo da Vinci. In
his time he was arguably the most accomplished man in each
of the following disciplines: art, sculpture, physiology, general
science, architecture, mechanics, anatomy, physics, invention,
meteorology, geology, engineering and aviation. He could also
play, compose and sing spontaneous ballads when thrown
any stringed instrument in the courts of Europe. Rather than
separating these different areas of his latent ability, da Vinci
combined them. His scientific note books are filled with three-
dimensional drawings and images; and, equally interesting, the
final plans for his great painting masterpieces often look like
architectural plans: straight lines, angles, curves and numbers
incorporating mathematics, logic and precise measurements.
Fulfilling your mental potential
It seems, then, that when we describe ourselves as talented
in certain areas and not talented in others, what we are
really describing are those areas of our potential that we
have successfully developed, and those areas of our potential
YOUR BRAIN: IT'S BETTER THAN YOU THINK, REALLY
19

20
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
that still lie dormant, which in reality could - with the right
nurturing - flourish.
The two sides of your brain do not operate separately from
one another - they need to work together to be at their most
effective. The more you can stimulate both sides of your brain at
the same time, the more effectively they will work together to
help you to:
o Think better.
o Remember more.
o Recall instantly.
Stimulation for study is going to come in the guise of BOST,
the Buzan Organic Study Technique programme. Using these
unique and personally refined study skills - incorporating Mind
Maps, Radiant Thinking, Speed Reading, Recall after Learning
and other core Buzan Study Skills- your ability to master
revision, learning, comprehension, exam study and preparation
will be transformed. Consider, to give you confidence, these two
true student cases studies:
Case study - Eva
'Nobody should ever be told he or she is stupid or that they
can't do something. We all have potential and it is vital that
every person studying is given the best opportunity to achieve
that potential. But we need ways that work for us. Tony
Buzan's techniques are incredibly powerful and yet simple
to learn and I strongly advocate young people beinggiven
an introduction to them at school and college, so they can
maximize their enjoyment oflearning.'
Eva, a researcher who transformed her study techniques through
Mind Mapping.
• • ••• • • • • • •• • ••• ••• • ••••••• ••••• •••• •• ••• •••• •• • • • ••• ••• ••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Eva had a tough schooling: her school had relegated her to the
'dumb pile' and pretty explicitly told her parents she didn't have
'a hope in hell' of passing her exams. Eva, bluntly, was regarded
as stupid, but in fact she was dyslexic (a condition much bette~
known about now). Moreover, she loved learning, and after an
assessment by an educational psychologist when she was 13
she knew she had an above average IQ. 'SO I knew that I had to
learn in a different way,' says Eva. 'My reaction to being told I
was stupid and wouldn'tget my ~' Levels was to work harder
to prove them wrong... I can be very stubborn.'
Eva was 16 when she discovered Mind Maps in the first year
of her '1\ Levels. She was lucky to find a truly inspirational tutor
and her parents were incredibly supportive and had real belief
in her. It was her mum who found the tutor who viewed Eva as
'potential' rather than 'work', and discovered who she was and
how she worked best. Eva's tutor taught her Mind Mapping and
opened up a new world of learning possibilities.
'The visual appeal was huge and my organizational demon
liked having everything on one page,' recalls Eva.
The Mind Maps were invaluable in all her studies from '1\
levels through to her professional qualifications in marketing.
'In my studies I consistently achieved high results including
many distinctions and merits. In one exam Igot the highest
mark in the country (CAM Advertising paper).'
As Eva concludes: 'School went a long way to dampen my
love oflearning to the point at which the idea ofthree more
years at University was a horror to me - which is very sad as
I know I would have loved it. Tony Buzan's Mind Maps and
learning techniques reintroduced that love oflearning which I
cherish to this day.'
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
YOUR BRAIN: IT'S BETTER THAN YOU THINK, REALLY
21

22
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Case study - Edmund
At the age of 11 years and still at his prep school, Edmund was
clear in his dream. He wanted to go to Winchester College, one
of the leading academic public schools in the UK. But in order
to reach this goal, he had to work hard to achieve the high
grades that Winchester demands. Nine months before he sat
his Common Entrance exams his grades were not high enough
and the target seemed far off. His mother, knowing the work
of Tony Buzan and all his learning-how-to-Iearn techniques,
set about teaching Edmund how to do Mind Maps and how to
apply them to his school work. This was a turning point for him
and very quickly, instead of feeling overwhelmed by the eight
subjects that he knew he had to pass, Edmund felt in control
and was able to plan his revision and study periods. First, he
created a Mind Map on the eight subjects, which gave him the
'overview' he needed to recognize which subject needed more
work. Then he created a Mind Map for each subject, giving a
branch to the main topic headings in that subject. Thus, on just
a single piece of paper, he had the whole syllabus for that one
subject and could concentrate on the topics that he felt needed
more revision or work. When the exams eventually came,
instead of feeling a sense of panic, he was able to organize his
thoughts and answers through the use of rough Mind Maps.
The result was a resounding success. Edmund passed all of his
exams with ease and went to the school of his dreams.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••



2
OBSTACLES TO EFFECTIVE
STUDY

26
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
You have this fantastic mind, this awesome brain
power, so why do you feel fear, stress and anxiety when
it comes to studying?
Most people will have experienced difficulties in studying or
revising for examinations. This chapter outlines these common
difficulties so that you can accept and overcome your quite
rational fears of the exam, test, assessment, essay, thesis and
coursework. The key barriers to successful study are:
o The reluctant learner.
o The mental blocks to effective study.
o Outdated study techniques.
The reluctant learner
The Six-o'clock-in-the-Evening-Enthusiastic-Determined-and-
Well-Intentioned-Studier-Until-Midnight is a person with
whom you are probably already familiar. At 6 p.m. the student
approaches his (or her) desk, and carefully organizes everything
in preparation for the study period to follow. Having everything
in place, he next carefully adjusts each item again, giving him
time to complete the first excuse; he recalls that in the morning
he did not have quite enough time to read all articles of interest
in the newspaper. He also realizes that if he is going to study
it is best to have such small things completely out of the way
before settling down to the task at hand.
He therefore leaves his desk, browses through the
newspaper and notices as he browses that there are more
articles of interest than he had originally thought. He also
notices, as he leafs through the pages, the entertainment
section. At this point it seems like a good idea to plan for the
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
evening'sJirst break - perhaps an interesting programme
between 8 and 8.30 p.m.
He finds the programme, and it inevitably starts at about
7 p.m. At this point, he thinks, 'Well, I've had a difficult day
and it's not too long before the programme starts, and I need
a rest anyway and the relaxation will really help me to get
down to studying...' He returns to his desk at 7.45 p.m, because
the beginning of the next programme was also a bit more
interesting than he thought it would be.
At this stage, he still hovers over his desk, tapping his
book reassuringly as he remembers that phone call and text
messaging to his two fellow students which, like the articles of
interest in the newspaper, are best cleared out of the way before
the serious studying begins.
The phone call and texts coming back and forth, of course,
are much more interesting and longer than originally planned,
but eventually the intrepid studier finds himself back at his
desk at about 8.30 p.m.
At this point in the proceedings he actually sits down at the
desk, opens the book with a display of physical determination
and starts to read (usually at page one) as he experiences the
first pangs of hunger and thirst. This is disastrous because he
realizes that the longer he waits to satisfy the pangs, the worse
they will get, and the more interrupted his study concentration
will be.
The obvious and only solution is a light snack, but as more
and more tasty items are linked to the central core of hunger,
the snack becomes a feast.
Having removed this final obstacle, he returns to his desk
with the certain knowledge that this time there is nothing
that could possibly interfere with the dedication. The first
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
OBSTACLES TO EFFECTIVE STUDY
27

28
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
couple of sentences on page one are looked at again... as the
studier realizes that his stomach is feeling decidedly heavy and
a general drowsiness seems to have set in. Far better at this
juncture to watch that other interesting half-hour programme at
10 p.m., after which the digestion will be mostly completed and
the rest will enable him really to get down to the task at hand.
At midnight we find him asleep in front of the TV.
Even at this point, when he has been woken up by whoever
comes into the room, he will think that things have not gone
too badly, for after all he had a good rest, a good meal, watched
some interesting and relaxing programmes, fulfilled his social
commitments to his friends, digested the day's information,
and got everything completely out of the way so that tomorrow,
at 6 p.m...
Fear of (coming to grips with) study is rational.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

At the present time information is being given more
importance and emphasis than the individual. As a result,
the reluctant learner is being mentally swamped and almost
literally 'weighed down' by it all. Both the information and
publication explosions are still continuing at staggering rates,
while the ability of the individual to handle and study it all
remains neglected. If he is ever to cope with the situation he
must learn not more 'hard facts', but new ways of handling
and studying the information - new ways of using his natural
abilities to learn, think, recall, create and find solutions to
problems.
The mental blocks to effective study
The preceding episode is probably familiar and amusing, but the
implications of it are significant and serious.
On one level the story is encouraging because, by the very
fact that it is a problem experienced by everybody, it confirms
what has long been suspected: that everyone is creative and
inventive, and that the feelings that many have about being
uncreative are not necessary. The creativity demonstrated
in the example of the reluctant student is not applied very
usefully. But the diversity and originality with which we all
make up reasons for not doing things suggests that each person
has a wealth of talent which could be applied in more positive
directions!
On another level the story is discouraging because it
shows up the widespread and underlying fear that most of us
experience when confronted with a study text.
This reluctance and fear arises from the examination-
based education system in which the student is presented
OBSTACLES TO EFFECTIVE STUDY
29

30
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
with textbooks on the subjects he is 'taking'. He knows that
textbooks are 'harder' than storybooks and novels; he also
knows that they represent a lot of work; and he further knows
that he will be tested on his knowledge of the information from
the books.
So:
1
The fact that the type of book is 'hard' is discouraging in
itself.
2
The fact that the book represents work is also discouraging,
because the student instinctively knows that he is unable to
read, note, and remember properly.
3
The fact that he is going to be tested is often the most
serious of the three difficulties. It is well known that this
threat can completely disrupt your brain's ability to work in
certain situations. The number of cases are legion of people who
literally cannot write anything in an exam situation despite
the fact that they know their subject thoroughly - as are the
number of cases of people who, even though they are able to
write some form of answer, have gigantic mental blocks where
whole areas of knowledge are completely forgotten during
an exam period. In even more extreme cases many people .
have been known to spend a whole two-hour period writing
frantically, assuming that they were answering the question,
when in fact they are repeating over and over again either their
own name or one word.
Faced with this kind of threat, which for many is truly
terrifying, the student has one of two choices: he can either
study and face one set of consequences, or not study and face
a different set of consequences. If he studies and does badly,
then he has proven himself 'incapable', 'unintelligent', 'stupid', a
'dunce', or whatever the negative expression is at the time.

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Of course this is not really the case, but he has no way of
knowing that it is the system which is not testing him properly,
and not his own ineptitude causing the 'failure'.
If he does not study, the situation is quite different.
Confronted with having failed a test or exam, he can
immediately say that obviously he failed it because he 'didn't
study and wasn't interested in that kind of stuff anyway'.
By doing this, the reluctant student solves the problem in a
number of ways:
o He avoids both the test and the threat to his self-esteem
that studying would involve.
o He has a perfect excuse for failing.
o He gets respect from fellow students because he is daring
to attack a situation which is frightening to them as well. It is
interesting to note that such a student will often find himself in
the position of a leader.
It is also interesting to note that even those who do make
the decision to study will still reserve a little part of themselves
for behaving like the non-studier. The person who gets scores
as high as 80 or 90 per cent will also be found using exactly the
same excuses for not getting 100 per cent as the non-studier
uses for failing.
Outdated study techniques
The situations described are unsatisfactory for everyone
concerned. One further and major reason for poor study results
lies in the way we have approached both study techniques and
the information we wanted people to study.
We have surrounded the person with a confusing mass of
different subjects or 'disciplines', demanding that he learn,
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
OBSTACLES TO EFFECTIVE STUDY
31

32
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
...........•...............•..........•...............
~
In traditional education, information is given or 'taught' about
the different areas of knowledge that surround the individual.
The direction and flow is from the subject to the individual - he is
simply given the information, and is expected to absorb, learn and
remember as much as he possibly can.
remember and understand a frightening array of subjects under
headings such as Mathematics, Physics, Chemistry, Biology,
Zoology, Botany, Anatomy, Physiology, Sociology, Psychology,
Anthropology, Philosophy, History, Geography, English, Media
Studies, Music, Technology and Palaeontology. In each of these
subject areas the individual has been and is still presented with
series of dates, theories, facts, names, and general ideas.
••• • • •• • • •••••••• •••• •• • • • •• • •• • • • • • • • • • • • • •••• ••• • ••• ••• •• • • • • • • •

~
.
What this really means is that we have been taking a totally
lopsided approach to study and to the way in which a person
deals with and relates to the information and knowledge that
surrounds him.
As can be seen from the illustration, we are concentrating far
too much on information about the 'separate' areas of knowledge.
We are also laying too much stress on asking the individual to
feed back facts in pre-digested order or in pre-set forms such as
standard examination papers or formal essays.
This approach has also been reflected in the standard study
techniques recommended in sixth form colleges, universities,
institutes of further education and the text and study books
that go with it. These techniques have been 'grid' approaches in
which it is recommended that a series of steps always be worked
through on any book being studied. One common suggestion
is that any reasonably difficult study book should always
be read through three times in order to ensure a complete
understanding. This is obviously a very simple example,
but even the many more developed approaches tend to be
comparatively rigid and inflexible - simply standard systems to
be repeated on each studying occasion.
It is obvious that methods such as these cannot be applied
with success to every study book. There is an enormous
difference between studying a text on Literary Criticism and
studying a text on Higher Mathematics. In order to study
properly, a technique is required which does not force the same
approach to such different materials.
First, it is necessary to start working from the individual
outwards. Rather than bombarding him with books, formulas
and examinations we must begin to concentrate on teaching each
person how he or she can study most efficiently. We must teach
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
OBSTACLES TO EFFECTIVE STUDY
33

34
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
In the new forms of education, the previous emphases must be
reversed. Instead of teaching the individual facts about other
things, we must first teach him facts about himself - facts about how
he can learn, think, recall, create, solve problems, and so on.
ourselves how our eyes work when we read, how we remember,
how we think, how we can learn more effectively, how we can
organize noting, how we can solve problems and in general how
we can best use our abilities, whatever the subject matter (see
illustration on above).
Most of the problems outlined here will be eliminated
when we finally do change the emphasis away from the subject
toward the student and how he can select and understand any
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

information he wants to. Students will be equipped to study
and remember whatever area of knowledge is interesting or
necessary. Things will not have to be 'crammed in'. Each student
will be able to range subjects at his own pace, going for help and
personal supervision only when he realizes it is necessary.
Yet another advantage of this approach is that it will make both
teaching and learning much easier, more enjoyable and more
productive. By concentrating on individuals and their abilities,
we will finally and sensibly have placed the learning situation in
its proper perspective.
Onword
One is tempted to note here that the modern student has access
to instruction manuals and 'How To Do It' books and websites
on virtually anything he wishes to study or research. But when
it comes to the most complicated, complex, and important
organism of all, ourselves, there has been practically no help.
We need our own 'operations manual' on how to operate our
own 'Super Bio Computer'. The Buzan Study Skills Handbook is
that operations manual.
OBSTACLES TO EFFECTIVE STUDY
35


3
BOST@

38
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The Buzan Organic Study Technique (BOST®), laid out in
this chapter, will show you how to develop strong study
habits and overcome those study fears, stresses and
anxieties. In the following four chapters, we are going
to reinforce and multiply the power of the technique by
introducing you to ways of increasing your speed while
using it. This will improve your memory of what you
read, as you read it and after you've read it. The master
note-taking technique, the Mind Map® will allow you
to have everything you have speed read and everything
you have learned and remembered in order, perfectly
structured and under control. In the final chapter, we
will revisit BOST and supplement it and empower it
with each of these major elements.
BOST is divided into two main strategies: Preparation and
Application.
It is important to note at the outset that although the main
steps are presented in a certain order, this order is by no means
essential and can be changed, subtracted from and added to as
the study texts warrant. You will also need to read and revisit
the chapters on Speed Reading, Memory and Mind Maps to
utilize the BOST programme for maximum effect.
BOST®: Preparation
This first section contains:
o The browse.
o Time and amount.
o Five minute Mind Map jotter.
o Asking questions and defining goals.
• • •••• • • • • • •••••••• •••• • •• • •• • • •• •• ••• •••••••• ••• ••• ••• • •••••• • • ••

,....•••.................••••......••.....•........................
The browse
Before doing anything else, it is essential to 'browse' or look
through the entire textbook, journal, lecture notes or periodical
you are about to study. The browse should be done in the way
you would look through a book you were considering buying
in a book shop, or considering taking out from the library.
In other words, casually but rather rapidly flipping through
the pages, getting the general 'feel' of the book, observing
the organization and structure, the level of difficulty, the
proportion of diagrams and illustrations to text, and the
location of any Results, Summaries and Conclusions.
Time and amount
These two aspects can be dealt with simultaneously because the
theory behind them both is similar.
The first thing to do when sitting down to study a textbook
is to decide on the periods of time to be devoted to it. Having
done this, decide what amount to cover in each time period.
The reason for insisting on these two initial steps is not
arbitrary, and is supported by the findings of the Gestalt psycho-
logists. (Before reading on, complete the activity on page 40.)
The Gestalt psychologists discovered that the human brain
has a very strong tendency to complete things - thus most
readers will find that they labelled the shapes on page 40 as
straight line, cylinder, square, ellipse or oval, zigzag line, circle,
triangle, wavy or curved line, rectangle. In fact the 'circle' is not
a circle but a 'broken circle'. Many actually see this broken circle
as a completed circle. Others see it as a broken circle but assume
that the artist intended to complete it.
,...••....................•.................•••........
BOST~
39

40
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
1
2
4
6
3
5
7
8
Shape recognition. Enter the name of the shape of each of the items
above next to the appropriate number.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

In study, making a decision about Time and Amount gives us
a secure anchor, as well as an end point, or goal. This has the
advantage of enabling the proper linkages to be made rather
than encouraging a wandering off in more disconnected ways.
An excellent comparison is that of listening to a good
.
lecturer. She, attempting to expound a lot of difficult material,
will usually explain her starting and ending points and will
often indicate the amount of time to be spent on each area
of the presentation. The audience will automatically find the
lecture easier to follow because they have guidelines within
which to work.
It is advisable to define physically the amount to be read by
placing reasonably large paper markers at the beginning and
end of the section chosen. This enables you to refer back and
forward to the information in the chosen amount.
A further advantage of making these decisions at the outset
is that the underlying fear of the unknown is avoided. If a large
study book is plunged into with no planning, the number of
pages you eventually have to complete will continuously oppress
you. Each time you sit down you will be aware that you still have
'a few hundred pages to go' and will be studying with this as a
constant and real background threat. If, on the other hand, you
have selected a reasonable number of pages for the time you are
going to study, you will be reading with the knowledge that the
task you have set yourself is easy and can certainly be completed.
The difference in attitude and performance will be marked.
The five minute Mind Map® jotter
Having decided on the amounts to be covered, next jot down as
fast as you can everything you know on the subject. No more
than five minutes should be devoted to the exercise.
BOST~
41

42
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The purpose of this exercise is:
o To improve concentration.
o To eliminate wandering.
o To establish a good mental 'set'.
This last term refers to getting your mind filled with important
rather than unimportant information. If you have spent five
minutes searching your memory for pertinent information, you
will be far more attuned to the text material and far less likely
to continue thinking about the strawberries and cream you are
going to eat afterwards.
From the time limit of five minutes on this exercise it is
obvious that your entire knowledge is not required - the five-
minute exercise is intended purely to activate your storage
system and to set your mind off in the right direction.
One question which will arise is 'what about the difference
in my Mind Map if I know almost nothing on the subject or if I
know an enormous amount?'
Ifknowledge in the area is great, the five minutes should
be spent recalling the major divisions, theories and names
connected with the subject. As your mind can flash through
information much faster than your hand can write it, all the
minor associations will still be 'seen' mentally and the proper
mental set and direction will be established.
Ifthe knowledge ofthe subject is almost nothing, the five
minutes should be spent recalling those few items which are
known, as well as any other information which seems in any
way at all to be connected. This will enable you to get as close as
you possibly can to the new subject, and will prevent you from
feeling totally lost as so many do in this situation.
t •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
1

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
So, you gain by gathering together your immediate and
current state of knowledge on areas of interest. In this way
you will be able to keep much more up to date with yourself
and will actually know what you know, rather than being in a
continually embarrassing position of not knowing what you
know - the 'I've got it on the tip of my tongue' syndrome.
Asking questions and defining goals
Having established your current state of knowledge on the
subject, decide what you want from the book. This involves
defining the questions you want answered during the reading,
and these questions should refer directly to what you wish to
achieve. Many prefer to use a different coloured pen for this
section, and add their questions to their jotting of current
knowledge. A Mind Map is the best way to do this (see Chapter 6).
This exercise, again like that for noting knowledge, is based
on the principle of establishing proper mental sets. It shouldn't
take much more than five minutes at the outset, as questions
can be redefined and added to as the reading progresses.
Why knowledge and aims are important
A standard experiment to confirm this approach takes two
groups of people who are generally equal in terms of age,
education and aptitude. Each group is given the same study text
and is given enough time to complete the whole book.
Group A is told that they are going to be given a completely
comprehensive test on everything in the book and that they
must study accordingly.
Group B is told that they will be tested on two or three
major themes which run through the book, and that they also
must study accordingly.
••• • •• • • • • •••• • ••• • • • •• • • • • ••• • • • • • • • • • • • •• • • ••• • • • • • • •
BOST*
43

44
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
Both groups are in fact tested on the entire text, a situation that
one would immediately think unfair to the group that had been
told they would be tested only on the main themes.
One might also think that in this situation the second
group would do better on questions about the themes they had
been given, the first group better on other questions and that
both groups might have a similar final score. To the surprise of
many, the second group not only does better on questions about
the themes, but they achieve higher total scores which include better
marks on all parts ofthe test.
The reason for this is that the main themes act like great
grappling hooks through the information, attaching everything
else to them. In other words the main questions and goals
act as associative and linking centres to which all other
information becomes easily attached.
The group instructed to get everything had no centres
at all to which they could connect new information, and
because of this they groped, with no foundations, through
the information. It is much like a situation where a person is
given so much choice that he ends up making no decision; the
paradox where attempting to get everything gains nothing.
Asking questions and establishing goals can be seen, like the
section preceding it, to become more and more important as
the theory behind becomes better understood. It should be
emphasized that the more accurately these questions and goals
are established, the better you will perform in the Application
section of BOST below.
How to Mind Map this application stage is
explained in Chapter 6

I ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 4
BOST®: Application
This second section deals with Application and contains:
o Overview.
o Preview.
o Inview.
o Review.
Overview
One of the interesting facts about people using study books is
that most, when given a new text, start reading on page one.
It is not advisable to start reading a new study text on the first
page. Here's why.
Imagine that you are a fanatical jigsaw-puzzle-doer. A friend
arrives on your doorstep with a gigantic box wrapped in paper
and tied with string, and tells you that it's a present: 'the most
beautiful and complex jigsaw puzzle yet devised by man!' You
thank her, and as you watch her walk away down the front path,
you decide that from that moment on you are going to devote
yourself entirely to the completion of the puzzle.
Before continuing, note in precise detail the steps you
would take from that point on in order to complete the task.
Now check your own answers with the following list compiled
from my students:
1
Go back inside the house.
2
Take the string off the box.
3
Take off the paper.
4
Dispose of string and paper.
S
Look at the picture on the outside of the box.
6
Read the instructions, concentrating on the number of
pieces and overall dimensions of the puzzle.
I ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
BOST"'
45

46
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
......................................................'
7
Estimate and organize the amount of time necessary for
completion.
8
Plan breaks and meals!
9
Find a surface of appropriate dimensions for the puzzle.
10 Open the box.
11 Empty the contents of the box onto the surface or a
separate tray.
12 If pessimistic, check the number of pieces!
13 Turn all the pieces right side up.
14 Find the edge and corner pieces.
15 Sort out colour areas.
16 Fit 'obvious' bits and pieces together.
17 Continue to fill in.
18 Leave 'difficult' pieces until the end (because as the overall
picture becomes more clear, and the number of pieces used
increases, so does the probability increase that the difficult
pieces will fit in more easily when there is greater context into
which they can fit).
19 Continue the process until completion.
20 Celebrate!
This jigsaw analogy can be applied directly to study: studying
on page one would be like finding the bottom left-hand corner,
and insisting to yourself that the entire picture be built up step
by step from that corner only!
What is essential in a reasonable approach to study texts,
especially difficult ones, is to get a good idea of what's in them
before plodding on into a learning catastrophe. The Overview in
BOST is designed to perform this task, and may be likened to
looking at the picture, reading the instructions, and finding the
edge and corner pieces of the puzzle. What this means in the
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
1

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
study context is that you should scour the book for all material
not included in the regular body of the print, using a visual
guide such as a pencil as you do so. Areas of the book to be
covered in your overview include:
Results
Tables
Subheadings
Summaries
Table of contents
Dates
Conclusions
Marginal notes
Italics
Indents
Illustrations
Graphs
Glossaries
Capitalized words
Footnotes
Back cover
Photographs
Statistics
The function of this is to provide you with a good knowledge
of the graphic sections of the book, not skimming the whole
thing, but selecting specific areas for relatively comprehensive
coverage. (Speed reading is a great aid here - see Chapter 4.)
amount of mate"alto be studied
--
I
--
I
sectIons to be covered by prevIew after overVIew
Sections of a study text to be covered by Overview.
It is extremely important to note again that throughout the
overview a pen, pencil, or other form of visual guide, should
always be used.
The reason for this can best be explained by reference to
a graph. If the eye is unaided, it will simply fixate briefly on
general areas of the graph, then move off, leaving only a vague
visual memory and an interference to that memory because the
eye movement will not have 'registered' the same pattern as the
graph.
•••••• ••• • • •• ••• • • • • • •• • • • •• ••• •• •• • • •• • •• • •••• •• • • • •• •
BOSP
47

48
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Example pattern of graph to be studied.
If a visual aid is used, your eye will more closely approximate
the flow of the graph and your memory will be strengthened by
each of the following inputs:
1
The visual memory itself.
2
The remembered eye movement approximating the graph
shape.
3
The memory of the movement of the arm or hand in tracing
the graph (Kinaesthetic memory).
4
The visual memory of the rhythm and movement of the
tracer.
Standard pattern of unguided eye movement on graph causing
conflicting memory of shape of graph.
••• • •• • • •• • •••••••• • ••••••• ••••• • •• • • • • •• • •• • • • • • •• • •••• •••• •••• ••

The overall recall resulting from this practice is far superior
to that of a person who reads without any visual guide. It
is interesting to note that accountants often use their pens
to guide their eyes across and down columns and rows of
figures. They do this naturally because any very rigid linear eye
movement is difficult to maintain with the unaided eye.
Preview
To preview something means just that: to pre-view, or to see
before. If you allow your brain to see the whole text before
speed reading it (by skimming, in association with one of the
guided reading techniques) you will be able to navigate your way
through it more effectively when you read it the second time.
The purpose of previewing material before reading it is the
same as the purpose of planning a route before driving from A
to B. You need to know the terrain and decide whether to take
the long scenic route or if a shortcut will suffice.
Previewing should be applied to everything you are studying
including communications like exam details and emails. If done
effectively it will save you an immense amount of time, and
speed up your levels of reading and comprehension.
HowtoPre~eweffeoav~y
Be aware of what you already know before you begin reading
a book or a document and have an idea of what you want to
achieve by reading it. Skim read the text first to discover the
core elements. If the text is describing something you know
already, make a note of the fact for future reference.
Take effective notes on everything you read so that you can
refer back to them in future and use your previously acquired
knowledge to assess the relevance of what you are reading.
BOST"
49

50
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
During the preview, concentration should be directed to the
beginning and end of paragraphs, sections, chapters, and even
whole texts, because information tends to be concentrated at
the beginning and end of written material.
If you are studying a short academic paper or a complex
study book, the Summary, Results and Conclusion sections
should always be read first. These sections often include exactly
those essences of information for which you are searching,
enabling you to grasp that essence without having to wade
through a lot of time-wasting material.
Having gained the essence from these sections, simply check
that they do indeed summarize the main body of the text.
In the Preview, as with the Overview, you are not fully
reading all the material, but simply concentrating once again on
special areas.
amount of matenal to be studied
sections to be covered by preview after overview
---
c
-------
,
,.
------
,
"
7-~
Sections of a study text to be covered by Preview after Overview.
Strategies for success
The value of this section cannot be overemphasized. A case in
point is that of a student taught at Oxford who had spent four
months struggling through a SOO-page tome on psychology. By
the time he had reached page 4S0 he was beginning to despair
because the amount of information he was 'holding on to' as he
tried to get to the end was becoming too much - he was literally
L
beginning to drown in the information just before reaching
his goal.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
It transpired that he had been reading straight through the
book, and even though he was nearing the end, did not know
what the last chapter was about. It was a complete summary of
the book! He read the section and estimated that had he done
so at the beginning he would have saved himself approximately
70 hours in reading time, 20 hours in note-taking time and a
few hundred hours of worrying.
So in both the Overview and Preview you should very
actively select and reject. Many people still feel obliged to
read everything in a book even though they know it is not
necessarily relevant to them. It is far better to treat a book
in the way most people treat lecturers. In other words, if the
lecturer is boring, skip what he says, and if he is giving too
many examples, is missing the point or is making errors, select,
criticize, correct, and disregard as appropriate.
Inview
After the Overview and Preview, and providing that still more
information is required, Inview the material. This involves
'filling in' those areas still left, and can be compared with the
filling in process of the jigsaw puzzle, once the boundaries and
colour areas have been established. It is not necessarily the
major reading, as in some cases most of the important material
will have been covered in the previous stages.
--Dr-------iD--D-
,
,
,
difficult areas or areas where knowledge not complete
Sections of a study text to be covered after Inview has been
completed.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
BOST~
51

S2
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
It should be noted from the illustration on page 51 that there
are still certain sections that have been left incomplete even
at the Inview stage. This is because it is far better to move
over particularly difficult points than to batter away at them
immediately from one side only.
Once again the comparison with the jigsaw puzzle becomes
clear: racking your brains to find the pieces that connect to your
'difficult bit' is a tension-producing waste of time, and jamming
the piece in, or cutting it with a pair of scissors so that it does fit
(assuming or pretending you understand in context when really
you don't), is similarly futile. The difficult sections of a study
text are seldom essential to that which follows them, and the
advantages of leaving them are manifold:
1
If they are not immediately struggled with, your brain is
given that most important brief period in which it can work on
them subconsciously. (Most readers will have experienced the
examination question which they 'can't possibly answer' only to
find on returning to the question later that the answer pops out
and often seems ridiculously simple.)
2
If the difficult areas are returned to later, they can be
approached from both sides. Apart from its obvious advantages,
considering the difficult area in context (as with the difficult bit
in the jigsaw) also enables your brain's automatic tendency to
fill in gaps to work to greater advantage.
____..L-~~
-
~
'Jumping over' a stumbling block usually enables the reader to go
back to it later on with more information from 'the other side'. The
block itself is seldom essential for the understanding of that which
follows it.

creative leap
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
3
Moving on from a difficult area releases the tension and
mental floundering that often accompanies the traditional
approach.
Looking at the normal historical development of any discipline,
it is found that a fairly regular series of small and logically
connected steps are interrupted by great leaps forward.
The propounders of these giant new steps have in many
cases 'intuited' them (combining left and right cortex
functions), and afterwards been met with scorn. Galileo and
Einstein are examples. As they then explained their ideas step
by step, others gradually and progressively understood, some
early in the explanation, and others as the innovator neared his
conclusion.
In the same manner in which the innovator jumps over
an enormous number of sequential steps, and in the same
manner in which those who first realized his conclusions did
so, the studier who leaves out small sections of study will be
giving a greater range to his natural creative and understanding
abilities.
new creative Innovation
of discoverer,
./
./
./
/
"\ steps the innovator has to 'fill in'
10gl,"'"
/ / /
I.,,,, h..iog m.d, hi,di""",
stand:;d:;;o-;::e:---I,
the present
Historical development of ideas and creative innovations.
• • • ••• • ••• • • • • •• • • • •• •• • • • • • • • • ••• • • • •• • • • • •• ••• • ••• • • •
BOST~
53

S4
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Review
Having completed the Overview, Preview and Inview, and if
further information is still required to complete goals, answer
questions or solve problem areas, a Review stage is necessary.
In this stage simply fill in all those areas as yet incomplete, and
reconsider those sections you marked as noteworthy. In most
cases you will find that not much more than 70 per cent of that
initially considered relevant will finally be used.
A note on note-taking
Noting while studying should take two main forms:
1
Notes made on the text itself.
2
A growing Mind Map - see Chapter 6.
Notes you make in the textbook itself can include:
1
Underlining.
2
Personal thoughts generated by the text.
3
Critical comments.
4
Marginal straight lines for important or noteworthy material.
5
Curved or wavy marginal lines to indicate unclear or
difficult material.
6
Question marks for areas that you wish to research further
or that you find questionable.
7
Exclamation marks for outstanding items.
8
Your own symbol code for items and areas that relate to
your own specific and general objectives.
Straight line mark for
important or noteworthy
material.
Curved line mark for difficult
or unclear material.
'•.•••.........•••.........................•...•.........•....•.•..

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
If the textbook is not valuable, markings can be made in colour
codes. If the book is a cherished volume, then markings can be
made with a very soft pencil. If the pencil is soft enough, and
if a very soft eraser is used, the damage to the book will be l~ss
than that caused by the finger and thumb as they turn a page.
How to Mind Map this application stage is
explained in Chapter 6
Note-taking with Mind Maps®
You will find Mind Mapping the structure of the text as you
progress through it a highly accessible study tool and very
similar to building up the picture of the jigsaw puzzle as you fit
in bit by bit. (To learn how to develop and draw your own Mind
Maps for different aspects of study, see Chapters 6 and 7.)
The advantage of building up a Mind Map as you progress
through the study text is that you externalize and integrate a
lot of information that would otherwise be 'up in the air'. The
growing Mind Map also allows you to refer back quickly to
areas you have previously covered, rather than having to thumb
through pages already read.
It will enable you, after a reasonable amount of basic study,
to see just where the areas of confusion in your subject are, and
to see also where your subject connects with other subjects. As
such it will place you in the creative situation of being able to:
o Integrate the known.
o Realize the relevance to other areas.
o Make appropriate comment where confusion and debate
still exist.
•••• • • •• ••• ••• • •••• • • • •• • • • •••• •• • ••• ••• • •••• • • • • • •• • ••
BaST"'
55

56
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The final stage of your study will include the completion and
integration of any notes from your text with the Mind Map,
which will act as your basis for ongoing study and review.
When you have completed this final stage, you should,
as did our imaginary jigsaw puzzle fanatic, celebrate! This
may sound humorous, but it is also serious: if you associate
the completion of study tasks with personal celebration, the
context of your study will become increasingly more pleasant,
and thus the probability of your studying far greater.
Once your study programme is well under way, it is
advisable to keep enormous 'Master' Mind Maps which
summarize and overview the main branches and structures of
your subject areas.
See Chapter 6 Mind Maps@ for Mind Map@ notes
Continuing review
Apart from the immediate review, a continuing review
programme is essential, and should be constructed in the light
of the knowledge you will find concerning memory (see Chapter
5 on Memory).
We know that memory does not decline immediately after
you have learned something, but actually rises before levelling
off and then plummeting.
This graph can be warped to your advantage by reviewing
just at that point where your memory starts to fall. A review
here, at the point of highest memory and integration, will keep
the high point up for another one or two days.
• ••• • • ••••••• •• • • • • • • • • • • • • •• • • • • • • ••••••• • • • • ••• • •• ••• ••••• • •• • ••

CREATIVE
THINKING
5th review
6 months
4th review
1 month
3rd review
1 week
2nd review
24 hours
1st review
10 minutes
~
area of maintained m
area of maintained •
area of maintained
knowledge after
knowledge after
knowledge without
10 minutes
1 week
any review
~
area of maintained m
area of maintained
knowledge after
knowledge after
24 hours
1 month
0%
75%
C-o"
<Q
(b
50%
3
:3
<Il
:3
D
~
25%
This graph shows how quickly forgetting takes place after
something has been learned. It also shows how review can
'warp' this graph to enormous advantage.
100%

S8
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
Summary: BOST®
e The entire BaST (Buzan Organic Study Technique)
programme must be seen not as a step-by-step progression,
but as a series of inter-related aspects of approaching study
material. The following three skills-related chapters will impact
directly on BaST.
e It is quite possible to switch and change the order from the
one given here.
e The amount to be covered may be decided upon before
the period of time; the subject matter may be known before
the time and amount are decided upon and consequently the
knowledge Mind Map could be completed first; the questions
can be asked at the preparation stage or after anyone of the
latter stages; the overview can be eliminated in books where it
is inappropriate, or repeated a number of times if the subjects
are mathematics or physics. (One student found that it was
easier to read four chapters of post-degree mathematics
25 times per week for four weeks quickly, using the survey
technique, than to struggle through one formula at a time. He
was of course applying to its extreme, but very effectively, the
point made about skipping over difficult areas.) Preview can
be eliminated or broken down into separate sections; and the
Inview and Review can be variously extended or eliminated.
In other words each subject, and each book of each subject,
can be confidently approached in the manner best suited to it.
To each textbook you will bring the knowledge that, whatever
the difficulties, you possess the fundamental understanding to
choose the appropriate and necessarily unique approach.

.................................................................. '
Your study is consequently made a personal, interactive,
continually changing and stimulating experience, rather than a
rigid, impersonal and tiresomely onerous task.
It should also be noted that although it seems as if the bO,ok
is being read more times, this is not the case. By using BOST
you will be on average reading most sections once only and
will then be effectively reviewing those sections considered
important. A pictorial representation can be seen below.
/-
'Number of times' book is covered using BOST.
===1
By contrast, the 'once through' reader is not reading it once
through but is reading it an enormous number of times. He
thinks he is reading it through once only because he takes in
once piece of information after another. He does not realize
that his regressions, back-skipping, re-reading of difficult
sentences, general disorganization and forgetting because of
inadequate review, result in an actual reading of the book or
chapter as many as ten times.
'Number of times' book is covered using traditional 'once through'
reading techniques.
• •••••• • ••••• • • •• • •• • • ••••• •••••••• • • ••••• •••• ••• • ••• •
BaST'"
59

60
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Onword
The Buzan Organic Study Technique will allow you easy and
effective access to the world of knowledge in a manner that will
encourage your brain to learn more and more easily as it learns
more, and will turn you from a reluctant learner into one who
will avidly devour books by the hundred! The following chapters
show you how to incorporate Speed Reading, Memory and
Mind Maps into BOST.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••



,
SPEED READING

64
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The skill of speed reading - which is a complete process
of knowledge assimilation - will revolutionize your
ability to prioritize and retain essential study facts and
figures.
Speed reading will improve your study capabilities. Learning
how to do it successfully will:
o Increase your reading speeds dramatically.
o Improve your levels of concentration and comprehension.
o Increase your understanding of how your eyes and brain
work.
o Improve your vocabulary and general knowledge.
o Save you time and build your confidence.
The problems to overcome are:
o Deciding what to read: the art of selection.
o Understanding what you read: effective note taking and
comprehension.
o Retaining information: how to remember what you want
to know.
o Recalling information: having the ability to recall, on
demand, the facts you want and having them at your fingertips.
The study techniques that you will learn in this chapter include:
o Self-assessment: how fast do you read?
o Guided reading techniques that will help you to take in
more information more quickly from the written page.
o Tips on how to turn reading problems to your advantage.
o Guidance on how to:
o
Concentrate better.
o
Understand more.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

l ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
o
Scan and skim information to get to the crux of the
matter.
o
Create your environment to work with you.
Once you have learned the basics, we will up the pace with
a section that includes guidance on how to increase your
vocabulary to include new prefixes, suffices and word roots. This
has the potential to increase your vocabulary from 1000 words
to 10,000 words with very little effort.
There are many advantages for your brain in learning to
speed read:
o Your eyes will work less hard physically, because you will not
need to pause as often to absorb the information you are reading.
o The rhythm and flow of the speed reading process will
allow you to absorb the meaning of what you are reading with
greater ease. (A slower reading pace encourages more scope
for pauses, boredom and loss of concentration, which inhibit
comprehension and slow down understanding.)
Self-test your reading speed
Why not test your current reading speed right now, before you
start following my techniques? It may be helpful at this point
to select a book that you will use specifically for assessing
your speed reading progress. In that way, as you move through
this chapter, you will get a true picture of the progress you are
making, day by day and week by week.
To calculate your speed in words per minute, take the
following steps:
1
Read for one minute - note your starting and stopping
points within the text.
•• ••• • • • • ••• •••• • • •• •• •••• •• •••• • • • • •••• •••••••• •••• ••
SPEED READING
6S

66
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 4
2
Count the number of words on three lines.
3
Divide that number by three to give you the average number
of words per line.
4
Count the number of lines read (balancing short lines out).
5
Multiply the average number of words per line by the
number of lines you read and divide the total by the number
of minutes spent reading; this will give you your reading speed
in words per minute (wpm). Expressed as an equation, the
formula for working out speed in wpm is:
wpm (speed) =
number of pages read x number of words per average page
number of minutes spent reading
If you work with your brain in the ways described, you can't help
but learn to speed read, which, as a result, will add immense
value to your experience of learning and understanding.
How you read
Have you ever stopped to think about how you read and
assimilate information? Before starting to learn speed reading
techniques that will allow you to read as many as 1000 words
pe·r minute, take a moment to review the following statements.
o Words are read one at a time.
o Reading faster than 500 words per minute is impossible.
o If you read fast you are not able to appreciate what you are
reading.
• • ••••• • •••• •• ••• ••••••••••••••••• •• ••••• • • • ••• • • •••••••••• •• • •• • •

o High reading speeds mean lower levels of concentration.
o Average reading speeds are natural, and therefore the best
way to learn.
To which of the following statements would you reply 'True' and
to which 'False'?
o Words are read one at a time.
False - We read for meaning, not for single words.
o Reading faster than 500 words per minute is impossible.
False - We have the capacity to take in as many as six
words at a time and as many as twenty-four words a second.
o If you read fast you are not able to appreciate what you are
reading.
False - The faster reader will understand more of what is
being expressed, will experience greater levels of concentration
and will have time to review areas of special interest and
relevance.
o High reading speeds mean lower levels of concentration.
False - The faster we read, the more impetus we gather and
the more we concentrate.
o Average reading speeds are natural, and therefore the best
way to learn.
False - Average reading speeds are not natural; they are
simply the result of the limitations of the way we were taught to
read.
Changing a personal belief about what is possible will help
you to understand the process of speed reading; it will also
encourage your success because your mind will not be hindering
your progress with the weight of false assumptions.
SPEED READING
67

68
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
l
Guided eye movements
If I were to sit with you as you read this study guide and ask you
to show me with your forefinger how you believe your eyes move
across the page, what do you think the speed and path of that
movement would look like? The majority of people would trace
each line of text in straight lines from left to right, as they move
gradually down the page. However, they would be incorrect.
Stop-start sweeps
The average reader takes in approximately 200-240 words per
minute. Taking in text line by line is an effective way to absorb
information, but it is not the fastest. There are many different
pathways by which our eyes can travel across a page and still
successfully absorb information.
When we read, our eyes actually make small and regular
'jumps', pausing or 'fixating' in order to take in information
(see illustration on page 70). Your eyes therefore do not move
smoothly in one continuous sweep across the page; they stop
and start in order to take in information. It is possible to make
an immediate improvement in your reading speed by spending
less time on each pause, and but using a guide such as a pencil.
Interestingly, the eyes can see things clearly only when they can
'hold them still':
o If an object is still, your eyes must be still in order to see it.
o If an object is moving, your eyes must move with the object
in order to see it.
Test this for yourself by holding a finger in front of your eyes.
When it is still, your eyes are still; when it moves, your eyes
follow it in order to see it. In relation to reading, this means
that your eyes have to pause to take in the words, because the
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
words are static. This is a critical speed reading concept. When
your eyes pause, they can take in up to five or six words at a
time. They can easily fixate after the beginning and before the
end of the line, thus taking in the information 'to the side'.
.
If you use a visual aid, it minimizes the amount of work that
your eyes have to do, keeps your brain focused and maintains
constant reading speeds, combined with high levels of
understanding.
Take a look at the diagrams on the next page.
Figure (B) shows what happens in the eye movements of a
poor reader. This reader pauses or fixates on words for twice as
long as most people. Extra pauses are caused because the reader
often re-reads words, sometimes skipping back in as many as
three places to make sure that the correct meaning has been
taken in. Research has shown that, in 80 per cent of cases when
readers were not allowed to skip back or regress, they had taken
in all the necessary information.
Figure (C) shows that the good reader, while not back-
skipping or regressing, also has longer jumps between groups of
words.
On a normal page of 12 words per line, the weaker reader
will fixate on single words, back-skip and regress while reading,
pausing approximately 14 times, for an average of half a second
per pause. That's a time of seven seconds per line. A speed
reader, on the other hand, with minor adjustments and no
interruptions, would take no more than two seconds per line.
The techniques that follow are designed to overcome the
common problems of back-skipping, visual wandering and
regression that impede progress and will instead lead you
towards taking in more and more words each time your eyes
fixate on the page, as in Figure (C).
........................................................
SPEED READING
69

70
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
,-__-,_ fixations (2 .1j sec)
eye movement .. _
..... ,
~I
words ..
Figure A: Diagram representing the stop-and-start movement
or 'jumps' of the eyes during the reading process.
visual
wandering
eye movement ~ _ .....---.......---_~-""'-3 __-_"'~-........
words.
Figure B: Diagram showing poor reading habits of a slow reader:
one word read at a time, with unconscious back-skipping, visual
wanderings and conscious regressions.
fixation
fixation
fixation
fixation
eye movement ~
words
~
__
__
-
--""'-
~
_
.-....-
__
number of words in each fixation
Figure C: Diagram showing eye movements of a better and more
efficient reader. More words are taken in at each fixation, and
back-skipping, regression and visual wandering are reduced.

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Seven steps to speed up your reading
Reading is usually described as 'getting from a book what
the author intended' or, 'assimilating the facts, figures and
theories'; but I believe it to be more than that: reading is
the individual's total interrelationship with symbolic
information.
At its core is a process taking place on many different
levels at the same time - and it is usually related to the visual
aspect of learning, that is, what we can see. For reading to
be informative and for reading methods to be effective, the
following seven levels of understanding need to be absorbed.
Every level must be further developed if you are to become an
effective speed reader.
1
Recognition.
2
Assimilation.
3
Comprehension.
4
Knowledge.
5
Retention.
6
Recall.
7
Communication.
Recognition
Your knowledge of the alphabetic symbols. This step takes place
before the physical aspect of reading begins.
Assimilation
The physical process by which light is reflected from the word
and is received by the eye. It is then transmitted via the optic
nerve to your brain.
•• ••• • ••• • • • • •• • • •• • • • • •• • • • • ••• • • • • •• • • • •• •• ••• ••• • • •
SPEED READING
71

72
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• t
Comprehension
The linking together of all parts of the information being
read with all other appropriate information. This includes
words, figures, concepts, facts and pictures. (I call this 'intra-
integration'.)
Knowledge
The process by which you bring the whole body of your previous
knowledge to the new information that you are reading, whilst
making the appropriate connections. This includes analysis,
criticism, appreciation, selection and rejection of information.
(I call this 'extra-integration'.)
Retention
The basic storage of information. Storage can itself become a
problem; most students will have experienced the anxiety of
being in an examination and having trouble retrieving some of
that essential information successfully. Storage on its own is
not enough - it must be accompanied by 'recall'.
Recall
Critically, the ability to retrieve from storage the information
that is needed, ideally when it is needed.
Communication
The use to which the acquired information is immediately
or 'eventually put: in your case essays, written and oral
examinations and creative manifestations. Most significantly,
communication also includes that all-important function;
thinking.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
l

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Now that you have understood the full definition of reading
and its application to speeding up your reading, we can move on
to dealing with some major reading problems.
Beat reading 'problems'
'Once a problem is faced, analyzed and understood it becomes a
positive energy centre for the creation ofsolutions.'
Many of us hold false beliefs about reading and our ability
to read. Take a moment to think about what you consider to be
your problems with reading - the most commonly experienced
being:
Comprehension
Time
Retention
Fear
Recall
Analysis
Organization
Selection
Rejection
Concentration
Vision
Speed
Amount
Noting
Fatigue
Boredom
Vocabulary
These traits are not the result of lack of ability, but of negative
self-belief, inappropriate teaching methods, or a lack of
understanding about how your eyes and brain work together to
assimilate information.
Four common reading 'problems' that with a change of
perspective are positively beneficial to learning speed reading are:
sub-vocalization
finger-pointing
regression
back-skipping
.•.....•••..•.•...••.. ~
.
SPEED READING
73

74
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Sub-vocalization
The tendency to 'mouth' words as you are reading is known
as sub-vocalization. It is a natural stage in learning to read. It
could be a barrier to learning to speed read for some people if
they were dependent upon it for understanding, because it may
slow down the rate at which words are read. However, as it is
quite possible for your brain to sub-vocalize 2000 words per
minute, the problem vanishes!
The advantage of sub-vocalization is that it can reinforce what
is being read. You can choose to use your inner voice selectively
- to emphasize important words or concepts - by increasing the
volume on demand and literally shouting them out internally.
The technique then becomes a positive memory aid.
Sub-vocalization can be of positive benefit to dyslexic
readers, because internalizing the sound of the words as they are
read will provide a reminder of the shape of the individual letters
and will appeal to both the right and left sides of the brain.
Finger-pointing
Most people find that they are more comfortable having a guide
to follow, which makes their eyes far more relaxed and efficient.
This is because the eyes are designed to follow movement. Far
from being a disadvantage, finger-pointing can actually help in
learning to speed read. I would simply recommend that you may
prefer to use a slimmer, purpose-designed reading aid, since
fingers can be large and bulky and may obscure some words.
Regression and back-skipping
Regression is the conscious process of returning to words,
phrases or paragraphs that you feel you must have missed or
misunderstood.
•• • • • •••••••••••• ••••••• • • • • • • • • ••• ••• • • ••••••••••••• •• •• ••• • ••• ••

Back-skipping is a similar but unconscious process of re-reading
material that has just been read.
Although regression and back-skipping are slightly different
traits, they both are related to a lack of confidence and a
tendency to stay in a reading 'comfort zone'. They are habits
that can be altered.
Re-reading material has been shown to make no difference
to levels of understanding, so all you are doing is putting added
pressure on your eyes. The simplest way to force yourself to
break these habits is to increase your reading speed, and to
maintain a rhythm as you read.
Your amazing eyes
Each of your eyes is an amazing optical instrument, far superior
in its precision and complexity to the most advanced telescope
or microscope. We have known for some time that our pupils
adjust their size according to the intensity of light and the
nearness of the object viewed. The brighter the light and the
nearer the object, the smaller the size of the pupil (of the eye,
that is!).
We also know that pupil size adjusts in tune with emotion,
so if, for example, you are gazing at someone you are attracted
to, your pupil size will increase automatically. This means
that the more you can generate and maintain interest in your
subject, the easier it will be for you to absorb the information
you are needing.
How do your eyes 'read' information?
The retina at the back of the eye is a light receiver. When your
eye takes in a range of complex images, the retinal light receivers
SPEED READING
7S

76
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
decode the images and send them along the optic nerve to the
visual area of your brain, known as the occipital lobe.
The occipital lobe is located not behind the eyes, but at the
back of your head; so the popular phrase is correct; we really do
have eyes 'in the back of the head'.
Your occipital lobe directs your eyes around the page to
hunt for information that is of interest. This knowledge forms
the basis of the revolutionary approach to speed reading that is
explained here.
Exercises to increase your 'mind's eye'
The next series of exercises is designed to expand your visual
power so that you are able to take in more words 'at a glance'
when you look at a page.
Measuring your horizontal and vertical vision
Read through these instructions once first before trying the
technique or, alternatively, ask a fellow student to read the
passage to you while you follow the directions:
Look straight ahead and focus your attention on a point on
the horizon as far away as possible, then:
o Touch the tips of your two forefingers together so they form
a horizontal line, then hold them approximately 10 em (4 inches)
in front of your nose.
o While keeping your eyes fixed on your chosen point in the
distance, begin to wiggle the tips of your fingers and move
them apart slowly, along a straight, horizontal line. (You will
need to move your arms and elbows apart as well, but keep the
movement horizontal.)
o Keep going until your fingers move just outside your field of

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
vision and you can no longer see the movement of your fingers
out of the corner of your eyes.
o Stop and ask your friend to measure how far apart your
fingers are.
Now repeat the exercise, but with one forefinger pointing
upwards and the other downwards, so that the fingertips
meet in a vertical line this time. Again, hold them together,
approximately 10 cm (4 in) in front of your nose.
o While keeping your eyes fixed firmly on your chosen point
in the distance, begin to wiggle your fingers and move them
apart - one upwards, one downwards - in a vertical line so that
they gradually move out of the top and bottom of your field of
vision.
o Stop and measure how far apart your fingers are.
Does it surprise you to find out just how much and how far you
can see when you are apparently focused solely on something
else? How is this possible?
The answer lies in the unique design of the human eye. Each
of your eyes has 130 million light receivers in its retina, which
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SPEED READING
77

78
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
means that you have 260 million receivers of light in total. Your
central focus (that part which you use to read your book, or
focus on the point in the distance) takes up only 20 per cent of
this light-receiving capacity. The rest - that is 80 per cent of the
total light receivers - are devoted to your peripheral vision.
By learning to make greater use of your peripheral vision
while you are reading, you will begin to utilize the vast
untapped potential of your peripheral vision: your mind's eye.
What do I mean by the 'mind's eye'? I mean the ability to
read or see with your entire brain, not just with your eyes. It
is a concept that is recognized by those who practise yoga,
meditation or prayer and by anyone familiar with learning to
'see' Magic Eye™three-dimensional pictures.
Fields of vision. The inner circled area shows the area of clear
vision available to the speed reader when the eye/brain system
is used properly. The outer circle shows the peripheral vision
also available.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
See with your mind's eye
When you have read through the guidelines of the following
exercise, turn to page 83 and place your finger directly
underneath the word 'Daydreaming' in the middle of the page.
Keeping your eyes totally focused on that central word, and
without moving them:
o See how many words you can observe to either side of the
central word.
o See how many words you can make out clearly above and
below the word at which you are pointing.
o See if you can tell whether there is a number at the top or
the bottom of the page and, if so, what that number is.
o See whether you can count the number of images on the
opposite page.
o See whether you can count the number of paragraphs on
the opposite page.
o Can you determine clearly or roughly what the image on the
opposite page is illustrating?
Most people answer 'yes' to the majority of these questions,
which shows that most people have the innate capacity to read
using their peripheral vision as well as their central vision. By
this means, you use all 260 million of your eye's light receivers
to communicate with and illuminate your brain.
This revolutionary new approach means that, from now on,
you will read with your brain and not just with your eyes. The
image opposite shows clearly the two levels of vision that are
available. The inner circle of vision is the one with which we are
all familiar; the outer circle shows the field of peripheral vision
that is available to us, if we choose to use it.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SPEED READING
79

80
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Reading bites
o If you are able to combine peripheral vision with central
focus you will be able to see and absorb information from entire
paragraphs and pages at the same time.
o You can expand your peripheral vision by holding your
textbook further away from your eyes than usual. It will enable
your peripheral vision to work better.
o While your central focus is taking in the detail line by line,
your peripheral vision is able to review what has been read and
assess the value of what is to come.
o 'This practice is also easier on the eyes, as they do not need
to over-work their muscles.
Remember: it is your brain that reads - your eyes are
just the very sophisticated lenses that it uses to do so.
Three key guided reading techniques
Open this book (or any book) at any page, and look at it for one
second only. Do you think you could recognize the same page
again? 'The answer is 'yes'. If you doubt the truth of this, think
of how much information your eyes can take in and your brain
can remember in a fraction of a second when on the road, at a
railway station, or anywhere where you are seeing a multitude
of different images and influences at the same time. 'Think how
few.images are on a page of text in comparison.
'The three key reading techniques that follow are designed to
super-power your vision.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

First practise each technique at a very high reading speed
- without pausing or worrying about whether or not you
understand what you are reading.
Then practise each technique at normal speed.
In this way your brain will gradually become accustomed
to your faster reading speeds. (You may find it useful to begin
by re-reading familiar material, so you have the benefit of
reviewing something that you already know, while 'warming up'
your brain for the tasks ahead.)
1
The double-line sweep
involves your eyes taking in
two lines of text at a time. It is
a technique that combines both
vertical and horizontal vision
(and a skill applied by those
studying music).
;.:.:.;.:.:.;.:.;.;.;.::.:.;.;.;.:.;.:.:..;.;.;.;.:.:.:.;.:.;
:.;.:.:
.......•.................:.::
:.;.:.:.;.:::;:::;:;::::::::.:::;:;:::;:;:;::;::::::.;.;.
..•.•..•..•.•.......-
::::.•....•.-:.;.;.;.:::;:;:;::=.;.;.:.•.•.
:.;.:.;.;;.;.:.:<.;.:.;.;.;.;•.:.:.;;.;.:.;.:.;.;.:.;•......•...•••.•.•••..••....;.:.:.;.;
•.................::::...•.....-.....•;.;.::::::;:;:;::;:;;;:;:;::::::;:;::::;:;:::;:;:;:::;:;:;:;
............•.............•............:
.
......
,.,..,.,.,.,.,.,.".,.".,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,.,., ..••..
'··'··'···.'.""·.·.·.'..\/"'",t.,·.··'.....···.,.,.····.....i:
~,.
2
The variable sweep takes
the same approach as the
double-line sweep, but allows
you to take in the number of
lines that you can cope with at
one time.
SPEED READING
81

82
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
3
The reverse sweep is
identical to the previous
two but with one significant
difference: you are altering the
process to review each section
of text in reverse. This may
sound absurd, but it makes
sense if you recall that the eye
can take in information only
by fixing attention, and that
words are viewed in groups of
five or six.
In reading backwards you
are simply 'holding' all the information you have in your mind,
until you receive the final piece of the jigsaw at the start of each
line. This has the benefit of enabling you to review the text at
the same time as reading it - which will speed up your reading
and improve your levels of concentration and comprehension.
Each of these 'sweep' techniques can be used for
o Previewing.
o Skimming.
o Scanning.
for information, and you can take in as many lines as you
choose. You can shorten (by taking in fewer lines) or lengthen
(by taking in more lines) your sweeps, or combine more than
one technique. This applies specifically to the Preparation and
Overview sections in BOST.

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Supercharge your speed reading
Now it's time to explore and improve your:
1
Powers of concentration.
2
Ability to scan and skim data.
3
Environmental influences on studying.
Improving concentration
In my experience of teaching and lecturing around the world,
I have found that the vast majority of people believe that they
suffer from regular periods of poor concentration. Many people
say that they find themselves daydreaming instead of applying
themselves to the task in hand. In fact, this is good news and
is perfectly natural. Daydreaming occurs naturally every few
minutes and it is your brain's way of taking a break in order to
absorb what it has learnt.
If you think about it, you have not actually lost concentration,
you have just chosen to concentrate on a series of other points
of interest instead: the cat on the chair; the mobile ring tones;
a sample of music on the radio; or someone walking along the
street - to name but a few distractions.
The problem is not your powers of concentration, it is
the direction and focus of that concentration.
When you master the art of concentration, your entire eye-
brain system becomes laser-like, with an extraordinary ability
to focus and absorb information.
• ••••• ••• • •••••• • • •• •• •• • • • • • • ••• •••• •• • • • •• •••••••• • • •
SPEED READING
83

84
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
Causes of poor concentration
1
Vocabulary difficulties
Efficient and concentrated speed reading relies upon a smooth
flow of information with few interruptions in understanding.
Pauses to look up words or to ponder will break your
concentration and slow your understanding of the whole. If you
come across a word that you don't understand when reading,
rather than looking it up straight away, underline it and review
it afterwards.
2
Conceptual difficulties
If you don't really understand the concepts you are reading
about you will have difficulty concentrating. To get past this
obstacle, choose one of the guiding techniques outlined on
page 80 and use skimming and scanning as ways of multiple-
reading the material until it becomes familiar to you.
3
Inappropriate reading speed
Many people believe (because that is what they were
taught) that reading things slowly and carefully will help
understanding and comprehension. This approach is actually
counter-productive and, far from aiding your brain, reading
slowly will actually slow it down. To check this out, try reading
the following statement exactly as it is laid out. Read it 'slowly
and carefully':
Speed read ing has be en found to be bet ter for
understand ing than slow read ing.
You probably found that hard work because your brain is not
designed to take in information at such a slow pace. If you skim

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
read it fast, the words will make instant sense. Now read the
following sentence, this time reading the words as they are
grouped:
It has been discovered
that the human brain
with the help
of its eyes takes in information
far more easily
when the information
is conveniently grouped
in meaningful bundles.
An increase in the speed of reading leads to an automatic
increase in comprehension. If you apply the speed reading
techniques outlined in this book, your brain will develop the
capacity to organize words into meaningful groups as you read.
Reading slowly and carefully encourages your brain
to read more and more slowly, with less and less
comprehension.
4
Distraction
Another common enemy of concentration is allowing your
mind to remain focused on something else, instead of the task
in hand. For example, you may need to finish reading a primary
reference for a tutorial tomorrow morning, but your mind keeps
wandering to your mates, to the disagreement you had with
your partner, to money worries, to the gig you are all going to
tomorrow.
If you find yourself getting easily distracted, you will need
to 'shake off' the threads of thought that are diverting you by
refocusing on what you are trying to achieve. You may even
I ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SPEED READ1NG
85

86
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
want to stop for a moment to Mind Map your current aims to
help you gather your thoughts.
5
Poor organization
Sitting down to read something can sometimes feel like a
personal battle. Having begun to read, the distractions begin:
you have no pencil, cup of coffee, notepaper or spectacles...
Constant distractions make it harder to build the impetus to
begin again. The answer is simple: plan ahead so that you have
everything you need close to hand, set yourself achievement
targets and plan your breaks to coincide with completion of
those tasks.
6
Lack of interest
An apparent lack of interest is often linked to other difficulties.
For example: confusing material, lack of specialist vocabulary,
conflicting priorities, negative attitude and other obstacles to
concentration that are listed above. It is worth trying to solve
these related issues first and then, if necessary, apply the 'harsh
critic' approach.
Get annoyed with the material you are trying to read. In
that way you will be drawn in, in the way you would to a debate
with someone whose opinions you oppose.
7
Lack of motivation
Lack of motivation relates to a lack of goal. If you don't know
why you are reading a study text it can be hard to motivate
yourself to be interested in reading it.
Review your goals. It's an obvious thing to say, but once you
become clear about why you need to absorb the information
you will be better able to complete the task. Use organization
t •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
and personal interest to realign yourself with your target, and
use your preferred guided reading technique to ensure that you
complete the task as quickly as possible - and with optimum
return.
Use scanning and skimming
Scanning and skimming are designed to combine your recently
acquired skill of guided reading with special emphasis on the
way your brain can pre-select information automatically (your
mental set).
Scanning is a natural skill. You use it when you are scanning
a crowd for a face that you know, or when you are scanning a
road sign for relevant directions. You use scanning when the
eye glances over a range of material to find a very specific piece
of information - usually in the context of text when you need
to look up a particular piece of information in a book or lecture
notes, or a relevant link on a website.
As long as you know what you are looking for in advance
and understand how the information is organized (for example,
in alphabetical order or by theme), then this technique
is simple. If you want to find particular information, use
scanning.
Skimming is a more complex method than scanning and is
similar to the guided reading skill explained earlier. It is used to
gain a general overview of information so that the 'bricks and
mortar', the framework of the content, rather than the detailed
rooms and furnishings are understood.
Efficient skim reading can be done at speeds of 1000
words per minute or more, while still gaining an outline
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SPEED READING
87

88
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
understanding of what is being said. If you want to acquire a
general overview of material, use skimming.
Environmental influences
Without doubt:
o Your environment - your posture and place of study - will
affect your level of achievement.
o Your sense of physical well-being will influence your ability
to take in information.
If you are feeling negative or unwell, or your study area is
crammed or cluttered, your state of being will have a negative
influence on your productivity. If, on the other hand, you
are happy in your environment and inwardly content, you
will react positively to reading and will comprehend new
information better. It therefore makes sense to ensure that your
environment is as positive and conducive to study as possible.
Placement and intensity of light
Whenever possible, it is best to study in natural daylight.
Indeed, a recent study found that exposing yourself to daylight
allows your brain to release more 'good guy' hormones, so your
desk or tabletop should ideally be placed near a window. At
other times, artificial light should come over your shoulder,
opposite the hand with which you write. The lamp should be
bright enough to illuminate the material being read, but not
so bright that it provides a contrast with the rest of the room.
If you are using a desktop or laptop computer, then the screen
should be facing toward, not away from, the light.

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
All study materials at hand
To enable your brain to work comfortably and in a focused way,
it is useful to have all the work materials and reference guides
that you might need placed easily to hand. It will help you fee.l
prepared and relaxed and better able to concentrate on the task.
Height of chair and desk
Making yourself too comfortable is counter-productive, because
you will be tempted to fall asleep instead of concentrate! Ideally,
your chair should be upright, with a straight back, and neither
too hard nor too soft. Swivel and office chairs especially should
support you comfortably, ensuring good posture. The chair should
be adjustable and high enough to allow your thighs to be parallel
with the floor, because your sitting bones will then be taking the
strain. The desk should be approximately 20 cm (8 inches) above
the seat of the chair. 'Kneel', 'kneeling' or 'posture' chairs are a
very good medium for study as they encourage correct posture.
•• • • ••• • •• ••• •• • •• • • •• • • • • • • • • • • • • • • • •• •• • • ••• • •• • • • • • •
SPEED READING
89

90
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• l
Distance of the eyes from the reading material
The natural distance for your eyes from your reading material is
approximately 50 cm (20 in). This makes it easier for your eyes
to focus on groups of words and lessens the possibility of eye
strain or headaches.
Your posture
Ideally your feet should be flat on the floor, your back upright,
with the slight curve in your back maintained to give you
support. If you sit up either too 'straight' or slumped, you will
exhaust yourself and strain your back. Try either holding the
book, or resting it on something so that it is slightly upright,
rather than flat.
Sitting correctly has a number of physiological benefits for
studying:
o Your brain receives the maximum flow of air and blood
because your windpipe, veins and arteries are functioning
unrestricted.
o It optimizes the flow of energy up your spine and
maximizes the power of your brain.
o If your body is alert then your brain knows something
important is happening (conversely, if you sit in a slumped
position, you are telling your brain that it is time to sleep!).
o Your eyes can make full use of both your central and
peripheral vision.
Finding your optimum studying time
We all have peaks and troughs of concentration and each of
us is likely to find that we read or concentrate best at different
times of the day. There are 'larks' who work best between 5 a.m.
and 9 a.m.; 'owls' who are at their most productive in the
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

evening and at night; and others who find that late morning or
early afternoon suits them best, though periods immediately
before or after eating allow hunger and drowsiness respectively
to interfere with concentration. You may not know what is your
optimum time, so experiment with working at different times
of day - see what works best for you; it may alter dramatically
your propensity to concentrate on study.
Minimize interruptions
It is as important to minimize external interruptions when
you are reading as it is to minimize the pauses while you read.
External interruptions, such as telephone calls or personal
diversions (for instance, unnecessary breaks), are the enemy
of con·centration and focus. Similarly, if you are worrying
about something personal or are in physical discomfort,
your preoccupation with other influences will reduce your
concentration and comprehension.
So divert your phone to voicemail, play music that will help
you concentrate and keep your area free of distractions and
temptations. (And turn your computer off, if you are not using
it, so that you are not tempted onto the Internet.)
SPEED READING
91

92
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Mastermind your vocabulary
Vocabulary is important for many reasons. The person with
a broad vocabulary is at a greater advantage when it comes to
study.
Most of us have more than one vocabulary, and usually we
have at least three. These are:
o The vocabulary we use in conversation.
o The vocabulary we use when writing.
o The vocabulary of word recognition.
DID YOU KNOW?
o
The average person's spoken vocabulary is about
1000 words.
o
The number of available words is over 3,000,000.
o
Improving your vocabulary raises your
intelligence.
Our conversational vocabulary tends to be limited to a
maximum of 1000 words per person; our written vocabulary is
greater because we take more care over our choice of words and
sentence structure when we are drafting text; but the largest of
the three is our recognition vocabulary. We understand many
more words than we use.
In theory our conversational vocabulary should be as
large as our recognition vocabulary, but that is rarely the case.
It is possible, however, to increase the size of all three quite
dramatically - and therefore your speed reading capabilities.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 4

• •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The next three sections will explore the word power of prefixes,
suffixes and word roots. They are powerful shortcuts to
increasing your language and vocabulary.
The power of prefixes
Prefixes are letters, syllables or words placed at the beginning
of a word that alter meaning. Learning just a few prefixes
will expand your vocabulary enormously. Many of them are
concerned with position, opposition and movement. They are
mini words with power.
The list of prefixes following is a selection of some of the
most common ones; these were found within over 14,000
words from a standard desktop dictionary.
You will increase your potential vocabulary instantly by at
least 10,000 words if you are able to remember and use these
prefixes, by adding them to the beginning of words. Be on the
lookout for them as you read from now on.
•• • •••• •• •• • • • • • • • • • • • •• •• •• •• • • • •• • • • • ••• • • • • • • • • ••• ••
SPEED READING
93

94
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
Words containing key prefixes
Word
Prefix
Common
meaning
Root
Common
meaning
precept
pre-
before
capere
take, seize
detain
de-
away, down
tenere
hold, have
intermittent
inter-
between,
mittere
send
among
offer
ob-
against
ferre
bear, carry
insist
in-
into
stare
stand
monograph
mono-
alone, one
graphein
write
epilogue
epi-
upon
logos
speech,
study of
advance
ad-
to, toward
specere
see
uncomplicated un-
not together plicare
fold
com-
with
non-extended
non-
not
tender
stretch
ex-
out, beyond
reproduction
re-
back, again
ducere
lead
pro-
forward, for
indisposed
in-
not
ponere
put, place
dis-
apart, not
over-sufficient
over-
above
facere
make, do
sub-
under
mistranscribe
mis-
wrong
scribere
write
trans-
across,
beyond

Eye-cue vocabulary exercise - prefixes
Choose five words from the following list of six, to complete
sentences 1-5 accurately:
Examinations
Reviewing
Prepare
Depress
Comprehension
Progress
1
In order to be ready for a meeting or other event it is always
best to
.
in advance.
2
.. what you have learned will help to
consolidate the associations in your memory.
3
Negative thoughts..
. ....
....
. ..... the brain and inhibit
your ability to remember effectively.
4
Speed reading improves reading efficiency as well as
5
Preparing for...
......
.. .. needn't be daunting if you
use speed reading and Mind Maps as your memory tools.
Now refer to page 190 for the answers.
SPEED READING
9S

96
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
F
su
G = Greek, L = Latin, F = French, E = English
Suffix
Meaning
Example
-able, -ible (L)
capable of, fit for
durable,
comprehensible
-aI, -ail (L)
relating to quality
abdominal
-ance, -ence,
or action of forming
-ant (L)
adjectives of quality,
insurance,
nouns signifying
corpulence
a personal agent or
defiant, servant
something
producing an effect
-ation, -ition (L)
action or state of
condition,
dilapidation
-er (E)
belonging to
farmer, New Yorker
-ism (E)
quality or doctrine of
realism, socialism
-ive (L)
nature of
creative, receptive
-ize, -ise (G)
make, practise, act like
modernize,
advertise
-logy (G)
indicating a branch
biology, psychology
of knowledge
-ly (E)
having the quality of
softly, quickly
-or (L)
a state or action,
victor, generator
a person who, or
thing which
-ous, -ose (L)
full of
murderous, anxious,
officious, morose
-some
like
gladsome
-y (E)
condition
difficulty

The strength of suffixes
Suffixes are letters, syllables or words that are placed at the
end of a word to alter meaning. They are often concerned with
characteristics or qualities of something, or with changing from
one part of speech to another (for example, from adjectives into
verbs).
-c
I
Choose five words from the following list of six, to complete
sentences 1-5 accurately:
Minimal
Vociferous
Winsome
Hedonism
Psychology
Practitioner
1
A
.
is one who works in a certain field,
such as medicine.
2
The doctrine of pursuing pleasure as the highest good is
known as
3
A charge for something which relates to the lowest or
smallest price is
4
People who speak loudly and often are
5
The branch of knowledge that deals with the human mind
and its functioning is known as
....... . . ".
Now refer to page 190 for the answers.
SPEED READING
97

98
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
An A-Z of roots
This is the final section to focus on developing vocabulary and
following is a list of 14 Latin and Greek root words that are
commonly used in modern English.
Fourteen roots
Root
Meaning
Example
aer
air
aerate, aeroplane
am (from amare)
love
amorous, amateur, amiable
ehran
time
chronology, chronic
die, diet
say, speak
dictate
equi
equal
equidistant
graph
write
calligraphy, graphology,
telegraph
lue (from lux)
light
elucidate
pat, pass, paten
be able
potential, possible
(from panerte)
quaerere
ask,
question, inquiry, query
seek
sent, sens
feel
sensitive, sentient
(from sentire)
saph
wise
philosopher
speet (from spieere)
look
introspective, inspect
spir (from spirare)
breathe
inspiration
vid, vis (from videre)
see
supervisor, vision, provident

Eye-cue vocabular exercise - roots
Choose five words from the following list of six, to complete
sentences 1-5 accurately:
Aerodynamics
Querulous
Equinox
Chronometer
Egocentric
Amiable
1
A person who is quarrelsome and discontented, and who
complains in a questioning manner is .
.
..
2
A person who is friendly and lovable is often described as
3
The.....
. ........ is that time of year when both day
and night are of equal length.
4
An instrument that finely measures time is a
5
The science which deals with the forces exerted by air and
by gaseous fluids is
.
.
Now refer to page 190 for the answers.
SPEED READING
99

100
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
How to use prefixes, suffixes and roots
The first time you look over these lists many of the words will
seem unfamiliar, and getting to know them may feel daunting.
In order to make the words more familiar and to help them
become part of your daily vocabulary, I would like to offer the
following tips:
o Browse through a good dictionary, and become familiar
with the various ways in which these suffixes, prefixes and root
words are used.
o Keep a record of Key Words and phrases that stand out for
you and are useful in some way.
o Commit to making an effort to introduce one new word into
your vocabulary each day. New words, like any information,
need to be repeated a minimum of five tim~s over an extended
period before they become a permanent feature of your memory.
o Listen for new and exciting words in conversation that you
want to make a part of your growing vocabulary - and don't be
shy about making a note of what you hear.
o Make a mental note to look up words that you don't
understand when you read a study text; wait until you have
finished reading the chapter, passage or paper. Don't interrupt
the flow of what you are doing.
If you consciously improve your vocabulary by adding a
few words and phrases each day, you will also improve your
overall intellect as well as your general understanding and
comprehension.
At the same time your speed reading ability will accelerate
because of your increased ability to spot Key Words and
concepts, and you will have fewer problems understanding what
you are reading.
• •••••••• • • ••••• ••• •••• ••••• •••••••• ••••••• ••••• • • • • • • •• • • • ••••• ••

In addition, you will no longer be tempted to back-skip as
you read because you will have the confidence to know that
your vocabulary is broad enough to support your general
comprehension.
Onword
You are now equipped to be a super-fast Study Reader. In the
next chapter, you will learn how to remember what you have
speed read.
SPEED READING
101


5
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY

104
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
How good are you at remembering facts and figures?
Are you worried about recalling information under
pressure in exams? This chapter provides you with easy-
to-follow memory techniques and exercises to enable
you to develop a supercharged memory, and will help
you to overcome poor information retention by utilizing
the memory enhancement method of Mind Mapping.
We've noted in Chapter 1 how data and information are taken
in by your brain and stored in your memory in many different
ways and are processed by either:
o The right side of your brain - concerned with rhythm,
imagination, daydreaming, colour, dimension, spatial
awareness, completeness.
o The left side of your brain - concerned with logic, words,
lists, numbers, sequence, lines, analysis.
To recap, we also know the two sides of your brain do not operate
separately - they need to work together to be at their most
effective. The more you can stimulate both sides of your brain at
the same time, the more effectively they will work together to
help you to think better, remember more, and recall instantly.
Helping your brain to learn
A memory system works rather like a super-sized filing cabinet
that contains files on every aspect of your entire life. The only
way you are going to find information quickly and easily in your
cabinet is to make sure that it is
o Well organized.
o Accessible.
.........•••........•............••.......•••.•••••..•..•......... ,

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
This means that no matter how obscure the memory you want
to retrieve, you know what its category is and can find it easily.
In order to be able to categorize and store the information
in the filing cabinet that is your memory, it is important to have
some understanding of how your brain and memory function
while you are learning.
Research has shown that first and last impressions
matter to your brain. In every situation, we are more likely to
remember things that happen or that are introduced:
o At the beginning - the Primacy Effect.
o At the end - the Recency Effect.
We also find it easier to remember things that are:
o Associated with items or thoughts that are already stored in
the memory.
o Outstanding or unique - as this appeals to the imagination.
Your brain is more likely to notice and recall something that has
strong appeal:
o To your senses - taste, smell, touch, sound or sight.
o To your particular interests.
Your brain is geared to create patterns and maps, and to
finish sequences; which is why, if a familiar song on the radio
stops halfway through, you will probably keep humming it to
completion; or if a sequence of paragraphs is numbered one to
six and point three is missing, you will search for the missing
point three.
Your brain also needs help to remember facts, figures, and
other important reference information that needs to be bought
quickly to mind. An aid that assists memory is a mnemonic.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
105

106
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• t
Mnemonics
A mnemonic may be a word, a picture, a system or other device
that will help you to recall a phrase, a name or a sequence of
facts. The 'm' in mnemonic is silent (it is pronounced 'nem-on-ic')
and the word comes from the Greek word mnemon, which means
'mindful'.
Most of us will have used mnemonic techniques during
our schooldays, even if we didn't realize it at the time. Students
learning music are often taught the phrase 'Every Good Boy
Deserves Favour' to help them remember the notes EGBDF.
Many of us will have learned the poem 'Thirty days hath
September, April, June and November...' to help remember
which months have 30 days and which have 31 ('except for
February, alone...'). That too is a mnemonic: a device to help you
to remember.
Mnemonics work by stimulating your imagination, and by
using words and other tools to encourage your brain to make
associations.
Key misconceptions
o As people get older, they often think that their memory is
fading. This is false thinking.
o Those who are working under stress may find recalling
information a challenge and feel they will never be able to hold
anything in their mind for long ever again. However, this is
more to do with not giving yourself time to pause and think,
and having poor methods of recall.
Your memory is highly effective - although your process of
recalling information may not be as effective as you'd like it
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

to be. You need only to refine the way you access the
information that is stored in your brain. To begin the process,
try this simple exercise.
Word recall exercise 1
Below is a list of words. Read each word on this list once,
quickly, in order. Then turn to page 108, and fill in as many of
the words as you can. Unless you are a grandmaster of memory,
you will not be able to remember all of them, so simply try for
as many as possible.
Then read the complete list again, one word after the other.
To ensure you do this properly, use a small card, covering each
word as you read it.
When you have finished, turn back to page 108 to answer a
few questions that will show you how your memory works.
house
rope
floor
watch
wall
Shakespeare
glass
ring
roof
and
tree
of
sky
the
road
table
the
pen
of
flower
and
pain
of
dog
and
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
107

108
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
Now fill in as many of the words, in order, as you can, without
referring to the original list.
Recall during learning
o How many words from the beginning of the list did you
remember?
o How many words from the end of the list did you remember?
o Did you recall any words that appeared more than once?
o Were there any words in the list that stood out in your
memory as outstandingly different?
o.How many words from the middle of the list did you
remember (that you have not already noted)?
In this test almost everyone recalls similar information:
o One to seven words from the beginning of the list.

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
o One or two words from the end of the list.
o Most of the words that appear more than once (in this case:
the, and, of).
o The outstanding word or phrase (in this case: Shakespeare).
o Relatively few, if any, words from the middle of the list.
Why should this similarity occur? This pattern of results
shows that memory and understanding do not work in the
same way: although all the words were understood, not all of
them were remembered. Our ability to recall information we
understand is related to several factors:
o We tend to remember first things and last things more
easily than things in between. Therefore we recall more
information from the beginning and the end of a learning
period. (See how the curve of the graph at the top of page 111
begins high at the start, drops before the three peaks, and lifts
again before the end.)
In the case of the word recall test, the words 'house' and
'dog' appear at the beginning and the end of the sequence.
o We learn more when things are Associated or Linked
in some way: by using rhyme, repetition, or something that
connects with our senses. (See points A, B, C on the graph on
page 110).
In the case of the word recall test, repetitive words include:
'the', 'at', 'of', 'and'; associated words are: 'Shakespeare' and 'pen';
or 'house', 'wall' and 'roof'.
o We also learn more when things are Outstanding or Unique.
(See point 0 on the graph on page 110).
The best time period in which we can recall and understand the
most has been found to be between 20 and 60 minutes after
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
109

110
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
..
.
c&\Opoint in time
where learning
starts
1 hour
.. point in time where
learning ends
Recall during learning. Graph indicating that we recall more from
the beginning and ends of a learning period. We also recall more
when things are associated or linked (A, B and C) and more when
things are outstanding or unique (0).
the starting point. A shorter period does not give your mind
long enough to assimilate what is being learned.
'This will make sense to those of us studying in a lesson
when it is difficult to maintain full attention and interest for
longer than 20 to 50 minutes.
Recall after learning
One of the least understood or appreciated aspects of memory
and learning is what we recall immediately after learning.
'This is what people think happens with their memory after
studying or being lectured at for one hour. If you ask them to
guess, they correctly think recall goes down fairly steeply in five
days. However, the one thing they miss out changes everything.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

0%
i
75%
"0
!11
1]
l'
50%
c:"
0
EO
'"
25%
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
100%
Recall after a learning period -
people's estimates. Graph shows
the different kinds of answers
people gave when asked to s~ow
how their recall functioned
after a period of learning.
point in time where
learning ends
100%
750/.
25%
4 months
Graph showing how human recall
rises for a short while after
learning, and then falls steeply
(80 per cent of detail forgotten
within 24 hours).
0%
~
•
...
.........
1 day
2 days
1 week
l ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
111

112
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The graph of recall after learning actually rises after learning,
while the data is 'sinking in': your brain needs time to integrate,
to Mind Map. Your brain needs integration and association
of the last stuff just learned with the first stuff you learned in
that session - and that's what happens in that curve - if you
don't review, your recall plummets 80 per cent in a day and the
detail you've learned is lost. Your ability to remember not only
goes down but busts through the bottom as you misremember
what it is you learned, you get the facts in the wrong order, the
chemical equation/vocabulary/mathematical formula incorrect,
the history dates wrong, then you remember the wrong things
and then you get angry because you're under pressure and you
don't like exams, so you get into a monstrous negative spiral...
But if you had reviewed at that point, your short-term
memory would have picked up and linked up and recalled after
learning was self generated by simple five-minute reviews. It
\ seems impossible, but it's true.
The value of repetition
New information is stored first in your short-term memory.
To transfer information to your long-term memory takes
rehearsal and practice. On average, you will need to repeat an
action at least five times before the information is transferred
permanently to your long-term memory; this means revisiting
what you have learned, using one or more of the memory
techniques on a regular basis. My recommendations are to
review and repeat what you have learned:
o Shortly after you have learned it.
o One day after you have learned it.
o One week after you first learned it.
l ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 4

o One month after you first learned it.
o Three to six months after you first learned it.
With each period of recall, you are not only revisiting the
information that you have learned; you will also be adding to
your knowledge. Your creative imagination has a part to play in
long-term memory, and the more you go over information you
have learned, the more you will link it to other information and
knowledge that you already retain. Refer back to the graph on
page 57 to see an illustration of all this.
The more we learn, the more we remember.
The more we remember, the more we learn.
Take a break or carryon?
Imagine that you have decided to study for two hours and that
the first half-an-hour has been pretty difficult, although you
have been making some progress. At this point in time you find
that understanding begins to improve and that your progress
seems to be getting better and faster. Would you pat yourself on
the back and take a break? Or would you decide to keep the new
and better rhythm going by studying on for a while until you
began to lose the fresh impetus?
Some 90 per cent of people asked those questions would
carryon. Of those who would take a break, only a few would
recommend the same thing to anyone else! And yet surprisingly
the best answer is to take a break. The reason is that
understanding may be continuously high, but the recall of that
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
113

114
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
100%---_
igh J:)oint
~ -recall 6urves where---r-__
of recall
planned breaks are
taken
75%
"0
~
(lj
u
~
50%
-
c
::J
0
E
til
25%
recall curve where no breaks are taken and
_learning continues for more.than 2-bours-_---:
2 hrs
Point in time where
learning ends.
1 hr
0%
_
~
_
-
-
.
......
.l___.L_._
__:'___
_.,;
...
ohrs
Point in time where
learning starts.
understanding will be getting worse if your mind is not given a
break. It is essential that any time period for studying be broken
down into 20-50 minute sections with small rests in between.
The graph above shows three different patterns of recall
over a two-hour period of learning.
o The top line includes four short breaks. The raised peaks
show the moments when recall is highest. There are more high
points on this line than in any of the other memory curves
because there are four 'beginnings and endings'. Recall remains
high.
o The middle line shows a recall curve when no break is taken.
The beginning and end points show the highest level of recall,
but overall the retention drops to well below 75 per cent.
o The bottom line shows what happens if no break is taken for
a period of over two hours. This approach is obviously counter-
productive as the recall line falls steadily downwards, to below
the 50 per cent mark.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
1

o So the more well-spaced and short breaks we have, the more
beginnings and endings we have, and the better our brain will
be able to remember.
o Brief breaks are also essential for relaxation: they relieve
the muscular and mental tension that inevitably builds up
during periods of intense concentration.
The common student practice of swotting five hours at a stretch
for examination purposes should become a thing of the past,
for understanding is not the same as remembering, as all too
many failed examination papers bear witness.
The breaks themselves are also important for a number of
reasons:
1
They give the body a physical rest and a chance to relax. This
is always useful in a learning situation, and releases the build-
up of tension.
2
They enable recall and understanding to 'work together' to
the best advantage.
3
They allow a brief period of time for the just-studied
information completely to relate each part of itself to the other
part - to intra-integrate.
During each break the amount of knowledge that can
immediately be recalled from the section just studied will
increase and will be at a peak as the next section is commenced.
This means that not only will more be recalled because the time
period itself is best, but also that even more will be recalled
because of the rest period.
To assist this even further, do a quick review of what you
have read and a preview of what you are about to read at the
beginning and end of each study period.
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
115

116
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
It has taken a number of pages to explain the necessity of
deciding the best period of time for study and on an amount
to be covered, but remember that the decisions themselves are
extremely brief and will usually become automatic as you near
completion of your browse. When these decisions have been
made, the next step can be taken.
'Ihe core memory principles
Imagination and
ssocia ion are at the heart of all
the memory techniques in this chapter - they are also the
foundation stones upon which BOST and Mind Maps are
based. The more effectively you can use them, through key
memory devices such as words, numbers and images, the more
supercharged and effective your mind and memory will be.
Imagination
The more you stimulate and use your Imagination, the more
you will enhance your ability to learn. This is because your
Imagination has no limits; it is boundless and it stimulates
your senses, and therefore your brain. Having an unlimited
Imagination makes you more open to new experiences and less
inclined to hold yourself back from learning new things.
Association
The most effective way to remember something is to think
about it as an image, in Association with something else that
is already fixed and known to you. If you ground your images
in reality by associating them with something that is familiar,
it will anchor them in a location, and you will be able to
remember the information more easily. Association works by

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
linking or pegging information to other information, such as
the use of numbers, symbols, order and patterns.
As already explained, for your brain to work effectively you
need to use both sides. It can be no coincidence that the two
foundation-stones of memory are two main activities of your
brain:
Imagination} together they = MEMORY
Association }
Your memory gives you your sense of who you are, and so it is
appropriate that the mnemonic to remember this is:
lAM
Imagination and Association are supported by the Ten Core
Memory Principles. These principles help to anchor events in
your memory and make it easier to recall them on demand.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
117

118
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Ten Core Memory Principles
To superpower your memory and help it to recall information
efficiently, you will need to use every aspect of your mind.
The Ten Core Memory Principles are designed to reinforce
the strength of the impact of Imagination and Association on
memory, and to trigger the involvement of as much of your
extraordinary brainpower as possible. They are:
1 Your senses
2 Exaggeration
3 Rhythm and movement
4 Colour
5 Numbers
6 Symbols
7 Order and patterns
8 Attraction
9 Laughter
10 Positive thinking
The difference in impact is rather like using a 15-million-
candlepower spotlight instead of your standard 4.5-volt-battery
torch to illuminate your way home. You would experience the
world more brightly and more brilliantly than ever before.
1
Senses
The more you can visualize, hear, taste, smell, feel or sense the
thing that you are trying to recall, the better you will reinforce
your ability to remember and be able to call to mind the
information when you need it.
Everything you experience, everything you learn and
everything you enjoy, is delivered to your brain via your senses:
Vision
Hearing
Smell
Taste
Touch
Spatial awareness - of your body and
its movement
.......•...••..••..•..•...........••...••.•...•.•...........••... ,

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The more sensitive you become to the information that your
senses receive, the better you will be able to remember.
2
Exaggeration
Think large and be absurd in your imaginings. The more
exaggerated your images are, in size, shape and sound, the
better you will be able to remember them. Think of children's
favourite characters: the cartoon ogre, Shrek, and the Harry
Potter giant, Hagrid, are larger than life and stay alive in the
mind's eye more readily than other characters in the films.
3
Rhythm and movement
Movement adds to the potential for something to be memorable
to your brain.
e Make your images move.
e Make them three-dimensional.
e Give them rhythm.
Movement helps your brain to 'link in' to the story and will
help the sequence of data to become more extraordinary, and
therefore memorable.
4
Colour
Colour brings
memories alive and
makes events more
memorable. Whenever
possible, use colour in
your imaginings and in your drawings and notes so that your
visual sense is heightened and your brain is stimulated to enjoy
the experience of seeing.
t •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
119

120
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
5
Numbers
Numbers have a powerful impact on your memory because they
bring order to your thoughts. Numbers help to make memories
more specific.
6 Symbols
Symbols are a compact and coded way of using Imagination and
Exaggeration to anchor memory. Creating a symbol to prompt
a memory is rather like creating a logo. It tells a story and
connects to, and is representative of, something larger than the
image itself.
7
Order and patterns
Ordering your thoughts or putting them in sequence can be
very useful when employed in conjunction with other memory
principles. You might think about grouping thoughts by colour,
weight or size, or order items by height, age or location.
(ASSOCIATION)
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
8 Attraction
We know what we like to look at and how we feel when we are
attracted to someone or something. Your mind will remember
an attractive image more readily than an unattractive one. U,se
your imagination to include attractive, positive images and
associations as part of your memory.
9 Laughter
The more we laugh, the more we enjoy thinking about what
we want to remember, and the easier it is to summon up
information. Use humour, absurdity and a sense of fun to
enhance your ability to remember and recall.
10 Positive thinking
In most instances, it is easier and more pleasant to recall
positive images and experiences than negative ones. This is
because your brain wants to return to things that make you feel
pOSITIVE
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
121

122
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
good about life and positive about your experiences. Negative
associations and experiences are more likely to be blocked or
modified by your brain. Think positive, and your Imagination
and Associations will have more positive power.
Note: Key Words and Key Images
As you will find out in Chapters 6 and 7, it is easier to recall
and Mind Map using Key Images and Key Words. One will
trigger the other in your memory and these triggers are the
pegs on which you will learn to hang all the other items you
want to remember. They apply to the following two key memory
systems which are essential aids to your studying success.
Two key memory systems to aid your studies
1 The Number-Shape System
o This is ideal for short-term memory use, for recalling those
items that you need to remember for only a few hours.
o Each of the numbers is anchored to a constant set of images
that you choose yourself.
The Number-Shape System is simple. All you have to do is
think of an image for each of the numbers from one to ten.
Follow the example below but, as we are all different, the
images that will work best for you are ones that you choose and
create for yourself. Once you understand the system, modify
the'words and images to fit your own imagination.
Each Key Image acts as a visual reminder of the number
with which it is associated. Images should be strong and simple:
easy to draw, easy to visualize and remember. The following list
of associations shows classic examples:

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
1
paintbrush
6
elephant's trunk
2
swan
7
cliff
3
heart
8
snowman
4
yacht
9
balloon on stick
5
hook
10 bat and ball
After practising, you will automatically see in your mind's
eye the image of a yacht, for example, when you think of the
number four; or a swan when you think of the number two.
Each of us is different and the numbers will conjure up different
images for different people. Give yourself about ten minutes
to think of any other alternatives that you may prefer to those
listed above and choose the one image for each number that
works best for you. These will become your Key Number-Shape
Memory images.
Use the space provided on the next page to write each
number and draw the images that you have chosen to represent
each digit.
o Don't worry about how 'good' or 'bad' your images are.
o Do use colour to bring the images alive and to reinforce
them in your memory.
o Do use also exaggeration, and movement.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
123

124
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
1
When you have completed the task, close your eyes and run
through the numbers from one to ten to ensure that you have
remembered each of the image associations.
2
Then count backwards from ten to one, doing the same
thing.
3
Practise recalling numbers at random until the Number-
Shape image association becomes second-nature.
4
The idea is that the image, rather than the number, will
gradually become synonymous with the numerical order.
S
Once you are comfortable that you can instantly recall
the Number-Shape images, you can begin to use them in a
study scenario. Simply peg the Number-Shape images to other
words and then link them together by creating imaginative
associations.
The Number-Shape System in action
Take a look at the following list of items:
1
symphony
2
prayer
3
watermelon
4
volcano
S
motorcycle
6
sunshine
7
apple pie
8
blossoms
9
spaceship
10 field of wheat
o In your mind's eye, think of the Number-Shape images
on page 124 that you have chosen to represent the numbers one
to ten.
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
125

126
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
o Peg those Key Images to each of the words in the list above.
o Then create an imaginative image to link each of the pegged
pairings.
o Create associations that are outrageous, crazy and
colourful, so that you are better able to remember them.
For example, when paired with the words on the list, my
Number-Shape memory keys are:
1
paintbrush
+ symphony
2
swan
+ prayer
3
heart
+ watermelon
4
yacht
+ volcano
S
hook
+ motorcycle
6
elephant's trunk
+ sunshine
7
cliff
+ apple pie
8
snowman
+ blossoms
9
balloon and stick
+ spaceship
10 bat and ball
+ field of wheat
The links could be as follows:
1
For symphony you might imagine a conductor, conducting
frantically, with a gigantic paintbrush.
2
Prayer is an abstract word, which can be represented by
adding form to the image. Try imagining your swan with its
wings upheld like hands in prayer.
3· With a little imagination your watermelon can be
transformed into a heart-shaped fruit, beating.
4
Imagine a gigantic volcano within the ocean that erupts red
and furious beneath your yacht.
S
Imagine a heavy hook coming down from the sky and
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
lifting you and your speeding motorcycle off the road.
6
Imagine rays of sunshine pouring out of an elephant's
trunk.
7
Your cliff could be made entirely of apple pie.
8
Imagine a snowman in springtime covered from head to
foot in sweet blossoms.
9
Imagine a miniature spaceship that has flown into your
balloon and stick and caused it to burst.
10 Imagine the shock as your bat cracks against the ball, and
the ball is sent flying across a golden and windswept field of
wheat.
You get the idea.
It is when you start to create your own sequences that you
will feel this technique working. Don't just read the examples
given here; create your own. The more absurd, over-the-top
and sensual you are able to make your associations, the better
you will tap into your own imagination. The more you practise,
the easier the technique will be, and eventually, it will become
second-nature.
2 The Number-Rhyme System
Easy to learn and based on a similar principle to the Number-
Shape System, this is ideal for use when you need to remember
short lists of items for a brief period of time.
The Number-Rhyme System differs from the Number-
Shape System only in that it uses rhyming sounds rather than
associated shapes as memory triggers for the numbers one to
ten. The words you choose should conjure up strong but simple
images, be easy to draw and easy to visualize and remember.
,...••......•••..•....•.•....•••......••..............•
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
127

128
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• •• -••••••••
t
The following list of rhyming words will start you off:
1
bun
2
shoe
3
tree
4
door
5
hive
6
sticks
7
heaven
8
skate
9
vine
10 hen
Use your imagination - if you wish different images - to come
up with alternative, memorable rhymes that work for you.
Choose words that are easy for you to remember and associate
with each number, and draw your images in the boxes on the next
page - using as much colour and imagination as possible.
o To help create the clearest mental picture possible for each
image, close your eyes and imagine projecting the image onto
the inside of your eyelid - or onto a screen inside your head.
o Hear, feel, smell and experience the image that works best
for you.
When you have completed the task, close your eyes and run
through the numbers from one to ten to ensure that you have
remembered each of the rhyming image associations. Then
count backwards from ten to one, doing the same thing.
The more you practise these techniques, the more your
associative and creative thinking abilities will improve.
o Practise recalling numbers at random until the Number-
Rhymes and image association becomes second-nature.
••••••• ••• ••••••••• ••••••••• •••••••• ••• • • •• • • •• • •••••••• • • • •• • • •••


130
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
...................................................... ,
The Number-Rhyme System in action
Once you have memorized your Number-Rhyme Key Words
and Images you will be ready to put the Number-Rhyme
System into action. Start by using the list of items below:
1
table
2
feather
3
cat
4
leaf
5
student
6
orange
7
car
8
pencil
9
shirt
10 poker
+ table
+ feather
+ car
+ cat
+ leaf
+ student
+ orange
+ pencil
+ shirt
+ poker
Refer back and you will see that the Number-Rhyme pairings
would become:
1
bun
2
shoe
3
tree
4
door
5
hive
6
sticks
7
heaven
8
skate
9
vine
10.hen
The Key Memory Words are in bold. These are your memory
triggers and remain consistent, no matter what else you are
trying to remember.
•••• •• ••••••• •••• ••••••• • •• •••• • • • • •• • •• ••••• ••• • ••••••••••••• • • • •

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Use Imagination and Association to create links between the
pairs of words, perhaps as follows:
1
Imagine a giant bun on top of a fragile table which is in the
process of crumbling from the weight. Smell the fresh cooked
aroma; taste your favourite bun.
2
Imagine your favourite shoe with an enormous feather
growing out of the inside, preventing you from putting your
shoe on, tickling your foot.
3
Imagine a large tree with either your own cat or a cat you
know, stuck in the very top branches, frantically scrambling
about and mewing loudly.
4
Imagine your bedroom door is a giant leaf, crunching and
rustling as you open it.
S
Imagine a student at his desk, dressed in black and yellow
stripes, buzzing busily in a hive of activity, or with honey
dripping on his pages.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
131

132
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• I
6
Imagine large sticks puncturing the juicy surface of an
orange that is as big as a beach ball. Feel and smell the juice of
the orange squirting out.
7
Imagine the angels in heaven sitting on cars rather than
clouds; experience yourself driving the car you think is heavenly.
8
Imagine yourself skating over the pavement, hearing
the sound of the wheels on the ground, as you see the multi-
coloured pencils attached to your skates creating fantastic
coloured shapes wherever you go.
9
Imagine a vine as large as Jack and the Beanstalk's bean
stalk, and instead of leaves on the vine, picture brightly
coloured shirts hanging all over it, blowing in the wind.
10 Now it's your turn... Imagine a hen, with a poker...
Check that all the word and image associations are strong,
positive, simple and clear, and make sure they are working
for you. You can be sure that each time you practise, your
technique will improve rapidly, and your memory will perform
well above average.
Both key memory systems will give a supercharge
boost to your recall and remembering powers - vital
tools in cracking those revision barriers to exams,
diplomas, coursework and other studies. Indeed, these
two concepts lead straight to the development of Mind
Maps. Mind Maps are an associated network of images
which incorporate all the main elements of memory
theory and left and right brain information.
• •••• ••••• • • • • • ••••• ••• ••••• ••• ••• •••• •••• •• •••• • • •• • • •• • ••• ••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Here is a memory Mind Map. Mind Maps boost your memory
by drawing on Key Words and Key Images. You will discover the
power of Mind Maps in Chapter 6.
•••• ••• ••• • ••••• •••••• • • ••• ••••• ••• •• ••• ••••••••••••••••
SUPERCHARGE YOUR MEMORY
133

134
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Onword
Now that you have discovered all the main elements of
learning, and have seen how Speed Reading and Memory can
be applied to your BOST technique, in the final chapters I
will take you step by step through Mind Mapping to a totally
comprehensive and easy-to-manage study programme.
•••• • • ••• •••••••• ••••••• ••• ••••• ••• ••••• •••••••••• ••• •• •• • •••• • • ••



6
MIND MAPS®

138
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• c
Welcome to Mind Mapping - the core study skill for
note-taking and note-making, preparing for essays
and examinations, and the ground-breaking tool for
transforming research and revision planning into
smarter and faster activities.
The creation of a Mind Map® is a revolutionary way to tap
into the infinite resources in your brain. I first developed it
as a learning and memory method whilst struggling to take
effective notes in my student days. So it couldn't be more
relevant as a study skill. It is not merely a visual aide memoire; it
is also a dynamic and organic revision tool, time manager and
memory stimulator.
What is a Mind Map®?
Mind Maps are a graphic, networked method of-storing,
organizing and prioritizing information (usually on paper)
using key or trigger words and images, each of which will
'snap on' specific memories and encourage new thoughts and
ideas. Each of the memory triggers in a Mind Map is a key to
unlocking facts, ideas and information and, also, to releasing
the true potential of your amazing mind.
The clue to the Mind Map's effectiveness lies in its dynamic
shape and form. It is drawn in the shape and form of a brain
cell and is designed to encourage your brain to work in a way
that is fast, efficient, and in the style that it does naturally.
Every time we look at the veins of a leaf or the branches
of a tree we see nature's 'Mind Maps' echoing the shapes of
brain cells and reflecting the way we ourselves are created and
connected. Like us, the natural world is forever changing and
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
regenerating, and has a communication structure that appears
similar to our own. A Mind Map is a natural thinking tool that
draws upon the inspiration and effectiveness of these natural
structures.
Mind Maps are particularly adaptive for reading, revising,
note-taking and planning for exams efficiently. They are
invaluable for gathering and ordering information, and for
identifying the key trigger words and facts from:
o Reference, books, textbooks, primary and secondary source
books.
o Lectures, tutorials, course notes, research material.
o Your own head.
They help you to manage information effectively, and increase
the potential for personal success. Those students who use
Mind Maps usually report that they feel a sense of confidence,
that their aims are achievable, and that they are on track for
reaching their goals.
Linear v. whole brain thinking
Because we speak and write in sentences, we have assumed that
ideas and information should be stored in a linear, or list-like,
fashion. This is self-limiting, as we shall see.
In speech we are limited to saying only one word at a time;
likewise, in print, words are presented in lines and sentences,
with a beginning, middle and end. This linear emphasis
continues in schools, colleges and universities, where students
are encouraged to take notes in sentence and bullet-point form.
The limitation of this approach is that it can take quite
a while to get to the core issue of the matter, and during
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
MIND MAPS"
139

140
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
this process you will say, hear or read a great deal that is not
essential for long-term recall.
We now know the brain is multi-dimensional, perfectly
capable of, and designed for, taking in information that is
non-linear, and that it does so all the time: when looking
at photographs, pictures or interpreting the images and
environment that are around you every day. Your brain,
when listening to a series of spoken sentences, does not
absorb information word by word, line by line; it takes in the
information as a whole, sorts it, interprets it, and feeds it back
to you in a multitude of ways. Whole-brain thinking is exactly
the premise of the BOST® programme - see Chapters 3 and
7. You hear each word and put it in the context of existing
knowledge as well as the other words around it. You do not need
to have heard the entire range of sentences before forming a
response. Key Words are critical 'signposts' or 'joggers' to your
multi-dimensional data sorter, your brain.
Key Words and Key Images
The word 'Key' in front of the words 'Word' or 'Image' means
much more than 'this is important'. It means this is a 'Memory
Key'. The Key Word or Key Image is being developed as a
critically important trigger to stimulate your mind, and unlock
and retrieve your memories.
A Key Word is a special word that has been chosen or
created to become a unique reference point for something
important that you wish to remember. Words stimulate the
left side of your brain and are a vital component of mastering
memory; but they are not as powerful on their own as when
you take the time to draw them and transform them into a
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

e}
g .An effective Key Image will stimulate both sides of
your brain and draw upon all your senses. Key Images are at the
very heart of my Mind Mapping and BOST programme.
Here is a simple example of how a Key Word and Key Image
can boost your memory:
o When trying to find an image to encapsulate the concept of
environmental water and waste management and the problems
of water shortage, you might choose the word 'tap'.
o The word 'tap' will, as a Key Word, trigger your analytical
left-brain memory.
o Drawing a picture of a tap, with perhaps a drop of water
dripping out, will create a Key Image, which will engage your
visual right-brain memory.
o The picture will become a visual trigger that will
represent not only the written word, but also water and waste
management as an industry with its attendant hosepipe bans,
leaking pipes and declining reservoir reserves.
The word on its own is not enough to trigger recall of all your
studies of water energy, because it is not engaging your whole
brain. The word as part of a sentence will not trigger the entire
experience either, because a sentence defines and limits. The
purpose of a Key Word that has been transformed into a
drawn Key Image, on the other hand, is to connect with both
the left-brain and the right-brain functions. This action will
radiate connections and trigger recall of complete associated
information.
Here's another example of how your brain can lock into a
KeyWord:
o You telephone a talking timetable to receive information
about the 18.50 train from your college digs to your family home.
MIND MAPS'"
141

142
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
Before the automatic voice has made any mention of your home
town, you are told that there are delays that evening at a city
along the line, the first stop just outside station from your college.
o In a split second, your brain will begin to make associations:
feelings associated with returning home, or sleeping in a
comfortable bed; the sounds of people's voices and platform
announcements; the smell and taste of a delicious evening
meal. All of which leave you weighing up whether to make the
journey by coach, or stay overnight and get the morning train.
o The reason for this response is that the word'delay' has
acted as a Key Word that has triggered a multi-faceted response
before you have heard one word of specific information relating
to your original question, and before the talking timetable has
finished its sentence.
o Getting home is still your main aim - but the delay has, for
the present time, become the central concept.
So Key Words and their context are vitally important memory
joggers, and it is the network inside your mind that is of most
importance in helping to understand and interpret them.
Key Words - cut the verbiage
We are so used to speaking and writing words that we
have come to believe that normal sentences are the
best way to store and recall verbal images and ideas.
In fact, over 90 per cent of written notes taken by
students are superfluous, because your brain naturally
prefers Key Words that represent the big picture. This
means that:

'
.
o
Time is wasted recording words that have no
bearing on memory.
o
Time is wasted re-reading unnecessary words.
o
Time is wasted searching for Key Words that have
not been highlighted in any way and therefore blend in
with the whole.
o
Time is wasted when the connections between
Key Words are slowed down by extraneous connecting
words.
o
Distance weakens associations between Key Words.
The further apart they are, the weaker the associations.
The language of your brain
Key Words are crucial and so are Key Images. Remember, the
main language of your brain is neither the spoken nor the
written word. Your brain works via your senses by creating
associations between images, colours, Key Words and ideas. Put
in a nutshell: Imagination and Association. These are connected
to whole-brain activity and both are stimulated mainly when
you use:
o Your senses.
o Exaggeration.
o Rhythm and movement.
o Colour.
o Laughter.
o Pictures and images.
•• ••••••• •• • ••• ••• •••••• •••• ••• • •••• ••• ••••••••• •• ••••• ••
MIND
MAPS~
143

144
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
o Numbers.
o Words.
o Symbols.
o Order.
o Patterns.
We are all attracted to people who make us feel good, and
things that we enjoy. In order for your Mind Map to become
something that you enjoy looking at, and want to keep referring
to, it needs to be:
o A positive representation of events or plans.
o Attractive to look at.
A Mind Map that includes these important factors will
encourage your brain to associate, link and connect your
thoughts, fears, dreams and ideals in ways that are far more
creative than any other form of note-taking. A Mind Map
triggers associations in your brain that will help you to link key
revision ideas more quickly and creatively than any other form
of 'brainstorming'.
Mind Maps are better than standard note-taking.
A Mind Map has a number of advantages over standard
note-taking:
o
The central idea is more clearly defined.
o
The relative importance of each idea is clearly
identified.
o
The more important ideas are immediately
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• ••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
recognizable at the centre of the Mind Map.
o
The links between key concepts are immediately
identifiable - via Key Words - encouraging association
of ideas and concepts and improving memory.
o
Review of information is effective and rapid.
o
The structure of a Mind Map allows additional
concepts to be added easily.
o
Each Mind Map is a unique creation - which will in
turn aid accurate recall.
Radiant Thinking® for optimum revision
To understand why Mind Maps are so effective, it is helpful to
know more about the way your brain thinks and remembers
information. As explained above, your brain does not think in a
linear, monotonous way. Rather it thinks in multiple directions
simultaneously, starting from central trigger points in Key
Images and Key Words, which are explained on page 140:
what I call Radiant Thinking®. As the term suggests, thoughts
radiate outward like the branches of a tree, the veins of a leaf or
the blood vessels of the
body that emanate from
the heart. In the same
way, a Mind Map starts
with the central concept
and radiates outwards
to take in the detail,
mirroring effectively the
activity of your brain.
••• • •••• • •• • ••• • •• • •• • • •• • • ••• ••• • • •• •••• •••• ••••••• •• •
MIND MAPS~
145

146
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
The more closely you can record information in a way that
reflects the natural workings of your brain, the more efficiently
your brain will be able to trigger the recall of essential facts and
personal memories. To show you what I mean, try the following
exercise.
Radiant Thinking® exercise 1
Most people believe that the brain thinks linguistically.
am going to ask you to access a piece of data from that vast
database, your brain. You will have no time to think about it in
advance. I would like you to consider the following questions,
once you have accessed the piece of data:
o What was it that you accessed?
o How long did it take you to access it?
o Was there colour?
o What were the associations around the data?
Now, here is the data:
BANANA
Most people are familiar with what a banana looks like. When
you 'heard' the word you may have seen the colours yellow,
brown, or green - depending on the ripeness of the fruit. You
may have seen its curved shape. You may have associated the
image with a fruit salad, breakfast cereal or a milk shake. The
image will have appeared instantaneously, as if from nowhere,
and you are unlikely to have spent any time visualizing the
letters of the word. The image was already stored in your mind;
you simply needed to trigger its release. We learn from this that
ultimately we think in images and not words.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
This quick test shows that everyone, whatever their sex,
status or nationality, uses Radiant Thinking to link Key Word
associations with Key Images - instantaneously (see below).
This is the basis for all our thinking and this is the basis of
Mind Maps. Mind Maps have been devised to enhance
and increase your Radiant Thinking processes.
Radiant Thinking@ exercise 2
You are going to complete a mini Mind Map to represent the
concept of 'happiness'. There is space around the word for ten
Key Word associations.
o First draw a central image that represents 'happiness' for
you.
o Then, on each of the branches around the edge, write the
first ten Key Word associations that radiate from the centre
when you think of the picture you have drawn to represent
'happiness'.
o It is important to put down the first words that come to
mind, no matter how ridiculous you may think they are. Don't
self-censor or give yourself pause for thought.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
MIND MAPS"
147

148
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 4
o If you find it easy to think of more than ten words, include
them by drawing extra branches for them.
o When you have finished, compare your results with the
example above to see which words overlap.
The point of this exercise is to show that once your brain begins
to 'freewheel' in word association, it doesn't slow down. Rather
like following links on the Internet, you will find yourself
thinking of many more connections.
How to prepare a Mind Map®
A Mind Map represents a personal thought-journey on paper,
and like any successful journey it needs some planning in order
to be successful. The first step before starting your Mind Map is
to decide where you are headed:
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

o What is your goal or vision?
o What are the sub-goals and categories that contribute to
your goal?
o Are you planning a study project?
o Are you brainstorming ideas to prepare an essay?
o Do you need to note-take an upcoming lecture?
o Are you preparing a plan for an entire term's coursework?
Making this decision is important because a successful Mind
Map has at its heart a core image which represents your goal,
and your first step will be to draw a picture in the centre of your
Mind Map to represent that goal as a success.
Think pictorially and think in colour
The adage that 'a picture is worth a thousand words' is true. In
an experiment, scientists showed a group of people 600 images
at a rate of one per second. When tested for accurate recall
after the presentation, there was a 98 per cent rate of accurate
recall across the whole group. The human brain finds it much
easier to remember images than words and this is why, in a Mind
Map, the central key idea is expressed as an image. Using images
elsewhere in your Mind Map is also important. To practise your
image-association skills, look back at Radiant Thinking exercise 2
for the word 'happiness'. See whether you can re-create the whole
Mind Map using images only.
To make sure that your Mind Map becomes a genuinely
useful tool that you want to develop, the central image needs
to make you feel positive and focused when you look at it.
Therefore think in colour, preferably multi-colours rather than
boring monochrome. It does not need to be beautifully drawn
or wonderfully artistic. Create a positive vision, and it will take
MIND MAPS"
149

150
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
on a life and energy of its own and will help you to stay focused.
When you are focused you become the human equivalent
of a very powerful laser beam: precise, goal-directed and
phenomenally powerful.
Basic Ordering Ideas
You now need to add structure to the Mind Mapping of your
ideas. The first step is to decide on your Basic Ordering Ideas
(BOIs). BOIs are the 'hooks' on which to hang all associated
ideas (just as the chapter headings of a textbook represent
the thematic content within the pages). BOIs are the chapter
headings of your thoughts: the words or images that represent
the simplest and most obvious categories of information. They
are the words that will automatically attract your brain to think
of the greatest number of associations.
If you are not sure what your BOIs should be, ask yourself
the following simple questions with regard to your main goal or
vision:
o What knowledge is required to achieve my aim?
o If this were a book, what would the chapter headings be?
o What are my specific objectives?
o What are the seven most important categories in this
subject area?
o What are the answers to my seven basic questions: Why?
What? Where? Who? How? Which? When?
o Is there a larger, more encompassing category that all of
these fit into that would be more appropriate to use?
For example, a Mind Map of life plans might include the
following useful personal BOI categories:

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Personal history: past, present, future
Strengths
Weaknesses
Likes
Dislikes
Long-term goals
Family
Friends
Achievements
Hobbies
Emotions
Work
Home
Responsibilities
The advantages of having well-thought-out BOIs are:
o The primary ideas are in place, so the secondary ideas will
follow and flow more naturally.
o The BOIs help to shape, sculpt and construct the Mind Map,
so encouraging your mind to think in a naturally structured way.
When you decide upon your first set of BOIs before you begin
Mind Mapping, the rest of your ideas will flow in a far more
coherent and useful way.
Pen to paper
To create effective Mind Maps you will need:
o A stock of paper: make sure you have a blank exercise book
filled with plain pages, or a quantity of good-quality, large-sized
sheets of blank, unlined paper.
o A range of multi-coloured pens in fine, medium and
highlighter thickness.
o At least 10-20 minutes of uninterrupted time.
o Your brain.
More on paper
o You need plenty of paper, because this is not just a practical
exercise - it is a personal journey. You will want to refer back
to your Mind Maps over time to assess your progress and to
review your goals.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
MIND
MAPS~
151

152
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
o You need large-sized sheets of paper because you will want
space to explore your ideas. Small pages will cramp your style.
o The pages should be blank and unlined in order to free your
brain to think in a non-linear, uninhibited and creative way.
o An exercise book or ring binder of paper is best because
your first Mind Map is the start of a working journal. You don't
want to be subconsciously inhibited by a need to be 'neat', and
you will want to keep all your ideas together in order to see how
your plans and needs evolve over time.
More on pens
o You need easy-flowing pens because you will want to be able
to read what you have created and may want to write fast.
o A selection of colours is important because colour
stimulates your brain and will activate creativity and visual
memory.
o Colour also allows you to introduce structure, weight and
emphasis to your Mind Map.
Mind Map® skills in detail
1
Use emphasis
Always use a central image
o An image automatically focuses your eye and your brain.
It triggers numerous associations and is a highly effective
memoryaid.
o ·In addition, an image that is appealing will please you and
draw attention to itself.
o If a word, rather than a picture, is used as the central image,
it can be made more three-dimensional by the addition of
shade, colour or attractive lettering.
• •• • ••• ••• •• •• •••••• ••• ••• •••• ••• • •••• •••• •••• ••• • • • • • • •• ••••• ••••

••••••••••••••••••••
{'4P7-,
•
•••••
~ .
~ .
Z •
•
tl
••
~ .
:t> •
..." .
C/l
•
8
•
... .
~--?
CLeA~"
~
\11
•
l'1oRf:-
I>l
•
.-<It'l1!

154
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Use images throughout your Mind Map@
o Using images throughout your Mind Map will add more
focus and make it more attractive. It will also help you to 'open
your mind' to the world around you, and will stimulate both the
left brain and the right brain in the process.
o Use three or more colours per central image. Colours
stimulate memory and creativity: they wake up your brain. This
is in contrast to monochrome (one-colour) images, which your
brain sees as monotonous, and which send it to sleep.
o Use dimension both in images and around words. This
will help things to stand out, and whatever stands out is more
easily remembered. Using dimension is
especially effective in giving Key Words
prominence.
Use variations of printing, line and image
o Varying the size of the type will introduce a sense of
hierarchy and give a clear message regarding the relative
importance of the items listed.
Use organized spacing
o Organizing the look of the branches on the page will
help communicate the hierarchy and categorization of ideas,
and will also make it easier
to read and more attractive
to look at. Leave the right
amount of space around each
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

item on your Mind Map, partly so that each item can be seen
clearly, and partly because space itself is an important part of
communicating a message.
2
Use association
Use arrows
o Use arrows when you want to make connections within and
across the branches.
o Arrows guide your eye in a way that will automatically join
things together. Arrows also suggest movement. Movement is a
valuable aid to effective memory and recall.
o Arrows can point in one direction, or in several directions at
once, and they can be of all shapes and sizes.
Use colours
o Colour is one of the most powerful tools for enhancing
memory and creativity.
o Choosing specific colours for coding purposes will give you
faster access to the information contained in your Mind Map
and will help you to remember it more easily.
o Colour-coding is especially useful for group Mind Mapping.
Use codes
o Codes save you a lot of time. They enable you to make
instant connections between different parts of your Mind Map,
however far apart they may be on the page.
MIND MAPS@
155

156
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
o Codes may take the form of ticks, crosses, circles, triangles
or underlining, or they can be more elaborate.
3
Be clear
Use only one Key Word per line
o Each individual word will conjure up many thousands of its
own possible connotations and associations.
o By placing one word per line, you have maximum opportunity
to make associations for each word. In addition every word is
connected to the word or image that sits alongside it on the next
line. In this way, your brain is opened up to new thoughts.
o Using one Key Word per line gives that Key Word, and
therefore your mind, freedom to radiate out in all possible
directions. This rule is the opposite of a restriction. If you can
use it well, it sets your mind free to explore its infinite creative
potential.
Print all words
o Printed words are more defined in shape and are therefore
easier for your mind to 'photograph' and retain.
o The extra time it takes to print a word is more than made up
for by the advantages it creates of increased speed of association
and recall.
o Printing also encourages brevity, and can be used to
emphasize the relative importance of words.
Print Key Words on lines
o The lines on a Mind Map are important as they connect the
individual Key Words together.
o Your Key Words need to be connected to the lines to help
your brain make the connection with the rest of your Mind Map.

t •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Make line length equal to word length
o If words and their lines are of equal length they will look
more effective and will connect more easily to the words on
either side of them.
o The space saved will allow you to add more information to
your Mind Map.
Connect lines to other lines and major branches to
the central image
o Connecting the lines on your Mind Map will help you to
connect the thoughts in your mind.
o Lines can be transformed into arrows, curves, loops, circles,
ovals, triangles or any other shape you choose.
Make the central lines thicker and keep them curved
o Thicker lines will send the message to your brain that they
are the most important, so thicken up all central lines. If,
to begin with, you are uncertain which ideas are going to be
the most important, you can thicken the lines once you have
finished.
Create shapes and boundaries around your Mind
Map® branches
o Shapes encourage your imagination.
o Creating shapes in your Mind Map - for example, by
creating a shape around a branch of a Mind Map - will help you
to remember the many themes and ideas more easily.
•••••••• •• •• ••••• •••• •••• • ••••••• ••••••••• ••••• •• ••••••
MIND MAPS"
157

158
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Make your images as clear as possible
o Clarity on the page encourages clarity of thought. A clear
Mind Map will also be more elegant, graceful and pleasant to use.
Keep the paper arranged horizontally in front of you
o The 'landscape' format of the page will give you optimum
freedom to draw and create your Mind Map.
o It will also be easier to read once you have finished it.
Keep printing as upright as possible
o Upright printing gives your brain easier access to the
thoughts expressed on the page; this applies to the angle of the
lines as well as of the words.
4
Use hierarchy
o The way you layout and structure your Mind Map will have
an immense impact on how you use it, and its practical 'usability'.
5 Use numerical order
o If your Mind Map is the basis for, say, a core topic, you will
need to order your thoughts - whether chronologically or in
order of importance.
o To do this, simply number the branches in the desired order
of action or priority.
o Other levels of detail, such as dates, can be added if
preferred. Letters of the alphabet could also be used, instead of
numbers.
6
Develop a personal style
You will relate to, and remember more easily, something that
you have created yourself.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
1

What to avoid when Mind Mapping
There are three danger areas that face any Mind Mapper:
1
The creation of Mind Maps that aren't really Mind Maps.
2
Using phrases instead of single words.
3
Unnecessary concern about creating a 'messy' Mind Map,
and a negative emotional response as a result.
1
When a Mind Map® is not a Mind Map®
Take a look at the following cluster shapes. Each of them
represents an early Mind Map drawn by someone who hasn't
quite grasped the basics.
At first glance they may seem acceptable, but in fact they
ignore the key principle of Radiant Thinking. Each idea is on its
own, cut off from the others. There is no dynamic connection
MIND MAPS"
159

160
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
between the branches and nothing to encourage your brain to
spark with new ideas. They are designed to cut off thought.
Compare this with the outline of a Mind Map that closely
follows all the important principles:
2 Why words are better than phrases
Take a look at the three images on the next page as they
illustrate perfectly why a phrase does not work well in a Mind
Map or good thinking.
t •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
,VERY UNHAPPY AFTERNOON
o The first version, showing the three words all together on
the same line, is ineffective because there is no escape from the
'unhappiness' of the phrase.
o The second version is an improvement as it has opened the
phrase out into its component parts and therefore enables free
association to take place with each word. However, the words-
only approach means that it is appealing mainly to the left side
of your brain, and is limiting your brain's creative response to
the words. Nor is it completely clear which of the words is the
core concept.
o The third version follows all Mind Map rules. It is no longer
a completely negative picture. The cause of the unhappiness can
be seen to be separate from the afternoon itself and the basic
concept of happiness has been introduced into the equation. It
is a dynamic image where change and choice are possible.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
MIND MAPS"
161

162
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
3 When a messy Mind Map® is agood Mind Map®
Depending on your circumstances when note-taking, you
may not always be able to create a neat and tidy Mind Map.
If you are in a lecture where ideas are not being presented in
an ordered fashion, it will not always be possible to identify
immediately the core concepts. Your Mind Map will reflect that
organic situation and will be an accurate reflection of your state
of mind at the time.
However 'messy' the Mind Map is, it is still likely to contain
more information of value than would have been the case had
you noted everything down. Take some time immediately after
such a lecture to transform your Mind Map notes into a more
constructive form. Use:
o Arrows.
o Symbols.
o
Highlighting.
o
Images.
and other devices, to identify the Basic Ordering Ideas and
to instil hierarchy, associations and colour into your notes. If
necessary, re-draw your Mind Map following the basic rules, so
that the information is made easier for your memory to recall
in future.
How to create a Mind Map®
1
.Focus on the core question, the precise topic. Be clear about
what it is that you are aiming for or trying to resolve.
2
Turn your first sheet of paper sideways in front of you
(landscape-style), in order to start creating your Mind Map
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

in the centre of the page. This will allow you freedom of
expression, without being restricted by the narrow measure of
the page.
3
Draw an i
a e in the centre of the blank sheet of paper to
represent your goal. Don't worry if you feel that you can't draw
well; that doesn't matter. It is very important to use an image
as the starting point for your Mind Map because an image will
jump-start your thinking by activating your imagination.
4
Use colo r from the
outset, for emphasis,
structure, texture,
creativity - to stimulate
visual flow and reinforce
the image in your mind.
Try to use at least three
colours overall, and
create your own colour-
coding system. Colour
can be used hierarchically or thematically, or it can be used to
emphasize certain points.
5
Now draw a series of
t
, radiating
out from the centre of
the image. These are the
primary branches of
your Mind Map and will
support your idea like the
sturdy branches of a tree.
MIND MAPS"
163

164
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
Make sure you connec these primary branches firmly to the
central image, because your brain, and therefore your memory,
operates by association.
6
Curve your lines because they are more interesting to your
eye and more memorable to your brain than straight ones.
7
Write one
e.
Tord on each branch, that you associate
with the topic. These are your
ain
ug
s (and your Basic
Ordering Ideas), relating to themes such as:
Situation
Feelings
Facts
Choices
Remember that using only one Key Word per line allows
you to define the very essence of the issue you are exploring,

whilst also helping to make the association be stored more
emphatically in your brain. Phrases and sentences limit the
effect and confuse your memory.
8
Add a few mp
branches to your Mind Map. Your brain
will want to put something on them.
9
Next, create second- and third-level branches for your
related Associa ed and Secon a y Thoughts. The secondary
level connects to the primary branches, the third level to the
secondary branches, and so on. Association is everything
in this process. The words that you choose for each of your
branches might include themes that ask questions: the Who,
What, Where, Why, How of the subject or situation.
MIND MAPS@
165

166
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Ideas into action
Your completed Mind Map is both a picture of your thoughts
and the first stage in preparing a plan of action. Prioritizing
and weighting your themes and conclusions can be done quite
simply by numbering each branch of the Mind Map.
Make your most important study point 1, the next most
important 2, then 3, 4 and so on.
Onword
Now that you have learned how to create a Mind Map, the next
chapter examines the many exciting applications of your new-
found skills to the crucial areas of your study using BOST.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••



7
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR STUDY WITH
MIND MAPS@ AND BOST@

170
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Now you are armed with all the information and skills you
need in order to: study efficiently, organize effectively,
read at least twice as fast, remember successfully what
you have read and Mind Map so brilliantly that you will
remember information 10 times better. Now you can
incorporate the skills you have acquired into using BOST
to Mind Map all your textbooks and study materials.
How to Mind Map® a textbook
Preparation
1
Browse - create the central image of the Mind Map
(10 minutes).
2
Set time and amount targets (5 minutes).
3
Mind Map existing knowledge on the subject (10 minutes).
4
Define and Mind Map goals (5 minutes).
Application (times dependent on material studied)
5
Overview - add main Mind Map branches.
6
Preview - first and second levels.
7
Inview - fill in the Mind Map details.
8
Review - complete the Mind Map.
Preparation
1
Browse (10 minutes)
A
Speed reading: Before you start reading the textbook in
detail, it is essential to gain a quick overview. The best way is to
look at the front and back cover and the list of contents, and,
using a guide (a pencil or your finger), skim through the pages a
few times, getting the general 'feel' of the book.
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
B
Mind Mapping: Now take a large blank sheet, turn
it sideways or landscape and draw a central image that
summarizes the subject or title. If there is a particularly
striking or colourful image on the cover or inside the book, feel
free to use it.
C
Radiant Thinking: If you are also reasonably sure of the
main branches that are going to radiate from the centre, you
can add these at the same time. They will often correspond to
the major divisions or chapters of the book, or your specific
objectives in reading it.
By starting your Mind Map at this early stage, you are giving
your brain a central focus and the basic architecture within
which it can integrate all the information gained from studying
the book.
2 Setting time and amount targets (5 minutes)
In view of your study objectives, the book's content and level
of difficulty, and the amount of knowledge you already have,
decide on:
A
The amount of time you will devote to the entire task.
B
The amount you will cover in each study period.
3
Mind Mapping existing knowledge on the subject
(10 minutes)
Now 'turn away' from the book and your previous Mind Map,
take a new sheet of paper, and as fast as you can do a quick-
fire Mind Map burst on everything you already know about
the topic you are about to study. This will include whatever
information you have gained from your initial browse through
the book, plus any general knowledge or specific items of
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR STUDY WITH MIND MAPS" AND BOST"
171

172
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
....................................................... '
information you may have picked up during your whole life
that relate to the topic in any way. Avoid simply jotting down
headwords and data in linear form - you are practising Mind
Mapping here.
Most students are delighted and surprised to find that
they actually know a lot more about the topic than they had
previously thought. This exercise is also especially valuable
because it brings appropriate associations or 'grappling hooks'
to the surface of your brain and sets it moving in the direction
of the topic you are studying. It also enables you to identify
areas of strength and weakness in your knowledge, indicating
which aspects you need to supplement.
4
Defining and Mind Mapping goals (5 minutes)
At this stage you can either add to the existing knowledge Mind
Map you have just completed, using a different-coloured pen, or
you can take a new blank sheet and do another quick-fire Mind
Map burst on your goals in reading the textbook or study guide.
These goals may take the form of specific questions to which
you wish to find the answers, or areas of knowledge about
which you wish to find out more.
Mind Mapping your goals in this way greatly increases
the probability of your eye/brain system registering any
information it comes across that seems relevant to those goals.
In effect, the Mind Map of your goals acts as an 'appetite' that
naturally motivates your search. In the same way as a person
who has not eaten for several days will become obsessed with
food, good preparatory Mind Maps increase your 'hunger' for
knowledge.
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• • ••••••••••••

Application
5 - 8 Overview, Preview, Inview, Review (time
dependent on study material)
Having completed your preparation, you are ready to start the
four levels of reading - Overview, Preview, Inview and Review
- which take you ever deeper into the content of the book. (This
is where Speed Reading especially comes into its own - see
Chapter 4.) You can now either Mind Map the book as you read,
or mark the book while reading and complete your Mind Map
afterwards.
o Mind Mapping while you read is like having an ongoing
'conversation' with the author, reflecting the developing pattern
of knowledge as the book progresses. The growing Mind Map
also enables you to keep checking your level of understanding
and adjusting the focus of your information gathering.
o Mind Mapping afterwards means that you produce your
Mind Map only once you have gained a complete understanding
of the book's content, and the way each part relates to the
others. Your Mind Map will therefore be more comprehensive
and focused and less likely to require revision.
Whichever method you choose, it is important to remember
that Mind Mapping a textbook or study guide is a two-way
process. The aim is not simply to duplicate the author's thoughts
in Mind Map form. Rather, it is a question of organizing and
integrating his or her thoughts in the context of your own
knowledge, understanding, interpretation and specific goals,
for example, the likely exam questions. Your Mind Map should
therefore ideally include your own comments, thoughts and
creative realizations arising from what you have read. Using
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR STUDY WITH MIND MAPS"' AND BOST"'
173

174
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
different colours or codes will enable you to distinguish your
own contributions from those of the author.
To refresh your memory of the Application system generally
see Chapter 3.
How to Mind Map® from lectures to DVDs
This is very similar to Mind Mapping a book, except that you
are often subject to the linear progression of the lecture or
visual presentation and do not have the luxury of being able to
refer to different parts of the material at will, nor can you rely
on speed reading to achieve fast learning.
For this reason, it is especially important to get an
Overview of the topic as quickly as possible. Before the lecture,
video, DVD or film begins, you should draw your central image
and as many of the main branches as you can. (A good lecturer
should be pleased to help anyone who shows an interest in their
subject and give you a preview of the lecture showing the main
areas he or she plans to cover.)
Again, before the lecture, video, DVD or film begins and
if circumstances permit, you can do a quick-fire two-minute
Mind Map burst of your existing knowledge on the subject, in
order to prepare your brain to take in new information.
As time progresses, you can fill in the information and
ideas on your original Mind Map wherever they seem most
relevant, adjusting your basic structure if necessary. As with
MiFld Mapping a textbook, try to clarify y colour coding
your own comments and contributions in response to those of
the lecturer.

•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 1
Case study of a Mind-Mapping student
Here's an example of a female student, Lana Israel, who used
Mind Maps as a standard part of her study practice. Lana
won a school Science competition using Mind Maps, and
went on to win not only the State Science Fair Competition,
but also the USA National Science Fair Competition. She was
then contacted by Harvard University where she studied and
achieved straight A grades and one surprising Bgrade. Not
satisfied that her Bgrade was warranted, she presented her
appeal case using Mind Maps, and was duly awarded the A
grade she deserved. Her Mind Map is a combination of note-
taking, and essay and exam preparation. As Lana said:
Mind Map by Lana Israel in preparation for a History exam.
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
REVOLUTIO
:ZE YOU::l. S':'UDY WITH MIND MAPS~ AND BOST~
175

176
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
'This Mind Map is taken straight from my history notes. My
teacher usually lectures every day and naturally I Mind Map
his lectures. This Mind Map deals with America's earliest
political parties and their stands. The central image illustrates
the split in politics which lead to the formation oftwo separate
parties. Just byglancing at my image, I am made aware
ofthe theme ofthe Map andgeneral characteristics ofthe
parties, Democrats being more common men and Federalists
more concerned with aristocracy. The use ofpictures in Mind
Mapped notes is wonderful for chunking down concepts,
recalling information and making history fun. The equivalent
ofthis Map, linearly, is at least two to three pages oflinear
notes - studying three pages rather than one is certainly
not fun. Furthermore, this Map can be reviewed in under a
minute, saving time and enabling one to remember more as key
words are strongly linked... Mind Maps have helped me get As
in History -
'~" Definite Advantage!'
Creating a Master Mind Map® for study
If you are involved in a long-term course of study it is a good
idea to keep a giant Master Mind Map reflecting the major
sub-divisions, themes, theories, personalities and events in
that subject. Every time you read a textbook or go to a lecture,
you can record any major new insight on your Master Mind
Map, thus creating an external mirror image of your growing
network of internal knowledge.
Those who have done this notice a surprising and rewarding
trend. After a reasonable length of time, the boundaries of the
Mind Map begin to edge into other subjects and disciplines.
Thus the periphery of a Master Mind Map on psychology, for
example, begins to touch on neurophysiology, mathematics,
......•••.•........................••.••..........•.....•......... ,

' ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••• 4
philosophy, astronomy, geography, meteorology, ecology, and
so on.
This does not mean that your knowledge structure is
disintegrating and moving too far from the point. It actually
means that your knowledge is becoming so deep and extensive
that it is beginning to relate to other areas of knowledge.
Mind Mapping for note-taking
The most effective speed-reading skills in the world need a note
taking technique that supports them rather than, like linear-
minded studying techniques, one that is time-consuming and
ineffective. The Mind Map method of information storage and
retrieval follows the same principles as speed reading, and it
has been designed to work in synergy with your brain, which
means that your knowledge levels will increase the more you
use them.
A valid note-taking method must incorporate:
1
Planning, focus and preview.
2
Clear recognition, assimilation and comprehension of facts.
3
A reflection of existing levels of knowledge.
4
A way of retaining information.
S
Ease of recall.
6
An easy form of communicating the information.
A Mind Map fulfils all these criteria. Effective note-taking
is not about slavishly reproducing everything that has been
said; it is a selective process. It should minimize the number of
words written down and maximize the amount of information
recalled. Mind Maps help you achieve precisely that.
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR STUDY WITH MIND MAPS"' AND BOST"'
177

178
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Disadvantages of 'normal' note-taking
o A tendency to take indiscriminate notes without Preview,
which means that the overall focus and intent are lost.
o A preoccupation with 'getting everything down' on paper,
which prevents ongoing critical analysis and appreciation of the
subject matter.
o Detailed note-taking bypasses the mind and distracts the
listener who then misses what is really being said. (Just as it
is possible to copy-type thousands of words of text without
reading it.)
o The volume of notes tends to become so great that the note-
taker feels disinclined to refer back to them, or can make no
sense of them, and has to begin again.
Key Words and Key Images revisited
The crucial element in effective note-taking is the selection of
appropriate Key Words and Key Images that encapsulate the
essence of everything you have read. These have already been
described in Chapter 6, but to re-iterate at this crucial juncture:
The Key Words in your Mind Map:
1
Must trigger the right kind of memory.
2
Should not be too descriptive, abstract or general to be
practical.
3
Must evoke a very specific image in your mind.
4
Must be personally satisfying.
5
Must have the ability to summarize information.
In Mind Map notes, instead of taking down whole sentences
or making lists, a combination of Key Words and Key Images
is used to capture the essence of the information and to act as
precise memory triggers to recall the information.
t •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

As you build up your Mind Map, so your brain creates an
integrated map of the whole of the territory you are recording.
Your BOST Mind Map therefore becomes a multi-dimensional
note from your own brain that reproduces all you want
to remember in a unique fashion. It is a powerful graphic
technique that harnesses the power of your brain to the full
and unlocks your true potential. Mind Maps work with your
memory, to make it easy for you to recall information on
demand.
Reviewing your Mind Map® notes
Having completed your Mind Map notes, you should review
them regularly in order to maintain your understanding and
recall of what you have learnt. For a I-hour period of study the
optimum intervals and time limits for review after the study
are as follows:
o After 10 minutes - take a 10-minute review.
o After 24 hours - take a 2-4-minute review.
o After a week - take a 2-minute review.
o After a month - take a 2-minute review.
o After six months ;:- take a 2-minute review.
o After a year - take a 2-minute review.
The information will then be stored in your long-term memory.
Rather than just looking at your original Mind Map for each
review, it is best to start by doing another quick-fire Mind Map
burst of what you remember. This will show what you are able
to recall without any assistance. You can then check against
your original Mind Map, adjusting any discrepancies and
strengthening any areas of weak recall. Refer back to the graph
on page 57 for a visual reminder of recall patterns.
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR STUDY WITH MIND MAPS"' AND BOST"'
179

180
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
Benefits of Mind Map® notes and the
Master Mind Map®
1
They enable you to keep the whole knowledge 'picture'
inview at all times, thus giving you a more balanced and
comprehensive understanding of the subject in its entirety.
2
They take up far less space than linear notes. Between 10
and 1000 pages of text can be summarized on one large Mind
Map page.
se a
I
v
ee
3
They give your brain a central focus and structure within
which to integrate your knowledge of any subject.
4
They increase your brain's 'hunger' for knowledge.
5
They allow you to relate your own thoughts and ideas to
those expressed in books, lectures or presentations.
6
They are far more effective and efficient for review purposes.
7
They enhance your memory and understanding of
textbooks, study guides, lectures and coursework, enabling you
to excel in any course of study.
Mind Mapping for essays
The Mind Maps we are discussing are meant to replace the
voluminous linear notes that most students write before
actually writing their essays.
Note-tala g from a textbook or lecture involves taking the
essential elements from linear material to generate a Mind Map
(as described above).
Note-makl g for an essay means first identifying the
essential elements of the subject in a Mind Map and then using
your Mind Map notes to build a linear structure.
o As always, you should begin your Mind Map with a central
image representing the subject of your essay.
o You can then select appropriate Basic Ordering Ideas (BOIs),

t ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
as your major branches or principal sub-divisions. At this stage
you should pay close attention to what the topic or question is
asking you to do. The wording of essay topics usually suggests
what the BOIs need to be.
o Let your mind range freely, adding items of information,
or points you wish to make, wherever they seem most relevant
on your Mind Map. There is no limit to the number of branches
and sub-branches that can radiate outwards from your BOIs.
During this Mind Mapping stage you should use codes (colours,
symbols, or both) to indicate cross-reference or association
between different areas.
o Next, edit and re-order your Mind Map into a cohesive whole.
o Now sit down and write the first draft of your essay, using
the Mind Map as a framework. A well-organized Mind Map
should provide you with:
o All the main sub-divisions of your essay.
o
The key points to be mentioned in each.
o
The way those points relate to each other.
At this stage you should write as quickly as possible, skipping
over any areas that cause you special difficulty, especially
particular words or grammatical structures. In this way you
will create a much greater flow, and you can always return to
the 'problem areas' later, much as you would when studying a
reference book.
o If you come up against 'writer's block', (which with a Mind
Map you probably won't - remember that jigsaw puzzle!), doing
another Mind Map will help you overcome it. In many cases
just drawing the central image will get your mind going again,
playing and freewheeling round the topic of your essay. If you
get blocked once more, simply add new lines branching off from
the Key Words and Images you have so far generated, and your
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR STUDY WITH MIND MAPS~ AND BOST~
181

182
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
brain's natural Gestalt or 'completing' tendency will fill in the
blank spaces with new words and images. At the same time
you should remind yourself of your brain's infinite capacity for
association and allow all your thoughts to flow, especially the
ones you may have been dismissing as 'absurd'. Such blocks will
disappear as soon as you realize that they are actually created
not by your brain's inability but by an underlying fear of failure
and a misunderstanding of the way your brain works.
o Finally, review your Mind Map and put the finishing
touches to your essay, adding cross-references, supporting your
argument with more evidence or quotations, and modifying or
expanding your conclusions where necessary.
Mind Mapping for examinations
Having taken Mind Map notes throughout your course of study,
and having reviewed your Mind Maps at the recommended
intervals, you should be more than ready for the examination.
All you need to translate your excellent knowledge into
excellent performance is the correct approach.
1
The first step is to read the examination paper fully,
selecting the questions you choose to answer, noting in Mini-
Mind Maps any thoughts that immediately spring to mind on
reading the questions.
2
Next, you have to decide in what order you are going to
answer the questions, and how much time you will devote to
each.
3· Resisting the temptation to start answering the first
question in detail straight away, do quick-fire Mind Map bursts
on all the questions you intend to answer. By following this
procedure, you enable your mind to explore, throughout the
examination, the ramifications of all the questions regardless of
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
r~fUD
~~~ ~O~~
~~f#
c;
~~
~
A Mind Map to help a literature student pass her exam (which she did!).
the particular question you are answering at any given time.
4
Now go back to your first question and do a Mind Map
to act as the framework for your answer. The central image
corresponds to your introductory comments, while each of the
major branches provides a major subheading or section of the
essay. For each extension from your major branches, you should
be able to write a paragraph or two.
S
As you build up your answer you will find that you can
begin to cross-refer throughout your knowledge structure,
and can conclude by adding your own thoughts, associations
and interpretations. Such an answer will demonstrate to the
examiner a comprehensive knowledge, an ability to analyze,
organize, integrate and cross-refer, and especially an ability
to come up with your own creative and original ideas on the
subject. In other words you will have achieved top marks!
t •••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR STUDY WITH MIND MAPS@ AND BOST@
183

184
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Case study: Mind Map® in action
The Mind Map below is one of hundreds of Mind Maps by
student James Lee. He prepared these Mind Maps to help him
pass his senior and university entrance examinations. At the
age of 15 James missed six months of schooling because of
illness and was advised to go back a year in view of the fact
that his '0' level examinations loomed on the horizon. James
persuaded his teachers to let him 'go for it' and started to Mind
Map everything in sight! In just three months he did a year's
work, and in ten examinations scored seven As and three Bs.
This Mind Map is one that James did for History, outlining the
main explanations given for the commencement of the Second
World War.
'»~t'
-l~f..
"
.,...,..
'v
~~
N
":>
c;
~~
~
'\
.:'Q
~
~
-<
t.A
~
~~
:·IN"E.~\
o'vt
:,,~~~
;I"
One of the Mind Maps by James Lee that helped him to pass his exams.
• •••••• • • •• • • • • •• ••• •••••• • •••• • •••• • ••• • • ••••••• ••••• • •••••••••••• ••

Limit your time, not your boundaries
College or university students, who take exams regularly, will
find it very useful to write every essay to a strict time limit, as
if it were an examination question. This approach is especially
rewarding in highly competitive academic situations, where
your brain needs constant training to excel under pressure-
cooker examination conditions.
Swedish student Katarina Naiman used Mind Maps for
essays on Sweden:
'The more I wrote and drew, the more things came to my
mind - the more ideas Igot, the more brave and original they
were. I have realized that a Mind Map is never-ending. Only
some other person I respect, a stomach aching ofhunger, or
real thirst could make me stop building my Mind Maps!'
Mind Mapping for group study
Study can also be a communal experience (as well as a solitary
revision exercise) and Mind Maps are ideal for small groups
seeking to increase their studying efficiency. Using well
organized Mind Map notes, the content of a whole text book
can be communicated to members of the group within one hour
or less. I recommend a study day with, say, four members, in
which four books can be read, Mind Mapped, understood and
exchanged.
1
Start at 10 a.m. having had a half-hour exercise or
stretching session.
2
Quickly browse through the text to be studied (15 minutes).
3
Break - rest, play games, relax (15 minutes).
4
Decide how much time you have available for study and
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR STUDY WITH MIND MAPS~ AND BOSTe
185

186
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
breaks, and divide it into chunks to cover appropriate sections
of material (10 minutes).
5
Mind Map your existing knowledge of the subject, your
goals and objectives, and the questions you want to answer (20
minutes).
6
Break (5-10 minutes).
7
Take a quick overview of your text book, looking at the
contents, major headings and so on. Then put in the major
branches on your Mind Map (15 minutes).
8
Preview your book, looking at the material in more detail,
and continue building your Mind Map (15 minutes).
9
Lunch break (60 minutes).
10 This is the interview stage during which you can discuss
and resolve your problem areas with others in your study group
(30 minutes).
11 Break (5-10 minutes).
12 Review your book, dealing with any outstanding problems
or questions and filling the final details on your Mind Map (30
minutes).
13 Break (5-10 minutes).
14 This is the exchange during which study group members
present, from your own Mind Maps, a complete summary
of what has been learned from your particular study text.
Each presentation should last about 25 minutes with a 5-10
minute break after the first two. While one member presents,
you should make your own Mind Maps and attempt to gain
an understanding at least equal to that of the presenter. You
should all be able to refine and improve each other's and your
own Mind Maps to the highest possible level.
15 By 4 or 5 in the afternoon, you all have four new books of
information in your head and the only thing you need to do

••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
with the actual text is to have a little browse through to add to
your Mind Maps during the coming year.
o You have achieved an enhanced knowledge of the subject
through Mind Map communication, rather than via linear
notes which diffuse the knowledge.
o Moreover it has been a positive and enjoyable experience,
completely different from the pain and punishment anxieties of
study - so now go out and celebrate!
Benefits of group Mind Map® study
What percentage of the book do you think each one of your
study group will have learned of, say, a book on geography
which includes sections on weather systems, wildlife, geology,
planetary maps and the like? Answer: 75 per cent.
An average student who reads a whole book, and takes ages
to do that, absorbs between 60 and 80 per cent in an entire year
and then forgets up to 80 per cent of it within a week. In other
words, it is better to start 'cramming' at the beginning of the
year. Why spend the whole of the year being terrified about the
looming monstrous tsunami that is coming at you, and in 90
per cent of cases, is going to blow you away? Why wait until the
last moment to stop it? Why don't you push it off the horizon
right at the beginning?
The other advantage of group Mind Map study is that when
your study group is sitting in the second week of lectures, you
will be at the great advantage of already having all the main
texts Mind Mapped. So when your lecturer starts to talk about
a 'new topic for the week', you will already have anticipated it
and have a clear Mind Map in your head before she even begins.
Then, as she brings up interesting ideas, you can simply add
them to your fabulous Mind Map. But it doesn't end there.
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
REVOLUTIONIZE YOUR STUDY WITH MIND MAPS'" AND BOST'"
187

188
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Whatever is said inside or outside the class, lecture hall, or
tutorial in any way associated with that topic, your brain will
have the ultimate network of the synapses to add and grow
- 'snap! snap! snap!' -like a fusion or fission reaction, a critical
mass.
And that's just one subject. How many subjects does a
student study? At this level, four, maybe five - so if there are 30
books you need to read in an academic year, and you are a gang
of four, you can get through them in eight Saturdays, and by the
end of the first two months of the academic year you've got it all
bedded down.
Your future
Your mental armoury is now complete and you are equipped
with a brain of extraordinary power. You have obliterated the
standard obstacles to effective study. You are able to read faster
than 99 per cent of the world's population. You have a newly
supercharged memory. You have knowledge of the theory and
application to study of the world's most powerful thinking,
learning and memory tool, the Mind Map, and you know how
to mobilize the most powerful studying technique, BOST, to
your ultimate advantage.
I look forward to hearing about your exam success!
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••


190
THE BUZAN STUDY SKILLS HANDBOOK
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Answers
Page 95: Eye-cue vocabulary exercise - prefixes
1 prepare; 2 reviewing; 3 depress; 4 comprehension;
5 examinations
Page 97: Eye-cue vocabulary exercise - suffixes
1 practitioner; 2 hedonism; 3 minimal; 4 vociferous;
5 psychology
Page 99: Eye-cue vocabulary exercise - roots
1 querulous; 2 amiable; 3 equinox; 4 chronometer;
5 aerodynamics
••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••

> ••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
Further reading
For those of you who are ready to take your knowledge beyond
the arena of study, my Mind Set series contains in-depth
guidance on how to make maximum use of your mind and YO~H
memory in all aspects of life. The following books are available
from BBC Active:
Use Your Head
The Mind Map® Book
The Illustrated Mind Map® Book
The Speed Reading Book
Use Your Memory
Master Your Memory
•••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••••
FURTHER READING
191

~Your brain is an extraordinary,
super-powered processor capable
of boundless and interconnected
thoughts: if you know how to harness
it, studying will cease to be a fraught
and stressful exercise, and will be
fast, easy andfruitful.' Tony Buzan
Would you like to:
• Discover a route to maximize your success in your studies?
• Be able to read 1000 words per minute?
• Improve your concentration and comprehension?
• Take and make notes even more effectively in lectures and
when reading?
• Memorize and recall what you have learned far more successfully?
• Get into a revision mind-set but still enjoy 'time outs' to relax?
• Prepare with confidence for study, exams and tests?
Over the last 35 years Tony Buzan has been helping adults and
children throughout the world to maximize their mental abilities
through his Mind Mapping, Memory and Speed Reading techniques.
Here, in this handbook, he combines these techniques with his
unique BOST® programme to enable students at all levels to adopt
a new and totally positive way to learn. By putting Buzan's techniques
into practice you will develop the confidence and the skills to fulfil
your own study potential- whatever your subjects or academic level.
Tony Buzan is the inventor of Mind Maps® and the world's leading
authority on the brain and learning. His books have achieved massive
success in more than 100 countries and have been translated into 30
languages. He lectures worldwide and acts as advisor to numerous
multi-national companies and governments.
DESIGNED BY
REJDEJ©

