The Mereological foundation
of Megethology
Massimiliano Carrara, Enrico Martino
FISPPA Department, University of Padua (Italy)
April 24, 2015
Abstract
In Mathematics is megethology (Lewis, 1993) David K. Lewis pro-
poses a structuralist reconstruction of classical set theory based on
mereology. In order to formulate suitable hypotheses about the size of
the universe of individuals without the help of set-theoretical notions,
he uses the device of Boolos’ plural quantiﬁcation for treating second
order logic without commitment to set-theoretical entities.
In this paper we show how, assuming the existence of a pairing
function on atoms, as the unique assumption non expressed in a mere-
ological language, a mereological foundation of set theory is achievable
within ﬁrst order logic. Furthermore, we show how a mereological cod-
iﬁcation of ordered pairs is achievable with a very restricted use of the
notion of plurality without plural quantiﬁcation.
1

1
Introduction
David Lewis (Lewis, 1993) proposes a reconstruction of classical set theory
grounded on mereology and plural quantiﬁcation (see also (Lewis, 1991)).1
Mereology is the theory of parthood relation. One of its ﬁrst formaliza-
tions is Leonard and Goodman Calculus of individuals ((Leonard & Good-
man, 1940), 33-40).2
Plural quantiﬁcation is a reinterpretation of second
order monadic logic, proposed by Boolos in (Boolos, 1984), (Boolos, 1985).3
In Boolos’ perspective second order monadic logic is ontologically innocent:
contrary to the most accredited view, it doesn’t entail any commitment to
classes or to properties but only to individuals, as ﬁrst order logic does.
Acccording to Boolos, second order quantiﬁcation diﬀers from ﬁrst order
quantiﬁcation only in that it refers to individuals plurally, while the latter
refers to individuals singularly.
By combining mereology with plural quantiﬁcation, Lewis in (Lewis,
1993) introduces megethology, a powerful framework in which one can for-
mulate strong assumptions about the size of the universe of individuals (cor-
responding to the existence of strongly inaccessible cardinals). Within such
a framework Lewis develops a structuralist class theory, where the role of
classes is played by individuals. Thus, accepting Boolos’ thesis about the
innocence of second order logic, Lewis achieves an ontological reduction of
classes to individuals.
Boolos’ view, however, though very attractive, is highly controversial. It
1For an analysis of the power of mereology and plural quantiﬁcation see also Geoﬀrey
Hellman’s (Hellman, 1996) and (Hellman, 2009).
2For a general survey of mereology see (Varzi, 2012).
3A general introduction to plural quantiﬁcation is in (Linnebo, 2013).
2

has faced the criticism of several philosophers of mathematics, (Parsons in
(Parsons, 1990), Resnik in (Resnik, 1988) and, more recently, Linnebo, for
example in (Linnebo, 2003)). Quine’s old claim that second order logic is “set
theory in disguise” doesn’t seem to have lost all its advocates. Be that as it
may, we think that, in order to better estimate the foundational power of the
mereological component, it is worth trying to develop mgethology without
the help of plural quantiﬁcation.
Though in the Lewis’ paper plural quantiﬁcation is used extensively, a
careful analysis shows that it plays an essential role only as a device for
providing a mereological codiﬁcation of ordered pairs. This is surely an in-
teresting step. However, the notion of ordered pair is certainly not one of the
most problematic notions of set theory. Therefore giving up plural quantiﬁ-
cation and taking ordered pairs as primitive seems to be a natural move in
order to make the mereological conception of set theory more perspicuous.4
Accordingly, we will propose a version of megethology within ﬁrst order
logic with identity by using, besides the mereological part-whole relation ≤,
a primitive pairing function ( , ) from ordered pairs of atoms to atoms. In
this framework we will develop a structuralist interpretation of set theory
with proper classes (in the Von Neumann-Goedel-Bernays style). In the last
section we will show how a suitable mereological codiﬁcation of ordered pairs
of atoms by atoms is achievable with a restricted use of the notion of plurality
that does not involve plural quantiﬁcation.
4(Hellman, 1989) and (Feferman & Hellman, 1995) also incorporated primitive pairing
in their systems.
3

2
Mereological axioms
The language ML of megethology is a ﬁrst order language with identity.
Variables x, y,... range over individuals. The primitive non-logical constants
are the binary relation ≤(x ≤y is to be read “x is part of y”) and the pairing
function ( , ) from ordered pairs of atoms to atoms.
1.1 Axiom. ≤is a partial order (reﬂexive, antisymmetric, transitive).
x < y (x is a proper part of y) ifdf. x ≤y and x ̸= y.
x is an atom ifdf. it has no proper parts.
1.2 Axiom. Every individual has an atomic part.
Fusion schema:
1.3 Axiom. ∃zφ →∃!y∀x(x atom →(x ≤y ↔∃z(φ ∧x ≤z)), where φ
is a formula with possible parameters and without x, y free.
Such y is the fusion of the φ’s. (in words: if there are some φ’s, there is
the fusion of all φ’s).
From 1.2 and 1.3 it follows that every individual is the fusion of its atoms.
Besides it follows that:
1.4 Extensionality.
Two individuals are equal iﬀthey have the same
atoms.
1.5 Complementation. Every individual has a complement.
If all φ’s have some part in common, we deﬁne the product of the φ’s as
the fusion of all their common parts.
4

1.6 Axiom for the pairing function. (x, y) = (u, z) ↔x = u ∧y = z,
where x, y, u, z are atoms as well as the codes of the ordered pairs.
3
Axioms on the size of the universe
Using the pairing function, we can correlate atoms by means of individuals.
An atom-relation (brieﬂy a-relation) is a fusion of ordered pairs of atoms.
In particular, a function is a many-one-a-relation. Such a function can
be extended in a natural way to non atomic individuals by mapping an
individual into the fusion of the images of its atoms.
Following (Lewis, 1991) we say that an individual is small if there is no
1-1-a-relation between its atoms and all atoms of the universe V.
An individual x is (Dedekind) inﬁnite if there is a 1-1-a-relation between
its atoms and the atoms of a proper part of x.
The following axioms assure that V (the fusion of all atoms) is very big:
2.1 Axiom. Some small individual is inﬁnite.
Let r be an a-relation. We say that the atom x r-represents the individual
y if, for all atoms z, z ≤y iﬀ(z, x) ≤r.
The following axiom of representability enables us to represent small in-
dividuals by atoms:
2.2 Axiom. There is an a-relation r such that every small individual has
a unique r-representative.
Such an a-relation will be called a representing a-relation.
5

2.3 Axiom. If x is small and r is a representing a-relation, then the fusion
of all r-representatives of parts of x is small.
It is worth noting that Axioms 2.2 and 2.3 are independent of the pre-
ceding ones, as the following counter-examples show:
About 2.2. Suppose that the size of the universe is a cardinal α, with ℵ0 <
α < c (the cardinality of the continuum), what is compatible with the failure
of the continuum hypothesis. Then 2.1 holds because any countable individual
is small. But, in order to represent by atoms the parts of a denumerable
individual, c-many atoms are needed; so 2.2 fails.
About 2.3. Consider set theory without the power axiom. This theory can
be interpreted in a universe of sets, where all inﬁnite sets are denumerable.
Interpreting small individuals as sets and atoms as singletons, 2.1 and 2.2
hold, but 2.3 fails, because the singletons of the parts of a denumerable set
do not form a set.
2.4 Axiom of choice. There is an a-function that maps each representative
atom into an atom of the represented individual.
4
Interpretation of set theory
Let r be a representing a-relation.
Let u be an atom that is not an r-
representative (since V is inﬁnite, we can assume that such an atom exists).
Relative to r and u we deﬁne a model of set theory.
We shall refer to
the Kelley-Morse axiomatization of class theory, as formulated in (Kelley &
Stone, 1955).
6

Let U be the mereological product of all individuals x such that (i) u ≤x
and (ii) the r-representative of any small part of x is a part of x.
In other words, U is the smallest individual, including u, and closed under
r-representation.
Take as classes the parts of U and use capital letters X, Y, Z,...
as
variables for classes. Deﬁne membership as follows:
X ∈Y ifdf. X is small and its r-representative is part of Y.
A class X is a set ifdf., for some Y, X ∈Y.
It follows immediately that a class is a set iﬀit is small.
We will prove that all the main axioms of the Kelley-Morse class theory
hold.
3.1 Lemma. Every atom of U, diﬀerent from u, is an r-representative.
Proof. Let y be an atom, diﬀerent from u, which is not an r-representative.
The fusion x of all atoms of U, diﬀerent from y, satisﬁes conditions (i), (ii)
of the deﬁnition of U. Hence y is not part of U. ■
So u is the unique class without members and will be denoted by 0.
3.2 Extensionality. If two classes have the same members, they are iden-
tical.
Proof. It follows from the lemma that classes with the same members are
fusions of the same atoms.■
7

3.3 Comprehension. Let φ be a formula of class theory, whose free vari-
ables are among X, Z1,. . . , Zn. For all classes Z1,. . . , Zn, there is a class Y
whose members are just the sets X such that φ.
We introduce the usual notation Y = {X : φ}.
Proof. Given Z1,..., Zn, if there is some set X such that φ, then Y is
the fusion of the r-representatives of all sets satisfying φ; otherwise Y = 0.■
Standard class-theoretical notions are deﬁned as usual.
X ⊂Y means that X is a subclass of Y, including the case that X = Y.
2X =df. {Y : Y ⊂X }.
From axiom 2.3 we get immediately
3.4 Subsets. If X is a set, so is 2X.
{X ,Y }= df.{Z: Z = X ∨Z = Y }.
3.5 Pairs. {X , Y} is a set.
Proof. {X , Y } is 0, if both X and Y are proper classes. Otherwise it is
the fusion of at most two atoms, so it is small.■
Ordered pairs are deﬁned in the usual way.
Relations are (possibly
proper) classes of ordered pairs. Functions are many-one relations. If the
domain of a function is small, so is clearly its range. Thus
3.6 Substitution. If the domain of a function is a set, so is its range.
8

3.7 Union. If X is a set, so is S X.
Proof. Suppose, by reduction, that S X is a proper class. Then it has
the same size as U and we can suppose U = S X. For any class Y, the
intersections of Y with the members of X are (by 3.6) the members of a set
Y *. By mapping Y into Y *, we get a bijection between classes and sets.
This leads to an absurdity, arguing as in Cantor’s theorem.■
3.8 Regularity. If X ̸= 0, there is a member Y of X such that X ∩Y = 0.
Proof. Let x be the fusion of all atoms n satisfying the following condition:
for every individual y such that n ≤y, there is an atom m ≤y such that,
for no atom p ≤y , (p , m ) ≤r. It is easily seen that x satisﬁes conditions
(i), (ii) of the deﬁnition of U. So U ≤x and the theorem follows.■
By using the foregoing set-theoretical axioms, one can deﬁne ordinal num-
bers and show that they are the members of a proper class, which is well-
ordered by membership. Since proper classes have the same size as U, there
is a well-order of U and the axiom of choice follows:
3.9 Choice. There is a choice function that assigns to every set one of its
members.
5
Categoricity
Our model U of class theory is relative to the arbitrary choice of r and u. We
want to show that the models obtained by changing r and u are isomorphic.
9

Categoricity. Let r′, u′ be an a-relation and an atom satisfying the same
conditions as r, u and let U ′ be the relative model of class theory. Then there
is an a-function h (extended to individuals in the natural way) through which
U and U ′ are isomorphic.
Proof. We will deﬁne, by transﬁnite induction, for every ordinal α of U,
a 1 −1−a-function hα from a part of U to a part of U ′ such that
(i) hα (u) = u′;
(ii) If hα (a) = a′ where a, a′ are atoms, then either a = u and a′ = u′, or a
is the r-representative of x, a′ the r′-representative of x′ and hα(x) = x′.
Put:
(1) h0 (u) = u′;
(2) hα+1 extends hα as follows: for every x, x′ such that hα(x) = x′, put
hα+1(a) = a’, where a is the r-representative of x and a′ the r′-representative
of x′.
(3) hα = ∪β<α hβ, for α limit.
One recognizes, by transﬁnite induction, that all functions are 1-1 and
satisfy clauses (i) and (ii).
We claim that the fusion h of all hα is the required isomorphism.
Let D be the domain of h and, for each α, Dα the domain of hα. Of
course, D ≤U. In order to show that D = U, we have to prove that D is
closed under r-representation. Observe that all Dα are small. For, if Dα is
10

small, so is Dα+1, by 2.3; besides, the fusion of a bounded sequence of small
individuals is small. Hence, by induction, every Dα is small. Now, let x be
a small part of D. Since the atoms of x are few and each of them occurs in
some Dα, x is part of some Dα and its representative is part of Dα+1. Thus
D is closed under r-representation; and hence D = U.
Similarly, the codomain of h is the whole U ′. For, observe that the height
of the ordinals of U ′ is the same as that of the ordinals of U, since it is
determined by the size of the universe of atoms.
Besides, it is plain that h preserves membership, so that it is an isomor-
phism between U and U ′.■
It is worth noticing that our result of categoricity presupposes an absolute
sense of the mereological notions of part and of fusion. In virtue of that non-
standard models are ruled out.
Besides, notice that categoricity shows the independence of the set theo-
retic structure of the choice of the representing relation and the non-representing
atom, but the structure still depends on the size of the universe of atoms.
Changing the universe of atoms one gets a result of quasi-categoricity: one
of the models is isomorphic to a segment of the other.5
Thus, the mereological structure of individuals determines, up to isomor-
phism, a model of class theory.
We can conclude that the conception of a big universe of individuals,
mereologically structured, provides, with the help of any given pairing func-
tion, an adequate framework for a structuralist foundation of class theory.
5The situation is very similar to Zermelo’s quasi-categoricity. See on that (Hellman,
2002).
11

6
Consistency of megethology
We want to observe that megethology is, in turn, interpretable in Kelley-
Morse class theory, so that it is consistent relatively to the latter.
For, take non-empty classes as individuals, singletons of sets as atoms,
subclasses as parts. Deﬁne the pairing function by putting
(x, y) =df. {{x}, {x ,y}}, where x, y are singletons.
As it is known, it is provable from Kelley-Morse axioms that a class is
proper iﬀit is equinumerous with the total class U (see (Fraenkel, Bar-
Hillel, & Levy, 1973, p.137)). So sets are small classes and we can deﬁne a
representing a-relation r as follows: (x , y) ≤r iﬀ, for some set z, x is the
singleton of a member of z and y the singleton of z.
All axioms of megethology are straightforwardly veriﬁable.
7
A mereological codiﬁcation of ordered pairs
Our development of megethology, without plural quantiﬁcation, with the
help of a primitive pairing function, puts forward that Lewis’ use of plural
quantiﬁcation serves only the purpose of supplying a mereological codiﬁca-
tion of ordered pairs. We want to show that even for this purpose plural
quantiﬁcation is overwhelming.
Lewis codiﬁes ordered pairs of atoms as biatoms, relative to certain given
pluralities of individuals. In this way he can identify a binary relation with
a certain plurality of biatoms. So quantiﬁcation over relations is understood
as plural quantiﬁcation.
We will show that, with a suitable modiﬁcation
12

of Lewis’ strategy, ordered pairs of atoms can be codiﬁed by single atoms
(instead of biatoms). In this way an a-relation can be understood as a fusion
of atoms, i.e.
as a single individual, and quantiﬁcation over relations is
reduced to ﬁrst order quantiﬁcation.
Following a Burgess’ idea (Burgess, Hazen, & Lewis, 1991), assume that
the universe U of atoms is divided in three microcosms U1, U2, U3 of the same
cardinality of U and pairwise non-overlapping. Let f be a 1-1 map from U3
to U1 and g a 1-1-map from U3 to U2, understood as pluralities of biatoms.
So every atom of U3 has a counterpart in U1 and a counterpart in U2. Let A
be a plurality of three-atoms satisfying the following conditions:
(i) for every x in U1, y in U2 there is a unique z in U3 such that x + y + z
is in A;
(ii) every atom in U3 can occur in a unique three-atom of A.
Relative to the pluralities f, g and A, we can codify the ordered pairs of
U3: if x and y are atoms of U3, take as ordered pair (x, y) the unique z in U3
such that f(x) + g(y) + z is in A. In this way the ordered pairs of atoms of
U3 are deﬁned mereologically, relative to a ﬁnite number of ﬁxed pluralities,
i.e. f, g, and A. Of course, the restriction of ordered pairs to U3 is suﬃcient
for the reconstruction of megethology: since the size of U3 is the same as
that of U, once ordered pairs are deﬁned, one can build megethology on the
universe U3.
13

8
Conclusions
In this paper we have shown that – provided a machinery for pairing is taken
as primitive – mereology is adequate to a reformulation of megethology in
ﬁrst order logic with identity.
Besides, we have proved that, in order to develop megethology, ordered
pairs can be restricted to atoms and can be codiﬁed by means of ﬁnitely
many pluralities without involving plural quantiﬁcation.
We have proved in (Carrara & Martino, 2014) that, in turn, plural quan-
tiﬁcation is adequate to a reformulation of megethology without the help
of mereology. The two results show that Lewis’ framework, endorsing both
mereology and plural quantiﬁcation, is overwhelming and stress the power of
each of the two components separately.
9
Acknowledgments
We would like to thank the referees of the JPL for the helpful comments and
suggestions.
References
Boolos, G. (1984). To be is to be a value of a variable (or to be some values
of some variables). The Journal of Philosophy, 81(8), 430–449.
Boolos, G. (1985). Nominalist platonism. The Philosophical Review, 94(3),
327–344.
14

Burgess, J. P., Hazen, A., & Lewis, D. (1991). Appendix on pairing. D.
Lewis, Parts of Classes, Blackwell, Oxford, 121–149.
Carrara, M., & Martino, E. (2014). Grounding megethology on plural refer-
ence. Studia Logica, Online.
Feferman, S., & Hellman, G. (1995). Predicative foundations of arithmetic.
Journal of Philosophical Logic, 24(1), 1–17.
Fraenkel, A., Bar-Hillel, Y., & Levy, A. (1973). Foundations of set theory
north-holland. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Hellman, G.
(1989).
Mathematics without numbers:
towards a modal-
structural interpretation. Oxford University Press.
Hellman, G. (1996). Structuralism without structures. Philosophia Mathe-
matica, 4(2), 100–123.
Hellman, G. (2002). Maximality vs. extendability: reﬂections on structural-
ism and set theory. In Reading natural philosophy: Essays in the history
and philosophy of science and mathematics (pp. 335–361). La Salle, IL:
Open Court.
Hellman, G.
(2009).
Mereology in philosophy of mathematics.
In
H. Burkhardt, J. Seibt, & G. Imaguire (Eds.), Handbook of mereology.
M¨unchen: Philosophia Verlag.
Kelley, J. L., & Stone, M. (1955). General topology (Vol. 233). van Nostrand
Princeton.
Leonard, H. S., & Goodman, N. (1940). The calculus of individuals and its
uses. The Journal of Symbolic Logic, 5(2), 45–55.
Lewis, D. (1991). Parts of classes. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, D. (1993). Mathematics in megethology. Philosophia Mathematica,
15

1(1), 3–23.
Linnebo, Ø. (2003). Plural quantiﬁcation exposed. Noˆus, 37(1), 71–92.
Linnebo, Ø.
(2013).
Plural quantiﬁcation.
In E. N. Zalta (Ed.),
The
stanford
encyclopedia
of
philosophy
(Spring
2013
ed.).
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/spr2013/entries/plural-quant/.
Parsons, C. (1990). The structuralist view of mathematical objects. Synthese,
84(3), 303–346.
Resnik, M. D. (1988). Second-order logic still wild. The Journal of philoso-
phy, 85(2), 75–87.
Varzi,
A.
(2012).
Mereology.
In
E.
N.
Zalta
(Ed.),
The
stanford
encyclopedia
of
philosophy
(Winter
2012
ed.).
http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/win2012/entries/mereology/.
16

