

This book is dedicated to all of the scholars who have labored at the margins
of their disciplines to help create more equitable and more effective forms of
social research and to you, the reader, in gratitude for your interest and
in hopes that you will expand upon and improve all that you find here.


Copyright 2011 by SAGE Publications, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, or by any
information storage and retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
For information:
SAGE Publications, Inc.
SAGE Publications India Pvt. Ltd.
2455 Teller Road
B 1/I 1 Mohan Cooperative
Thousand Oaks,
Industrial Area
California 91320
Mathura Road, New Delhi 110 044
E-mail: order@sagepub.com
India
SAGE Publications Ltd.
SAGE Publications Asia-Pacific Pte. Ltd.
1 Oliver’s Yard
33 Pekin Street #02-01
55 City Road
Far East Square
London EC1Y 1SP
Singapore 048763
United Kingdom
Printed in the United States of America
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Pascale, Celine-Marie, 1956-
Cartographies of knowledge: exploring qualitative epistemologies / Celine-Marie
Pascale.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4129-5496-9 (pbk.)
1. Social sciences—Research. 2. Qualitative research. I. Title.
H62.P313 2011
001.4′2—dc22
2010022051
This book is printed on acid-free paper.
10
11
12
13
14
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Acquisitions Editor:
Vicki Knight
Associate Editor:
Lauren Habib
Editorial Assistant:
Ashley Dodd
Production Editor:
Catherine M. Chilton
Copy Editor:
Megan Markanich
Typesetter:
C&M Digitals (P) Ltd.
Proofreader:
Annette R. Van Deusen
Indexer:
Molly Hall
Cover Designer:
Glenn Vogel
Marketing Manager:
Stephanie Adams
Permissions:
Karen Ehrmann and Adele Hutchinson

BRIEF CONTENTS

Preface
ix
About the Author
xvii
1. Introduction
1
2. Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
13
3. Analytic Induction
39
4. Symbolic Interaction
77
5. Ethnomethodology
105
6. Social Research: Drawing New Maps
139
References
169
Index
181

DETAILED CONTENTS

Preface
ix
Organization of the Book
xi
Outline of the Chapters
xiii
Acknowledgments
xv
About the Author
xvii
1. Introduction
1
Mapping the Journey
1
Familiar Intellectual Geographies
6
Implications for Social Research
11
Concluding Thoughts
11
Further Reading
12
2. Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
13
Introduction
13
The Changing Discourses of Social Science
16
Feminist and Critical Race Challenges
to Qualitative Research
18
Interpretive Challenges to Social Research
21
Philosophy and Practice
24
Ontology and Epistemology
28
Subjectivity
30
Agency
33
Experience
34
Implications for Social Research
35
Concluding Thoughts
37
Further Reading
38

3. Analytic Induction
39
Introduction
39
Analytic Induction: A Brief History
40
Analytic Induction, Postpositivism, and Social Constructionism
47
The Basic Premise of Contemporary Analytic Induction
53
Analysis of Newspaper, Television, and Interview Exemplars
55
Newspaper Analysis
56
Television Analysis
59
Interview Analysis
64
Implications for Social Research
70
Concluding Thoughts
75
Further Reading
76
4. Symbolic Interaction
77
Introduction
77
Symbolic Interaction: A Brief History
78
The Basic Premise of Symbolic Interaction
87
Analysis of Newspaper, Television, and Interview Exemplars
89
Newspaper Analysis
89
Television Analysis
95
Interview Analysis
98
Implications for Social Research
102
Concluding Thoughts
104
Further Reading
104
5. Ethnomethodology
105
Introduction
105
Ethnomethodology: A Brief History
108
The Basic Premise of Ethnomethodology
116
Analysis of Newspaper, Television, and Interview Exemplars
118
Newspaper Analysis
119
Television Analysis
124
Interview Analysis
129
Implications for Social Research
134
Concluding Thoughts
137
Further Reading
138
6. Social Research: Drawing New Maps
139
Introduction
139
The Problems of Social Research Revisited
141
Mining New Media With an Old Tool
146

A Matter of Ethics: The Making of a Social Scientist
151
Revisiting Subjectivity, Agency, and Experience
153
Envisioning Social Epistemologies
157
Implications for Social Research
163
Concluding Thoughts
166
Further Reading
167
References
169
Index
181

ix
PREFACE

C
artographies of Knowledge: Exploring Qualitative Epistemologies exam-
ines the theoretical foundations that shape both the premise and logic of
qualitative social research. It critiques the politics of knowledge production by
exploring some of the ways that a 19th-century philosophy of science both
enables and constrains qualitative research in the 21st century. In particular,
Cartographies of Knowledge illustrates how qualitative social research constructs
knowledge that is recognized as credible social science by exploring analytic
induction, symbolic interaction, and ethnomethodology.
Arguably, analytic induction is the defining logic of qualitative inquiry. It
is foundational to qualitative research—including the prominent interpretive
strategies of symbolic interaction and ethnomethodology. At the same time,
the logic of analytic induction is used frequently with postpositivist and social
constructionist research. Consequently, the chapter on analytic induction as a
method of inquiry (Chapter 3) includes considerations of postpostivism as well
as various forms of social constructionism. Further, since analytic induction is
frequently practiced as a variation of grounded theory, this chapter also under-
takes discussion of the logic and techniques of analytic induction in relation to
those of grounded theory.
Symbolic interaction is the earliest form of interpretive research and
remains one of the most common styles of interpretive research practiced
today. Four variations of symbolic interaction are now embodied in distinct
schools of research—the collection of which point to the longevity, intellec-
tual diversity, and prominence of the field. Cartographies of Knowledge delin-
eates the history and practices associated with each school as well as their

relationships to analytic induction as a method of inquiry. while eth-
nomethodology is less widely used than symbolic interaction, it is a distinctive
interpretive framework and represents the efforts of scholars to systematically
challenge the foundations of qualitative research. Indeed the field began with
scholars questioning the processes used to create knowledge that is recogniz-
able as “science.” Both symbolic interaction and ethnomethodology offer
particular insights into how scholars have challenged dominant research para-
digms in the past and offer tangible insights into the promise and problems of
transforming the practices of qualitative social research today.
Throughout the book, I argue that the philosophical foundations embed-
ded in the premise and logic of qualitative analysis render knowledge that is
incomplete and, at times, distorted. As a qualitative researcher, my critique is not
intended to find fault with qualitative research (as opposed to quantitative).
Rather, I aim to provide deeper understanding of the methodologies I most
value in order to suggest alternatives that may be capable of more fully appre-
hending porous social contexts and routine of relations of power in the 21st
century. My critique of qualitative research is both a historical analysis of the
limits that are imposed on qualitative research and an experiment with provo-
cations for going beyond them.
Cartographies of Knowledge makes an unusual and practical contribution
by combining a study of specific methodologies with corresponding analyses
of empirical data. while there are many excellent books on research method-
ology that offer important critiques of epistemology and ontology (cf. Denzin,
Lincoln, & Smith, 2008; Haraway, 1991; Harding, 1987, 1991, 2007;
Ramazanoğlu & Holland, 2002; Sandoval, 2000; Smith, 2004), Cartographies
of Knowledge takes up both theory and praxis by illustrating how the theoret-
ical foundations of analytic induction, symbolic interaction, and ethnomethod-
ology enable and constrain specific empirical analyses. It demonstrates how
each framework functions differently in the production of social science
knowledge.
Cartographies of Knowledge is substantially different from existing liter-
ature in three key ways. First, it provides historical overviews of the develop-
ment of each framework that are intended to illustrate the theoretical and
philosophical assumptions inherent in each. All social research advances not
only substantive findings but also an implicit view of the social world that
includes a politics of culture, knowledge, and power. Second, Cartographies
of Knowledge applies each analytical framework to exactly the same set of
x
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOwLEDGE

Preface
xi
data, thus more clearly demonstrating how each framework animates social
research differently. Collectively, these chapters will demonstrate how ana-
lytic strategies elide, as well as produce, knowledge. Third, Cartographies of
Knowledge has a very specific concern with issues of agency, subjectivity, and
experience, and in this sense, it considers the political effects of analytical
strategies. Typically discussions of agency and subjectivity are considered to
be the domain of critical social theory; they are rarely central points of dis-
cussion in social research methods. Yet within every method is a theory of
agency and subjectivity. More recently methods books, particularly those con-
cerned with issues of reflexivity, have taken up important issues of subjectiv-
ity and agency with respect to the role of the researcher and data collection.
However, these books are not focused on issues of ontology and epistemology
that underpin social sciences, nor do they consider how social research ani-
mates particular conceptions of agency, subjectivity, and experience. I argue
that researchers need more explicit understandings of how qualitative strate-
gies themselves animate particular conceptions of agency, subjectivity, and
experience. Cartographies of Knowledge is rooted to feminist, critical race
and poststructural critiques—it was written with the hope of strengthening
qualitative social research and encouraging more and different critiques.
ORGANIzATION OF THE BOOK
Despite progressive work on methodology, there is a general disconnect
between methodological critiques of epistemology and ontology and discus-
sion of the pragmatics of data collection and analysis. This book sets out to fill
that void. Cartographies of Knowledge applies each framework to several
styles of empirical data to illustrate how the different philosophical founda-
tions of each framework are expressed in the relative abilities of each frame-
work. The analyses demonstrate the effectiveness of each framework with
respect to newspaper articles, television drama, and semistructured interviews.
My intention in using three sources of data is to illustrate how analytic
induction, symbolic interaction, and ethnomethodology each approach com-
monly used sources of data in the social sciences. Newspaper articles, televi-
sion drama, and research interviews also proved to be efficient resources for
generating exemplars—as compared with other common forms of empirical
research such as ethnography, focus groups, participant observation, and

action research. The variety of empirical data helps to showcase the breadth
and depth of each analytical framework. At the same time, I believe that the
analytical issues illustrated in this book can be usefully translated to other
forms of empirical data derived from qualitative data collection.
All empirical excerpts appear as originally collected; they are not scripted
or edited. Throughout I treat each as analytical exemplars. Specifically, in
each of Chapters 3, 4, and 5, I examine an article from the New York Times
about resistance to including Oscar Pistorius (“the fastest man on no legs”)
(Longman, 2007) in the 2008 Olympics; an excerpt about same-sex marriage
from the ABC television drama Brothers and Sisters; and an excerpt from an
interview that I did with Tony Romero, an Esselen Indian (in the excerpt, he
talks about racialized violence in his youth).1 The newspaper, television, and
interview excerpts articulate contemporary concerns regarding ability, sexual-
ity, and race, respectively.
Cartographies of Knowledge breaks with what has become the more
expected social science trilogy of race, class, and gender. Analyses of ability,
sexuality, and race—frequently understood as essential categories of identity—
are especially vibrant resources for illustrating the implications of various con-
ceptions of agency, subjectivity, and experience. As a result, the exemplars
offer an effective way to demonstrate how each research framework both
relies upon and generates different understandings of culture, knowledge,
power, and privilege. Overall this focus provides a fresh approach with impor-
tant and potentially engaging contexts.
Although I treat data excerpts as exemplars, I also offer a necessary
caveat: They do not come from complete research designs and therefore can-
not be the basis of a comprehensive analysis. However, by using analytic
induction, symbolic interaction, and ethnomethodology to analyze the same
empirical data, I illustrate the various ways that each framework interprets the
same excerpts and demonstrate how theoretical underpinnings establish com-
mitments regarding the nature and possibilities of agency subjectivity and
experience. In the process, I critically examine the construction of what comes
to be seen as evidence.
Although scholars often use critical race theory, feminist theory, and/or
poststructural theory in combination with analytic induction, symbolic
xii
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOwLEDGE
1Tony Romero is a pseudonym used throughout the book.

interaction, and ethnomethodology, the ensuing chapters do not. The analy-
ses in Chapters 3, 4, and 5 are not intended to show the creative and com-
plex ways in which scholars incorporate theory and methods. Rather the
analyses seek to demonstrate the underlying philosophical premises that
shape all qualitative research—despite the various theoretical strategies that
scholars might use to compensate for particular limitations. My intention is
to produce bare bones analyses that bring the foundational assumptions of
qualitative research clearly to the surface. Chapters 3, 4, and 5 collectively
demonstrate the significant differences among analytic induction, symbolic
interaction, and ethnomethodology; they also demonstrate how these frame-
works are constrained in surprisingly similar ways. Collectively, the chap-
ters build as a form of argument that leads to the provocation in Chapter 6
calling for a fundamental change in the philosophical foundations of quali-
tative research.
OUTLINE OF THE CHAPTERS
Cartographies of Knowledge begins with a chapter that defines the large ques-
tions of ontology, epistemology, and social justice that run throughout the
book. It also elaborates on the relationship of analytic induction to interpretive
research. Chapter 2 examines the historical terrain that shaped qualitative
research and situates the development of research paradigms within philo-
sophical debates about the nature of self, society, and interaction. This context
establishes the importance and implications of how researchers conceptualize
agency, subjectivity, and experience. Chapters 3, 4, and 5 each presents a sin-
gle analytical framework. These three chapters begin with a general introduc-
tion and are then divided into four primary sections.
• The first section provides a historical context and an intellectual tra-
jectory in relation to the key points of the framework. It offers a
descriptive (rather than critical) overview of the development of the
framework and renders a pragmatic consideration of the theoretical/
philosophical foundations that give rise to particular conceptions of
agency, subjectivity, and experience. This section concludes by tracing
the development of various schools within each framework and funda-
mental differences/debates among them.
Preface
xiii

• The second section summarizes the framework’s central points to ori-
ent the reader to the key distinguishing features of the framework as it
is most commonly used today and as it will be used to analyze the
excerpts.
• The third section systematically analyzes newspaper, television, and
interview excerpts. In order to illustrate the power of each frame-
work, the analyses treat the excerpts as exemplars of patterns that
articulate substantive findings. Exactly the same configuration of
data is analyzed in each chapter, giving readers a clear way to com-
pare how each framework generates different problems, solutions,
and conclusions.
 Each analysis is followed by a critique that analyzes the possibili-
ties that are opened or foreclosed by the framework. It draws out the
implications of the particular conceptions of ontology, epistemol-
ogy, agency, subjectivity, and experience that are embedded in the
framework.
• The fourth section builds upon the critiques of newspaper, televi-
sion, and interview analyses to explore how “scientific research” is
accomplished. It seeks to answer questions such as How does
this framework help or hinder understanding of routinized relations
of power and privilege? what relations of power and privilege
come to be visible? what are the implications for understanding
culture, knowledge, and power? In addition, each analytic chapter
offers concluding thoughts that emphasize the dilemmas and
issues raised in the chapter and closes with suggestions for further
reading.
The sixth and final chapter is a provocation toward rethinking the philo-
sophical foundations and implications of empiricism in social research. It joins
with, and extends, indispensable critiques of methodology in relation to dom-
inant social research strategies. Chapter 6 draws together, and expands upon,
the analyses of earlier chapters to reconsider the purpose of a social science
and to argue for social epistemologies. Ultimately, this chapter offers grounds
for rethinking social research in relation to the politics of production of knowl-
edge and offers potential solutions to the limitations posed by existing quali-
tative frameworks.
xiv
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOwLEDGE

ACKNOwLEDGMENTS
I owe a special debt of gratitude to my family and friends for their loving sup-
port that continues to sustain me. I especially want to thank Mercedes Santos
for her love and for being a transformative force in my life. Many people
provided critical feedback on earlier drafts of this book. In particular, this
book benefitted enormously from the insights and suggestions that emerged
from long and ongoing conversations with Ezerbet Barat and John Kelly.
Their intellectual contributions vastly improved my work. I want to thank
Melanie Heath for generously reading multiple drafts of this manuscript; her
comments have been invaluable. Ian Bruff, Shobha Gurung, and Corinne
Kirschner also provided thoughtful perspectives and clarifying comments on
an earlier draft. I owe Chanda Cook an enormous debt of thanks for the excel-
lent research assistance she provided throughout. In addition, I want to
acknowledge rich conversations on epistemology, ontology, and social
research that I have enjoyed both with Patrick Thaddeus Jackson and with the
doctoral students of the Graduate Research Cluster: Jesse Crane-Seeber,
Shaconna Haley, Jacon Stump, Malinda Rhone, Maria Amelia Viteri, Arventia
washington, and Briana weadock.
I am deeply appreciative of American University for providing institu-
tional support that enabled me to complete this book. As well, I am grateful to
my colleagues at American University, the Congress for Qualitative Inquiry,
and the International Sociological Association (ISA) for sustained and sus-
taining conversations on the politics of social research.
I owe a special debt to the editorial staff at SAGE, including Lisa
Cuevas-Shaw and Margo Crouppen for their vision and encouragement in
the early days of this project and most especially to Vicki Knight, who
guided this book to completion. I also want to thank Ashley Dodd, Megan
Markanich, and Catherine M. Chilton for contributing their thoughtful
expertise to the production of this book. From planning to completion, this
book benefitted from 3 review cycles and a total of 18 outside reviews.
while this sounds arduous, it was terrifically supportive. I want to thank all
of the following reviewers for contributing their time and expertise to help
make this a better book.
Ellen M. Broido
Bowling Green State University
Preface
xv

Carol Chetkovich
Mills College
Thomas Cushman
Wellesley College
Sarah Amira De la Garza
Arizona State University
Patrick Dilley
Associate Professor of Higher Education and Qualitative Research
Southern Illinois University Carbondale
Marco Gemignani
Psychology Department, Duquesne University
Elizabeth McGibbon
St. Francis Xavier University
sj Miller
Indiana University of Pennsylvania
Patricia Somers
University of Texas at Austin
Elizabeth Adams St.Pierre
University of Georgia
Karen M. Staller
University of Michigan School of Social Work
Of course, the remaining shortcomings are mine alone.
My deepest gratitude goes to the many scholars cited in this book whose
critical scholarship has sustained, inspired, and transformed qualitative social
research.
xvi
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOwLEDGE

xvii

ABOUT THE AUTHOR
Celine-Marie Pascale is an associate professor of sociology at American
University in washington, DC, where she teaches courses on language and
inequalities. with a doctorate in sociology and a certificate in women’s stud-
ies from the University of California, Santa Cruz, Pascale pursues research
regarding issues of culture, knowledge, and power. In 2008, she received the
Distinguished Contribution to Scholarship Book Award from the American
Sociological Association Section on Race, Gender, and Class for a distin-
guished and significant contribution to the development of the integrative field
of race, gender, and class for her first book Making Sense of Race, Class and
Gender: Commonsense, Power and Privilege in the United States (Routledge,
2007). Her third book, Inequality & The Politics of Representation: A Global
Landscape, is due out from SAGE in 2012. Pascale also has published her
research in journals that include Cultural Sociology, Current Sociology,
Qualitative Inquiry, Studies in Symbolic Interactions, Advances in Gender
Research, Cultural Studies ↔Critical Methodologies, and Perspectives on
Social Problems. In 2005, Pascale was awarded the American University
Multicultural Affairs/International Student Services Award for Distinguished
Faculty for scholarly achievements and commitment to the enhancement of
cultural awareness and diversity at American University. She is active in the
International Sociological Association (ISA) and currently serves as president
of the Research Committee on Language and Society.


1
 CHAPTER ONE 

INTRODUCTION
MAPPING THE JOURNEY
Social sciences encompass technologies for generating knowledge; as such,
they shape and are shaped by cultural ideologies, concepts, conditions, and
processes. The use of cartography as a metaphor in the title, and throughout the
book, alludes to geographies of power expressed in technologies for generating
knowledge. Early maps, as a technology for creating knowledge, served mer-
chants engaged in trade as well as nations engaged in the colonial expansion of
empire. In both contexts, maps might be understood as textualization of power
struggles—maps have supported both real and symbolic forms of control.
Early maps produced not only redrawn boundaries in the service of empire
but also a language of conquest that was needed to create new social orders
through genocide, enslavement, and colonization. Discourses of conquest and
discovery provided a means to reduce entire civilizations to “savages” and to
define ancient homelands as “new territories.” Regardless of real-world knowl-
edge, maps remained Eurocentric ideological expressions of power for centuries.
Indeed, maps began to acquire geographic proportion only in a postcolonial

2
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
world. In the Western traditions of science, where the language of “discovery”
has been foundational, maps were an early metaphor for knowledge production.
Traditional epistemology is consistently defined in geographical terms—
knowledge is surveyed and divided into fields, topics (from topos, or place),
provinces, domains, realms, and spheres. Implied in this subdivision of episte-
mological territory is a mastery or dominance over knowledge, as the terms
“subject” and “discipline” make evident. Thus knowledge in the Enlightenment
tradition is represented metaphorically as a territory that can be unproblemati-
cally encompassed, mapped, and viewed empirically and objectively. Moreover,
this knowledge can be framed, by the philosopher, in an objective and literal
language—a language that denies any difference between the word and thing,
between map and territory. (Mitchell, 2007, p. 2)
The classical map metaphor began to shift in the early 20th century. By the
late 20th century, it had transformed into a site of poststructural critique of both
classical and modernist epistemology. Poststructural map metaphors highlight
the subjective and political experience of mapmaking as well as the constructive
processes of reading. If sun and light were the primary metaphors of Classical
and Enlightenment epistemes—and biological and mechanical tropes definitive
of the Modernist episteme—the map becomes a formative and performative
metaphor of postmodern epistemes (Mitchell, 2007, p. 26). The map metaphor
in this book emphasizes the ways that social research goes well beyond merely
representing social realities and suggests both the impermanence of boundaries
and subjective nature of understanding. Cartographies of Knowledge examines
how forms of knowledge are made true by social science—it challenges both the
production of knowledge and the meaning of science.
Cartographies of Knowledge begins with a distinction between methodol-
ogy (the logical frameworks of research design) and methods (techniques for
acquiring data) and presents a critique of method-driven research that is profi-
cient at applying techniques for acquiring and analyzing data but not responsi-
ble for politics on which those techniques are premised. Despite rich literature
in research methodology, it is possible to learn, and to use, social research
methods without ever considering their philosophical/theoretical foundations—
which has profound implications for the production of knowledge.
To the extent that social sciences treat the philosophical foundations of
research as tangential abstractions, contemporary research paradigms carry
unnoticed historical commitments within them. The analyses in Cartographies
demonstrate some of these historical commitments. I argue that, despite

Chapter 1
Introduction
3
significant efforts to move beyond the philosophical foundations of the natural
sciences, techniques of data collection and analysis have kept analytical
processes of qualitative research tethered to a 19th-century philosophy of
science.1 This has created odd analytical crosscurrents in social research and
truncated the ability of qualitative research methods to apprehend profound
changes in social life and routine relations of power and privilege.
A number of big questions run through this book. The first is the funda-
mental question of ontology. Ontologies are theories about the nature of exis-
tence. As such, they address the question of what can be known. Yet ontologies
are not motivations or causal explanations for how we develop research meth-
ods. Indeed researchers’ emotional and intellectual investments often induce
particular ontological views about the nature of the social world. It may be help-
ful to consider a primary ontological change in the social sciences. The pursuit
of social laws once served as the intellectual compass that oriented the develop-
ment of social research—scholars, certain that fixed laws governed social life,
borrowed analytic frameworks from the physical sciences that had been used to
ascertain laws that govern physical matter. Few social researchers today believe
that fixed laws govern social life. Social research has been through an ontolog-
ical shift. However, methods premised on this earlier ontology remain corner-
stones of social science research. What other assumptions about the nature of the
self and social life remain sequestered in the methods that scholars use today?
Ontological questions are fundamental to social research. All research is
anchored to basic beliefs about how the world exists. For example, to what
extent is the world objectively real? Socially constructed? What is the relation-
ship of the unconscious to social life?2 The answers to these, and other ontolog-
ical questions, constitute the foundations of social inquiry yet dominant social
science protocols generally direct researchers away from such philosophical
pursuits and toward more pragmatic concerns of systematic data collection—
as if data exist independently and need only to be collected properly.
The neglect of philosophical foundations in social research results in
ontological assumptions that function as untheorized truths. Ontological
1This is a reference to Rene´ Descartes, whose philosophy gave rise to logical positivism in the
20th century. Although subsequent scholars, such as those in the First Vienna Circle, elaborated
upon logical positivism, the theoretical foundation of logical positivism—indeed of all social
science research—can be traced back to the philosophical premises established by Descartes.
2Arguably, the most substantial obstacle posed to social research is the unconscious. In order to
be ethically responsible scholars, “we cannot be tied to the conceit of a fully transparent self”—
our own or others’ (Butler, 2005, p. 83). Yet by and large, social sciences have been unprepared
to address issues of the unconscious in social life.

assumptions operate as ideologies that construct what can be known and on
what terms—they constitute social research through the topics researchers take
up. Ontological assumptions are extremely powerful, not just because they
shape what counts as valid knowledge, but because they do so in ways that are
not explicit and therefore not accountable, and not even easily open to doubt.
The second big question framing this book regards epistemology.
Epistemology is a branch of philosophy that takes up questions about how the
world can be known—it concerns the nature, sources, and limits of knowledge. As
such, it regards issues of belief—assertions and propositions about how the world
can be apprehended. How can we produce knowledge about the social world?
Under what conditions can we know what we know? Epistemology can be under-
stood as a justificatory account of the scientific production of knowledge. To rec-
ognize epistemology as a justificatory account of knowledge production is to
recognize as well that values, ethics, politics, and power are intrinsically and
inseparably infused in the production of knowledge (Flyvbjerg, 2001).
Yet scholars are seldom well trained in epistemology; rather, in mainstream
social science programs, students are likely to study techniques of data collec-
tion and analysis but to inherit broad epistemological assumptions that render
core aspects of inquiry a matter of common sense. In vernacular usage, common
sense refers to sound, uncomplicated judgment. However, Gramsci provided a
more critical understanding of common sense as shared knowledge that is so
pervasive, so commonly held that it appears only tacitly as shared assumptions.3
Commonsense assumptions arise at every step of the research process as
seen, but unnoticed, features of research. For example, the concept of evi-
dence as some thing to which one can physically point is just such an assump-
tion. It is an epistemological assumption that is treated as being so obvious
that it passes without remark—as a matter of common sense. What other kind
of evidence could there possibly be in science? However, for those trained in
nonhegemonic social research that critiques epistemology, the notion of evi-
dence is itself extremely problematic.
Processes of research, which are rendered as matters of common sense, are
not easily available to doubt or critique. This is true in part because these
assumptions are implicit, but also because common sense prepares one to think
about the world in particular ways by excluding some topics from consideration,
while making others appear obvious (Handel, 1982, p. 56). Historical arguments
about the nature and importance of ontology and epistemology are embedded in
4
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
3This is consistent also with an ethnomethodological usage of common sense.

Chapter 1
Introduction
5
commonsense assumptions about the research process. How each researcher
conceptualizes the best way to apprehend the social world is clearly dependent
upon what she or he believes about the nature of existence. What constitutes
data? What constitutes a pattern in data? What does the pattern mean?
Whether or not researchers use the term epistemology, and regardless of
whether or not researchers understand epistemology, we all draw from it each
time we assert (or assume) that something counts as evidence. Every decision that
we make about how to create valid knowledge about the world is an ontological
and epistemological issue. There are two broad issues at stake in ontological and
epistemological assumptions: One is the reproduction of hegemonic scientific
discourse; the other is the production of knowledge about the social world. My
intent is not to try to eliminate commonsense assumptions but to transform them
into more critical modes of engagement.
The third big question for this book regards the fundamental issue of how
social research relates to social justice. Even advocates for objective social
research (as opposed to activist social research) often are concerned with
issues of inequality. Researchers concerned with inequality face a broad range
of philosophical questions. To what extent is a concern for issues of inequal-
ity the same as a concern for social justice? To what extent is a concern for
creating inclusive research projects the same as a concern for social justice? Is
social research for social justice simply a matter of exposing inequalities? Is it
a matter of supplying remedies for inequalities? Of producing knowledge that
empowers people to act in their own best interests? Does social research that
is sensitive to issues of social justice require an ethic of transparency? Of co-
participation? To what extent does social research for social justice require us
to expose the machinations of power? All of these questions about social jus-
tice are important and deserve to be answered—multiple times and in multiple
ways—yet this book does not take up the kind of analyses needed to answer
them. Rather, Cartographies of Knowledge takes up a more rudimentary
approach to social justice by exploring the politics of knowledge production;
it addresses foundational issues that must be reconciled before these questions
can be adequately addressed by a 21st-century social science.
Cartographies of Knowledge explores the liberatory potentials of social
research by contesting the conventional oppositional binary between the philo-
sophical and the practical. There is a tendency among persons concerned with
the immediacies of inequality to dismiss philosophical concerns as belonging
to the “ivory tower” of academia. However, in very important ways, this
binary way of thinking counterproductively separates the techniques of data

collection from the philosophical foundations that direct the very possibilities
of knowledge production.
If issues of ontology or epistemology seem remote or too erudite to be
practical, consider the vast changes in social research that emerged in the 1960s
and 1970s from feminist and critical race critiques of social research methods.
Scholarship demands not only a thoughtfulness about who or what we study but
also insight into the tools we use for conducting research—regardless of
whether we care about social justice—yet even more so if we are committed to
research that supports social and economic equality. To the extent that con-
temporary social science holds an emancipatory promise, it is a promise that
cannot be fully realized unless it can account for the most intractable forms of
privilege that social life produces. At the same time, social science must be able
to grasp new forms of social relationships and knowledge that emerge through
technological and global changes.
Concerned both with effective research and issues of social justice, I
locate the politics of knowledge production in relation to conceptions of sub-
jectivity, agency, and experience. It is important to underscore that I do not
attempt to link methodology or methods with an external theory. Rather, I
work to excavate the theoretical foundations that already exist in social
research paradigms in order to more fully understand their implications as
resources for understanding culture, knowledge, power, and privilege. It is a
beginning effort to explore the possibilities and potentials that arise from tak-
ing up the uneasy and problematic tensions among methods, methodology,
and theory in the service of social research and social justice.
FAMILIAR INTELLECTUAL GEOGRAPHIES
The impetus for Cartographies of Knowledge came from three paradigmatic quan-
daries that arose quickly in my academic career: one regards ethics, power, and
knowledge; one regards the study of routine relations of power and privilege; and
one regards the relationship between social theory and social research. This nexus
of these analytical problems form the intellectual foundation that both motivated
and framed my thinking about this book, so they warrant some discussion.
Although discussions of research ethics are generally limited to the con-
cerns of institutional review boards (IRBs), as a graduate student working on
my dissertation, the IRB was the least of my ethical concerns. I interviewed a
number of people who could not afford housing. In particular, I interviewed a
6
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Chapter 1
Introduction
7
53-year-old woman who suffered from several serious illnesses and had
recently gone through a divorce. As a result of these circumstances, she was
unable to work, was living on Social Security, and was sleeping in her car. The
combination of the car and Social Security made her both unusually wealthy,
and particularly vulnerable, among people on the streets. She was the person
everyone went to when they needed a lift to a clinic or money for medicine.
At the same time, she was easy prey on the streets—her age, gender, visibly
poor health, and comparative wealth marked her as an easy target. Although I
did what little I could for her at the time, ultimately I left her to sleep in her
car and went home to type up my field notes. If this were my experience with
only one person, it would have been hard enough, but I spent long hours talk-
ing with people who were much less fortunate than the woman I describe.
I sought advice both from textbooks and a variety of senior scholars. In
feminist scholarship, I found critiques of prevailing standards of ethical
responsibilities regarding insider/outsider research (Zinn, 1979), critiques of
ethnographic processes (Rosaldo, 1993; Smith, 1999), and more general cri-
tiques concerning the design of feminist methods (DeVault, 1999; Harding,
1991; Olesen, 1994; Reinharz, 1992; Stanley & Wise, 1983). This literature
was both valuable and important but not adequate for addressing the prag-
matic, ethical, and methodological quandaries that I faced.
Senior scholars consistently advised me to remember that I was in the
field to collect data and that I needed to set better boundaries between me and
the people I interviewed. Over and again, scholars reminded me that I could
not fix the troubles I saw. Of course, I knew that I could not end systemic,
chronic poverty—I could not even find affordable housing for one woman. I
also knew that I was facing the opportunism of a broader system that actively
rewarded researchers for turning away from the suffering encountered in the
field. However, I faced more than “simple” careerism.
In the face of seemingly unsolvable conflicts, I began to think seriously
about the vision of power I was asked to embody for the pursuit of knowledge. I
eventually came to understand that social research ethics were not just a set of
rules to protect the people researchers study. It seemed to me then, as it does now,
that learning to be a scholar was a process of learning to be accountable to a dif-
ferent set of ethics than those I might use in daily life. Consider that as a
researcher I was potentially accountable to the IRB for an ethic of doing no harm,
informed consent, and so forth; I might even be called to acknowledge and ana-
lyze my research as a subjective process. But I was not ever accountable—in any
way—for easing the suffering that I saw, for compensating people for their time,

or for contributing to the communities in which I worked. This is striking in two
ways. First, it is notable that feminist developments in the ethics of social
research have remained marginal to IRB protocols for more or less 50 years.
Second, this lack of accountability was striking because the enlighten-
ment ideals of social progress and betterment were said to have shaped the for-
mation of the social sciences. Certainly, the social sciences have a long and
rich history of research of making visible the plights of marginalized people—
yet this is quite different from having a rich history of helping to create a level
playing field. One might argue that visibility is the first step toward equality;
however, the social sciences have intellectual histories that are voyeuristic at
times and colonialist at others. I began to think about research ethics not as a
set of norms to which one must conform but as a set of conditions that produce
the subject position of social researcher—the position from which it becomes
possible to produce credible knowledge.
A 19th-century philosophy of social science directed scholars to treat the peo-
ple they studied as objects—which we did through most of the 20th century. For
this reason alone (and of course, there are many others), it should not be surpris-
ing that marginalized people developed a deep distrust of social researchers and
social research (cf. Denzin, Lincoln, & Smith, 2008; Steinberg, 2007). The notion
that scholars should mirror the physical sciences by treating people as objects was
critiqued in the 1960s and, by and large, has been abandoned; but in the late 20th
century, I found myself wondering about other cultural distortions embodied in the
practice of social research. How do other aspects of a 19th-century vision of power
remain embedded in contemporary research practices?
In Cartographies of Knowledge, I examine how commonsense assump-
tions embedded in the foundations of qualitative social research embody his-
torical relations of power. Throughout the book, my analyses bring these
assumptions to the surface for consideration. This critique joins with, and
extends, recent feminist scholarship on social research methodologies
(cf. Harding, 2007) by challenging the foundation’s knowledge construction
in mainstream, qualitative research.
The second intellectual quandary that inspired this book arose from the
challenges that I faced when designing a study to apprehend routine relations
of power. For example, the routine, or commonsense production of whiteness,
as an unmarked category, leaves little or no empirical evidence in daily inter-
action or in media—precisely because it passes without remark. How do social
researchers analyze what passes without comment? I consistently found that
social science research methods could help me to examine oppression and
8
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Chapter 1
Introduction
9
domination, but were poor tools for understanding the forms of privilege and
power that routinely pass without remark in daily life.
A social scientist needs evidence—indeed a particular kind of evidence,
something in a specific context to which one can point. While researchers can
prompt interviewees to talk about whiteness (cf. Bonilla-Silva, 2003), analyz-
ing whiteness in media and in unprompted conversation or interaction poses
an arguably insurmountable challenge within the existing paradigms of sci-
ence. All routine relations of power and privilege pass without remark—this
is the measure of how deeply routinized such relations are in a culture.
Social researchers know that whiteness, as an unmarked category, has
profound importance in social interaction and in media representation—yet it
consistently escapes empirical analysis. Social science is not prepared to
enable scholars to examine the effects of what isn’t expressed. On the one
hand, a reader must ask, should it be? On the other hand, this problem directs
us back to an analysis of the politics of knowledge production. If social
research is not yet capable of fully accounting for human experience, there
must be something in our assumptions that alienates research processes from
aspects of human experiences. In Cartographies of Knowledge, I demonstrate
the strengths and limits of qualitative frameworks for being able to analyze
routine relations of power. In this respect, my analyses join contemporary crit-
ical race scholarship on methodology (cf. Bernal, 2002; Denzin et al., 2008;
Ladson-Billings, 2003a; Osha, 2005; Smith, 2004; Sullivan & Tuana, 2007;
Twine & Warren, 2000; Zuberi, 2001; Zuberi & Bonilla-Silva, 2008).
The third quandary that shaped Cartographies of Knowledge regards the
relationship between theory and method. As a sociologist, I quickly encountered
a schism between empirical studies of talk in the social sciences and theories of
language/discourse in the humanities. When writing my first book, Making Sense
of Race, Class and Gender: Commonsense, Power and Privilege in the United
States, I wanted to analyze commonsense assumptions embedded in social inter-
action and in popular media. The techniques available to me, as a sociologist, all
concerned language use in a localized context: ethnomethodology, conversation
analysis, and variations of sociolinguistics. All of these analytical frameworks
treat the speaker (or writer) as an autonomous individual, free to speak or write
as she or he chooses—without considering how both history and culture shape
the possibilities for speaking at any moment in time. By contrast, theoretical stud-
ies of language (e.g., the variety of styles of discourse analysis) in the humanities
illuminate broader structures of language by pursuing the historical and cultural
productions of meaning. Consequently these analyses tend to focus on how

personal agency is constrained. Theory is not bound to the concreteness of lan-
guage use in daily life—it does not examine the specific practices through which
people variously reproduce and subvert broader cultural discursive paradigms.
This distinction between theories of language and studies of talk, between
theory and method, and between social science and the humanities seemed to me
both artificial and unhelpful. Language use regards both individual agency and
social constraint. Studies of agency must be grounded in local, material contexts,
yet knowledge/power always exceeds the immediate moment. Knowledge/power
is never a local event, although it has local expressions. Knowledge/power needs
to be understood through its ability to travel across time and space.
The schism between social theory and social research that I encountered
prevented a full analysis of knowledge, power, and agency. At the time, I
addressed this problem by taking a heterodox approach that drew from both eth-
nomethodology and poststructural discourse analysis—other strategies have
been effective as well (cf. Van Dijk, 1993; Watson & Seiler, 1992; Williams,
1999; Wodak & Meyer, 2009). Yet the conceptualization of theory and methods
as dichotomous binaries remains at the heart of social sciences. The continuing
theory and method binary regards more than disagreements about the kinds of
problems social theory or social research can solve. The theory/method binaries
of existing paradigms and standards have made particular kinds of problems
impossible to legitimately investigate. Indeed many researchers attempt to over-
come limitations by combining analytic induction, symbolic interaction, and
ethnomethodology with analytical frameworks drawn from the humanities.
Ultimately, the robustness of social research is dependent upon its ability to
allow for a variety of analytical paradigms and explorations. However, the social
sciences generally remain reluctant to consider the methodological limitations
that are bound to notions of evidence and discourses of science.
My experience in social research brought me to Cartographies of
Knowledge committed to the belief that the possibilities of democratic knowl-
edge production require analyses that can move beyond the limiting method-
ological, theoretical, and disciplinary positions that present dichotomous
binaries such as theory/method, macro/micro, and structure/agency. In this
respect, Cartographies contributes to scholarship that challenges traditional
boundaries between method and theory in the social sciences (cf. Bjelic &
Lynch, 1992; Cannella & Lincoln, 2004; Clarke, 2009; Cruz, 2006; Flyvbjerg,
2001; Holstein & Gubrium, 2000; Lal, 2008; Latour & Woolgar, 1986; Saukko,
2003). Cartographies of Knowledge explores and critiques qualitative strate-
gies for producing scientific knowledge within and across the social sciences.
10
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Chapter 1
Introduction
11
IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH
Scholars’ abilities to conduct effective social research—with an eye toward social
justice or not—requires a thorough grasp of the theoretical frameworks that direct
particular techniques of data collection and analysis. We must understand more
than the mapmaker’s immediate tools of paper and pen, yet journals and grantors
consistently reward scholarship that focuses on findings while completely
neglecting the philosophical foundations of research. In dominant research prac-
tices, the underlying philosophy of science operates implicitly and unaccount-
ably. This has profound consequences that will be explored throughout the book.
At this juncture, it may be useful to consider the simple observation that
ethnomethodology and symbolic interaction are each understood as interpre-
tive forms of research. Interpretive research takes “human interpretation as
the starting point for developing knowledge about the social world” (Prasad,
2005, p. 13). While scholars often use analytic induction with symbolic inter-
action and ethnomethodology, analytic induction is not an interpretive frame-
work; nor must researchers use it with interpretive frameworks. Analytic
induction stands on its own as a legitimate qualitative method—arguably the
most common qualitative method. Consequently, it is particularly important to
consider that qualitative research that does not account for the importance of
human interpretation in social interaction arguably limits understandings of
human behavior to a behaviorist framework of stimulus–response.
It has been a long time since social scientists have accepted a stimulus–
response framework for social interaction. Social researchers broadly believe that
people do not simply respond to what others say or do but to their interpretation
of what has been said or done. Therefore it is important to consider the various
ways in which standard analytic induction functions as an interpretive framework
that is not made to account for its interpretations. To the extent that the social sci-
ences do not acknowledge analytic induction as an interpretive framework, ana-
lytic induction is made to appear as an objective (realist) process for apprehending
social facts. Yet nothing is less real than “realism.” In mapmaking, the most
simple distortions can have the most profound and lasting impact.
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
Cartographies of Knowledge is not intended as a “how to” book, nor is it
intended as a definitive exegesis on qualitative research. Rather I intend, and

trust, that it will offer some thought-provoking insights with regard to com-
monsense assumptions that researchers learn to make—and, into how these
assumptions map a particular kind of social world by bringing particular rela-
tions of power into view while obscuring others.
The framework of the book distinguishes between the range of techniques
used for interpreting data and the techniques employed to produce credible
social science claims. By breaking research into these dual functions of inter-
pretation and authentication, the differences among analytic induction, sym-
bolic interaction, and ethnomethodology come into sharp relief. At the same
time, the assumptions embedded in processes of authentication are so system-
atic that the analyses may feel surprisingly consistent at places.
Many scholars in the social sciences have tried to achieve sound analytic
strategies for apprehending both routine relations of power and the intertextu-
ality of social life by drawing from theoretical frameworks. While this impulse
has produced, and continues to produce, important insights, the analyses of
Cartographies demonstrate why these strategies are not enough. Any mature
science needs to include a broad range of strategies and tools in order to be
fully capable of responding to contemporary issues. Consequently, it may be
useful to read the ensuing chapters, while thinking about potential paradigm
shifts in the social sciences. To the extent that maps can never be identical
with what they represent, it is important to keep in mind that distortion
remains an implicit feature of all maps—including the metaphoric one being
constructed in this book.
FURTHER READING
Flyvbjerg, B. (2001). Making social science matter: Why social inquiry fails and how
it can succeed again. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harding, S. (1991). Whose science? Whose knowledge? Thinking from women’s lives.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Osha, S. (2005). Kwasi Wiredu and beyond: The text, writing and thought in Africa.
Dakra, Senegal: Council for the Development of Social Science Research in
Africa.
Sandoval, C. (2000). Methodology of the oppressed. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota.
Saukko, P. (2003). Doing research in cultural studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Smith, L. T. (2004). Decolonizing methodologies: Research and indigenous peoples.
London: Zed Books Ltd.
12
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

13
 CHAPTER TWO 

PhilosoPhiCal Roots of
ReseaRCh Methodologies
intRoduCtion
historically, Western traditions of social research have taken the methods estab-
lished in the physical sciences as the model for social inquiry. auguste Comte
(1798–1857), one of the first social researchers, asserted that authentic knowl-
edge came from personal experience rather than from metaphysical or theolog-
ical foundations. he argued that by “relying solely on observable facts and the
relations that hold among observed phenomena, scientific inquiry could dis-
cover the ‘laws’ governing empirical events” (hawkesworth, 2007, p. 472).
Comte is widely accepted as the founder of positivism, a philosophical orienta-
tion toward research methodology.1 Positivism articulated a search for laws of
social life that could stand as equivalents to the natural laws of the physical sci-
ences. Consequently, it is anchored to the same ontological premise of the natural
1Comte is also widely recognized as the founder of sociology.

14
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge
sciences: the world exists as an objective entity and is (at least in principle)
knowable in its entirety; epistemologically, the task of the researcher is first to
accurately describe the reality and then to analyze the results (della Porta &
Keating, 2008). in this sense, positivism (and neopositivism) mirrors the com-
monsense ontology of daily life in which things exist as they appear—unless one
is dreaming or deceived.
epistemological realism was “one moment of the general revolutionary
progressivism of 18th- and 19th-century science and politics in which societal
laws of nature—rather than laws of the state—now explained the social
world” (somers & gibson, 1996, p. 47). Positivist research can be character-
ized by a quest for determinacy, expressed through a reductionist impulse to
develop precise meanings and operational indicators. By embracing the onto-
logical belief that a single reality exists, and the epistemological claim that this
reality can be known objectively, social scientists argued that there was one,
and only one, correct logic for scientific inquiry. as a consequence, positivism
served as the methodological foundation of the early social sciences.
antonio gramsci (1995) was an early critic of the trend in social research
to use the physical sciences as a model; he described this attitude toward the
physical sciences as “science as fetish.” gramsci wrote, “there do not exist
sciences par excellence and there does not exist a method par excellence,
‘a method in itself’” (gramsci, 1995, p. 282). gramsci argued that every
process of inquiry needed to be congruent with its own particular purpose.
despite such critiques, researchers continued to use the scientific dis-
courses of the physical sciences to legitimate all forms of social research. and,
as scientific knowledge was idealized, its philosophical underpinnings faded
from view. scholars in the social sciences treated social research as a tool that
offered peerless access to the social world; consequently, they tended to focus
on improving techniques for more effective data collection, while neglecting
the theorization of knowledge production, including the creation of data itself.
although positivism still appears to many researchers as the most legitimate
form of social research, it also continues to be soundly critiqued.
assumptions guiding positivism derive from the study of largely inanimate
or biological phenomena that lack the capacity for self-reflection and cultural
production. . . . By contrast social sciences are inevitably concerned with
social, economic, and cultural worlds that are constituted by the human
capacity for meaningful understanding and action. according to flyvbjerg
(2001), this human capacity for interpretation incessantly thwarts the social

science dream of becoming the mirror image of the natural sciences.
furthermore, such a dream is not merely impossible, it is also pointless inas-
much as positivism is ill equipped to answer many questions of interest to
social science. these include questions such as why organizational reform
efforts are frequently met with resistance; which cultural features are most
responsible for the collapse of corporate ethic; or how organizations social-
ize their members. (Prasad, 2005, p. 5)
the way that power is distributed across social, cultural, economic, and
institutional orders strongly influences what we have learned to regard as
legitimate knowledge (northcutt & McCoy, 2004, pp. 3–4)—and as legitimate
routes to knowledge. social sciences emerged as part of a modernist discourse
of progress that was concerned with goals of value neutrality and an ever-
increasing effort to generate insights into social life that could stand as the
equivalents of physical laws. With the benefit of hindsight, social scientists in
the 21st century frequently recognize that science has been more than a search
for objective knowledge. Consider, for example, that social scientists searched
for laws that would explain progress from “primitive” to “advanced” forms of
society (Connell, 2010).
the practical work of scientific research necessarily reproduces culturally
shared assumptions about how the world exists and how it works. to the extent
that social sciences developed alongside the nation-state, they are bound by
nationalist assumptions and experiences (della Porta & Keating, 2008).
science, like the concept of modernization, was a tool of colonization, and as
such, it contributed to the decimation of cultures. discourses of science erased
important knowledge and useful epistemologies by systematically devaluing
entire cultures as well as specific groups of people within cultures.
one does not have to look hard to find scientific research that advanced
various forms of bigotry—today such studies clearly reveal more about cul-
tural hierarchies of power than about the people, places, and cultures that
were studied. the “ways of knowing” that have been privileged by academics
in dominant cultures continue to be a site of contention and resistance—
particularly for those who have been constructed as “other” in their dis-
courses. linda tuhiwai smith (2004, p. 1) wrote, “the term ‘research’ is
inextricably linked to european imperialism and colonialism. the word itself,
‘research’, is probably one of the dirtiest words in the indigenous world’s
vocabulary.” Researchers in dominant cultures have viewed the social world
through classificatory systems that embody a hegemonic view of power. to
Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
15

understand research methods as value-laden relations of power is to make an
epistemic break with history.
the traditional epistemology of the anglo-american canon was a theory for
knowledge makers. it was a normative theory that told how knowledge makers
ought to reason to reach knowledge of the true or the good or the right. the fact
that it was a theory for knowledge makers was covered up by using several
clever strategies—including the democratic claim that anyone might have
knowledge if only they used the certified method. (addelson, 2007, p. 265)
although research is always credited to specific individuals, knowledge is
never produced by an individual—knowledge is necessarily the product of a
cultural community. and every powerful community has its gatekeepers.
in some sense, it has been easy to imagine that the results of earlier research
supported bigoted social hierarchies because the researchers themselves held such
views. Consequently, contemporary researchers have challenged specific research
findings, even as we have advanced 19th-century paradigms of social research—
as if prevailing social and political agendas produced good research methodolo-
gies and methods that had been put to bad ends. students and scholars alike tend
to look back at the bigotry of the 19th century as the perspectives of individuals,
and perhaps of an era; we less frequently acknowledge that the era, and its schol-
ars, shaped what we understand (and continue to use) as the foundations of social
research, social theory, and indeed the university system itself.arguably, the intel-
lectual empires of the 19th century have outlasted the geographic ones.
Precisely because the facts and procedures of social research are social pro-
ductions, they can be contested and transformed. With an eye to the politics of
knowledge production, this chapter provides a broad overview of the philosoph-
ical premises that have underpinned the development of qualitative social
research. the chapter explores a number of challenges to standards of qualitative
research that have attempted to address particular analytical problems in Western
social science. subsequently, it provides a foundation for understanding ontology,
epistemology, agency, subjectivity, and experience in relation to social science.
the Changing disCouRses of soCial sCienCe
social science research faces two overarching tasks: formalization and inter-
pretation. formalization refers to the processes for systematizing knowl-
edge production—processes that provide protocols for recognizing relevant
16
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
17
phenomenon and transforming them into data. Processes of formalization gen-
erate what can be understood as “valid evidence.” indeed, a primary boundary
between sciences and other disciplines has been formed by the demand that all
scientific knowledge claims be authenticated by specific processes of formal-
ization. Procedures for formalization enable researchers to make credible scien-
tific claims about groups of people. historically only specific processes of
formalization (i.e., systematic elaboration) have been certified as generating
“scientific” findings. over time, these procedures have been naturalized—as a
matter of common sense for “good” research. for example, most fundamentally,
formalization requires empirical evidence—something to which one can point in
a local context. Researchers examine local contexts as if they are unproblematic
and naturally occurring. it would be more transparent to speak of localized
contexts—emphasizing the construction of research contexts. however, this
level of transparency is generally not regarded as necessary in mainstream social
sciences. indeed, it might even be construed as problematic since it refers to sub-
jective processes involved in creating both contexts and data.
Within the past decade, emergent research methods have challenged
processes of formalization. for example, scholars have challenged the processes
of formalization through performance scholarship and autoethnography (cf. ellis
& Bochner, 1996; Richardson, 2004). these strategies are very useful, yet they
have a fairly limited impact on social science precisely because they challenge
the need for the broad coherence that continues to define social science. in very
different ways, the earlier institutional ethnographies developed by dorothy
smith also could be said to challenge processes of formalization. By examining
the social organization of knowledge in institutional settings, smith (1990a,
1990b, 1999) developed a cultural framing of knowledge production within the
thick description of ethnography. emergent methods such as these express a par-
adigm shift in what constitutes a social science—but one that remains highly
marginalized by mainstream social research.
Perhaps some of the more substantial challenges to processes of formal-
ization have come from scholars in education who more commonly broaden
notions of empirical evidence by turning to the humanities (cf. hendry, 2007;
Kincheloe & Mclaren, 1998; Korth, 2002; lather 1991, 2001). similarly,
some scholars working in the social sciences also have turned to the humani-
ties to more fully and effectively analyze social life (cf. Clarke, 2005; Clough,
1992, 2000; denzin, 2003a, 2003b; holstein & gubrium, 2000; saukko,
2003). this book owes a debt to all such scholarship as it attempts to take such
efforts a bit farther.

the second task of social science research is interpretation—explaining
the significance of evidence. Clearly, processes of formalization and interpre-
tation are intimately linked. to a significant extent the ontological and episte-
mological frameworks used to interpret data are not separable from those that
determine the systematic collection of evidence and its transformation into
data to be analyzed. the two cannot operate independently—although they
serve slightly different ends.2
the number of possible interpretations for any given pattern or theme is
fairly large—at least in principle. a significant aspect of scientific activity is
rendering some interpretations more plausible than others (latour & Woolgar,
1986, p. 36). the numbers of interpretations that will be accepted as plausible
by an informed audience are constrained by the forms of knowledge the audi-
ence holds and the particular context that is brought to bear on the reading. Yet
rendering some explanations of evidence more, or less, plausible than others
is always a political project—although it is a political project that is often
masked by scientific discourse.
historically, scientific discourse has been more invested in limiting
processes of formalization than processes of interpretation. as a result, social
scientists have elaborated on a variety of processes of interpretation, while
processes of formalization remain largely unchanged. the subsequent sections
examine key challenges and transformations to processes of interpretation in
qualitative social research: feminist, critical race, and interpretive. the usual
caveat applies: these challenges are neither as distinct, as limited, nor as lin-
ear as their presentation here may make them appear.
Feminist and Critical Race Challenges to Qualitative Research
feminist scholarship began with a three-part challenge that confronted
androcentric bias in research, in social theory, and in research methods. at the
heart of feminist methodology is a critique of knowledge production as a site
that has constructed and sustained women’s oppression (deVault, 1999;
hartsock, 1987). feminist critiques of research methods (cf. Behar & gordon,
1995; haraway, 1991; harding, 1991; hartsock, 1987; naples, 2003;
Reinharz, 1992) transformed what is considered to be the production of valid
18
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge
2the relationship between ontology and epistemology will be explored in depth throughout
subsequent chapters.

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
19
knowledge by exposing the ways that traditional epistemology supported male
dominance. in varying ways, “feminist empiricism, standpoint theories, post-
modernism and transnational perspectives all recognize the importance of
women’s lived experiences with the goal of unearthing subjugated knowl-
edge” (hesse-Biber, 2007, p. 3).3
a central point of feminist critique has been the concept of objectivity.
Ramazanoğlu and holland (2002) wrote,
objectivity implies that the researcher can control the research process so as
to produce neutral knowledge of social reality that is external to the
researcher and independent of the observer’s observations—just as the world
turns whether we know it or not. (p. 48)
donna haraway (1991, p. 189) famously called the scientific emphasis on
(and claim to) objective knowledge the “god trick” because it is predicated on
a “view from nowhere.” sandra harding (2007) also has leveled incisive cri-
tiques of the notion of objectivity. she wrote,
objectivity has not been [understood] in such a way that scientific method
can detect sexist and androcentric assumptions that are “the dominant beliefs
of an age”—that is, [it cannot confront beliefs] that are collectively (versus
only individually) held. as far as scientific method goes (and feminist
empiricist defenses of it), it is entirely serendipitous when cultural beliefs
that are assumed by most members of a scientific community are challenged
by a piece of scientific research. (p. 52)
objectivity constructs usable, but not innocent knowledge.4 some femi-
nists have argued that the goals of objectivity are better fulfilled by taking sub-
jectivity into account (Code, 1993, p. 32). acknowledging that all knowledge
and all attempts to produce knowledge are socially situated, feminist scholars
3Referring to feminists working in derridean grammatology and foucauldian disciplinary
genealogy, Clough (2008) wrote, “While these feminists questioned the politics of identity as
well as experience as a ground of knowledge of reality, they nonetheless were concerned with
experience and identity, reality and knowing. they meant to emphasize speech and voice, even
while engaging these as nonintentional expressions of subjectivity shaped by unconscious
desire” (p. 39).
4Patricia Clough (1992) cogently argued that social science research creates an authorized, factual
representation of empirical reality that is the effect of an unconscious narrative process that
prevents the narrative construction of factuality from becoming apparent (pp. 12–13).

(cf. Collins, 2000; hartsock, 1987; smith, 1990a) countered the emphasis on
objectivism with standpoint theory—what might be called a view “from some-
where.” standpoint begins with the understanding that in stratified societies the
activities of those at the top both organize, and set limits on, what they can
understand about themselves and the world around them (harding, 2007, p. 54).5
Within the framework of standpoint, researchers begin with the experi-
ences and knowledge that are central to marginalized lives, and from there,
problematize everyday practices.6 in this sense, standpoint attempts to account
for the contingency of both knowledge claims and knowing subjects. a pri-
mary goal of standpoint is to enable scholars to account for multiple perspec-
tives while also maintaining a commitment to faithful accounts of a “real”
world. standpoint does not do away with the concept of objectivity but
attempts to strengthen it by demanding strong reflexivity.
some scholars have claimed that feminism’s greatest strength is its abil-
ity to address the production of sexist results “with only a minimal challenge
to the fundamental logic of research as this is understood in scientific fields
and to the logic of explanation as this is understood in the dominant philoso-
phies of science” (harding, 2007, p. 53). if this conservatism has been useful
in the physical sciences, it is not necessarily widely embraced by feminist
scholars in the social sciences.
While there is enormous overlap among feminist and critical race chal-
lenges that have been leveled at traditional social sciences, some scholars have
directed their primary critiques toward social science’s ability to fully appre-
hend racial inequalities (cf. Cannella & lincoln, 2004; Collins, 1993; denzin,
1978; glenn, 2002; osha, 2005; twine & Warren, 2000; Zuberi, 2001; Zuberi
& Bonilla-silva, 2008). some critical race scholars have conceptualized
“Blackness both as an epistemological standpoint and as a methodological
one” (dillard & dixson, 2006, p. 244). others argue that standpoint research
is problematic; not all standpoints are critical ones. “Racial subordination does
not mechanistically generate a critical stance vis-à-vis racism any more than
colonialism created anticolonial subjectivities (fanon 1967; Memmi 1991)”
(twine & Warren, 2000, p. 15). standpoint research is necessary for
20
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge
5notably, the line between the positionality of standpoint and essentialism is thin: standpoint
research must be intensely and strategically qualified to avoid becoming bluntly universalizing.
6importantly, within a standpoint framework, some social locations are better starting points than
others for challenging the fundamental assumptions of hegemonic science and Western thought
(harding, 2007, p. 56).

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
21
confronting racism but not sufficient—the same must be said for confronting
other forms of systematized subordination as well. Cultural discourses on race
and racialization make all researchers vulnerable in different ways to repro-
ducing knowledge that reinforces hegemonic conceptions of social life.
some critical race critiques of social research have challenged both
processes of formalization and processes of interpretation. for example, stanfield
(1993), Zuberi (2001), and Zuberi and Bonilla-silva (2008) have leveled incisive
critiques of “white research methods” generally, and more specifically regarding
statistical analyses of race. in the 21st century, the emphasis on quantitative
research methods continues to be endorsed as the gold standard of social research
because of a belief that “numbers don’t lie.” however, there are many contem-
porary examples to the contrary—The Bell Curve (hernstein & Murray, 1994)
quickly comes to mind. numbers are meaningless without narratives.
assumptions and theories about social life guide how we collect and inter-
pret data; this has particular implications for studying race, racism, and racial-
ization. given that social research methods were developed during periods of
devastating racial oppression, researchers must consistently ask how white racial
ideologies are embedded in existing research paradigms. the systematic and
cumulative nature of racism requires that all practices need to be understood, and
studied, as part of an overarching system, rather than isolated in localized con-
texts (essed & goldberg, 2002). Yet if scholars focus only on the overarching
system of racism, we miss the particularities of time and place that give racism
specific form and meaning. social research needs to be able to do both.
Many feminist and critical race researchers have sought to develop a bet-
ter grasp of the mechanisms and practices of social inequality by deepening
understandings of the reflexive repertoires used both by researchers and the
people we study (cf. Cannella & lincoln, 2004; hesse-Biber & leavy, 2006;
holstein & gubrium, 2000, 2005; ladson-Billings, 2003a, 2003b; Prasad &
Prasad, 2002). Yet it is also possible to use reflexivity in instrumental or utili-
tarian ways that do not challenge underlying assumptions about processes of
formalization or interpretation in social research. there is no simple or for-
mulaic way to create useful knowledge in the service of social justice.
Interpretive Challenges to Social Research
Many researchers have pointedly argued that the methodologies and
methods of the natural sciences, which were used to study objects and organ-
isms, are inappropriate and ineffective for studying the complexities of social

life. Winch (1958) argued that causal explanations were too simplistic to cap-
ture social life and actually interfered with the ability to conduct valid social
research. for example, we can see that cars stop at red traffic lights but if we
formulate a simple causal relationship between red traffic lights and cars stop-
ping we will never understand why cars stop (Winch, 1958).
Winch (1958, p. 95) asserted that the concepts that we use “for think-
ing about social events are logically incompatible with the concepts belong-
ing to scientific explanation.” for example, if we formulate a causal
explanation of behavior, computers and robots responding to commands
would appear to understand language; however, their responses are based
on formulaic computations, not semantic content. social behavior is not
governed by fixed natural laws; there are no social equivalents of scientific
laws such as gravity.
Many scholars have attempted to address the limitations of the natural sci-
ence model of research by developing competing analytic frameworks for
interpreting evidence. such efforts have resulted in the fields of symbolic
interaction, dramaturgy, and ethnomethodology. each follows a distinct logic,
yet taken together, they are broadly understood as styles of interpretivism.
Most broadly, interpretive research is committed to the philosophy of social
construction that posits a social world produced through meaningful interpre-
tations. social constructionism emphasizes the importance of contextual
understanding, the subjective nature of research, and the importance of reflex-
ivity (Willis, 2007). Chapter 3 elaborates on social constructionism. for now,
suffice it to say that, at its most conservative, social constructionist ontology
holds that the world exists objectively but the terms we use to define and
describe it are socially produced.
interpretive analyses begin with the belief that meaning is socially con-
structed through shared, rather than individual interpretations of reality—that
is to say, it is constructed intersubjectively (holstein & Miller, 1993). Rather
than approaching research with predefined concepts, interpretivists use sen-
sitizing concepts to help them better understand the social relationships being
studied. for example, an interpretivist would want to discover how people in
a particular community understand the meaning of “class,” rather than
approaching the community with a predetermined definition of “class.”
interpretive research seeks to broaden the possibilities of social research by
directly challenging the limitations of the positivist and postpositivist founda-
tions, which have been recognized historically as the primary (and often the only)
22
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
23
valid model of social science research.7 in order to understand a situation, inter-
pretivists argue that researchers must understand the meanings the situation holds
for the participants, not just their behaviors. for interpretivists, meaning and iden-
tity are ontological conventions, not absolute facts. for example, what makes a
set of activities “work”? is it the specific tasks one undertakes? the responsibil-
ities one assumes? the remuneration one receives? interpretive analyses attempt
to pursue understanding, while necessarily allowing for degrees of indeterminacy
(Charmaz, 2006). in social sciences, interpretive frameworks rely on the logic of
analytic induction and have been used with feminist and critical race theories, as
well as with a range of qualitative methods for data collection (including case
studies, ethnography, interviews, and textual analysis).
significant research demonstrates the importance, value, and necessity of
feminist, critical race, and interpretive research frameworks. all scholars work-
ing to shift the discourse of social science have faced the overarching task of
needing to pursue two directions simultaneously in order to challenge dominant
research paradigms. on one hand, they must develop critiques of existing para-
digms and on the other they must develop research that demonstrates the strength
of the new frameworks. these two tasks often overlap in research that pushes the
boundaries of existing analytical frameworks. the social sciences have changed
in dramatic and useful ways. feminist, critical race, and interpretive frameworks
have changed the way social researchers think about epistemology and practices
of interpretation. however, practices of formalization have been harder to
challenge—precisely because they are fundamentally linked to issues of ontology
and therefore more intrinsic to the discursive construction of science itself.
While processes of formalization constitute defining features of a science,
it is critically important to consider that these processes were developed in an era
that did not imagine the need to study routine social privilege and could not have
anticipated the development and proliferation of 21st-century media.
Consequently, it is important to broaden the discourse of social sciences to
address these phenomena—both by problematizing the concept of formalization
7Postpositivism emerged as consonant with some of the main principles of positivism. it is
premised on the belief that a single reality exists; however, unlike positivism, it is also premised
on the belief that there is no way to know this reality in its totality. in postpositivism, knowledge
about the objective world is filled with uncertainties that lead to somewhat imperfect and/or
incomplete knowledge. Whereas positivism is often referred to as naive realism, postpositivism is
often characterized as critical realism. Critical realist epistemology, often practiced by second-
wave feminists and critical race scholars, posits an object social world but asserts that knowledge
is socially conditioned and subject to challenge and reinterpretation (della Porta & Keating, 2008).

and by connecting philosophical concerns with practical ones. Qualitative
research has made substantial contributions to culturally relevant and socially
progressive research. Critically examining the philosophical foundations of
qualitative research in relationship to the practice of qualitative methods
promises to contribute to debates among interpretivist scholars, to feminist and
critical race methodological critiques, to social science media research, and to
the ongoing discussions regarding the emergence and evolution of new qualita-
tive research strategies.
PhilosoPhY and PRaCtiCe
in order to examine how processes of formalization in social research paradigms
are themselves implicated in sustaining hegemonic social orders, it is necessary
to explore the philosophical foundations that shape process of formalization. to
make that exploration possible in subsequent chapters, in this section, i consider
the politics of social research practices in relationship to assumptions about the
nature of existence (ontology) and in relationship to beliefs and assumptions
about how the world can be known (epistemology). i then elaborate on the con-
cepts of ontology and epistemology and finally consider how each is rudimen-
tary to conceptions of subjectivity, agency, and experience.
in the social sciences, many scholars increasingly are turning toward cri-
tiques of methodology to take up foundational issues of ontology and epistemol-
ogy in social research (cf. Clough, 1992; denzin, 2003b; flyvbjerg, 2001;
harding, 1987, 1991, 2007; lal, 2008; latour, 1993; Ramazanoğlu & holland,
2002; sandoval, 2000; smith, 2004; Zuberi, 2001; Zuberi & Bonilla-silva,
2008). Yet the most profound challenges to ontology tend to be theoretical dis-
cussions of methodology that stand apart from pragmatic concerns of implemen-
tation. Consequently, there is a significant gap between critical methodologies
and the practice of social research—which should not be too surprising since the
literatures seldom overlap. the gap between theory and practice is reinforced by
funding agencies and publishers, who regularly accept research designs that
include well-detailed characterizations of methods (i.e., data collection and
analysis) but lack any consideration of ontology and epistemology.
importantly, it is not only funding agencies and publishers that nurture
the gap between critical methodology and critical research. academic institu-
tions tend to offer research courses that are focused on techniques for data
24
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
25
collection—often without significant philosophical consideration. Yet,
research paradigms offer scholars and students more than simple orientations
for data collection and analysis. they provide frameworks for recognizing
what we see, as well as for understanding the relevance and importance of
what we see. Without understanding the theoretical underpinnings of social
research methods, we are reduced to taking what is often referred to as a
“cookbook approach” (hesse-Biber & leavy, 2006) to research that
inevitably precludes a deeply critical stance.
By and large, empirical research is understood as having practical policy
and community-based implications, whereas scholarship on methodology and
the philosophy of science tend to be framed as “ivory-tower” issues. this
binary juxtaposition between the philosophical and the practical has led gen-
erations of researchers to follow techniques for producing credible research
without seriously examining ideologies sequestered in what appear to be
commonsense assumptions about the nature of empirical research. it is a dis-
empowering binary framework that encourages a lack of awareness, account-
ability, and agency.
Recall, for example, the earlier discussion of localized contexts. for cen-
turies, empirical evidence has been limited to that to which we can point in a
localized context. for those immersed in hegemonic scientific discourse, it is
difficult to imagine why this could possibly be problematic—or how it might
be otherwise. to the extent that the social sciences remain exclusively bound
to empirical evidence in localized contexts, we will fail in our abilities to ana-
lyze particular aspects of power, privilege, culture, and knowledge—which
always and inevitably exceed any local context. the epistemic foundations of
social research prevent researchers from addressing the broader cultural con-
ditions that shape the localized contexts.8 for example, within the cognitive
space of social science, it is impossible to critique social processes such as
racialization, reification, and hegemony. if we don’t see “the big picture, nar-
row empiricism provide[s] an ingenious smoke screen. it is a method perfectly
tailored to an epistemology of ignorance. as the adage goes, we ‘look’ but
never ‘see’” (steinberg, 2007, p. 11).
generally ignorance is understood as a result of a bad or neglectful epis-
temic practice—not as a substantive epistemic practice in itself (alcoff, 2007,
8gramsci (1995) leveled this critique of the social sciences with regard specifically to the ability
of social science to apprehend italian politics.

p. 39). an epistemology of ignorance may sound oxymoronic: how can we
have a theory of knowing and ignorance? ignorance is not simply “not know-
ing” but an active misapprehension that systematically produces inaccurate
information—ignorance is an active social production. an epistemology of
ignorance exists when one uses socially acceptable but faulty systems of jus-
tification (alcoff, 2007; sullivan & tuana, 2007).
eugenics can be understood as an epistemology of ignorance (Zuberi,
2001; Zuberi & Bonilla-silva, 2008). the intrinsically scholarly framing of
race discourse was not, in itself, enough to establish the scientific legitimacy of
race research in general or eugenics in particular. such studies gain prominence
in particular times and places because they also have practical applications that
resonate with commonsense perceptions held by dominant groups in society. in
this sense, academic research has applied what might be called “facticity” to
racism—its appeal is not to greed nor to spiritual passion, but to reason.
similarly, much of freud’s work was based on an epistemology of igno-
rance (hoagland, 2007). Consider that although freud initially believed the
stories of women reporting rape, he subsequently chose to discredit their tes-
timony in favor of a theory in which women and children fantasized about
being raped—a theory that helped to silence women’s voices and deny their
experiences for decades. Misrepresentations of race and gender such as these
found widespread scientific acceptance because they supported hegemonic
worldviews in europe and north america. science validates itself; however,
hegemonic culture provides structural validation—most particularly for epis-
temologies of ignorance that reproduce existing social hierarchies.
if we accept that all knowledge is socially constructed, and historically
situated, we must understand social research methodologies as historically
produced social formations articulated through particular discourses and sys-
tems of signification. the epistemological ground of social research devel-
oped, in part, as a legitimated form of knowledge about “the other” produced
by and for those in power. social research is itself a relation of power that pro-
duces (and is produced by) “domains of objects and rituals of truth” (foucault,
1977, p. 194). science itself is a cultural activity—a kind of performance that
enacts itself.
the most basic (and perhaps most powerful) level of critique recognizes
that in all research methods, phenomena count as “evidence” only if they are
recognized in relation to a potential analysis (gordon, 1997; scott, 1991).
evidence is always the political effect of decisions regarding what constitutes
26
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
27
valid and relevant knowledge as well as decisions that regard the conditions a
researcher must fulfill to give her or his work value as science. Consequently,
critical empirical research must begin not with a theory/evidence dichotomy
but rather with a theory/evidence convergence that recognizes the theoretical
foundations that shape what constitutes valid knowledge.9
at the start of the 21st century, one of the characteristics of research method-
ologies must be the capacity to excavate the full range of social life, including the
ways that it is mediated by technologies. in order to continue to develop a vision
for social research that is capable of being fully compatible with a vision of a
socially just world, scholars need to consistently explore, not only our own
locations as researchers but also, the philosophical foundations and working
assumptions of social research paradigms. Charting the terrain of commonsense
assumptions about the nature of evidence disturbs some of the most enshrined
principles of social science. it is a mapping that not only displaces old geogra-
phies but one that also contributes to new epistemic ground. it is a remapping that
seeks to replace the dogmatism of historical assumptions with questions that raise
doubts about the certainties and assumptions of social research.
as an inquiry into ontology, the analyses that follow in subsequent chapters
will undermine notions of essentialism and call into question the assumptions
and limitations of all forms of Cartesian dualism—even those related to
critical realism and feminism.10 this position might be interpreted incorrectly
as being antipositivist; it is intended as an effort to call social research to
account for how ontological commitments operate in social research. gramsci
(1995, p. 282) argued that every process of inquiry needs to be congruent with
its own particular purpose. there is no definitive place from which to locate
the necessary and sufficient conditions for establishing empirical knowledge
once and for all. hence the path forward is not proposing a single framework
9 “it was not until forty years after aston that thomas Kuhn demonstrated in The Structure of
Scientific Revolutions, a cornerstone of modern realist philosophy of science, that scientific facts
and data are not separable from theory (or systems of hypotheses) but are ‘theory-laden’; two of
the main examples he cites are mass in the einsteinian and newtonian frameworks and the atom
pre- and post-dalton. he leaves no room for doubt that after such changes in scientific paradigm
‘the data themselves had changed’ and quoting ‘force, mass, element, compound, cell’ as
examples, ‘the ways in which some [of these terms—or signs. . . .] attach to nature has somehow
changed,’ i.e., ‘the datum is such in light of theoretical interpretations and the reconstruction of
facts is guided by theoretical hypotheses’” (Boothman, 1995, p. vii).
10essentialism is the belief that there is a fundamental essence or unchanging core that
characterizes all members of a group.

to replace another, but understanding the philosophical and political founda-
tions of research well enough to recognize the potential and possibilities of
additional frameworks.
Ontology and Epistemology
although discussions of ontology and epistemology have been made, by
and large, to fall outside standard social scientific discourse, all social research
presumes and reproduces both an ontology and an epistemology—each of
which has a system of internal logic and external validation. ontologies are
“theories of being” that map the kinds of things that can exist. ontological
questions regard the form and nature of reality—what can be known. Consider
this, for example: to what extent does an objective, social world exist apart
from human interpretation? is gender socially constructed or biologically
determined? these are ontological questions and the answers to them
(consciously made or not) will profoundly shape the processes of social research.
ontological beliefs do not necessarily precede epistemological ones—they are
not causal. epistemological commitments can shape what we believe about the
world. Consider, for example, the common expression: “i only believe what i can
see.” ontological and epistemological beliefs are entwined in each other.
every ontological premise implies certain epistemological commitments,
that is to say certain possibilities for producing valid knowledge.11 should
researchers treat interview data as neutral (i.e., transparent) descriptions of
experience, as symbolic interpretations of experience, or as strategic meaning-
making practices? this is an epistemological question that can be sensibly
answered only in relation to a set of commitments about the nature of social
life—which is an ontological premise.
in philosophy, the study of epistemology focuses on two questions: one
regarding the individuals who know and the other regarding the process of
knowing how anything can be regarded as true. historically, the scientific
emphasis on universal knowledge necessarily de-emphasized epistemology in
28
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge
11the ontological premise about the nature of reality shapes not only what can be known and how
it can be known (epistemology) but also the nature of what counts as a social problem, the nature
of research ethics, practices of representation, as well as subsequent research and pedagogy that
reproduces the field (dillard & dixson, 2006). epistemological concerns in social research are
central to the functions of hegemonic domination in knowledge production and dissemination
(stanfield, 1993, as cited in dillard & dixson, 2006, p. 236).

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
29
this first sense—the nature of “knowers.” the production of so-called univer-
sal knowledge demanded universal experiences shared by universal people.
this emphasis on universal knowledge reinforced hegemonic social hierar-
chies by naturalizing and systematizing various forms of bias.
feminist epistemological critiques beginning in the 1960s, with few
exceptions (cf. Millman & Kanter, 1975), took up epistemological critiques
regarding the nature of knowers. feminists challenged existing scientific
beliefs regarding who could produce valid knowledge about whom, and on
what terms (cf. harding, 1987; hartsock, 1987). standpoint epistemology
became the center of feminist and critical race critiques of social science.
subsequently, the cultural turn heralded by poststructuralism and postmod-
ernism ushered in a set of crises in social sciences regarding the second epis-
temological question regarding how we can know—how we can find or create
“truth.” Methodological critiques informed by the cultural turn concern the
nature of existence, the politics of truth, and the production of knowledge.
Pragmatically this is reflected in scholarship that centers questions regarding
the nature of evidence, subjectivity, and meaning. these challenges to scien-
tific ontology and epistemology have made inroads in the social sciences
despite fierce resistance. Many researchers working in interpretive frame-
works have turned to the humanities, particularly postmodern and poststruc-
tural thought, in order to explore key philosophical issues central to social
research. this has, to varying degrees, destabilized traditional social science
by challenging both epistemological and ontological foundations.
it is important to underscore once again that epistemologies and ontologies
are not motives or points of origin for behavior; rather, they are integral (and often
Ontologies are theories, beliefs, and assumptions about the nature and relations
of existence. they are commonly referred to as “theories of being.”
Sample ontological questions: to what extent is there an objective social world?
What does it mean to say something exists objectively?
Epistemologies are theories, beliefs, and assumptions about the ways we can
learn about the world. they consider the relationship between the knower and
the known and how valid knowledge is created.
Sample epistemological questions: What issues or events constitute important
points of social inquiry? how should such inquiry proceed?
Table 2.1
Philosophical foundations of social Research

assumed) conceptual parameters that render particular courses of action more
plausible, or implausible, than others. the epistemic foundation of social research
directs our attention to certain “realities” and not to others and thereby determines
the horizon of possibilities for any research project—what can and cannot be seen
as well as what can and cannot legitimately be argued. as noted earlier, ontolog-
ical and epistemological foundations establish strategies for recognizing, collect-
ing, and analyzing data. they also provide conceptual commitments that include
the nature and possibilities of subjectivity, agency, and experience.
Subjectivity
theories of subjectivity stand at the intersection of ontology and episte-
mology (hall, 2004, p. 4). an ontological investment inheres in every con-
ception of subjectivity—and every qualitative framework articulates this
investment in different ways. overall, theories of subjectivity fall into two
broad categories. the earliest of these defines a subject as a person with his or
her own truth; the subject is synonymous with the self. from Plato through
Popper, all phenomena (animate and inanimate) were thought to have fixed,
essential natures—which made understanding both possible and, in some
respects, finite. the self might be understood as divine or biological (or some
combination of these) but it was not understood as a social product. the con-
cept of “truth-as-essence” originated in the enlightenment construction of sci-
ence and objectivity. the conceptual separation of the self from social life
makes it possible to think of research as mirroring what exists in nature, as
producing a reflection of other fixed essential essences that exist around us.
Both Plato and descartes allowed for a rational subject that stands apart
from the world of objects. however, the struggle for epistemic autonomy was
even starker for descartes than for Plato. descartes “suspended belief in all
but his own existence in order to recreate a body of knowledge cleansed of
faults, impurities, and uncertainties” (longino, 2007, p. 104). in Metaphysical
Meditations (1641), descartes proposed what has come to be known as the
modern, rational subject. for descartes, subjective identity is the mind’s
awareness of its own representations—in this sense, it results from a rational
process of reflection that bridges inner and outer worlds. individual con-
sciousness is transparent to itself and operates according to principles that are
independent of embodied experience (longino, 2007, p. 105).
descartes used the term subject in opposition to the term object to indicate
an individual fully endowed with consciousness and agency—hence the concepts
30
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
31
of agent and agency collapse into each other. this subject/object dichotomy,
known as Cartesian dualism, became the foundation of scientific research in
which researchers (subjects) study and measure objects. Within the social sci-
ences, this has particular consequences since the “objects” of social research are
generally other people. despite the logical problems created by subject/object
distinctions, descartes’ radically isolated individual became the ideal knower.
Cartesian presuppositions enable us to experience objects and facts as being in the
world. empirical claims are those that can be verified by sensory inspection—
hence the conception of “evidence” as something one can point to in a localized
context. however, despite this emphasis on sensory inspection, descartes held
that reason was always the ultimate tool of knowledge that validated the senses.
Without reason, one could be mistaken about, or deceived by, sensory perception.
in asserting the primacy of the mind, descartes reduced bodies to vehicles for the
mind.12 the Cartesian self is by its very nature disembodied.
Cartesian dualism asserts an ontological premise in which there is radical
separation between subject and object and between people and the external
world; consequently, it advances an epistemology (a theory of how the world
can be known) of objectivism, which as noted earlier, continues to be effec-
tively challenged. early Western science embraced Cartesian dualism, and
despite hundreds of years and multiple challenges, it continues to define the
heart of mainstream social science research.
the most recent theories of subjectivity regard subjects not as persons
but as discursive categories that articulate collective social relations.
Poststructuralists and postmodernists draw from althusser to conceptualize
subjects as the expression of social processes—the embodiment and reifica-
tion of social structures. for example, terms such as “black” or “heterosexual”
are understood as subject locations that are the products of culture and power.
subject positions, in this sense, are historical and discursive categories of
identification. individuals come to occupy subject locations through a process
althusser identified as interpolation, which might be understood as a dual
process of ideological coercion and personal identification. for example, no
one is born with a racial identification; culture “hails” individuals as belong-
ing to a particular racial category or subject location that becomes part of a
personal identity. subjectivities are dominant cultural markers of “difference”
12artifical intelligence literature rests largely in this kind of dualism. however, Cartesian dualism
is effectively challenged by theories that posit the mind is both caused by and realized through the
body (searle, 2003).

that shape individual identity through the tension and interplay between the
symbolic and the imaginary.
subjects are produced through repetition but the process of repetition does
not produce identical iterations—neither does the process of repetition pro-
duce subjects anew over and over again (Butler, 1993). each iteration is an
expression of others but also open to variation and change. Because subjects
are created repeatedly, differently, and in different circumstances, the possi-
bilities of resistance, nonconformity, and variation become possible. the
process of repetition itself can undermine the normalizing force of interpellation
(Butler, 1997a).
our interior lives inevitably involve both other people generally and soci-
ety more broadly (Mansfield, 2000) and this has particular consequences for
marginalized subjectivities, which are always produced through, or in opposi-
tion to, dominant ones. for example, it is possible to understand selected
attributes as “a disability,” only in relation to attributes understood as “ability.”
if scholars no longer accept a simple or fixed notion of ability, it becomes
incumbent upon researchers to understand the social conditions through which
people come to occupy the subject position of “disabled.”
subject positions are never individual formulations; they are always
linked to something beyond personal experience. subjectivity “is a constant
work of daily construction that involves both receiving representations made
to us by culture—of gender, class, age, race, identity and so forth—and pro-
cessing these significations so that we are at once produced and
(re)producing” (Pollock, 2008, p. 252). foucault (1972, p. 115) argued that a
subject is “not the speaking consciousness, not the author of a formulation, but
a position that may be filled in certain conditions by various individuals.”
theories of subjectivity have “unparalleled and enduring importance” for
understanding the possibilities for social change (hall, 2004, p. 5). in the 21st
century, problems of subjectivity, agency, and experience are at the heart of
questions about human existence. subsequent chapters pose and answer three
key questions with respect to issues of subjectivity. first, how do analytic induc-
tion, symbolic interaction, and ethnomethodology constitute their objects/subjects
of knowledge? second, what epistemological and ontological assumptions are
implicit in the ways that objects/subjects of knowledge are constituted? and,
third, what are the political effects? these questions are critical to understand-
ing how each framework conceptualizes the ways that people are bound together
and set apart in society. Consequently, they hold special importance to social
32
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
33
science researchers in general and more specifically to those researchers who are
invested in scholarship aimed at issues of social justice.
Agency
every theory of subjectivity is tethered to a corresponding conception of
agency. What does it mean to speak of agency? to a commonsense attitude,
agency might be as simple as the ability to affect some aspect of our environ-
ment. the question becomes more complex if we ask, “Where is the locus of
the action that affects our environment?” in order to understand “agency,” we
must first lay claim to an ontological narrative. for example, notions of
agency derived from Cartesian (body/mind) dualism are associated with con-
sciousness and the mind—agency begins with a thought or intention that
directs action. in Cartesian dualism, bodies emerge either as the conditions of
social action or as objects that are acted upon. Commonsense attitudes, and
much of social research, reflect this orientation to agency.
second-wave feminism, by challenging the notion of gender and sex as nat-
ural essences, complicated a commonsense understanding of agency. if we con-
sider bodies not as natural but as socially constructed—that is, as the results of the
processes of embodiment—we must reconsider both the meanings of bodies and
the locus of agency. to the extent that feminist analyses are rooted in Cartesian
ontologies, however, this tension is left unexplored. By contrast feminisms rooted
in poststructural ontologies have placed issues of agency at the center of social
analysis. if gender is socially constructed, rather than biologically inherent, people
must learn to “construct” gender and by implication, put some measure of effort
into making ourselves recognizable as gendered beings. this is not only a matter
of hairstyle and clothing but also includes body language, demeanor, and interac-
tional styles. from this perspective, how do we locate the source of agency behind
the accomplishment of gender? if gender is not an individual choice, to what
extent is gendered demeanor a matter of individual agency?
at the heart of issues of agency are ontological narratives regarding the
nature of the world and epistemological narratives about how that world can
be apprehended or known. ontological narratives are central to agency. however,
when faced with expressions of agency that cannot be said to be entirely indi-
vidual, scholars initially turned to the constraining forces of social institutions
to explain human behavior. tradition, norms, and roles, along with other
constraining forces such as false consciousness and formal social institutions

(including legal and educational systems), emerged as key focal points. the
tension between notions of free will, and the forces of social control that con-
strain free will, is directly related to the macro/micro divide in social research.
empirical analyses typically regard either macro analyses of constraining
structures or micro analyses that foreground the agency of personal action.
the binary distinction between micro and macro echoes the effects of
Cartesian dualism. again, at the heart of questions of agency is an ontological
narrative about the nature of the world and an epistemological narrative about
how that world can be apprehended or known.
Both radical and liberal feminisms rely on a humanist conception of sub-
jectivity that conflates subjects with autonomous, rational individuals who
exist separate from and outside of language. in contrast to a humanist subject
that is essential and more or less fixed, poststructural scholarship posits sub-
jectivity as constantly in process; it is both precarious and contradictory. the
constituted character of subjectivity forms the precondition of agency (Butler,
1993). indeed, the possibility of change exists precisely because there is not
essential nature that binds us irrevocably. from this perspective, agency is
always possible and always political. agency is always situated in, and to
some extent determined by, specific historical, political, and social factors—it
is never entirely free, nor entirely constrained. subsequent chapters take up
this lingering tension regarding the nature of agency and attempt to demon-
strate the importance of transcending the impulse to understand constraint as
structural and agency as personal.
Experience
the Cartesian framework that underlies positivist research presumes a
subject who has experiences, which can then be objectively measured. But do
people simply have experiences that researchers can then study? do we sim-
ply recognize objects and events that appear before us? is language a neutral
tool for describing reality? does reality “speak for itself”? interpretivists
would answer “no” to these questions. experience is always an interpretation
of events, not a mere encounter with them (scott, 1991, p. 777), and language
is always implicated in constructing social meanings. interpretivists argue that
all meaning is situated in localized contexts; all efforts to understand social
interaction must be located and described in a localized context. for interpre-
tivists, decontextualized data are oxymoronic (northcutt & McCoy, 2004).
however, just how much context is necessary? What constitutes a context?
34
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
35
What is the social context of media? how does a researcher draw logical
boundaries around the social contexts of a research design? how does the
notion of context affect conceptions of subjectivity, agency, and constraint?
What can a narrow sense of context offer to our research? What can it cost our
research? as we shall see in subsequent chapters, analytic induction, symbolic
interaction, and ethnomethodology each take a different position in response
to questions of context. Questions about context are, of course, related to ques-
tions about the constructed nature of experience, about the constitution of sub-
jects, and about whether or not experience can in itself serve as a kind of
evidence. By engaging both the philosophy of science and the practice of sci-
ence, subsequent chapters ground critiques of methodology in pragmatic con-
cerns and practical applications of research.
iMPliCations foR soCial ReseaRCh
to varying degrees, all social research paradigms are implicated in sustaining
hegemonic social orders. understanding the philosophical/theoretical founda-
tions of social research contributes to more effective social research. it also
enables scholars to critique the reification of analytical constructs used in
social research and thereby more broadly transform what counts as valid
knowledge. in this sense, inquiries into the foundations of social research get
at the root of how discourses of science can reproduce existing relations of
power—even as they are used to reveal inequalities and advance remedies for
social problems. historically, qualitative researchers have been at the center of
challenges to hegemonic conceptions of science. these challenges continue
today as scholars attempt to make the methods most widely used by qualita-
tive researchers both more effective and more accountable for their own
processes of knowledge production.
in much of the social sciences, researchers tend to focus on techniques for
creating valid knowledge and to treat theory as something that one brings to
social research, rather than as something already embedded in the research
process. this has had particular consequences for how students learn social
research methodologies generally—and particularly dramatic consequences for
training in interpretive research strategies. for example, symbolic interaction
and ethnomethodology each have histories as somewhat amphibious frame-
works; at times they are understood as research methodologies and at times as
social theories. textbooks typically introduce students to symbolic interaction

and ethnomethodology as social theories, yet students learn to engage symbolic
interaction and ethnomethodology as methodologies. even within a single text
it is possible to find ethnomethodology and symbolic interaction referred to as
theories in one chapter and methodologies in another. Both symbolic interac-
tion and ethnomethodology are engaged as part of the infrastructure of social
research, but they are not research methodologies. Broadly speaking, research
methodologies provide analytic frameworks that enable social researchers to
design well-constructed research. Yet symbolic interaction and ethnomethodol-
ogy are not social theories insofar as social theories provide (or are intended to
provide) a significant level of predictive power and ably stand apart from empir-
ical analyses as coherent explanations of social life. typically, social theories
serve to make social life intelligible by organizing phenomena into systems—
feminism, world systems theory, and Marxism come quickly to mind.13
some scholars refer to symbolic interaction and ethnomethodology as
“soft theory” (iser, 2006), some refer to them as “micro level theory” (Wodak
& Meyer, 2009), others refer to them as “approaches” or “perspectives”
(Blumer, 1986; gusfield, 2003), and still others regard them as methodological
frameworks (Prasad, 1993). i begin with the premise that symbolic interaction
and ethnomethodology are more theoretically elaborate than research method-
ologies and yet less analytically developed than social theory—hence, i refer to
them as interpretive frameworks for research that shift the foundations of
empirical work.
By contrast, analytic induction is recognized as a research methodology
and rarely discussed in theoretical terms not because it is theoretically barren
but because the theoretical commitments of analytic induction generally func-
tion at the level of common sense for social researchers—that is to say they
36
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge
13socrates argued that theory rests on three critieria: (1) it must be explicit in its details, (2) it must
also be conceptually abstract enough that it does not require reference to concrete examples, and
(3) finally, theory must be understood as universal, applying to all times and places. descartes
elaborated on these three elements to create a list of six qualities that constitute an ideal-type for
scientific theory. descartes insisted that theory must also be formulated with elements that are
independent of any specific context, action or interpretation; it must be systematic—that is to say
the context–independent elements must be related to each other by rules or laws; and, it must be
complete and predictive (flyvbjerg, 2001, pp. 38–39). Critical theory, as a formal mode of
research, first emerged in the frankfurt school of social Research, most particularly through the
work of adorno, horkheimer, Marcuse, and to some extent habermas. Critical theorists developed
a reflexive style of inquiry that saw social science as implicated in the complex production of
regimes of truth (gannon & davies, 2007, p. 76). Critical theory continues to be commonly used
by qualitative researchers—however, the use of critical theory does not alter the premise of
analytic induction in empirical research.

Chapter 2
Philosophical Roots of Research Methodologies
37
seem to require no elaboration. in standard analytic induction, often both
researchers and research participants hold a belief that they are describing the
social world as it exists. this has particular value for describing wage gaps and
investigating discriminatory practices. however, when qualitative researchers
and those they study both rely on realism, we enter the logical equivalent of a
Möbius strip that offers two alternatives. Researchers must either adopt a con-
sensus theory of truth and reiterate the most dominant view(s) expressed
among research participants or researchers must presume to know more about
what is going on than do the participants. as a consequence, realism limits
insight into social processes and tends to reify social identities and structures.
the problem is not with realism as an analytic strategy but with a discursive
construction of social science that naturalizes some forms of knowledge pro-
duction as “the gold standard” for all research questions. at the same time, by
limiting both the discussion of ontological and epistemological concerns
embedded within social research, this narrow range of analytic strategies pre-
vents social research from fully accounting for human experience. that is a
fundamental problem. While a range of interpretive practices have emerged in
the past 50 years, it has been quite difficult to diversify processes of formal-
ization, since these are what give social science its scientific credibility. Yet
this is essential if social research is to move ably forward in the 21st century.
ConCluding thoughts
social scientific knowledge has accrued over the years not only by amassing
studies but also by marginalizing research that did not adhere to the Cartesian
foundations of the natural sciences. “science” has produced subjugated
knowledge by devaluing or disqualifying some forms of social research.
Within this particular framework of rationality, controversies are seen as
extraneous to scientific research; they arise because of errors, because deci-
sions are made with insufficient evidence, or because researchers fail to act
as they “should” (Barrotta & dascal, 2005). this leaves little room for broad-
ening conceptions of social research since all concepts and phenomenon can
be explained only by appealing to the reasons already firmly lodged within
the premises of “science” (Barrotta & dascal, 2005).
all researchers inherit cartographies of knowledge, maps that throw into
relief a research imaginary from within which social researchers begin to work.

this book works at deconstructing those maps in order to demonstrate how qual-
itative frameworks are situated within discourses of power/knowledge and to
examine some of the ideological investments that both enable and constrain
social research. Contemporary researchers cannot trust that research frameworks
created by the most privileged, during eras of great oppression, will serve as the
basis of socially just research. it is not a matter of good methods applied to bad
uses but rather academia’s lack of awareness regarding its own processes of
reproduction. With that said, i also acknowledge that the idealized quest for
knowledge can make it difficult to admit that knowledge leads as often to closures
as to openings (Minh-ha, 1989, p. 40). i understand this work to be not a process
of perfecting but of honing. to be fully compatible with a vision of a socially just
world, we need to consistently explore not only our own locations as researchers
but also the foundations and assumptions of the social research paradigms that we
have inherited. this book is intended as a step in that direction. i hope that read-
ers will test this book against their own experience, knowledge, and logic; argue
when what is written here does not seem to fit; and more generally engage in
public discussion by offering more and different interpretations.
fuRtheR Reading
atkins, K. (2005). Self and subjectivity. new York: Blackwell.
Baert, P. (2005). Philosophy of the social sciences. Cambridge, uK: Polity Press.
denzin, n. K., lincoln, Y. s., & smith, l. t. (eds.). (2008). Handbook of critical and
indigenous methodologies. thousand oaks, Ca: sage.
deVault, M. (1999). Liberating method: Feminism and social research. Philadelphia:
temple university Press.
hall, d. e. (2004). Subjectivity. new York: Routledge.
Jackson, P. t. (2010). The conduct of inquiry in international relations. new York:
Routledge.
Mansfield, n. (2000). Subjectivity: Theories of the self from Freud to Haraway. newYork:
new York university Press.
naples, n. (2003). Feminism and method. new York: Routledge.
Ramazanoğlu, C., & holland, J. (2002). Feminist methodology: Challenges and
choices. thousand oaks, Ca: sage.
scott, J. W. (1991). the evidence of experience. Critical Inquiry, 17(4), 773–797.
tolman, d. l., & Miller, M. B. (2001). From subjects to subjectivities: A handbook of
interpretive and participatory methods. new York: new York university Press.
Winch, P. (1958). The idea of a social science and its relationship to philosophy.
london: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
38
CaRtogRaPhies of KnoWledge

39
 CHAPTER THREE 

ANALYTIC INDUCTION
INTRODUCTION
Today researchers commonly use analytic induction as a qualitative method of
inquiry—arguably it is the most common form of qualitative inquiry. All
forms of research rely upon the logics of induction, deduction, and abduction
to varying degree. However, as a method, analytic induction requires that
researchers begin with numerous observations of a particular phenomenon;
then, through processes of coding, researchers establish patterns (and their
exceptions) in order to draw general conclusions. “In its most simple terms,
induction is the scientific process of building theoretical explanations on the
basis of repeated observation of particular circumstances” (Daly, 2007, p. 45).
However, this was not the original intent or design of analytic induction.
Analytic induction as a method of inquiry actually began with a concern for
causal explanations and universal generalizations (Glaser & Strauss, 1967;
Husband & Foster, 1987; Rettig, Tam, & Magistad, 1996; Robinson, 1951;
Smelser & Baltes, 2001; Znaniecki, 1934). While a quantitatively inflected style

40
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
of analytic induction continues in some disciplines, contemporary qualitative
researchers more commonly consider the strength of analytic induction to be its
ability to provide a rich understanding of complex social contexts—not its abil-
ity to provide a causal explanation of events. This more common use of analytic
induction is properly known as modified analytic induction; however, in prac-
tice, qualitative researchers seldom describe their work as such.
Beginning with a short history, this chapter will examine the ontological and
epistemological foundations of analytic induction and then explore analytic
induction in relation to grounded theory, postpositivism, and social construction-
ism. It offers a general summary of analytic induction before moving into analy-
ses of data and corresponding critiques of these analyses. A discussion regarding
the implications for social research and social justice follows, and the chapter
ends with concluding remarks. Overall, the chapter attempts to provide a context
for understanding the conceptions of agency, experience, and subjectivity that are
embedded in analytic induction, as it is widely practiced today. By applying ana-
lytic induction to exemplars drawn from the New York Times, the television
drama Brothers and Sisters, and a research interview with Tony Romero, I hope
to demonstrate both the potentials and problems of analytic induction.
ANALYTIC INDUCTION: A BRIEF HISTORY
The move toward analytic induction emerged (at least conceptually) around
1930, and was elaborated upon in the 1950s and 1960s. A variety of scholars
made significant contributions to the development of analytic induction. For
example, in 1929 Dorothy Thomas developed techniques for describing small
units of behavior that could be categorized and then quantified; and, in 1936,
Robert Angell pioneered work in analytic induction in principle, if not in name
(Platt, 1996, pp. 18–19). Today, however, the development of analytic induc-
tion is attributed to Florian Znaniecki, who sought to articulate the causal laws
and universal patterns, which he believed escaped the grasp of quantitative
methods as they were practiced (Ragin, 1994).
Early social researchers commonly pursued correlations through enumer-
ative induction—a form of analysis that only could confirm instances of sta-
tistical correlations. Znaniecki believed that these correlations would always
be troubled by exceptions; consequently, he developed analytic induction to
build upon the strengths, and overcome the shortcomings, of enumerative

induction. Znaniecki’s analytic induction pursued correlations but emphasized
the importance of examining negative, or deviant, cases (cases where there
was no correlation) in order to develop a more comprehensive explanation
(Robinson, 1951, p. 813). Znaniecki believed that by studying the essential
features of a social phenomenon, researchers would be able to create compre-
hensive lists of characteristics that would always be associated with the occur-
rence of the phenomenon being studied—thus enabling researchers to generate
exhaustive knowledge in the form of universal statements. He reasoned that by
isolating the essential characteristics of a phenomenon, researchers could pro-
vide not only exhaustive knowledge and universal statements but also gen-
uinely causal laws—even though case selections were not drawn from
statistically representative samples.1 Znaniecki’s focus on characteristics that
were both essential and typical led many researchers to refer to analytic induc-
tion as the type method.
Although Znaniecki claimed that analytic induction was the “true”
method of the natural sciences (and ought to be that of the social sciences), he
was criticized for not providing accessible examples of its methodological
procedures (Robinson, 1951). Indeed, much of his efforts toward analytic
induction can best be understood as describing a logic of analysis, as opposed
to a method of inquiry. Perhaps among Znaniecki’s most lasting contribution
to qualitative research was his emphasis on personal experience and personal
documents that ultimately expanded what researchers recognized as credible
data (Platt, 1996).
The Polish Peasant in Europe and America by William Isaac Thomas and
Florian Znaniecki gained early acclaim as one of the most important contribu-
tions to sociology (Young, 1941) and became a landmark study both in the
development of analytic induction and in the use of life histories in social
research (Platt, 1996; Reynolds & Herman-Kinney, 2003). Although the
analysis was crafted in the causal language of physical sciences, the study
broke new ground by examining life histories and by demonstrating that
aspects of culture are dependent on the practices of individuals (Musolf, 2003;
Young, 1941). The Polish Peasant in Europe and America caught the interest
of early symbolic interactionists at the University of Chicago—in particular
Edwin Sutherland, Donald Cressey, Alfred Lindesmith, and Herbert Blumer.
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
41
1In this usage, “essential” refers not to an ontological status but to a logical one of “necessary and
sufficient” as operationally defined.

Yet many scholars, including Herbert Blumer (1941), were highly critical of
the study and argued that it had no clear methodology.2
Most broadly, Znaniecki’s contemporaries understood the particular brilliance
of analytic induction as its capacity for knowledge-building and its self-corrective
procedure of analyzing deviant cases (Robinson, 1951, p. 814). In the 1950s,
W. S. Robinson began to formalize and systematize analytic induction. Robinson
modified analytic induction by developing a clear method of causal analysis, which
included calculations for standard deviation (Miller, 1982). In addition, Robinson
argued that the process of analytic induction begins with a provisional definition of
something to be explained and a corresponding explanatory hypothesis. As data
were collected, they were to be compared with the hypothesis. If the hypothesis did
not fit “the facts,” either the hypothesis would be reformulated or the phenomenon
to be explained would be redefined so to exclude the nonconforming case(s). The
procedure would be continued exhaustively with the intent of establishing a uni-
versal relationship among observed facts. The final methodological step provided a
distinctive element in early analytic induction: because conditions, which are
always present when the phenomenon is present, should not be present when the
phenomenon is absent. Consequently, the researcher was required to look for cases
that fall outside of the area circumscribed by the definition of the phenomenon in
order to determine whether or not the final hypothesis might apply to them.3 This
requirement—to account for every possible case (all positive and negative
instances)—posed obvious practical problems and made analytic induction a daunt-
ing endeavor (Johnson, 1998, pp. 29–30).4
In the 1960s, major transformations occurred in the development of social
research that moved analytic induction away from the quantitative model of
42
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
2In critiquing The Polish Peasant in Europe and America, Blumer argued that human documents lend
themselves to a wide range of interpretations, depending on the experience, interests, competence, and
theoretical framework one brings to it. Given the impossibility of truly exhaustive accounts, and the
nature of documents as open to interpretation and abstraction, Blumer exhorted scholars to seek
validation for their interpretations through statistical analyses in which findings can be compared with
those of a control group rather than to specific experience (Blumer, 1986, pp. 123–126). Blumer
argued that accounts can only make clear the nature of the interpretation, not its validity.
3The insistence on generating lawlike claims from empirical evidence created conceptual tensions.
“Karl Popper’s solution to these logical problems involved an inversion of the basic stance of the
logical positivists: since lawlike claims could never be verified, and since scientific claims were
phrased in lawlike—often universal terms—perhaps it made sense to stop asking whether a claim
could be proven true and instead ask whether a claim could be proven false (1992, 92)” (Jackson,
2010, p. 21). This move toward falsification is reflected in early analytic induction.
4Robinson (1951, p. 814) imagined that analytic induction would not stand alone and argued that
in order to “study cases in which the phenomenon does not occur would involve us in enumerative
induction.”

the physical sciences.5 At a minimum, many qualitative researchers began to
doubt the ontological premise that human behavior was governed by absolute
laws such as those that Znaniecki and Robinson had pursued (cf. Ratcliff,
2006). Barry Glaser and Anselm Strauss (1967) flatly rejected the methods of
analytic induction and initiated a move away from hypothesis testing and
toward theory creation.6 They argued that researchers were imposing theories
on empirical settings and hence were using data to test theory—rather than
actually investigating social life. Glaser and Strauss (1967) created what is
known as grounded theory by inverting the typical paradigm that brought the-
ory to the data. By observing social life without preconceptions, Glaser and
Strauss asserted that researchers would be able to develop theory from cate-
gories and concepts that emerged organically from data.
Developed as comparative case analysis, scholars conduct grounded theory
research by constantly comparing data in order to observe their analytically rel-
evant properties (ten Have, 2004). In a very loose sense, one might say the
researcher develops a hypothesis about what is going on and searches to see if
an observation/case is typical. However, grounded theory was juxtaposed
against the hypothesis testing and the causal proofs developed by Znaniecki
(1934) and Robinson (1951). The language of grounded theory replaced the pos-
itivist notion of hypothesis testing with that of theory development.
In grounded theory, the researcher develops and tests any number of emerg-
ing theoretical explanations of the data against the increasing numbers of obser-
vations or cases and then revises her or his theoretical explanation in light of
accumulating information.7 Analytically, the process of grounded theory is char-
acterized by a search for exceptions; pragmatically, it is characterized by several
stages of coding.8 Further, unlike the analytic induction of their predecessors,
Glaser and Strauss (1967, p. 104) argued that the method does not require
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
43
5The pragmatist philosophy of James, Peirce, and Dilthey as well as phenomenological
foundations provided by Husserl, Schutz, Berger, and Luckmann broadly influenced both the
future direction of social research and analytic induction.
6Herbert Blumer was Strauss’s advisor at the University of Chicago. Glaser had studied with Paul
Lazerfield and Robert Merton at Columbia.
7“Theory produced by analytic induction is universal, precise, and limited” (Ratcliff, 2006, p. 2).
8“All variants of grounded theory include the following strategies: (a) simultaneous data
collection and analysis, (b) pursuit of emergent themes through early data analysis, (c) discovery
of basic social processes within the data, (d) inductive construction of abstract categories that
explain and synthesize these processes, (e) sampling to refine the categories through comparative
processes, and (f) integration of categories into a theoretical framework that specifies causes,
conditions, and consequences of the studied processes (see Charmaz 1990, 1995b, 2000; Glaser
1978, 1992; Glaser and Strauss 1967; Strauss 1987, 1995)” (Charmaz, 2001, p. 677).

consideration of all possible data, but rather consideration of data until new infor-
mation no longer contributes to the development of the theory or explanation—
referred to as the point of saturation.
The influence of grounded theory moved the practice of analytic induc-
tion away from hypothesis testing, statistical calculations, causal analyses,
and falsification and toward rich analyses of a complex social phenomenon
through the process of examining, comparing, and coding/organizing data.
Many researchers consider analytic induction today to be a variety of the con-
stant comparative method associated with grounded theory in which there is a
systematic search for negative cases (variations or exceptions) and the modi-
fication of one’s analysis/theory until no disconfirming evidence can be found
(Hammersley, 1981, p. 216).9
There are multiple variations of grounded theory today. The variations in
grounded theory, like those included in the rubric of analytic induction, range
from postpositivist to constructivist. However, it is safe to say that both
grounded theory and analytic induction refer to an ongoing inductive process
of identifying emergent patterns, both are recursive processes, and both build
theory from the raw materials of data. In each, scholars are faced with the task
of producing an ordered explanation of observations and interpretations.
In order to make sense of observations, the researcher tests out themes (poten-
tial explanations) in hopes of constructing a pattern. “If he [sic] can successfully
use a theme to convince others of the existence of a pattern, he can be said, at least
according to relatively weak criteria, to have ‘explained’ his observations” (Latour
& Woolgar, 1986, p. 37). Well-written grounded theory and analytic induction
make the processes of analysis and the logical warrants of interpretation available
to readers for consideration and evaluation. These are rigorous ventures that pro-
vide accountability of methodology, methods, and interpretation.
For some researchers, a primary distinction between analytic induction
and grounded theory is that analytic induction compares cases only within the
specific sample being studied, while grounded theory relies on a constant
search for cases that are external to the sample under investigation (Husband
& Foster, 1987, p. 57). Grounded theory is an iterative process that requires
one to remain in the field, analyzing data and using abduction to search
for new cases to test emerging theory against, until the full analysis is
44
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
9As noted earlier, some disciplines continue to use the language of hypothesis testing in
association with analytic induction, although contemporary practices are generally less formal
processes of constant verification (Morse & Mitcham, 2002).

complete. However, the nature of research funding and academic life makes
this approach to fieldwork largely untenable today. Scholars doing grounded
theory, like those using analytic induction, are more likely to return home after
initial data collection and return to the field if initial analyses require it.
At least initially, the relationship of theory to data was an obvious and pri-
mary distinction between grounded theory and other forms of analytic induction
(Glaser & Strauss, 1967, p. 101). Analytic induction “begins with a pre-existing
theoretical viewpoint or premise that guides the investigator’s approach to the
cases that are examined (Gilgun, 1995; Miller, 1982)” (Rettig et al., 1996,
p. 208). By contrast, grounded theorists attempt to approach data with a theo-
retical tabula rasa—with the intent of generating theory from the data. Yet again,
this is no longer necessarily the case today. For example, Strauss and Corbin
(1998, p. 12) wrote, “A researcher does not begin a project with a preconceived
theory in mind (unless his or her purpose is to elaborate and extend existing the-
ory).” In this sense, the original goal of developing theory is retained, but it is
no longer necessarily a development drawn from a tabula rasa.
While researchers using inductive analysis may not use the language of
grounded theory (e.g., memoing or open, axial, and selective coding) the
process of induction itself leads them to proceed through comparative analy-
ses and multiple layers of coding that can be quite similar. In practice, both
grounded theory and analytic induction use an ongoing inductive process to
identify emergent patterns (and variations or exceptions) in order to build
explanations in the form of concepts and/or theory. Finally, researchers using
analytic induction, like those using grounded theory, work until they reach
saturation—not until they have examined all possible cases as Znaniecki and
Robinson had envisioned. For good reason, scholars today debate the extent to
which the procedures of grounded theory are indeed distinctive of it (Pidgeon
& Henwood, 2004, p. 625).
As practiced today, few qualitative researchers would describe analytic
induction as an interpretive framework because it does not explicitly regard
the interpretive practices of social life. Yet most social researchers accept that
interpretation plays a central role in all human interaction and social processes.
Qualitative research that does not account for the importance of human inter-
pretation in interaction would seem to implicitly rely upon the behaviorist
framework of stimulus–response. What other alternative is there for under-
standing interaction? Some researchers sidestep this question by claiming to
focus only on interaction without consideration of meaning-making practices
or motivation. However, when analyses that rely on analytic induction do not
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
45

account for the gap between behaviorism and interpretation, they assume a
realist ontology—as a matter of common sense.
From a realist perspective, a researcher faces limited options for under-
standing the complexities of social life: She or he can advance the most dom-
inant views that emerge in the accounts being examined, or she or he can adopt
a “god’s eye view” by asserting that she or he “knows better” than those being
studied. The first approach, advancing dominant views, is vulnerable to repro-
ducing hegemonic relationships—it gives us truth by consensus. The second
option is seldom tenable by contemporary standards of good research. This
tension persists, in part, because discussions of analytic induction generally
are limited to technical descriptions of procedures—as if these stand apart
from interpretive practices. Further, ontological realism leads the categories of
analysis created through induction to be presented as if they were derived
intact—rather than as if they represent conceptual ideas about social life.
By and large, researchers are not expected to identify, much less analyze,
the ontological and epistemological moorings of the research methodologies
and methods that we use. Consequently, much of what we know about episte-
mology and ontology operates at the level of commonsense assumptions, mak-
ing us vulnerable to replicating a Cartesian paradigm without necessarily
recognizing it as such. Even analytic induction used in conjunction with social
constructionism can reproduce ontological realism. The same can be said for
Action Research, which includes both quantitative and qualitative methods in
the service of developing social equality.10
The principles of Action Research mark a substantial departure from
traditional academic research. Indeed, politically guided research projects that
account for their investments in research can produce less partial and there-
fore less distorted results than those purportedly guided by value neutrality
(Harding, 2007). However, Action Research, as a field, does not take up the
more rudimentary critical analysis of the philosophical foundations of
social research that would enable scholars to get at the politics of knowl-
edge production embedded in conceptions of agency, subjectivity, experi-
ence, and the nature of evidence—as well as in a host of other assumptions
regarding the nature of theory and method. Like all research that relies upon
deductive or inductive processes of formalization, Action Research remains
46
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
10Action Research “is not so much a methodology as an orientation to inquiry that seeks to create
participative communities of inquiry in which qualities of engagement, curiosity and question
posing are brought to bear on significant practical issues” (Reason & Bradbury, 2008, p. 1).

tethered to traditional practices of formalization and consequently to the
assumptions of a Cartesian paradigm.
It is important to note that I am not suggesting that researchers should
never choose ontological realism; rather I am arguing that the ontological
premise of social research should be a conscious choice that is both articulated
and justified in the research design. I am asserting that responsible social
research begins with an understanding of the philosophical and political com-
mitments that underlie methods of data collection and analysis. Since analytic
induction is frequently used with postpositivism and social constructionism,
I take up each in the next section.
Analytic Induction, Postpositivism, and Social Constructionism
Postpositivism
As the previous section demonstrated, the historical roots of analytic
induction are positivist. Positivism and grand theory emerged as dichotomous
yet complementary ways of understanding the social world—both were in
search of lawlike regularities to explain social life. Where grand theory was
broadly explanatory but unverifiable, positivism offered undertheorized tech-
niques for generating universal empirical proofs. Most broadly, positivism can
be characterized by three core beliefs: (1) the world exists as an objective
entity and is (at least in principle) knowable in its entirety; (2) science can
study only phenomena that can be directly observed (empiricism); and (3) the
work of science is to construct general laws that express relationships between
observed phenomena.
Postpositivism—also referred to as naturalism (Gubrium & Holstein,
1997)—assumes there is an objective social world that researchers can
describe (or quantify) more or less accurately and more or less objectively.
However, in this paradigm, knowledge about the world will always be imper-
fect and incomplete. Postpositivism emphasizes an empiricist philosophy in
which social relationships and processes exist thoroughly independently of
human interpretation (Lincoln & Guba, 1985; Prasad & Prasad, 2002). But it
rejects the pursuit of universal laws.
Positivism is often referred to as naive realism, whereas postpositivism
often is characterized simply as realism (cf. Travers, 2001). Some postpositivist
scholars adopt a position referred to as critical realism that goes one step fur-
ther in recognizing that knowledge is socially conditioned and subject to
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
47

reinterpretation. Second-wave feminists and critical race scholars often use
postpositivist paradigms to analyze systems of oppression. Qualitative research
conducted in this way can easily be combined with statistical analyses, since
both methods rely on the same ontological premise. Critical realism shares
some overlap with social constructionist frameworks, which will be explored in
the next section. Suffice it to say for now that a naturalist ontology in qualita-
tive research replicates conventionally positivist assumptions about the nature
of social reality and the production of knowledge (Prasad, 2005, p. 4).
48
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
Table 3.1
Postpositivist Methodology and Method
Postpositivist Realism
Postpositivist Critical Realism
Ontology
An objective social world
exists.
An objective social world
exists.
Epistemology
Objective knowledge is
possible but often
incomplete.
Knowledge is incomplete and
socially conditioned.
Methodology
Seeks objective knowledge
regarding the social world
Seeks to reveal oppression and
inequality
Methods
Surveys, quantitative
content analysis, mixed
methods, and interviews
Interviews, ethnography, mixed
methods, surveys, and
quantitative content analysis
In all postpositivist frameworks, the goal of qualitative research is to accu-
rately capture and reflect an objectively existent, ongoing social world. This
goal is possible only in Cartesian ontology, which presumes the separation of
object and subject that is necessary to give rise to the possibility of objective
social worlds. Epistemologically, postpositivism is concerned with maximizing
the accuracy of scientific representations (measures or descriptions) of that
external reality. Although the method of data collection may be qualitative,
rather than quantitative, the epistemological emphasis is quite similar. “Realist
epistemology assumes an equation of truth (albeit, partial truths) with the faith-
ful reproduction of the object as factual knowledge. Language is understood as
a purely referential medium” (Clough, 1989, p. 162). Much of qualitative
research is conducted this way in the social sciences. Social research is valued
for its accuracy in mirroring real-world events; hence even media studies tend
to focus on critiques of the reality (or lack of reality) in media representations.

Scholars working in interpretive frameworks that emerged from this history
critique methodological realism—both naive and critical realism—by arguing
that a realist ontology is particularly problematic for apprehending how social
life operates. For example, people’s interactions are based on their interpretation
of events—and in life, events seldom have a single, unchanging meaning for all
people. In addition, to the extent that social research treats categories such as
race, gender, and ability as natural, it necessarily reifies these categories as it
attempts to mirror them. Further, a commitment to realism obscures the many
layers of interpretation that occur at every level of the research process. For
example, the assumption that the world exists in such a way that can be mirrored
by research constitutes an interpretation about the nature of social life. Deciding
what to study is a process of interpretation—one that is positioned/shaped by
social and discursive relations. The ability to “recognize” evidence is an inter-
pretive process made possible by commitments to paradigms that enable phe-
nomena to be defined as such. The process of moving from cases to categories
is an interpretive process that constructs “findings” from “evidence.” Then, of
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
49
Table 3.2
Postpositivist and Interpretivist Frameworks
Postpositivist
Realism
Postpositivist
Critical Realism
Interpretivist
Ontology
An objective
social world
exists.
An objective
social world
exists.
Social life is always
intersubjective.
Epistemology
Objective
knowledge is
possible but often
incomplete.
Knowledge is
incomplete and
socially
conditioned.
Objective and
subjective meanings
are inseparable and
always open to
reinterpretation.
Methodology
Seeks objective
knowledge
regarding the
social world
Seeks to reveal
oppression and
inequality
Seeks to understand
the reflexive
production of
meaning
Methods
Surveys,
quantitative
content analysis,
mixed methods,
and interviews
Interviews,
ethnography,
mixed methods,
surveys, and
quantitative
content analysis
Interviews, critical
ethnography,
discourse analyses,
qualitative textual
analyses, and media
analysis

course, data analysis and representations of that analysis are both processes of
interpretation. All epistemological pathways (that enable us to know about the
world) are interpretations—at a minimum they are interpretations of what exists,
how things that exist are related to each other, and what is relevant.
The discursive construction of science as “objective” through reliance on
a Cartesian ontology does not remove the processes of interpretation involved
in research; rather, it renders them less visible and therefore less accountable.
By contrast, interpretive research rejects (to varying degrees and with vary-
ing success) the Cartesian subject/object dualism and attempts to draw
meaning-making processes to the surface of analyses. To understand the
various forms of interpretive research, it is helpful to turn to a brief history of
social constructionism.
Social Constructionism
In the mid-1960s, social constructionism challenged the essentialist para-
digms of methodological realism. The term social construction is credited to
Berger and Luckmann (1966), who used it to describe the process by which
people assign (or socially construct) meaning. Unlike a Cartesian commitment
to an objectively distinct social world, social constructionism approaches
social worlds as social products. Social constructionism posits that knowledge
and meaning are always partial, conditional, and perspectival—therefore there
is no possibility of timeless or universal knowledge. However, social con-
structionism generally does not challenge the processes of systemization/
formalization that give science its credibility—in this sense it transforms
processes of interpretation to generate new forms of knowledge without
addressing processes of formalization. (The exception to this is radical con-
structionism, which will be discussed shortly.)
Multiple variations of social constructionism exist today, and the degree
to which social constructionists view meaning as socially constructed varies
dramatically within and across disciplines. Each variation of social construc-
tionism implies different ontological commitments. So it may not be surpris-
ing that among constructionists, the concept of reality, as socially constructed,
is itself a point of controversy and debate (Ibarra, 2008, p. 355). For example,
some social constructionist research is completely consistent with critical real-
ism. Ontologically, it is grounded in the belief in an objective social world but
holds that meaning is socially/historically constructed. “One can reasonably
50
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

hold that concepts and ideas are invented (rather than discovered) yet maintain
that these inventions correspond to something in the real world” (Schwandt,
1994, p. 126). In this sense, even socially constructed identities can be under-
stood, or treated, as intractable—thus perpetuating a kind of determinism,
despite antiessentialist claims. For example, gender can be understood as
socially constructed but treated as real.
By contrast, other social constructionists account for the world in much
the same way that poststructural analysts do: Absolutely nothing stands out-
side of, or apart from, meaning-making processes. There is no objectively
existent social world that can serve as a reference point for knowledge—all
knowledge is intersubjectively produced.
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
51
Table 3.3
Philosophical Extremes Used With Analytic Induction
Postpositivist Social Constructionism
Radical Social Constructionism
Realism
No meaning exists beyond what we
create
Subject = Person
Subject = Discursive category
Subject/object dualism
Intersubjective
Objective truths exist
Truth is always problematized
Subjects have experiences
Subjects are constituted through
experience
Language is neutral (transparent) bearer
of information
Language is productive
Broadly speaking, social constructionism takes three different directions
today, although the distinctions are not always as firm as they might appear.
Strict constructionism emerged in relation to studies of deviance and
directed analyses toward claims-making activities (Ibarra, 2008; Ibarra &
Kitsuse, 1993). Strict constructionists examine how people define activities—
for example, how behaviors come to be labeled as deviant. Although it might
loosely be understood to concern meaning-making practices (e.g., how some
behaviors come to be labeled deviant), it is premised on a postpositivist
ontology of critical realism. Social constructionism (sometimes called

contextual constructionism) is concerned with the collective generation of
meaning shaped by social processes, rather than with the claims-making
activities of concern to strict constructionists (Schwandt, 1994). Social
constructionism examines how social processes in local contexts generate
particular meanings (Best, 1993; Ibarra, 2008); it is also premised on a post-
positivist ontology of critical realism.
The third form of constructionism is known as radical constructionism. It
is based on the premise that it is impossible to know an independent, objective
world that stands apart from our experience of it (Schwandt, 1994, p. 127).
These constructionists are concerned with the production and organization of
social differences (Fuss, 1989, pp. 2–3) and evaluate their research with con-
cepts such as credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability,
rather than with positivist criteria such as internal and external validity, relia-
bility, and objectivity used in critical realism. Philosophically, radical con-
structionism is more closely aligned with poststructuralism. Given the
ontological premise that objective experience is impossible, radical construc-
tionism interrogates how ideology functions to naturalize and privilege some
forms of knowledge over others.
Each form of constructionism is rooted in a slightly different epistemol-
ogy. For example, in studying poverty, strict constructionists would look at
claims that people make about poverty. By contrast, social (or contextual)
constructionists would examine how the meanings of poverty are collectively
generated in a specific setting. And, alternatively, radical constructionists
might examine the cultural discourses through which wealth and poverty gain
meaning.
Importantly, some social science disciplines that are not rooted in the
Berger and Luckmann (1966) concept of social constructionism refer to social
constructivism. If social constructionism can be understood to refer to socio-
logical processes of knowledge production that are external to the individual
(socialization), constructivism can be understood as being directed at
processes of knowledge production that are more internal (Hruby, 2001).
Social constructionism enables scholars to pursue empirical data to uncover
the meanings of gender produced through symbolic, structural, and interac-
tional process. By contrast, constructivism enables scholars to consider the
discursive production of gender as collectively produced and achieved—in
this sense, it is more consistent with postmodern/poststructural approaches to
social life.
52
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Within the framework of constructivism, scholars distinguish broadly
between weak and strong constructivism.11
Weak social constructivism is the view that representations—either linguis-
tic representations or mental representations—are social constructs. When it
is said that “gender” is constructed, a weak interpretation of this is merely
that people’s representations or conceptions of gender are socially con-
structed. (Goldman, 2002, p. 196)
Weak constructivism does not pose a challenge to objectivism, since facts
exist independently of their representations. By contrast, strong social con-
structivism claims not only that representations of gender are constructed but
that gender itself is socially constructed. This extends to all “social facts” and
is consequently more controversial.12
It is important to keep in mind that all forms of social constructionism in
social research rely on analytic induction. Berger and Luckmann’s (1966)
social constructionism may be the most widely practiced in the social sciences
today. Consequently, I will use their variation of social constructionism with
analytic induction to analyze three forms of empirical data. I intend these
analyses to explicitly illustrate the respective philosophical commitments of
social constructionism and analytic induction as well as their political effects.
First, however, I review the basic premise of analytic induction.
THE BASIC PREMISE OF
CONTEMPORARY ANALYTIC INDUCTION
Most broadly, analytic induction today refers to the systematic examination of
similarities within and across cases to develop concepts, ideas, or theories.
Analytic induction is a “ ‘double fitting’ of ideas and evidence that focuses
on similarities across a limited number of case studies studied in depth”
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
53
11Some scholars distinguish among social, literary–rhetorical, and ideological constructivism. For
a further discussion of these, see Hruby (2001).
12Strong constructivism is divided into two schools: causal constructivism and constitutive
constructivism. Causal constructivism claims that human activity sustains social facts. By
contrast, constitutive constructivism claims that human activity constitutes, or makes up, the
entities we call social facts—the latter is ontologically consistent with poststructuralism.

(Ragin, 1994, p. 183). Researchers use inductive reasoning to code data and,
based on these codes, identify patterns and construct potential explanations.13
As she or he locates exceptions in existing data, or in new cases, the researcher
either refines the emerging theme or pattern, and its explanation, to include the
exceptions, or explains the presence of the exceptions.
Exceptions are an integral part of developing a thorough analysis because
they provide clues for how to alter concepts, shift categories, and modify
developing explanations or theories (Ragin, 1994). The concern here is for
developing comprehensive accounts. The ability to conclude that one’s theory
or explanation is accurate depends upon the search for exceptions to the pat-
tern being as thorough and complete as possible. Consequently, researchers
focus their data collection to maximize the possibility of encountering data
that does not fit with the developing pattern(s).14
Researchers using analytic induction pursue three fundamental questions:
Under what contexts do patterns arise? Under what contexts do the exceptions
to the patterns arise? What significance do these patterns and exceptions hold?
It is important to note that there is no single correct answer to questions of
meaning. Like all research, analytic induction is a subjective process. However,
researchers build their analyses carefully and provide enough information for
readers to evaluate the credibility of their argument. “The strategy of analytic
induction involves a rather strict way of steering the fit between ideas and evi-
dence, through adapting any generally formulated conclusion to what can be
said about all cases in a relevant population of cases” (ten Have, 2004, p. 147).
A major strength of analytic induction is that it avoids weak and abstract
conclusions by taking exceptions to patterns seriously (ten Have, 2004). In
analytic induction, exceptions to an emerging pattern often are referred to as
negative cases—a term that comes from quantitative research and is related to
the concept of falsifying a hypothesis. However, among contemporary
54
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
13For example, in a previous study (Pascale, 2007), I asked interviewees if they had a racial
identity. I noticed that some people responded to my question with the question of “Who, me?” I
coded these instances as answering a question with a question. As I analyzed my data by this
category (answering the question with a question), I realized that the only people who responded
to my question about racial identity this way were people who later identified as white or
Caucasian. Based on the pattern and the exceptions to the pattern, I then interpreted the
significance of this finding within the broader context of the interviews.
14Exceptions, or negative cases, “are especially important because they are either excluded when
the relevant category is narrowed or they are the main focus when the investigator attempts to
reconceptualize commonalities and thereby reconcile contradictory evidence” (Ragin, 1994, p. 94).

researchers, there is an increasing effort to move away from language rooted
to quantitative research—in particular, the term negative case. Since
researchers build a theory or explanation that accounts for the pattern and all
exceptions to the pattern, across all of the cases, many scholars simply say that
they seek to explain 100% of the variation (cf. Clarke, 2005). In developing
an explanation or theory, the researcher tries to locate as many cases as possi-
ble, in as many circumstances as possible.
Analytic induction works best when there are multiple instances of the
phenomenon—a diversity of contexts and empirical evidence (Ragin, 1994,
p. 101). Eventually, this produces a point of saturation—a point in the research
process when new instances do not contribute new information, either to the
existing explanation or theory regarding the pattern or its exceptions. Data col-
lection concludes when saturation is reached or when all cases in a small, self-
limiting sample have been examined. The strength of analytic induction is its
capacity to generate complex, theoretically rich understandings of social life.
To some extent, analytic induction does enable researchers to theorize and
anticipate contexts in which a phenomenon might arise, yet this is quite dif-
ferent from the generalizability of quantitative research.
The following section presents exemplars from three forms of empirical
data (newspaper, television, and interview). Each of the exemplars is relevant
to issues of social justice: The newspaper article is about access/ability; the
television drama centers gender/sexuality; and an interview focuses on matters
of race/racialization. After analyzing each exemplar, I then reflect on how the
various philosophical commitments of analytic induction and social construc-
tionism shaped my data analysis. I conclude the chapter by considering the rel-
evance of ontology and epistemology to social justice.
ANALYSIS OF NEWSPAPER,
TELEVISION, AND INTERVIEW EXEMPLARS
In an effort to replicate the presentation of research findings as if they came
from a larger study, in each of the subsequent sections I introduce empirical
data as an exemplar of an overarching pattern inductively derived from a
broader collection of articles. This practice is consistent with the presentation
of qualitative research and provides important context for the ensuing analysis.
In every analytical chapter, I present the same excerpts and the same framing
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
55

of the excerpts in order to highlight the various features of analysis that analytic
induction, symbolic interaction, and ethnomethodology bring into relief.
Newspaper Analysis
One can say that, at a minimum, newspapers contribute to public dis-
course about current events. Yet how social researchers understand the nature
and means of newspaper contributions depends upon the research paradigms
that we use. This exercise is an attempt to demonstrate analytic possibilities
using analytic induction and social constructionism to develop a reflexive cri-
tique of the ontological and epistemological commitments that shape both the
promise and limits of analysis.
56
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
Being a double amputee is not often described as an unfair advantage,
but that is the argument made by the governing body of world athlet-
ics, the International Association of Athletics Federation (IAAF) in
newspaper articles about Oscar Pistorius, a 20-year-old South African
runner. Pistorius was born without fibulae in his legs; his parents, on
the advice of multiple medical experts, had their son’s legs amputated
just beneath the knee when he was 11 months old (Philip, 2005).
Pistorius has run for many years in the para-Olympics with record per-
formances in this and other events at 100 meters (10.91 seconds), 200
meters (21.58 seconds), and 400 meters (46.34 seconds) (Longman,
2007). While those times do not meet Olympic qualifying standards for
men, Pistorius is fast enough that his marks “would have won gold
medals in equivalent women’s races at the 2004 Athens Olympics”
(Longman, 2007).
When the Beijing Games were still 15 months away, Pistorius peti-
tioned the IAAF to run in the 2008 Olympics. I examined newspaper arti-
cles about Pistorius’s petition and the IAAF administrative response and
found that administrators, athletes, and ethicists argued that Pistorius’s
prosthetic legs create a potentially unfair advantage for him over runners
with biological legs. The following newspaper excerpt is an exemplar of
coverage on the issue:
Newspaper Exemplar

The excerpt reveals core arguments by officials against allowing Oscar
Pistorius to compete in the 2008 Olympics in Beijing alongside able-bodied
athletes. In the process, the officials construct the meaning of being disabled.
The IAAF officials challenge Pistorius’s ability to participate in the upcoming
Olympic Games through their interpretation of Olympic guidelines regarding
the status of an athlete as someone who has feet—or at least a foot. The offi-
cials also challenge Pistorius’s identity as an athlete (as opposed to being seen
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
57
“The rule book says a foot has to be in contact with the starting
block,” Leon Fleiser, a general manager of the South African Olympic
Committee, said. “What is the definition of a foot? Is a prosthetic device
a foot, or is it an actual foot?”
I.A.A.F. officials have also expressed concern that Pistorius could top-
ple over, obstructing others or injuring himself and fellow competitors.
Some also fear that, without limits on technological aids, able-bodied run-
ners could begin wearing carbon-fiber plates or other unsuitably springy
devices in their shoes.
Among ethicists, Pistorius’s success has spurred talk of “transhu-
mans” and “cyborgs.” Some note that athletes already modify them-
selves in a number of ways, including baseball sluggers who undergo
laser eye surgery to enhance their vision and pitchers who have elbow
reconstruction using sturdier ligaments from elsewhere in the body. At
least three disabled athletes have competed in the Summer Olympics:
George Eyser, an American, won a gold medal in gymnastics while com-
peting on a wooden leg at the 1904 Games in St. Louis; Neroli Fairhall, a
paraplegic from New Zealand, competed in archery in the 1984 Olympics
in Los Angeles; and Marla Runyan, a legally blind runner from the United
States, competed in the 1,500 meters at the 2000 Olympics in Sydney.
But Pistorius would be the first amputee to compete in a track event,
international officials said.
A sobering question was posed recently on the Web site of the
Connecticut-based Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies.
“Given the arms race nature of competition,” will technological advan-
tages cause “athletes to do something as seemingly radical as having
their healthy natural limbs replaced by artificial ones?” wrote George
Dvorsky, a member of the institute’s board of directors. “Is it self-mutilation
when you’re getting a better limb?” (Longman, 2007).

58
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
as a “special” athlete) by constructing Pistorius’s presence on the track as a
potential hazard for other athletes. Consequently, the meaning of being dis-
abled is constructed as being potentially problematic for able-bodied others.
The IAAF is responsible both for matters of fairness and safety at the
Olympics, and Pistorius’s unusual circumstances cause administrators to rethink
both. In addition to raising concerns about the potential safety of other athletes,
the officials describe concerns that success of Pistorius’s carbon prosthetics
might lead other athletes to cheat by inserting carbon devices in their shoes—or
worse, to amputate their biological legs to gain a technological advantage. In this
sense, the article illustrates how the IAAF constructs Pistorius’s bid to compete
through a series of potentially wide-ranging moral dilemmas.
Notably, ethicists are called upon to comment on Pistorius’s potential
Olympic participation—further contributing to the construction of disability as
a moral status. Yet at the heart of the ethical issues is an expression of concern
for fairness with regard to his competitors—not fairness to Pistorius. Indeed
the moral construction of Pistorius slides from “disabled” to “transhuman,”
which marginalizes Pistorius further.
Analyzing the Analysis
As noted earlier, social constructionism is the process of interpretation, and
analytic induction is the process of formalization in this analysis. While analytic
induction shapes what can be understood as an exemplar, indeed what is under-
stood as evidence, in the analysis itself, the process of analytic induction through
which the patterns and exemplars were created is not visible. The power and
influence of analytic induction as a methodological framework is never at the
surface of analyses—it is never accountable as a productive force in this analy-
sis. However, in this instance, social constructionism is visible as the interpre-
tive process. Much of qualitative research lays claim only to analytic induction
and not explicitly to a realist, constructionist, or interpretive framework.
Consequently, the evidence appears to simply unfold on the page, and research
that is least accountable for its assumptions comes to be seen as most objective.
On the surface, the use of social constructionism would seem to mitigate
a realist ontology while producing some potentially useful insights regarding
the construction of ability/disability. However, it is possible to observe a real-
ist ontology at work on two levels: First, the article is not analyzed for how it
constructs what counts as news—the news story is treated as an objectively
real event. Second, as the analysis pursues a social constructionist analysis, it

Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
59
also relies upon a realist ontology, which is evident in the way that contem-
porary debates serve as unproblematic referent for the analysis.
The ontological realism of the analysis implies a Cartesian notion of sub-
jectivity, agency, and experience. The ontological realism of the analysis is
supported by, if not derived from, the use of analytic induction to select data,
identify patterns, and generate the analysis—processes that are referred to in
the introduction but are not actually part of reporting the analysis. This gives
rise to several practical implications regarding subjectivity that are embedded
here and worth some elaboration.
First, the analysis brings the social construction of disability as a moral
enterprise to the surface. However, disability is never really interrogated as a
subject position—it presents subjects as being synonymous with persons. In
addition, the analysis does not address the underlying assumption that there
are two different kinds of people: those with ability and those with disability.
The analysis relies on an implicitly Cartesian concept of persons as having a
more or less fixed and essential nature—even as disability is analyzed for
being socially constructed. In this sense, ability seems to be a natural phe-
nomenon that rests within the individual rather than within material or social
aspects of culture. This conception of ability is reinforced by the fact that the
analysis never explicitly names ability but allows it to function as the
unmarked center of the analysis. Disability is named and emerges implicitly as
a less “natural” state of being—a socially constructed state of being that is
used to reify the apparent naturalness of ability.
Within a Cartesian framework, agency resides within the individual and
is evidenced in the ability to affect (or failure to affect) the surrounding world.
Agency is never explicitly analyzed because it is implicitly assumed as a
property of a Cartesian subject. The ability of “disabled” athletes to partic-
ipate in the Olympics is constrained, in this article, by the external force
of the Olympic vetting process—through the exercise of its own agency.
Congruently, the nature of experience, in this analysis, is unproblematized—
actors within the news article are treated as simply responding to the environ-
ment around them.
Television Analysis
Any analysis of a television series provides several important analytical
challenges. Minimally, it raises analytical tensions between content and
form, between cultural representation and daily life, and between production

and consumption. These tensions speak to a historical cleavage between the
humanities, which approach television as collaboratively produced systems
of symbolic meaning, and the social sciences, which have tended to
approach television either as mirrors of daily life or as having a causal rela-
tionship to social life.
Importantly, television is not always or only a mirror of daily life; and
causal relationships are nearly impossible to study, even if scholars feel they
are worth proving. Perhaps, as a consequence, television studies have
accounted for a very small proportion of social science research. Yet at the
start of the 21st century, social life involves media, in general, and televi-
sion, in particular, in important and unprecedented ways. One might argue
that it is impossible to understand industrial and postindustrial societies
without understanding their media. For this reason alone, it is important that
social researchers understand the potential and the limits of existing research
paradigms.
60
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
The ABC drama Brothers and Sisters features a white, upper-class family in
Southern California involved in the daily dramas of a family-run business—
complicated (of course) by interpersonal relationships and family intrigues.
The series is unusual in that one of the adult siblings in the Walker family is
gay, which makes it a potentially interesting site for examining talk about
sexuality. I examined shows from the first season and found two relevant
patterns.
First, scenes consistently allowed for multiple and contradictory audi-
ence engagements with politically controversial issues related to sexual-
ity. Brothers and Sisters commonly dramatizes political issues that affect
many families in the United States—particularly with regard to same-sex
marriage and the Republican/Democrat partisan divides that character-
ized the George W. Bush administration.
Second, scenes consistently left disagreements about sexuality unre-
solved. The show framed these disagreements within the contexts of
family intimacy, human frailty, and political aspirations—and typically
used humor to drain or divert dramatic tension when very harsh or divi-
sive conflict threatened to break out.
Television Exemplar

Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
61
The following excerpt features a scene between siblings Kitty Walker,
played by Calista Flockhart, and Kevin Walker, played by Matthew Rhys.
Kitty enters this scene having just come from a meeting with Republican
Senator Robert McCallister (played by Rob Lowe), who offered her a posi-
tion as head of communications for his presidential campaign.Their meet-
ing holds particular significance to the following scene for two reasons:
Kitty and her deceased father have been the only Republicans in a family
with strong Democrat affiliations, and it exposed romantic tension
between Kitty and the senator, who is a father of two young children and
is in the process of a divorce.
Kitty has just mentioned the job offer to her brother, Kevin, who is an
attorney and the only gay primary character in the show in the first
season.15 As the scene opens, Kevin is upset with Kitty because Robert
McCallister has voted in favor of a constitutional ban on same-sex
marriage.Throughout this scene, Kitty is preoccupied with the mail while
Kevin is consumed by the conversation; the camera alternates with the
speaker, taking the view of the listener.
Kevin: Well, why you?
Kitty:
Well, what the hell does that mean?
Kevin: [stuttering] Well, c-cause it’s completely absurd. You can’t work
for this guy!
Kitty:
Why? [Kitty laughs.] Why, Kevin? Because he’s a Republican?
Kevin: No, because he’s against gay marriage!
Kitty:
There are lots of people in the world, Kevin, for instance me, who
have no problem with gay people but still believe that marriage is
fundamentally a religious institution that has nothing to do with
the [camera turns to Kevin who is visibly upset] state and that
does not discount civil unions or domestic partnerships or
anything you . . . .
Kevin: [Voice escalates] Oh come on! That’s just a cover that people like
you provide for people like him who hate people like me.
[Kitty shakes her head.]
(Continued)
15Subsequent seasons have included several other white gay men.

62
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
Kitty:
Oh, Kevin! Please, let’s not make it personal.
Kevin: Ah, ah . . . [Raises eyebrows] Personal? Kitty, in 10 years . . . in
20 years, when I am finally . . . m-mature enough to sustain a
committed relationship I would like to settle down and get
married. That’s personal.
[Kitty stops glancing through mail and looks up to speak.]
Kitty:
That’s improbable.
Kevin: Don’t take this job, Kitty. I’m warning you it will cause a great deal
of . . . .
Kitty:
Wait a minute. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait a minute. You’re
warning me?
[Brothers and Sisters, Episode 11: “Family Day” 1/7/07]
The scene opens with Kevin attempting to control Kitty’s behavior—the
motivation for his behavior is not immediately clear to Kitty, who initially
attributes it to Kevin’s dislike for Republican politics. Kitty is aware that
Robert McCallister is against same-sex marriage so she might reasonably antic-
ipate this to upset Kevin. Yet Kitty constructs “the problem” between herself
and Kevin as Republican politics more broadly. However, if it seems possible
that she completely failed to anticipate Kevin’s investment in his own ability to
marry, consider that Kitty shares McCallister’s views on same-sex marriage.
Kitty explains this as she invokes a “separate but equal” paradigm and devel-
ops a distinction between marriage as a religious issue and civil unions as a
state matter—even as she seems to support amending the Constitution of the
United States to protect what she claims to see as a solely religious practice.
This distinction between religious and state institutions enables her to frame
same-sex marriage as a matter of social institutions and to refuse to recognize
same-sex marriage as a matter of personal relationships, civil rights, and
homophobia—a common alternative, which appears to be Kevin’s position.
The dual constructions of the problem are driven home in the conversa-
tion when Kevin challenges the equity of the framework. Kitty responds, “Oh,
Kevin! Please, let’s not make it personal.” At this moment in the exchange,
when Kevin could pursue same-sex marriage as a civil rights issue, he avoids

Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
63
the confrontation and uses humor to drain the dramatic tension. Significantly,
the humor is itself a homophobic stereotype (“Kitty, in 10 years . . . in 20
years, when I am finally . . . m-mature enough to sustain a committed rela-
tionship I would like to settle down and get married. That’s personal.”). The
humor dissipates some of the tension and maintains the conflict as familial
rather than political. Yet in this shifting context, Kitty’s response of “That’s
improbable” appears to support the homophobic stereotype and/or be a com-
ment about the personality of her younger brother. The ambiguity continues as
the conflict escalates again.
Analyzing the Analysis
This analysis of an episode from Brothers and Sisters examines the social
construction of the argument about same-sex marriage. The influence of ana-
lytic induction again is not at the surface of the analysis; although it is evident
in the style of analysis. The analysis makes no contribution to understanding
media or society and very little contribution toward understanding processes
of representation. Analytic induction tethers the analysis to evidence in a
localized context. Consequently the analysis proceeds as if the transcript was
an interaction between two people. The analysis does not substantially address
the excerpt as a media representation and consistently refers to “Kevin” and
“Kitty” rather than to characters or writers. Consequently, the analysis itself
lends a sense of reality to a carefully constructed fiction. In this sense, the seg-
ment is analyzed as the reality it purportedly represents. With that said, the
analysis does not analyze the segment in terms of its accuracy in mirroring
contemporary political debates as some postpositivist analyses would do.
Consistent with a realist ontology, the analysis does not address issues of
agency explicitly—recall that in realist ontology agency is implicitly under-
stood as a quality possessed (or not) by people. Consequently, issues of
agency appear to be irrelevant to this excerpt; “Kitty” and “Kevin” both pos-
sess an implied agency. Actors seem to “stand in” for real people—either as
a mirror of reality or as a simulacrum—a representation or copy of “the real”
for which there is no original. Notably, agency is not attributed to writers, edi-
tors, producers, or advertisers. In addition, the analysis lacks any considera-
tion of agency on the part of the viewer/researcher, in constructing meaning.
One could argue that I allude to audience participation at both the beginning
and end of the analysis when I allow for the possibility of more than one

interpretation of the dialogue. However, that is a long way from an analysis
of active audience participation.
Just as an implicit sense of agency haunts this analysis—it is present
but out of view—the same can be said for conceptions of subjectivity and
experience. Although not addressed explicitly, those conceptions linger
implicitly as part of a realist ontology that conflates agency with individu-
als and subjectivity with identity, while rendering the nature of experience
as self-evident—all of which is ironic, to say the least, for an analysis of a
television drama.
The analytical conflation of subjectivity and identity erases the sociohis-
torical processes that create and reproduce subject locations (such as sexuality
or gender). Hence those locations become reified even as they are acknowl-
edged as socially constructed. The social constructionist framework does not
substantially mitigate the ontological and epistemological investments of ana-
lytic induction that control what counts as evidence. In this sense, one might
say the effects of analytic induction are profoundly present but unnoticed in
the analysis.
While the analysis uses a social constructionist framework, it advances,
and is constrained by, a realist ontology. It is this commitment to realism and
a Cartesian paradigm that underpins a seemingly self-evident epistemology in
which the researcher needs to focus only upon apparently objective “evi-
dence” in the localized context—in this case the scene excerpted as an exem-
plar. Of course, the same can be said of the earlier newspaper analysis.
Interview Analysis
Interviews may be the most common form of empirical data in the social
sciences. As such, analytic approaches to interviews can vary a great deal,
depending on the ontological and epistemological foundations of research—
most particularly, how one conceptualizes the nature of “truth.” As in the pre-
vious sections, I introduce this exemplar as part of a larger research project.
The introductions to each of these exemplars could be quite different, depend-
ing on the analytic framework being used. I sought to create a rhetorical/
analytical middle ground in an effort to develop one introduction that could
work across social constructionism/analytic induction, symbolic interaction,
and ethnomethodology.
64
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
65
While dominant public discourses in the United States construct race
as natural, and apparently self-evident, in interviews with Native
American Indians, I found that talk about race consistently exposed
the social, historical, and legal processes of racialization. The exemplar
that follows is from my interview with Tony Romero an Esselen
Indian. It is important to note that in the early 1900s, Esselen Indians
(indigenous to the land that came to be called California) were
declared “extinct” by the U.S. government. The federal government’s
policy of recognition for Native Americans requires genealogical evi-
dence of unbroken ancestry over hundreds of years. Indigenous
nations unable to provide that evidence were “terminated” by the
government—that is to say denied federal recognition that would
have entitled them to land and other settlement claims, as well as uni-
versity scholarships and other forms of affirmative action candidacy.
The Esselens, however, were never officially terminated but rather
declared “extinct.”
The federal declaration of their “extinction” has become part of a
dominant cultural discourse. For example, the Economist featured an
article on the Esalen [sic] Institute, and described it as “named after
the Esselen, a now-extinct Indian tribe that used the place as their bur-
ial ground. In 1910 the Murphy family bought the land from home-
steaders” (The Economist, 2007). The Esalen Institute is a spa/retreat
center that has drawn renowned authors including John Steinbeck,
Aldous Huxley, and Henry Miller. In the 1950s, the beat poets visited
Esalen, and it later became a home to Alan Watts (The Economist,
2007).
In the following excerpt from my interview withTony Romero in 2000,
he talks about growing up in California as an Esselen Indian.
Celine-Marie: I wonder if you could tell me what it was like for you
growing up and crossing worlds between your family and
your home and the rest of the culture you experienced
around you.
(Continued)
Interview Exemplar

66
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
Tony:
Well grownin’ up, uh, growin’ up, I remember my mom
and dad always told me, “Don’t tell anybody you’re
Indian.” Uh, they were scared because I had uncles that
were either drug behind horses or hung just ’cause they
said they were Native American Indians. I have documen-
tation of that. I had a couple of my relatives that were
hung in a barn in Carmel Valley ’cause they wouldn’t sell
their property.
Celine-Marie: I’m so sorry.
Tony:
It’s things like that that happened in those days, and you
know were talkin’ like the ’50s—1950s—and things like
that were still goin’ on like I remember when I was in high
school I used to go down Monterey, I used to go to Louis’
Bar on Alvarado Street. My uncle used to hang out, and
there were two Obispo used to hang out in front of Louis’
all the time and sit, they used to have these benches in
front of all the pool halls. They were like, I guess there
were like 10 or 12 pool halls you know on Alvarado Street
and all these bars. So the Indians always used to carry
these little pints of whiskey. I’ll never forget the whiskey
bottles cause they’re, they’re made in a shape where you
can put ’em in your back pocket and they just fit perfect
cause they had a little concave, concave shape to ’em.
Celine-Marie: Mmm.
Tony:
And, uh, I remember ’em always sippin’ out them damn
whiskey bottles and, uh, but I remember one time I was
comin’ out of Louis’ pool hall and my uncle was fightin’
with these two white guys. He was tellin’ how they were
on his land, he didn’t like it you know, he was feelin’ a lit-
tle tipsy there. So then I just ignored him, went across the
street with some friends of mine to another place. And
about a half an hour later I came back out and my uncle
was sittin’ on the same bench but he had a bloody nose,
his eye was all black and blue, what they did was, they
drug him in the back alley, beat the shit out of him to teach

Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
67
him a lesson, you know, that it wasn’t his land anymore, it
was theirs. And, uh, it was things like that that happened
in Monterey where my mother was scared. She said well
don’t tell anybody you’re Indian, tell ’em you’re Spanish.
So then when I did tell people I was Spanish and Indian,
the first thing that came into mind was you’re Mexican. I
said no, no. I said bein’ a Spanish Indian didn’t make you
Mexican. It wasn’t the idea that I was ashamed of bein’ a
Mexican, it was the idea of wanting to be called what I
really was. And I wasn’t a Mexican. And I knew that and my
parents knew that and, uh, so anyway, I went through that
through my whole school years.You know OK,Tony, you’re
Spanish and Indian but you’re Mexican. I says no. So any-
way I had to go through this whole thing when I was a kid.
I was always, I was always, when I was a kid I was always
fightin’ to protect my heritage.
Celine-Marie: Mmm.
Tony:
Always fightin’ you know to show people I was Native
American Indian and I was proud of it. But then, uh, after
a while I just, I just ignored the whole thing. But then after
my mom passed away, I will never forget my mom passed
away in 1970, she, uh, she looked at me and says you’re
Native American Indian. She said be proud of it. I’ll never
forget that. She says you’re Esselen Indian. She said be
proud of it. And, uh, so ever since then I’ve been fightin’
for my recognition as a Native American Indian. I’m doin’
it not only for her, but for my family, you know my existing
family I have now, which isn’t much.
In this excerpt, Tony constructs the meaning of being a Native American
through four central “fights”—all of which regard various levels of systematic
violence directed by whites toward Indians/Native Americans. His narrative
began with his parent’s injunction of “don’t tell anybody you’re Indian.” Tony
seems to have reconciled this injunction by describing himself as Spanish and
Indian. This identity shift seems to protect him by leaving him with no appar-
ent claim to land in the United States—as opposed to revealing himself to be

68
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
an Esselen Indian (with a long historical claim to the land). However, this pro-
tection from physical violence came with enormous personal cost. The rela-
tionship between land and identity shapes Tony’s narrative and all four
“fights” that define his experience. Tony begins with family stories of loved
ones being hung in a barn and/or dragged behind horses because they would
not sell their land. Notably the people who murdered his family are not named
as white—perhaps because they don’t need to be.
Tony went on to describe a second fight that occurred when he was in
high school. He was hanging out on Alvarado Street when he saw his “tipsy”
uncle get into a fight “with two white guys” who beat him “to teach him a les-
son.” The violence is humiliating and painful—not intended to take land—but
made possible because the land had already been taken. In his telling of the
story, Tony did not represent himself as attempting to diffuse the conflict or to
intervene to protect his uncle at any level. Neither did he offer an explanation,
or a sense of regret, about having ignored the fight. So when Tony described
himself as always fighting (“I was always, I was always, when I was a kid I
was always fightin’ to protect my heritage.”), I understand this to refer not to
physical altercations but to verbal fights and to a deep internal struggle about
his inability to name himself as an Esselen Indian. This is evidenced also in
his description toward the end of his third remark when he described the ver-
bal conflicts that characterized his youth.
What began as a story about growing up jumps ahead to a time when
Tony was about 40 years old, and his mother, on her deathbed, liberated him
from the secrecy that opened the excerpt, the secrecy that she had hoped would
protect him from violence. Tony twice repeated her encouragement to be
proud of being an Esselen Indian. And it is this moment that resolves one con-
flict and inaugurates another—the fight for recognition as a living people, the
remaining Esselen Nation. If the fight for survival of the Esselen people once
depended on the ability to hide, it now depends on their ability to become vis-
ible in the struggle for federal recognition of the Esselen Nation’s existence.
Analyzing the Analysis
Researchers employ social constructionist analyses in a variety of ways,
according to their skill and interest. Many social constructionist analyses would
have used Tony’s narrative as evidence that reflected, or failed to accurately
reflect, an objective world—the veracity of his claims would be determined by

Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
69
how broadly they are shared among interviewees or validated by other sources.
This would be consistent with the analytical lens brought to the television
excerpt. By creating a different inflection of a social constructionist analysis, I
hope to demonstrate a more nuanced critique of how analytic induction operates
beneath the surface of analyses. Again, analytic induction brings this exemplar
to the printed page in this form. The process of analytic induction shapes both
what counts as evidence (in this case an interview) and what can be said about
it (the evidence for all claims must physically exist in this excerpt).
The analysis of my interview with Tony Romero focused on the social
construction of Native American identity through four conflicts, yet it does so
without abandoning a Cartesian ontology. For example, the analysis replicates
a commonsense view (ontological realism) regarding the way the world exists.
It examines the social construction of identity in Tony’s narrative but does not
take up the social construction of social worlds or social experience. However,
to the extent that the analysis does not use the same logic that Tony used to
describe his experience, it steps away from ontological realism. In this sense,
it is quite unlike the earlier analyses. In addition, by using “I” in relationship
to the construction of the analysis, there is a very slight acknowledgment of
the subjective process of creating an analysis. In this sense, the use of this par-
ticular style of social constructionism brings some weight to bear against the
ontological investments of realism embedded in analytic induction. Given the
style of the analysis, the commitment to ontological realism is less obvious
and more conflicted.
Epistemologically, I have treated the interview data as a way of gaining
access to the “real” world. The analysis does not consider the accomplishment
of the interview itself or the construction of interviews as a research genre.
The interview process is not problematized at all but treated as a transparent
window into the lives of others. This commitment to ontological realism is
deeply embedded in the assumptions of research.
Agency, subjectivity and experience remain sequestered as the presuppo-
sitions of social research. The locus of agency appears to reside within indi-
viduals who have experiences that could be more or less accurately and
objectively described. There is no consideration of subjectivity or its cultural
production. As a consequence, identity and subjectivity appear to be conflated—
as in a Cartesian realist ontology. The same can be said regarding the nature
of experience, which appears to be self-evident—experiences are simply what
people have, even if we interpret them differently.

The commitment to a Cartesian ontology is anchored in the use of ana-
lytic induction that defines both context and evidence—the foundation of any
science. The transparent structure of analytic induction controls the deeper
levels of analysis while allowing for variation in focus and interpretation.
Analytic induction is a process of systemization (i.e., formalization) that gives
research its “scientific” credibility whereas social constructionism is a process
of interpretation that offers some analytical range for making sense of social
life without challenging the foundation of what counts as science.
IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH
Scholars working in analytic induction and social constructionism have pro-
duced many fine contributions to scholarship—contributions that often critique
inequalities. The general strength of this combination for getting at the active
production of social meaning is evident in the previous analyses. However, as
noted earlier, these are not the only social constructionist analyses that are pos-
sible for these exemplars. Certainly they could have been enriched by recourse
to feminist, critical race, or poststructural theories. Yet as a bare-bones
approach, these exercises provide useful insights into the philosophical under-
pinnings of both analytic induction and social constructionism.
While social constructionism provided an analytic focus on social life as
the product of socially produced meanings, it did not liberate the analyses from
the philosophical foundations of ontological realism at the heart of analytic
induction. Analytic induction is the process of formalization that gives most of
qualitative research claim to “scientific validity.” It is arguably the primary
technique of data collection/analysis used by qualitative researchers, yet
research is written in such a way that makes it difficult to apprehend how ana-
lytic induction shapes what can be known and on what terms. Researchers tend
to consider the implications of social constructionism but not the analytic
induction that underlies it. So on one hand there is a commitment to social life
as constructed, and on the other, the social world is reified as inherently, objec-
tively real. Commonsense assumptions among researchers can lead to dis-
jointed and contradictory analytical claims.
Most obviously, analytic induction provides methodological tools for
apprehending patterned occurrences in localized contexts. Researchers often
refer to “finding patterns in data” or examining “patterns that emerge in data”;
70
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

this is the language of scientific discovery, the language of Cartesian dualism.
This discourse has two immediate effects. First, Cartesian dualism privileges
the mind over the body and presupposes a correlative emphasis on visuality.
Within a Cartesian framework correlation of vision and mind is evident in
the use of the verb “to see” as a metaphor for “to know” or “to understand.”
Concomitantly, the metaphor of blindness came to stand for ignorance—for
example, “double-blind experiments” and “blind to her own process of inter-
pretation.” To the extent that we rely upon Cartesian dualism, we talk as if data
analysis is a matter of recognizing what we see before us. The ontological real-
ism of Cartesian dualism emphasizes the power of vision—not only must evi-
dence be located in a local context (it must be something “seen”) but it also
dominates the intellectual landscape, since to see is to know. In this sense, the
distant perspective of a social researcher both clarifies some forms of knowl-
edge and subjugates others.
Second, the language of analytic induction minimizes, if not obscures, the
need for reflexivity at every stage of the research process: from the formula-
tion of the research problem through research design, data collection, data
analysis, and writing. Its roots in the ontological and epistemological realism
of Cartesian dualism make it possible to believe that one only needs consis-
tently systematic techniques for accurately apprehending social life in local
contexts. Typically, the practice of analytic induction obscures even the con-
struction of what counts as a localized context.
An emphasis on reflexivity would create different demands on
researchers using analytic induction. On one hand, reflexivity is the recogni-
tion of the ways that the self always mediates the social world: Researchers
know only about the world through our own experience of it. On the other
hand, reflexivity is also a constant awareness of how the social conditions of
research affect the production of knowledge. Historically, analytic induction
has rendered both forms of reflexivity external to analytic induction—
although contemporary researchers often bring principles of reflexivity, as
they bring other theoretical frameworks, to the practice of analytic induction.
Despite the sequestered realist ontological and epistemological commit-
ments of analytic induction, as social researchers, our work begins not with
objective observation of social life but with logical processes of interpretation.
We begin with key questions: What counts as a viable topic of research?
What establishes viable data? What constitutes the presence of patterns?
What is the meaning or significance of those patterns? The answers to all of
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
71

these questions are matters of interpretation—although they often are taught
as matters of fact. Importantly, interpretation is itself always a matter of
positionality—how one is situated within networks of power, geographies
of privilege, and the histories of experience. It might seem that standards of
good research would require scholars to be accountable for the many
processes of interpretation involved in knowledge production—certainly
feminist standpoint and critical race scholarship succeeded in making
research more accountable for these processes of knowledge production.
However, there is more work to do.
Even while pursuing a social constructionist analysis, the technical proce-
dures of social research pull us back into the mythical vision of Descartes.
Analytic induction combined with social constructionism created a modified
version of Cartesian dualism—not a radically different ontology as one might
have expected. Ontological commitments form the horizons of possibility for
social research. Analytic induction limits the scope of study to that which we
can point to in a localized context—indeed, the commitment to empirical evi-
dence may seem like a matter of common sense. What else should researchers
be looking for if not empirical evidence? Where else might we find “evidence”
but in a localized context? And yet, in each of the exemplars, the commitment
to empiricism left me unable to even pose (much less answer) questions about
ability, whiteness, wealth, and masculinity in relation to Oscar Pistorius’s suc-
cess as an athlete.
Newspaper articles about Pistorius do not discuss whiteness, wealth, or
masculinity, so there is no evidence in a localized context that would enable
me to examine the routine relations of privilege that provided him with
access to the material and emotional resources that made his success possi-
ble. In addition, although Pistorius had experienced (and indeed was fight-
ing) “separate but equal” segregation as an athlete, news articles did not
mention this. Consequently, there were no data, no means for considering
segregation based on ability even though this bears distinctly on his petition
to compete. And there is no way to demonstrate how such segregation is
related to the belief that there are two distinct kinds of people (able and dis-
abled) rather than a continuum of abilities for every person that change over
the life course. The emphasis on empirical evidence from a local context
also makes it impossible to consider the social production of news—the fact
that “news” in and of itself does not exist; events are assembled into news
for popular consumption.
72
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Some researchers may understand these problems as related to the data—
not to analytic induction. Social researchers draw evidence from a local con-
text; if you want a different kind of analysis, you need a different kind of
context. Perhaps I should interview athletes about segregation, talk to
reporters about the construction of news, or perhaps engage audiences through
focus groups. Yet here again, whole sets of questions would still need to be
bracketed as falling outside of the local context. Analytic induction, and social
research more broadly, requires that researchers learn to see “local contexts”
as naturally occurring—as a matter of common sense. However, there are no
local contexts that exist in and of themselves; there are only localized contexts
that have been produced and reified through scientific discourses and that now
appear to be self-evident and objectively existent. The localization of contexts
has profoundly political consequences since routine relations of power are
effective precisely because they exceed immediate contexts.
Using analytic induction and social constructionism, I was able to exam-
ine talk about sexuality in the Brothers and Sisters excerpt; however, I was
unable to explore whiteness, wealth, and gender because these aspects of the
production were reduced to matters that one can see—in the dialogue and
interaction, they appeared to have no meaning. The ontological realism of
Descarte privileges the senses, in particular vision, as a way of knowing, when
combined with reason. Yet visuality itself proves not to be very useful with-
out access to the discourses that give images meaning. White skin color—
devoid of historical discourses of power that give it meaning—appears as just
that: white skin color. Yet in film and in daily life, skin color rarely functions
at such a simplistic level. Similarly, wealth seems to form only the details of
the background of this interaction—there is no way to even transcribe it. And
gender, like race, is reduced to what we see on the screen or read in the tran-
script. Race, class, and gender are social relationships whose meanings exceed
this localized moment. If they truly were as irrelevant as analytic induction
makes them appear, they would not be recognizable as such.
Despite the contributions of social constructionism, analytic induction
produces an analysis in which whiteness, wealth, and gender seem to have no
relevant bearing on the media construction of sexualities. As in the analysis of
the news article, analytic induction does not give me access to processes of
media production or audience consumption. Given these limitations, perhaps
it is not surprising there are so few qualitative studies of media. If this con-
struction of localized contexts made sense in the 19th century, it certainly
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
73

does not in the 21st century. Social sciences are being left behind in one of the
most important developments of this century: media, both “old” forms such as
newspapers, television, and film as well as new forms including wikis, blogs,
vlogs, texting, and Twitter.
If the constraints of analytic induction seem particularly significant only
when analyzing forms of media, the excerpt from my interview with Tony
Romero demonstrates otherwise. For example, although this interview
exposed racial violence that has been central to historical processes of racial-
ization, I was unable to analyze the process of racialization—again that would
have required my ability to move from the evidence of a localized context.
Although I examined the social construction of racialized conflicts in the inter-
view, to the extent that I wrote about race as though it simply existed as a
material reality, I reified race—despite my claim in setting up the exemplar
that processes of racialization were evident in my interviews with Native
American Indians. Gender and class were left outside of the analysis
completely—though one could make the argument for “fighting” itself as a
class-based, masculine metaphor or practice and one that in this case presumes
the unmarked category of physical “ability.”
Analytic induction is based upon the presuppositions of a realist ontology
and epistemology that requires researchers to show the relevance of whiteness,
racialization, wealth, gender, ability, and so forth in the empirical evidence of
a localized context—this is, the discursive production of “data.” Empirical
analyses are limited literally to what one can point to in the data, as if data
themselves were not constructed. The logic behind this mandate is that if
researchers were not constrained in this way, we would be vulnerable to
imposing our own assumptions and drifting away from science. Yet science
secures its own discourse by reifying its own practices and obscuring its
processes of production.
While analytic induction has much to offer social sciences—indeed there
have been many excellent studies of oppression—it is unable to apprehend
routine relations of privilege. This is particularly significant since privilege
does not operate independently from mechanisms of oppression—oppression
always, simultaneously, produces privilege. The ontology of analytic real-
ism can produce good analyses of marginalization, while allowing routine
privilege to pass without comment—precisely because it is so rarely
commented upon.
74
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Social research that is confined to a localized context will always be sig-
nificantly rooted in ontological realism. That is because localized contexts
(in and of themselves) cannot provide the range of analytical resources nec-
essary for examining the cultural and historical aspects of social processes
or for examining the social construction of localized contexts. By limiting
analyses to localized contexts, researchers cannot examine the cultural
forces that give rise to the embodiment and reification of historical relations
of power, privilege, and inequality.
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
The relative importance of race, class, gender, sexuality, and ability never
depends on a localized context—or even on multiple localized contexts—but
rather on their repetition in multiple contexts over time. For example, if race
can be analyzed in a local context, racialization must be understood as a
process over time in multiple contexts. The categories of social difference
upon which inequalities are built, consistently exceed the frame of inductive
analysis.
Analytic induction was designed to “study down” to point toward the dis-
advantaged and make visible marginalized social locations. It can do this quite
well—as fields such as social problems demonstrate. However, analytic induc-
tion was never intended to study how the machinery of marginalization pro-
duced viable subjects for exploitation. Nor was analytic induction intended as
a method for examining routine relations of power and privilege. The episte-
mological foundations on which it is moored render it ineffective for such
analysis today.
If analytic induction were an objective way of producing knowledge
about the world, it would seem logical to believe that analytic induction could
get at power and privilege as effectively as it gets at exploitation and domina-
tion. It does not. Common sense leads us to understand evidence as something
that appears in a “local context.” However, this belief is both a political and
historical construction. This leaves researchers with the conundrum of imag-
ining other ways that evidence could be logically constructed to enable sys-
tematized analyses. If the task seems impossible at this point, perhaps the next
chapters will be helpful in imagining it as both possible and necessary.
Chapter 3
Analytic Induction
75

76
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
FURTHER READING
Berger, P., & Luckmann, T. (1966). The social construction of reality: A treatise in the
sociology of knowledge. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through quali-
tative analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Clough, P. T. (1992). End(s) of ethnography. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for
qualitative research. New York: Aldine.
Holstein, J., & Gubrium, J. (Eds.). (2008). Handbook of constructionist research.
New York: Guilford Press.
Ladson-Billings, G. (2003). Racialized discourses and ethnic epistemologies. In
N. Denzin & Y. Lincoln (Eds.), The landscape of qualitative research (pp. 398–432).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory life: The construction of scientific facts
(2nd ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Ragin, C. (1994). Constructing social research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine Forge Press.
Robinson, W. S. (1951). The logical structure of analytic induction. American
Sociological Review, 16(6), 812–818.

77
 CHAPTER FOUR 

SYMBOLIC INTERACTION
INTRODUCTION
Max Weber’s work was particularly influential among early social scientists
who wanted to break away from using the physical science model in the social
sciences. Weber had argued that it is meaningless to attempt to reduce empir-
ical findings to social laws. According to Weber, laws are only conceptual aids
for understanding reality—knowledge of social laws cannot constitute an
understanding of reality. Weber (1978) argued that knowledge of cultural
processes is possible only by understanding the meanings that the specific and
shared reality holds for those involved. He used the term verstehen to charac-
terize the deep level of understanding that is necessary in order to inter-
pretatively re-create (not just to follow) cultural processes. These two aspects
of Weber’s work were particularly influential among the early efforts of social
researchers to examine social interaction.

78
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
In addition to Weber, the philosophical school of American Pragmatism
profoundly influenced the development of symbolic interaction.1 Inspired by
Charles Darwin, the work of American pragmatists contrasted sharply with
that of Descartes. Pragmatists argued that reality is not ready-made and wait-
ing to be discovered. Rather, knowledge acquisition is the active process of
coping with life’s demands and therefore always “in the making” (Baert,
2005, p. 129).2
From these philosophical roots, symbolic interaction began with the
premise that the individual and society are interdependent and inseparable—
both are constituted through shared meanings. Symbolic interaction emerged
as an effort to understand social life through something other than laboratory
research and behaviorist conceptions of stimulus–response. Consequently, it
shifted the goal of social research from an objective study of an empirical
reality to a deep understanding of the symbolic practices that make a shared
reality possible.
This chapter begins by offering some key linkages between pragmatist phi-
losophy and contributions to social research by Charles Horton Cooley, George
Herbert Mead, and Herbert Blumer. It then offers a brief glance at the varied land-
scape of symbolic interaction today and offers a general summary of the frame-
work. From this foundation, it moves into analyses of data and corresponding
analyses of symbolic interaction before concluding with discussion about the
implications for social research and relevance for social justice.
SYMBOLIC INTERACTION: A BRIEF HISTORY
American pragmatists John Dewey and William James were particularly influ-
ential among scholars who were thinking about symbolic processes and social
interaction (Reynolds, 2003b). Dewey distrusted the theoretical premise of what
1The philosophical school of pragmatism originated in the late 19th century. William James (1902)
attributed the term pragmatism to Charles Sanders Peirce; however, Peirce never claimed to be the
founder of modern pragmatism (Helle, 2005).
2“Darwinism taught pragmatists that it is perfectly possible to explain how the human species
developed language as one among many sophisticated methods of survival, but it is difficult to see
how human beings would have acquired the capacity to represent the universe as it actually is”
(Baert, 2005, p. 129).

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
79
he called “spectator knowledge”—the idea that knowledge is based on the accu-
rate observation and representation of existing realities. He, like other pragma-
tists, conceptualized knowledge production as an active process. Pragmatists
argued that truth is not the property of an idea or thing; rather, truth is a process
of becoming: truth is made true. “Truth lives, in fact, for the most part on a credit
system. Our thoughts and beliefs ‘pass,’so long as nothing challenges them, just
as bank-notes pass so long as nobody refuses them” (James, 1948, pp. 163–164).
Pragmatism shifted notions of truth from the academic to the everyday—from
what scholars think about the world to the “everyday truths” that everyone
encounters and uses as the basis of decisions and actions (Helle, 2005, pp. 35–36).
Both pragmatism and symbolic interaction are defined in some measure in rela-
tion to these two key points regarding truth and knowledge: Truth is not the
property of things, and truth is made true through everyday interactions.
William James’s philosophy of instinct, habit, and self were also of key
importance both to pragmatists and to the development of symbolic interac-
tion. James was a Cartesian materialist—that is to say he believed that the self
was identical with the brain. Like Descartes, he believed that bodily states fol-
low from perception. He famously argued that people do not run from a bear
because we are frightened; rather, we are frightened because we are running
from a bear. James argued that given the human capacity for memory, repeated
patterns of behavior must be understood as reflecting socially learned habits—
not as basic instinct as had been thought previously.
For James (1902, 1948, 1971), the self was not an expression of some
unitary inner being, but rather, it was the effect of caring about the opinions
of distinct groups of people. This is particularly significant for two reasons.
First, it means that the self is a social product—not a divine creation or a bio-
logically determined one. Second, to the extent that individuals care about the
opinions of many groups of people, each person could be said to have multi-
ple selves. It is important to note this is not a postmodern notion of multiple
selves but closer to a conflation of roles (e.g., parent, student, or athlete) and
identity. Pragmatists believed that the potential of human nature could only
be actualized in interaction with others; therefore, they were concerned with
identifying the conditions that would most effectively develop that potential.
Early scholars working in (what was to become) symbolic interaction drew
strongly from these concepts in pragmatist philosophy to develop theories of
self and interaction.

The influence of William James and John Dewey can be found in the
ideas of Charles Horton Cooley, George Herbert Mead, and Herbert Blumer as
well as in the most defining features of symbolic interaction: the looking-glass
self, significant symbols, and lines of action. For example, Cooley’s concept
of a “looking-glass self” synthesized William James’s philosophy of self and
J. M. Baldwin’s earlier theory of a looking-glass self. Cooley argued that a
sense of self develops along two parallel lines: one in which the child devel-
ops a sense of power (agency) through her/his ability to manipulate the social
and physical environment and one in which the child becomes aware of the
fact that his or her own self-image reflects the imaginations of others con-
cerning him/her. In this later sense, the self exists as an imaginative fact:
People imagine how they are viewed by others and act accordingly.
Cooley, like James, believed that society does not restrict human behav-
ior and creativity but rather, nurtures these and other qualities in social
settings—social experience provides the conditions under which individuals
develop. Cooley is linked to George Herbert Mead by a continuous analytic
thread: the attempt to find a methodically satisfactory solution to the problem
of the separation of subject and object (Helle, 2005, p. 53). Taking up this
problem, George Herbert Mead extended what previously had been the
province of psychology into sociology.
Mead belonged to an early tradition of scholars who viewed themselves
as both philosophers and scientists: As a philosopher, Mead was a pragmatist,
and as a scientist, he was a social behaviorist (Mead, 1962). Both fields mark
his contributions to symbolic interaction. Mead (1962) drew from William
James’s concept of multiple selves to argue that institutional order is real only
80
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
Table 4.1
Cartesian and Pragmatist Ontologies
Cartesian Dualism
Pragmatism
Ontological realism
Modified ontological realism
Subject = Person
Subject = Person
Subject/object dualism
Intersubjective
Objective truth
Truth is made true
Subjects have experiences
Subjects interpret experience
Language is neutral (transparent)
Language as symbolic communication

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
81
insofar as it is realized in performed roles (such as manager, parent, scholar);
however, roles are defined and rendered apparently objective by institutions
(Rousseau, 2002, pp. 238–239).
In order to develop a framework for understanding interaction, Mead drew
from John Dewey. Like Dewey, Mead argued that in order to effectively under-
stand social interaction, researchers need to examine how “lines of interaction”
are fitted together in what he called flexible, ongoing, and spontaneous ways
(Blumer, 2004). Mead contended that interactions are an ever-evolving series
of gestures that can spontaneously change directions. For example, Mead wrote
Much subtlety has been wasted on the problem of the meaning of meaning.
It is not necessary, in attempting to solve this problem, to have recourse to
psychical states, for the nature of meaning, as we have seen, is found to be
implicit in the structure of the social act, implicit in the relations among its
three basic individual components: namely the triadic relation of a gesture of
one individual. A response to that gesture by a second individual, and a com-
pletion of the given social act initiated by the gesture of the first individual.
(Mead, 1962, p. 81)
Mead’s understanding of interaction is related to the pragmatist notion of
truth. For Mead, as for the pragmatists, truth and meaning must be understood
relative to purposeful action, rather than as expressions of relationships of cor-
respondence to reality.
In addition, this excerpt makes clear Mead’s social behaviorist perspective—
both through his conceptualization of interaction as a linear trajectory as well as
in his focus on social behavior—phenomenological processes of interaction, not
interior processes of understanding. Further, as a social behaviorist, Mead theo-
rized how individuals fit lines of interaction together by distinguishing between
what he called gestures and significant gestures or significant symbols.
According to Mead, a gesture foreshadows action; gestures also presuppose
a response on the part of the other. Mead offered dogfights as a classic example
of gestures. Dogs signal a potential fight through their behavior, and this stimu-
lates a response in another (Mead, 1962, p. 43). Gestures do not represent ideas
nor do they stimulate ideas in response. People respond to gestures without
thought or conscious awareness—much like a boxer responds to a punch.
Mead argued that in interaction people more often respond to a considered
interpretation of gestures—what he called significant gestures or significant
symbols. Significant gestures entail the use of symbols for specific meaning

and hence become “language” (Mead, 1962). For example, one must interpret
whether the person shaking her or his fists is expressing anger or playfulness.
Any gesture will become a significant symbol if it is interpreted as indicating
forthcoming lines of action—an anticipated future (Blumer, 2004, pp. 18–20).
According to Mead, interaction pivots on three key points. First, since the
interpreted meaning of an action depends upon what the action appears to por-
tend for the future, interaction is always conducted with regard to anticipated
behavior. Second, in role-taking, one imaginatively rehearses the prospective
action of the other person; hence, the social ceases to be a purely external
event and assumes an interiorized relation. Third, activity is self-directed, not
evoked; prospective actions are not simply reactions, rather they are inten-
tionally chosen actions (Blumer 2004, pp. 30–31).
Mead’s theorization of self and of lines of action influenced Herbert
Blumer (1986, pp. 70–77), who drew from Mead to develop a distinction
between a personal “I” (how one sees oneself) and a social “me” (how one
imagines that one is seen by others). Blumer referred to the ongoing process
of “conversation” between the “I” and the “me” as “self-indication.” This
process entails internal conversations, which include questions such as Should
I say this? Will this joke be funny? Will I look foolish if I do this? To answer
questions that we pose to ourselves, we must take the position of another per-
son looking back at us. We then shape our behavior in response to her or his
imagined perspective.
For Blumer (1986), the foundation of all social interaction rests in the
process of representing ourselves to ourselves—of thinking about ourselves as
we think about other objects of consciousness.3 Joint action requires the ability
to think about ourselves as we do others. Individuals fit lines of action together
by first imagining how those with whom we are interacting might perceive us
and then adjusting our behavior accordingly.4 Thus people communicate
82
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
3Blumer (1986) delineates three types of objects: (1) social objects (such as children, professors,
or painters), (2) abstract objects (concepts such as loyalty or compassion), and (3) physical objects
(such as buildings, parks, open spaces, and desks). Physical environments are never “just”
backdrops for social interaction; they are an important part of interaction because people assign
both symbolic value and forms of agency to them (Smith & Bugni, 2006).
4While joint lines of action are generally orderly, they are necessarily open to uncertainties. Joint
actions must be initiated; can be interrupted, abandoned, or transformed; and may be oriented to
different premises. Even while definition of a joint action is shared, participants may take quite
different lines of action: New situations may arise that call for new lines of joint action and
participants may rely on considerations outside of the immediate context to interpret each other’s
lines of action (Blumer, 1986, pp. 71–72).

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
83
symbolically and imaginatively with others, and also with ourselves, as we
experiment with potential lines of action in our minds.5 In short, self-indications
enable individuals to create meaningful, purposive action; to adjust to circum-
stances that emerge; and to imagine how others might react. In addition, the
process of self-indication involves the concept of multiple selves. For example,
a person will shape joint lines of action on campus (when thinking of one’s self
as a scholar) differently than she or he would at home around a dinner table
(when thinking of one’s self as a lover, spouse, or parent). Blumer believed that
the salience of any identity is context dependent and therefore should be thought
of as identity-in-use.6 Since identities change over time—both in terms of sub-
stance and meaning—they are far from being fixed or permanent.
According to Blumer, the empirical world is always interpreted through a
human imaginary (Blumer, 1986, p. 22). Therefore, all objects are social prod-
ucts that emerge out of social interaction; the meaning of an object exists in
terms of how people make it meaningful. Yet Blumer was not a radical con-
structionist; he did not believe the world existed only in terms of the concep-
tions and images that people hold of it—Blumer argued that the world can and
does “talk back.” Blumer (1986) argued that reality does not necessarily bend
to our conceptions of it; the task of a social science is to test the images and
concepts that people use by scrutinizing the empirical world.
Although Blumer was concerned with the symbolic and interpretive
processes of social life, he worked within a model of science that was derived
from the physical sciences. Consequently, Blumer argued that human docu-
ments, such as life histories, can only make clear the nature of the interpreta-
tion, not its validity. Given the impossibility of providing truly exhaustive
accounts of human behavior, Blumer sought validation for interpretations in
statistical analyses that compared research findings with a control group
(Blumer, 1986, pp. 123–126).
In 1937, Herbert Blumer characterized ongoing research regarding the use
of significant symbols at the University of Chicago as “symbolic interaction”
5Social control is understood fundamentally as self-control (Blumer, 1986). Social disorganization
is understood as the inability to mobilize action effectively, not as the failure of social structures.
6“The fluidity and multivocality of these identities also implies that socially constructed realities
are likely to be characterized by multiple and changing meanings rather than fixed and shared
ones. This is a point of departure for SI from the European phenomenological tradition, which
tends to more strongly emphasize the intersubjective and shared aspects of reality construction. SI
on the other hand, is definitely more concerned with the multiplicity of realities within any
situation” (Prasad, 2005, p. 22).

(Platt, 1996, pp. 120–121). Today there is no single school of symbolic inter-
action. Over the years, symbolic interaction has thrived in a variety of schools
and genres, none of which represents a homogenous intellectual presence. At a
minimum, some scholars have inflected symbolic interaction with feminist and
critical race theories. Yet several distinctions have been institutionalized as par-
ticular schools of symbolic interaction—although the number and significance
of the schools continues to be strongly debated (cf. Denzin, 1992). With that
caveat emptor, I want to note a few of the competing lines of thought that have
emerged. These delineations are not intended to point to homogeneous schools
that are absolutely distinct from each other but to provide a brief, descriptive
overview that might be useful as a general heuristic for conceptualizing move-
ments of thought.7
Roughly between the First and Second World Wars, social scientists work-
ing at the University of Chicago began to move away from laboratory research
and toward a more naturalistic mode of inquiry; their research is referred to as the
first Chicago School (Travers, 2001, p. 18). This school includes scholars such as
Robert Park, Herbert Blumer, Nels Anderson, W. I. Thomas, Louis Wirth, and
Everett Hughes. Research from the first Chicago School is characterized by case
studies and ethnographic fieldwork that tend to incorporate functionalist analyses
and emphasize social competition for scarce resources. In addition, these studies
draw particularly from the functionalist language of norms and values and rely on
positivist standards of data analysis (Herman-Kinney & Verschaeve, 2003).
Perhaps most notable among these ethnographies was The Polish Peasant in
Europe and America, published in 1918 by Thomas and Znaniecki. As noted in
Chapter 3, The Polish Peasant in Europe and America, although crafted in the
causal language of physical sciences, broke new ground by examining life histo-
ries (Musolf, 2003, pp. 92–93).8 While The Polish Peasant in Europe and
America broadened sociological notions of evidence in ways that were critically
important to symbolic interactionists, it also drew strong criticism from Blumer
(1941) and other symbolic interactionists for a lack of clear methodology.
The second Chicago School refers to research after the Second World War
and today is commonly referred to simply as the Chicago School. The second
84
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
7It is beyond the scope of this book to provide analyses of the social, economic, and political
contexts that gave rise to these schools. However, it is important to keep in mind that all research
paradigms are products of such contexts.
8Thomas’s axiom of “If men (sic) define situations as real, they are real in their consequences” has
since become foundational in sociology (Musolf, 2003, p. 93).

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
85
Chicago School differs from the first in that it rejects generalizability as an
analytic goal and focuses instead on internal validity and the production of
theory. It includes the “new” ethnographies of Herbert Gans, Howard Becker,
Elliot Liebow, Blanche Greer, and Elijah Anderson. These later ethnographies
emphasize the unfolding and emergent nature of human interaction. In addi-
tion, the second Chicago School is characterized by sympathetic introspection,
participant observation, and interviews—the hallmarks of contemporary
ethnographic research.
By contrast, Manford Kuhn at the University of Iowa drew from the more
behaviorist aspects of the first Chicago School, as well as from the physical
sciences, to develop what came to be known as the Iowa School (Katovich,
Miller, & Stewart, 2003). Kuhn emphasized the positivist features of Blumer’s
work—in particular standardization and hypothesis testing (Herman-Kinney
& Verschaeve, 2003) and incorporated only those aspects of Blumer’s and
Mead’s work that could be operationalized (Helle, 2005, p. 41). The result was
quantitatively driven and expressed a more fundamentally deterministic view
of human behavior. After Kuhn’s death, Carl Couch continued a quantitative
approach to symbolic interaction and created the New Iowa School (now
referred to as the Iowa School). Couch incorporated a positivist approach with
a pragmatist philosophical foundation; research in this school emphasizes the
study of dyadic relationships over time.9
Yet Couch was not alone in developing a variation of Kuhn’s first Iowa
School. Jan Stets and Peter Burke also modified ideas from the original Iowa
School to develop what is known as the Indiana School, which focuses on
structure, both as the source of identity and action. In this framework, social
roles are understood as expressions of social structures; the analytic emphasis
concerns interactions between roles (parents, teacher, spouse, etc.) rather than
between individuals (cf. Burke, 1980; Stryker, 1980). The Indiana School may
be best known for its pioneering work in technology, particularly cybernetic
models of mind and social interaction and artificial intelligence (Herman-
Kinney & Verschaeve, 2003, p. 223).
At the University of Illinois, Norman Denzin cultivated what has come
to be known as the Illinois School—a version of symbolic interactionism
combined with postmodern and poststructural theories (Travers, 2001). The
9The Iowa School itself has been subdivided into four waves of research, each connected to Mead
and Couch’s empiricism but with distinctly different themes (Katovich, Miller, & Hintz, 2002).

Illinois School takes up the politics of representation by deconstructing sym-
bolic practices, as well as by incorporating a psychoanalytic perspective. With
a primary focus on cultural production and consumption, the Illinois School
reorients symbolic interaction toward cultural studies. It also underscores the
reflexive nature of interaction and extends the concept to researchers as well
who must role-take (place themselves in the position of those they study) in
order to make sense of interactions, objects, events, and contexts.
In this sense, symbolic interaction in the Illinois School involves a double
hermeneutic: one involving the relationships and interpretations among par-
ticipants, and another involving the researcher’s relationship to, and interpre-
tation of, the social context or interaction. The researcher is not just an
observer but someone who is actively (re)constructing the process of meaning
in order to be able to understand and interpret it (Helle, 2005, p. 19). In addi-
tion, researchers actively construct their findings for others—this could be said
to constitute another double hermeneutic: one regarding the researcher’s
process of writing and one regarding the reader’s interpretation of the text.
While the Chicago, Iowa, Indiana, and Illinois Schools constitute the
primary variations of contemporary symbolic interaction, some scholars iden-
tify two subfields of symbolic interaction: dramaturgy and ethnomethodology.
Erving Goffman (1959b, 1967) argued that the process of interpretively
recreating social knowledge has an essentially dramatic structure that makes
reality appear to simply unfold—hence Goffman developed what now is
called dramaturgy. The influence of Cooley’s looking-glass self is evident in
Goffman’s concept of dramaturgy. Goffman took the premise that, in inter-
action, each person behaves (consciously or not) in ways that attempt to
manage the impressions that others might gain of them—in effect, individu-
als put on a “show,” or performance, for others. Goffman’s dramaturgical
framework centers issues of role-taking, as well as front stage and backstage
performances. Goffman also drew from Cooley’s work on emotion, specifi-
cally regarding pride and shame (Scheff, 2005). In particular, Goffman
(1963) famously examined shame in relation to stigmatized performances.
In his later work, Goffman shifted his analytical emphasis from face-to-face
interaction to frame analysis, which regards broader aspects of language.
This shift remains controversial, with some scholars choosing to ignore
frame analysis as a blemish on an otherwise brilliant career and others
asserting that his research on frame analysis was the pinnacle of his intel-
lectual achievement.
86
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
87
The second of these subfields is ethnomethodology, which was devel-
oped by Harold Garfinkel. Concerned with the production of apparently nat-
ural social worlds, Garfinkel (1967) pursued a distinctively different path in
order to examine the assumptions underlying the meaning-making processes
of ordinary activities in daily life. Ethnomethodology is discussed in detail in
Chapter 5; for now, suffice it to say that ethnomethodological research is
characterized by a primary concern: How is a particular social activity done
and what must be assumed in doing it?
It is important to repeat that there are fundamental challenges to nearly all
delineations of interactionist schools. For example, while some scholars
(Boden, 1990; Denzin, 1970) consider the general project of ethnomethodol-
ogy to be congruent with symbolic interaction, others (Maynard & Clayman,
2003) have argued that it is fundamentally incompatible with symbolic inter-
action. In addition, although both symbolic interaction and ethnomethodology
claim Erving Goffman as part of their lineages, in his lifetime, he chose not to
affiliate with either. More generally, scholars continue to debate whether
researchers should refer to symbolic interaction or symbolic interactionism;
the latter is contested as an inappropriate reification. While a rich debate con-
tinues, I will sketch the basic principles of symbolic interaction as an inter-
pretive framework in the following section.
THE BASIC PREMISE OF SYMBOLIC INTERACTION
Today, symbolic interaction is most often practiced as a loose amalgam of
Cooley’s “looking-glass self” and Blumer’s sociological interpretation of
Mead’s theories. Generally, symbolic interaction is associated with three basic
tenets.10 First, people act toward things based on the meanings that the things
hold for them (Blumer, 1986). A tree might be a sacred object for one person,
an example of a particular botanical species for another, and cubits of lumber
10Manis and Meltzer provide seven principles of symbolic interaction: (1) Distinctively human
behavior and interaction are carried on through the medium of symbols and their meanings.
(2) The individual becomes humanized through interaction with other persons. (3) Human society
is most usefully conceived as consisting of people in interaction. (4) Human beings are active in
shaping their own behavior. (5) Consciousness, or thinking, involves interaction with oneself.
(6) Human beings construct their own behavior in the course of its execution. (7) An understand-
ing of human conduct requires study of the actors’ covert behavior (Manis & Meltzer, 1978,
pp. 6–8 in Musolf, 2003, p. 104).

for another. Each person will act toward the tree on the basis of the meaning
it holds for him or her. This first tenet is a critical but not a defining feature of
symbolic interaction.
Second, the meanings of things are generated over time through human
interaction (Blumer, 1986). The source of meaning for symbolic interaction is
collective; it is not individually determined nor is it intrinsic to objects. This is
a key point for symbolic interaction and one that distinguishes it from analytic
realism in which a chair is seen as a chair in and of itself. In symbolic inter-
action, objects and events are never just backdrops for interaction. Mead
(1962) argued that people imagine not only the likely positions of other peo-
ple but also the objects and places with which we interact. Consequently, inan-
imate objects can be understood to have a kind of agency in that they have
profound and integral effects on human responses and interactions. The field
of material culture is socially alive.11
Third, meanings are modified during interaction through interpretive
processes (Blumer, 1986). A sense of meaning involves an interpretive
process during which an individual communicates with him/herself; in the
process of self-indication, he or she may come to suspend, regroup, or trans-
form meanings. For example, in the course of reflecting on cutting down
trees, a logger may come to see trees not as lumber but as sacred objects to
be protected.
As a qualitative interpretive framework, symbolic interaction is
dependent on the procedural techniques of analytic induction or grounded
theory. As described in Chapter 3, analytic induction and grounded theory
both rely on inductive logic and empirical evidence in localized contexts.
Common modes of study for symbolic interactionists include ethnography,
participant observation, life history, unstructured interviews, focus groups,
as well as textual and visual media (including photographs, film, and
vlogs) analyses.
Significantly, Blumer (1933, 1986) believed that the task of media was
to accurately reflect the empirical world; in this sense, Blumer treated film
as an iconographic sign that represented the real world. Consequently, from
this perspective, the primary task of media analyses necessarily regards the
88
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
11This perspective is distinctly different from ethnomethodology in which inanimate objects are
generally not analyzed in the production of meaning.

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
89
success or failure (the relative accuracy) of the media’s reflection of the
world it claimed to represent. Blumer (1933, 1986) also asserted a causal
relationship between film and the social behavior of audiences, although he
never developed a method of analysis that could pursue the relationship.
Contemporary scholars (cf. Clough, 1988, 2000; Denzin, 1992, 2002b)
associated with the Illinois School have developed analyses of media analy-
sis that go well beyond Blumer’s realist conceptions—often by combining
symbolic interaction with poststructuralist and/or psychoanalytical theory. I
turn next to a practical application of symbolic interaction, followed by
reflexive analyses.
ANALYSIS OF NEWSPAPER,
TELEVISION, AND INTERVIEW EXEMPLARS
This section uses what might be called the tenets of mainstream symbolic
interaction associated with the Chicago School highlighted in the previous
overview. Subsequent sections present exemplars from three forms of empiri-
cal data (newspaper, television, and interview) as done in Chapter 3. They are
the same exemplars with the same brief contextualizing overviews. After ana-
lyzing each exemplar, I then reflect on how the various philosophical com-
mitments of symbolic interaction shaped my analysis. As in Chapter 3, I
conclude the chapter by considering the relevance of ontology and epistemol-
ogy to social justice.
Newspaper Analysis
The purportedly objective nature of news reporting makes it a particularly
interesting site for analysis. News stories are carefully crafted narratives that
select and assemble a narrow range of sources and events from a wide range
of possibilities. Through multiple revisions and edits, a story is shaped into an
apparently linear “news event.” Despite this well-established process, the gen-
eral public commonly reads a news story as a description of an event. This
holds particular promise and pitfalls for social researchers. What is the most
effective way of analyzing news articles? Symbolic interaction provides a dis-
tinctive framework.

90
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
Being a double amputee is not often described as an unfair advantage,
but that is the argument made by the governing body of world athlet-
ics, the International Association of Athletics Federation (IAAF) in
newspaper articles about Oscar Pistorius, a 20-year-old South African
runner. Pistorius was born without fibulae in his legs; his parents, on
the advice of multiple medical experts, had their son’s legs amputated
just beneath the knee when he was 11 months old (Philip, 2005).
Pistorius has run for many years in the para-Olympics with record per-
formances in this and other events at 100 meters (10.91 seconds), 200
meters (21.58 seconds), and 400 meters (46.34 seconds) (Longman,
2007). While those times do not meet Olympic qualifying standards for
men, Pistorius is fast enough that his marks “would have won gold
medals in equivalent women’s races at the 2004 Athens Olympics”
(Longman, 2007).
When the Beijing Games were still 15 months away, Pistorius peti-
tioned the IAAF to run in the 2008 Olympics. I examined newspaper arti-
cles about Pistorius’s petition and the IAAF administrative response and
found that administrators, athletes, and ethicists argued that Pistorius’s
prosthetic legs create a potentially unfair advantage for him over runners
with biological legs. The following newspaper excerpt is an exemplar of
coverage on the issue:
“The rule book says a foot has to be in contact with the starting
block,” Leon Fleiser, a general manager of the South African Olympic
Committee, said. “What is the definition of a foot? Is a prosthetic device
a foot, or is it an actual foot?”
I.A.A.F. officials have also expressed concern that Pistorius could top-
ple over, obstructing others or injuring himself and fellow competitors.
Some also fear that, without limits on technological aids, able-bodied run-
ners could begin wearing carbon-fiber plates or other unsuitably springy
devices in their shoes.
Among ethicists, Pistorius’s success has spurred talk of “transhumans”
and “cyborgs.” Some note that athletes already modify themselves in
a number of ways, including baseball sluggers who undergo laser eye
surgery to enhance their vision and pitchers who have elbow reconstruction
using sturdier ligaments from elsewhere in the body. At least three disabled
athletes have competed in the Summer Olympics: George Eyser, an
American, won a gold medal in gymnastics while competing on a wooden
Newspaper Exemplar

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
91
leg at the 1904 Games in St. Louis; Neroli Fairhall, a paraplegic from New
Zealand, competed in archery in the 1984 Olympics in Los Angeles; and
Marla Runyan, a legally blind runner from the United States, competed in
the 1,500 meters at the 2000 Olympics in Sydney. But Pistorius would be
the first amputee to compete in a track event, international officials said.
A sobering question was posed recently on the Web site of the
Connecticut-based Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies.
“Given the arms race nature of competition,” will technological advan-
tages cause “athletes to do something as seemingly radical as having
their healthy natural limbs replaced by artificial ones?” wrote George
Dvorsky, a member of the institute’s board of directors. “Is it self-mutilation
when you’re getting a better limb?” (Longman, 2007).
This excerpt demonstrates how “disability” emerges as a product of inter-
subjective social agreements about what constitutes ability/disability, rather
than as the result of any particular physical, emotional, or mental characteris-
tic. The excerpt illustrates that social agreements regarding the nature of dis-
ability are reached over time, in multiple contexts, and by multiple actors. In
some respects, the excerpt also demonstrates how such social agreements can
change; in the article, the meaning of being a double amputee shifts from a dis-
advantage to a potential advantage.
At issue for IAAF officials is the kind of body that Pistorius has—not his
ability to meet required starting times or his ability to run the distance of the
race. The article demonstrates how the meaning of disability is created not in
relation to ability but in relation to a conventional body—not even necessarily
an athletic body. Because disability gains meaning through the perception of
bodies, rather than abilities, the article is able to characterize an Olympic gold
medal winner, George Eyser, as disabled. To the extent that disability is framed
in relation to an idealized human body, eye surgery and elbow reconstruction
can be understood as restoring elements of a “natural” body rather than as
replacing them—which begins the journey to becoming “transhuman.”
Pistorius’s Olympic bid is symbolically framed as a moral contest
between humans and technology that threatens to redefine the ideal body—
and indeed challenges the meaning of humanness. Further, by placing the
human body, rather than athletic ability, at the center of the discussion about
disability, the article constructs Pistorius as a potential threat to human bodies.
Consider for instance Dvorsky’s concern that Pistorius might inspire other ath-
letes to willingly amputate their own legs.

Although people may have different limbs, sense faculties, and so forth, dis-
ability is the product of how the social environment and cultural institutions
interpret and respond to those differences—becoming disabled is a symbolic and
interactional process. Pistorius’s bid for admission to the Olympics is a clear
(if implicit) assertion that he rejects limitations associated with being labeled
disabled—and consequently, rejects the cultural meanings of ability and dis-
ability produced through idealized bodies. This rejection seems to be at the core
of the IAAF’s apparent troubles. Embodiment that diverges from a hegemonic
ideal remains deliberative grounds for disqualification as the meaning of dis-
ability slides from being a potential disadvantage to being a potential advantage.
Analyzing the Analysis
Symbolic interaction is not a form of textual analysis per se; it enables the
researcher to bring broader concepts and theories to bear on the reading of the
text.12 For example, to analyze disability as a symbolic process, I made refer-
ence to “social agreements” about disability. At the most basic level, the pre-
ceding analysis illustrates the ways that various actors (Pistorius, the IAAF,
and ethicists) respond to the range of meanings that ability/disability hold for
each. Yet none is acting from an individual construction of meaning—the
tenacity of the various meanings has been established over time and through
multiple contexts. And they remain open to challenge—as is evident both in
Pistorius’s bid for Olympic competition and as the meaning of being a double
amputee shifts from a disadvantage to a potential advantage.
However, as in Chapter 3, the analysis does not substantially address the
symbolic construction of ability. Human bodies are treated as a referent rather
than a symbolic construction in and of themselves. In this sense, ability is still
the unmarked center from which difference is measured. Overall, the analysis
demonstrates how the meaning of humanness is tethered to an idealized body
as the article raises the question of cyborgs and transhumans. While the analy-
sis is not tightly tied to the text, broader considerations, such as athletic seg-
regation and the effects of race and gender, are inaccessible because they are
not reflected in the text. Again this likely appears to be a matter of common
sense—why should researchers analyze what is not in the text?
92
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
12This is why, in part, some ethnomethodologists seek to distance the two frameworks. In addition,
in symbolic interaction, researchers often verify their emerging understandings of an ethnographic
context through interviews with key informants. In ethnomethodology, this process of verification
is problematic and will be discussed in Chapter 5.

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
93
Rooted to a pragmatist philosophy, the analysis does not rely upon, or
offer, a fixed notion of reality but rather examines a series of negotiations
through which Pistorius is symbolically constructed as “disabled,” despite his
ability to run competitively. However, the analysis also relies upon the proce-
dural technique of analytic induction—the exemplar is brought to the page
through analytic induction. What are the effects of combining a process of
formalization/systemization that relies on a Cartesian ontology, with a process
of interpretation, which relies on a pragmatist ontology?
First, the analysis treats the newspaper article as a transparent accounting
of news; it does not examine how events are assembled to appear as news.
However, this could simply be a shortcoming of the researcher’s analysis.
There is nothing in symbolic interaction that would preclude an analysis of the
symbolic construction of news—although this omission is extremely common
among symbolic interactionist analyses. So while it is possible to argue that
the influence of a Cartesian ontology might foreclose or restrict the analytical
impulse to study news as a cultural product, for now I want to simply acknowl-
edge that the analysis (as done) examines the symbolic production of disabil-
ity, and at another level, it also replicates the realist ontology that it resists.
The competing theoretical foundations have perhaps clearer effects where the
analysis encounters many of the same limitations as in Chapter 3 regarding the
nature of evidence and the production of knowledge.
If people create the meaning of social realities through symbolic interac-
tions, we must accept a limitless number of layers to the meaning-making
process. Given that all meaning is a link in an infinite chain of meanings, at
what point(s) can/should the researcher bracket the meaning-making
processes? Symbolic interaction is rooted to a Cartesian ontology through the
procedural techniques of analytic induction/grounded theory. The process of
formalization determines, most broadly, what can count as potential evidence.
Consequently, my examination of meaning-making processes is confined to
localized contexts—even though epistemologically, I take up an interpretive
analysis of meaning-making processes.
The resonance of a Cartesian ontology also is evidenced in the sub-
ject/object dualism that enables the analysis to appear to write itself. Because
there is no consideration of how the researcher is constructing data, evidence,
or meaning, the analysis creates the appearance of objective (if interpretive)
knowledge. The analysis lacks reflexivity—both as a critical expression of
self-awareness and more broadly as an acknowledgment of the symbolically
mediated, intersubjective relational process of social research.

Although experience is understood as an interpretive process, the ana-
lytical process can obscure the locus of agency and the meaning of subjec-
tivity. The early founders of symbolic interaction equated subjects with
persons and hence directed their analyses to the production of identities-in-
use. Today, mainstream symbolic interaction acknowledges the fluidity of
identities but also conflates identities with roles (parent, scholar, banker).
This is particularly problematic, not only because some identities are more
fixed and permanent than others, but also because it reduces identity to roles.
For example, many scholars today would assert that gender, sexuality, and
race are subject locations, not roles, precisely because there is no place to
stand outside of them.
An implicitly Cartesian concept of subjectivity is evidenced in the treat-
ment of disability and ability as dichotomous and fixed positions—even as
symbolic interaction demonstrates that the meaning of those positions is cul-
turally created. There is no empirical evidence in the article that would sup-
port an analysis of the ways that segregation makes it possible for
“able-bodied” athletes and audiences to ignore the ways in which all ability
exists on a continuum—or that such segregation also encourages “able-bodied”
athletes and audiences to ignore how their own behavior produces what they
have come to perceive as “disability” in others.
Also, in the earlier analysis, the question of agency never explicitly
arises because it is implicitly assumed as a property of a Cartesian subject.
The ability of “disabled” athletes to participate in the Olympics is
constrained in this article by the external force of the Olympic vetting
process—through the exercise of its own agency. Congruently, the analysis
does not problematize the nature of experience—it is simply something that
individuals have. In this sense, experience seems to be constituted in an
interactional environment.
Finally, because Pistorius’s gender, race, and class are never mentioned in
the article, they fall outside the context available for analysis and hence appear
to be irrelevant. Yet as a South African who was born without fibulae, his race,
class, and gender have much to contribute to his success as an Olympic ath-
lete. Had they been mentioned in the article, I could have brought cultural
knowledge and social theory regarding whiteness, wealth, and masculinity to
bear on the analysis. Analyses of the symbolic construction of ability and dis-
ability (which are rooted to a pragmatist ontology) are dramatically shaped
and constrained by the demands of Cartesian ontology, which forms the basis
of analytic induction/grounded theory.
94
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
95
Television Analysis
Generally television dramas are premised on the commonsense attitude of
ontological realism—viewers believe that the drama is a realistic portrayal,
even if this requires temporarily suspending particular moments of disbelief.
Audiences are invited to engage in a kind of voyeurism, in which the drama
serves as a private window into events unfolding, apparently spontaneously, in
the lives of others. For researchers, the pitfalls of approaching television
shows with an analytic foundation premised on ontological realism are obvi-
ous. Yet it would seem from existing media studies in mainstream social sci-
ences that such an approach is equally hard to avoid. To what extent does
symbolic interaction offer promising insights?
The ABC drama Brothers and Sisters features a white, upper-class fam-
ily in Southern California involved in the daily dramas of a family-run
business—complicated (of course) by interpersonal relationships and
family intrigues. The series is unusual in that one of the adult siblings in
the Walker family is gay, which makes it a potentially interesting site for
examining talk about sexuality. I examined shows from the first season
and found two relevant patterns.
First, scenes consistently allowed for multiple and contradictory audi-
ence engagements with politically controversial issues related to sexual-
ity. Brothers and Sisters commonly dramatizes political issues that affect
many families in the United States—particularly with regard to same-sex
marriage and the Republican/Democrat partisan divides that character-
ized the George W. Bush administration.
Second, scenes consistently left disagreements about sexuality unre-
solved. The show framed these disagreements within the contexts of
family intimacy, human frailty, and political aspirations—and typically
used humor to drain or divert dramatic tension when very harsh or divi-
sive conflict threatened to break out.
The following excerpt features a scene between siblings Kitty Walker,
played by Calista Flockhart, and Kevin Walker, played by Matthew Rhys. Kitty
enters this scene having just come from a meeting with Republican Senator
(Continued)
Television Exemplar

96
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
Robert McCallister (played by Rob Lowe), who offered her a position as head
of communications for his presidential campaign.Their meeting holds particu-
lar significance to the following scene for two reasons: Kitty and her deceased
father have been the only Republicans in a family with strong Democrat
affiliations, and it exposed romantic tension between Kitty and the senator,
who is a father of two young children and is in the process of a divorce.
Kitty has just mentioned the job offer to her brother, Kevin, who is an
attorney and the only gay primary character in the show in the first season.13
As the scene opens, Kevin is upset with Kitty because Robert McCallister
has voted in favor of a constitutional ban on same-sex marriage.Throughout
this scene, Kitty is preoccupied with the mail while Kevin is consumed by
the conversation; the camera alternates with the speaker, taking the view
of the listener.
Kevin: Well, why you?
Kitty:
Well, what the hell does that mean?
Kevin: [stuttering] Well, c-cause it’s completely absurd. You can’t work
for this guy!
Kitty:
Why? [Kitty laughs.] Why, Kevin? Because he’s a Republican?
Kevin: No, because he’s against gay marriage!
Kitty:
There are lots of people in the world, Kevin, for instance me, who
have no problem with gay people but still believe that marriage is
fundamentally a religious institution that has nothing to do with the
[camera turns to Kevin who is visibly upset] state and that does not
discount civil unions or domestic partnerships or anything you . . . .
Kevin: [Voice escalates] Oh come on! That’s just a cover that people like
you provide for people like him who hate people like me.
[Kitty shakes her head.]
Kitty:
Oh, Kevin! Please, let’s not make it personal.
Kevin: Ah, ah . . . [Raises eyebrows] Personal? Kitty, in 10 years . . . in
20 years, when I am finally . . . m-mature enough to sustain a
committed relationship I would like to settle down and get mar-
ried. That’s personal.
[Kitty stops glancing through mail and looks up to speak.]
13Subsequent seasons have included several other white gay men.

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
97
Kitty:
That’s improbable.
Kevin: Don’t take this job, Kitty. I’m warning you it will cause a great deal
of . . . .
Kitty:
Wait a minute. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait a minute. You’re
warning me?
[Brothers and Sisters, Episode 11: “Family Day” 1/7/07]
Brothers and Sisters, like all television shows, finds an audience by repre-
senting the social world in ways that resonate with large numbers of people.
Viewers become part of a regular audience when they reliably find characters and
situations with which they can identify in reality or in fantasy. In this sense, stud-
ies of popular media can offer important insights into contemporary social life. For
example, the excerpt from Brothers and Sisters both draws upon and exposes the
tensions that exist in many contemporary U.S. families around issues of same-sex
marriage and politics. The excerpt highlights these tensions in the argument that
arises between Kitty and Kevin in response to McCallister’s job offer to Kitty.
Throughout the show, and in this scene, Kitty represents the current
“moderate” Republican view that asserts marriage is a religious issue having
nothing to do with the state or with quality of life issues. Her family more consis-
tently represents positions associated with “liberal” Democrats. Yet with regard to
this particular issue, only Kevin, who is gay, advances marriage as a civil rights
issue that regards basic equality; other family members are silent on the issue. In
this scene, Kevin advances an emotional response rather than an analysis of how
the state is involved in allocating special rights to married people. The emotional-
ity may bring to light that this is a personal issue for him as a gay man, or it may
frame this as a sibling conflict; it also may raise some questions about his matu-
rity and masculinity in ways that are consistent with dominant homophobic views.
Kevin’s response and his difficulty in maintaining intimate relationships
(again an element of a homophobic discourse) are parlayed into a sibling conflict
between an older sister and younger brother—which enables both interpretations
of the conflict to coexist. While sibling intimacy enables a conversation about per-
sonal and political differences that emerge in relationship to same-sex marriage, as
a political argument begins to unfold, Kevin de-escalates the conflict from a polit-
ical debate to a sibling spat through self-deprecating characterizations of his own
marital aspirations. The show thus brings up political issues but reduces them to
personal differences by stripping arguments of their political/social value.

Analyzing the Analysis
Consistent with the Chicago School, this analysis takes up media repre-
sentations as being reflective of social life. It provides some insight into how
political tensions in the show are introduced and averted as well as demon-
strating how multiple interpretations of the scene would enable a broad range
of viewers to find their own political values validated by the show. While the
analysis takes up the issue of representation from the point of view of poten-
tial audiences, we lack the necessary audience for making arguments regard-
ing the dialogic relationship between audiences and representations.
Similarly, the analysis does not take up the construction of television
shows—the deliberate practices of writers, editors, producers, actors, and adver-
tisers. Although the scene is acknowledged as a constructed representation,
“mainstream” symbolic interaction does not provide the necessary tools for ana-
lyzing the processes of representation that would be relevant to this scene. As a
consequence, even though the analysis critiques representational practices,
agency seems to be limited to what one sees—the lines of action taken (or not
taken). This is consistent with the realist ontology of a Cartesian framework and
contributes to the somewhat transparent quality of representation: The show
appears to be the equivalent of social life, which leaves the meaning of experi-
ence in a liminal state that is at best irrelevant and at worst the property of the
television characters. The analysis carries an implicit Cartesian understanding of
social subjects as equivalent to persons—even if those persons are fictional.
While the symbolic interactionist epistemology expresses the commitments
of a pragmatist philosophy directed at processes of interpretation, the analytical
focus expresses those of a Cartesian ontology embedded in analytic induction.
This is evident by the notion of evidence that is bracketed in such a way as to focus
only on what is on the screen, or in this case in the transcript. Clough (2000, p. 92)
argued that television is not narrative media but rather is a ceaseless flow, an end-
less circulation of information and images. This flow cannot be accounted for in
my analyses because it is rooted to the processes of analytic induction. In addition,
because no one talks about race, gender, ability, or class, there is no evidence to
analyze in this excerpt. Hence, these systematic forms of cultural privilege appear
to be irrelevant to representations of and political debates about sexuality.
Interview Analysis
Historically, scholars working with symbolic interaction have tended to pro-
duce ethnographies; interviews are an important cornerstone of ethnographic
98
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
99
study. However, the strong emphasis on behavioral observation in symbolic
interaction leads researchers to use interviews to check the validity of the
researcher’s emerging interpretations of events and situations in the ethno-
graphic context (Cahill, 1987). My analysis of my interview with Tony Romero
attends only to symbolic elements rather than to processes of verification, which
exceed the structure of the example.
While dominant public discourses in the United States construct race as
natural, and apparently self-evident, in interviews with Native American
Indians, I found that talk about race consistently exposed the social, his-
torical, and legal processes of racialization. The exemplar that follows is
from my interview withTony Romero an Esselen Indian. It is important to
note that in the early 1900s, Esselen Indians (indigenous to the land that
came to be called California) were declared “extinct” by the U.S. govern-
ment. The federal government’s policy of recognition for Native
Americans requires genealogical evidence of unbroken ancestry over
hundreds of years. Indigenous nations unable to provide that evidence
were “terminated” by the government—that is to say denied federal
recognition that would have entitled them to land and other settlement
claims, as well as university scholarships and other forms of affirmative
action candidacy.The Esselens, however, were never officially terminated
but rather declared “extinct.”
The federal declaration of their “extinction” has become part of a
dominant cultural discourse. For example, the Economist featured an
article on the Esalen [sic] Institute, and described it as “named after
the Esselen, a now-extinct Indian tribe that used the place as their bur-
ial ground. In 1910 the Murphy family bought the land from home-
steaders” (The Economist, 2007). The Esalen Institute is a spa/retreat
center that has drawn renowned authors including John Steinbeck,
Aldous Huxley, and Henry Miller. In the 1950s, the beat poets visited
Esalen, and it later became a home to Alan Watts (The Economist,
2007).
In the following excerpt from my interview withTony Romero in 2000,
he talks about growing up in California as an Esselen Indian.
(Continued)
Interview Exemplar

100
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
Celine-Marie: I wonder if you could tell me what it was like for you growing
up and crossing worlds between your family and your home
and the rest of the culture you experienced around you.
Tony:
Well grownin’ up, uh, growin’ up, I remember my mom and
dad always told me, “Don’t tell anybody you’re Indian.” Uh,
they were scared because I had uncles that were either
drug behind horses or hung just ’cause they said they were
Native American Indians. I have documentation of that. I
had a couple of my relatives that were hung in a barn in
Carmel Valley ’cause they wouldn’t sell their property.
Celine-Marie: I’m so sorry.
Tony:
It’s things like that that happened in those days, and you
know were talkin’ like the ’50s—1950s—and things like
that were still goin’ on like I remember when I was in high
school I used to go down Monterey, I used to go to Louis’
Bar on Alvarado Street. My uncle used to hang out, and
there were two Obispo used to hang out in front of Louis’
all the time and sit, they used to have these benches in
front of all the pool halls. They were like, I guess there
were like 10 or 12 pool halls you know on Alvarado Street
and all these bars. So the Indians always used to carry
these little pints of whiskey. I’ll never forget the whiskey
bottles cause they’re, they’re made in a shape where you
can put ’em in your back pocket and they just fit perfect
cause they had a little concave, concave shape to ’em.
Celine-Marie: Mmm.
Tony:
And, uh, I remember ’em always sippin’ out them damn
whiskey bottles and, uh, but I remember one time I was
comin’ out of Louis’ pool hall and my uncle was fightin’
with these two white guys. He was tellin’ how they were
on his land, he didn’t like it you know, he was feelin’ a little
tipsy there. So then I just ignored him, went across the
street with some friends of mine to another place. And
about a half an hour later I came back out and my uncle
was sittin’ on the same bench but he had a bloody nose, his
eye was all black and blue, what they did was, they drug him
in the back alley, beat the shit out of him to teach him a

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
101
lesson, you know, that it wasn’t his land anymore, it was
theirs. And, uh, it was things like that that happened in
Monterey where my mother was scared. She said well don’t
tell anybody you’re Indian, tell ’em you’re Spanish. So then
when I did tell people I was Spanish and Indian, the first thing
that came into mind was you’re Mexican. I said no, no. I said
bein’ a Spanish Indian didn’t make you Mexican. It wasn’t the
idea that I was ashamed of bein’ a Mexican, it was the idea
of wanting to be called what I really was. And I wasn’t a
Mexican. And I knew that and my parents knew that and, uh,
so anyway, I went through that through my whole school
years. You know OK, Tony, you’re Spanish and Indian but
you’re Mexican. I says no. So anyway I had to go through this
whole thing when I was a kid. I was always, I was always,
when I was a kid I was always fightin’ to protect my heritage.
Celine-Marie: Mmm.
Tony:
Always fightin’ you know to show people I was Native
American Indian and I was proud of it. But then, uh, after
a while I just, I just ignored the whole thing. But then after
my mom passed away, I will never forget my mom passed
away in 1970, she, uh, she looked at me and says you’re
Native American Indian. She said be proud of it. I’ll never
forget that. She says you’re Esselen Indian. She said be
proud of it. And, uh, so ever since then I’ve been fightin’
for my recognition as a Native American Indian. I’m doin’
it not only for her, but for my family, you know my existing
family I have now, which isn’t much.
Through a narrative defined by conflicts (internal and external) Tony rep-
resents himself as both a victim and a warrior. His identification as an Esselen
Indian is anchored to a life history that seems to revolve around pool halls,
whiskey pints, and various forms of social and cultural violence. Tony repre-
sents his survival as an Esselen Indian—perhaps economically as well as
physically—as being dependent upon becoming culturally invisible. Yet if his
parents’ admonition to deny that he was Esselen Indian protected him from
racist violence, it also enacted another form of violence characterized by con-
tinuing forms of conflict in Tony’s life. Further, the cultural invisibility that
saved the lives of Esselen Indians also advanced a quite lethal form of violence

102
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
by enabling the U.S. government to declare them extinct. If the word extinction
conjures species of plants, animals, and insects, it works here to mask the more
appropriate word genocide. Metaphorically, Tony’s mother gave birth to a
“new” Tony on her deathbed when she told Tony to stop hiding his identity, to
be proud, and to never forget that he is Esselen Indian. The excerpt ends with
a claim to cultural citizenship as Tony pursues both personal and cultural visi-
bility by launching a fight for the Federal recognition of the Esselen Nation.
Analyzing the Analysis
This analysis offers some broad and interesting insights into symbolic
processes at work in this interview. It seems to articulate key concepts of pragma-
tist philosophy: Identities are negotiated and changeable, and social life is under-
stood as an emerging process, rather than as a defined reality. In addition, my focus
on symbolic processes moves the analysis away from ontological realism. Yet the
philosophical commitments are not entirely clear. Notably, my analysis did not
problematize subjectivity, agency, or experience; hence, they appear to be
either irrelevant or self-evident—qualities of a Cartesian ontology in either case.
Although symbolic interaction understands experience as an interpretive process,
the analytical process obscures the locus of agency and the nature of experience.
The system of formalization (analytic induction) is evident through the
implicit ontological realism that dominates the analysis. In addition, it is evi-
dent as well in the way the analysis is presented as transparent—written by no
one in particular. To the extent that interviews appear to be less constructed
(there are not hosts of writers, editors, and advertisers that escape the analyti-
cal frame), interviews can seem to be more objectively accessible and more
effective forms of social research. Again, these are features of ontological real-
ism. Although my analysis concerns symbolic processes of interpretation in
the narrative, the analysis is not self-reflexive with respect to the production
of knowledge. The researcher always frames the analysis—bringing some
things to the fore and leaving others behind. This process alone must under-
mine the belief that interviews are not constructed events.
IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH
Symbolic interaction is a process of interpretation that draws from American
Pragmatism and which also relies on a Cartesian framework for the process of

Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction
103
formalization that generates evidence. The double nature of symbolic interac-
tion as rooted to both philosophical pragmatism and Cartesian dualism enables
the proliferation of schools with apparently contradictory approaches to social
life and social research. On the one hand, symbolic interaction is practiced as
an interpretive framework—leading some to incorporate poststructuralism. On
the other hand, its grounding in Cartesian dualism leads others to implement it
as a quantitative strategy committed to models of scientific inquiry associated
with physical sciences. To the extent that both pragmatist and Cartesian ontolo-
gies are present in symbolic interaction analyses, schools with completely
oppositional ontological and epistemological frameworks share the same rubric
of symbolic interaction.
The pragmatist and Cartesian cross-currents enable and disable quite a
variety of potential analyses. This also produces a sizable dilemma in
which human interactions (and representations of human interaction) are
reduced to, or made equivalent to, free will. Symbolic interaction is not
able to get at unconscious processes or the constraining effects of cultural
forces. Further, Mead’s notion of multiple selves, reduced to social roles,
seems to mask an underlying commitment to a Cartesian self who enacts
the various roles. This is presumably what Blumer called “the self that is
known only to the self”—a purely transcendent self that is not shaped by,
or known to, others.
Further, while symbolic interaction emphasizes the way definitions and
shared meanings are worked out between people in a localized setting, it has
some trouble getting at routine relations of power. As in Chapter 3, the com-
mitment to a particular kind of empirical evidence left me unable to analyze
race, class, gender, and ability as routine relations of power and privilege—
both with respect to Oscar Pistorius and the representation of same-sex mar-
riage in the Brothers and Sisters excerpt. In the transcript of my interview with
Tony Romero, I was able to analyze the symbolic meanings of being an
Esselen Indian but unable to analyze the processes of racialization or the pro-
duction of whiteness that is critical to the meanings of being an Esselen Indian
in his narrative. Further masculinity, heterosexuality, whiteness, and ability, as
unmarked categories of privilege, appear to be irrelevant. Scientific reality
creates a particular type of order by enclosing (i.e., ordering) phenomena that
fit within that which has already been ordered; science is a way of creating
order out of chaos, albeit “at a cost” (Latour & Woolgar, 1986, p. 246).
Ultimately, even as I pursued processes of symbolic meaning, my analyses rei-
fied categories of race, gender, sexuality, class, and ability.

CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
While symbolic interaction can tell us a great deal about the processes of repre-
sentation through which social life is constructed, it carries analytical constraints
that prevent analyses of forms of power that produce and shape the localized
context.14 In localized contexts, a commonsense view necessarily reduces sub-
jects to persons because there is no way to apprehend the processes of subjec-
tification. If interpretive frameworks do not allow us to take up questions of
subjectivity, how are we to understand social locations, such as race, gender,
class, sexuality, and ability? They must be understood as real conditions that
have symbolic meanings—they are features of a real world that in Blumer’s
words “talks back to us.” This seems to imply that while we can (perhaps)
change the associated symbolic meanings, these categories are vested with an
inherent existence. The implications of this view raise serious concerns. For
example, if the ability to recognize race is itself a product of racism (Memmi,
2000), scholars must ask what is the liberatory potential of analyzing the shift-
ing symbolic meanings of race? While symbolic interaction is a very useful
framework for social research, its promise for disrupting relations of power and
generating insights into the creation of research useful to social justice seems
to be more limited—despite the best intentions of researchers. The unresolved
paradigmatic conflicts embedded in symbolic interaction create logical incon-
sistencies that are broadly relevant to social research.
FURTHER READING
Blumer, H. (1986). Symbolic interaction: perspective and method. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Blumer, H. (2004). George Herbert Mead and human conduct. Walnut Creek, CA:
AltaMira Press.
Clough, P. T. (1989). Letters from Pamela: Reading Howard S. Becker’s writing(s) for
social scientists. Symbolic Interaction, 12, 159–170.
Denzin, N. K. (1992). Symbolic interactionism and cultural studies. New York:
Blackwell.
Helle, H. J. (2005). Symbolic interaction and verstehen (Vol. 4). New York: Peter Lang.
Reynolds, L. T., & Herman-Kinney, N. J. (Eds.). (2003). Handbook of symbolic inter-
actionism. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
104
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
14These are precisely the limitations that scholars in the Illinois School have attempted to address
by incorporating poststructural and psychoanalytic frameworks into symbolic interaction.

105
 CHAPTER FIVE 

ETHNOMETHODOLOGY
INTRODUCTION
The emergence of ethnomethodology is often understood as a critical
response to the structural–functionalism that once dominated both theory and
methods in the social sciences. Harold Garfinkel developed ethnomethodol-
ogy, in part, as a response to what was then mainstream sociology’s tendency
to treat people as “cultural dopes” who respond to external social forces and
are motivated by internalized norms. As its name might suggest, eth-
nomethodology is a study of ethnomethods or “people’s methods” (Garfinkel,
1967). Ethnomethodology begins with a twofold premise: Social life is a
series of ongoing interactional accomplishments, and descriptions, conversa-
tions, and representations are not merely about the social world—they
actively constitute it. Daily life is understood as an intersubjective process
that becomes ordinary, or predictable, through systems of shared meaning.
This ontological grounding means that the truth or accuracy of any statement

106
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
is irrelevant—ethnomethodologists are interested in the meaning-making
processes of interpretation that can be identified in interaction.
Unlike formal logic or structural linguistics, ethnomethodological analy-
sis brings into view that which is seen but unnoticed in social interaction.
Since people rarely say literally what they mean, listeners must constantly
interpret what was said, in order to understand what was meant. For example,
even the apparently simple question of “How are you?” demands that the lis-
tener interpret what the speaker means by this question in order to formulate
an appropriate response.1 Is the question a greeting or an inquiry? Is it an
inquiry about one’s physical health? Emotional well-being? How much detail
is appropriate? Does the question deserve a simple nod of the head, an elab-
oration of ailments, or something in between? In all social interactions, the
person talking must trust the listener’s ability to respond to what was not
said, in order to make sense of what was said. This trust is often, but not
always, rewarded.
At one point or other in life, everyone seems to encounter the awkward
moment of having responded to what was said, rather than to what was meant.
For example, a very casual “How are you?” offered as a greeting can be met
with a much more detailed response than expected—or desired. Given that
people rarely say literally what they mean, it is remarkable that such confusion
happens as rarely as it does. The analytic interest for ethnomethodological
analyses regards the commonsense knowledge that people use every day as we
rely upon each other’s interpretive capacities. Consequently ethnomethodol-
ogy provides tools for apprehending and analyzing the interpretive practices
through which people assemble what then comes to be seen as objective fea-
tures of social life—such as rationality, morality, and social order. In short, it
provides tools for examining how people’s daily actions and practical reason-
ing produce the appearance of a stable, objective social reality.2
1Here readers will recognize some common ground with symbolic interaction. Ethnomethodology is
distinct from symbolic interaction in that it does not attend to symbolic processes but to assumptions
that are evident in the exchange and required to make sense of interactions.
2Ethnomethodology and symbolic interaction are both “concerned with the methods and practices
whereby participants in talk, action, and social interaction—who are ‘communicating’ with one
another by the use of symbols and language—manage their joint affairs. . . . [However] symbolic
interactionist empirical studies tend to focus on comparatively broad meanings and persistent def-
initions of the situation rather than singular actions and the sequences in which their meanings
emerge” (Maynard & Clayman, 2003, p. 174).

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
107
Ethnomethodology and symbolic interaction share an analytical focus on
interaction; consequently, their approaches to social life are often construed as
being the same. While a meaningful comparison exceeds the limits of this book,
most simply ethnomethodology and symbolic interaction can be differentiated
by their orientations toward social structures as well as toward language and
interaction. Symbolic interaction is rooted in an ontology that is consistent with
Weber and Durkheim (Maines, 1977). Hence, symbolic interactionism
addresses social structures as existing contexts for interaction. Further, it exam-
ines the relationships between people and structures through analyses of sym-
bolic communication and action.
By contrast, for ethnomethodologists, social structures are processes to be
understood through the social interactions that reflexively constitute them. The
ethnomethodological concern with the production of meaning in interaction
demands a narrowly focused analytical context, which does not regard social
structures in the abstract, as either empowering or constraining forces. In addi-
tion, for ethnomethodological analyses, language and interaction are constitu-
tive elements that produce an apparently objective social world; they are not
symbolic practices of meaning-making. Further, the analytical point of interest
is not language per se but the shared assumptions that are revealed through
what is not said.
This chapter takes up key analytical tools used in ethnomethodology:
accounts, documentary method, category analysis, and indexicality. It is
especially important to note that Garfinkel (1967) intended ethnomethodol-
ogy to be used to analyze naturally occurring events and interactions—not
newspaper articles, television dramas, or interviews. With that said, many
scholars (cf. Watson & Seiler, 1992) have found ethnomethdology to be a
fruitful framework for analyzing a wide range of data including interviews,
cultural texts, and ethnographies. At the very least, the empirical evidence
used in this chapter will provide a basic understanding of core principles that
will help to distinguish ethnomethodology from other interpretive frame-
works and to provide a context for understanding conceptions of agency,
experience, and subjectivity. As with previous chapters, this chapter is not
intended to provide how-to instruction. It begins with a short history of the
development of ethnomethodology and a general summary of the frame-
work. It then turns to analyses of exemplars and then corresponding analy-
sis of ethnomethodology.

ETHNOMETHODOLOGY: A BRIEF HISTORY
In developing ethnomethodology, Harold Garfinkel strategically drew
from phenomenologists Edmund Husserl and Alfred Schutz.3 A significant
influence for Husserl was his own teacher Franz Brentano. Husserl drew
from Brentano’s intentional theory of mind to develop the concept of
conscious as always intentional and always about something (Husserl,
1964). By asserting that the relationship between perception and its objects
is not passive, Husserl distinguished himself from other phenomenologists
including Hegel, Heidegger, Sartre, and de Beauvoir (Holstein &
Gubrium, 1998).4
Husserl (1964) attempted to study the essence of consciousness by distin-
guishing between consciousness and the objects that consciousness appre-
hends. Husserl argued that one could know the essential essence of objects by
bracketing all assumptions about the world. Consequently, he sought to
develop knowledge that was free of presuppositions. In pursuit of this goal,
Husserl (1960, 1964, 1970) examined first-person experiences with phenom-
ena in order to discover, and then generalize, the essential features of experi-
ence through ideal types.5
Although Husserl believed that Descartes misconceived the problems of
knowledge, he developed Cartesian motifs in his own work and even referred
108
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
3“Phenomenology is defined in Husserl’s Logical Investigations (1901) as the study of the essence
of human consciousness. Essence is not a question of empirical investigation but rather a matter
of pure abstractions—the very foundation of logic and mathematics. A case is made by Husserl
for ‘an a priori necessity of essence’ (1901:443); objects are seen to have ‘pure essences’ which
are self-evidently true—‘non-empirical, universal, and unconditionally valid’ (1901:446). Husserl
believed that by removing essence from the empirical realm of natural science and relocating it in
the universal realm of pure logic he was achieving a radical break with metaphysics. Essence, in
this early twentieth-century phenomenological view, is not something that lies behind a given
thing, but rather essence is that which is most self-evident and self-given about that thing: a figure
is, in essence, a triangle if the sum of its angles add up to 180 degrees. In Husserlian phenome-
nology, then, it is self-evidence which operates as the basis of epistemology, the validation of the
truth of all knowledge” (Fuss, 1989, pp. 14–15).
4It is important to note that Husserl’s emphasis on consciousness does not include any considera-
tion of the unconscious; further, he was concerned only with inferred consciousness.
5Ideal types are generated from characteristics that are not exhaustive of all cases, but they point
to elements common to most cases. Typification is a conceptual tool that stresses defining features
of a phenomenon for purposes of comparison. The term is most often associated with Weber, who
developed ideal types.

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
109
to phenomenology as “neo-Cartesianism” (Husserl, 1960, p. 43). The influ-
ence of Descartes is evident in Husserl’s assertion that it is both possible, and
necessary, to examine objects and behavior without presuppositions, indeed
without regard to any internal psychic or psychological landscapes, or broader
cultural structures and influences. Yet to the extent that Husserl asserted that
consciousness was always “about something,” he can be understood as chal-
lenging the rigidity of Cartesian subject/object dualism. Husserl (1964) argued
that in daily life a “natural attitude” is held wherein people view objects as
existing independently from their own consciousness of them. Notably
Husserl used the term natural attitude to refer to what he considered to be a
naive life—not completely devoid of practical, critical reflection but pretheo-
retical and therefore naturalistic.
Phenomenology requires the researcher to bracket his or her natural
attitude in order to investigate how consciousness actively constitutes the
objects of its experience (Husserl, 1964). However, Husserl worked from
the ontological premise that real objects exist independently of human per-
ception, so exactly what then does it mean to say, “consciousness consti-
tutes the objects of experience”? Husserl argued that objects do not simply
exist as external to human consciousness; they also are formed by shared
meanings. In this sense, Husserl’s thinking was aligned ontologically with
Blumer’s.
Husserl had considerable influence on his student Alfred Schutz, yet
Schutz was much more critical of Descartes than was Husserl. Schutz began
his critique of Descartes by challenging the logical foundation of Descartes’
theory of pure reason. Descartes had established the primacy of pure reason
through the concept of doubt; he argued that everything is open to doubt
except the existence of a thinking subject who doubts. Schutz argued that
doubting everything except our thoughts might be useful philosophically,
but practically speaking, it is impossible. He contended that if people
doubted the reality of everything around us, we would not be able to func-
tion. Consequently, daily life must be conducted on some other basis. Schutz
inverted Descartes’ work by pursuing not what people doubted but what they
assumed. In the process, Schutz reoriented Husserl’s philosophical project
away from structures of consciousness and toward the assumptions that peo-
ple make in daily life. This philosophical foundation remains at the core of
ethnomethodology.

Drawing from Husserl, Schutz (1970) used the term natural attitude to
refer to the daily assumptions that people bring to ordinary events—assumptions
that enable us to take our daily social worlds for granted.Ahallmark of Schutz’s
natural attitude is the belief that the world exists precisely as we see it: If some-
one could stand where I am, they would see things just as I do. “[W]e assume
that others experience the world basically in the way we do, and that we can
therefore understand one another in our dealings in and with the world”
(Holstein & Gubrium, 1998, p. 263). Like Husserl, Schutz’s concept of a nat-
ural attitude is intersubjective. That is to say it is collectively and interactively
produced; it does not arise out of an individual’s mind, nor is it isolated from
history or culture (Cuff, Sharrock, & Francis, 2006). Of course, the practice of
routinely counting on shared assumptions does not always work out—we all
encounter a few people who behave in unexpected or unpredictable ways.
Given the many differences among us, Schutz wanted to understand how people
manage to succeed so often in maintaining a sense of a shared social world.
In a radically empirical turn, Schutz combined a phenomenological sensi-
bility with an analytical concern for interaction (Gubrium & Holstein, 1997).
Schutz (1970) reasoned that people approach interaction with shared stocks of
knowledge—socially established structures of meaning. However, Schutz
believed that meaning is never completely predetermined by these stocks of
knowledge. Consequently, he argued that in order to understand social life,
researchers must bracket the presence of their own shared stocks of knowledge
and seek to understand interpretive practices solely by examining the processes
110
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
Table 5.1
Cartesian and Phenomenological Ontologies
Cartesian Dualism
Phenomenology
Ontological realism
Modified ontological realism
Objective truth
Emphasis on meaning, not truth
Subject = Person
Subject = Person
Subject/object dualism
Intersubjective
Subjects have experiences
Experience requires assumptions and
interpretations
Language is neutral (transparent)
bearer of information
Conversation/talk in localized contexts
is productive

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
111
of interaction. Further, he argued that researchers must be able to convincingly
and accountably indicate which stocks of knowledge are relevant to the inter-
action by referring to the concrete details in interaction.6 One must be able to
point to the precise behaviors or exchanges in the interaction that indicate that
the individuals are drawing from a particular stock of shared knowledge.
While Garfinkel acknowledged that people draw from broad stocks of
knowledge to help them make sense of what they see and experience (ten
Have, 2004), he bracketed this knowledge as being outside the field of analytic
interest for ethnomethodology. Garfinkel rooted ethnomethodology to a radi-
cal, or fundamental, notion of personal sovereignty—ethnomethodological
analyses examine people in interaction as sovereign actors. Yet ethnomethod-
ology has no analytical interest in concepts such as intentionality, conscious-
ness, or will with regard to human action.
Garfinkel developed ethnomethodology by drawing from two key phe-
nomenological components: an emphasis on daily practices that constitute an
apparently objective, social world and tacit, or commonsense, knowledge. In
this framework, conduct is understood to be a product of commonsense ratio-
nalities of judgment that are observable, accountable, and orderly features of
everyday reality (Garfinkel, 1967). As might be apparent, ethnomethodology
is intended as a descriptive, not a critical, framework. Ethnomethodology’s
concern with the interactional accomplishment of a shared sense of reality
forms its specific analytic contours: From this perspective, the truth, or accu-
racy, of any statement is irrelevant to the procedures people use to make sense
of it.
Ethnomethodological analyses are premised on the belief that meaning is
reflexively created, self-generating, and context dependent. Consequently, the
analytical focus is always on how participants cooperatively create shared
meanings. For example, consider the following statement: “I’d like you to meet
my invisible friend.” It might be easy to imagine how this interaction would
unfold differently for a child talking with a parent, for a comedian talking with
an audience, or for a client talking with a psychiatrist. An ethnomethodological
analysis would examine the concrete details of the interaction to understand
how the participants involved interpreted this statement.
To understand how (and why) a researcher might bracket her or his own
stockpiles of knowledge in the process of examining an interaction, consider
6This is a key distinction between ethnomethodology and symbolic interaction.

Goffman’s (1959a) research on psychiatric institutions and the residents’ practice
of collecting string and foil. If one understands this behavior through a common-
sense understanding of a mental illness diagnosis, collecting string and foil appears
to be evidence of mental illness. However, if one understands this behavior
through an appreciation of the value of personal possessions in an institution that
denies the right to all personal possessions, the same behavior can be understood
as a way of preserving mental health. Researchers are asked to “bracket” or try to
suspend their own knowledge, judgments, and expectations in order to understand
meaning-making practices from the perspectives of those who are interacting.
In addition to phenomenology, ethnomethodology draws from several
other intellectual resources, including Durkheim (Garfinkel, 2002). Yet it might
be most useful to understand the development of ethnomethodology, in relation
to Garfinkel’s mentor, Talcott Parsons (Heritage, 1984). For Parsons (1970),
social order was made possible through institutionalized systems of norms,
rules, and values. Parsons argued that social actors are broadly unreflexive with
respect to social norms; through socialization, people internalize norms as part
of their personalities. Deviant behavior results from inadequate socialization
and hence the failure to follow social rules. Garfinkel completely rejected the
notion that people follow social rules (Boden & Zimmerman, 1991). Departing
radically from Parsons, Garfinkel argued that the whole notion of following
rules fails to capture the constantly shifting social contexts. In every context
there would need to be a rule to follow, and there cannot be preexisting rules
for contexts that have not yet emerged (Feldman, 1995, p. 10).
Further, Garfinkel argued that shared values could not be the answer to
questions of social order because shared values presuppose the existence of a
social order. Garfinkel also rejected the belief that social structures precede
interaction and cause (or condition) social conduct. He contended that struc-
tures (be it capitalism, race, or the banking industry) exist only through the
interactions that make them possible (West & Zimmerman, 1987).7
Garfinkel asserted that an orientation to normative conceptions underpins the
interpretative nature of social interaction—these constitute the edges, the parame-
ters, of recognizably appropriate behaviors. They are not standards that one must
“live up to.” Rather, normative conceptions are the materials that people employ
112
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
7“In maintaining, elaborating or transforming their circumstances by their actions, the actors are
also simultaneously reproducing, developing, or modifying the institutional realities which
envelop these actions” (Heritage, 1984, p. 180). Since institutional realities must be generated,
maintained, and transformed at the level of human interaction, ethnomethodologists do not face a
micro–macro binary (Watson & Goulet, 1998).

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
113
to make sense of their circumstances, to evaluate what is going on in an interac-
tion, and to produce and to recognize a range of expectations for “appropriate”
behavior. Behaviors are “unremarkable” to the extent that they are “seen to be in
accord with culturally approved standards” (West & Zimmerman, 1987, p. 136).
Social order, according to Garfinkel, is built through the contingent, embodied,
and ongoing interpretive work of ordinary members of society. Through social
interaction, people accomplish, manage, and reproduce social structures.
In order to understand how people maintain social structures, Garfinkel
developed breaching experiments as an analytic framework that focused not
only on conduct but also on apprehending the commonsense rationalities
behind conduct. He believed that people rely on commonsense rationalities,
unless there is a breakdown that prevents them from seeing “business as usual.”
Breaching experiments were designed to cause just such a breakdown and
enable researchers to observe “repair work” that would reveal the shared
assumptions that had been disrupted. Garfinkel asked his students to violate
basic social expectations—the social trust on which collective assumptions
rest. Importantly, breaches are not violations of social norms wherein a person
might be seen as deviant. Rather they violate the meaningful social order of
daily activities and thereby cause varying levels of confusion. For example,
Garfinkel asked his students to take what people say literally. So when asked
the question “How are you?” in passing, students provided long and detailed
accountings of their physical and emotional well-being rather than the expected
nod of the head. Garfinkel also had students pursue detailed clarification of
quite ordinary events that “should have been” (and were assumed to be) famil-
iar to them. He then examined how people attempted to address or repair the
breaches made by the students in order to understand the assumptions that were
involved in producing an apparently objective, shared social world.
As he developed ethnomethodology, Garfinkel leveled two fundamental
challenges to social research methods. One challenge targeted the epistemo-
logical foundation of social research: Garfinkel (1967) argued that any notion
of “objective science” is fundamentally flawed because researchers rely on
their own commonsense assumptions in order to make sense of the world(s)
they are researching and in order to make sense of their data. As a consequence
what purport[s] to be objective and scientific descriptions can turn out to be
partial and distorted, lacking a grasp upon the contextual conditions of activ-
ities concerned and the meaning of those circumstances and activities for
those who are situated in them. (Cuff et al., 2006, pp. 121–122)

A methodology more appropriate to understanding social life, according
to Garfinkel, must require that scholars analyze all of their own cultural
resources and assumptions that are used for analyzing phenomena.
Garfinkel’s second challenge to social research targeted the nature of data
and data analysis. For example, an ethnomethodological critique of Le Suicide:
E´tude de Sociologie undermines Durkheim’s notion of “social facts” by assert-
ing that these are not facts at all but rather they are practical accomplishments.
In other words, while classical sociology is in the business of explaining social
facts, the effort of ethnomethodology is directed towards an explication of their
constitution. In his Le suicide: etude de sociologie, Emile Durkheim tried to
explain variations in suicide rates in terms of variation in kinds of social integra-
tion.An ethnomethodologist, however, might investigate the ways in which cases
of sudden death get constituted as being suicide, or at a different level, how sta-
tistical information about various “rates” is used to construct a sociological
explanation of suicide in terms of social “causes.” (ten Have, 2004, pp. 14–15)
This analysis demonstrates a distinctive ethnomethodological focus on
the meaning-making processes through which the world comes to appear
objectively real.8 The same logic applies as well to the notion of data. To the
extent that the word data suggests social facts that need to be uncovered, it is
a misleading term because it elides the processes through which “data,” like
“reality,” are always being produced in one way or another.
Ethnomethodology requires the researcher to take up social interaction not
as social facts or symbolic practices but rather as practical accomplishments
that constitute meaning. Broadly speaking, the mandate of ethnomethodology is
to produce specific, context-dependent analyses—which are not to be treated as
general theories of human action. Given this focus on describing a narrow,
localized context, it should not be surprising that ethnomethodology does not
explicitly address issues of subjectivity but rather implicitly assumes that
subjects and persons are synonymous. In addition, its phenomenological foun-
dation limits conceptions of agency to human action in a local context—agency
is a human property. And, as noted earlier, experience is a process of interpreta-
tion. Although the focus is on meaning-making practices, ethnomethodology is
ontologically consistent with both phenomenology and symbolic interaction—
and like them uses analytic induction as a method of formalization.
114
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
8See, for example, Dorothy Smith’s analysis of suicide in The Conceptual Practices of Power:
A Feminist Sociology of Knowledge (Smith, 1990b).

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
115
The fundamental usefulness of Garfinkel’s framework inspired several
variations of ethnomethodology. Aaron Cicourel developed a distinct variation
that pursues issues of cognition and draws from Wittgenstein; Jeff Coulter fur-
ther refined and developed this line of research. Following a different trajec-
tory, Harvey Sacks (Garfinkel’s student) along with Emanuel Schegloff and
Gail Jefferson developed conversation analysis as a very specific and highly
technical variation of ethnomethodology.9 In addition, other scholars (cf. Hak,
1992; Holstein & Gubrium, 2005; Moerman, 1992; Pascale, 2007; Smith,
1999) have developed variously hybridized variations of ethnomethodology
intended to apprehend not only localized practices but also to critically exam-
ine how those practices are situated within broader cultural structures.
There are many disagreements about the variations of ethnomethodology.
While conversation analysis is frequently regarded as the most typical form of
ethnomethodological research, some researchers (cf. Holstein & Gubrium,
1998, 2005; Lynch & Bogen, 1994) contend that despite sharing key concerns,
the particular emphasis of conversational analysis on the sequential structur-
ing and micro-features of talk-in-interaction makes its connection to eth-
nomethodology somewhat tenuous. In addition, attempts to modify or extend
Garfinkel’s original project are nearly always contentious among those
attempting to preserve Garfinkel’s original contributions.
The ethnomethodological concern with common sense leads researchers to
regard extraordinary activities or events, which disrupt commonsense assump-
tions, as particularly rich sites for social research. There are four primary
research strategies associated with ethnomethodology: (1) close study of meaning-
making activities through breaching experiments, (2) analyzing extraordinary
circumstances in which we can examine our own ability to make sense of
events, (3) ethnographic fieldwork to study the routine competences involved
9Conversation analysis, developed by Harvey Sacks, seeks to identify and analyze structural compo-
nents of conversational sequencing. John Heritage (1984) summarized the fundamentals of conversa-
tion analysis in three premises. First, interaction is structurally organized, and this may be observed
in the regularities of ordinary conversation. All aspects of interaction can be found to exhibit orga-
nized patterns of stable, identifiable structural features. They stand independent of the psychological
or other characteristics of particular speakers, representing ubiquitous features of talk-in-interaction
itself to which participants orient. Second, all interaction is contextually oriented in that talk is both
productive of and reflects the circumstances of its production. Third, these two properties character-
ize all interaction so that no order of detail can be dismissed as disorderly, accidental, or irrelevant to
the ongoing interaction. This focus on the real-time, sequential details of ordinary conversation
requires naturalistic methods of study. Naturally occurring talk is tape recorded (increasingly, video-
taping is encouraged) and transcribed to reproduce the fine-grained detail of speech exchanges.

in performing daily activities, and (4) ordinary or natural practices (uncontrived
by the researcher) that are recorded and then transcribed and analyzed, not for
what is said, but how it is said (ten Have, 2004, pp. 32–34). These strategies are
often combined. In all cases, ethnomethodologists begin with a focus on mun-
dane interaction and use analytic induction to build analyses.
THE BASIC PREMISE OF ETHNOMETHODOLOGY
While there are many forms of ethnomethodological analysis, in order to
demonstrate the distinctiveness of the basic premise of ethnomethodology, this
section focuses on a nexus of Garfinkel’s key concepts/tenets: indexicality,
reflexivity, accounts, documentary method, and commonsense knowl-
edge. Ethnomethodological analysis uses the techniques and standards of ana-
lytic induction: searching for patterns (themes) and negative cases as well as
working toward saturation (cf. Maynard & Clayman, 2003) but the processes of
interpretation are quite different. Ethnomethodology begins with the premise
that all meaning is indexical—that is to say it depends on context (Heritage,
1984). It is easy to see how concepts such as short/tall, yesterday/tomorrow as
well as pronouns (you, him, her) are always indexical—it is impossible to know
to what (or whom) these words refer without some understanding of the context
in which they are used.10
Fundamentally, all meaning is indexical, or context dependent. The simple
declaration “It is raining” will mean different things depending on the context
in which it is spoken. The statement will mean one thing in a place experienc-
ing drought, another in a place experiencing flooding, and a third on the day of
a wedding—“if you think of it, on all occasions, all expressions (and actions)
are in fact indexical” (ten Have, 2004, p. 21). The meaning of any statement
becomes evident by examining the various ways in which participants respond
in the interaction. In this sense, interactions are also reflexive—they shape and
are shaped by localized settings. Just as a reflexive verb is one whose subject
and object is the same, in ethnomethodology reflexivity refers to the “self-
explicating property of ordinary actions” (ten Have, 2004, p. 20). The reflexive
nature of all interaction refers to the ability of practices to both describe and
constitute a social framework (Coulon, 1995, p. 23). Reflexivity, in this sense,
116
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
10This is different from Volosinov’s formulation of indexicality—as meaning embedded in orders
of value.

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
117
is not a conscious process: Participants generate a constantly emerging social
reality through the dialogic production of meaning in interaction.
The reflexive and indexical nature of interactions enables researchers to
analyze them as accounts that organize and constitute that which they describe.11
The difference between conversation and accounts is an important epistemolog-
ical one. Researchers who analyze conversation through a postpositivist frame-
work are concerned with what people say or don’t say, how they describe events,
and the relative truth of their statements. Researchers who analyze the same con-
versation as an account are concerned with responses that indicate how state-
ments are interpreted, how claims are accepted or discredited, and the shared
assumptions, or tacit knowledge, underlying the conversation. This last point
may be regarded as a defining feature of ethnomethodological analyses.
Researchers analyze accounts not only for the particulars of what is said
but also as pointing toward “a mass of unstated assumptions” (Heritage, 1984,
p. 181). This analytical focus is referred to as a documentary method—that is
to say, researchers treat appearances as a document pointing to, or standing on
behalf of, a presupposed underlying pattern (Garfinkel, 1967, p. 78). “The
appearances and the underlying patterns are reflexively related. The point of
documentary analysis is to examine the tacit knowledge underlying what is
said that enables ‘what is said’ to make sense” (Pascale, 2007, p. 11).
Consider, for example, the following statement: “Please have more.” The
meaning of the statement is produced through more than just these words. Is
the person being sarcastic? Playful? Is the person merely being polite? Is she
or he earnest? All participants in an exchange around this statement would
necessarily rely upon tacit knowledge to make sense of the interaction. The
way each person responds would point the researcher toward assumptions
(shared or not) in the interaction. Someone who struggles with overeating
might interpret “please have more” as a form of sarcastic ridicule—regardless
of whether or not it was intended in this way. The details of the interaction
would reveal various sets of interpretations at play. By treating what is said as
pointing toward unstated assumptions (tacit knowledge), the documentary
method enables researchers to examine commonsense or tacit knowledge that
is central to the production of mutual understanding.
Garfinkel’s emphasis on the routine nature of “seen but unnoticed” proce-
dures for accomplishing normal courses of action (Heritage, 1984) has led more
11Although Garfinkel’s initial focus of analysis was naturally occurring talk in local interactions,
nearly any form of data can be treated as an account rather than as a description.

recent ethnomethodologists to draw from Sacks’(1992) work on the use of mem-
bership category devices (MCDs) and membership categorizations, to explore
and elaborate on accounts. A membership category device is an overarching con-
ceptual frame that reflexively organizes the member categories it contains. For
example, in the United States, “family” is an MCD that includes membership cat-
egories of parents, children, siblings, cousins, aunts, uncles, and so forth. In this
sense, the term membership category is phenomenologically based and refers to
displays that inform others about the person’s social identity; they reveal nothing
of the individual character of the person but rather exhibit socially learned, pat-
terned behavior that establishes the terms of interaction (Goffman, 1976).
The MCD in use in an interaction determines which membership cate-
gories (and types of behaviors) are potentially accountable. For example,
within a family one may be called to account for her or his behavior as a par-
ent, or as a child, a cousin, and so forth. In interaction, behavior perceived to
be appropriate to the membership category in use passes without comment, but
breaches may be remarked upon. Within “family” one is potentially account-
able for behavior as a cousin but not as a scientist—even though one may be
both a cousin and a scientist. The category of “scientist” is not incumbent
within the MCD of “family.” Situationally relevant membership categories are
made salient through the concrete details of the interaction.
Every membership category has category-bound behaviors associated
with it and consequently holds the potential for requiring members to be
accountable for behavior. This does not mean that actions are subject to over-
sight (e.g., teachers are accountable to parents or administration). Rather,
membership categories make the organization of activities visible and there-
fore potentially vulnerable to being evaluated by others. One might be visible
as a man or woman in an interaction and therefore potentially be held respon-
sible for behavior as a man or as a woman. In environments in which gender
is a relevant MCD, boys might be chided to “man up,” or girls might be told
to “act like a lady” (cf. West & Zimmerman, 1987). Through localized con-
texts we learn what behaviors are potentially accountable.
ANALYSIS OF NEWSPAPER,
TELEVISION, AND INTERVIEW EXEMPLARS
This section uses foundational concepts of ethnomethodology to examine the
same exemplars that were used in Chapters 3 and 4: a newspaper excerpt, an
118
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

excerpt from a television drama, and an interview excerpt. As noted earlier,
one might rightly argue that Garfinkel intended ethnomethodology to be used
to analyze talk and interaction in natural environments—he did not envision it
being used in this way. While some scholars might argue that these data may
not best showcase the analytical strengths of Garfinkel’s ethnomethodology, it
is also true that today scholars use ethnomethodology in a wide variety of
ways, and with a range of data, that Garfinkel had not envisioned. My intent
is only to demonstrate the ontological and epistemological commitments of
the framework and so the exemplars are of value for the following exercises.
Newspaper Analysis
An ethnomethodological analysis of news articles approaches them not as
descriptions of events but as accounts that produce what they appear to
describe—news. This demands a documentary approach to the analysis in
order to get at tacit knowledge.
Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
119
Being a double amputee is not often described as an unfair advantage,
but that is the argument made by the governing body of world athlet-
ics, the International Association of Athletics Federation (IAAF) in
newspaper articles about Oscar Pistorius, a 20-year-old South African
runner. Pistorius was born without fibulae in his legs; his parents, on the
advice of multiple medical experts, had their son’s legs amputated just
beneath the knee when he was 11 months old (Philip, 2005). Pistorius
has run for many years in the para-Olympics with record performances
in this and other events at 100 meters (10.91 seconds), 200 meters
(21.58 seconds), and 400 meters (46.34 seconds) (Longman, 2007).
While those times do not meet Olympic qualifying standards for men,
Pistorius is fast enough that his marks “would have won gold medals
in equivalent women’s races at the 2004 Athens Olympics” (Longman,
2007).
When the Beijing Games were still 15 months away, Pistorius petitioned
the IAAF to run in the 2008 Olympics. I examined newspaper articles about
Pistorius’s petition and the IAAF administrative response and found that
(Continued)
Newspaper Exemplar

120
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
administrators, athletes, and ethicists argued that Pistorius’s prosthetic
legs create a potentially unfair advantage for him over runners with bio-
logical legs. The following newspaper excerpt is an exemplar of cover-
age on the issue:
“The rule book says a foot has to be in contact with the starting
block,” Leon Fleiser, a general manager of the South African Olympic
Committee, said. “What is the definition of a foot? Is a prosthetic
device a foot, or is it an actual foot?”
I.A.A.F. officials have also expressed concern that Pistorius could top-
ple over, obstructing others or injuring himself and fellow competitors.
Some also fear that, without limits on technological aids, able-bodied run-
ners could begin wearing carbon-fiber plates or other unsuitably springy
devices in their shoes.
Among ethicists, Pistorius’s success has spurred talk of “transhu-
mans” and “cyborgs.” Some note that athletes already modify them-
selves in a number of ways, including baseball sluggers who undergo
laser eye surgery to enhance their vision and pitchers who have elbow
reconstruction using sturdier ligaments from elsewhere in the body. At
least three disabled athletes have competed in the Summer Olympics:
George Eyser, an American, won a gold medal in gymnastics while com-
peting on a wooden leg at the 1904 Games in St. Louis; Neroli Fairhall, a
paraplegic from New Zealand, competed in archery in the 1984 Olympics
in Los Angeles; and Marla Runyan, a legally blind runner from the United
States, competed in the 1,500 meters at the 2000 Olympics in Sydney.
But Pistorius would be the first amputee to compete in a track event,
international officials said.
A sobering question was posed recently on the Web site of the
Connecticut-based Institute for Ethics and Emerging Technologies.
“Given the arms race nature of competition,” will technological
advantages cause “athletes to do something as seemingly radical
as having their healthy natural limbs replaced by artificial ones?”
wrote George Dvorsky, a member of the institute’s board of directors.
“Is it self-mutilation when you’re getting a better limb?” (Longman,
2007).

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
121
Pistorius’s bid for the Olympics is itself an exercise in breaching that
exposes unspoken assumptions about the nature of athletes and athletic compe-
tition. In this excerpt, the legitimacy of Pistorius’s bid to compete in the
Olympics is challenged initially through recourse to a rule book quoted as say-
ing, “A foot must be in contact with the starting block.” Leon Fleiser, the gen-
eral manager of the South African Olympic Committee, appears to take the rule
book literally. He is quoted questioning whether or not a prosthetic device could
be interpreted as meeting this requirement (“What is the definition of a foot? Is
a prosthetic device a foot, or is it an actual foot?”). Yet even a literal reading of
the rule book would not leave us with a foot in contact with the starting block
but presumably another form of a prosthetic device—a shoe. Fleiser’s comments
suggest an assumption about runners (as having feet, not just shoes) has been
breached. Further, this breach provides grounds for dismissing Pistorius for fail-
ing to meet the commonsense qualification of an Olympic runner.
The article goes on to construct Pistorius’s body as being outside of the
bounds of what constitutes an athlete generally and an Olympic runner in par-
ticular. Entrance into Olympic competitions would appear to be based on athletic
performance. Yet Pistorius’s bid for Olympic competition breached common-
sense assumptions about the kinds of athletes who are allowed to participate in
the Olympics. The organization is not called “the able-bodied Olympics”;
instead, ability functions as the unmarked category—that which is presumed. By
contrast, consider the athletic competitions called the Paralympics and the Gay
Games. This marking constitutes the events and the athletes who compete in
them as a special class—something other than “ordinary.”
While runners typically are not vetted based on the likelihood of whether
or not they might fall, or cause an accident, the article quotes IAAF officials
as having “expressed concern” that Pistorius might “topple over.” If stumbling
or falling is a misfortune that many athletes encounter over the course of a
career, it is an experience that seems to be fundamentally different from “top-
pling over”—which more often is used to refer to human pyramids or physi-
cal structures. In this context, the characterization of “toppling over” suggests
that Pistorius is precariously balanced, and if he fell, he may not be able to
right himself again. Through the possibility of “toppling over,” as opposed to
falling, his presence is constructed as a threat to the safety of others and hence
the integrity of the game. Yet the ability to recover quickly from a potential fall
has never been an explicit criterion for vetting athletes.

Newspaper articles generally assemble current events and quotes into a
linear narrative that can be recognized by readers as “news”; they less often
include historical background. Consequently, it is particularly interesting to
examine how the article makes use of historical references to “disabled” ath-
letes that the Olympic committee approved for competition in the past. The
article notes three people: George Eyser with a wooden leg competing in gym-
nastics; Neroli Fairhall, a paraplegic competing in archery; and Marla Runyan,
a legally blind runner. In no instance was the athlete characterized as having a
prosthetic that could have created a level playing field for their participation
in the games. By contrast, at issue seems to be the possibility that Pistorius’s
prosthetic leg could be as good as—or perhaps better than—biological legs.
Pistorius is distinctly different from Eyser, Fairhall, and Runyan in this
respect. However, it is important to note that as members of the same mem-
bership category (disabled athlete) such arguments could have been made
about them—like Pistorius they were potentially accountable for their partici-
pation in the Olympics as disabled athletes. For example, one could have
argued that sitting in a wheelchair would enable Fairhall to maintain the bow
at a constant, perfect angle or that Eyser’s wooden leg might be lighter or less
likely to strike a piece of equipment. Such arguments are always available but
not always made.12
The article constructs Pistorius not as an inspiring athlete who overcomes
in the face of adversity but as one who threatens to redefine the meaning of
ability—evidenced by the quotes from an ethicist. By quoting an ethicist in
this particular way, the article moves center of the apparent controversy from
Olympic competition to “talk of ‘transhumans’ and ‘cyborgs.’” It replaces
questions about what it means to be an Olympic athlete with questions about
what it means to be human. Finally the article relies on the common sense of
readers to accept the construction/production of news, including the shift from
athletics to cyborgs, as ordinary and unremarkable.
Analysis of the Analysis
The preceding ethnomethodological analysis of this newspaper excerpt
attempts to get at the assumptions underlying the logic of the statements in
this article. It takes the linguistic accomplishment of “news” as an analytic
122
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
12I want to acknowledge John Kelly for helping to initiate and develop this line of thinking.

point—although it is not central to the analysis. Indeed from an ethnomethod-
ological perspective there is no such thing as news—only events that are con-
structed as news. While the preceding analysis fits with those commonly
done, it would be possible to create ethnomethodological analyses that
focused more on the structure of the article (e.g., it could attend to the orga-
nization of paragraphs). Ontologically, the analysis is anchored to phenome-
nology; hence, it concerns only that which can be observed—the presence of
the text. This is consistent with the Cartesian ontological premise of analytic
induction. In ethnomethodology, this foundation requires a close reading of a
text, evidenced here as a longer and more detailed analysis of the exemplar
than in previous chapters. However, it is important to note that the result is
not standard empiricism; the objects of analysis are the assumptions that can
be demonstrated to exist through reference to the text.
In considering the production of news, ethnomethodologists would
consider who is quoted, when they are quoted, the relationship of narrative
to quotes, how the perception of objective reporting is credibly estab-
lished, and so forth. My reference to the marked categories of Paralympics
and the Gay Games can be justified as explicating the unmarked nature of
the Olympics. What I believe to be most distinctive of the ethnomethod-
ological analysis is that it treats the excerpt as an account and uses the doc-
umentary method to get at unstated assumptions in the text. So while the
analysis doesn’t leave the page, neither does it stay at the surface of what
is on the page.
In daily life, because people belong to so many membership categories,
ethnomethodology requires that the analysis incorporate only those that can be
identified in the text. This enables me to analyze “transhumans” and “cyborgs”
but not ability, whiteness, wealth, or masculinity—since these are not named.
There is no evidence in the article that such categories are relevant.
Ethnomethodology’s strong commitment to the proof of empirical evidence
often leads scholars to erroneously describe it as postpositivist. I say erro-
neously because “proof” functions differently for ethnomethodologists than it
does for postpositivists—because of its ontological commitment. “Evidence”
in an ethnomethodological sense is not proof of how things exist but a gloss to
show what things are being assumed and how meaning is being constructed.
Epistemologically, ethnomethodology presents a departure from other forms
of empirical study, yet it also is consistent with analytic induction, which con-
stitutes the process of formalization.
Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
123

The narrow context for analysis provides insight into assumptions, but
stripped of broader social contexts, it places the locus of all agency in (and
only in) individuals. Experience is always an interpretation and always limited
to situated interaction in localized contexts. Ethnomethodology does not take
up issues of identity or subjectivity but works with membership categories—
which might be conceptualized as the equivalent of subject positions.
However, it is important to recall that in ethnomethodology both “man” and
“runner” are membership categories—and in this sense, membership cate-
gories are quite distinct from subject positions.
Importantly, for ethnomethodologists there is no fundamental difference
between the membership categories of man and runner except for the fre-
quency with which these categories are relevant to social interaction. Hence
ethnomethodology’s ability to get at issues of power that infuse membership
categories themselves is severely circumscribed. Further, in ethnomethodol-
ogy, membership categories are not intersectional—although they could be
analyzed as such, it would be unusual.
Ethnomethodology as a qualitative framework is highly specified but
largely undertheorized. For example, while ethnomethodology examines the
production of an apparently objective social world, this does not mean that
everything exists in language. Rather, the material world has its own exis-
tence, but the meaning and order of social life are constituted through interac-
tion in ways that make them appear to be objectively real. Like other
interpretive strategies, ethnomethodology relies on the logic and method of
analytic induction and consequently is grounded to a Cartesian framework.
This is apparent in what has become a commonsense assumption for qualita-
tive researchers: Evidence is something that one can literally see and point to.
Television Analysis
Harold Garfinkel certainly had access to television as he developed eth-
nomethodology, yet it never became a focus for analysis for him. Concerned
with naturally occurring interaction, Garfinkel did not take up interviews,
much less highly scripted and edited forms of media. Goffman’s Gender
Advertisements (1976) foreshadowed some of the analytical power of treating
images as accounts. Given the primary importance of media (new and old) to
21st-century social life, it seems worthwhile to explore the potential of eth-
nomethodological analyses for media.
124
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
125
The ABC drama Brothers and Sisters features a white, upper-class
family in Southern California involved in the daily dramas of a family-run
business—complicated (of course) by interpersonal relationships and
family intrigues. The series is unusual in that one of the adult siblings in
the Walker family is gay, which makes it a potentially interesting site for
examining talk about sexuality. I examined shows from the first season
and found two relevant patterns.
First, scenes consistently allowed for multiple and contradictory audi-
ence engagements with politically controversial issues related to sexual-
ity. Brothers and Sisters commonly dramatizes political issues that affect
many families in the United States—particularly with regard to same-sex
marriage and the Republican/Democrat partisan divides that character-
ized the George W. Bush administration.
Second, scenes consistently left disagreements about sexuality unre-
solved. The show framed these disagreements within the contexts of
family intimacy, human frailty, and political aspirations—and typically
used humor to drain or divert dramatic tension when very harsh or divi-
sive conflict threatened to break out.
The following excerpt features a scene between siblings Kitty
Walker, played by Calista Flockhart, and Kevin Walker, played by
Matthew Rhys. Kitty enters this scene having just come from a
meeting with Republican Senator Robert McCallister (played by Rob
Lowe), who offered her a position as head of communications for his
presidential campaign. Their meeting holds particular significance to
the following scene for two reasons: Kitty and her deceased father
have been the only Republicans in a family with strong Democrat affil-
iations, and it exposed romantic tension between Kitty and the sena-
tor, who is a father of two young children and is in the process of a
divorce.
Kitty has just mentioned the job offer to her brother, Kevin, who is an
attorney and the only gay primary character in the show in the first season.13
As the scene opens, Kevin is upset with Kitty because Robert McCallister
has voted in favor of a constitutional ban on same-sex marriage.Throughout
(Continued)
Television Exemplar
13Subsequent seasons have included several other white gay men.

126
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
this scene, Kitty is preoccupied with the mail while Kevin is consumed by
the conversation; the camera alternates with the speaker, taking the view
of the listener.
Kevin: Well, why you?
Kitty:
Well, what the hell does that mean?
Kevin: [stuttering] Well, c-cause it’s completely absurd. You can’t work
for this guy!
Kitty:
Why? [Kitty laughs.] Why, Kevin? Because he’s a Republican?
Kevin: No, because he’s against gay marriage!
Kitty:
There are lots of people in the world, Kevin, for instance me, who
have no problem with gay people but still believe that marriage is
fundamentally a religious institution that has nothing to do with
the [camera turns to Kevin who is visibly upset] state and that
does not discount civil unions or domestic partnerships or any-
thing you . . . .
Kevin: [Voice escalates] Oh come on! That’s just a cover that people like
you provide for people like him who hate people like me.
[Kitty shakes her head.]
Kitty:
Oh, Kevin! Please, let’s not make it personal.
Kevin: Ah, ah . . . [Raises eyebrows] Personal? Kitty, in 10 years . . . in
20 years, when I am finally . . . m-mature enough to sustain a
committed relationship I would like to settle down and get mar-
ried. That’s personal.
[Kitty stops glancing through mail and looks up to speak.]
Kitty:
That’s improbable.
Kevin: Don’t take this job, Kitty. I’m warning you it will cause a great deal
of . . . .
Kitty:
Wait a minute. Wait, wait, wait, wait, wait a minute. You’re warn-
ing me?
[Brothers and Sisters, Episode 11: “Family Day” 1/7/07]

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
127
As the scene opens, Kevin’s question “Well, why you?” can be interpreted
in multiple ways—as is evident by Kitty’s response. Initially it is not clear if
Kevin is asking why McCallister would offer the job to Kitty (challenging her
ability) or if he is asking, “Why does it have to be you who does this work?”
(challenging her politics, perhaps). It becomes possible to understand Kevin’s
question “Why you?” as this later formulation, through Kitty’s response. Kitty
meets Kevin’s injunction with sarcasm: “Why Kevin, because he’s a
Republican?” Her ability to do the work does not appear to be in question.
While Kevin protests that Senator McCallister is against gay marriage, Kitty
talks about McCallister’s position against same-sex marriage as ordinary—
shared by “lots of people” including herself. By constituting McCallister’s view
as ordinary, Kitty renders it apparently less alarming and less dangerous than it
appears to be to Kevin. By locating same-sex marriage as being about religious
institutions rather than about gay people, she advocates limiting rights without
claiming homophobia. Kevin’s response seems to reflect his recognition of this:
“That’s just a cover that people like you provide for people like him who hate
people like me.” Further, Kevin’s comment produces membership categories
(people like me/you) that are less than clear because they rely on knowledge that
exceeds the immediate interaction. While it is plausible that the categories refer
to gay/straight, they might also refer to people who are pro/anti same-sex mar-
riage, or the membership categories may not be so obviously binary—this could
be a reference to a kind of Republican person and gay men. What is clear is that
the membership categories Kevin evokes are not brother and sister—if the argu-
ment began as a sibling dispute, Kevin has just changed the terms of the conflict.
Kitty’s response again fails to take Kevin’s concerns seriously and
through sarcasm returns the tone of the interaction from an emerging political
conflict between adults to a familial one between siblings. “Oh, Kevin!” is
delivered (and received) as condescending admonishment—her younger
brother responds in a childish way intended for comedic effect (“Kitty, in
10 years . . . in 20 years, when I am finally . . . m-mature enough to sustain a
committed relationship I would like to settle down and get married. That’s per-
sonal.”). In this conversation, Kevin’s ability to sustain a committed relation-
ship is construed as a personal issue of immaturity and unrelated to the broader
political issues regarding a society that denies him access to the institution of
marriage that helps to sustain such commitment. Yet at a moment when the
dramatic tension threatens to bring this issue from subtext to text, the issue is

deflected through humor—arguably homophobic humor articulated through a
gay character. Kitty delivers the punch line (“That’s improbable”). Yet the
excerpt closes as it opened, with Kevin attempting to issue an order and Kitty
responding both aggressively and defensively.
Analysis of the Analysis
While an ethnomethodological analysis of news articles takes up the con-
struction of events into news, the ethnomethodological emphases on interac-
tion in localized contexts lead to the analysis of a television excerpt as if it was
an interpersonal interaction, rather than a scripted scene. The analysis is able
to get at the assumptions and interpretations made by “Kitty” and “Kevin” by
examining their responses to each other because the excerpt simulates a social
interaction. Consequently, it reveals more clearly how ethnomethodology
treats empirical evidence as a gloss for something beneath the surface of the
interaction. The power of the analysis comes from being able to get at that
which is not present in the surface of the talk but which can be shown to be
implicit through a close reading of the transcript.
At two places, the analysis presses the boundaries of a strict eth-
nomethodological analysis. First is the analysis that critiques that Kevin’s abil-
ity to sustain a committed relationship is construed as a personal issue of
immaturity and unrelated to the fact that he is denied access to the institution
of marriage. In order to make this point, I went outside the boundary of the
show. This occurs again when I interpret Kevin’s humor regarding his inabil-
ity to commit as homophobic. There is nothing in this interaction to indicate
that Kitty, as a listener, heard that sarcasm as homophobia. This is a case of
bringing my own outside knowledge to the analysis rather than bracketing it
as is required of strict ethnomethodological analyses.
Although ethnomethodology would be quite effective for analyzing how
audiences talk about the show, it is not grounded to an ontological or epistemo-
logical foundation that provides tools for analyzing television as a system of rep-
resentations. The analytical focus is entirely on the process of meaning-making
without regard to the nature of the exchange as between television characters.
This does not disrupt a realist ontology embedded in both ethnomethodology and
the processes of analytic induction subsumed in this analysis. Ethnomethodology
is epistemologically distinct from other qualitative frameworks—how it gener-
ates evidence is consistent with other frameworks, while the kind of evidence it
seeks and the process of interpretation it applies are different.
128
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

As in a realist ontology, agency and experience are just what one sees—
even if the meaning of each is constituted in interaction. While our attention is
directed to the analytical insights of ethnomethodology, the possibilities for
analysis remain shaped and constrained by analytic induction—which is not
apparent in the analysis. In this respect, it eludes consideration when critiques
consider the strengths and weaknesses of ethnomethodology.
If membership categories might be thought to function as subject posi-
tions, they are not anchored to any broad cultural or historical processes and
overall less developed theoretically. As in other frameworks, routine relations
of privilege cannot be captured because they fall outside the bounds of the
localized context—there is no evidence that race, class, gender, or ability is
relevant. Although ethnomethodology is concerned with routine interaction,
routine relations of power and privilege escape the analytical frame because
they are unmarked in interactions.
Interview Analysis
Within an ethnomethodological framework, interviews must be approached
as mutually constituted interaction—the interviewer’s participation is as much a
point of analysis as is that of the interviewee. While interviews are a long way
from naturally occurring conversation, they can serve as rich sites of analysis—
and at a minimum serve here as a useful basis for the exercise.
Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
129
While dominant public discourses in the United States construct race as
natural, and apparently self-evident, in interviews with Native American
Indians, I found that talk about race consistently exposed the social, his-
torical, and legal processes of racialization. The exemplar that follows is
from my interview with Tony Romero an Esselen Indian. It is important
to note that in the early 1900s, Esselen Indians (indigenous to the land
that came to be called California) were declared “extinct” by the U.S.
government. The federal government’s policy of recognition for Native
Americans requires genealogical evidence of unbroken ancestry over
(Continued)
Interview Exemplar

130
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
hundreds of years. Indigenous nations unable to provide that evidence
were “terminated” by the government—that is to say denied federal
recognition that would have entitled them to land and other settlement
claims, as well as university scholarships and other forms of affirmative
action candidacy. The Esselens, however, were never officially termi-
nated but rather declared “extinct.”
The federal declaration of their “extinction” has become part of a
dominant cultural discourse. For example, the Economist featured an
article on the Esalen [sic] Institute, and described it as “named after
the Esselen, a now-extinct Indian tribe that used the place as their bur-
ial ground. In 1910 the Murphy family bought the land from home-
steaders” (The Economist, 2007). The Esalen Institute is a spa/retreat
center that has drawn renowned authors including John Steinbeck,
Aldous Huxley, and Henry Miller. In the 1950s, the beat poets visited
Esalen, and it later became a home to Alan Watts (The Economist,
2007).
In the following excerpt from my interview withTony Romero in 2000,
he talks about growing up in California as an Esselen Indian.
Celine-Marie: I wonder if you could tell me what it was like for you growing
up and crossing worlds between your family and your home
and the rest of the culture you experienced around you.
Tony:
Well grownin’ up, uh, growin’ up, I remember my mom
and dad always told me, “Don’t tell anybody you’re
Indian.” Uh, they were scared because I had uncles that
were either drug behind horses or hung just ’cause they
said they were Native American Indians. I have documen-
tation of that. I had a couple of my relatives that were
hung in a barn in Carmel Valley ’cause they wouldn’t sell
their property.
Celine-Marie: I’m so sorry.
Tony:
It’s things like that that happened in those days, and you
know were talkin’ like the ’50s—1950s—and things like
that were still goin’ on like I remember when I was in high
school I used to go down Monterey, I used to go to Louis’
Bar on Alvarado Street. My uncle used to hang out, and

Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
131
there were two Obispo used to hang out in front of Louis’
all the time and sit, they used to have these benches in
front of all the pool halls. They were like, I guess there
were like 10 or 12 pool halls you know on Alvarado Street
and all these bars. So the Indians always used to carry
these little pints of whiskey. I’ll never forget the whiskey
bottles cause they’re, they’re made in a shape where you
can put ’em in your back pocket and they just fit perfect
cause they had a little concave, concave shape to ’em.
Celine-Marie: Mmm.
Tony:
And, uh, I remember ’em always sippin’ out them damn
whiskey bottles and, uh, but I remember one time I was
comin’ out of Louis’ pool hall and my uncle was fightin’ with
these two white guys. He was tellin’ how they were on his
land, he didn’t like it you know, he was feelin’ a little tipsy
there. So then I just ignored him, went across the street with
some friends of mine to another place. And about a half an
hour later I came back out and my uncle was sittin’ on the
same bench but he had a bloody nose, his eye was all black
and blue, what they did was, they drug him in the back alley,
beat the shit out of him to teach him a lesson, you know, that
it wasn’t his land anymore, it was theirs. And, uh, it was
things like that that happened in Monterey where my mother
was scared. She said well don’t tell anybody you’re Indian, tell
’em you’re Spanish. So then when I did tell people I was
Spanish and Indian, the first thing that came into mind was
you’re Mexican. I said no, no. I said bein’ a Spanish Indian
didn’t make you Mexican. It wasn’t the idea that I was
ashamed of bein’ a Mexican, it was the idea of wanting to be
called what I really was. And I wasn’t a Mexican. And I knew
that and my parents knew that and, uh, so anyway, I went
through that through my whole school years. You know OK,
Tony, you’re Spanish and Indian but you’re Mexican. I says
no. So anyway I had to go through this whole thing when I
was a kid. I was always, I was always, when I was a kid I was
always fightin’ to protect my heritage.
(Continued)

132
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE
(Continued)
Celine-Marie: Mmm.
Tony:
Always fightin’ you know to show people I was Native
American Indian and I was proud of it. But then, uh, after
a while I just, I just ignored the whole thing. But then after
my mom passed away, I will never forget my mom passed
away in 1970, she, uh, she looked at me and says you’re
Native American Indian. She said be proud of it. I’ll never
forget that. She says you’re Esselen Indian. She said be
proud of it. And, uh, so ever since then I’ve been fightin’
for my recognition as a Native American Indian. I’m doin’
it not only for her, but for my family, you know my existing
family I have now, which isn’t much.
In this excerpt, I begin as an interviewer with a broad and vague question
that makes sense only to the extent that Tony and I share some understanding
of the cultural environments that shaped his life—it reveals some level of
shared knowledge that was developed outside of this excerpt. Throughout the
interview, Tony identifies one of the “worlds” he crosses between as Esselen
Indian/Native American Indian but never names the other—and never is asked
to do so. Because of this, it appears that both of us assume that we share an
understanding of the nature of the other world that Tony navigated as a child.
Yet he does not assume that his parents’ logic (“don’t tell anybody you’re
Indian”) would be clear to me. Instead, he explains their fear with a story of
his uncles being “drug behind horses or hung.” In addition, his mention of hav-
ing “proof” of the murders seems to anticipate disbelief, if not an open chal-
lenge. If my interruption (“I’m so sorry”) acknowledges the violence, Tony’s
response prevents this violence from being seen as an exception. Tony
describes deadly violence as an ordinary part of his life (“It’s things like that
that happened in those days and you know were talkin’ like the 50s, 1950s and
things like that were still goin’ on”). Again Tony never names, and is not asked
to name, the membership category of those who perpetrated the violence.
It is not clear from the excerpt where this presumption of shared under-
standing comes from; however, what is most important is that Tony does not
need to name the perpetrators of racist violence in order for his narrative to

make sense to me. His narrative unfolds through a series of conflicts as he tells
the story of his youth as a constant effort to fight physical and emotional vic-
timization in relationship to his identity as Esselen Indian.
The stories of conflict (internal and external) are interspersed with a bit of
nostalgia for the whiskey pints (“I’ll never forget the whiskey bottles cause
they’re, they’re made in a shape where you can put ’em in your back pocket
and they just fit perfect cause they had a little concave, concave shape to ’em”).
Tony’s narrative is anchored to a hometown where people congregated at
Louis’ Bar on Alvarado Street or at the string of bars and pool halls. Tony and
I both know this town and its more recent history. In this context, the names of
streets and a specific bar can be understood as place markers that make his nar-
rative both more familiar and concrete and therefore, perhaps more real.
Analysis of the Analysis
The analysis is shorter than the previous two because my ability to get the
constructed nature of the account is limited and because the interactional
exchange is limited. The concept of membership categories was not useful in
this particular excerpt although the documentary method for analyzing
accounts proved to be especially useful.
The epistemological framework is quite technical and again very narrow—
and still grounded to analytic induction. While I am able (compelled) to exam-
ine how the interview was mutually produced, whiteness and white racism
escaped scrutiny. In addition, my inability to analyze whiteness is compounded
because Tony named Indians as being involved in the conflicts (but not whites),
and so the conflicts he detailed seems to be “about being Indian” or about being
perceived as “Mexican,” rather than being about the construction of white
racial privilege. Further the narrow frame of analysis makes the conflicts
appear to be unrelated to masculinity or poverty—there is no evidence to pur-
sue. Finally, the narrow analytical focus also makes both interviewee and inter-
viewer appear to be sovereign actors, and experience is reduced to interaction.
The forces that might constrain or shape agency are not present in the excerpt.
The analysis demonstrates how the interviewer and interviewee mutually
produce the interview process—both through questions that are asked and
through those that are not asked. Despite a long history of white racism, the
analysis does not examine, or even consider, whiteness or racism because
these are never named in the interview. Could I have argued there is an
Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
133

assumption of white racism? That becomes possible only if there is something
explicit in the interaction (a question, a response, or a statement) that would
be concordant with that interpretation. In this excerpt there is none. Similarly
there is no analytical avenue that would enable me to explore the implications
of Tony’s claim to be Spanish and Indian rather than Mexican and Indian. The
ontological foundation dictates the narrow focus on the situated interaction; as
a researcher, I am asked to bracket my knowledge of broader cultural frame-
works for identifying or interpreting the violence that Tony experienced.
To the extent that interviews can appear to be less constructed (there are
not hosts of writers, editors, and advertisers that escape the analytical frame)
they can seem to be more “objective” forms of social research. Consequently, I
believe it is important to notice that Tony’s narrative of fights, pool halls, and
drinking corresponds with many white racist stereotypes of Native cultures.
Therefore, it is important to look carefully to see to what extent my whiteness
(the whiteness of the interviewer) in some way produced this particular kind of
narrative. Consider, for example, the opening question that solicits his child-
hood stories and implicitly calls forth stories of conflict: “I wonder if you could
tell me what it was like for you growing up and crossing worlds between your
family and your home and the rest of the culture you experienced around you.”
To get at the shared knowledge that makes this exchange meaningful, I need to
go outside of the text to understand “the worlds” that I asked about as being
implicitly white and American Indian. Consequently, the history of genocide by
whites against American Indians is also implicit in the opening question.
Without explicitly saying so, I had asked Tony to talk about racialized
conflicts that existed for him as an Esselen Indian living in a predominantly
white society. This is particularly important since on the surface the question
might appear to be open rather than directive. It clearly solicits stories of
racialized conflict for a white audience. Therefore it is important to ask, To
what extent is the violence of white racism reproduced by the interviewer’s
question? It is a question that needs to be raised, regardless of whether or not
it can be answered. It is also a strong argument for providing the broader con-
text of exchanges when analyzing interviews.
IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIAL RESEARCH
Ethnomethodology focuses on the methods people use to decide what is rele-
vant and meaningful in any specific situation. Because ethnomethodology is
134
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

interested in order-producing practices, truth and authenticity are never prob-
lems for researchers—nor are researchers ever in the position of “knowing
better than” the people they study. Garfinkel (1967) focused on the concrete
analysis of localized contexts and the routine nature of “seen but unnoticed”
procedures for producing courses of action. Since the most efficient forms of
domination are those that are “seen but unnoticed,” ethnomethodology has
much to offer potentially liberatory analyses.
In addition, ethnomethodology is especially useful because it suspends
notions of a shared culture; rationality and understanding are the outcomes of
what people do, not the premises (Sharrock & Anderson, 1986). However,
ethnomethodology’s ontological and epistemological roots in phenomenol-
ogy and use of analytic induction mean that all social resources that exist out-
side of the immediate context, even those which enable meaning-making
practices, are excluded from analysis. Consequently, its ability to get at rela-
tions of routine privilege (arguably exploitation and domination as well) is
quite limited. The ontological formulation of experience brackets the uncon-
scious as well as discursive, cultural frames. Ethnomethodology changes the
object of analysis and the epistemology (ways of knowing the object) but not
the ontological premise—which is rooted to analytic induction.
While ethnomethodology examines the reflexive production of meaning,
because it is bound to localized contexts, all discourse appears to emerge as if
for the first time. Yet all communication has to have a place in collective mem-
ory; it must be repeatable (iterable and anticipatable) in order to be under-
stood. Garfinkel (2002) argued that all phenomenon need to be studied as
“another next first time”—because the realizations will be different from any
other time. This mandate acknowledges, but dismisses, the importance of rep-
etition over time—that we “recognize” phenomenon (including words and
images) as meaningful because we have encountered them before. However,
ethnomethodology delivers analyses devoid of historical contexts.
The use of membership categories in place of a theorization of subjec-
tivity creates some interesting possibilities. Working with the definition of
categories as learned, patterned, social behavior, membership categories pro-
vide a way of examining the relationships between subject positions and
identity-in-use. This seems to me to be a potentially rich site of analysis. Yet
the analytical power is radically diminished because ethnomethodological
analyses treat all membership categories such as woman, white, cousin, and
clerk as equivalent; there is no access to historically constructed relations of
power, or social categories of difference, that make membership categories
Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
135

meaningfully different from each other. Such aspects are treated as irrelevant
to the interaction unless there is empirical evidence to the contrary. It does not
address the problem that one can decide to stop being a clerk, but generally,
one does not decide to stop being white or a woman in the same way. Social
life is layered in ways that arguably exceed the context and tools of eth-
nomethodological analysis.
It is important to repeat that ethnomethodology treats empirical evidence
as a gloss for something beneath the surface of the interaction. However, while
ethnomethodologists interpret notions of evidence differently than other
frameworks rooted to a Cartesian ontology, they locate evidence in the same
way. That is to say researchers use analytic induction. Social science has pro-
duced multiple challenges to systems of interpretation but not to systems of
formalization. Qualitative research relies on analytic induction to locate pat-
terns that can then be interpreted.
Although ethnomethodology levels important and profound charges at
Cartesian ontology, ethnomethodological analyses are themselves con-
strained by the seen but unnoticed influence of a Cartesian paradigm. If a
researcher could easily point to an act of violence or oppression in a local-
ized interaction, routine relations of power function as such only to the
extent that they pass without remark in localized contexts. Hence ability,
whiteness, wealth, masculinity, and heterosexuality are never named in any
of the three analyses. Ethnomethodologists would argue that each person
belongs to numerous membership categories, and we cannot presume that
any one of them is relevant but must look for evidence of a category as being
in use in the localized context in order to establish its relevance. While a par-
ticular strength of ethnomethodology is apprehending the “seen but unno-
ticed” aspects of daily life, routine relations of privilege largely operate
outside of its analytical framework.
While ethnomethodology demonstrates how members actively construct
their sense of objective social worlds, the epistemological demand for “evi-
dence” that one can point to in a localized context prevents analyses from
examining the processes, events, and relations of power that shape localized
contexts. Although social contexts provide the means for interpreting the
importance of membership categories in use, relations of power depend on
the category’s repetition over time in multiple contexts. Meaning is always
context bound but contexts themselves are boundless. The historicity of lan-
guage, talk-in-interaction always exceeds the circumstances of its production.
136
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

By placing spatial and temporal limits on the context of talk to be ana-
lyzed, researchers make people appear to be sovereign speakers, free of
history and discourse.
CONCLUDING THOUGHTS
Ethnomethodology offers interesting and innovative ways to explore
processes of meaning-making; however, the analytical constraints lead most
often to descriptive, rather than critical, research. This is completely in keep-
ing with the philosophy of ethnomethodology, which would regard any pre-
conceived notion, even that of social justice, an imposition on empirical
evidence. Yet it is more than idealistic to imagine that researchers truly could
bracket all of their assumptions or that we would be able to make sense of any
interaction if we did! While membership categories might appear to be a par-
allel strategy for getting at subjectivity, they are anchored to a phenomenolog-
ical account that makes it impossible to get at historical formations that
operate through categories.
So while ethnomethodological analyses may be able to get at allusions
and assumptions that rest beneath the surface of what is said in a localized
context, they cannot apprehend how historical relations of power (such as
race and processes of racialization) operate, since these are never fully
articulated in any single localized context. This limitation is consistent
with, and amplified by, the analytical emphasis on personal agency that
cannot adequately address the broader constraining forces of language and
culture. As a consequence, while ethnomethodological analyses are said to
reveal the practices through which social structures are maintained, they are
unable to demonstrate how discursive structures enable and constrain the
conditions that constitute the sayable. The latter has never been the mission
of ethnomethodology, but it remains an important limitation to consider for
social science.
While ethnomethodology, social constructionism, and symbolic interac-
tion each offer substantially different ways of interpreting the three exemplars
used in Cartographies, they are all consistently constrained by the ontological
and epistemological assumptions embedded in analytic induction—the tech-
nique of data collection and analysis common to all three forms of analysis.
The processes of interpretation have changed, but the process of formalization
Chapter 5
Ethnomethodology
137

has remained the same. This illustrates why strengthening qualitative methods
through the use of feminist, critical race, and poststructural theories has been
both helpful for strengthening qualitative research and also inadequate.
FURTHER READING
Coulon, A. (1995). Ethnomethodology (Vol. 36). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Handel, W. (1982). Ethnomethodology: How people make sense. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Heritage, J. (1984). Garfinkel and ethnomethodology. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Maynard, D., & Clayman, S. (1991). The diversity of ethnomethodology. Annual
Review of Sociology, 17, 385–418.
Mehan, H., & Wood, H. (1975). The reality of ethnomethodology. New York: John Wiley.
Sharrock, W., & Anderson, B. (1986). The ethnomethodologists. London: Tavistock
Publications.
Smith, D. (1999). Writing the social: Critique, theory and investigations. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
ten Have, P. (2004). Understanding qualitative research and ethnomethodology.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Watson, G., & Seiler, R. (Eds.). (1992). Text in context: Contributions to ethnomethod-
ology. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
138
CARTOGRAPHIES OF KNOWLEDGE

139
 CHAPTER SIX 

Social ReSeaRch
Drawing New Maps
intRoduction
Social sciences have much to contribute to public debates regarding changing
social landscapes in an increasingly globalized world. Globalization and the
internationalization of disciplines are central to our time (Sztompka, 2010),
yet exactly what scholars are able to contribute—and how useful those contri-
butions may be—will have much to do with how we think about our research
in relationship to narratives of science. “Science” functions as a disciplining
force that privileges some modes of inquiry at the expense of others. in a vari-
ety of ways, the project of rethinking qualitative inquiry has been underway
for decades—and a great deal of change has been accomplished.
Scholars have developed multiple, and more effective, ways of interpret-
ing data than existed a century ago. Yet as chapters 3, 4, and 5 demonstrated,
processes of interpretation operate separately from, but in relationship to,

140
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe
processes of formalization. the analytical styles of social constructionism,
symbolic interaction, and ethnomethodology are significantly different from
each other. however, each of these frameworks produces analyses that are
constrained in similar ways because they share the same process of formaliza-
tion for generating systematic elaboration.
Researchers, academic institutions, funding institutions, and the state are
all intimately involved in the production of valid “science.” even as qualita-
tive research occupies a “mainstream” location in social research, it faces new
political challenges in a time of global uncertainty.
around the globe, governments are attempting to regulate scientific inquiry
by defining what is good science. conservative regimes are enforcing evi-
dence, or scientifically based, biomedical models of research (SBR). these
regulatory activities raise fundamental philosophical, epistemological, polit-
ical, and pedagogical issues for scholarship and freedom of speech in the
academy. (denzin & Giardina, 2006, pp. ix–x)
despite these challenges, in recent years there also has been a prolifera-
tion of new qualitative journals, books, and conferences that reflect both inter-
national and transnational scholarship that actively challenges traditional
paradigms of social science. the prominence of this scholarship in relation-
ship to funding and more mainstream research varies in relation to the domi-
nant discourse of science at work in each social science discipline.
all scientific claims are relative to their paradigmatic frameworks—
which makes it impossible to verify or falsify any claim from outside of the
framework (Kuhn, 1970). Science is performative in that the claims of science
make sense only within the discourse of science. the continuation of what
Kuhn called “normal science” depends upon conducting research and devel-
oping findings that do not challenge the parameters of the dominant research
paradigms. By endorsing only biomedical models as the gold standard of
social research, conservative movements profoundly narrow what we can
know about social worlds. Scholars today would not limit social theory to the
sweeping narratives of grand theory, yet many continue to use its philosophi-
cal counterpart as the sole or primary foundation for empirical research.
Perhaps the best response to the contemporary debates about the meaning
of “science” is to refuse the push back to older and narrow definitions of sci-
ence by moving forward with a broader, more inclusive definition of science
that can effectively get at the complexity of 21st-century social worlds. efforts
to expand the discourse of science—to provide what de certeau (1984) called

the as yet undrawn map—have been premised on the understanding that mod-
els of the physical science are inadequate for understanding social life and that
social life in the 21st century is substantially different from that in other eras.
as previous chapters have illustrated, expanding the discourse of science is
essential to developing analytical tools for effectively exploring routine relations
of power and privilege, for examining porous relationships among social phe-
nomena, for thinking about the nature of evidence differently, and for situating
localized contexts in the broader cultural and historical contexts from which they
emerged. continuing efforts to broaden the paradigms used for social research
require that scholars challenge the dominant binaries through which the social
sciences have been constructed, including art/science, objective/subjective,
theory/method, and scientific/ideological. a more inclusive social science
would recognize multiple styles of inquiry that use a variety of processes of for-
malization for making systematic claims—each best suited to its purpose.
in previous chapters, i demonstrated the need for critically engaging the
ontological and epistemological assumptions embedded in qualitative frame-
works and the importance of rethinking data collection and interpretation in
relationship to each other. this chapter is intended as a kind of provocation
toward rethinking social research from the foundations up. it begins with a brief
overview that synthesizes arguments made in previous chapters and then
explores the imperatives of social research and the production of knowledge in
relationship to power, media, ethics, and language. the chapter concludes with
consideration of the importance of social epistemologies for social sciences.
the PRoBlemS of Social ReSeaRch ReviSited
Bertrand Russell (1938, p. 10) once said the fundamental concept in the social
science is power—in the same sense in which energy is the fundamental concept
in physics. like energy, there are many expressions of power, and none of these
can be necessarily regarded as subordinate to another; there is no single expression
of power from which other forms derive, no stagnant expression of power and no
expression of power that exists in isolation. the complex networks of power that
infuse social life require specific and diverse methodologies and methods.
as noted at the start of this book, researchers today denounce the colo-
nialist projects of earlier scholarship—and here i use “colonialist” broadly to
refer both to the ways that anthropologists have studied so-called primitive
nations and peoples and also to the ways that sociologists have studied “the
poor and disenfranchised.” the ontological and epistemological foundations
Chapter 6
Social Research
141

of cartesian dualism used to organize and validate colonialist research con-
tinue to form the foundations of contemporary scholarship. individually and
collectively, the preceding chapters demonstrated the powerful influence of
cartesian ontology—even in interpretive frameworks that openly reject the
premise of cartesian dualism.
Qualitative researchers have made significant efforts to move beyond
cartesian dualism through the use of interpretive frameworks; however, despite
these efforts, techniques of valid data collection and analysis have kept the ana-
lytical process tethered to a cartesian paradigm. this has created odd ontological
and epistemological crosscurrents in social research that have truncated the abil-
ity of interpretive methods to apprehend routine relations of power and privilege,
prevented consideration of processes of subjectification (such as those which cre-
ate race), and profoundly limited the ability to examine contemporary media.
cartesian ontological and epistemological assumptions pervade scientific
research and are used to systematically discredit techniques of knowledge pro-
duction that fall outside of this paradigm. indeed research can be discredited
simply on the grounds that it falls outside of this paradigm. although descartes’
epistemology initially was conceptualized in resistance to centralized religious
authoritarianism, it has become “a practice of ignorance—a methodological
inward-turning, promoting cognitive dismissal of all that lies outside its bounds
of sense, and resulting in a highly sophisticated eurocentrism” (hoagland, 2007,
p. 101). as noted in chapter 2, ignorance is not simply “not knowing” but an
active misapprehension that systematically produces inaccurate information. an
epistemology of ignorance is one that uses socially acceptable but faulty systems
of justification (alcoff, 2007; Sullivan & tuana, 2007).
the epistemic foundations of social research encourage us to see “local
contexts” as naturally occurring rather than as socially constructed. in addi-
tion, the current epistemic foundations prevent us from addressing the broader
cultural conditions that shape localized contexts. this is not an accidental or
inadvertent aspect of social research. Since the social sciences have been mod-
eled on the physical sciences, it is illustrative to consider a study by latour and
woolgar (1986) that sought to sociologically understand what constitutes typ-
ical scientific practice. in particular, they were interested in what they took to
be a general lack of methodological reflexivity in scientific methods.
through daily contact over a period of 2 years, they studied the social
construction of scientific knowledge by examining the processes through
which physical scientists made claims about their research observations. in
short, they sought to produce insights into the social construction of scientific
142
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe

Chapter 6
Social Research
143
claims and disputes of claims. they found that in a scientific laboratory the
most commonly used method to dispute a researcher’s work was to place his
or her findings in a broader social context. latour and woolgar (1986) argued
that the distinction between technical processes of research and social phe-
nomena meant that researchers introduced broader social analyses only when
things had gone wrong in their own work or when they wanted to discredit the
work of others.1 distinction between the social and the intellectual provided a
resource that scientists used to explain error but not knowledge.
the master narratives of science and modernity were constructed through
a self-consciously antihistorical, antinarrative, naturalistic conceptual frame
(Somers & Gibson, 1996, p. 46). these discourses remain in place today as
part of the dominant scientific paradigm and affect the broader legitimacy of
qualitative research generally and interpretative research in particular—
especially in relation to research funding. however, a great deal of qualitative
research continues to challenge and diverge from this conceptualization of sci-
ence. the commitment among qualitative researchers to transforming the dis-
course of science is evident as well in critical race and feminist critiques of
existing research and in attempts to deepen understandings of reflexive and
interpretive repertoires.
over the years, challenges to hegemonic discourses of science have
brought greater inclusivity, both in terms of scholars and fields of interest;
they have developed competing notions of objectivity; and elaborated new
processes of interpretation including those focused on intersubjectivity.
within qualitative frameworks, many scholars have sought to expand the lim-
itations of analytical frameworks by incorporating poststructural discourse
analysis, psychoanalytic literature, and cultural studies.2
in addition, there has been a growing interest in critical methodologies
that challenge the epistemic frameworks of social research (cf. harding,
2008; Sandoval, 2000; Smith, 2004; Zuberi & Bonilla-Silva, 2008). this
literature is theoretically driven and generally provides frameworks for
1“for example, the assertion that X observed the first pulsar can be severely undermined by use
of the following formulation: x thought he had seen the first optical pulsar, having stayed awake
three nights in a row and being in a state of extreme exhaustion” (latour & woolgar, 1986, p. 21).
2“the analytics of interpretive practice has benefited from drawing together ethnomethodology
and foucauldian sensibilities. this is not simply another attempt at bridging the so-called macro-
micro divide . . . . [t]hose who consider ethnomethodology and foucauldian analytics to be
parallel operations focus their attention instead on the interactional, institutional, and cultural
variability of socially constituting discursive practice or discourses-in-practice, as the case might
be” (holstein & Gubrium, 2005, p. 492).

interpreting data—not methods for collecting it. there is also a small but
growing body of new methods (including performance and autoethnogra-
phy), which are very useful yet fairly limited without the broad coherence
associated with social science. the impulse for change has been both clear
and highly controversial.
with that said, as we have seen in previous chapters, as long as researchers
remain (consciously or unconsciously) committed to cartesian presuppositions,
the most profound changes in social research methodologies and methods
remain trapped by the entropy of 19th-century philosophy of science. in a
cartesian framework, epistemology is individualistic; it concerns the ability of
subjects to know objects. this epistemological compulsion to individuate is a
naturalistic and historical creation of modernity (Somers & Gibson, 1996).
however, knowledge is never an individual enterprise as the cartesian frame-
work insists. Knowledge, cognition, and perception must always be cultural
productions as well as individual ones. even the internal landscape of thought
comes to us through language—the premier signifying system of culture.
consider how the cultural force of language shapes perception and experience.
“Savages” tend to do certain things and to be unable to do others; these go
with the conceptual territory. thus the term itself encourages if not quite log-
ically determines particular conclusions. . . . in the classic period of european
expansionism, it then becomes possible to speak with no sense of absurdity of
“empty lands” that are actually teeming with millions of people, of “discov-
ering” countries whose inhabitants already exist. (mills, 2007, p. 27)
to the extent that cartesian dualism is a philosophical foundation for
research that regards individual practices of knowing in localized contexts, it
denies the cultural relationality of knowledge production. By its own self-
validating standards, a cartesian foundation actively prevents researchers
from being able to apprehend and examine the cultural relationality of knowl-
edge production. while analyses of localized practices can document meaning-
making practices in interaction, the demands of science force these practices
to stand apart from the cultural discourses that make them possible.
the principles of science make it possible to study inequality without ever
exploring who benefits from the impoverishment of others; they also make it
possible to “study up” without connecting wealth and power to the daily lives
of those who are marginalized and oppressed. the principles of science also
make it possible to study how people are oppressed without also considering
how they are simultaneously oppressors; they encourage an understanding of
144
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe

the world that is divided into victims and aggressors. further, the principles of
scientific discourse create frameworks that are not capable of effectively
exploring the presence of absence: what is not said and who is not present in
a localized context. Recall that whiteness generally passes without remark in
conversation and in media. as noted earlier, the routine and privileged subject
position of whiteness is accessible through standard empirical analyses only in
very limited ways. the power of whiteness, particularly for white people,
works through virtue of its invisibility.
in order for whiteness to be effective as a routine relation of power and priv-
ilege, it must flourish beneath the surface of interaction, at the level of com-
monsense knowledge. that is to say through the ability of common sense to
erase the presence and meaning of white racial identities while producing all
other racial identities as apparently inherently meaningful—even if the mean-
ings of those racialized identities is unclear or contradictory. this is true for all
unmarked categories of social experience and is particularly critical in sustain-
ing social hierarchies of race, gender, ability, sexuality, and class. like all rela-
tions of power, the meaning of these categories exceeds any local context.
hegemonic hierarchies arise only through repetition over time in multiple con-
texts. Scholars can never fully examine the production of routine relations of
power and privilege if we attend only to a localized context of interaction—
regardless of whether we attend to that interaction through interpretive or posi-
tivist methods. the production of unmarked social categories exceeds our ability
to critically examine them through conventional tools of social science. Routine
relations of power and privilege escape existing social research paradigms.
consider also that standard social research methods make it virtually
impossible to analytically include people who are physically absent from the
research setting. indeed the concept of including people who are absent from
a research site flies against commonsense knowledge in the sciences so force-
fully that it may be difficult to consider seriously. the needs and perspectives
of those “not in the room” cannot be evidenced through the procedures of sci-
ence. on one hand, it might seem unreasonable to be asked to address every
possible absence. on the other hand, there is not reason to include every
possible absence—only those with theoretical and practical relevance. as
researchers, our failure to acknowledge the importance of people who are
absent from the localized context naturalizes exclusionary environments as
ordinary environments. By normalizing localized contexts that exclude,
researchers perpetuate and ingrain a naturalistic view of historical relations of
power. to account for absence as a meaningful social production involves
Chapter 6
Social Research
145

epistemic and ethical shifts that foreground interdependent relationality in data
collection and analysis as well as self-reflexivity by the researcher. localized
contexts exist as they do because they are shaped by broader cultural impera-
tives including relations of power and privilege.
Some scholars might argue that their purpose is not to presume, or reveal,
relations of power and privilege but rather to examine lived experience in rela-
tion to social interactions and social structures. this raises key questions for
scholars working in qualitative methods generally, as well as for those work-
ing in interpretive methods in particular. of what use is an understanding of
agency in local interaction that does not account for broader relations of power
that shape and constrain agency? without an understanding of subjectivity,
how are we to understand the relationship between social categories (such as
race, gender, ability, sexuality, and class) and personal identities? who is
served by research on oppression that does not demonstrate how such
exploitation benefits “ordinary” others?
Mining New Media With an Old Tool
the philosophical foundations of social research methods shape and con-
strain both what counts as techniques for analysis and as data. The Polish
Peasant in Europe and America (thomas & Znaniecki, 1918) once broke his-
toric ground in the social sciences by broadening the notion of evidence to
include life history. today life histories, interviews, and archives are main-
stream sources of social science data; in addition, media have become more
accepted as sources of data for social research. Pragmatist charles Sanders
Peirce, who pursued semiotics, and herbert Blumer, who approached media
as iconic signs, significantly influenced early media studies in the social sci-
ences. their media scholarship paved the way for notable studies such as
howard Becker’s (1974) research on photography and erving Goffman’s
(1976) study of gender in advertisements.
more recently, scholarship on media has begun to bend the parameters of
science by drawing from a variety of disciplines in the humanities including cul-
tural studies, media studies, discourse studies, and communication studies. while
such interdisciplinary research has been quite useful, it fits only marginally
within the social sciences. unfortunately, within the social sciences, techniques
for studying media have not kept pace with the expanding presence and forms of
media—largely because the 19th-century philosophical premises of social
146
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe

Chapter 6
Social Research
147
research restrict the ability to study 21st-century media. for example, without
recourse to methods of other disciplines, researchers are left to approach film,
television, and newspapers with the same analytical frameworks used for inter-
views or ethnography. consequently, researchers pursue cinematic realism—or
at the very least to treat film, television, and newspapers just as they would inter-
view transcripts.3 a focus on localized contexts leads interpretive researchers to
“recognize” the indexicality of meaning—that is to say the way that the meaning
of any words depends on its context for sense. Yet both indexical and iconic sys-
tems of representation are limited. media are not the same as the situated inter-
action of daily life; nor are they a second-order mirror that reflects daily life.
in the example of television drama in this book, qualitative frameworks
blurred distinctions between production and consumption. focused on the imme-
diacy of a localized context, how does one make sense of editors, writers, pro-
ducers, advertisers, designers, and so forth? ethnomethodologists would argue
that this is exactly why they focus only on naturally occurring talk-in-
interaction. if this once seemed a reasonable way to understand social life, the
explosion and pervasion of media calls such a narrow scope into question today.
not only is there a massive proliferation of media in the 21st century, there
is also a “media convergence” as media content crosses multiple platforms, gen-
res, industries, and audiences (Jenkins, 2008). changes in media are simultane-
ously technological, industrial, cultural, and social; media convergence “alters
the logic by which media industries operate and by which media consumers
process news and entertainment” (Jenkins, 2008, pp. 15–16). however, the
research paradigms of the social sciences have not adjusted to be able to effec-
tively address the complex issues of representation in the proliferation of media
and its porous relationships with arguably all aspects of social life. the com-
plexities of 21st-century media demonstrate the limitations of social science.4
3at the same time, the approach of cinematic realism dialogically supports the discourse on
participant observation, establishing it as an empirical scientific methodology (clough, 1992, p. 27).
4“mass media have enframed configurations of the subject (psychic structure), have regulated
what will be constituted for that subject as reality (objects of knowledge), and have established
the distribution of persons, places, events, and perspectives in relations of knowledge production
(rules of knowledge formation), these effects have been produced through adjustments between
realist narrativity and mass media communication technologies. these adjustments, i would
argue, serve to maintain empirical sciences’s hegemony. thus science, nearly identical with
writing technologies of the subject, is, as Bruno latour (1983) describes it, a site for the
production of knowledge/power, aligning itself with political, economic arrangements or what
aronowitz (1988) refers to as the capital/state/axis (p. 300)” (clough, 1992, p. 8).

daily life is mediated by technology in unprecedented ways; indeed,
media have a broad range of possibilities for constructing meaning. even tele-
vision has become less a singular text and more a technological movement and
mediation of culture; the extension and intensification of “teletechnology” has
moved television well beyond a broadcast model (clough, 2000, p. 96).
“[t]elevision shows repeat over and again through various forms of syndica-
tion” (Pascale, 2007, p. 20). Shows can be viewed online, on dvd, through
wii, or downloaded onto iPods and iPads. Soundtracks for television shows
have moved from the background to center stage; popular music now has a
regular and important place in the soundtracks of primetime network televi-
sion as well as in film. indeed, shows such as Glee foreground music and the
soundtracks for this and many other television shows are available on itunes.
Yet perhaps more consequentially, television provides, and draws upon, cul-
tural resources for more than immediate audiences. in this sense, television
collapses distinctions between production and reproduction, between produc-
tion and circulation, and between text and context (clough, 2000).
all media are intertextual—the meanings of any one image or text depend
on the meanings carried by other images and texts (Rose, 2007, p. 142); how-
ever, new technologies, marketing strategies, and social relations converge in
the production of transmedia texts. consider that The Matrix opened in the-
aters but also became available on dvd, on television, online, and through
downloads onto iPods and iPads; in addition, it comes in two different game
forms (Enter the Matrix and The Matrix), a series of comics, and several ani-
mated videos, all of which textually interact with the film. changes in media
content and circulation embody processes that are simultaneously technologi-
cal and social. Yet social science research remains constrained by a philoso-
phy of science that cannot begin to address intertextuality, the changing nature
of social interaction, or the porousness of mediated relationships. further,
technology alone, no matter how sophisticated, cannot account for the shifts in
production and consumption that occur in and through a variety of forms of
media. “the circulation of media content—across different media systems,
competing media economies, and national borders—depends heavily on con-
sumer’s active participation” (Jenkins, 2008, p. 3). Qualitative researchers
need specific capacities for deciphering the layers of media intertextuality (cf.
fornäs, Becker, Bjurstöm, & Ganetz, 2007), new forms of sociality, and the
complexities of mediated social interaction.
the advent of tivo and other similar recording devices are contributing to
the decreasing value of 30-second commercials and causing marketing strategists
148
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe

to rethink possibilities for generating media that blur the lines between marketing
and entertainment. Beyond the most obvious product placement techniques,
mtv videos, American Idol, and virgin media come immediately to mind as
new genres created by this blurring of advertising and entertainment. in an ever-
increasing media landscape, with new forms of media constantly emerging, for-
mer distinctions among culture, politics, and economics come to seem less
relevant than they once were. consider that what first started as a campy joke in
dino ignacio’s bedroom as he assembled a collage combining Sesame Street’s
Bert with osama bin laden (to “prove” that Bert was truly evil) quickly became
part of an international controversy when the collage appeared on thousands of
posters across the middle east—some of which appeared in anti-american
protests (Jenkins, 2008, pp. 1–2). new media, including wikis, blogs, vlogs,
videoconferencing, text messaging, facebook, and twitter have shifted the
meaning of interaction itself. arguably, they have completely collapsed what has
been imagined historically as a local interactional context. from the privacy of
our homes, we can enter an endlessly public space. truth, authenticity, and real-
ity are no longer easily assumed or clearly apparent.
if audiences were once understood as passive spectators of television, film,
or other forms of media, today audiences must be understood as participatory
cultures. increasingly, youth are not only consuming media but also producing
it. an elementary school child being homeschooled began The Daily Prophet,
a student written and run newsletter dedicated to bringing the world of harry
Potter to life; the paper now has a staff of 102 children around the world who
have never met face-to-face but who form a community that writes, edits, and
reads the paper (Jenkins, 2008). this is not to say that all participatory cultures
are equal—certainly the ability to participate varies dramatically. corporations
still exert far greater power in this participatory culture than do any individuals
or smaller groups. Yet it does indicate how quickly social interactions and
social relations are transforming in important ways that pose profound prob-
lems of data collection and analysis for the social sciences.
in the 21st century, social research must be able to consider the techno-
logical mediation of social relationships. while many scholars would argue the
physical sciences never presented a good model of social research, the com-
plexities of social life in the 21st century render the model of the physical sci-
ence even less useful. not only do changes in media content and circulation
embody processes that are simultaneously technological and social but changes
in technology and computerization blur the distinction between manual labor
and mental activity.
Chapter 6
Social Research
149

consider that consumers have always purchased not just products but also
symbolic value. however, in the 21st century, the symbolic value of products
seems strikingly disproportionate. the increased symbolic value of products
has come to erode obvious distinctions among economic processes, consumer
products, and systems of representation. if this seems implausible, consider
how the presence (or absence) of a nike “Swoosh” affects the price of running
shoes. even on otherwise identical shoes, the Swoosh can increase the market
value of a pair of shoes five times; clearly we are not buying the physical char-
acteristics of the nike symbol but its symbolic effect, its meaning (ives, 2004,
p. 13). it is impossible to separate the value of the nike Swoosh from the
advertisements that give it social value. Yet the research paradigms of the
social sciences have not adjusted to be able to effectively address the complex
issues of representation in the proliferation of media, social relationships, and
economic processes.
the philosophical foundations of social research methods make it impos-
sible to effectively examine 21st-century media using only social science
methods. while interpretivist frameworks can get at meaning-making
processes in various ways, they also bind us to a narrow context of analysis—
the demands of formalization make it difficult to do effective and credible
studies of representation.5 a cartesian ontology directs techniques of data col-
lection and analysis—even if another ontology, such as pragmatism, directs
the interpretive process. the demands for empirical evidence necessitate an
epistemological focus on localized contexts, which precludes intertextual and
generally broader cultural analyses.
to call social life into question without also calling into question our con-
ception of an adequate explanation of social life makes research vulnerable to
intensely ideological and unconscious conclusions. a philosophy of science
must question the presuppositions that constitute both apparent problems and
the methods to address them. what is the value of a social science that cannot
meaningfully apprehend and account for technological mediation, symbolic
value, and intertexuality of social relationships? is this ineffectiveness a rea-
sonable price to pay to maintain the boundary of “science”? Should social sci-
ences continue to concede media studies to the humanities? clearly the answer
to these last two questions is “no,” if we believe that all experience is intensely
personal, profoundly intersubjective, and culturally mediated. however,
150
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe
5tools (such as psychoanalytic, poststructural, and semiotic frameworks) that are commonly used
to apprehend the productive power of media stand outside the parameters of social sciences.

Chapter 6
Social Research
151
before a more substantial response can be offered, it’s important to take up
consideration of ethics and subjectivity, since these are fundamental to how
we understand the production of knowledge.
a matteR of ethicS:
the maKinG of a Social ScientiSt
feminist criticisms regarding the inadequacy of prevailing standards of
research within the social sciences have focused on notions of objectivity, as
well as on the assumptions, practices, and philosophies of science (harding,
2008, p. 7). in addition, feminists have engaged related discussions of ethical
responsibilities with respect to insider/outsider research (Zinn, 1979) and
ethnography (Rosaldo, 1993; Smith, 1999), as well as more generally with
respect to the construction of feminist methods (devault, 1999; harding, 1991;
naples, 2003; Ramazanoğlu & holland, 2002; Reinharz, 1992; Stanley &
wise, 1983). these important and relevant feminist innovations in social
research ethics have not yet made it into the foundations of mainstream social
research, which remain primarily concerned with institutional review board
(iRB) procedures. indeed even having to designate practices as “feminist”
points to their distance from hegemonic practices. feminist analyses linger at
the periphery of social sciences to such an extent that they are underdeveloped
by new generations of scholarship. “objectivity, rationality, good method, real
science, social progress, civilization—the excellence of these and other self-
proclaimed modern achievements are all measured in terms of their distance
from whatever is associated with the feminine and the primitive” (harding,
2008, p. 3). from this perspective, even in the 21st century, feminism is still
one more barbarian at the gate of science.
what does it mean to speak of research ethics beyond the demands of
iRBs? to what extent must the historical relationship between objectivity and
research ethics continue to change? the concept that a researcher needs to
establish a strong boundary between oneself and interviewees, that a scholar
must protect her- or himself from the problems of strangers, is the product of
an enlightenment notion of objectivity based upon a subject/object dichotomy.
in this framework, emotional distance is thought to provide the needed objec-
tivity for evaluating the truth or falsity of the information our interviewees
offer to us. it protects researchers from becoming “lost in the stories” and
hence vulnerable to distorted or inaccurate data. consequently, there appears

to be no middle ground: no opportunities between doing nothing (as an objec-
tive scholar) and attempting a total rescue (as “not objective” activist). this
logic alleviates a sense of responsibility and nearly compels inaction—it is
both presumptuous and impossible to rescue people from their own lives. it
is important to pay attention to the premise of a social science.
the social sciences are strongest where the natural sciences are weakest: just
as the social sciences have not contributed much to explanatory and predic-
tive theory, neither have the natural sciences contributed to the reflexive
analysis and discussion of values and interests, which is the prerequisite for
an enlightened political, economic and cultural development in any society.
(flyvbjerg, 2001, p. 3)
exploration of social values, interests, and meanings form the core of
social sciences; such exploration requires a critical intersubjectivity. if empa-
thy (the ability to relate compassionately to another) is one of our greatest
pathways to interpersonal relationships, it is also one of our greatest resources
in social research. empathy and compassion form a bridge between the inter-
viewer and the interviewee—not a bridge that allows one to cross over and
share an experience but a bridge that makes shared understanding more likely.
empathy is a very powerful point of human connection that can help
researchers to better understand people whose experiences and values were
very different from our own. for example, in interviews, empathy helped me
to understand how multimillionaires might truly think of themselves as
belonging to the middle class. it also helped me to understand how white
people—who did not identify as racists and would never have sanctioned
racism—routinely expressed racist views. Yet by suspending my own views
to see the world through the eyes of those i interviewed, i often found myself
implicated in both bigotry and human suffering in ways i had not anticipated.
as researchers, we become intimately acquainted with the suffering of
others—suffering that we cannot resolve. this is why social researchers are
often trained, as i was, “to not think about it.” circumstances such as these
form the very conditions of our research, and for that reason, it seems to me to
be of critical importance that we reflect carefully on them. witnessing the
effects of 3 days of unrelenting rain on people living without housing gave me
a visceral understanding of why it is important never to look away from suf-
fering and never to forget. especially when we are powerless to change the cir-
cumstances we face, it is important to bear witness and through witnessing and
152
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe

remembering to deepen our commitment and to sharpen our strategies for
enacting meaningful social change. this is the place from which we can begin to
rethink the meaning of social research and the ethics of knowledge production.
to develop research methods that are able to effectively apprehend both
routine relations of power and media in the 21st century, it will be necessary to
draw theory and method into more integrated frameworks than currently exist
in the social sciences. many important issues in the social sciences, such as the
nature of agency, subjectivity, and experience, can only be solved by concep-
tual analysis, not empirical research (cf. winch, 1958). experience does not
consist of discrete moments, like frames in a film. experience is a complex,
multidimensional web in which all moments are related to others. of course, all
research requires temporal limits, yet how scholars envision appropriate limits
is as much a political process as a research one. this is one reason why it is
important to write about localized contexts rather than local contexts.
the ability to set temporal limits relies on the self-reflexive skills of the
researcher; what we bring to the study enables us to make sense (or prevents us
from making sense) of what we observe. for example, a racial slur is recogniz-
able as a slur only because it has been used as such in the past—it connects us
to a cultural history of racism (Butler, 1997b). without the broader social and
historical context, it is not possible to understand a slur as a slur. Yet the demand
for analyses of localized contexts ignores the cultural contexts that make a slur
meaningful and reduce it to an individual act. as de certeau (1984) reminds us,
words are tools marked by their use. Yet ethically and intellectually we are
accountable only for the knowledge produced within a very narrow temporal
frame. this is precisely how research reproduces dominant cultural ideologies.
ReviSitinG SuBJectivitY, aGencY, and eXPeRience
Problems of subjectivity are at the heart of all questions about human exis-
tence. while such problems may be taken up in courses on methodology, they
appear only superficially, if at all, in discussions of research methods. Robust
distinctions between social theory and social science have prevented social
scientists generally, and sociologists in particular, from taking up issues of
subjectivity, agency, and experience. at the start of the 21st century, efforts to
understand human interaction must call into question the usefulness of the
theory/method binary. while researchers once studied subject locations such
as race, gender, sexuality, class, and ability as if they were the essential and
Chapter 6
Social Research
153

fixed natures of persons, today our positionalities along these lines are under-
stood more commonly as subject locations that become part of individual
identity (althuser, 1971; hall, 1997b, 1997c).
the tension and interplay between the social, symbolic, and imaginary
processes of identification defy any simple notion of distinctly separate selves.
however, within the common sense of cartesian dualism, “identity” is who
we know ourselves to be. identity is believed to express an essential or authen-
tic core of “self-ness” (cf. minh-ha, 1989). identity is what minh-ha referred
to as “a continuing me” while “difference” is the boundary that distinguishes
me from not me. in this sense, identity refers to “the whole pattern of same-
ness” within a human life (hall, 1997a; minh-ha, 1989). certainly, the reifi-
cation of an objective social world presupposes a persistent self as its subject.
much of what we in sociology treat as abstract or presuppositional categories—
subject and object, agent and structure for example—carry within them “frozen”
historical arguments, which have been abstracted into our familiar general cat-
egories. to “unfreeze” requires “undoing” and that requires history. taking a
look at the historicity of apparently presuppositional categories of social thought
also involves asking how the historical construction and transformations of a
concept shaped and continue to shape its logical dimensions and its social mean-
ings. (Somers & Gibson, 1996, p. 44)
if we accept that people are brought into being through social interaction,
there is no identity (no me, or i) that can stand outside of the conditions of its
emergence. experience then is not what one has but the processes through
which one is constituted. every “i” is implicated in a social context that
exceeds its own existence (Butler, 2005, p. 7). the only way to know oneself
is through a mediation that takes place outside of oneself.6
it is one thing to accept that social categories such as race are socially con-
structed and quite another to examine the processes of subjectification—the
processes through which people become bearers of social structures. Processes
of subjectification give researchers access to ways of thinking and writing about
categories such as race, gender, sexuality, and ability without reifying them and
without divesting them of the historical relations of power through which they
are produced. analyses and narratives about who people are, and the lives they
154
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe
6to an important extent, identity categories are both reductive (essentialist) and productive (as
political dispositions); any use of them must be self-reflexive, self-conscious, and strategic in
order to maximize their productive usefulness and minimize their essentialist reductions.

Chapter 6
Social Research
155
have lived, will always be incomplete if we cannot see the processes of social
formation through which they became inaugurated as subjects.
the “frozen historical arguments” of ontological and epistemological
assumptions have particular consequences for marginalized subjectivities. for
example, if we no longer accept a fixed or reified notion of race, sexuality, or
ability, it becomes incumbent upon researchers to understand the social con-
ditions through which people come to occupy related subject positions. this
would demand that we broaden the analytical focus of research methods to
include cultural knowledge as well as local practices. localized contexts of
data collection do not provide a broad enough lens for generating insights into
processes of subjectification. “material conditions are the necessary but not
sufficient condition of all historical practice” (hall, 1996, p. 147). Social sci-
ence has much to gain by bringing empirical, theoretical, and historical lenses
together in order to effectively make sense of social life.
in the social sciences, there is little agreement about the ontology of the
subject (how subjects exist) or about the epistemology of the subject (how the
subject can be known). contemporary researchers have argued that the notion
of a persistent subject is itself incoherent. for example, in order to conduct sta-
tistical analyses of race, researchers must assume that people have a single
constant racial identification over the course of their lives: this assumes that
a multiracial person will always identify as such and not as a black person in
one context and multiracial in another. indeed, the notion of a persistent sub-
ject over time is untenable, because it requires researchers to ignore the onto-
logical conditions of knowledge.
changing conceptions of subjectivity demand a concomitant reexamination
of notions of agency. what does it mean to speak of agency? to a commonsense
attitude, agency might be as simple as the ability to affect some aspect of our
environment. Yet as noted in chapter 2, social research demands a more com-
plicated question: where is the locus of the action that affects our environment?
notions of agency derived from cartesian (body/mind) dualism are associated
with consciousness and the mind: agency begins with a thought or intention that
directs our action. in cartesian dualism, bodies emerge either as the conditions
of social action or as objects that are acted upon. commonsense attitudes and
much of social research reflect this orientation to agency.
at the heart of issues of agency are ontological narratives regarding the
nature of the world and epistemological narratives about how that world can be
apprehended or known. in the social sciences, the practice of conceptualizing
agency as a personal quality is related to the concomitant conceptualization of

constraint as the consequence of social structures. this binary framing of agency
and constraint comes from, and perpetuates, a cartesian paradigm that contin-
ues to preclude certain forms of knowledge. Recall from chapter 2 that if we
challenge the notion of gender and sex as natural essences, we necessarily com-
plicate understandings of agency. if gender is socially constructed, people need
to learn to put some measure of effort into making ourselves recognizable as
gendered beings. this is not only a matter of hairstyle and clothing but one that
also includes body language, demeanor, interactional styles, and so forth. from
this perspective, how do we locate the source of agency behind the accomplish-
ment of gender? if gender is not an individual choice, to what extent is gendered
demeanor—hegemonic or subversive—a matter of individual agency?
to the extent that scholars believe that gender and sex are socially
constructed, we must consider bodies not as natural but as processes of
subjectification—that is to say, as the result of social processes of embod-
iment. Scholars then must reconsider both the meanings of bodies and the
locus of agency. from this perspective, the humanist conception of agency
is decentered: agency is no longer centered in, or emanating from, an indi-
vidual. in this sense, agency is understood as a nonlinear process with no
single point of origin. agency and constraint are expressions of the com-
plex conditions of their constitution.
tradition, norms, and roles, along with more theoretically driven concepts
of false consciousness and discursive formations, have at various times emerged
as focal points for understanding social constraint. Gramsci’s notion of hege-
mony provides a rich example of how seemingly private lives are infused in
politically important ways with cultural relations of power. indeed the institu-
tions responsible for the creation of “civil society” (schools, churches, temples,
mosques, news media, and so forth) are hegemonic forces of the state that are
intimately involved in processes of coercion and consent. for Gramsci, consent
always implies both coercion and constraint—and coercion and constraint
always imply some level of consent. these concepts cannot be separated mean-
ingfully from each other. however, in the social sciences the analytic tension
between free will and the forces of social control that constrain free will has been
institutionalized through macro/micro divides in social research.
empirical analyses typically pursue either macro analyses of constraining
structures or micro analyses that foreground the agency of personal action. Yet
agency is always situated in, and to some extent determined by, specific his-
torical, political, structural, and social factors. agency is never entirely free
nor is it entirely constrained. from this perspective, the work of social
156
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe

research becomes, at least in part, understanding agency as neither fully deter-
mined nor fully free but produced paradoxically through a struggle with con-
straining forces—the “unchosen” conditions of our lives (Butler, 2005).
Social research that seeks to fully understand processes of social change
must resist the dualistic impulse to explain constraint and agency as dichoto-
mous binaries. this would lead us not only to examine the compromised
nature of agency, but also to examine the compromised nature and inherent
vulnerability of social structures. to refuse a dichotomous framing of agency
and constraint would direct social research—not to studies of people, places,
times, events, or contexts—but to the relations that bind people, places, times,
events, and contexts.
i want to underscore the point that in order to develop non-reifying empir-
ical knowledge of domination, we need to examine the determining force of
relationships of domination, as well as its effects. if we understand that mate-
rial conditions are not fixed absolutes, we must consider the range of condi-
tions that give rise to them. from this starting point, social research shifts from
being solely (or primarily) about exposing exploitation to making power and
privilege as visible as oppression and exploitation. of course, in order to make
this starting point possible, scholars need to explore and reconceptualize both
processes of formalization and interpretation in social research. it would
require exploring more fully how philosophical foundations, as well as tech-
nical procedures, can work to prevent relations of power and privilege from
fully appearing in analyses of disenfranchisement.
enviSioninG Social ePiStemoloGieS
how might the philosophical roots of qualitative analysis be transformed?
how might future research reframe and broaden social science research? at
present, the strong investment in a cartesian philosophy of science makes it
difficult to account for layers of interpretation in the research process without
appearing to compromise the very name of science. Producing knowledge is
always a political act—one in which ideologies are both rationalized and nat-
uralized. the more effective scholars become at revealing the processes and
terms of knowledge production, the foundation of cognitive authority, the
more effective we will be at minimizing the effects of ideologies.
Research will never be an ideal process, but it can be a more accountable
one. Recall from chapter 2 that social science research is charged with two
Chapter 6
Social Research
157

overarching tasks: formalization and interpretation. formalization regards the
processes for systematizing knowledge production. to varying degrees, all
research draws from deductive, abductive, and inductive logics. however,
qualitative research relies most strongly on both the principles of inductive
logic and generally on the method of analytic induction. Grounded theory and
analytic induction, as commonly practiced today, vary in the mechanics of
coding, in the processes of sampling, and arguably in reliance on analytic
abduction; however, they both rest on inductive strategies for identifying
themes and variations in empirical data from a localized context.
in qualitative research, principles of analytic induction provide the scientific
rationale and technical parameters for systematic qualitative data collection and
analysis—the process of formalization. the ability to identify/produce empirical
data and to generate findings from data is the cognitive condition of social sci-
ence; researchers make their case through warranted interpretations of themes
and exceptions. to the extent that theory and method are treated as binaries, the
logics of historicism, deconstruction, or genealogy have no place in social sci-
ence. indeed, within the cognitive space of social science, it is impossible to cri-
tique processes such as reification and hegemony. formalization seems possible
only if evidence is understood as a thing to which one can physically point, rather
than as a heuristic for investigation. operationally, social science has depended
upon realism. we might speak of multiple realities, but the techniques of quali-
tative research redirect us to a cartesian construct. constrained by ontological
and epistemological foundations, interpretive research is compelled to operate in
reified modes of thought—yet researchers lose sight of this by focusing on the
second task of social research: processes of interpretation.
the second task of social research is to provide systems of interpretation—
hermeneutics for apprehending social processes. Realism, social constructionism,
symbolic interaction, and ethnomethodology each offer different interpretive
strategies for making sense of social life. where qualitative research is concerned,
we have developed far more strategies for interpretation than we have for for-
malization. Since the development of “modified analytic induction” and
grounded theory, nearly all challenges to the natural science model have regarded
processes of interpretation, not processes of formalization.7 consequently the
effectiveness of interpretive research is both limited and fragmented. utilizing,
158
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe
7the two exceptions are autoethnography and performance scholarship, and these remain quite
marginal to the social sciences precisely because they eschew processes of systematization that
distinguish science from other modes of inquiry. institutional ethnographies are well positioned to
challenge processes of formalization but do not always do so.

Chapter 6
Social Research
159
indeed requiring historical procedures of formalization for social science
research, has profound consequences for conducting social research that is truly
capable of advancing social justice. to the extent that the social sciences remain
exclusively bound to empirical evidence in localized contexts, we will fall short
of our abilities to analyze power, privilege, culture, and knowledge. to repeat an
old adage introduced in chapter 2, if we do not see the big picture, “we ‘look’ but
never ‘see’” (Steinberg, 2007, p. 11).
any adequate epistemology must account for the inseparability of knowl-
edge and social organization. epistemic communities are not groups of indi-
viduals; they are interdependent relationships. Social sciences need social
epistemologies. where individualistic epistemologies are concerned with truth
and error, social epistemologies are concerned with social practices in relation
to knowledge production. there are myriad ways of conceptualizing social
epistemologies that have a broad range of political effects (cf. clarke, 2009;
Goldman, 2002; lynch & mcnally, 1999; Smith, 1990a, 1990b, 1999;
weinstein & Stehr, 1999). of particular relevance here are those that best sup-
port the production of knowledge in ways that are consistent with efforts to
apprehend the intertextuality of socialities: specifically, the historicity of local-
ized contexts, the technological mediation of culture, and the subjective
processes of social research. with relationality as an ontological premise, social
epistemologies demand that we pursue knowledge about the social world by
examining social routes to knowledge. narratives must be understood both in
relationship to each other and to broader discursive systems. in addition, social
epistemologies refuse the possibility of conceptualizing identity or subjectivity
as fixed. all identities and subject locations would need to be analyzed in the
relational contexts that make them possible and which give them meaning.
many scholars seeking to pursue more social epistemologies than currently
exist in the social sciences have drawn from poststructural discourse analysis
(charmaz, 2009; clarke, 2009; denzin, 1992; holstein & Gubrium, 2000;
Pascale, 2007; Saukko, 2003; Scheurich, 1997; St. Pierre & Pillow, 2000).
although the use of poststructural discourse analysis does not provide simple
answers to social problems, it does enable close analysis of the operations of
power. “it enables us to examine how power operates to construct our desires,
our thoughts, our ways of being in the world—our subjectivities—in ways that
can make us unconsciously complicit in our own oppression” (Gannon &
davies, 2007, p. 91). if this seems a long way from the charge of social sci-
ences, consider adele clarke’s (2005) elaborated technique of situational
analysis as a means to examine empirical data, while disrupting the illusion that

coherent meaning exists in isolated moments. working with a social episte-
mology, situational analysis seeks to integrate symbolic interaction, construc-
tivist grounded theory, and poststructural discourse (clarke, 2009).
discourse, understood as the intersection of text and context, provides an
important analytical resource for developing social epistemologies.8 Systems
of representation, particularly narratives and discourse, are the basic concepts
of a social ontology and a social epistemology. through narratives we come
to know and make sense of the social world, and through narratives we con-
stitute social research. Yet narratives can never be entirely of our own making,
they are the products of broader cultural discourses. in a social ontology,
events and phenomena exist as constellations of relationships—not singular or
isolated moments—that are discerned in temporal and spatial relationship to
other events and phenomena. ontological narratives dialogically define who
we are and what course of action to pursue—these are socially constituted, not
individual, narratives. in this sense, ontological narratives are fundamental to
conceptions of agency and constraint. indeed, agency and constraint are pos-
sible only through the narratives in which they are embedded.
challenging the limited notion of localized contexts necessarily disrupts the
theory/method binary. it also expands the presence and need for analyses that in
the social sciences have not traditionally been considered empirical, or even rel-
evant to the empirical. Practically speaking, there are at least two ways to trans-
form the notion of empirical evidence to create more fully developed social
epistemologies. one way of moving forward is to expand the notion of empiri-
cal contexts by situating localized interactions in broader cultural/historical
contexts. as noted earlier, some qualitative scholars are pursuing this route. in
education, scholars such as Patti lather (1991), and elizabeth St. Pierre and
wanda Pillow (2000) challenge both research and writing practices; in cultural
studies, Paula Saukko (2003) and Johnson, chambers, Raghuram, and tincknell
(2004) propose cultural studies analyses that refuse the notion of localized con-
texts; and Patricia clough (1992, 2000, 2008) includes a psychoanalytic per-
spective that pushes the boundaries of sociological research. dorothy Smith’s
(1990b, 1999) work on the social organization of knowledge demonstrates the
usefulness and need for apprehending the conceptual organization of power as
it functions in daily lives. there are many scholars, often working at the margins
of their disciplines, to transform the practices of social research.
160
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe
8i want to acknowledge ezerbet Barat for this particular framing of discourse.

Chapter 6
Social Research
161
a second way of cultivating social epistemologies emerges through a focus
on language as an organic connection between local and cultural contexts. By
language, i do not refer to the study of grammar or syntax but to a range of dis-
ciplinary approaches that get at the discursive production of meaning and
knowledge in local and cultural contexts. consider, for example, the range of
disciplines in which researchers are attempting to expand analyses of the local-
ized context associated with social constructionism, symbolic interaction, and
ethnomethodology through the incorporation of more theoretical tools such as
deconstruction, psychoanalysis, foucauldian discourse analysis, and genealogy.
“Some of the most influential intellectual movements of the 20th century—
including psychoanalysis, structuralism, postmodernism, deconstruction, and
discourse analysis—have focused on language” (ives, 2008, p. 3).
a short list of scholars who have made substantial contributions to cul-
tural analyses of language include Roland Barthes, ferdinand de Saussure,
louis althusser, antonio Gramsci, walter Benjamin, Jurgen habermas,
mikhail Bakhtin, valentin volosinov, ludwig wittgenstein, monique wittig,
michel foucault, Pierre Bourdieu, Jacques derrida, Jacques lacan, Judith
Butler, michael Billig, norman faircough, teun van dijk, margaret
wetherell, and Ruth wodak. notably, however, these are largely theorists in
the social sciences or scholars in the humanities. Perhaps because language is
the premiere signifying system of cultures, studies of language have been
regarded as something other than the basis of scientific investigation. Glyn
williams (1999) argued that
Sociology’s emergence as a feature of modernism was responsible for the sep-
aration of language, mind and reality. this meant that it was possible to study
reality without reference to language. it also meant that reality was reflected
in language and that a consideration of evidence, as language, implied an
introduction to truth. in the same manner, language and nature were separated,
involving the separation of representation and fact. this meant that society
could become something to study as something separate from language. in a
sense, language was excluded from proto-sociology. (p. 294)
the need for social epistemologies in the 21st century points to the impor-
tance of reclaiming the study of language (in many variations) as integral to the
study of social life. this might mean broadening conceptions of “mixed methods”
to also refer to efforts to combine interpretive and critical qualitative strategies of
empirical analysis with more theoretical strategies such as deconstruction,

genealogy, and poststructural discourse analysis. or it might mean developing
sociological studies of language that are empirically and theoretically rich and
tethered to a pragmatist ontology and epistemology. there are many possibilities.
if we accept that max weber had it right when he said that people are sus-
pended in webs of significance that we ourselves have spun, then social analy-
sis must be understood not as an experimental search for laws but an interpretive
search for meaning (Geertz, 1973). our most private experiences are narratively
constructed through the cultural framework of language. the ability to distin-
guish among truth, illusion, and falsity is dependent upon language—upon cul-
ture. all classificatory systems are narratively produced; even the individual, as
such, does not exist as such prior to language. without language there is no
social interaction; without social interaction there is no social structure, no cul-
ture. language, broadly construed as systems of representation, is arguably the
foundation of shared culture. consequently, it offers an effective means for
developing social epistemologies that link together structure and agency, history
and local interaction.
linguistic turns have occurred in social, political, and economic contexts
because there are commonalities among these contexts including an emphasis
on the interrelated character of phenomena, the idea that the source of knowl-
edge does not reside in individuals or objects but in relationships among indi-
viduals and objects, and an appreciation of language as actively contributing
to our lives and our choices (ives, 2004, p. 16). Perhaps one of the most com-
mon frameworks for analyzing social relationships in terms of language is crit-
ical discourse studies (cdS).
cdS, often referred to as critical discourse analysis (cda), draws from a
wide array of sampling procedures, theories, and analytic frameworks (cf. wodak
& meyer, 2009). Some researchers readily make use of strategies that are strongly
bound by the discipline of linguistics, such as corpus linguistics and sociolin-
guistics, yet others use analytic frameworks associated with foucauldian dis-
course analysis, social psychology, or rhetoric studies. under the broad umbrella
of cdS, theories and methods are contingent upon the kind of intellectual prob-
lem being explored. issues taken up by scholars in cdS, such as cognition, crit-
ical transmedia analysis, social interaction, and cultural texts, all require different
analytic tools. Perhaps what most binds the variety of research together is an
interest in looking at language and a commitment to understanding intertextual-
ity. in this sense, the field is congruent with Gramsci’s (1995) assertion that every
process of inquiry needs to be congruent with its own particular purpose.
162
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe

however, while cdS may provide a conceptual model for how many ana-
lytic frameworks might form a broad umbrella of qualitative methodologies/
methods, it has not been well defined empirically or theoretically. as a conse-
quence, cdS can appear to lack a coherent, disciplinary center; there may be
as many ways of conducting cdS as there are scholars working in the field.
indeed from a social science perspective, the multitude of approaches would
benefit from more coherence, particularly greater clarification and elaboration
of processes of formalization.
within the social sciences, sociology has developed studies of language
that focus on highly technical aspects of conversation and sociolinguistics in
an effort to reconcile the importance of language and the demands of science.
however, with changing and contested notions of what constitutes a social sci-
ence, and deeper appreciation for the inseparability of symbolic practices and
material realities, more sociologists are turning to a broader range of methods
and theories for apprehending the sociological importance of language. for
example, Steinberg (1999) demonstrated how material and discursive forces
conjoin in shaping inequalities. Similarly, Bourdieu (2003) argued that the
potency of symbolic power is the capacity of systems of meaning and signifi-
cation to strengthen relations of oppression and exploitation. in the Research
committee on language and Society of the international Sociological
association (iSa), scholars whose research ranges from sociolinguistics to
poststructural discourse analysis are united by the desire to look at rather than
through systems of communication. moving away from a technical focus
commonly associated with conversation analysis and sociolinguistics, sociol-
ogists are increasingly concerned about the ability of studies of language to
effectively apprehend routine relations of power and privilege—to get at the
reproduction of power and the intertextuality of ordinary life.
imPlicationS foR Social ReSeaRch
Scientific rationality was established and enabled through historically specific
power relations. one consequence has been that western science has been pro-
duced through narratives of achievement that actively disassociate science from
disasters such as the tuskegee syphilis experiment, hiroshima, environmental
degradation, global militarism, entrenched racism, and other forms of systemic
social and economic inequalities (harding, 2008). Yet a strong commitment to
Chapter 6
Social Research
163

challenging hegemonic science and to advancing social justice is clear in much
of qualitative research. Scholars continue to address the limitations of qualita-
tive frameworks, particularly through incorporating poststructural and psycho-
analytic analyses. while this has created some improvements, it still leaves the
field with philosophical crosscurrents that make it difficult (if not impossible)
to examine routine power and privilege, intertextuality, and contemporary
media. our efforts can be made more effective.
throughout this book i have attempted to demonstrate that there are real
limits to the amount and kind of change that can be produced within the cur-
rent social science paradigms. we need new techniques for analyzing data and
new standards for empirical analysis that will enable us to legitimately ask
(and answer) different kinds of questions. while the social sciences have
changed dramatically in the past 50 years, our transformation is incomplete—
indeed precisely because it can never be complete, scholars must continue to
examine the theoretical foundations of research methodologies that determine
what counts as valid knowledge and consequently limit what can be known.
the social sciences have been predicated on “an epistemology of igno-
rance,” a state of “unknowingness,” in relationship to routine relationships of
power and privilege—indeed our identities as social researchers are forged
through institutional processes that simultaneously construct and obfuscate
our own privileged positions of power. we should not and cannot trust that
research methodologies created by the most privileged, during eras of great
oppression, will serve as the basis of socially just research. it is not a matter
of good methods applied to bad uses but rather academia’s ignorance of its
own processes of reproduction. opacity seems to be built into our own for-
mation as we construct “others” who are knowable.
to the extent that social researchers assume, rather than account for, the
ontological and epistemological commitments of social research, social scien-
tific knowledge is bound to an unacknowledged, ideologically determined,
and culturally biased production of knowledge. Both the practices and repre-
sentations of the social sciences are constitutive of epistemic realities. as
researchers, we know that “knowledge” and “truth” are polemical, strategic
relations of power—our efforts to create just social research paradigms will
always be imperfect, but we can do better.
Social research has served (and arguably continues to serve) as a power-
ful marginalizing force. more recently, however, scholars have come to argue
that social research, as well as all of social life, is storied; “narrative is an
164
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe

ontological condition of social life” (Somers & Gibson, 1996, p. 38). Stories,
in this sense, are not objects of knowledge. Rather, they are practices that
constitute what they intend to mean. all representations of empirical realities,
even statistical representations, are narratively constructed; this is true as well
for the construction of factuality at the heart of all dominant forms of mass
media communication technologies (clough, 1992, p. 2).9 indeed all obser-
vations of social life and all data require narratives that enable us to recog-
nize what we see and to make comparisons.
the incompleteness of narratives, and of interpretation, is inevitable
because everything is already an interpretation; there is no primary moment
that stands apart from the chain of interpretation. there is always a strategic
place where the chain of interpretations is cut off from its origins in order to
be analyzed. in social sciences, the chain of interpretation has been cut off at
a localized context, which prevents any complex analysis of the phenome-
non’s conditions of emergence. Yet language itself is epistemic: language
makes “reality” real. how we relate to ourselves and to each other is depen-
dent upon not only the words we exchange but also upon the conceptualiza-
tion that language makes possible.
meaning is only possible through language; our conversations are always
constructed through systems of representation that preceded us and will go on
well past us. consider, for example, that in the search for intellectual auton-
omy in west africa, many scholars find it important to deconstruct the narra-
tives of science and society that have been inherited from colonial regimes
(ocha, 2005; Sall & Quedraogo, 2010). without doubt, “under colonialism,
social science became a science in service of the colonial order” (Sall &
Quedraogo, 2010, p. 226). unfortunately, this practice of deconstruction has
been limited; many countries around the globe still practice social sciences as
they were constructed by empire.
the diversity of methods that could place the empirical findings of local-
ized contexts in broader social and historical contexts are crushed by demands
for more “evidence-based” research and the declaration of methods of the phys-
ical sciences as the “gold standard” of social research. the current western
social science paradigm demands that we treat language as a transparent bearer
Chapter 6
Social Research
165
9in the 21st century, interpretivism can no longer be juxtaposed against realism. Realism in
science and in media must be understood as an unconscious construction of “empirical reality”
that attempts to prevent the narrative construction of empiricism and factuality from becoming
visible (clough, 1992, p. 6).

of information, devoid of history, which can be understood through examina-
tion of a very narrow context of use. this practice speaks to one of the most
profound and lasting binaries in social research—that of theory and method.
the distinction has been maintained, in part, through the construction of posi-
tivist conceptions of evidence. in the face of ever-narrowing conceptions of
evidence, it is critical to explore broader social and historical contexts—not as
a search for origins but as an effort to identify and understand rhizomatic con-
nections to events beyond the immediacy of what can be seen at a particular
time, in order to generate an understanding of the multiple, intersecting forces
that produce the meaning of a particular phenomenon or practice. in this sense,
expanding what counts as legitimate evidence would constitute what foucault
(1972) and nietzsche (1994) referred to as a genealogy—a kind of topology of
social practices.
concludinG thouGhtS
in the 21st century, social sciences require techniques of data collection, analy-
sis, and interpretation that can apprehend the tensions between personal agency
and social constraints while accounting for relative consistency in contexts of
multiplicity, contingency, and difference. around the globe there are multiple
traditions and practices that may be of core relevance for rethinking social sci-
ence. at a minimum, reconceptualizing discourses of science to account for
routine relations of power, contemporary media, and intertextuality requires a
more integrated and flexible relationship between theory and method.
the social sciences need processes of formalization that can draw from
both empirical data and logical warrants in order to situate localized practices
in broader cultural contexts. a more integrated, less dualistic approach to the-
ory and method would not generate limitless relativism. Rather, it would pro-
vide an intellectual framework that is capable of addressing issues of
formalization and interpretation in scholarship that would make social
research more accountable, and more relevant, to contemporary social life. at
present, the complexities of routine relations of power, media convergence,
and the intertextuality of social life demand that researchers rethink the philo-
sophical foundations of social science. in addition, i have underscored the
importance of a broader conception of social ethics based on principles of
intersubjectivity. Social sciences are distinctively positioned to draw from
166
caRtoGRaPhieS of KnowledGe

interpersonal strengths of critical empathy and compassion to cultivate a deeper
self-reflexive awareness of intersubjectivity in scholarship.
the work of rethinking social sciences has been in process for decades,
although it exists at the margins of disciplines. it is past time for these lines of
inquiry to become part of mainstream discussion and debate. the strength of
future social science research depends upon the abilities of scholars to rethink
the very foundations of scientific assumptions that define our work. this book
concludes by returning to the initial provocation to rethink both the philo-
sophical foundation and methodological techniques of qualitative research. if
the mark of a mature science is its ability to generate new paradigms for
research, social sciences are coming of age. it is both possible and necessary
to move social research toward a coherent, 21st-century ontological and epis-
temological foundation expressed not only in data collection and interpretation
but also in ethics and social justice. changing the way we conduct research is
both impossible and necessary.
fuRtheR ReadinG
Butler, J. (2005). Giving an account of oneself. new York: fordham university Press.
clarke, a. (2005). Situational analysis: Grounded theory after the postmodern turn.
thousand oaks, ca: Sage.
clough, P. t. (2000). Autoaffection: Unconscious thought in the age of teletechnology.
minneapolis: university of minnesota Press.
cruz, c. (2006). toward an epistemology of a brown body. in d. d. Bernal, c. a. elenes,
f. e. Godinez, & S. villenas (eds.), Chicana/Latina education in everyday life:
Feminista perspectives on pedagogy and epistemology (pp. 59–75). albany: State
university of new York Press.
denzin, n. K., lincoln, Y. S., & Smith, l. t. (eds.). (2008). Handbook of critical and
indigenous methodologies. thousand oaks, ca: Sage.
foucault, m. (1994). Aesthetics, method, and epistemology (R. hurley, trans.). new
York: the new Press.
harding, S. (2008). Sciences from below. durham, nc: duke university Press.
ladson-Billings, G. (2003). Racialized discourses and ethnic epistemologies. in
n. K. denzin & Y. S. lincoln (eds.), The landscape of qualitative research
(pp. 398–432). thousand oaks, ca: Sage.
Chapter 6
Social Research
167



169
REfERENCES
Addelson, K. P. (2007). Knowers/doers and their moral problems. In L. M. Alcoff
& E. Potter (Eds.), Feminist epistemologies (pp. 265–295). New York:
Routledge.
Alcoff, L. M. (2007). Epistemologies of ignorance: Three types. In S. Sullivan &
N. Tuana (Eds.), Race and epistemologies of ignorance (pp. 39–58). Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Althuser, L. (1971). Lenin, philosophy, and other essays. London: New Left
Books.
Baert, P. (2005). Philosophy of the social sciences. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Barrotta, P., & Dascal, M. (2005). Introduction. In P. Barrotta & M. Dascal (Eds.),
Controversies and subjectivity (pp. 1–30).Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins
Publishing Company.
Becker, H. S. (1974). Photography and sociology. Studies in the Anthropology of Visual
Communication, 1, 3–26.
Behar, R., & Gordon, D. (1995). Women writing culture. Berkeley: University of
California Press.
Berger, P., & Luckmann, T. (1966). The social construction of reality: A treatise in the
sociology of knowledge. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Bernal, D. D. (2002). Critical race theory, Latino critical theory, and critical race-
gendered epistemologies: Recognizing students of color as knowledge holders.
Qualitative Inquiry, 8(1), 105–126.
Best, J. (1993). But seriously folks: The limitations of strict constructionist interpreta-
tion of social problems. In J. Holstein & G. Miller (Eds.), Reconsidering social
constructionism (pp. 129–147). New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Bjelic, D., & Lynch, M. (1992). The work of a (scientific) demonstration: Respecifying
Newton’s and Goethe’s theories of prismatic color. In G. Watson & R. Seiler
(Eds.), Text in context: Contributions to ethnomethodology (pp. 52–78). Newbury
Park, CA: Sage.
Blumer, H. (1933). Movies and conduct. New York: Macmillan.

170
CARTOGRAPHIES Of KNOWLEDGE
Blumer, H. (1941). Critiques of research in the social sciences, vol. I: An appraisal of
Thomas and Znaniecki’s “The Polish Peasant in Europe and America.” The
Journal of American Sociology, 46(6), 903–906.
Blumer, H. (1986). Symbolic interactionism: Perspective and method. Berkeley:
University of California Press.
Blumer, H. (2004). George Herbert Mead and human conduct. Walnut Creek, CA:
AltaMira Press.
Boden, D. (1990). People are talking: Conversation analysis and symbolic interaction.
In H. S. Becker & M. McCall (Eds.), Talk and social structure (pp. 244–273).
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Boden, D., & Zimmerman, D. H. (1991). Structure-in-action:An introduction. In D. Boden
& D. H. Zimmerman (Eds.), Talk and social structure: Studies in ethnomethodology
and conversation analysis (pp. 3–21). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Bonilla-Silva, E. (2003). Racism without racists: Color-blind racism and the persistence
of racial inequality in the United States. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Boothman, D. (1995). Introduction. In D. Boothman (Ed.), Further selections from the
prison notebooks. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Bourdieu, P. (2003). Language and symbolic power. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press.
Burke, P. J. (1980). The self: Measurement implications from a symbolic interactionist
perspective. Social Psychology Quarterly, 43, 18–29.
Butler, J. (1993). Bodies that matter. London: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1997a). Excitable speech: A politics of the performative. New York: Routledge.
Butler, J. (1997b). Gender is burning: Questions of appropriation and subversion. In
A. McClintock, A. Mufti, & E. Shohat (Eds.), Dangerous liaisons: Gender, nation
and postcolonial perspectives (pp. 381–395). Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota.
Butler, J. (2005). Giving an account of oneself. New York: fordham University Press.
Cahill, S. (1987). Directions for an interactionist study of gender development. In
M. J. Deegan & M. Hill (Eds.), Women and symbolic interaction (pp. 81–98).
Boston: Allen and Unwin.
Cannella, G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (2004). Epilogue: Claiming a critical public social science—
Reconceptualizing and redeploying research. Qualitative Inquiry, 10(20), 298–309.
Charmaz, K. (2001). Qualitative interviewing and grounded theory analysis. In
J. f. Gubrium & J. A. Holstein (Eds.), Handbook of interview research: Context
& method (pp. 675–694). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Charmaz, K. (2006). Constructing grounded theory: A practical guide through quali-
tative analysis. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Charmaz, K. (2009). Constructivist grounded theory methods. In J. M. Morse (Ed.),
Developing grounded theory: The second generation (pp. 127–154). Walnut
Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
Clarke, A. (2005). Situational analysis: Grounded theory after the postmodern turn.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

References
171
Clarke, A. (2009). from grounded theory to situational analysis. In J. M. Morse (Ed.),
Developing grounded theory: The second generation (pp. 194–235). Walnut
Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
Clough, P. T. (1988). The movies and social observations: Reading Blumer’s movies
and conduct. Symbolic Interaction, 11(1), 85–97.
Clough, P. T. (1989). Letters from Pamela: Reading Howard S. Becker’s writing(s) for
social scientists. Symbolic Interaction, 12, 159–170.
Clough, P. T. (1992). End(s) of ethnography. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Clough, P. T. (2000). Autoaffection: Unconscious thought in the age of teletechnology.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Clough, P. T. (2008). Celebrating work. In N. K. Denzin (Ed.), Studies in symbolic
interaction (Vol. 30, pp. 37–44). Bingley, UK: Emerald Group Publishing Ltd.
Code, L. (1993). Taking subjectivity into account. In L. M. Alcoff & E. Potter (Eds.),
Feminist epistemologies (pp. 15–48). New York: Routledge.
Collins, P. H. (1993). Black feminist thought in the matrix of domination. In C. Lemert
(Ed.), Social theory: The multicultural & classical readings. San francisco:
Westview Press.
Collins, P. H. (2000). Black feminist thought: Knowledge, consciousness, and the pol-
itics of empowerment (2nd ed.). New York: Routledge.
Connell, R. (2010). Learning from each other: Sociology on a world scale. In S. Patel
(Ed.), The ISA handbook of diverse sociological traditions (pp. 40–51). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Coulon, A. (1995). Ethnomethodology (Vol. 36). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Cruz, C. (2006). Toward an epistemology of a brown body. In D. D. Bernal, C. A. Elenes,
f. E. Godinez, & S. Villenas (Eds.), Chicana/Latina education in everyday life:
Feminista perspectives on pedagogy and epistemology (pp. 59–75). Albany: State
University of New York Press.
Cuff, E. C., Sharrock, W. W., & francis, D. W. (2006). Perspectives in sociology
(5th ed.). New York: Routledge.
Daly, K. (2007). Qualitative methods for family studies and human development.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
de Certeau, M. (1984). The practice of everyday life (S. Rendall, Trans.). Berkeley:
University of California Press.
della Porta, D., & Keating, M. (2008). Introduction. In D. della Porta & M. Keating
(Eds.), Approaches and methodologies in the social sciences: A pluralist perspec-
tive (pp. 1–16). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Denzin, N. K. (1970). Symbolic interaction and ethnomethodology. In J. Douglas (Ed.),
Understanding everyday life (pp. 261–286). Chicago: Aldine.
Denzin, N. K. (1978). The research act. In J. Manis & B. N. Meltzer (Eds.), Symbolic
interaction: A reader in social psychology (3rd ed., pp. 58–68). Boston: Allyn &
Bacon.
Denzin, N. K. (1992). Symbolic interactionism and cultural studies. New York:
Blackwell.

172
CARTOGRAPHIES Of KNOWLEDGE
Denzin, N. K. (2002a). The cinematic society and the reflexive interview. In
J. Gubrium & J. Holstein (Eds.), Handbook of interview research: Context and
method (pp. 833–848). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Denzin, N. K. (2002b). Reading race. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Denzin, N. K. (2003a). Cultural studies. In L. T. Reynolds & N. J. Herman-Kinney
(Eds.), Handbook of symbolic interactionism (pp. 997–1019). Walnut Creek, CA:
AltaMira Press.
Denzin, N. K. (2003b). The call to performance. Symbolic Interaction, 26(1), 187–207.
Denzin, N. K., & Giardina, M. D. (2006). Introduction: Qualitative inquiry and the con-
servative challenge. In N. K. Denzin & M. D. Giardina (Eds.), Qualitative
research and the conservative challenge (pp. ix–xxxi). Walnut Creek, CA: Left
Coast Press, Inc.
Denzin, N. K., Lincoln, Y. S., & Smith, L. T. (Eds.). (2008). Handbook of critical and
indigenous methodologies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
DeVault, M. (1999). Liberating method: Feminism and social research. Philadelphia:
Temple University Press.
Dillard, C. B., & Dixson, A. D. (2006). Affirming the will and the way of the ances-
tors: Black feminist consciousness and the search for “good”[ness] in qualitative
science. In N. K. Denzin & M. D. Giardina (Eds.), Qualitative research and the
conservative challenge (pp. 227–254). Walnut Creek, CA: Left Coast Press.
The Economist. (2007, December 19). Where “California” bubbled up: Esalen, birth-
place of the New Age, is a victim of its own success. The Economist. Retrieved
from http://www.economist.com/displayStory.cfm?Story_ID=10278745
Ellis, C., & Bochner, A. P. (Eds.). (1996). Composing ethnography: Alternative forms
of qualitative writing. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Essed, P., & Goldberg, D. T. (Eds.). (2002). Race critical theories. New York:
Blackwell.
feldman, M. (1995). Strategies for interpreting qualitative data (Vol. 33). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
flyvbjerg, B. (2001). Making social science matter: Why social inquiry fails and how
it can succeed again. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
fornäs, J., Becker, K., Bjurstöm, E., & Ganetz, H. (2007). Consuming media:
Communication, shopping and everyday life. New York: Oxford University Press.
foucault, M. (1972). The archeology of knowledge (A. M. S. Smith, Trans.). New York:
Pantheon Books.
foucault, M. (1977). Discipline and punish: The birth of the prison (A. Sheridan,
Trans.). New York: Vintage Books.
fuss, D. (1989). Essentially speaking: Feminism, nature & difference. New York:
Routledge.
Gannon, S., & Davies, B. (2007). Postmodern, poststructural and critical theories. In
S. N. Hesse-Biber (Ed.), Handbook of feminist research: Theory and praxis
(pp. 71–106). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Garfinkel, H. (1967). Studies in ethnomethodology. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.

References
173
Garfinkel, H. (2002). Ethnomethodology’s program: Working out Durkheim’s apho-
rism. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Geertz, C. (1973). Thick description: Toward an interpretive theory of culture. In
C. Geertz (Ed.), The interpretatin of cultures: Selected essays (pp. 3–30). New York:
Basic Books.
Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory: Strategies for qual-
itative research. New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Glenn, E. N. (2002). Unequal freedom. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Goffman, E. (1959a). Asylums: Essays on the social situation of mental patients and
other inmates. New York: Anchor Books.
Goffman, E. (1959b). The presentation of self in everyday life. New York: Anchor
Books/Doubleday.
Goffman, E. (1963). Stigma: Notes on the management of spoiled identity. New York:
Simon & Schuster.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction ritual: Essays on face-to-face behavior. New York:
Pantheon Books.
Goffman, E. (1976). Gender advertisements. New York: Harper Torchbooks.
Goldman, A. (2002). Pathways to knowledge. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Gordon, A. (1997). Ghostly matters: Haunting and the sociological imagination.
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Gramsci, A. (1995). Further selections from the prison notebooks (D. Boothman,
Trans.). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Gubrium, J., & Holstein, J. (1997). The new language of qualitative method. Oxford,
UK: Oxford University Press.
Gubrium, J., & Holstein, J. (2003). The life course. In L. T. Reynolds & N. J. Herman-Kinney
(Eds.), Handbook of symbolic interactionism. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Gusfield, J. R. (2003). A journey with symbolic interaction. Symbolic Interaction,
26(1), 119–139.
Hak, T. (1992). Psychiatric records as transformations of other texts. In G. Watson &
R. Seiler (Eds.), Text in context: Contributions to ethnomethodology (pp. 138–155).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hall, D. E. (2004). Subjectivity. New York: Routledge.
Hall, S. (1996). On postmodernism and articulation: An interview with Stuart Hall. In
D. Morely & K.-H. Chen (Eds.), Stuart Hall: Critical dialogues in cultural stud-
ies (pp. 131–150). New York: Routledge.
Hall, S. (1997a). Introduction. In S. Hall (Ed.), Representation: Cultural representa-
tions and signifying practices (pp. 1–11). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hall, S. (1997b). The spectacle of the “Other.” In S. Hall (Ed.), Representation:
Cultural representations and signifying practices (pp. 223–290). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Hall, S. (1997c). The work of representation. In S. Hall (Ed.), Representation:
Cultural representations and signifying practices (pp. 13–74). Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.

174
CARTOGRAPHIES Of KNOWLEDGE
Hammersley, M. (1981). Using qualitative methods. Social Science Information
Studies, 1, 209–220.
Handel, W. (1982). Ethnomethodology: How people make sense. Englewood Cliffs,
NJ: Prentice Hall.
Haraway, D. (1991). Simians, cyborgs, and women: The reinvention of nature. New York:
Routledge.
Harding, S. (Ed.). (1987). Feminism and methodology. Bloomington: Indiana
University Press.
Harding, S. (1991). Whose science? Whose knowledge? Thinking from women’s lives.
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Harding, S. (2007). Rethinking standpoint epistemology: What is “strong objectivity”?
In L. M. Alcoff & E. Potter (Eds.), Feminist epistemologies (pp. 49–82). New York:
Routledge.
Harding, S. (2008). Sciences from below. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Hartsock, N. (1987). The feminist standpoint: Developing the ground for a specific
feminist historical materialism. In S. Harding (Ed.), Feminism and methodology
(pp. 159–166). Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Hawkesworth, M. (2007). Truth and truths in feminist knowledge production. In
S. N. Hesse-Biber (Ed.), Handbook of feminist research: Theory and praxis
(pp. 469–491). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Helle, H. J. (2005). Symbolic interaction and verstehen (Vol. 4). New York: Peter Lang.
Hendry, P. M. (2007). The future of narrative. Qualitative Inquiry, 13, 487–498.
Heritage, J. (1984). Garfinkel and ethnomethodology. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Herman-Kinney, N. J., & Verschaeve, J. M. (2003). Methods of Symbolic
Interactionism. In L. T. Reynolds & N. J. Herman-Kinney (Eds.), Handbook of
symbolic interactionism (pp. 213–252). Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Hernstein, R., & Murray, C. (1994). The bell curve: Intelligence and class structure in
American life. New York: free Press.
Hesse-Biber, S. N. (2007). feminist research: Exploring the interconnections of epis-
temology, methodology and method. In S. N. Hesse-Biber (Ed.), Handbook of
feminist research: Theory and praxis (pp. 1–28). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hesse-Biber, S. N., & Leavy, P. (2006). Emergent methods in social research.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hoagland, S. L. (2007). Denying relationality: Epistemology and ethics and ignorance.
In S. Sullivan & N. Tuana (Eds.), Race and epistemologies of ignorance
(pp. 95–118). Albany: State University of New York Press.
Holstein, J., & Gubrium, J. (1998). Phenomenology, ethnomethodology, and interpre-
tive practice. In N. K Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Strategies of qualitative
inquiry (pp. 262–272). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Holstein, J., & Gubrium, J. (2000). The self we live by: Narrative identity in a post-
modern world. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Holstein, J., & Gubrium, J. (2005). Interpretive practice and social action. In N. K. Denzin
& Y. Lincoln (Eds.), The Sage handbook of qualitative research (3rd ed.,
pp. 483–505). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage

References
175
Holstein, J., & Miller, G. (1993). Social constructionism and social problems work. In
J. Holstein & G. Miller (Eds.), Reconsidering social constructionism (pp. 151–172).
New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Hruby, G. (2001). Sociology, postmodern, and new realism perspectives in social con-
structionism: Implications for literacy research. Reading Research Quarterly,
36(1), 48–62.
Husband, R., & foster, W. (1987). Understanding qualitative research: A strategic
approach to qualitative methodology. Journal of Humanistic Education and
Development, 26(2), 50–63.
Husserl, E. (1960). Cartesian meditations: An introduction to phenomenology
(D. Cairns, Trans.). The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1964). The idea of phenomenology (W. P. Alston & G. Nakhnikian, Trans.).
The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1970). Logical investigations. New York: Humanities Press.
Ibarra, P. (2008). Strict and contextual constructionism in the sociology of deviance
and social problems. In J. Holstein & J. Gubrium (Eds.), Handbook of construc-
tionist research (pp. 355–369). New York: Guilford Press.
Ibarra, P., & Kitsuse, J. (1993). Vernacular constituents of moral discourse. In
J. Holstein & G. Miller (Eds.), Reconsidering social constructionism (pp. 25–58).
New York: Aldine de Gruyter.
Iser, W. (2006). How to do theory. New York: Blackwell.
Ives, P. (2004). Language and hegemony in Gramsci. London: Pluto Press.
Ives, P. (2008). Gramsci’s politics of language: Engaging the Bakhtin Circle and the
Frankfurt School. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Jackson, P. T. (2010). The conduct of inquiry in international relations. New York:
Routledge.
James, W. (1902). Varieties of religious experience. New York: Longmans, Green &
Company.
James, W. (1948). Essays in pragmatism. New York: Hafner Publishing Company.
James, W. (1971). The moral equivalent of war and other essays and selections from
some problems of philosophy. New York: Harper Torchbooks.
Jenkins, H. (2008). Convergence culture: Where old and new media collide. New York:
New York University Press.
Johnson, P. (1998). Analytic induction. In G. Symon & C. Cassell (Eds.), Qualitative
methods and analysis in organizational research: A practical guide (pp. 29–50).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Johnson, R., Chambers, D., Raghuram, P., & Tincknell, E. (Eds.). (2004). The practice
of cultural studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Katovich, M. A., Miller, D. E., & Hintz, R. A. (2002). Empiricism on the prairie:
four waves of the new Iowa School. Studies in Symbolic Interaction, 25,
5–23.
Katovich, M.A., Miller, D. E., & Stewart, R. L. (2003). The Iowa school. In L. T. Reynolds
& N. J. Herman-Kinney (Eds.), Handbook of symbolic interactionism (pp. 119–139).
Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.

176
CARTOGRAPHIES Of KNOWLEDGE
Kincheloe, J., & McLaren, P. (1998). Rethinking critical theory and qualitative
research. In N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The landscape of qualitative
research (pp. 260–299). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Korth, B. (2002). Critical qualitative research as consciousness raising: The dialogic
texts of researcher/researchee. Qualitative Inquiry, 8, 381–403.
Kuhn, T. (1970). The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
Ladson-Billings, G. (2003a). It’s your world, I’m just trying to explain it:
Understanding our epistemological and methodological challenges. Qualitative
Inquiry, 9(1), 5–12.
Ladson-Billings, G. (2003b). Racialized discourses and ethnic epistemologies. In
N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), The landscape of qualitative research
(pp. 398–432). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Lal, J. (2008). On the domestication of American public sociology: A postcolonial fem-
inist perspective. Critical Sociology, 43(2), 169–191.
Lather, P. (1991). Getting smart: Feminist research and pedagogy with/in the post-
modern. New York: Routledge.
Lather, P. (2001). Getting lost: Feminist efforts toward a double(d) science. Albany:
State University of New York Press.
Latour, B. (1993). We have never been modern. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Latour, B., & Woolgar, S. (1986). Laboratory life: The construction of scientific facts
(2nd ed.). Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
Lincoln, Y., & Guba, E. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Longino, H. E. (2007). Subjects, power and knowledge: Description and prescription
in feminist philosophies of science. In L. M. Alcoff & E. Potter (Eds.), Feminist
epistemologies (pp. 101–120). New York: Routledge.
Longman, J. (2007, May 16). An amputee sprinter: Is he disabled or too-abled? New York
Times. Retrieved from http://www.nytimes.com/2007/05/15/sports/othersports/
15runner.html
Lynch, M., & Bogen, D. (1994). Harvey Sacks’s primitive natural science. Theory
Culture and Society, 11(4), 65–104.
Lynch, M., & McNally, R. (1999). Science, common sense and common law: Courtroom
inquiries and the public understanding of science. Social Epistemology, 13(2), 183–196.
Maines, D. R. (1977). Social organization and social structure in symbolic interaction-
ist thought. Annual Review of Sociology, 3, 325–359.
Mansfield, N. (2000). Subjectivity: Theories of the self from Freud to Haraway. New
York: New York University Press.
Maynard, D., & Clayman, S. (2003). Ethnomethodology and conversation analysis. In
L. T. Reynolds & N. J. Herman-Kinney (Eds.), Handbook of symbolic interac-
tionism (pp. 173–202). Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Mead, G. H. (1962). Mind, self and society: From the standpoint of a social behaviorist.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Memmi, A. (2000). Racism (S. Martinot, Trans.). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
Press.

References
177
Miller, S. I. (1982). Quality and quantity: Another view of analytic induction as a
research technique. Quality & Quantity, 16, 281–295.
Millman, M., & Kanter, R. (Eds.). (1975). Another voice: Feminist perspectives on
social life. New York: Anchor Books.
Mills, C. W. (2007). White ignorance. In S. Sullivan & N. Tuana (Eds.), Race and episte-
mologies of ignorance (pp. 11–38). Albany: State University of New York Press.
Minh-ha, T. T. (1989). Woman, native, other. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
Mitchell, P. (2007). Cartographic strategies of postmodernity: The figure of the map in
contemporary theory and fiction. London: Routledge.
Moerman, M. (1992). Life after CA: An ethnographer’s autobiograpy. In G. Watson &
R. Seiler (Eds.), Text in context: Contributions to ethnomethodology (pp. 20–34).
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Morse, J. M., & Mitcham, C. (2002). Exploring qualitatively derived concepts:
Inductive–deductive methods. International Journal of Qualitative Methods, 1(4),
Article 3. Retrieved from http://www.ualberta.ca/~ijqm
Musolf, G. R. (2003). The Chicago school. In L. T. Reynolds & N. J. Herman-Kinney (Eds.),
Handbook of symbolic interactionism (pp. 91–117). Walnut Creek, CA:AltaMira Press.
Naples, N. (2003). Feminism and method. New York: Routledge.
Nietzsche, f. (1994). On the genealogy of morality (C. Diethe, Trans.). Cambridge,
UK: Cambridge University Press.
Northcutt, N., & McCoy, D. (2004). Interactive qualitative analysis: A systems method
of qualitative inquiry. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Olesen, V. (1994). feminisms and models of qualitative research. In N. K. Denzin &
Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 158–174). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Osha, S. (2005). Kwasi Wiredu and beyond: The text, writing and thought in Africa.
Dakra, Senegal: Council for the Development of Social Science Research inAfrica.
Parsons, T. (1970). Social structure and personality. New York: The free Press.
Pascale, C.-M. (2007). Making sense of race, class, and gender: Commonsense, power,
and privilege in the United States. New York: Routledge.
Philip, R. (2005, April 27). Pistorius masters quick step. Telegraph. Retrieved from
www.telegraph.co.uk/philip
Pidgeon, N., & Henwood, K. (2004). Grounded theory. In M. Hardy & A. Bryman
(Eds.), Handbook of data analysis (pp. 625–648). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Platt, J. (1996). A history of sociological research methods in America, 1920–1960.
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Pollock, G. (2008). feminism and culture: Theoretical perspectives. In T. Bennett &
J. frow (Eds.), The Sage handbook of cultural analysis (pp. 249–270). Thousand
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Prasad, A., & Prasad, P. (2002). The coming of age of interpretive organizational
research. Organizational Research Methods, 5(1), 4–11.
Prasad, P. (1993). Symbolic processes in the implementation of technological change:
A symbolic interactionist study of work computerization. Academy of
Management Journal, 36(6), 1400–1429.

178
CARTOGRAPHIES Of KNOWLEDGE
Prasad, P. (2005). Crafting qualitative research: Working in the postpositivist tradi-
tions. New York: M.E. Sharpe.
Ragin, C. (1994). Constructing social research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Pine forge Press.
Ramazanoğlu, C., & Holland, J. (2002). Feminist methodology: Challenges and
choices. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ratcliff, D. E. (2006). Analytic induction as a qualitative research method of
analysis. Retrieved from http://www.vanguard.edu/uploadedfiles/faculty/
dratcliff/qualresources/analytic.pdf
Reason, P., & Bradbury, H. (2008). Introduction. In P. Reason & H. Bradbury (Eds.),
The Sage handbook of action research: Participative inquiry and practice
(2nd ed., pp. 1–9). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Reinharz, S. (1992). Feminist methods in social research. NewYork: Oxford University Press.
Rettig, K. D., Tam, V. C.-W., & Magistad, B. M. (1996). Using pattern matching and
modified analytic induction in examining justice principles in child support guide-
lines. Marriage & Family Review, 24(1/2), 193–222.
Reynolds, L. T. (2003a). Early representatives. In L. T. Reynolds & N. J. Herman-
Kinney (Eds.), Handbook of symbolic interactionism (pp. 59–81). Walnut Creek,
CA: AltaMira Press.
Reynolds, L. T. (2003b). Intellectual precursors. In L. T. Reynolds & N. J. Herman-
Kinney (Eds.), Handbook of symbolic interactionism (pp. 39–58). Walnut Creek,
CA: AltaMira Press.
Reynolds, L. T., & Herman-Kinney, N. J. (Eds.). (2003). Handbook of symbolic inter-
actionism. Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Richardson, L. (2004). Travels with Ernest: Crossing the literary/sociological divide.
Walnut Creek, CA: AltaMira Press.
Robinson, W. S. (1951). The logical structure of analytic induction. American
Sociological Review, 16(6), 812–818.
Rosaldo, R. (1993). Culture and truth: The remaking of social analysis. Boston:
Beacon Press.
Rose, G. (2007). Visual methodologies: An introduction to the interpretation of visual
materials (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Rousseau, N. (2002). Self, symbols, and society: Classic readings in social psychology.
Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Russell, B. (1938). Power: A new social analysis. New York: Routledge.
Sacks, H. (1992). Lectures on conversation (Vol. 1). Oxford, UK: Basil Blackwell.
Sall, E., & Ouedraogo, J.-B. (2010). Sociology in West Africa: Challenges and obsta-
cles to academic autonomy. In S. Patel (Ed.), The ISA handbook of diverse socio-
logical traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Sandoval, C. (2000). Methodology of the oppressed. Minneapolis: University of
Minnesota.
Saukko, P. (2003). Doing research in cultural studies. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Scheff, T. J. (2005). Looking-glass self: Goffman as symbolic interactionist. Symbolic
Interaction, 28(2), 147–166.

References
179
Scheurich, J. (Ed.). (1997). Research methods in the postmodern. London: falmer
Press.
Schutz, A. (1970). On phenomenology and social relations. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Schwandt, T. A. (1994). Constructivist, interpretivist approaches to human inquiry. In
N. K. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research
(pp. 118–137). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Scott, J. W. (1991). The evidence of experience. Critical Inquiry, 17(4), 773–797.
Searle, J. (2003). Minds, brains, and science. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Sharrock, W., & Anderson, B. (1986). The ethnomethodologists. London: Tavistock
Publications.
Smelser, N. J., & Baltes, P. B. (2001). International encyclopedia of the social and
behavioral sciences. Retrieved from http://www.sscnet.ucla.edu/soc/faculty/
katz/pubs/Analytic_Induction.pdf
Smith, D. (1990a). Texts, facts, and femininity: Exploring the relations of ruling. New
York: Routledge.
Smith, D. (1990b). The conceptual practices of power. Boston: Northeastern
University Press.
Smith, D. (1999). Writing the social: Critique, theory and investigations. Toronto:
University of Toronto Press.
Smith, L. T. (2004). Decolonizing methodologies: Research and indigenous peoples.
London: Zed Books Ltd.
Smith, R. W., & Bugni, V. (2006). Symbolic interaction theory and architecture.
Symbolic Interaction, 29(2), 123–155.
Somers, M. R., & Gibson, G. D. (1996). Reclaiming the epistemological “other”:
Narrative and the social constitution of identity. In C. Calhoun (Ed.), Social theory
and the politics of identity (pp. 35–99). Cambridge, MA: Blackwell Publishers.
St. Pierre, E., & Pillow, W. (2000). Working in the ruins: Feminist poststructural the-
ory and methods in education. New York: Routledge.
Stanfield, J. H., II. (1993). Methodological reflections: An introduction. In J. H.
Stanfield II & R. M. Dennis (Eds.), Race and ethnicity in research methods
(pp. 3–15). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Stanley, L., & Wise, S. (1983). Breaking out: Feminist consciousness and feminist
research. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Steinberg, M. (1999). Fighting words: Working-class formation, collective action, and
discourse in early 19th century England. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Steinberg, S. (2007). Race relations: A critique. PaloAlto, CA: Stanford University Press.
Strauss, A., & Corbin, J. (1998). Basics of qualitative research: Techniques and proce-
dures for developing grounded theory (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Stryker, S. (1980). Symbolic interactionism: A social structural version. Menlo Park,
CA: Benjamin Cummings.
Sullivan, S., & Tuana, N. (Eds.). (2007). Race and epistemologies of ignorance.
Albany: State University of New York Press.

Sztompka, P. (2010). One sociology or many? In S. Patel (Ed.), The ISA handbook of
diverse sociological traditions (pp. 21–39). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
ten Have, P. (2004). Understanding qualitative research and ethnomethodology.
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Thomas, W. I., & Znaniecki, f. (1918). The Polish peasant in Europe and America.
Boston: The Gorham Press.
Travers, M. (2001). Qualitative research through case studies. Thousand Oaks,
CA: Sage.
Twine, f. W., & Warren, J. W. (Eds.). (2000). Racing research, researching race:
Methodological dilemmas in critical race studies. New York: New York
University Press.
Van Dijk, T. A. (1993). Analyzing racism through discourse analysis: Some method-
ological reflections. In J. H. Stanfield II & R. M. Dennis (Eds.), Race and ethnic-
ity in research methods (pp. 92–134). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Watson, G., & Goulet, J.-G. (1998). What can ethnomethodology say about power?
Qualitative Inquiry, 4(1), 96–114.
Watson, G., & Seiler, R. (Eds.). (1992). Text in context: Contributions to eth-
nomethodology. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Weber, M. (1978). Economy and society: An outline of interpretive sociology (G. Roth
& C. Wittich, Eds.). Berkeley: University of California Press.
Weinstein, J., & Stehr, N. (1999). The power of knowledge: Race science, race policy,
and the Holocaust. Social Epistemology, 13(1), 3–36.
West, C., & Zimmerman, D. H. (1987). Doing gender. Gender & Society, 1(2),
125–151.
Williams, G. (1999). French discourse analysis: The method of post-structuralism.
New York: Routledge.
Willis, J. W. (2007). Foundations of qualitative research: Interpretive and critical
approaches. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Winch, P. (1958). The idea of a social science and its relationship to philosophy.
London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Wodak, R., & Meyer, M. (Eds.). (2009). Methods of critical discourse analysis (2nd ed.).
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Young, K. (1941). Critiques of research in the social sciences, vol. I: An appraisal of
Thomas and Znaniecki’s “The Polish Peasant in Europe and America” by Herbert
Blumer, William I. Thomas, florian Znaniecki, Read Bain. American Journal of
Sociology, 46(6), 903–906.
Zinn, M. B. (1979). field research in minority communities: Ethical, methodological
and political observations by an insider. Social Problems, 27(2), 209–218.
Znaniecki, f. (1934). The method of sociology. New York: farrar & Rinehart.
Zuberi, T. (2001). Thicker than blood: How racial statistics lie. Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press.
Zuberi, T., & Bonilla-Silva, E. (Eds.). (2008). White logic, white methods: Racism and
methodology. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
180
CARTOGRAPHIES Of KNOWLEDGE


181
Index
Ability/disability, xii, 32, 33, 49, 55,
57–58, 59, 72, 74, 75, 91-94, 98,
103, 104, 121–123, 129, 136, 145,
146, 153–155
Absence, 144–145
Action research, 46–47
Agency, xi, xii, 6, 30–34, 146, 153–157
Cartesian dualism and, 30–31, 33–34
commonsense attitude and, 33
constraints on, 9–10, 33–34
feminism and, 33–34
free will vs. social control and, 34
ontological/epistemological narratives
and, 33–34
situated nature of, 34
social change and, 32–33
Althusser, L., 31, 61
American Pragmatism school, 78,
102–103
Analytic induction, ix, xi, 10, 36–37, 158
action research and, 46–47
basic premise of, 53–55
Cartesian dualism and, 71, 72
case comparison, limitations on, 44
case example of, 41–42
causal analysis, standard deviation
and, 42
common sense and, 36, 46, 69, 70,
72–73, 75
definition of, 39–40
deviant/negative cases and, 41, 42,
54–55
diversity of contexts/empirical
evidence and, 55
double fitting of ideas/evidence and,
53, 54
emerging patterns, identification of,
44, 45, 54
enumerative induction, statistical
correlations and, 40–41
epistemological realism and, 14, 23,
37, 49, 71
explanatory hypotheses and, 42
history of, 40–47
implications for social research and,
70–75
interpretive framework and, 45–46,
49–50, 58, 71–72
interview analysis and, 64–70, 74
knowledge building and, 42, 43
language of, 71
life histories and, 41–42
localized contexts and, 70, 72, 73, 74
modified analytic induction, 40
newspaper analysis and, 56–59, 72–73
ontological realism and, 11, 37, 46,
47–50, 52, 59, 64, 69, 70, 71, 73,
74, 75

182
CARToGRAPHIeS oF KnowLedGe
patterns in data and, 70–71
point of saturation and, 44, 45,
55, 116
postpositivism and, 47–50,
48–49 (tables)
pre-existing theoretical viewpoint
and, 45
reflexivity and, 71
self-corrective procedure of, 42
social constructionism and, 50–53,
72, 73
strength of, 54–55
subjective process of, 54
television analysis and, 59–64, 73
theory creation focus of, 43
transparent structure of, 70
universal statements/causal laws and,
41, 42
See also Grounded theory
Anderson, e., 85
Anderson, n., 84
Angell, R., 40
Autoethnography, 17, 144, 158fn
Baert, P., 78
Baldwin, J. M., 80
Becker, H., 85, 146
Berger, P., 22, 43, 50, 52, 53
Bigotry, 15, 16, 152
Blumer, H., 41, 42, 78, 80, 82, 84, 87,
88, 89, 103, 146
Bonilla-Silva, e., 21
Bourdieu, P., 161, 163
Brantano, F., 108
Burke, P., 85
Butler, J., 3fn, 32, 34, 153, 154, 157, 161
Cartesian dualism, 27, 31, 33, 34, 50,
51 (table), 71, 72, 80 (table), 93,
102–103, 109, 110 (table), 142,
144, 154–155
Cartesian materialism, 79, 80 (table)
Cartography metaphor, 1–2
commonsense assumptions, charting
of, 27
contemporary research paradigms,
historical commitments and, 2–3
See also Social science research
Case studies, 23, 53, 84
Causal explanations, 22, 39–44, 53fn,
60, 84, 89
Chambers, d., 160
Chicago School, 41, 43, 83, 84–85,
86, 98
Cicourel, A., 115
Clarke, A., 10, 17, 55, 159–160
Classical epistemes, 2
Clough, P. T., 17, 19fn, 24, 48, 89, 98,
147fn, 148, 160, 165
Code, L., 19
Colonialism, 1–2, 8, 15–16, 20, 141,
142, 165
Commonsense assumptions, 4–5, 8–9,
12, 14, 25
agency and, 33
analytic induction and, 45–46
charting of, 27
dominant perspectives and, 26,
144–145
epistemologies of ignorance and,
25–28
formalized inquiry and, 17
positivism and, 13–14
See also Analytic induction;
ethnomethodology; Symbolic
interaction
Comte, A., 13
Conceptual analysis, 153
Consciousness, 3fn, 19fn, 30, 32, 81,
82, 87fn, 103, 155
Cartesian dualism and, 33
false consciousness, 33, 156
phenomenology and, 108–109,
111, 117
See also Self; Subjectivity
Contexts. See Contextual
constructionism; Localized
contexts
Contextual constructionism, 52
Conversation analysis, 9, 115, 163

Cooley, C. H., 78, 80, 87
Couch, C., 85
Coulon, A., 116
Cressey, d., 41
Critical discourse studies (CdS),
162–163
Critical race critiques, xi, xii, 6, 9,
18–21, 23–24, 48, 72, 84, 138, 143
data collection/interpretation and, 21
hegemonic perspectives and, 21, 26
reflexivity and, 21
standpoint research and, 20–21, 29
white racial ideologies and, 8–9, 21,
54fn, 68, 72–74, 94, 103, 123,
133–136, 145, 152
Cuff, e. C., 113
Culture, 9, 41, 59, 88, 110, 144
discourses of science and, 15,
161–162
empirical evidence, localized
contexts and, 25, 135, 137
hegemonic culture, structural
validation and, 26
interpolation process and, 31–32
knowledge, cultural communities
and, 16
knowledge production, ethnography
and, 17
mediation of, 148–149, 159
participatory cultures, 149
subjects, embodiment/reification of
social structures and, 31–32
daly, K., 39
darwin, C., 78
data analysis, xi, xii, 2
commonsense assumptions and,
4–5, 21
historic philosophy of science and,
3, 4, 17–18, 24–25, 41
politics of, 2, 11, 12, 14, 27, 28, 30,
47, 142, 144, 146, 150–151,
155, 158, 165–167
social life, assumptions/theories
about, 21
See also data collection, Analytic
induction; ethnomethodology;
Symbolic interaction
data collection, xi–xii
commonsense assumptions and,
4–5, 21
explanatory hypotheses and, 42
historic philosophy of science and,
3, 4, 17–18, 24–25, 41
interdependent relationality in, 146
politics of, 2, 11, 12, 14, 27, 28, 30,
47, 142, 144, 146, 150–151,
155, 158, 165–167
davies, B., 159
de Certeau, M., 140, 153
denzin, n. K., x, 8, 9, 17, 20, 24, 84,
85, 87, 89, 140, 159
descartes, R., 3fn, 30–30, 36fn, 72,
78–79, 108–109, 142
dewey, J., 78, 80, 81
dillard, C. B., 20
disability. See Ability
discourses, 1, 5, 15, 38, 52
on science, 9–10, 14, 15, 16–24, 71,
73–74
dixson, A. d., 20
dramaturgy, 22, 86
dualism. See Cartesian dualism
durkheim, e., 107, 112, 114
empathy, 152–153
enlightenment epistemes, 2, 8, 30, 151
enumerative induction, 40–41, 42fn
epistemology, x, xi, xii, 2, 4–6, 16, 24,
28–30, 29 (table), 98,
108fn, 135, 142
agency and, 33–34
Cartesian dualism and, 31, 64, 144
Constructionism and, 52
contemporary social science,
emancipatory promise of, 6
epistemological assumptions,
common sense and, 4
feminist epistemological critiques,
19, 23, 29
Index
183

hegemonic relations of power and,
15–16
ignorance, epistemology of, 25–26,
142, 164
knowledge production and, 5, 29
positivism and, 14
postpositivism and, 23fn, 48,
48–49 (tables)
research process, commonsense
assumptions about, 4–5
scientific production of knowledge,
justificatory account of, 4
social epistemologies, 159–160, 162
social science research, development
of, 26
standpoint epistemology, 29
subjectivity and, 30–33, 155
universal knowledge concept and,
28–29
See also ontology; Research
methodology
essentialism, 20fn, 27
ethics. See Research ethics
ethnographic fieldwork, 84, 85, 92fn,
98, 99, 115
ethnographies, 17, 84, 85, 88, 98–99
ethnomethodology, ix, x, xi, 9, 10, 11,
12, 22, 35–36, 86, 87, 88, 92fn,
105–106. 143fn, 158
accounts, analysis of, 117–118
assumptions in daily life and, 109, 110
basic premise of, 116–118
bracketing practice and, 111–112
Cartesian dualism and,
109, 110 (table), 136
commonsense knowledge and, 106,
11, 112, 113, 115–117, 121, 122,
124, 145, 154, 155
conversation analysis and, 115
descriptive framework of, 111
evidence and, 136
history of, 108–116
implications for social research and,
134–137
indexical meaning and, 116
interpretive framework, 110. 113,
142, 143, 147, 150
intersubjectivity and, 110
interview analysis and, 129–134
localized contexts and, 135, 136
meaning construction, mechanisms
of, 111–112, 114, 136–137
membership category
devices/membership
categorization and, 118,
135–136
natural attitude and, 109, 110
neo-Cartesianism and, 108–109
newspaper analysis and, 119–124
phenomenology and, 108–112,
110 (table), 118, 135
premise of, 105–107, 116–118
presuppositions, knowledge free of,
108, 109
production of meaning in interaction
and, 107
reflexivity and, 116–117, 135
research strategies associated with,
115–116
shared knowledge, interpretive
processes and, 110–111
social interaction, practical
accomplishment of, 114
social facts and, 114
social order, normative conceptions
and, 112–113
social research, challenges to,
113–114
symbolic interaction and, 107
television analysis and, 124–129
unnoticed aspects of interaction and,
106, 117–118, 136
unstated assumptions and, 117
eugenics, 26
evidence, x, xii, 29
commonsense assumption and,
4, 8–9, 46, 49, 71–75
empirical evidence, localized
contexts and, 25, 31, 35, 42fn,
63, 70, 71–74, 141
184
CARToGRAPHIeS oF KnowLedGe

formalization process and, 16–18, 21,
23, 24, 37, 46, 47, 50, 58, 70,
84, 93, 102–103, 114, 123,
136–137, 140-141, 150, 157,
158-159, 163
interpretation process and, 18, 49, 94,
98, 123, 128, 158–159
methodological limitations and,
10, 93, 129, 133, 136, 146,
150, 166
politics of, 9, 54, 58-59, 64, 71–75,
93–94, 98, 103, 123, 140–141,
145, 159-160, 161, 165
routine relations of power/privilege
and, 8–9, 52, 72, 74, 98, 103,
104, 107, 124, 129, 135, 136,
145,163
theory/evidence convergence and,
26–27
experience, xi, 6, 9, 19, 30, 153
Cartesian framework and, 30–31,
34-35, 59, 69, 80 (table)
Constructionism and, 51–52
essential features of experience, ideal
types and, 108
ethnomethodology and, 34–35, 108,
110, 114, 124, 135
localized contexts and, 34–35
politics of, 15, 19fn, 28, 69, 71–72,
98, 102, 133, 144–145,
152–153, 162
positivism and, 13, 29, 129
postpositivism and, 51 (table)
social change and, 32–33
social science research and, 9, 41,
42fn, 80
standpoint theory and, 20
symbolic interaction and, 80, 84, 94
women’s lived experience,
subjugated knowledge and,
19, 26
Facticity, 26
Fanon, F., 20
Feldman, M., 112
Feminist critique, xi, xii, 6-8,
18–20 151
epistemological critiques and, 19–20,
23, 29, 33, 48, 84, 151
god trick and, 19
objective knowledge and, 19–20
reflexivity and, 21, 143
second-wave feminism, 33, 48
standpoint theory and, 19, 20, 29, 72
subjectivity, humanist conception
of, 34
Film, 73, 74, 88–89, 147, 148, 149
Flyvbjerg, B., 4, 10, 14, 24, 36fn, 152
Formalization, 16–18, 21, 23, 24, 37,
46, 47, 50, 58, 70, 84, 93,
102–103, 114, 123, 136–137,
140–141, 150, 157, 158–159, 163
action research and, 46–47
reified processes of, 24, 37
Foster, w., 44
Foucault, M., 26, 32, 161, 166
Frame analysis, 86
Francis, d. w., 113
Free will, 34, 103, 156
Freud, S., 26
Funding agencies, 24, 45, 140, 143
Fuss, d., 52, 108fn
Gannon, S., 159
Gans, H., 85
Garfinkel, H., 87, 105, 107, 108,
111–116, 117, 119, 124, 135
Gender, xii, 7, 28, 32, 51, 73, 74–75,
92, 118
poststructural, 32–33, 64, 94,
154, 156
(re)presentation and methods and, 26,
98, 103, 104, 124, 153
second-wave feminism and, 33, 49
social construction of, 33, 51, 52, 53,
64, 73
See also Feminist critique
Giardina, M. d., 140
Gibson, G. d., 143, 154, 165
Glaser, B., 39, 43, 45
Index
185

Globalization, 139, 140
Goffman, e., 86, 87, 112, 118, 124, 146
Goldman, A., 53
Gramsci, A., 4, 14, 25fn, 27, 156,
161, 162
Grand theory, 47, 140
Greer, B., 85
Grounded theory, ix, 40, 43, 88, 93, 94,
108, 158, 160
coding stages in, 43
comparative case analysis approach
of, 43, 44–45
emerging patterns, identification
of, 44
exceptions, search for, 43, 44
hypothesis testing/causal proofs
and, 43
influence of, 44
language of, 45
point of saturation and, 44, 45
theory development and, 43, 45
variation of, 44
See also Analytic induction
Hall, d. e., 30
Hall, S., 155
Hammersley, M., 44
Handel, w., 4
Haraway, d., 19
Harding, S., 19, 20, 151, 163
Hawkesworth, M., 13
Hegemonic scientific discourse, 5,
9–10, 14, 15–24, 71, 73–74, 140
empirical research, assumptions
of, 25
hegemonic culture, structural
validation and, 26
localized contexts and, 25, 144–145
social research paradigms and, 35
truth by consensus and, 46
universal knowledge concept and,
28–29
Helle, H. J., 78fn, 79, 80, 85, 86
Heritage, J., 117
Herman-Kinney, n. J., 85
Hernstein, R., 21
Hesse-Biber, S. n., 19
Holland, J., 19
Hughes, e., 84
Husband, R., 44
Husserl, e., 108, 109, 110
Hypotheses, 42, 43
Ibarra, P., 50
Ideologies, 1, 4
empirical research, assumptions of,
25, 38, 164
interpolation and, 31
knowledge and, 52, 150, 153, 157
white racial ideologies, 21
Ignorance, 25–26, 71, 142, 164
Illinois School, 85–86
Imperialism, 15
Indexical meaning, 107, 116–117, 147
Indiana School, 85, 86
Indigenous populations, 15
Induction. See Analytic induction
Inequality issues, 5, 75
principles of science, study of
inequality and, 35, 75,
144–145, 163
racial inequalities, 20–21
research ethics and, 7–8
See also Marginalized populations;
Social justice
Institutional order, 80–81
Institutional review boards (IRBs),
6, 7–8, 151
Intentional theory of mind, 108
Interaction. See ethnomethodology;
Symbolic interaction
International Sociological Association
(ISA), 163
Interpolation process, 31–32
Interpretation, 11, 12, 14–15, 18, 21, 45,
139, 165–166
analytic induction and, 45–53, 58, 70
Cartesian ontology and, 50
decontextualized data and, 34
experience and, 34–35
186
CARToGRAPHIeS oF KnowLedGe

interpretivism and, 22–23
meanings of situations, understanding
of, 23, 81, 83, 86
positivism and, 22–23
postpositivism and, 22–23, 47,
49–50, 49 (table)
sensitizing concepts and, 22
social behavior, analytic frameworks
for, 22
social construction philosophy and, 22
social research
interpretation, task of 16, 18, 21,
71–72, 157–158
interpretive challenges of, 21–24,
49, 49 (table)
See also Analytic induction;
ethnomethodology; Symbolic
interaction
Interpretive frameworks, ix, x, 11,
21–23, 29, 35–36, 45–56, 49–50,
58, 158, 161, 162
See also Analytic induction;
ethnomethodology; Symbolic
interaction
Intersubjectivity, 22, 49 (table), 51, 80
(table), 83, 91, 93, 105, 110, 143,
150, 152, 166, 167
Interview analysis, 64
analysis sections, 68–70, 102, 133–134
analytic induction and, 65–70
ethnomethodology and, 129–134
interview exemplars, 65–67, 99–101,
129–132
symbolic interaction and, 98–102
Interviews, 23, 37, 48–49 (tables), 64,
85, 98–99, 146, 152
See also Interview analysis;
Semistructured interviews;
Unstructured interviews
Iowa School, 85, 86
Ives, P., 150, 161, 162
James, w., 78, 79, 80
Jefferson, G., 115
Jenkins, H., 147, 148, 149
Johnson, P., 42
Johnson, R., 160
Knowledge, x-xi, xiv, 2, 6
Cartesian dualism and, 30–31, 142, 144
common sense and, 4–5, 8, 145, 156
cultural community and, 16, 162, 164
empirical evidence, localized
contexts and, 17, 25, 30, 37, 159
objective knowledge, 13–15, 19–20
socially situated nature of, 19, 26
spectator knowledge, 79
standpoint theory and, 19, 20, 29, 72
subjugated knowledge, 19, 37
universal knowledge, 28–29, 41
See also Knowledge production
Knowledge production, ix, 1–2, 4–5, 8,
9, 15–16, 143, 157
active process of, 79
critical race and, 20–21, 145
cultural communities and, 16, 144, 145
democratic knowledge production, 10
epistemology and, 4, 5, 16, 29,
159, 164
feminists and, 18-20, 29
formalization of, 16–17, 18, 158
gold standard for, 37, 165
justificatory account of, 4
ontology and, 4, 5, 28–29, 164
politics of, 1–2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 15–16, 24,
25–26, 29, 35, 37, 46, 144, 147,
153, 15, 157, 161, 164
positivism and, 13–15, 19-20, 23fn
power, influence of, 4, 10, 15, 141
social constructionism and, 52, 142
social justice and, 1–2, 6, 7, 15–16,
21, 25
socially situated production, 19–20,
26, 159, 160
standpoint theory and, 20
See also epistemology; Knowledge;
ontology; Qualitative social
research; Social science
research
Kuhn, M., 85
Index
187

Language:
conquest and discovery, 1–2, 71
critical discourse studies, 162–163
cultural force of, 136–137, 144, 156,
162, 165
epistemology and, 165
ethnomethodology and, 124, 136–137
experience and, 34, 156
frame analysis and, 86
local/cultural contextual connections
and, 161–163, 165
objective social world and, 7, 48,
107, 165
subjectivity and, 34
studies of talk and, 9–10
symbolic interaction and, 82, 84,
107, 146
theories of, 9–10, 51 (table),
80 (table), 106fn, 107, 110 (table),
136–137, 161–162, 163, 165
See also discourses
Lather, P., 17, 160
Latour, B., 10, 18, 24, 44, 103, 142,
143, 147fn
Liebow, e., 85
Life histories, 8, 41–42, 83, 84, 146
Lindesmith, A., 41
Lines of action, 82–83
Lived experience. See experience
Localized contexts, 9, 10, 17, 21, 25,
31, 34–35, 75, 141, 142, 144,
145-146, 147, 149–150, 153, 155,
158–159, 161–162, 165, 166
analytic induction and, 63, 64, 70, 71,
72, 73, 74, 75
ethnomethodology and, 110 (table),
114, 115, 116, 118, 124, 128,
129, 135, 136, 137
social constructionism and, 52
symbolic interaction and, 88, 93,
103, 104
Longino, H. e., 30
Longman, J., 56, 57, 90, 91, 119, 120
Looking-glass self, 80, 87
Luckmann, T., 50, 52, 53
Magistad, B. M., 45
Mapping. See Cartography metaphor
Marginalized populations, 8, 165
interior lives, marginalized
subjectivities and, 32, 155
ontology of analytic realism and, 74,
75, 144
standoint theory and, 20
McCoy, d., 15
Mead, G. H., 78, 80, 81, 82, 87, 88, 103
Meaning, 29, 50
construction/interpretation of,
86, 88
indexicality and, 116, 147
pragmatic truth/meaning, 81
shared meaning and, 78, 103,
105, 109
See also ethnomethodology;
Symbolic interaction
Media analysis, 8, 9, 23, 24, 35, 48, 49
(table), 60, 63, 73–74, 88–89, 98,
124, 141, 142, 146–151, 153, 156,
162, 164, 165, 166
See also newspaper analysis;
Television analysis
Media effects, 89
Media forms, 74, 88
advertising/entertainment, blurred
boundaries of, 149
audiences, participatory cultures
and, 149
contemporary social research and,
146–151
convergence of, 147
film, 88–89, 147, 153
intertextual media and, 148
mediated daily/social life and, 148
new media technology and, 148,
149, 165
proliferation of, 147
representation issues and, 147
symbolic value of products and, 150
teletechnology and, 148
See also Media analysis; newspaper
analysis; Television analysis
188
CARToGRAPHIeS oF KnowLedGe

Membership categorizations, 118
Membership category devices
(Cds), 118
Memmi, A., 20
Methods, xi, xiii, 3, 2, 6, 7, 8, 13,16,
17, 48, 105, 106fn, 113, 115fn
analytic induction and, 40, 43,
44, 46
dichotomous binaries and, 10
evidence and, 26, 146, 150
interpretive and, 49 (table), 134, 145
politics of, 18, 21, 23, 24-25, 35, 38,
141, 144, 145, 150, 151, 153,
161, 162, 164
postpositivism and, 48 (table),
49 (table), 145
theory and, 9–10, 161, 162, 163
See also Research methodology
Minh-ha, T. T., 154
Mitchell, P., 2
Modernist episteme, 2, 15
Murray, C., 21
Musolf, G. R., 84
natural attitude, 109, 110
natural science paradigm, 13, 14–15,
21–22, 41, 165
naturalism, 47, 145
neo-Cartesianism, 108–109
neopositivism, 14
newspaper analysis:
analysis sections, 58–59, 92–94,
122–124
analytic induction and, 56–58, 72–73
contemporary social research
and, 147
core issues and, 57–58, 91–92,
121–122
ethical issues and, 58
ethnomethodology and, 119–124
newspaper exemplars, 56–57, 90–91,
119–120
symbolic interaction and, 89–94
nietzsche, F., 166
northcutt, n., 15
objective knowledge, 15, 19–20
truth-as-essence and, 30
See also Knowledge; Knowledge
production; Subjectivity
objective social research, 5
social constructionist ontology
and, 22
See also objective knowledge
ontology, xi, 3–4, 28–35, 29 (table), 43
agency and, 33–34
Cartesian dualism and, 13–14, 27, 31,
30–35, 50, 141–142, 155
epistemological commitments and,
23, 24, 28–30, 159–160, 164
essentialism and, 27
ideologies and, 4
issues in, 5
ontological assumptions, untheorized
truths and, 3–4, 46, 155–156, 164
postpositivism and, 48,
48–49 (tables)
poststructuralism and, 30-35
reality, existence of, 14, 28, 46–47
research process, commonsense
assumptions about, 4–5
social constuctionist ontology, 22–23,
50–52, 53fn
social justice and, 6, 27, 28-30,
155–156, 164
social ontology, 159–160, 164–165
social research, ontological questions
and, 3, 16, 18, 23, 24, 27–28, 37,
141–142, 155–156, 164–165, 167
subjectivity and, 30–33
theories of being and, 28–29
See also epistemology; Research
methodology
oppression, 8, 38, 74, 136, 146, 157,
159, 163–164
analysis of, postpositivist paradigms
and, 48
androcentric bias, women’s
oppression and, 6–8, 18–20, 151
hegemonic relations of power in
research and, 15–16
Index
189

racism and, 20–21, 26, 104, 133–134,
152, 153, 163
standpoint theory and, 20–21
white racial ideologies and, 8, 9, 21,
54fn, 68, 72, 73, 74, 94, 103,
123, 133–134, 136, 145, 152
See also Power; Privilege
other, 15, 26, 31
Park, R., 84
Parsons, T., 112
Participant observation, 88
Pascale, C.-M., 54fn, 115, 117, 148,
159, 180
Performance scholarship, 17, 158fn
Phenomenology, 108fn, 109, 110,
110 (table), 111, 112, 114, 123, 135
Physical science. See natural science
paradigm
Peirce, C. S., 43fn, 78fn, 146
Pillow, w., 159, 160
Plato, 30
Platt, J., 40, 84
Pollock, G., 32
Popper, K., 30
Positivism, 13–15, 22–23, 34
core beliefs of, 47
grand theory and, 47
naive realism and, 47
See also Postpositivism
Postmodern episteme, 2, 19, 29, 31,
52, 85
Postpositivism, ix, 22–23, 47
analytic induction and, 47–50,
48–49 (tables)
epistemology and, 48,
48–49 (tables)
interpretive frameworks and, 49–50,
49 (table)
methods/methodology and, 48,
48–49 (tables)
ontology and, 48, 48–49 (tables)
realism/critical realism and, 47–49,
48–49 (tables)
second-wave feminism and, 48
universal law concept, rejection of, 47
See also Positivism; Social
constructionism
Poststructural critique, xi, xii, 2, 29, 31,
33, 34, 51, 52, 53fn, 85, 89, 103, 150
Poststructural discourse analysis, 10,
143, 159–160, 162, 163, 164
Power, x, xii, xiv, 1–2, 3, 6, 157
cartography, textualization of power
and, 1–2
empirical evidence, localized
contexts and, 25, 136, 137, 146
eurocentric ideological expressions
of, 1, 16
hegemonic view of, 15–16, 38, 156
knowledge production and, 4, 7, 8,
10, 12, 15, 26, 35, 72, 136, 137
routine relations of power, unmarked
categories and, 8–9, 103, 104,
107, 124, 129, 145, 163
social justice, social research and, 5,
12, 15–16, 25, 26, 35, 72, 73,
75, 141, 142, 145, 146, 153,
158–159, 163–164, 166
subjects, embodiment of social
structures and, 31–32, 142, 154
Practice. See Research methodology;
Social science research;
Theory-practice gap
Pragmatism, 43fn, 78–79, 80–82,
80 (table), 85, 93, 94, 98, 102–103,
146, 162
Prasad, P., 15, 48
Privilege, xii, xiv, 3, 6, 15, 29, 38, 72,,
157, 159, 163–164
empirical evidence, localized
contexts and, 25, 75,
141–142, 146
ontology of analytic realism and,
74, 145
routine relations of, 8–9, 52, 72,
74, 98, 103, 104, 107, 124, 129,
135, 136, 145,163
See also whiteness
Pure reason, 109
190
CARToGRAPHIeS oF KnowLedGe

Qualitative social research, ix, x
contemporary research paradigms,
historical commitments and, 2–3
critical race critiques of, 6, 9, 18,
20–21
culturally relevant/socially
progressive research and, 24
feminist critiques of, 6,18–20
interpretive critiques of, 18, 21–24
mainstream location of, 140
See also Contemporary social
research; Research ethics;
Research methodology; Social
science research
Quantitative research methods, 21
Quedraogo, J. -B., 165
Race:
epistemologies of ignorance and, 26
See also Critical race critiques;
Racism
Racism:
data collection/interpretation and, 21,
104, 132, 133, 153, 163
eugenics and, 26
facticity and, 26
standpoint theory and, 20–21
white racial ideologies and, 21,
133–134, 152
See also Critical race critiques; Race;
whiteness
Radical constructionism, 50
Raghuram, P., 160
Ragin, C., 54, 55
Ramazanoğlu, C., 19
Reality, 11, 14
epistemic foundation of social
research and, 30
facticity and, 26
ontological questions and, 28
postpositivist realism/critical realism
and, 23fn, 48–49, 48–49 (tables)
social life, understanding of, 22, 46
social processes, limited insight
into, 37
standpoint theory and, 20
See also Interpretation; Social
constructionism
Reflexivity:
analytic induction and, 71
ethnomethodology and, 107, 112,
116–117, 118, 135,
feminist/critical race and, 21,
36fn, 143
Illinois School of symbolic
interaction and, 86
instrumental/utilitarian use of, 21
interactions, reflexive nature of,
116–117
social construction philosophy and, 22
social sciences and, 152, 153, 167
standpoint theory and, 20
Research ethics, 4, 6–8, 151–153, 166
feminist developments in, 8, 151
knowledge production and, 4, 6–7,
28fn, 151–153
practical accountability and, 7–8
social progress/betterment,
enlightenment ideals of, 8
social researcher, subject position
of, 8
Research methodology, 2, 6
agency and, 33–34, 153–157
causal explanations and, 22
commonsense assumptions, charting
of, 27
critiques of, 24–25
culturally shared assumptions and, 15
emerging research strategies, 23–24
experience and, 34–35, 153–157
feminist/critical race challenges and,
18–21, 143, 151
formalization task and, 16–17, 18,
21, 23
hegemonic conceptions,
reinforcement of, 20–21, 25
implications for, 35–37
interpretation task and, 18, 21
interpretive challenges to social
research, 21–24, 143, 151
Index
191

interpretivism and, 22, 49, 49 (table)
limitations on, 10
localized contexts and, 17, 21, 25
natural science paradigm and, 13–14,
15, 21–22
paradigm shift in, 16–18, 23
positivism and, 13–15, 22–23
postpositivism and, 22–23, 48,
48–49 (tables)
poststructural critique and, xi, xii, 2,
29, 31, 33, 34, 51, 52, 53fn, 85,
89, 103, 150
privileged ways knowing and, 15–16
purpose of inquiry and, 14
quantitative methods and, 21
scientific inquiry, one logic for, 14
sensitizing concepts and, 22
social construction philosophy and, 22
social theories and, 35–36, 157–163
subjectivity and, 30–33, 146, 151,
153–157
theory-practice gap and, 24–28
theory/evidence convergence and,
26–27
white research methods, 21
See also epistemology; evidence;
ontology; Qualitative social
research; Social science research
Rettig, K. d., 45
Robinson, w. S., 42
Rose, G., 148
Routine relations of power, 8–9, 52, 72,
74, 98, 103, 104, 107, 124, 129,
135, 136, 145, 163
Russell, B., 141
Sacks, H., 115, 118
Sall, e., 165
Saukko, P., 160
Schegloff, e., 115
Schutz, A., 108, 109, 110
Schwandt, T. A., 51, 52
Second-wave feminism, 33, 48
Self, 3fn, 30–31, 79, 154
imaginative fact of, 80
institutional order, objective
performed roles and, 80–81
lines of action and, 82–83
looking-glass self, 80, 87
multiple selves, 80, 103, 154
transcendent self, 103
Semistructured interviews, xi
Sensitizing concepts, 22
Shame, 86
Shared meanings, 78, 103, 105, 109
Sharrock, w. w., 113
Significant symbols, 81–82
Smith, d., 17, 160
Smith, L. T., 15
Social change:
subjectivity theories and, 19, 32–33
See also Social justice
Social constructionism, ix, 33
analytic induction and, 50–53
intersubjectivity and, 22, 51
knowledge production and, 52
radical constructionism and, 50, 52
social constructivism and, 52
social differences,
production/organization of, 52
social worlds, social product view
of, 50
social/contextual constructionism
and, 51–52
strict constructionism and, 52–53
systemization/formalization processes
and, 50
universal knowledge and, 50
variations of, 50–51, 51 (table)
See also Postpositivism
Social constructivism, 52–53
Social control, 34
Social epistemologies, 157–161
Social facts, 114
Social justice, 1–2, 6, 7, 15–16, 21, 25
contemporary social science,
emancipatory promise of, 6, 164
conventional oppositional binary
thinking and, 5–6
inclusive research projects and, 5
192
CARToGRAPHIeS oF KnowLedGe

inequality, issues of, 5, 75
knowledge production and, 21
politics of knowledge production
and, 5
research ethics, accountability and,
7–8
social progress/betterment,
enlightenment ideals of, 8
Social order, 112–113
Social science research:
analytical paradigms/explorations
and, 10
boundary impermanence and, 2
Cartesian dualism and, 31
cartography metaphor and, 1–2
commonsense assumptions and, 4–5,
8–9
conventional oppositional binary
thinking and, 5–6
doubt/critique and, 4
epistemology, training in, 4
experience, accounting for, 9
formalization task of, 16–17, 18
hegemonic relations of power and,
15–16
heterodox approach to, 10
interpretation task of, 18
interpretive capacity of, 14–15
knowledge production and, 1, 2
method and, 2, 9–10
modernist discourse of progress and, 15
natural science paradigm and, 13–14,
15, 21–22
objectification of subjects in, 8
ontological questions/assumptions
and, 3–4
paradigm shift in, 16–18
politics of knowledge production and,
1–2, 4, 5, 6, 9, 15–16, 24,
25–26, 29, 35, 37, 46, 144, 147,
153, 15, 157, 161, 164
positivism and, 13–15
poststructural critique and, xi, xii, 2,
29, 31, 33, 34, 51, 52, 53fn, 85,
89, 103, 150
researcher, subject position of, 8
routine relations of power, unmarked
categories and, 8–9, 52, 72, 74,
98, 103, 104, 107, 124, 129,
135, 136, 145,163
social laws, pursuit of, 3
subjective understanding and, 2
theory/method binaries in, 9–10
See also Contemporary social
research; evidence; Qualitative
social research; Research ethics;
Research methodology; Social
justice
Socialization, 112
Somers, M. R., 143, 154, 165
St. Pierre, e., 160
Standpoint theories, 19, 20–21, 29
Stanfield, J. H., II, 21
Steinberg, M., 25, 163
Steinberg, S., 159
Stets, J., 85
Stigmatized performances, 86
Strauss, A., 43, 45
Strict constructionism, 51
Subjectivity, xi, 6, 19, 29, 30–33,
153–155
abled/disabled positions and, 32
agency and, 30–31
Cartesian dualism and, 30–31
interior lives, marginalized
subjectivities and, 32
interpolation process and, 31–32
intersubjectivity, 22
ontology-epistemology intersection
and, 30
poststructural approach and, 34
rational subject vs. world of objects
and, 30–31
repetitive iteration, normalizing force
of interpellation and, 32
research, subjective nature of, 22
social change and, 32–33
subject as person/self and, 30
subject positions, categories of
identification and, 31
Index
193

subjects, embodiment/reification of
social structures and, 31–32
See also Agency
Subjugated knowledge, 19
Sutherland, e., 41
Symbolic interaction, ix, x, xi, 10, 22,
35–36, 77–78
analytic induction and, 41–42, 88
basic premise of, 87–89
behavior patterns, social learning
and, 79
Cartesian materialism and,
79, 80 (table)
Chicago School and, 84–85
contemporary ethnographic research
and, 84, 85
deep understanding and, 78
dramaturgy and, 86
ethnomethodology and, 87, 107
everyday truths and, 79
feminist/critical race theories and, 84
gestures and, 81
grounded theory and, 88
history of, 78–87
Illinois School and, 85–86
implications for social research and,
102–103
Indiana School and, 85
institutional order, objective
performed roles and, 80–81
interpretive re-creation process
and, 77
interview analysis and, 98–102
Iowa School and, 85
knowledge acquisition, active process
of, 78
life histories and, 83, 84, 88
lines of action and, 82–83
looking-glass self and, 80, 87
meaning construction, human
interactions and, 88
meaning modification, interpretive
processes and, 88
media analysis and, 88–89
modes of research in, 88
newspaper analysis and, 89–94
object meanings, personal action and,
87–88
pragmatism and, 78–79, 80 (table),
81–82
self, social context and, 79
shared meanings/realities and, 78
significant symbols and, 81–82, 83
television analysis and, 95–98
validation for interpretations, control
groups and, 83
verstehen and, 77
Tam, V. C.-w., 45
Technology. See Media analysis; Media
forms
Television analysis:
analysis sections, 63–64, 98,
128–129
analytic induction and, 59–64, 73
contemporary social research and,
147
core issues and, 62–63, 97, 127–128
ethnomethodology and, 124–129
symbolic interaction and, 95–98
teletechnology and, 148
television exemplars, 60–63, 95–97,
125–126
See also Analytic induction
ten Have, P., 54, 114, 116
Theories of being, 28, 29
Theory:
analytical induction, theory creation
and, 43
dichotomous binaries and, 10, 166
grand and, 47
interpretive frameworks and, 36
methods and, 9–10
theory vs. methodology and, 35–36
theory/evidence convergence and,
26–27, 153, 158, 160
See also Grounded Theory;
Poststructural critique
194
CARToGRAPHIeS oF KnowLedGe

Theory-practice gap, 24–28
agency and, 33–34
empirical research, accepted
ideological assumptions and,
25, 26
experience and, 34–35
facticity and, 26
ignorance, epistemology of, 25–26
inquiry process, specific purpose of,
27–28
localized contexts and, 25
ontology/epistemology and, 28–30,
29 (table)
subjectivity and, 30–33
theory/evidence convergence and,
26–27
See also Research methodology
Thick description, 17
Thomas, d., 40
Thomas, w. I., 41, 84, 146
Tincknell, e., 160
Transparency, 5, 17, 70
Travers, M., 84, 85
Twine, F. w., 20
Understanding:
contextual understanding, 22
deep understanding, symbolic
interactionism and, 78
meanings of situations and, 23
social science inquiry and, 14–15
subjective nature of, 2
Universal knowledge, 28–29, 41, 42, 50
Universal laws, 47
Unmarked categories, 8–9
Unstructured interviews, 88
Values:
knowledge production and, 4, 15–16
research, relations of power and,
15–16
social order and, 112
Verschaeve, J. M., 85
Verstehen, 77
Voice:
silencing of, 26
See also Inequality issues;
Marginalized populations; Social
justice
warren, J. w., 20
ways of knowing, 15
weber, M., 77, 107, 162
west, C., 113
whiteness, 8, 9, 21, 54fn, 68, 72, 73,
74, 94, 103, 123, 133–134, 136,
145, 152
williams, G., 161
winch, P., 22, 153
wirth, L., 84
wittgenstein, L., 115
woolgar, S., 44, 103, 143
Zimmerman, d. H., 113
Znaniecki, F., 40, 41, 42, 84, 146
Zuberi, T., 9, 20, 21, 24, 26, 143
Index
195


SAGE Research 
Methods Online
The essential tool for researchers
Sign up now at 
www.sagepub.com/srmo 
for more information.
Launching
2011!
An expert 
research tool
• An expertly designed taxonomy 
with more than 1,400 unique terms for social 
and behavioral science research methods 
• Visual and hierarchical 
search tools to help you 
discover material 
and link to related 
methods
A wealth of 
essential content
• The most comprehensive picture of 
quantitative, qualitative, and mixed methods 
available today
• More than 100,000 pages of SAGE book and 
reference material on research methods as well as 
editorially selected material from SAGE journals
• More than 600 books 
available in their 
entirety online
• Easy-to-use navigation tools
• Content organized by complexity
• Tools for citing, printing, and downloading 
 
content with ease
• Regularly updated content and features


