Chapter 4 
 
Constitution, Lump Theory, Mereological Essentialism 
and The Modal Objection 
 
 
1. Introduction: The Modal Objection and Constitution 
In Chapter 2, I explained how a CI theorist could defend herself against 
Van Inwagen‟s Counting Objection. In Chapter 3, I explained how a CI theorist 
could defend herself against four other kinds of objections: (i) those that appeal 
to the Indiscernibility of Identicals, (ii) those that appeal to the Principle of 
Ontological Parsimony, (iii) those that appeal to the Substitutivity of Co-referential 
Terms, and (iv) those that appeal to technicalities involving Plural Logic—in 
particular, the details of predicates such as is one of. Admittedly absent from 
these objections was what I have previously called the Modal Objection. 
The Modal Objection runs as follows: Imagine that your hand is composed 
of millions of molecules. If CI is true, then your hand is simply identical to the 
millions of molecules. Yet there seems to be a clear difference-making feature 
between your hand and the molecules—namely, certain modal properties. Your 
hand could survive losing a few molecules here and there, but the molecules 
could not. Moreover, your hand could not survive being thrown in a blender, but 
the molecules composing your hand presumably could (assuming that we are 
dealing with a very precise and discerning blender).1 Yet if your hand has a 
                                                 
1 I am modifying Wiggins‟ Tree and Cellulose example here, and his arguments against the claim 
that the tree just is the cellulose molecules. The modification? Wiggins considers only the 
aggregate of the cellulose molecules, a singular item, not the molecules, plural. See Wiggins 
(1968). 
 

 
146
property that the molecules do not—viz., could survive a loss of molecules—and 
if the molecules have a property that your hand does not—viz., could survive 
being thrown in a blender—then by the Indiscernibility of Identicals, your hand is 
not identical the molecules. So CI must be false. 
This objection is related to certain other puzzles involving constitution. 
Imagine that we have before us a lump of clay that is sculpted into a statue; we 
typically say that the statue is constituted by the lump of clay. Yet many would 
resist claiming that the statue is (identical to) the lump of clay, because the statue 
and the lump of clay differ in certain properties. In particular, they differ in their 
modal properties: the statue could have had some of its clay bits replaced (by 
gold, or other clay bits, e.g.), but the lump of clay could not; and the lump of clay 
could have been sculpted into an ashtray, but the statue could not. Yet if the 
statue has a property that the lump of clay does not—viz., could survive a 
replacement of parts—and if the lump has a property that the statue could not—
viz., could survive being sculpted into an ashtray—then by the Indiscernibiltiy of 
Identicals, the statue is not identical to the lump of clay. And so, for reasons 
parallel to the Modal Objection against the claim that composition is identity, we 
have reason to think that constitution isn‟t identity either.    
Up until now, I have only been dealing with composition, not constitution. 
So one might wonder why I am changing the focus of my discussion now. This is 
because I think that the answer to the Modal Objection dovetails nicely with 
solutions to constitution puzzles. This is in part because I think there is no 
genuine distinction between the two kinds of puzzles, or the two kinds of 

 
147
relations. Composition as identity (CI), I will argue, leads to a collapse of the 
distinction between the composition and constitution relation, and thus suggests 
that constitution is identity as well.2         
Many have thought that composition and constitution are distinct relations, 
and hence, the puzzles that involve one are unrelated to the puzzles that involve 
the other. In recent philosophical literature, for example, it is often supposed that 
puzzles of composition are one thing, and puzzles of constitution are another.3 In 
certain footnotes of this thesis, even I have adopted (albeit temporarily) one 
purported difference between composition and constitution: that composition is 
the relation between one thing and many (the parts and the whole, e.g.), whereas 
constitution is the relation between one thing and another (a statue and a lump of 
clay, e.g).4  
I will argue below, however, that we have little reason to think this is 
difference-making feature between composition and constitution, independent of 
the truth of CI. Moreover, if CI is true, then we have even less reason to think that 
there is a distinction between composition and constitution. 
Yet if composition and constitution collapse—if composition and 
constitution are indeed identity—then it seems that Mereological Essentialism 
follows as a consequence. Mereological Essentialism is the thesis that all objects 
have their parts necessarily. If the relation between (e.g.) your hand and its parts, 
                                                 
2 Thanks to Adam Sennet for helpful discussion on this topic.  
 
3 Sider (2001, 2006); Van Inwagen (1990); Rea (1995); Thompson (1998); suggested in Wiggins 
(1968), Wiggins (1980); et. al. 
 
4 See Chapter 1, footnote 17; Chapter 2, section 1; etc. 
 

 
148
or the relation between (e.g.) a statue and a lump of clay, is identity, then by the 
necessity of identity, the hand and the statue must have all of their parts 
essentially.5 This worry is the contrapositive of the Modal Objection: the Modal 
Objection claims that the parts and whole differ in their modal properties, and so 
CI can‟t be true. The Mereological Essentialism worry claims that if CI is true, 
then the parts and wholes cannot differ in their modal properties. And so if the 
parts cannot survive a loss of parts, neither can the whole; thus, wholes (i.e., any 
object made of parts) must have their parts essentially.    
Below, I first aim to show that we have little reason to think that there is a 
principled difference between the composition relation and the constitution 
relation. In the course of this discussion, I will discuss Mereological Essentialism, 
and whether it follows from CI. I will then present four (traditionally labeled) 
constitution puzzles—the Marriage Paradox, the Ship of Theseus, Tib and 
Tibbles, and Goliath and Lumpl—and will show how a CI theorist might respond 
to them to them in a novel way,6 by embracing Mereological Essentialism and a 
„lump‟, or 5-dimensional, theory of objects.7  This lump theory of objects also has 
the distinct advantage of being able to defend the CI theorist against the Modal 
                                                 
5 This argument as presented here is much too quick. I will lay it out more carefully in the sections 
that follow.   
 
6 While the view I am endorsing isn‟t originally mine (see the following footnote), the application of 
it to the constitution puzzles as presented in this chapter, and its connection to my defense of CI, 
is (as far as I am aware). Moreover, as far as I am aware, no one has defended this view as one 
we should take seriously, as I argue in this chapter that we should. So this is what I mean when I 
say that the CI theorist can respond to constitution puzzles “in a novel way.” 
 
7 See Weatherson, “Stages, Worms, Slices and Lumps” (MS) 
http://brian.weatherson.org/swsl.pdf. To my knowledge, he is the first to coin the phrase „lump 
theory‟ to the view I will be endorsing in this chapter, although he attributes this view to Kaplan 
(1979), which is a paper that was first presented in 1967. 
 

 
149
Objection, thus completing our comprehensive defense of CI. I will dedicate 
Chapter 5 to discussing some advantages of CI—advantages that alternative 
views of composition do not enjoy.  
 
2. Composition and Constitution: Deflating the Difference 
Some maintain that there is a difference between composition and 
constitution. Of those who maintain this difference, there are some who do so 
merely by stipulation, and those who do so because they believe there is a 
principled difference. Wiggins, Rea, and Thompson, for example, all treat the 
puzzles of constitution as distinct from puzzles of composition, without much 
justification. 8 It is by way of example, and by the way that the puzzles have been 
taxonomized in contemporary literature, that one might conclude that 
composition and constitution are two difference relations. Sider (2007), on the 
other hand, explicitly maintains that the difference between composition and 
constitution is a principled one—the composition relation is many-one, whereas 
the constitution relation is one-one.9  
I think that either of these ways of distinguishing composition and 
constitution—by way of mere conventional stipulation, or in terms of the whether 
the relata are many-one or one-one—are inadequate means by which to 
distinguish composition and constitution.  
                                                 
8 Wiggins (1968), Rea (1995), Thompson (1998). Also: Winston, et. al. (1987), Iris, et. al. (1988), 
and Gristl and Pribbenow (1995).  
 
9 Sider (2007:55, ftnt 14) 
 

 
150
To see this, it will first behoove us to note that throughout the literature on 
the metaphysics of objects, it seems to be a matter of convention and trend, and 
not of kind, which puzzles get labeled constitution puzzles rather than 
composition. Wiggins, Rea, and Thompson, for example, all seem to think that 
certain puzzles are of one kind rather than another, simply in virtue of the fact 
that they classify certain puzzles (such as Goliath and Lumpl and Tib and 
Tibbles) as puzzles of constitution, not of composition.10  
But this is only a recent trend, and not a consistently recent one at that. 
Aristotle (Metaphysics, , 1023b), for example, seems to have collapsed 
composition and constitution puzzles into one category: puzzles about 
parthood.11 Or, if he did think that there was a difference, it was not a very 
significant one. He claims [1041b10-15]:  
“In the same way that an aggregate of parts does not make up a single 
being, nor do quantities of matter by themselves constitute something. 
Just as a syllable is more than the aggregate of letters, so is flesh 
something more than fire and earth.”  
 
Now, true, in this passage Aristotle is endorsing a view that is a clear denial of 
CI. But the point is that he is treating composition (“…an aggregate of parts does 
not make up a single being…”) and constitution (“…nor do quantities of matter by 
themselves constitute something.”) as analogous relations. In fact, earlier 
Aristotle formulates a question akin to van Inwagen‟s Special Composition 
Question, but in terms of constitution. Recall that van Inwagen‟s Special 
Composition Question is: when is it the case that some parts, the ps, compose a 
                                                 
10 Wiggins (1968), Rea (1995), Thompson (1998). 
 
11 Aristotle (Metaphysics, , 1023b).  

 
151
whole?12 Aristotle, on the other hand, asks: when is it the case that some 
quantity of matter, m, constitutes a unified thing.13 If these are different questions 
according to Aristotle, they do not differ by much, and they receive the same 
answer: some parts, such as flour, eggs and sugar, or some matter, such as a 
lump of clay, compose or constitute an object when they share “in one form.”14 
And while Aristotle‟s answer to the question(s) is not entirely relevant here, what 
is important is that he gives the same answer to both, indicating that he thought 
that composition and constitution were very similar—if not the same—relation.  
Moreover, in the contemporary literature, puzzles such as Tib and Tibbles 
(explained below) are classified as puzzles of constitution by some, but puzzles 
of composition by others. Van Inwagen (1990), for example, uses a variation of 
the Tib and Tibbles puzzle to argue against the Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached 
Parts, and to support his eliminative view of composition. That is, he treats a 
(purported) puzzle of constitution as a puzzle of composition, and draws a radical 
thesis about the composition relation (namely, that there isn‟t any such thing) 
from it.15 Heller (1984) uses a similar puzzle to argue for his four-dimensional 
view of objects, where objects are composed of parts, both spatial and temporal. 
Thus, he—like van Inwagen—treats a (purported) puzzle of constitution as a 
                                                 
12 Peter van Inwagen, Material Beings, p. 30. 
 
13 Metaphysics 1041b1-10. 
 
14 Aristotle, ibid. 
 
15 Peter van Inwagen, Material Beings. 
 

 
152
puzzle of composition, and draws a radical thesis about objects (namely, that 
there aren‟t any) from it.16  
So, often in the literature, while puzzles of constitution are sometimes 
treated separately from puzzles of composition, no justification is given for doing 
so; the difference between composition and constitution is presupposed but 
never explained. Moreover, the presupposed taxonomy is not even consistently 
uniform throughout the literature, both in the past and in contemporary literature. 
So if the only reason we have for thinking that there is a distinction between 
composition and constitution is mere precedence in the literature of making said 
distinction, and if such precedence is not even consistently uniform, then this 
undercuts the motivation for thinking that there is a distinction in the first place. 
Our default position should be that we only make distinctions when we have 
adequate reasons for doing so; otherwise, we might wind up positing distinct 
relations willy-nilly, violating our theoretical principles.17    
Second, as we shall see below, all of the puzzles of constitution can be 
adequately recast as puzzles about composition. For every puzzle that we give 
that is purportedly a puzzle of constitution, as opposed to composition, (e.g., 
Goliath and Lumpl), I will show how we can easily recast it, without loss of 
metaphysical significance, as a puzzle about composition, even without 
assuming that CI is true. If this is right, then this will also weaken support for the 
claim that composition and constitution are distinct relations. 
                                                 
16 Mark Heller, “Temporal Parts of Four-Dimensional Objects.” 
 
17 See Chapter 1, section 5.  

 
153
Third, let us address the claim that the difference between composition 
and constitution is a principled one—e.g., that composition is a many-one relation 
while constitution is a one-one relation. This claim can be doubted for at least two 
reasons, one of which is independent from the truth of CI, one of which is not. 
First, many of the puzzles that are traditionally hailed as puzzles of material 
constitution are puzzles about many-one relations (e.g., the Marriage Paradox, 
the Ship of Theseus, Wiggins‟ tree and cellulose example, all of which will be 
discussed below). And some puzzles that are traditionally hailed as composition 
puzzles are concerned with one-one relations (e.g., Unger and van Inwagen‟s 
discussion of the Body/Body-minus puzzle). This is a separate point from the one 
made above: it isn‟t just the fact that certain puzzles of constitution have been 
inconsistently treated as puzzles of composition, and vice versa; it isn‟t a matter 
of inconsistent, stipulated taxonomy. Rather, it‟s the idea that given the 
presumed principled difference—e.g., that composition is a many-one relation, 
whereas constitution is one-one—that even this difference is not honored by the 
literature.  
Michael Rea, for example, in his introduction to Material Constitution: A 
Reader, claims that what is in common with all puzzles of constitution is that 
“…all of them present us with scenarios in which it appears that an object a and 
an object b share all of the same parts but are essentially related to their parts in 
different ways.”18 This seems to suggest that puzzles of constitution involve a 
combination of many-one relations and one-one relations. On the one hand, 
                                                 
18 Michael C. Rea (1997: xvi). 
 

 
154
there is the relation between an object a and its parts, and an object b and its 
parts (which are both many-one relations), and on the other there is the relation 
between a and b (which is one-one).19 Distinguishing composition and 
constitution in terms of many-one or one-one relations, then, is simply not 
supported by past or contemporary literature. And if such a principled difference 
is not supported by the literature, and there is furthermore no independent 
argument for it, then we lack sufficient reason to think that the principled 
difference should be upheld. Grounding a distinction in a principle is unhelpful if 
the principle itself is unsupported.  
Yet, second, even if such a distinction was supported by the literature, 
someone who endorses CI should not (and maybe even cannot) embrace such a 
distinction. Suppose composition is a one-many relation, suppose constitution is 
a one-one relation, and suppose CI is true. Suppose also that we have a lump of 
clay that is composed of many clay particles (one-many), and a statue that is 
constituted by the lump of clay (one-one). CI claims that the relation between the 
lump of clay and the clay particles is identity; so the lump of clay is the clay 
particles. By the substitutivity of identity, the statue is constituted by the clay 
particles, which is a one-many relationship. So, by the supposition that 
composition is one-many, the statue is composed of the clay particles; thus, the 
                                                 
19 As Rea later explains, just what this relation is between a and b is up for debate. Some think 
that the relation between a and b has to be one of identity (since no two distinct objects can share 
all of the same parts, e.g.); others think that a and b are distinct. But whether one thinks a and b 
are identical or not, the fact remains that the relation between them—whatever it is—still a one-
one relation.  
 

 
155
statue is identical to the clay particles.20 So a CI theorist should not (and maybe 
even cannot) rest on the difference between composition and constitution as a 
difference between the relata being one-many or one-one.  
Of course, one might think that all of this will lead to pretty counterintuitive 
results. First, if composition is identity, then it seems we are committed to 
claiming that all objects have their parts necessarily. Second, if composition and 
constitution collapse into the same relation—i.e., identity—then it seems we must 
not only say that all objects have their parts necessarily, but that (e.g.) statues 
and lumps have the same modal properties. So we will be committed to claiming 
such absurdities as (e.g.) a statue could survive being molded into an ashtray, or 
a lump of clay couldn‟t survive being so-molded; or: a statue couldn‟t survive a 
replacement of parts, or a lump could, etc. The absurdity of such claims is a large 
part of what‟s motivating the constitution puzzles that I will discuss in detail 
below.  
To see the first point (i.e., that if CI is true, then all objects have their parts 
necessarily) recall that a classical mereologist is committed to the following 
axioms: 21  
 
Transitivity:  If x is part of y, and z is part x, then z is part of y. 
 
Uniqueness: If something, x, is a fusion of some things, y1, …, yn, and  
 
 
something, z, is also a fusion of the yis, then x =z.  
 
                                                 
20 I will have more to say about this particular example below, in the course of detailing the 
puzzles.  
 
21 See Lewis (1991), Yi (1999), McKay (2006), et. al.; this is discussed briefly in Chapter 1 of this 
thesis.  
 

 
156
Universality:  If there are some things, x1, …, xn, then there is something,  
 
 
 
x, that is a fusion of the xis.  
 
 
And let us suppose that we have a cat in front of us that is composed of a head, 
h, a body, b, and a tail, t. According to Universality, there is a fusion, f, that is 
composed of h, b, and t. According to CI, f =h h, b, t. Given the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals, if f =h h, b, t, then there is no world where f exists and h, b, and t do 
not; so f has as parts h, b, and t, in every possible world, hence, f has as parts h, 
b, and t, necessarily. Thus, if f =h h, b, t , then necessarily f =h h, b, t . And similar 
reasoning will apply to any object whatsoever, if CI is true. But then this is just to 
embrace mereological essentialism:  
 
 
Mereological Essentialism: all objects have their parts necessarily.22  
 
And mereological essentialism, while exciting for some, is wildly implausible for 
many. 
For starters, mereological essentialism just seems flat-out false. We tend 
to think, most of us, that ordinary objects can lose (at least) small parts over time. 
Take my office desk, for example. Every day I come into my office and sit at my 
desk. I have been sitting at it and reading by it and putting books on it and spilling 
coffee on it for over four years. And never once have I thought, as I walked into 
                                                 
22 One might want to claim that there is a difference between an object having its parts 
necessarily and an object having its parts essentially. I don‟t quite feel the pull to make such a 
distinction, but I do not want to get into this issue here. As we will see below, we can cash out the 
definition of Mereological Essentialism using world-talk, thus eliminating having to choose 
between talk about having parts necessarily or having parts essentially. I hope this will mitigate 
worries about the difference (if there is one) between necessary parts and essential parts. Also, I 
hope that such a worry won‟t interrupt the fact that I have chosen to call the position whereby all 
objects have their parts necessarily ,“Mereological Essentialism.” I have done this to maintain 
consistency with terminology already in use in the literature.  

 
157
my office, “Hey! Where the flip did my desk go?” This is because I think that my 
desk has remained my desk over these four years. Sure, I will admit that small 
portions of it have probably flaked off—tiny molecules get bumped off of it when I 
brush against it, or when I have to wipe off the spilled coffee, etc. I can admit that 
my desk has undergone some small changes, and that it has lost some of its 
original parts. But it is still my desk! And I am not alone: other people think my 
desk is still my desk, even after all these years, and all the loss of its various 
(small) parts. And my desk is not alone: other people think that lots of ordinary 
objects are the same objects over time and over change. Yet if mereological 
essentialism is true, then our ordinary intuitions are wildly false. But if this is right, 
some may argue, then so much the worse for mereological essentialism, and any 
view which entails it.  
In fact, some have explicitly used mereological essentialism as a direct 
modus tollens against CI. Trenton Merricks, for example, argues that CI entails 
mereological essentialism, so if one rejects mereological essentialism, then one 
should reject CI. The implication is that mereological essentialism is such a 
radical view, that any view—such as CI—which entails it, should be rejected.23 
Van Inwagen also thinks that a commitment to CI carries with it a commitment to 
(something very close to) mereological essentialism, and that this gives us 
reason enough to abandon CI.24 Actually, to be a bit more careful: Van Inwagen 
thinks that a commitment to Universal Composition (universality) carries with it a 
                                                 
23 Trenton Merricks, “Composition as identity, mereological essentialism, and counterpart theory” 
in Australasian Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 77, No. 2, pp. 192-195; June 1999. 
 
24 See van Inwagen (1981). 
 

 
158
commitment to something like mereological essentialism; he doesn‟t specifically 
talk about CI. But since a commitment to Universal Composition is assumed by 
my account of CI, his argument will apply to CI (as I‟m defending her here).25 The 
important issue, however, is to note that mereological essentialism is often seen 
as a reason to reject CI.    
Yet I propose to modus ponens the above sorts of arguments. In what 
follows, I will argue that mereological essentialism can (and should!) be 
embraced. I will begin by showing that we already have a commonsense, liberal 
view about „parthood,‟ which will be the first step in accepting mereological 
essentialism. Then I will endorse a “lump” theory of objects, or 5-dimensionalism: 
the view that objects are extended spatially, temporally, and modally. As we shall 
see, this move, despite its initial counter-intuitiveness in some ways, is actually 
amenable to some of our ordinary intuitions about objects in others. Moreover, 
such a view has the added benefit of providing elegant and novel solutions to the 
traditional puzzles of constitution.  
Before launching into these views, however, let us first take a look at four 
of the traditional puzzles of constitution. As I do so, I will re-emphasize the points 
made in this section—namely, that we have little (or no) reason to think that 
composition and constitution are distinct relations. 
 
3. Four Puzzles of (Material) Constitution 
 
                                                 
25 See Chapter 1 section 5.  
 

 
159
 
3.1  
The Marriage Paradox26 
 
Suppose you have finally decided to marry the love of your life. The two of 
you exchange vows and promise to be together forever. However, seven years 
later you come home and find the closets empty of your spouse's belongings, 
some suitcases missing, and the following note propped up on the bedroom 
bureau: 
“As we both know, human beings are made up of a collection of skin and 
bones and tissue and veins and millions and millions of atoms and particles. 
When we made our marriage vows, there were two distinct collections of 
particles exchanging vows. However, over the last seven years, those 
particles have changed: bits of tissue and skin have been replaced by new 
bits of tissue and skin. In fact, there is not a single particle that makes up me 
now that is identical with any of the particles that made up the collection of 
particles that made a promise to you at the alter. Therefore, since the 
particles that make up me now are entirely distinct from the ones that married 
you, I am a different human being from the one who married you. Since we 
are not married, I am out of here. Good-bye.”27 
 
Understandably, you are heartbroken. But, more importantly, you are feeling 
duped. Surely something must be wrong with the above line of reasoning 
(otherwise divorce proceedings would be a much swifter process and there 
would be no need for expensive divorce lawyers). But where did your spouse's 
reasoning go awry?  
Let us discuss a couple of assumptions at play in this puzzle. First, it 
presupposes the Existence Assumption (EA)—i.e., it assumes that objects such 
                                                 
26 Another version of this puzzle is called the Debtor‟s Paradox, where a borrower can weasel his 
way out of a debt (and a lender can likewise dodge culpability for the debtor‟s soon-to-be black 
eye!). See, e.g., Rea (1997). 
 
27 Example modified from Rea (1997), Introduction.  
 

 
160
as people, or human beings, exist. Second, it presupposes the Parthood 
Assumption (PA)—i.e., it assumes that people or human beings are made of 
parts, such as bits of molecules and cells and material particles.28 Moreover, in 
this particular formulation of the puzzle, it assumes that human beings are 
entirely made up of material parts; there are no souls, for example.29 It also 
assumes that a human can gain and lose some of its material parts, that they can 
survive or endure through time, but that they cannot lose all of their parts and still 
remain the same object. Finally, the above puzzle appeals to the Indiscernibility 
of Identicals: it compares the properties of a collection of molecules at one time 
(the molecules at the time of the exchange of marriage vows) to the properties of 
a collection of molecules at a later time (the collection of molecules that is writing 
the note, seven years after the wedding). Since the collection of molecules at one 
time differs from the collection of molecules at a later time, then by the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals, the collections are not identical. Thus, the collection 
of molecules that was standing at the altar is not identical to the one writing the 
letter 7 years later.  
Before moving on to the other puzzles, it is interesting to note that this 
puzzle is often hailed (in contemporary literature) as a puzzle of constitution, not 
of composition, even though the relation between the molecules and the human 
                                                 
28 See Chapter 1, section 5 for further elaboration on these assumptions. As discussed earlier, 
both of these are assumptions that some philosophers have denied (Unger, van Inwagen, etc.) 
but I will not be denying them here. 
 
29 Indeed, positing souls may be one way out of this puzzle. However, I suspect the puzzle may 
be recast at the levels of souls, depending on whether one thinks that souls have parts or not 
(psychological parts, perhaps?). And notice that an appeal to souls to solve this puzzle won‟t 
generalize to other versions of this puzzle, e.g. Ship of Theseus, or any puzzle that involves a 
soulless object, for example. 

 
161
being is clearly a many-one relation—i.e., the molecules are many, the human 
being is one. So this is a fine example of where the stipulated taxonomy pulls 
apart from a more (purported) principled difference between the constitution 
relation and the composition relation.  
Moreover, notice that we can easily recast this puzzle as one explicitly 
about composition. The puzzle was stated above using the made up of relation—
one that I believe is neutral between composition and constitution (which we 
should predict anyway, if it turns out that composition and constitution are the 
same relation).30 But notice that absolutely nothing is lost if we were to phrase 
the puzzle explicitly in terms of the composition relation. We could have easily 
begun the puzzle as follows: “human beings are composed of skin and bones 
and tissue and veins and millions and millions of atoms and particles,” etc. The 
entire puzzle, in other words, could be rephrased as one about people being 
composed of certain parts, or being constituted by certain parts, rather than 
people being made up of certain parts, and the same contradictory conclusion 
would result. If we can generate the same puzzle using either „composition‟, 
„constitution‟, or „made up of‟, without any significant loss of meaning, then this 
should weaken our motivations for thinking that the composition and constitution 
relation are distinct relations.  
 
 
3.2  
 
The Ship of Theseus 
 
                                                 
30 Also, see Chapter 2, where I propose a counting exercise where we consider some objects that 
are made up of others.  
 

 
162
Imagine that there is ship that is made up of just 100 planks of wood, a 
sail and a mast.31 In the year 1800, the ship goes out to sea. In an effort to 
maintain a maximally seaworthy ship, however, the following restoration 
procedure takes place: every year just one of the planks will be replaced, and 
then the sail, and then the mask, so that in the year 1902, all of the 102 parts that 
make up the ship have (gradually) been replaced. Let us call the original ship that 
left port in 1800, ship A. Let us call the ship that pulls into port in 1902, ship B. 
And let us ask ourselves the following question: Is ship A identical to ship B?  
Here are some reasons why you might think ship A is identical to ship B: 
first, we tend to think that objects can survive the loss of some of its parts. We 
tend to have a tolerance, for instance, for small changes over time. We do not 
think that the loss of one small part of an object results in a loss of that object. If 
we did, then that would mean that every time a speck of wood flaked off of your 
desk, or a molecule flaked off of you, then your desk and you would thereby 
cease to exist. So we tend to think that in the case of the Ship of Theseus, our 
tolerance for small changes will eventually lead us to identify ship B with ship A.  
Second, we can imagine that all of the people aboard the ship in 1800, 
when it sails out to sea, stay aboard the ship. We can imagine that these 
(unusually long-living) sailors never leave the ship, that they say things like “I‟m 
so tired of being on this dang ship” and “How much longer are we going to be 
sailing on this blasted ship, anyway?”, etc. Never do they wake up and think they 
are on a different ship; the changes in the boards every year has not inclined 
                                                 
31 This puzzle is discussed in: Plutarch, Life of Theseus, Hobbes (De Corpore, II, 7, 2), Rea 
(1995), Rea (1997), Wiggins (1967), Parfit (1984), Nozick (1982), Kripke (1980), Gallois (1986), 
(1988), Carter (1987), Chandler (1975), Griffin (1977), Bakker (2002), etc.   

 
163
them to think that their ship has popped out of existence and a new one has 
popped up in its place. So, we might conclude, ship A is identical to ship B.  
Yet a complication arises when we discover that the discarded boards 
(and mast and sail) have been collected and assembled over the years.32 In 
1902, then, there is a ship—call it ship C—that is qualitatively identical to ship A, 
and indeed is made up of all of the original boards (and mast and sail) that ship A 
was made up of. So now the question before us is: Is ship A identical to ship C?  
Here‟s why we might think so. Ship A and ship C have all of the same 
parts! There is not any part that ship A had that ship C does not now have. All of 
the parts are arranged in exactly the same way. There seems to be no 
difference-making feature that would distinguish ship A from C. So, ship A must 
be identical to ship C.  
But if ship A is identical to ship B (by our first line of reasoning), and ship A 
is identical to ship C (by our second line of reasoning), then it follows by the 
transitivity of identity that ship B is identical to ship C. But ship B cannot be 
identical to ship C, since B and C are clearly two ships not one (we can imagine 
them side by side at port, say). Thus, unless we want to endorse some strange 
metaphysical view whereby a single object can occupy two places at the same 
time,33 we cannot claim that B is identical to C. So then one of our above lines of 
reasoning has gone wrong.    
                                                 
32 This complication in the puzzle was first discussed by Hobbes (De Corpore, II, 7, 2). For 
contemporary discussions of this puzzle, see Simons (1987), Wiggins (1968), et. al.  
 
33 See O‟Leary-Hawthorne (1995) “The Bundle Theory of Substances and the Identity of 
Indiscernibles”, and Zimmerman (1997) “Disctinct Indiscernibles and the Bundle Theory,” for 
discussions of bi-located objects.  
 

 
164
Notice the parallel between this puzzle and the Marriage Paradox—both of 
these puzzles are about one thing (a ship or a person) and the parts (boards or 
molecules) that make them up. As such, both are about a many-one relation, and 
both should qualify as composition puzzles according to (e.g.) Sider‟s distinction 
between composition and constitution. Yet they are not treated consistently as 
such in the literature. Rea (1997), for example, labels both of these puzzles as 
puzzles of constitution, not composition. Also, notice that like the Marriage 
Paradox, the Ship of Theseus puzzle could be easily be recast explicitly as a 
puzzle about composition simply by making it explicit what the “made up of” 
relation is. Instead of beginning the argument with a premise such as “imagine a 
ship that is made up of 100 boards, a mast, and a sail, etc.,” we could have said: 
“imagine a ship that is composed of 100 boards, a mast, and a sail, etc.,” without 
affecting the puzzle in the least. Or we could have said that the ship was 
constituted by 100 boards, a mast, and a sail, etc. and the puzzle would still be 
just as puzzling. If the puzzle doesn‟t change when we swap in „composed of‟‟ for 
„constituted by‟, or „constituted by‟ for „made up of‟, etc., then this is some reason 
to think that these terms are synonymous.   
Now, true, there are two seemingly important differences between the 
Marriage Paradox and the Ship of Theseus. First, the Marriage Paradox involves 
the identity of people, whereas the Ship of Theseus involves the identity of ships. 
And one might—and in fact many philosophers do—think that there are 
significant, metaphysical differences between human beings and ships. Human 
beings, for example, might have minds, or souls, whereas ships do not. Or 

 
165
human beings might be alive, whereas ships are not, which might make all the 
difference, metaphysically speaking.34 Second, in the Ship of Theseus puzzle, we 
have the added complication of having a competitor for identity. We have ship C, 
the ship that was reassembled from ship A‟s original parts. One might not think 
that having a competitor would change the metaphysical facts of the case—if we 
want to know whether x = y, then x and y are important for our query, but it 
certainly doesn‟t matter what the rest of the world is doing!—but others have 
maintained that it does.35 So while there are noted similarities between the 
Marriage Paradox and the Ship of Theseus, there are some differences as well, 
but none these will affect my claim that constitution and composition are the 
same relation, or my bigger claim that CI is true.     
 
 
 
 
3.3  
Tib and Tibbles36 
 
Imagine that we have a cat named Tibbles who is a regular looking and 
ordinary cat. When we meet him one morning, at t1, Tibbles looks like a regular 
cat should, with legs, paws, whiskers, and tail, etc. Shortly after t1, Tibbles steps 
outside and goes about his normal cat-like business. Unfortunately, a terrible 
tragedy befalls Tibbles when he gets too close to a lawnmower. At night, t2, he 
                                                 
34 Indeed, this is the line that van Inwagen takes in Material Beings. He claims that it is only when 
something is a living thing that composition occurs. So, for example, the Ship of Theseus is just a 
bunch of simples arranged ship-wise, but a person can be composed of parts, since composition 
only occurs when the composed thing is a living thing.  
 
35 See, for example, R. M. Gale (1984) in Wiggins‟ Thesis (x), Philosophical Studies, Nathan 
Salmon (1982), Reference and Essence, R. Nozick (1981), Philosophical Explanations, Noonan 
(1985) in Analysis Vol. 45, No. 1, pp. 4-8. 
 
36 Another version of this puzzle is called „Body/Body-minus.‟  

 
166
comes back indoors as a tail-less cat. Let us name the name the part of Tibbles 
that came back—all of Tibbles minus his tail—Tib. Now at t1, it seems that both 
Tibbles and Tib exist. After all, we could easily paint Tib purple, and see that 
Tibbles is partly painted purple, while his tail is unsullied. Moreover, it seems 
clear that Tibbles at t1 ≠ Tib at t1. For Tibbles at t1 has a tail but Tib at t1 doesn't 
(in fact, by definition, Tib never has a tail), so by the Indiscernibility of Identicals, 
Tibbles at t1 ≠ Tib at t1. But at t2, Tibbles does not have a tail, and Tib doesn't 
either. So what, then, is the difference between Tibbles at t2 and Tib at t2? If you 
say nothing, then by the Identity of Indiscernibles, we will have to claim that 
Tibbles at t2 = Tib at t2. But then we will get into trouble by the transitivity of 
identity. For presumably, Tibbles did not go out of existence from t1 to t2—i.e., 
Tibbles at t1 = Tibbles at t2. But Tib did not go out of existence either, for nothing 
happened to Tib at all! So Tib at t1 = Tib at t2. But then we arrive at a 
contradiction. To see this:   
1. Tibbles at t1 = Tibbles at t2 (By commonsense intuition: we 
don‟t think that cats go out of existence when they lose their 
tails). 
 
2. Tib at t1 = Tib at t2 (Nothing happened to Tib at all!) 
 
3. Tibbles at t1 ≠ Tib at t1 (By LL: one has a tail and the other 
doesn‟t). 
 
4. Tibbles at t2 = Tib at t2 (Every region occupied by Tibbles is 
occupied by Tib; “they” have no difference-making feature). 
 
5. Tibbles at t1 = Tib at t2 (By 1, 4, Substitutivity of Identicals). 
 
6. Tibbles at t1 = Tib at t1 (By 5, 2, Substitutivity of Identicals). 
 
7. Tibbles at t1 = Tib at t1 & Tibbles at t1 ≠ Tib at t1 (3, 6, &I) 
 

 
167
 
Notice that unlike the Marriage Paradox or the Ship of Theseus, this puzzle isn‟t 
straightforwardly about some parts (e.g., boards or molecules) and the whole that 
is composed of them (e.g., a ship or a person). The primary relation is not many-
one, in other words. Rather, it seems that this puzzle is concerned with a singular 
thing, Tibbles, and another singular thing Tib. Or, more precisely, it is presumably 
concerned with four singular things: Tibbles at t1, Tib at t1, Tibbles at t2, and Tib 
at t2. Hence, we might be tempted to think that this is a constitution puzzle 
because it is concerned with one-one relations rather than many-one relations, if 
we thought that there was such a principled distinction between composition and 
constitution.  
But it is important that these singular things overlap, and hence, share 
parts. In fact, van Inwagen uses a version of this puzzle to argue against a 
mereological thesis, the Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts, or DAUP.37  
 
DAUP: For every material object, M, if R is the region of space occupied 
by M at time, t, and if sub-R is any occupiable sub-region of R whatever, 
there exists a material object that occupies the region sub-R at t.38  
 
 
First, let us see why DAUP is intuitively appealing. Throughout this thesis, I have 
been appealing to examples using ordinary objects and their undetached parts: a 
cat and his body parts, a coin and it‟s front and back half, a circle and its top 
third, its middle third, and its bottom third, my desk and its legs, drawers, top, and 
                                                 
37 Peter van Inwagen (1981) “The Doctrine of Arbitrary Undetached Parts,” Pacific Philosophical 
Quarterly 62 (1981), pp. 123-37. 
 
38 This is van Inwagen‟s formulation. His letters “M” and “R” are not intended to be plural terms, 
predicates, or variables, in the way that I have used them from chapter 2 and onward.  
 

 
168
all of its wood-particle bits, etc. Indeed, even to understand any of the four 
puzzles described in this present chapter, it seems we presupposed that objects 
have undetached parts: in the Marriage Paradox, we accept that people have 
undetached molecules as parts; in the Ship of Theseus, we accept that ships 
have undetached wooden planks as parts; in Tib and Tibbles, we accept that 
cats have tails as undetached parts; and in Goliath and Lumpl (which will be 
discussed below), in order to understand the purported modal differences 
between Goliath and Lumpl, we accept that statues have (e.g.) arms as 
undetached parts (Goliath could have lost an arm and survived, but Lumpl 
couldn‟t have), and lumps of clay have undetached parts (e.g., Lumpl is made of 
lots of undetached clay bits, all of which are essential to Lumpl‟s survival; in order 
to understand that Lumpl‟s clay bits are essential to it, you first have to 
presuppose that Lumpl has clay bits as parts to begin with, and all of these parts 
are undetached). 
 
So we have, at the very least, been implicitly assuming all along that 
objects have undetached parts; it seemed natural and even un-noteworthy to 
assume as much. To show that we think such undetached parts can be arbitrary, 
consider any example where we can talk about the arbitrary right half and left half 
of something—a pie, say.  
Suppose we think that there is a right half and a left half of a piece of pie. 
If we don‟t, then what an odd state of affairs seemingly occurs when we slice and 
separate the pie straight down the middle: two brand-new objects pop into 
existence! But this reasoning proliferates: if we think that a pie has a right half 

 
169
and a left half, then we must surely think that there is a right half and left half to 
each of the halves of the pie. After all, we could take a knife to the already cut 
halves and halve the halves. If the halved halves didn‟t exist prior to the cutting, 
then they must have just popped into existence the moment we sliced the pie! To 
avoid such arbitrary poppings-in-(and-outs!) of objects, we should admit the 
halved halves already exist prior to the cut. And a right and left half of those 
halved halves exits as well, etc. Surely, any „half‟ we think exists for a pie, goes 
similarly for any pieces of the pie, original halves included, and so on down to the 
smallest extended piece of the pie.39  
So if it is natural and intuitive to think that there are arbitrary right halves 
and left halves—or top halves and bottom halves—of bulky (material) items like 
pies and people and ships and statues, then it is similarly natural and intuitive to 
think that there are right halves and left halves—and top halves and bottom 
halves—of the halves of those objects. But, on pain of having an implausible and 
arbitrary cut-off point to the halves of (material) objects that exist, it looks as if we 
must accept that every extended (material) object has (at least) a right half and a 
left half, or a top half and a bottom half, etc. But this just amounts to DAUP: For 
every material object, M, if R is the region of space occupied by M at time, t, and 
                                                 
39 Of course such reasoning can get us into trouble. Is there a smallest bit of pie? Are pies (and 
other objects) parts „all the way down‟? Is there a rock bottom—some bit of stuff that can‟t be 
halved? Is the world a simple one (i.e., it bottoms out in parts with no parts)? Or a gunky one (i.e., 
there parts all the way down)? I need not get into all of this right now. All I need for my purposes 
here is the admission that some objects have parts (whether that be the right half and left half, the 
top and bottom, etc.). What happens „in the end‟ or „at rock bottom‟ is a story I can leave open-
ended for now.  
 

 
170
if sub-R is any occupiable sub-region of R whatever, there exists a material 
object that occupies the region sub-R at t.40 
So we can now see why DAUP is intuitive. Second, however, let us take a 
moment to appreciate how DAUP is related to composition: if one accepts DAUP 
then one accepts that (material) objects have arbitrary, undetached parts. Of 
course, the relation between a thing and its parts is that of composition. So any 
objection to DAUP will be an objection to  certain views of composition, since 
DAUP is a thesis about what kind of parts material objects have (i.e., arbitrary 
and undetached), and this will have a direct consequence for the composition 
relation, and the question as to when (or whether) it holds between some parts 
and a whole.   
And, in fact, Van Inwagen uses a variation of the Tib and Tibbles puzzle to 
argue against DAUP, and ultimately for a particular answer to the Special 
Composition Question— 
 
PvI’s Special Composition Question:  when do some xs compose an  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
object? 
 
 
—namely, never.41 Since DAUP is a thesis that a CI theorist (as I am imagining 
her) will embrace, then we can take Van Inwagen‟s argument as an argument 
against CI as well.42   
                                                 
40 DAUP commits us to the claim that there are no extended (material) simples (i.e., there are no 
extended, material, partless objects). I do not wish to get into the issue of whether there are or 
are not such things as extended simples, so let us just presuppose for now that there aren‟t. If 
after my discussion here, it is maintained that DAUP is false because there are extended simples, 
and not for the reasons Van Inwagen countenances, then I‟d be happy to adjust the direction of 
the dialectic accordingly. For now, however, I am just interested in why van Inwagen thinks DAUP 
is false (namely, the Tib and Tibbles puzzle). 
 

 
171
All of this is just to show, however, that Tib and Tibbles is not a puzzle 
about (merely) constitution; or, if it is, that this is not the only relation that the 
puzzle involves (assuming for the moment that composition and constitution 
relation are indeed distinct relations), since we can seemingly derive important 
conclusions about composition from the puzzle, as van Inwagen intends.  
Furthermore, however, notice that we could easily rephrase the Tib and 
Tibbles puzzle in terms of many-one relations. Imagine (what is likely): that 
Tibbles is composed of millions of molecules. Tib, then, could be defined as 
some sub-set of those millions of particles, and we would be off and running with 
a puzzle explicitly involving composition, with no seemingly significant difference 
between the original presentation and the rephrased one. Thus, we see yet again 
that there is little support for a difference between the composition relation and 
the constitution relation.   
 
 
 
3.4  
Goliath and Lumpl43 
 
Imagine that Sam the sculptor has decided to make a statue of Goliath out 
of clay. However, due to an odd superstition, Sam prefers to sculpt one half of 
the statue, and then the other, and then he puts them together after the halves 
are complete. So, on Day 1, he sculpts both the top half and the bottom half of 
                                                                                                                                                 
41 Cf. van Inwagen. 
 
42 See Chapter 1, section 5. In particular, recall that I am assuming (i) the Existence Assumption: 
that there are ordinary objects (tables, chairs, etc.) and (ii) the Parthood Assumption: that these 
objects have parts (front halves, back halves, etc.). If DAUP is false, then these assumptions are 
false (modulo the issue of extended, material, mereological simples, which I will ignore for the 
moment (see above, footnote 40)).  
   
43 The original presentation of this puzzle is found in Alan Gibbard (1975). 
 

 
172
Goliath, from two separate lumps of clay. On Day 2, he sticks the two halves 
together and lets the statue harden. On Day 3, he realizes the endeavor was a 
complete failure, and takes a sledgehammer to the clay statue, smashing it to 
smithereens. 
Suppose that lumps of clay are those bits of clay that are connected to 
other bits of clay, and that statues are what we ordinarily think they are—certain 
formations created to represent something and made of some kind of material 
like clay and bronze and what-not. Let us call the lump of clay that Goliath is 
made out of, Lumpl, and let us call the statue, Goliath. On Day 1, it seems that 
neither Lumpl nor Goliath exist. Yet on Day 2, it seems that Goliath and Lumpl 
come into existence at the same time. On Day 3, however, it seems they go out 
of existence at the same time (as soon as 'they' are smashed). So it would seem 
that both Lumpl and Goliath exist at the same place, at the same time, and for 
the same amount of time. But wait! Doesn't this violate an intuitive principle of 
ours, call this principle S? 
 
S: Two things cannot completely occupy exactly the same place or exactly 
the same volume (or exactly the same subvolumes within exactly the 
same volume) for exactly the same period of time.44, 45 
 
 
"Well, perhaps," you think, "Lumpl and Goliath are identical. Then principle 
S would not be violated." Yet by the Indiscernibility of Identicals, it seems that 
                                                 
44 David Wiggins, “On Being in the Same Place at the Same Time,” in Philosophical Review 
(1968); reprinted in Rea (1997) 
 
45 S isn‟t entirely correct. Even Wiggins himself (ibid.) goes through various different amendments 
on the principle. You might think that regions of space, or space-time points, etc., are things, for 
example, but clearly a material object and regions of space occupy the same place at the same 
time—indeed this seems to be what it means for an object to be at a certain place. But let us 
ignore these issues for now.  

 
173
Lumpl and Goliath are distinct. For Lumpl has a property that Goliath doesn't 
have: Lumpl could survive being smushed or rearranged, but Goliath couldn't. 
And Goliath has a property that Lumpl doesn't have: Goliath could survive the 
loss of a toe or an arm, say, but Lumpl couldn't. So by the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals it seems that Lumpl and Goliath are distinct; yet then how could they 
both be in the same place at the same time? Does this mean we should give up 
principle S?46 
This puzzle is traditionally hailed as the paradigm puzzle of constitution. 
But notice that this is also a puzzle about composition, since we need to be able 
to make sense of the composition relation to get on the grasp of the difference 
between Goliath and Lumpl to get the puzzle off the ground. As explained above, 
in accepting the puzzle, we accept that statues have (e.g.) arms as undetached 
parts (Goliath could have lost an arm and survived, but Lumpl couldn‟t have), and 
lumps of clay have undetached parts (e.g., Lumpl is made of lots of undetached 
clay bits, all of which are essential to Lumpl‟s survival; in order to understand that 
Lumpl‟s clay bits are essential to it, you first have to presuppose that Lumpl has 
clay bits as parts to begin with, and all of these parts are undetached). Also, in 
order to get the puzzle going, we had to imagine that there were two halves of 
the statues (the top half and the bottom half), and two lumps of clay, that will 
eventually make up Lumpl, in order to understand that both Goliath and Lumpl 
                                                 
46 Some think we should give up, or at least modify, principle S. See (e.g.) David Wiggins (1968). 
Others think that we should give up something else: Merricks (2001) thinks this puzzle shows that 
we should give up the Existence Assumption—i.e., he is an Eliminativist about ordinary objects 
and denies that (e.g.) tables and chairs exist. Van Cleve (1986) and Zimmerman (1995) think that 
we should reject the idea that objects lose their parts, and embrace mereological essentialism—
although not for the reasons that I do (discussed below). And so on.   

 
174
came into existence at the same time. We would not be able to understand that 
Goliath and Lumpl had overlapping temporal careers, an overlap of conception 
and destruction, if we didn‟t grasp that there were parts of each that existed on 
Day 1.47 So, integral to the puzzle, is that Goliath and Lumpl involve issues of 
composition as well as constitution (assuming for the moment that these are 
indeed distinct relations).  
Moreover, as I have mentioned before, since the CI theorist will claim, for 
example, that the lump of clay is identical to the clay molecules that compose the 
lump, then it is irrelevant whether the puzzle is formulated in terms of one-one 
relations, or many-one. Suppose that we have a lump of clay that is composed of 
many clay particles (one-many), and a statue that is constituted by the lump of 
clay (one-one). CI claims that the relation between the lump of clay and the clay 
particles is identity; so the lump of clay is the clay particles. By the substitutivity 
of identity, the statue is constituted by the clay particles, which is a one-many 
relationship. So, by the supposition that composition is one-many, the statue is 
composed of the clay particles; thus, the statue is identical to the clay particles.48 
So a CI theorist should not (and maybe even cannot) rest on the difference 
                                                 
47 One might think to object to me here: “Aha! Gotcha! You just admitted that the parts of Goliath 
and Lumpl existed on Day 1, yet admitted above (to get the puzzle going) that Golaith and Lumpl 
do not exist on Day 1. So doesn‟t that show that Goliath and Lumpl are not identical to the parts 
that compose them?” My answer to this objection is just the answer I will give to the Modal 
Objection, and to the constitution puzzles in general: it depends crucially on my metaphysics of 
objects, which I will detail in the work that follows. Also, as with many of these puzzles, the 
solutions involve the charge that the original set-up of the relevant puzzle is misleading in some 
way. Again, see below for more.   
 
48 I will have more to say about this particular example below, in the course of detailing the 
puzzles.  
 

 
175
between composition and constitution as a difference between the relata being 
one-many or one-one.  
I hope that at this point, one can easily see why the purported difference 
between composition and constitution is on shaky ground, especially if CI is true. 
Yet this should not lead us to think that the purported constitution puzzles are 
thereby unimportant; they are still (initially at least) problematic. Let us now see 
how a CI theorist will respond to them.   
 
4. CI and Solving the Constitution Puzzles 
4.1 
Does CI entail Mereological Essentialism?  
As mentioned at the outset, I think that the CI theorist has the resources 
available to adequately address the above four puzzles. However, some might 
think that this project is doomed from the start. This is because some might think 
that there is an obvious difference between my thesis—CI—and the puzzles I‟ve 
laid out above. Namely, CI is a thesis about mereological sums and their parts, 
whereas all of the puzzles I discussed above are concerned with ordinary 
objects, not mereological sums. When it comes to mereology, in other words, CI 
may be true, but when it comes to ordinary objects, it is not.  
Moreover, at this point, one might be wondering whether I have been 
overselling the merits of CI. I began this thesis with talk about ordinary objects; I 
continued this way of speaking in the chapters that followed. In fact, throughout 
this project I have been pumping intuitions using ordinary objects in our ordinary 
life. “The one deck is identical to 52 cards,” I insisted. “The 52 cards are identical 

 
176
to the one deck.” I continued. “The table is made up of four legs, a top, and some 
drawer,” I claimed, and then I tried my best to convince you that this „made up of‟ 
relation was one of identity. I slipped easily from talk about ordinary objects that 
were „made up of‟ other ordinary objects (e.g., that one dollar in your pocket is 
made up of four quarters, etc.), to abstract talk of parts and wholes. I brought in 
talk about mereology—the study of parts and wholes—and talked about why we 
might think that the mereological sum of any parts whatsoever is as much of an 
object as cats and mats and trees and rocks. In fact, the entire case for CI was 
built on the premise that, if we accept CI, mereology is ontologically innocent, 
and that, given some Quinean assumptions about ontological commitment and 
some traditional theoretical virtues (such as a commitment to parsimony, etc.), 
we could see that the relation between a mereological sum and its parts—the 
composition relation—is really one of identity.  
 But, you might be thinking, the relation between the parts of a 
mereological sum and that sum is one thing; the relation between the parts of an 
ordinary object and that ordinary object is another. The facts of mereology, in 
other words, whatever they may be, have no bearing on the facts of ordinary 
objects.  
Mereological sums have their parts essentially, you might rightly point out, 
while ordinary objects, so we tend to think, do not. If one of the parts of a 
mereological sum goes out of existence, the mereological sum thereby goes out 
of existence. Not so with ordinary objects, so we tend to think. My running shoe 
could lose some flakes of plastic and bits of rubber or some of the tread could 

 
177
wear off or some of the thread could fray away from the laces. But despite the 
loss of these parts, my running shoe is still my running shoe; the loss of various 
parts has not resulted in a loss of the object, my running shoe. Contrast: the 
mereological sum of all of the parts of my running shoe when it first came out of 
the box is no longer located where it used to be—many of the parts have 
scattered and flaked off the longer I‟ve been wearing them, many of the parts 
used to be attached and now they are not, etc.—and if some of the parts of the 
mereological sum of the parts of my running shoe when it first came out of the 
box have been destroyed, then the mereological sum has thereby been 
destroyed as well.  
So, you might be thinking, it is all fine and well that CI is true as far as 
mereological sums are concerned, but this has no bearing on the metaphysics of 
ordinary objects. And you might further think that I have been wasting your time. I 
have just spent many pages convincing you that CI is true, only to have this 
mean very little when it comes to the status of ordinary objects such as cats and 
mats and running shoes. And you might think that this point has been most 
poignantly highlighted by the foregoing constitution puzzles, which get their force 
from considering ordinary objects, not weird, theoretical objects such as 
mereological sums.  
One might be tempted to separate one‟s views of mereological sums from 
ordinary objects, and to claim that CI is true only with respect to mereological 
sums. But I have two objections against such a move. First, someone who claims 
that CI is limited only to mereological sums, and not to ordinary objects, is simply 

 
178
confused or mistaken about what the composition relation is. Second, it seems 
that many who are tempted by such a view are driven to this position via an 
argument similar to the one Merricks gives against CI.49 I will lay out this 
argument below and show where I think such an argument goes wrong. Let me 
discuss the first point first, and then I‟ll discuss the Merricks-like argument 
against CI.  
Suppose someone wants to claim that CI holds for mereological sums but 
not for ordinary objects. One of the problems with this position is that what has 
been at issue is the composition relation, not the relata that this relation is held 
between. It would be an odd view indeed if one were to say that the composition 
relation is identity when it holds between a mereological sum and its parts, but 
that this same(?!) relation is not identity when it holds between ordinary objects 
such as cats and mats and running shoes, and all of their respective parts.  
 
Now, true, one might claim that, strictly speaking, when we, qua 
philosophers, use the word „composition‟, this is a technical term that applies only 
to the study of mereology, and to formal, theoretical objects such as mereological 
sums. But, one might argue, this is not a relation that we ordinarily use when we 
are talking about the relation of ordinary objects and their parts.  
 
One might try to take this line, but I suspect it would crumble under 
scrutiny. Mereology, as discussed by Lesniewski, Leonard and Goodman (1940), 
Lewis (1991), Bigelow (1996), et. al., is supposed to be the study of parts and 
wholes, intuitively and pre-theoretically understood. Indeed, Lewis reminds us 
                                                 
49 Cf. Merricks (1999) 
 

 
179
that the notion of „part‟ in mereology is an ideological primitive. Talk of what it is 
for one thing to be a part of another does follow from certain axioms and 
principles (e.g., transitivity, reflexivity, anti-symmetry, etc.), yet this is supposed 
to reflect our intuitive sense of what it is for one thing to be a part of another. And 
this intuitive sense we acquire from our knowledge of things in the world—from 
our knowledge of ordinary objects such as cats and mats and running shoes and 
how these objects relate to their respective parts. So given that mereology is a 
formalism that aims to capture our intuitive notions of parthood, born out of our 
pre-theoretical notion of parthood as it applies to ordinary objects, it would be 
odd to claim that „composition‟ is then a purely formal notion that only applies to 
technical „objects‟ such as mereological sums, but not to ordinary objects.  
 
Also, for similar reasons, one could not plausibly maintain that 
„composition‟ is ambiguous—that on the one hand it refers to the relation 
between a mereological sum and its parts, which is identity, and on the other it 
refers to the relation between ordinary objects and their parts, which is not 
identity. For given that mereology is supposed to be capturing the relation that‟s 
had between an ordinary object and its parts, then it would be unlikely (and 
unfortunate!) that „composition‟ was ambiguous. 
 
So it is implausible that there is one relation—composition—that behaves 
one way when its relata are mereological sums and their parts, and another 
when its relata are ordinary objects and their parts. And it is implausible that 

 
180
there are two different relations that are confusingly both called „composition.‟ 
And our definitions of CI and ME reflect this well50:  
 
Composition as Identity (CI):  
Any composite object, O, is (hybrid)  
 
 
 
 
 
identical with the objects O1, …, On that  
 
 
 
 
 
are its parts; O =h O1, …, On.   
 
Mereological Essentialism (ME): Any composite object, O, is composed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of (all and only) its parts O1, …, On, in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
every possible world in which O exists. 
 
CI claims that so long as there is any composite object, O, that is made of 
(all and only) some parts, O1, …, On, then O is (hybrid) identical to O1, …, On. 
And ME claims that for any object O, which is composed of (all and only) its parts 
O1, …, On , O is composed of O1, …, On in every possible world in which O 
exists. If any composite object will count, then it could not be the case that CI 
was true for mereological sums, but not true for ordinary objects. So long as the 
composition relation holds—whatever the relata happen to be—then CI claims 
that this relation is identity. And so I haven‟t been overselling the case for CI; all 
of my examples of ordinary objects to motivate CI throughout this thesis have not 
been misleading, for we are dealing in each case with some kind of mereological 
sum or other.  
But one might still insist as follows. Never mind whether CI and ME are 
defined in seemingly compatible ways. The fact remains that mereological sums, 
                                                 
50 As noted previously, these definitions are borrowed and modified from Merricks (1999), 
“Composition as Identity, Mereological Essentialism, and Counterpart Theory”, Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy, Vol. 77, No.2, pp. 192-195; June 1999. See Chapter 1, 2, and 3.  
 

 
181
traditionally understood,51 have all of their parts essentially, whereas ordinary 
objects do not. Therefore, ordinary objects cannot be identical to any 
mereological sum, and so mereological sums must be something different from 
ordinary objects.  
My answer to this kind of objection is related to my response to Merricks‟ 
argument against CI. Trenton Merricks (1999) presents a seemingly compelling 
argument against CI, which I think many are tempted by. The first premise claims 
that CI entails mereological essentialism. As mentioned previously, he then 
concludes that since mereological essentialism is objectionable, CI is as well. I 
have already said why most people find ME objectionable: we intuitively think 
that objects can gain and lose (at least very small) parts! If ME is true, then no 
object would or could survive the loss of even its very smallest parts. And this 
would seemingly lead to a very wacky view of objects (e.g., objects would „pop‟ 
out of existence every time they „lost‟ a part, and a new one would „pop‟ up in its 
place, etc.). And this, as mentioned above, is one of the reasons one might have 
for insisting that ordinary objects cannot be identical to mereological sums.  
But let us first focus on his conditional claim that if CI is true, then 
mereological essentialism follows. If he is right, then this gives us yet another 
reason why one cannot think that CI is true for mereological sums, but not true 
for ordinary objects. Then I will address where I think the CI theorist should resist 
his argument. 
Recall again the above definitions of CI and ME: 
                                                 
51 I say traditionally: it is usually assumed mereological sums do have their parts essentially. This 
assumption has been challenged, offering up a looser notion of „mereological sum‟—one which 
does not carry with it part essentialism. See Sider (?), e.g. 

 
182
 
Composition as Identity (CI):  
Any composite object, O, is (hybrid)  
 
 
 
 
 
identical with the objects O1, …, On that  
 
 
 
 
 
are its parts; O =h O1, …, On.   
 
Mereological Essentialism (ME): Any composite object, O, is composed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of (all and only) its parts O1, …, On, in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
every possible world in which O exists. 
 
To show that CI entails ME, Trenton Merricks gives the following argument:  
 
“…suppose that O, the object composed of O1 …On, is identical with 
 
O1...On. From this, the fact that O1...On are identical with Ol...On in every 
 
possible world, and the indiscernibility of identicals it follows that O is 
 
identical with Ol...On in every possible world) Therefore, if composition as 
 
identity is true, there is no world in which O exists but is not composed of 
 
O1...On. So composition as identity implies that O—and, of course, every 
 
other composite object—must, in every world in which it exists, be 
 
composed of the parts that actually compose it. Composition as identity 
 
entails mereological essentialism.” [1999:192-1] 
 
The idea seems pretty straightforward. If we have already committed to CI, as 
formulated above, then we think that any composite object is (hybrid) identical to 
its parts. But if a composite object is identical to its parts, then by the 
Indiscernibility of Identicals,52 there is no world where the composite object exists 
and its (actual) parts do not. 
 
Of course, one way to resist this move is to deny the Indiscernibility of 
Identicals. As mentioned in previous chapters, this is the move that Donald 
Baxter makes. Also, if one maintains a Weak Composition Thesis, as Lewis does 
(1991), then one might think that composition is analogous to identity, but not 
strictly identity, and that one of the (few?) differences between composition and 
identity would be that the latter obeys the Indiscernibility of Identicals while the 
                                                 
52 One could also use the Necessity of Identity here to arrive at the same conclusion.  
 

 
183
former does not. And so, on this view, one might endorse a version of CI (as 
stated above) but wriggle out of Merricks‟ argument, since the relation held 
between a composite object and its parts, while a kind of identity, does not obey 
the Indiscernibility of Identicals. Thus, one could—in letter but not in spirit—
maintain CI but deny ME. But since I have already given my reasons for rejecting 
these two views,53 let us move on.54  
 
Trenton Merricks gives us a succinct argument against CI: a direct modus 
tollens against the view. And I actually agree with his first premise that CI does 
entail ME. Moreover—and this may be surprising—I think it should. That is, I 
think it is a good thing that it does. So, rather than resist Merrick‟s argument that 
CI entails ME, I will resist his claim that ME is a view that should be rejected. His 
modus tollens is my modus ponens. Moreover, going back to the line of 
reasoning that claims that ordinary objects cannot be identical to mereological 
sums because ordinary objects do not have their parts essentially, but 
mereological sums do, I am going pursue the line that, yes, ordinary objects do 
have their parts essentially. In other words, my response to both arguments will 
be a full defense of Mereological Essentialism. Once I show how ME can and 
should be embraced, then I will show how this view, together with CI, can solve 
the puzzles that were raised earlier in this chapter.  Once that is completed, we 
                                                 
53 See Chapter 1.  
 
54 Another way to resist Merricks‟ argument is to insist that something has gone awry. See Ross 
Cameron (2007) “The Contingency of Composition.” Unfortunately, I do not have the space here 
to discuss Cameron‟s objection to Merricks‟ argument; I will be assuming that Merricks‟ argument 
is problem-free.  

 
184
will then come full circle and see how CI can successfully defend herself against 
the Modal Objection.  
 
4.2 
 Embracing Mereological Essentialism: the Lump Theory 
I am going to try to convince you in the pages that follow that Mereological 
Essentialism is true and intuitive. I am going to do so by easing you in toe-first, 
little by little. Our first step in being so convinced will be to remind ourselves all of 
the many ways that we talk about some thing(s) being part of some other(s). This 
is supposed to be intuitive and commonsensical; I am relying on our pre-
theoretical judgments for now. (We will get to the unintuitive, non-
commonsensical, and post-theoretical bits in a moment.) Consider the following 
perfectly acceptable sentences: 
(1) Nacho‟s tail is a part of him. 
(2) Those pieces are part of the puzzle. 
(3) This is the part when the girl turns into a vampire. [Said during a 
movie] 
(4) Genocide is a very dark part of history. 
(5) Adolescence was a depressing part of my life. 
(6) The ability to love is the better part of humanity.  
(7) Knowing that she could run the marathon is part of what motivated the 
girl to actually run it. 
(8) God‟s foreknowledge is part of his omniscience. 
(9) Trigonometry is part of mathematics.55  
 
Up until this part of the thesis, I have been primarily concerned with material 
parts. I have talked about cards and cats and running shoes and all kinds of 
(material) parts and wholes. And it‟s true that we do talk about material parts in 
                                                 
55 Sentences (1)-(7) are modified from Varzi (2009); (8) and (9) are borrowed from Lewis (1991). 
See also L. A. Paul (2002) “Logical Parts,” in Nous 36:4. 
 

 
185
the way that I talked about them throughout this thesis, as well as sentences (1) 
and (2) above. But although (1) and (2) are both about material things, notice that 
there is a difference—tails are attached or connected parts, while puzzle pieces 
are often detached, or at least detachable, or disconnected, or disconnectable. 
We talked briefly (in Chapter 1) about the difference between connected parts 
and disconnected (or scattered) parts;56 (1) and (2) are just two more examples. 
So we‟ve been in agreement with this up until now: parts are material, and they 
can be attached or unattached, as is evidenced by the acceptable (1) and (2).  
 
But it also seems that we can talk about parts of an event or parts of a 
story, as in (3); we can talk about temporal parts, of history or of individuals, as in 
(4) and (5); we can talk about the parts of a natural kind or group, as in (6); we 
can talk about the parts of motivation or causal chains, even if these are modal in 
nature, as in (7); and we can talk about the parts of features or attributes or fields 
of study, as in (8) and (9). 57  And notice in each of these cases, (3)-(9), one 
might have particular metaphysical views that imply that the relevant parts in 
each case are immaterial. One might, for example, be an immaterialist when it 
comes to events or fictions; or one might think that temporal properties (of history 
or individuals) are abstract; or one might think that natural kinds or categories are 
lodged somewhere in Plato‟s heaven; or one might think that motivating reasons 
are somehow non-physical—perhaps some sort of dualism is true; or that 
                                                 
56 And we will talk even more about this in Chapter 5.  
 
57 Varzi (2009). 
 

 
186
properties, attributes, and fields of mathematical studies are abstract, sets of 
certain individuals, etc.  
I am not going to argue here that any of these above kinds of things need 
be immaterial; in fact, I want to remain decidedly neutral on ontology except for 
the thesis that composition is identity (for now). And this is as it should be. Our 
views of composition and mereology should be silent about whether the world is 
a material world or not.58 Mereology is concerned with the study of parts and 
whole, whatever those parts and wholes may be. So if Berkeley is right, and the 
world is an Idealist one, then my claims about composition will still hold; if Hume 
is right, and the world is a materialist one, then my claims about composition will 
still hold. So, no matter what one‟s ontological views about what there is, so long 
as it is admitted that there are some thing(s) and these things have parts (i.e., the 
Existence Assumption and the Parthood Assumption), CI will still hold.  
What this means, however, and what I think the above examples (1)-(9) 
show, is that we already have a very liberal understanding about what kinds of 
things count as parts. We may have only used examples such as (1) and (2)—
examples where the relevant parts and whole are material and spatial—up until 
this point in the thesis. But some reflection, and examples such as (3)-(9), show 
that that this is very often not the case. We do not always think about the part-
whole relation (only) materially and spatially. In fact, I want to propose that not 
only do we often consider events, properties, time, modality, etc. as parts of 
things (i.e., (3)-(7)), but that this is what is in fact the case: objects do in fact have 
properties, time, modality, etc. as parts. I will say more about this claim below.  
                                                 
58 See Lewis [1991: 76] 

 
187
For now, however, let me return to the point at hand. And let us be open 
to—for now—just the mere possibility that an object has more than just its 
material, spatial parts. (I will argue that this is no mere possibility, that it is in fact 
the case, as we proceed.) We are already, as sentence (1)-(9) seem to show, 
very liberal with our use of the term „part‟, and our concept of parthood in 
general.  
Also, let us recall that one of the reasons for thinking that Mereological 
Essentialism (ME) is implausible is that we tend to think that objects not only 
could lose and gain parts, but that they in fact do. But if ME is correct, then there 
is no possible world in which an object O has parts different than it actually has; it 
cannot be the case that O could have had one part more or less than the parts 
O1, .., On that it actually has, since O has O1, …, On in every world in which O 
exists, according to ME. And if O cannot gain and lose parts across worlds, it 
cannot gain and lose parts across time either. According to ME, O has all of its 
parts necessarily, and so there is no gaining or losing of parts across the board. 
And this may just seem flat-out unacceptable. Ordinary objects in fact do survive 
the loss of some of their parts, we might insist, they can survive the loss of some 
of their parts, and so any view which claims anything to the contrary must be 
false.  
However, I want to suggest that this intuition is misguided in a certain way. 
When we assent to claims such as “ordinary objects in fact do survive the loss of 
some of their parts” and “ordinary objects can survive the loss of their parts”, we 
have forgotten to consider all of the many (non-spatial and (maybe) non-material) 

 
188
parts that ordinary objects have. Our intuitions about whether an object can or 
cannot gain and lose parts, in other words, is intimately tied up with our view of 
what sorts of things count as parts. And this, I have tried to show above, is 
something about which we are actually very liberal-minded.  
Take my desk, for example. I had insisted above that it has remained the 
same desk over four years, even though I admitted that small molecules might 
have flaked off or have chipped away and been destroyed. But, at the time, we 
were only considering material, spatial parts—molecules and small bits of wood, 
say. Yet here is another claim that seems true of the desk, and that seems true 
about parts of the desk: there is part of the desk‟s life when it was just a hunk of 
wood. Think of it. Imagine that someone wanted to make a (rather boring) 
documentary about the life of my desk. We could imagine some grainy, poor-
quality film footage of a hunk of wood in a furniture-maker‟s shop. The narrator 
says something like, “It all began right here in this shop. Here is the desk, about 
to be crafted.” Etc. In a certain sense, then, the hunk of wood is part of the 
desk—the hunk of wood is the desk, way back when. It is true of the desk that it 
once was a piece of wood. And, in fact, this seems to be a very important feature 
of the desk. Put another way, it is a very important part of the desk that it once 
was a hunk of wood. If the desk had never been a hunk of wood, we might be 
inclined to say that the desk before us is very different desk from one that had 
once been a hunk of wood. So it is part of the desk that it used to be a certain 
way.59   
                                                 
59 I am treading on interesting topics about essences, and what it is that makes certain objects 
those particular objects. Is it essential to the desk that it have the history it has? If the desk had a 

 
189
And here is another thing that seems true of the desk: it is part of the 
nature of the desk to possibly lose parts. Part of what it is for this desk to be a 
desk is that it could lose a (material) part here, or it could lose a (material) part 
there, etc.  If this is true, then it seems to follow that at least one of the features 
of the desk is a bunch of modal features about it—it could lose certain (material) 
parts, maybe it couldn‟t lose others, etc. Part of what makes this desk a desk is 
that it could lose some (material) parts here and there! We often think that 
persistence conditions—i.e., those conditions under which some object 
persists—are an essential (or necessary) feature of those objects. Indeed, it is an 
essential (or necessary) part of them.  
I am admittedly stretching your intuitions here, given that you have already 
granted me that we have a liberal notion of parthood. We shall see that it 
ultimately won‟t matter to me whether you are convinced of the intuitiveness of 
the idea of having temporal and modal properties as literal parts of objects or not. 
Ultimately, I do not hold much stake in the connection between intuition and the 
underlying metaphysical truths of reality.60 But it does help to get a feel for the 
theory of objects I will be endorsing, and thinking of temporal and modal 
properties as parts of objects is a first step.    
Moreover, thinking of temporal and modal properties as parts can be 
captured quite nicely by combining metaphysical views already established in the 
                                                                                                                                                 
different history from the one it in fact has, would it still be the same desk? Could the desk be 
made out of a different hunk of wood and still be the same desk? These are all fine questions, but 
ones I will not have time to adequately address here—unless, of course, you think that these 
questions merely collapse into questions about necessary parts of objects.   
 
60 See my comments below, p. 48-9. 

 
190
literature. To see this, let us make two assumptions for now (that we may later 
chose to drop): let us be realists about time and realists about possible worlds. 
We will assume that there are times other than the present, and that (certain 
versions of) Presentism is false. Second, we will assume that there are possible 
worlds other than the actual world. We need not (yet) say what times and worlds 
amount to—i.e., times and worlds could be abstract, ersatz sorts of things—so 
long as we are in agreement that they exist. In what follows, I will often talk as if 
times and worlds are concrete, non-ersatz sorts of things, but we need not do 
this in order to capture the spirit of the metaphysical view of objects I will be 
proposing. If I speak of „worlds‟ and „times‟ and you think that there are no such 
things, simply apply your usual translation schema to my world-talk and time-talk, 
as you are accustomed to doing, and you will be able to see how my view of 
objects can be ontologically accommodating. 
Following Weatherson (ms), let us also assume (for now) that “objects 
which exist at more than one time (world) do so by having different parts at 
different times (worlds).” So we will be committed to both temporal and modal 
parts, and we will be committed to the idea that objects are temporally and 
modally extended.61  
A four-dimensionalist, or worm theorist, defends the view that individuals 
are trans-time fusions. Individual objects are stretched out in time (and space) 
                                                 
61 Again, depending on your own view of time and modality, this idea of objects being „extended‟ 
may be more metaphorical than literal. Details below.  
 

 
191
the way that ordinary folk believe a road is stretched out (only) in space.62 Desks, 
then, are spatiotemporal worms—mereological sums of time slices of three-
dimensional objects. Our intuition that an important feature or part of the desk 
that it used to be a hunk of wood, just about to be carved, is nicely captured by 
the four-dimensionalist picture, since individuals are these spatiotemporally 
extended items that can be „traced‟ over time.63   
One of the benefits of such a view is that we can wriggle out of some of 
the traditional metaphysical puzzles.64 Consider change over time: When you 
were 5 you were 3ft tall, not 5‟3; now you are 5‟3, not 3‟0. We‟d like to think that 
you, like the desk in my office, can remain the same object over time and despite 
some minor changes (a minimal growth spurt, say). But you at 5 years old had 
the property being 3‟0 (and not 5‟3). You at 32 have the property being 5‟3 (and 
not 3‟0). By the Indiscernibility of Identicals, then, you at 5  you at 32. So, 
despite what we might have initially thought, you do not survive over time and 
over change! 
But four-dimensionalism to the rescue: this idea of „you at 5‟ and „you at 
32‟ is a misdescription of the facts. Objects aren‟t wholly present at a time. 
                                                 
62 I am admittedly being a bit sloppy here. There are various different kinds of four-
dimensionalism, and not all of them agree on the picture I am painting here. But since I am only 
using the four-dimensional view as a springboard for my own lump theory of objects, it is fine for 
now if I have not captured all four-dimensionalists exactly right. It is only the general idea of four-
dimensionalism and temporal parts theory that is important for my purposes here. See Mark 
Heller‟s (1993) “Varieties of Four-Dimensionalism,” Sider (2001), etc. 
 
63 Of course, there may still remain some vagueness issues about when exactly an individual‟s 
life begins and ends—i.e., where or when we can start to „trace‟ an individual—but let us leave 
these issues aside from now, since they do not seem to affect the issue at hand.  
 
64 In fact, this is one of the leading reasons Sider is convinced that the view is true.  
 

 
192
Rather, they are extended across time (and space). So a part of you is 3‟0 (the 
part of you that is 5 years old) and a part of you is 5‟3 (the part of you that is 32). 
But this is no more of a contradiction than that part of you is on the ground right 
now (your foot, for example) and a part of you is not (your head, let‟s hope). The 
four-dimensionalist can then give a nice gloss of what it is for an object to change 
over time: an object changes iff there is a a temporal part of the object that differs 
from another temporal part of that object. Change, then, “is difference between 
successive temporal parts.”65  
In a sense, then, an object on the four-dimensionalist picture does not, 
strictly speaking, gain and lose parts. Since an object, according to this view, is a 
trans-time fusion, the object—the fusion—has all of its parts all of the time; it 
doesn‟t gain and lose parts at all. But the four-dimensionalist accommodates our 
intuitions about ordinary objects gaining and losing parts by saying that what it is 
for an object to gain and lose parts is for the object to have a temporal part that 
differs from one of its other temporal parts. My desk has a temporal part, tp1, let‟s 
say, that is composed of wood molecules m1, …mn. My desk has another 
temporal part, tp2, however, that is composed of wood molecules m1, …, mn, 
mn+1. To say that my desk gained a part, then, is just to say that my desk has two 
temporal parts, tp1 and tp2, which differ in their mis, such that tp2 has all of the 
parts tp1 has, plus one. So it is not the case that our statements about ordinary 
objects concerning change are flat-out false, according to the four-dimensionalist 
picture. But what makes these statements true is different than we might have 
                                                 
65 Sider (1997), (2001), (2007). 
 

 
193
(pre-theoretically) thought. In this way, we can have a view of objects that sort of 
captures our intuitions about my desk: my desk does gain and lose parts and still 
remain the same object. It‟s just that the metaphysical facts of what it is for 
something to change are slightly different than we may have first supposed.  
But let us take things a bit further. Let us imagine for a moment that we 
are not only stretched out across time (and space), but that we are stretched out 
across possible worlds as well. This might be called a kind of five-
dimensionalism, or lump, view of objects.66 According to this view, individuals are 
not only trans-time, but also trans-world individuals. What makes it the case that 
my desk could have one or more parts than it actually has is that in some other 
possible world, a part of my desk (the part that is in another possible world) has 
more parts than another part (the part of it that is in the actual world) does.  
One worry for the four-dimensionalist was that they would not be able to 
account for the fact that we think that objects gain and lose parts over time. For if 
an object is just a trans-time fusion, then it in fact has all of its parts all of the 
time, and so—in a certain sense—it (the fusion!) doesn‟t lose parts at all. But the 
move was to recast our talk of temporal change into differences between 
temporal parts. Similarly, the lump theorist will need to address a parallel worry: 
we think that objects can gain and lose parts. We think that, even if my desk is 
actually made out of parts p1, …, pn, in the actual world, it could have been made 
out of parts p1, …, pn, pn+1 instead; that is, it is made out of parts p1, …, pn, pn+1 in 
some other possible world. 
                                                 
66 Again, this terminology is borrowed from Weatherson (ms).  

 
194
But similar to the move made by the four-dimensionalist, talk about 
differences of individuals (or counterparts) in distinct possible worlds will be 
cashed out in terms of differences between modal parts of trans-world (and 
trans-time, trans-space) individuals. An individual, then, has (at least) one part in 
one world, and another in another world.67 Any differences between these parts 
will then be the basis for the modal facts about these individuals.  
In what way can we make sense of „modal facts‟ of these individuals? If 
objects such as tables and chairs and cats and mats—and all sorts of ordinary 
objects including you and me—really are these trans-world fusions, then how do 
we say of these trans-world individuals that it is possible that they lose parts or 
gain parts, or that it is possible that they run for president, or that it is impossible 
that they square the circle, etc? Just how do we make sense of what is possible 
and necessary for individuals that are stretched out over possible worlds? 
This question is analogous to the following if, after the four-dimensionalist 
has described her view, we were to ask: “OK. I see that individuals are these 
trans-temporal fusions of instantaneous temporal parts. And I see that you have 
a way of recasting our talk of „change‟ to capture our intuition that objects change 
over time. But what about these trans-time objects—these fusions of temporal 
parts—how can we make sense of these individuals changing over time?” 
What the four-dimensionalist will surely point out to such an inquisitor is 
that such objects simply do not change over time. To think that they would or do 
                                                 
67 I suppose there could be strange individuals that have only one modal part, just like there may 
be strange individuals that have just one (instantaneous) temporal part, just like there may be 
strange non-extended objects that have only one spatial part, etc. But let‟s leave these weird 
objects aside for now; I will be discussing them briefly below. 

 
195
would presuppose a confusion about what such objects are. Such objects are 
mereological fusions of temporal parts, and given what it is for something to 
change over time, such fusions simply do not change over time.  
Similarly, given that the lump theorist is going to cash out the modal facts 
in terms of parthood—i.e., given that what is possible and impossible for you is 
made true by parts of you doing thus-and-so in other possible worlds—then such 
trans-world objects do not themselves have anything that is possible or 
impossible for them. Or, rather: all modal facts about such trans-world fusions 
are vacuously true, since there is no one world in which such fusions exists. 
Modal talk, in other words, about such objects simply doesn‟t make sense, given 
that modal talk is cashed out (according to the lump theorist) as parts of these 
lumps being in different worlds. The lump itself—the lump‟s improper part—is not 
in any one world; it is stretched out among many of them! So to ask about the 
modal facts of the lump is as much of a confusion as it is to ask the four-
dimensionalist whether space-time worms change over time.  
But let us return to two of the assumptions that I made at the outset of my 
explanation of a lump theory of objects. I said that I wanted to assume: (i) that we 
are realists about time, or (at least) non-presentists, and (ii) that we are realists 
about possible worlds. Some may be balking at (i); even more, no doubt, will be 
balking at (ii). If my suggested method of embracing Mereological Essentialism 
requires a commitment to modal realism (some may argue), then so much the 
worse for my view! 

 
196
But just because I assumed modal realism and temporal realism does not 
mean that I need be committed to them. Indeed, I only assumed as much for a 
smoother elucidation of my theory of objects. Now that we have an outline of the 
view on the table, we can see what such a view would be like if we were to drop 
either assumption (i) or (ii). 
Let us first imagine that we are realists about time, but are not modal 
realists.68 We do not believe that there are concrete possible worlds, spatio-
temporally isolated from each other, that contain world-bound individuals living in 
them. Perhaps we think that there are possible worlds, but these are abstract 
sorts of things—sets of sentences in Plato‟s heaven, or propositions, or fictitious 
objects, etc. In that case, I still think that objects are lumpy, trans-world (and 
trans-spatiotemporal) objects. It‟s just that the parts of objects that are „in‟ these 
abstract possible worlds are themselves abstract. Our non-actual world-parts, 
then, are still part of us, they just happen to be abstract parts of us.  
That we can have abstract things as parts should be acceptable for three 
reasons. One, if the view we are imagining is an ersatz view of possible worlds, 
then abstract things are already included in the (assumed) ontology. So one 
should not be resistant to abstracta in general, if they are already included in the 
presupposed worldview. Second, abstracta are already part of the world (we are 
supposing); so they are already part of something (i.e., the universe). So we 
                                                 
68 Recall that “modal realism” is unfortunately labeled, as readily admitted by Lewis (1986). A 
modal realist is the view that there are possible worlds and these worlds are concrete. So, a 
better name would be “Concrete world realism.” An ersatzer about possible worlds believes that 
there are possible worlds, but that these worlds are abstract. So they might be labeled “Abstract 
world realism.” Only the first view, however, is called “modal realism,” even though both are 
realists about modality. And, of course, one could be a realist about modality, but not be a realist 
about worlds—perhaps one believes in brute modal facts, e.g.—and so one would technically be 
a modal realist. Unfortunately, since the inapt terminology has stuck, I‟ll keep using it as well.   

 
197
should not find it objectionable that such things are parts of people. Third, we‟ve 
already admitted at the beginning of this section that our ordinary use of „part of‟ 
is quite liberal, and so claiming that we have abstract things as part should be (in 
principle) no different than claiming that (e.g.) trigonometry is a part of 
mathematics. So even if one believes that there are possible worlds, but believes 
that possible worlds are abstract, not concrete, I can still accommodate my lump 
theory of objects to suit such a view. I will still maintain that ordinary objects are 
trans-world individuals—it is just that the worlds and world-parts in question are 
abstract rather than concrete.   
Now imagine that you are not a modal realist (i.e., you do not believe in 
concrete possible worlds), but you are not an ersatzer either (i.e., you do not 
believe in abstract possible worlds). Still, you must have some story about what 
makes our modal statements true. You either are committed to possible worlds, 
and they are either concrete or abstract; or you are a fictionalist about possible 
worlds, but you have a story to tell about how these fictions work; or you are an 
eliminativist about possible worlds, and are committed to brute modal facts or 
truths, or brute modal properties, etc.69 Whatever your modal story is going to be, 
I can accommodate the lump theory of objects to suit it: you tell me what‟s in your 
ontology to account for our rich array of modal truths, and then I will tell what 
ordinary objects are—mereological sums of spatial, temporal, and modal parts 
(where the metaphysics of „modal parts‟ here is supplied by you, and the theory 
of modality that you accept). 
                                                 
69 Or I suppose you could deny that there are modal truths at all. But then the Modal Objection, 
and all of the worries being dealt with in this chapter, would never get off the ground. Thanks to 
Ted Parent for discussion here.  

 
198
And a similar adaptation of my lump theory of objects will apply to your 
favorite view of time. Let us suppose that you are a Presentist about time. You 
think that there only exists the present, and present objects, and that there is no 
such thing as the past, or the future, or any past or future objects such as 
dinosaurs or flying cars. Still, on such a view, you do have a way of grounding 
the truths of our tensed claims. “Bill Clinton was president” still comes out true on 
the Presentist view (as it does on the four-dimensionalist view, e.g.). It‟s just that 
the metaphysical story about what makes it true is different than the four-
dimensionalist story. According to one kind of Presentist, what makes the above 
past-tensed statements true is that Bill Clinton presently has the property having 
been president.  So past-tensed statements are made true by presently existing 
objects having certain tensed properties. So if this kind of Presentist has already 
granted that there are tensed properties in her ontology, then I can accommodate 
my lump-theory of objects to suit her metaphysical preferences. I will maintain 
that tensed-properties are parts of ordinary objects.70 Indeed, ordinary objects 
are mereological sums of spatial, temporal, and modal parts—it‟s just that 
„temporal parts‟ here can be interpreted in a Presentist-friendly way.  
Analogous with the move made concerning modal parts, everyone has to 
have a story about our temporal truths. Whatever your temporal story is going to 
                                                 
70 This is assuming two things: (i) that tensed properties are the truth-makers of tensed 
statements, and (ii) that the relation between an individual and their properties is mereological 
(e.g., an immanent theory of properties). Neither of these assumptions is uncontroversial, but I do 
not have the space here to defend them. My main point in flagging the assumptions is to show 
that my lump theory is somewhat accommodating and flexible; it can be adjusted to many 
different views of time and modality. But it is not completely non-committal. See section 5 of this 
chapter for further discussion. Also, see Aristotle, Plato, Frege, Armstrong, Campell, Forrest, 
Bigelow for a discussion on assumption (ii). See Loux “Aristotle‟s Constituent Ontology OSM vol. 
2. Craig Burne is a presentist who denies (i). Thanks to Jason Bowers for discussion here.  
 

 
199
be, I can accommodate the lump theory of objects to suit it: you tell me what‟s in 
your ontology to account for our rich array of temporal truths, and then I will tell 
what ordinary objects are—mereological sums of spatial, temporal, and modal 
parts (where the metaphysics of „temporal parts‟ here is supplied by you, and the 
theory of time that you accept). 
Thus, even though I assumed at the outset a certain view of time and a 
certain view of modality, we can see now that I need not have done so. (In fact, I 
only did so to maintain the analogous moves between the temporal parts theorist 
and the lump theory of objects, and make my theory of objects more accessible.) 
So it is no objection to my lump theory of objects that its ontological commitments 
are too costly. My lump theory of objects can be accommodated to suit nearly 
any ontological view of the world, so long as that view has some story about what 
grounds our spatial, temporal, and modal facts. So there should little objection to 
my lump theory on the grounds that it commits one an outrageous ontology.71  
Obviously, this claim goes double if CI is true. For if mereological sums 
just are identical to the parts that make them up, and I claim that ordinary objects 
are mereological sums of spatial, temporal, and modal parts (where what counts 
as „spatial‟, „temporal‟, and „modal‟ parts is filled in by you and your favorite 
metaphysical world-view), then there have been no extra ontological 
commitments made by bringing on board CI and the lump theory of objects. The 
only ontological commitments you will have are those that were already in place 
prior to my theory of composition and my theory of objects. CI and the lump 
theory subsume your preferred theory of time and modality, and deliver an 
                                                 
71 This of course depends on how sparse your ontology already is. See below, section 5. 

 
200
ontologically friendly package—ontologically friendly relative to commitments you 
are already beholden to.   
But perhaps you are thinking: Look, I don‟t object to this view because I 
think it is ontologically excessive. I object to this view because it seems just plain 
unintuitive and crazy! 
I do not have time for a complete defense of a lump theory of objects, so I 
will just say a few quick words here. First, I think our intuitions about what objects 
are—the underlying metaphysical facts of objecthood—are guided in part by 
what we say, and the sentences and utterances we accept. Some of the things 
that we say are the sentences (1)-(9) that we listed at the beginning of this 
section. And, as discussed above, most of these do not straightforwardly involve 
spatial or material parts; rather, many of them involve aspatial or immaterial 
parts, depending on your theory of (e.g.) events, propositions, reasons, 
properties, etc. Insofar as any of these sentences are acceptable, thinking about 
objects as having more than just spatial or material parts is acceptable.  
 
Second, however, we use our ordinary intuitions to motivate us to think 
carefully about metaphysics, to get us initially intrigued about metaphysical 
puzzles. It may turn out that, after some reflection, our ordinary intuitions are 
misguided. We have been known to think that the earth is flat, that it is at the 
center of the universe, that objects such as tables and chairs are not mostly 
empty space, that Newtonian physics is correct, etc.; we don‟t have a terrific 
history of intuiting the truth. So, as a purely general point, I do not take 

 
201
„incredulous stare‟ objections as having much weight, dialectally.72 Of course, it 
will always be better, all else being equal, that a theory is intuitive rather than not. 
But if the only complaint against the lump theory object is mere incredulity, then I 
will consider my defense of the lump theory of objects as a success.  
 
Finally, in metaphysics, it is common practice to let the utility of a view 
count as evidence in favor for it.73 Sider, for example, thinks that the ability of 
four-dimensionalism to solve classic philosophical problems is a good reason to 
think that the view is true. If that‟s right, then it seems that my lump theory of 
objects adopts all of the reasons that Sider has for thinking that his temporal 
parts view is true (since I posit that there are at least temporal parts), and then 
some.  
Sider‟s view takes a decidedly ad hoc turn when he considers objects 
(such as Goliath and Lumpl) that have completely overlapping temporal careers. 
Sider cannot resort to his temporal parts theory to solve this particular puzzle, 
because by stipulation, Goliath and Lumpl share all of their temporal parts. Sider 
claims that it is due to an “inflexible account of de re modalities” that is 
responsible for generating puzzle cases such as Goliath and Lumpl. He claims 
that the purported distinguishing feature between Goliath and Lumpl—e.g., that 
Lumpl could have survived being smushed, but Goliath could not have, etc.—
should be resisted as a distinguishing feature. Rather, Sider claims that  
“…surely [this apparent difference] is due in some way to a shift in our 
conceptualization of a single object, rather than a difference between two 
                                                 
72 Nor does Lewis. See Lewis (1986). 
 
73 See Lewis (1986); Sider (2002); etc. 
 

 
202
objects; surely, adopting a flexible account of de re modal predication, or a 
flexible error-theory, is a more sensible alternative than multiplying entities 
corresponding to their modal differences.” 74 
 
Sider then invokes the notion of counterparts to solve the Goliath and Lumpl 
puzzle. He claims:  
“To say that Lumpl might have survived flattening is to say that Lumpl has 
lump counterparts that survive flattening; to say that Goliath could not 
have survived flattening is to say that Goliath has no statue counterparts 
that survive flattening. Nonetheless, Lumpl is Goliath.”  
 
So Sider claims that (i) we must choose between either ontological excess due to 
individuating objects according to their modal properties or adopting a flexible 
account of de re modal predication, or a flexible error theory, and (ii) that we 
should avoid ontological excess, avoid an error-theory, and instead adopt a 
counterpart theoretic explanation of how it is that we have a flexible account of 
de re modal predication.75   
But (i) is a false trilemma, which undermines our primary reason for 
accepting (ii). On my lump theory of objects it will not be ontologically excessive 
to individuate objects (such as Goliath and Lumpl) according to their modal 
properties. I claim that ordinary objects are mereological sums of spatial, 
temporal, and modal parts. If Goliath and Lumpl have completely overlapping 
temporal careers, this need not mean that we cannot distinguish them—for they 
will not have completely overlapping world-careers (the details of this will be 
                                                 
74 Sider 2001, p. 113-4.  
 
75 This last claim is not wholly supported by the passage I‟ve quoted above, but can be surmised 
by what Sider does say in other sections of Sider (2001).  
 

 
203
fleshed out below).76 But it will not mean that we are being ontologically 
excessive either, since I am not positing any additional items that Sider himself 
does not already have in his ontology. For Sider already has all of the lump 
counterparts, and all of the statue counterparts of Goliath and Lumpl. He 
maintains that Goliath is identical to Lumpl; I claim that Goliath is distinct from 
Lumpl. This might seem then, on the face of it, that I am adding to the number of 
entities in my ontology: I have just distinguished two objects where he thinks 
there is one.  
But I maintain that what „Goliath‟ and „Lumpl‟ refer to when Sider claims 
that Goliath is identical to Lumpl is merely a world-chunk—a world part that 
certain trans-world objects happen to share. When I claim that Goliath and Lumpl 
are distinct, „Goliath‟ and „Lumpl‟ refer to lumpy, trans-world, trans-spatiotemporal 
objects. In one world, it just so happens that Goliath (the trans-world fusion) and 
Lumpl (the trans-world fusion) overlap one of their world parts—just as two trans-
temporal mereological sums can overlap one their temporal parts (e.g., Tib and 
Tibbles), and just as two trans-spatial mereological sums can overlap one or 
more of their spatial parts (e.g., an intersecting road).  Goliath and Lumpl do not 
overlap all of their world parts, which is why it is that Goliath and Lumpl (the 
trans-world objects) are distinct; but the do overlap (at least) one of them, which 
is why we tend to (mistakenly) think that Goliath and Lumpl are completely 
coinciding.  
                                                 
76 For a different take on the idea that purported co-incident objects (e.g., Goliath and Lumpl) are 
cases of (incomplete) overlap, rather than total coincidence, see L.A. Paul “Coincidence as 
Overlap” in Nous (2006). Paul takes objects to be fusions of properties, which may be compatible 
with the lump theory of objects that I am endorsing here.  

 
204
Given that Sider already countenances (e.g.) lump counterparts and 
statue counterparts—i.e., individuals in other possible worlds that I claim are the 
world parts of trans-world mereological fusions—and given that his claim that 
Goliath is identical to Lumpl is translated on my view as merely a case of world-
chunk overlap, my view will be no more ontologically excessive than Sider‟s. I am 
merely taking the „part‟ part of counterpart seriously. What Sider countenances 
as counterparts of world-bound individuals, I countenance as genuine world parts 
of trans-world individuals.  
Moreover, I will have the added advantage of not appealing to counterpart 
theory in a suspiciously ad hoc way, to solve the modal analog of the temporal 
puzzle of the statue and the clay. Having parallel mereological explanations of 
spatial, temporal, and modal differences of distinct objects is theoretically 
elegant, which should add to its overall plausibility. There are no spatial, 
temporal, or modal differences, I claim, without a difference in spatial, temporal, 
or modal parts. Not so on Sider‟s four-dimensional view, however, where 
spatiotemporal differences are cashed out in terms of a difference in 
spatiotemporal parts, but where a modal difference is cashed out in terms of 
counterpart theory, and the flexibility of de re modality.      
If in the course of the rest of the chapter, I can show how my lump theory 
of objects can solve the four constitution puzzles delineated above, then I will 
have thereby provided some reason to think it is true. If I can show that my lump 
theory solves the puzzles more elegantly than any of the competitors, then this 
will only add to the lump theory‟s appeal.  

 
205
So in the end, if we have evidence that my lump theory of objects has 
enormous utility as a theory of objects—if it can solve puzzles, be explanatorily 
robust, be theoretically elegant, and be (reasonably) ontologically responsible—
then this will counterbalance any initial cognitive resistance to it. A theory‟s ability 
to solve a myriad of problems should always count more than the theory‟s (initial) 
un-intuitiveness, all else being equal. 
Alright. Now that we have the outlines of a lump theory of objects on the 
table, let us return to Trenton Merrick‟s claim in his argument that CI entails ME. I 
had said previously that I agreed with this premise; I think that CI does entail ME. 
But in light of my endorsement of a lump theory of objects, we can see that my 
interpretation of such a premise yields a slightly different interpretation than the 
one that was intended by Merricks. 
 
Composition as Identity (CI):  
Any composite object, O, is (hybrid) 
identical with the objects O1, …, On that 
are its parts; O =h O1, …, On.   
 
Mereological Essentialism (ME): Any composite object, O, is composed  
 
 
 
 
 
 
of (all and only) its parts O1, …, On, in  
 
 
 
 
 
 
every possible world in which O exists. 
 
ME claims that any composite object O, is composed of (all and only) its parts 
O1, …, On, in every possible world in which O exists. But notice that this is going 
to turn out trivially true on my lump theory of objects. Suppose O is a lumpy, 
trans-world object, with parts O1, …, On in different possible worlds. But then O 
doesn‟t exist in any one world—by hypothesis, O‟s parts O1, …, On are scattered 
across different possible worlds. If ME was false, then O would exist in a world 

 
206
without O1, …, On. Yet in every world in which O exists (none of them!), O is 
composed of all and only its parts O1, …, On. So ME is never false; so it is true. 
 
Now suppose O is a world-bound object—a strange object that has no 
modal properties because it is not worldally-extended; it is just a world-chunk. It 
exists in only one possible world, and no other. (This is analogous to an object 
that has no temporal properties because it is not temporally-extended; it is just a 
time-slice.) And suppose O is composed of (world-bound) parts O1, …, On. If ME 
was false, then O would exist in a world without O1, …, On. Yet in every world in 
which O exists (just the one!), O is composed of all and only its parts O1, …, On. 
So, again, ME is never false; so it is true. 
So either way—whether we are considering lumpy, trans-world fusions, or 
unlumpy, world-bound fusions—ME is true.  
One might claim that this is a bit of a cheat on my part: I endorse ME only 
because it is trivially true given my lump view of ordinary objects. But ME, 
interpreted this way, seems to capture an intuition that metaphysicians thinking 
about modality have held for quite some time. Many metaphysicians have 
thought that claims about what is possible and necessary are themselves 
necessary.77 If it is possible for me to be at a bar right now, then it seems 
necessary that it is possible for me to be at a bar right now. This intuition coupled 
with a liberal notion of parthood, such that we consider the idea our modal truths 
are made true by having modal parts (e.g., different parts in different possible 
worlds), just delivers us the lump theory of objects I am endorsing here. And on 
                                                 
77 I.e., the modal system S5, where one accepts the following axiom: ◊p →□◊p. 
 

 
207
such a view ME is true! If modal claims are made true by having modal parts, 
and if modal claims are true necessarily, then ME simply follows—i.e., it turns out 
that we have all of our parts necessarily, one way or another.78 As such, I think 
that ME can be plausibly defended, and in such a way that blocks Merrick‟s 
argument. We simply accept that CI entails ME, accept CI, and then show how 
our theory of objects entails that ME is (plausibly!) true. In this way, Merrick‟s 
argument will be ineffective against CI.   
 
  
4.3  
Back to the Puzzles 
Now let‟s apply my theory of objects to the constitution puzzles. Take, for 
example, the Marriage Paradox. We suppose that people are just a collection of 
molecules. And we also suppose that there are at t1 two people, p1 and p2—i.e., 
two groupings of molecules, M1 and M2, such that p1=M1 and p2=M2—exchanging 
vows on a wedding day. Yet seven years later, at t7, there are two groupings of 
molecules, M3 and M4, which are distinct from M1 and M2, such that M1≠M3 and 
M2≠M4. So by the transitivity of Identity, p1≠M3 and p2≠M4. But then the two 
people, p1 and p2 are not bound by the vows to be committed to each other, since 
they presumably do not exit at t7 (only M3 and M4 do).    
This puzzle assumes that people are identical to a grouping of molecules 
at a particular time. A four-dimensionalist view of the matter, however, claims that 
people are these four-dimensional worms, mereological sums of spatial and 
temporal parts. It is not the case that two people such as p1 and p2 are identical 
                                                 
78 That is, it‟s either because we are trans-world objects, or world-bound objects, but either way, 
we have all of our parts necessarily.  

 
208
to some molecules at a particular time, and so it is not the case that p1=M1 and 
p2=M2. Rather, p1 and p2 are each identical to some mereological sum of spatial 
and temporal parts. Moreover, what it would be to make a promise or vow on the 
four-dimensional view might be to promise that you, qua worm, will be committed 
to such-and-such; and so all of your temporal parts, from the time of the promise 
onward, are bound by the promise.79  
Since my lump theory of objects subsumes the four-dimensional strategy, 
I will make a similar move, modulo the commitment to a particular theory of time. 
Since people, according to my theory of objects, are simply lumpy objects, with 
spatial, temporal, and modal parts, then I will deny the claim that the two people 
involved are identical to some molecules at a particular time; i.e., I claim that 
p1≠M1 and p2≠M2, and so the inference that a person does not survive a change 
in their spatial parts is blocked.  
Similarly, with the Ship of Theseus puzzle. I will claim that an object is 
identical to all of its spatial, temporal, and modal parts. Of course, in the Ship of 
Theseus, we have the added complication of having a competitor for identity 
(recall: there is ship A in the beginning, there is ship B that is the result of small 
replacements of parts over time, and then there is ship C which composed of all 
of the material parts (board, mast, etc.) that composed ship A). But this shouldn‟t 
matter. For our mistake was in setting up the puzzle. We assumed that there 
were three candidates for identity ship A, ship B, and ship C. Of course, on my 
lump theory of objects, ships proper are five-dimensional lumps—mereological 
                                                 
79 I do not intend to commit a four-dimensionalist to a particular view of promises here; I merely 
mean to suggest that this is one way the four-dimensionalist could go, and it would add to a nice 
detail to the solution of the puzzle. 

 
209
sums of spatial, temporal, and modal parts. So, strictly speaking, calling A, B, or 
C a ship was a category mistake. A, B, and C were defined only in terms of their 
spatial parts (boards, mast, sail, etc.), and being located at a time. According to 
the lump theory, ordinary objects don‟t exist at a time. Ordinary objects are 
temporally (and modally) extended.    
Still, you might think that this is a merely technical objection. “Who cares 
whether we call A, B, and C ships,” you might think. “There is still a poignant 
question: what is the relationship between A, B, and C (whether they count as 
ships or not)? We had reason to think that A=B, and we had reason to think that 
B=C, but we also had reason to think that A≠C, thus violating the transitivity of 
identity. So this is a puzzle whether or not you think that the objects involved are 
properly ships or not.” 
The point about whether the objects involved are ships or not is important, 
however, since it will explain why it is that we deny one of the above identity 
claims. Our reason for thinking that A=B tracked our intuition that objects can 
survive a loss, gain, and replacement of parts, and still remain the same object. 
But this, according to the lump theory of objects, can be glossed as one object 
that differs in some of its temporal parts, just as you (or your body) might differ in 
some of your in spatial parts—e.g., your foot is flat and you head is round.  
So suppose we take „A‟ to designate some material, spatial parts at a 
time, and „B‟ to designate some material, spatial parts at another time, then A≠B 
because A and B differ in some of their material, spatial parts—e.g., A is made 
up of boards b1, …, bn and B is made up of o1, …, on, and none of the bis are 

 
210
identical to any of the ois.80 The analogy to your body: your foot is not identical to 
your head because your foot is made up of molecules m1, …, mn and your head 
is made up of molecules n1, …, nn, and none of the mis are identical to any of the 
nis. But just because A might not be identical to B does not mean that there isn‟t 
one ship that has A and B as parts. Similarly: just because your foot is not 
identical to your head does not mean that there isn‟t one body that has your foot 
and head as parts. Our reasons for thinking that A=B in the first place are now 
explained away as a mistakened bit of reasoning. We thought that just because 
there is one thing (the ship!) that has A and B as (temporal) parts, then A must 
be identical to B. But this would be just as mistaken as concluding from the fact 
that your body has your foot and head as parts, that your foot must be identical to 
your head.  
So a lump theorist might deny that A=B, without denying that there is a 
single thing—the ship!—that has A and B as (parts), and survives over time. 
Explanation: what it means to „survive over time‟ is receiving a different analysis 
than we may have first supposed (i.e., what it is for an object to „survive over 
time‟ is just for it—the mereological sum of spatial and temporal parts—to have 
temporal parts that are connected in the right way (causally, e.g.)).    
What about C? „C‟, we might claim, picks out (only!) some material, spatial 
parts—the boards, mast, sail, etc., that „A‟ picked out. And so A=C, if all of the 
                                                 
80 It should be noted that this is not the solution the Sider prefers, since he thinks that „A‟ and „B‟ 
pick out spatiotemporal time-slices, rather than mere spatial parts as I am assuming here. See 
below for discussion. 

 
211
material, spatial parts are identical, which by stipulation they were.81 But this 
does not then mean that either A or C is a ship, since ships are lumpy objects, 
mereological sums of spatial, temporal, and modal parts. So even though a lump 
theorist will admit that A=C, she will deny that this means that there is another 
ship that is a competitor for the ship that was under discussion a moment ago—
the mereological sum of lots of spatial and temporal (and modal parts), including 
A and B. 
Of course, it might be argued that there is a distinct ship that includes 
spatial parts A, C (since A=C), and a bunch of temporal and modal parts, such 
that the lumpy object we are left with is one that began as a bunch of boards 
b1,…, bn, then was just one board, then two, then three, then four, etc., until it 
was a bunch of boards again b1,…, bn. This would just be the mereological sum 
that results if we „trace‟ the object that is all of the original boards, and then an 
accumulation of those same boards as they are discarded from the other ship. If 
such a trans-spatiotemporal (trans-world) object is indeed a ship, then it would be 
distinct from the other ship, since they have distinct temporal (and presumably 
modal) parts. But even so, there is no puzzle here. At least, we no longer have a 
violation of the transitivity of identity as we did when the puzzle was originally 
being generated. There might be another issue as to which ship—which 
mereological sum of spatial, temporal, and modal parts—we mean to be picking 
out when we dub ships by a name, such as “Ship of Theseus.” But there is no 
genuine paradox here. We will not be able to generate a contradiction, for 
                                                 
81 Again, I am ignoring for now any temporal differences between A and C, and only 
concentrating on the spatial properties (or parts).  

 
212
example, since we will simply deny one of the identity claims that was 
responsible for it—namely, we deny that A=B. 
Alternatively, we might deny that „A‟, „B‟ and „C‟ pick out merely spatial 
parts; we might claim that „A‟, „B‟ and „C‟ as pick out spatiotemporal parts.82 Then 
the solution to the puzzle would be as follows: there are two relevant 
mereological sums, or ships. One is the mereological sum of all of the 
spatiotemporal parts A through B, and one is the mereological sum of all of the 
spatiotemporal parts A through C. Each of these mereological sums is distinct, 
because they have distinct spatiotemporal parts (in particular, one has B as a 
part, and the other has C as a part). But each mereological sum overlaps or 
shares the spatiotemporal part A. But overlap of spatiotemporal parts is no more 
of a problem than overlap of a (mere) spatial part: Franklin St. can overlap 
Columbia such that they share a bit of the road where they intersect; your office 
can overlap your colleague‟s office by sharing a wall, etc. So if we think that „A‟, 
„B‟ and „C‟ pick out spatiotemporal parts (instead of merely spatial parts) then it 
will not be the case that A=C; but it will be the case that the mereological sum 
that has A and B as parts, and the mereological sum that has A and C as parts 
overlap: the sums share part A. Either way, however, the lump-theorist (as well 
as the four-dimensionalist) has an elegant solution to the puzzle.  
 
And similar reasoning will apply to the remaining puzzles Tib and Tibbles, 
and Goliath and Lumpl. In Tib and Tibbles, we simply deny that Tibbles (the cat) 
is an object that can wholly exist at a time. Like the ships and people, cats are 
lumpy objects, mereological sums of spatial, temporal, and modal parts. The 
                                                 
82 This is the solution Sider favors. Sider 2001. 

 
213
puzzle is generated, however, by the mistaken assumption that cats are only 
composed of spatial parts, or—more carefully—that they are not mereological 
sums of spatial and temporal parts. So in our argument— 
1. Tibbles at t1 = Tibbles at t2 (By commonsense intuition: we 
don‟t think that cats go out of existence when they lose their 
tails). 
 
2. Tib at t1 = Tib at t2 (Nothing happened to Tib at all!) 
 
3. Tibbles at t1 ≠ Tib at t1 (By LL: one has a tail and the other 
doesn‟t). 
 
4. Tibbles at t2 = Tib at t2 (Every region occupied by Tibbles is 
occupied by Tib; “they” have no difference-making feature). 
 
5. Tibbles at t1 = Tib at t2 (By 1, 4, Substitutivity of Identicals). 
 
6. Tibbles at t1 = Tib at t1 (By 5, 2, Substitutivity of Identicals). 
 
7. Tibbles at t1 = Tib at t1 & Tibbles at t1 ≠ Tib at t1 (3, 6, &I) 
 
—we would (at least) deny premise 1. „Tibbles‟ is the name of a cat, and cats are 
not the sorts of things that wholly exist „at‟ a time, just as you do not exist wholly 
where your arm is or wholly where your head is. „Tibbles‟, rather, picks out a 
mereological sum of spatial and temporal parts, one of which is (e.g.) a 
spatiotemporal slice at t1, another of which is (e.g.) a spatiotemporal slice at t2 .  
These two parts, of course, are not identical to each other, but (again) that no 
more implies that there isn‟t a single thing that has those slices as parts, as does 
the fact that your foot is not identical to your head implies that there isn‟t a single 
thing (your body) that has those appendages as parts.  
Moreover, once we trace the Tib spatiotemporal worm, and compare it to 
the Tibbles spatitemporal worm, we will see that Tib and Tibbles merely overlap 

 
214
one of their spatiotemporal parts—the part at t2. But, again, overlap is never a 
problem. Thus, there is no contradiction, and the puzzle is solved.  
 
As for Goliath and Lumpl, we will need to move beyond an appeal to 
spatiotemporal parts, and appeal instead to modal parts—and this is where, 
incidentally, we will see an advantage of the lump theory of objects over the four-
dimensional, temporal parts view.  Recall that Goliath and Lumpl come into and 
go out of existence simultaneously; they have completely overlapping temporal 
careers. So unlike the previous puzzles, it will not help to appeal to the temporal 
parts of Goliath or Lumpl—by stipulation, Goliath and Lumpl share all of their 
spatial and temporal parts. Yet the features that were supposed to distinguish 
them were their modal properties: Lumpl could survive being smushed or 
rearranged, but Goliath couldn't. Goliath could survive the loss of a toe or an arm, 
say, but Lumpl couldn't. So by the Indiscernibility of Identicals, Lumpl and Goliath 
are distinct; yet if so, then this violates our principle S: 
S: Two things cannot completely occupy exactly the same place or exactly 
the same volume (or exactly the same subvolumes within exactly the 
same volume) for exactly the same period of time.83 
 
Of course, if we accept my lump theory of objects, then we will quickly realize 
that S isn‟t quite right—in particular, it is misleading, and it is not strong enough. 
It is misleading because it suggests that objects can be wholly or completely 
located at a time. If ordinary objects are indeed lumpy, then they are 
mereological sums of spatial, temporal and modal parts. They are not wholly 
                                                 
83 Again, this is pulled from David Wiggins, “On Being in the Same Place at the Same Time,” in 
Philosophical Review (1968). 
 

 
215
located at a particular place, time, or world. Moreover, S is not strong enough 
because, as the case of Goliath and Lumpl show, some objects might completely 
overlap spatially and temporally, yet still be distinct. What we need is a principle 
that claims that no two objects can completely overlap spatially, temporally, or 
worldally (or modally, if one prefers). We should adopt something like principle 
S+:  
 
S+: Two things cannot completely overlap in their spatial, temporal, and 
modal parts; for any object, x, and any object, y, if x and y completely 
overlap all of their spatial, temporal, and modal parts, then x = y. 
 
 
Since S+ is stronger than S, it claims at least as much as S does. So someone 
who accepts S+ will be friendly to the spirit of S, albeit she will want need to 
reformulate S so that it does not presuppose that objects are wholly present at a 
time.  
 
But even if we accept the stronger S+, Goliath and Lumpl will not be in 
violation of it if we accept the lump theory of objects. This is because while it may 
be the case that Goliath and Lumpl have completely overlapping spatiotemporal 
careers, they do not have completely overlapping world-careers. Indeed, by the 
very stipulation that they vary in their modal properties, this means (on the lump 
theory) that they vary in their modal parts. What makes it true that Goliath could 
have lost an arm, but Lumpl couldn‟t have, is that there is a world where Goliath 
has a part and is armless, yet Lumpl does not have a part in any world that is 
armless. What makes it true that Lumpl could survive being smushed but Goliath 

 
216
couldn‟t have is that there is a world where Lumpl has a part that is smushed, but 
Goliath does not have a part in any world that is smushed.  
On the spatial analog, what makes it true that the road changes terrain is 
that it is (e.g.) bumpy in one part and smooth in another. On the temporal analog, 
what makes it true that you changed from being short to tall, is that you have one 
temporal part that is short and another that is tall. Similarly, on the modal 
dimension, what makes it true that you could have won the lottery, but in fact 
didn‟t, is that you (the trans-world object) have one modal part that wins the 
lottery and one modal part that does not.  
So, Goliath and Lumpl have parts that overlap in (at least) one world—the 
world that generates the puzzle. But they do not overlap in all worlds, or else they 
would not vary in their modal properties (and hence, „they‟ would not be distinct). 
And so that it is how the lump theory of objects successfully solves the Goliath 
and Lumpl puzzle of constitution. 
Incidentally, there is a modal analog to the Tib and Tibbles puzzle that is 
discussed in the literature.84 Let us call this the puzzle of Nib and Nibbles. 
Consider a cat, Nibbles, who, in fact, never loses his tail. Surely, however, 
Nibbles could have lost his tail (and still survived). Using world-talk, we say that 
what makes it true that Nibbles could have lost his tail is that in some world 
Nibbles does lose his tail. Let us call the part of Nibbles minus his tail, Nib. And 
let‟s go to the world where Nibbles loses his tail. But then, this is just a world 
where Nib and Nibbles (seemingly) completely coincide!  
                                                 
84 See Van Inwagen (1981), Heller (1990), Sider (2001), etc. 

 
217
Of course, on the lump theory of objects, such a puzzle will be seen as 
corrupted from the start. This is because the set-up assumed that ordinary 
objects such as cats and tails are wholly located at a world. Not so, says the 
lump theorist. Nibbles is a lumpy, trans-world object that has lots of parts in 
different worlds. Nib is, likewise, a lumpy trans-world object that has lots of parts 
in different worlds. The world where Nib and Nibbles purportedly completely 
coincide, is merely a case of overlap of a world part.  
Interestingly, Sider thinks that the modal version of Tib and Tibbles—what 
I have here called the puzzle of Nib and Nibbles—is a paradox for everyone. He 
claims:  
“…the modal version of the paradox of undetached parts confronts 
everyone, not just a defender of temporal parts. A reasonable attitude 
about this sort of modal paradox might be a bit like one attitude towards 
the liar paradox: „well, that’s a difficult problem, and must be solved 
somehow, but until I learn how to solve the problem, I will carry believing 
what seems to be right on other grounds‟.”85 
 
Sider then claims that his preferred solution here mirrors his preferred solution to 
the Goliath and Lumpl puzzle (not surprisingly): he appeals to counterpart theory, 
and flexible de re modal predication.  
 
There is no need for this seemingly ad hoc maneuver on the lump theory 
of objects, however, since we merely appeal to the differences in parts of trans-
world objects to individuate Nib and Nibbles. Moreover, the modal analogs of 
temporal puzzles (e.g., Goliath and Lumpl, Nib and Nibbles) no longer seem like 
paradoxes on a par with the Liar. On the contrary, we have a very straightforward 
                                                 
85 Sider (2001: 221). 
  

 
218
explanation of how the puzzles are generated, and a solution to offer that is as 
elegant as Sider‟s solution to the temporal version of the puzzles. So, again, if 
utility and elegance are the measure of success for a metaphysical theory, the 
lump theory of objects has success in spades.86 
 
5. Back to the Modal Objection 
Let us now return to CI and the objection that began this chapter: the 
Modal Objection. Recall that the worry for CI was that parts cannot be identical to 
wholes because parts and wholes vary in their modal properties. Parts (such as 
the molecules that compose your hand) can (e.g.) survive being scattered, but 
wholes (such as your hand) cannot.  
But let us keep in mind the lessons we‟ve learned from my lump theory of 
objects, and its application to the constitution puzzles: most ordinary objects are 
not merely spatial parts. Rather, ordinary objects are mereological sums (lumps) 
                                                 
86 Another advantage of my lump theory of objects is that it avoids Sorites-like arguments for the 
Eliminativism of ordinary objects.  Van Inwagen (1990), Unger (1979) [“I do not exist” in 
Perception and Identity, G. F. MacDonald (ed.) (1979)], and Merricks (2001) all give such step-
wise arguments to conclude that ordinary objects such as tables and chairs do not exist (i.e., they 
argue against the existence assumption). These arguments rely on accepting a tolerance for 
small changes—e.g., we must at least agree that objects can lose small parts. If my lump theory 
of objects is correct, however, and we should thereby embrace mereological essentialism as I‟ve 
shown above, then strictly speaking objects do not lose parts, not even really, really small ones. 
So, one will block all sorties-type arguments for Eliminativism since we need not grant that we 
have a tolerance for objects losing parts. There are other arguments for Eliminativism that do not 
rely on Sorites-type objections (e.g., Merrick‟s arguments concerning overdetermination), but 
these arguments will be blocked by embracing (only) CI, or embracing CI and a lump theory of 
objects. Merricks claims that a ball and the parts of a ball seemingly both shatter a window, thus 
giving us reason to think that the shattering is overdetermined by the whole (ball) and its parts. 
According to CI, the ball is identical to its parts, so there are no distinct things to overdetermine 
anything. According to CI plus the lump theory of objects, the ball is a lumpy trans-world object 
that overlaps in this world with another lumpy, trans-world object (e.g., the ball, and the molecules 
of the ball). Since overlap is never a problem, then causation by objects at their overlapped bits 
should not be a problem either. So arguments for Eliminativism that appeal to overdetermination 
will also be ineffective if we accept CI, or accept CI and my lump theory of objects.    
 

 
219
of spatial, temporal, and modal parts. Now, sure, there are some odd objects that 
are not extended worldally (or modally, if you prefer); there are some objects that 
are indeed world-bound. But such objects won‟t have modal properties, since 
what it is to have modal properties (on the lump view) is to be extended across 
worlds (or, at least, such objects would inherit certain modal properties trivially, 
because they only exist in one possible world).87 Similarly, a four-dimensional 
temporal parts theorist might admit that there are non-temporally-extended 
objects, instantaneous objects that are extended only spatially, say. But such an 
object wouldn‟t have a history, a past, or a future. For what it is to have these 
temporal features is to be extended temporally—i.e., to be a mereological sum 
that has various temporal parts.  
So someone claims that the parts (some molecules, e.g.) could survive 
being scattered, but the whole (your hand, e.g.) could not. On the lump theory of 
objects, this claim—like any other modal statement—is made true by having 
lumpy trans-world mereological sums whose world parts are doing thus-and-so. 
So „the molecules‟ picks out a trans-world, trans-spatiotemporal object that has 
different (world) parts in different possible worlds. In some worlds, the (world) 
parts of this (trans-world) object has (spatial) parts that are scattered; in other 
worlds, the (world) parts of this (trans-world) object has (spatial) parts that are 
not scattered. This, then, is what makes it the case that (e.g.) the molecules 
could have been scattered—the relevant trans-world object has (at least) one 
world part that is scattered. In contrast, „your hand‟ picks out a trans-world, trans-
                                                 
87 Recall that I am adopting world-talk because of its extreme utility. If you are not committed to 
possible worlds, then take this talk of „being extended across possible worlds‟ metaphorically, and 
apply the appropriate translation schema to generate the modal claims you do accept.   

 
220
spatiotemporal object that has different (world) parts in different possible worlds. 
Yet this trans-world object has no (world) parts in any world where its (spatial) 
parts are scattered. So this is what makes it true that (e.g.) your hand could not 
have survive being scattered—the relevant trans-world object has no part in any 
world where is it‟s spatial parts are scattered. 
Thus, contrary to what some might have thought, I will grant that ordinary 
objects such as molecules and hands can differ in their modal properties. Yet this 
does not thereby result in an objection to CI. This is because, on my theory of 
objects, ordinary objects such as (e.g.) molecules and hands turn out to be lumpy 
mereological sums of spatial, temporal, and modal (or world) parts. As such, their 
modal features are inherited from their world (or modal) parts. If we ever have a 
case of overlapping world parts (which we very often do), then this presents no 
more of a problem than spatial overlap, (e.g.) intersecting roads. The reason 
many are perplexed by cases such as (e.g.) your hand and its molecular parts, is 
because they consider your hand and its molecular parts to be world-bound 
objects. Yet on my view, these trans-world objects are merely overlapping some 
of their world parts (as well as some of their spatiotemporal parts).  So a case of 
(purported) complete coincidence (e.g., your hand and its parts) is now seen as 
mere world-part overlap. And so the Modal Objection is no longer a problem. 
“But wait a minute!,” you might be thinking. “Haven‟t you just been trying to 
convince us that your hand is identical to its parts?! And haven‟t you just now 
said that your hand is not identical to its parts (because they have different world-
parts, apparently)? Prior to this chapter, you were defending Composition as 

 
221
Identity tooth and nail. Now, in order to deal with the Modal Objection, you 
introduce a wacky, lump theory of objects, just to get out from under the 
objection. Yet in so doing, you seem to have undermined your entire thesis! Why 
in the world did you need to defend CI—i.e., that your hand is identical to its 
parts—if your lump theory of objects was going to ultimately deliver the verdict 
that your hand is not identical to its parts!?”    
First, let‟s not be mistaken. I do think that your hand is identical to its 
parts. It‟s just that what counts as your hands and its parts is different than you 
may have supposed prior to reading this thesis. Your hand has parts—it has 
spatial, temporal, and modal parts. We ordinarily say that your hand is identical 
to (just) some spatial parts, e.g., some molecules. But just because we often 
restrict our discourse to spatial parts does not mean that these are the only parts 
of your hand that there are. And even when we say this, we usually have in mind 
just a world-chunk of your hand—the part of your hand that is in this world. Your 
(whole) hand—the trans-world object—is indeed identical to all of its spatial, 
temporal, and modal parts. And the relation between your hand and all of these 
parts is indeed identity. But this is just to endorse CI. So endorsing a lump theory 
of objects in no way undermines CI; it is completely compatible with it. The only 
difference is that now when we are talking about parts and wholes, we have a 
much broader (more liberal) conception of what counts as parts and wholes. And 
so this may seem (at first) to undercut the radical-ness of the CI thesis. But so 
what? If in embracing a lump theory of objects I have thereby made CI less 
radical and more intuitive, then so much the better for my defense of CI.  

 
222
Second, CI is concerned with what the composition relation is—namely, 
identity. The lump theory of objects is a theory about what objects are. As I had 
claimed in previous sections of this thesis, a discussion of the composition 
relation is quite independent of claims about what kinds of things there are in the 
world.88 Sure, I might have assumed the Existence Assumption (i.e., that ordinary 
objects exist), and the Parthood Assumption (i.e., that these objects have parts). 
But these were minimal assumptions, which I later admitted could be compatible 
with (e.g.) an idealist world, or a material monist world. I merely wanted to 
assume that there were indeed parts and wholes to give us a solid foundation for 
talking about the composition relation. In the end, if the only parts and wholes 
that exist are immaterial, this shouldn‟t affect the CI thesis in the slightest. As 
long as the relation between parts and wholes is identity, then CI is true; it 
doesn‟t matter what the rest of the world is doing, or what it looks like, or whether 
it‟s material or immaterial or what.  
 
The lump theory of objects, on the other hand, is a slightly more 
substantive thesis about what kinds of things there are. It boldly claims that 
ordinary objects are lumpy trans-world sums of spatial, temporal, and modal 
parts. Now, sure, I was somewhat accommodating in positing this view. If you 
don‟t like concrete possible worlds, for example, then you could have abstract 
world-parts as parts. If you don‟t like worlds at all, you could have brute modal 
properties as parts. If you don‟t like being committed to time, you could have 
temporal properties as parts. But as accommodating as I can be, at some point 
my theory makes ontological commitments: I claim that ordinary objects are 
                                                 
88 This chapter, p. 36. 

 
223
mereological sums with spatial, temporal, and modal parts (how exactly you cash 
these parts out is of course up to you). If you deny that there are such things as 
spatial, temporal, or modal parts (however defined), then you will object to my 
lump theory of objects. Even so, the point is that my lump theory of objects is a 
decidedly weighty metaphysical thesis about the ontology of ordinary objects. CI 
is thesis about the composition relation. As such, embracing one shouldn‟t (in 
principle) undermine the other.  
 
Finally, as should be evident in this chapter, I think that CI and the lump 
theory of objects are nicely suited for each other, rather than undermining of 
each other. If Merricks is right, then CI entails Mereological Essentialism. If I am 
right, then CI is true. Yet if the lump theory of objects is correct, then we can see 
that Mereological Essentialism is not a view to be avoided; nor is it incoherent, 
nor is it a view that should be outright rejected (without argument). If so, 
however, then this will undermine Merricks‟ modus tollens of CI. If Mereological 
Essentialism is not crazy, then it won‟t matter that CI entails it. We embrace CI 
because of the arguments I have given throughout this thesis; we embrace the 
lump theory of objects because of the arguments I have put forward in this 
chapter; and then we can embrace the entailment from CI to Mereological 
Essentialism, and Merricks‟ argument is ineffective. And, since Merricks‟ 
argument is the contrapositive of the Modal Objection against CI,89 if we have 
                                                 
89 This point is made above, p. 3. The Modal Objection claims that the parts and whole differ in 
their modal properties, and so CI can‟t be true. The Mereological Essentialism worry claims that if 
CI is true, then the parts and wholes cannot differ in their modal properties. And so if the parts 
cannot survive a loss of parts, neither can the whole; thus, wholes (i.e., any object made of parts) 
must have their parts essentially.    
 

 
224
rendered Merricks‟ argument ineffective, then we have rendered the Modal 
Objection ineffective as well.   
  Can one defend CI without embracing the lump theory of objects? Yes, 
of course. If you object to my lump theory of objects, you can still embrace CI 
and avoid the Modal Objection. As was shown above, the Modal Objection is a 
variant of the modal version of the constitution puzzles (e.g., Goliath and Lumpl, 
Nib and Nibbles). Suppose you already have a solution to those puzzles. Then 
such a solution will simply carry over to the Modal Objection. For example, one 
might be inclined towards a Sider-like response to puzzles such as Goliath and 
Lumpl. One might claim that Goliath and Lumpl are indeed identical, it‟s just that 
when we run our counterfactuals, a single object can produce seemingly distinct 
modal properties, depending on which counterparts we are taking under 
consideration. Goliath qua lump could survive being smushed, but Goliath qua 
statue could not, etc. But if this is the solution to the modal puzzles that you 
favor, then this solution will apply to the Modal Objection (against CI) as well. 
You could claim that, yes, (e.g.) your hand is identical to the molecules that 
compose it. It‟s just that your hand, qua parts, can survive being thrown in a 
blender, but your hand, qua hand, could not, etc. We simply run the analogous 
response that you are prepared to give in the cases of Goliath and Lumpl and 
Nib and Nibbles, and apply it to the Modal Objection. Then one could embrace all 
of the other arguments for CI that I have presented throughout this thesis. And 
so, this is just one way one could embrace CI, reject the lump theory of objects, 
and still have a response to the Modal Objection.  

 
225
Another way one could embrace CI, yet not endorse my lump theory of 
objects, is to adopt L.A. Paul‟s theory of objects, which maintains that ordinary 
objects are fusions of properties. 90 Paul endorses a mereological bundle theory, 
and claims that objects are mereological bundles or sums of properties; as such, 
objects are more than mere spatiotemporal parts. This view differs from my lump 
theory of objects, since on my view, I need not have a view about properties, and 
how they are related to ordinary objects. My view merely claims that objects are 
mereological sums of spatiotemporal and world (or modal) parts. Whether these 
parts are ultimately brute properties, or some other type of (non-property) 
abstract bits, or concrete world-chunks, etc., is left up to your preferred ontology. 
Moreover, I need not definitively say whether bundle theory is correct or not, 
since properties need not get into the mix (if your ontology is property-averse, 
e.g.).91  Also, Paul ultimately wants to reject unrestricted or universal composition 
(universality), whereas I embrace it.92 Nonetheless, if one has reason to prefer 
Paul‟s theory of objects over the lump theory of objects presented in this chapter, 
then this would be another way to embrace CI without the lump theory, and yet 
still avoid the Modal Objection. Paul herself does not embrace CI (although CI is 
compatible with her view), yet she does embrace mereological essentialism.93 
And, as we have seen, since the Modal Objection is simply the contrapositive of 
                                                 
90 See L. A. Paul (2006) “Coincidence as Overlap” in Nous, (2006) “In Defense of Essentialism” in 
Philosophical Perspectives, and  (2002) “Logical Parts” in Nous. 
   
91 I also avoid having to posit properties as primitive entities in my ontology.  
 
92 A bit more carefully: Paul rejects universality for fusions of properties, and allows that she 
could—if she was so inclined—embrace universality for spatiotemporal composition. See 
“Coincidence as Overlap.” 
 
93 See L. A. Paul (2006) “In Defense of Essentialism,” Philosophical Perspectives. 

 
226
Merrick‟s Mereological Essentialism worry, anyone who embraces mereological 
essentialism will be able to answer the Modal Objection. So this is yet another 
way to embrace CI and deny my lump theory of objects.  
And no doubt there are other options as well. However, my point here is 
simply to illustrate that CI is indeed independent from my lump theory of objects, 
and as such, one certainly does not undermine the other in any way. 
Nonetheless, I do want to commit to both of these claims in this current project. I 
think that embracing both of these theories delivers the most unified response to 
the objections and puzzles, including the modal puzzles. I hope their joint 
application to the constitution puzzles, to Mereological Essentialism, and to the 
Modal Objection has demonstrated this well.    
 

