 
 
 
 
 
Land 2021, 10, 301. https://doi.org/10.3390/land10030301 
www.mdpi.com/journal/land 
Communication 
Circuitscape in Julia: Empowering Dynamic Approaches to 
Connectivity Assessment 
Kimberly R. Hall 1,*, Ranjan Anantharaman 2, Vincent A. Landau 3, Melissa Clark 4, Brett G. Dickson 5,6,  
Aaron Jones 7, Jim Platt 8, Alan Edelman 2 and Viral B. Shah 9 
1 North America Science, The Nature Conservancy, Haslett, MI 48840, USA 
2 Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; ranjanan@mit.edu (R.A.);  
edelman@mit.edu (A.E.) 
3 Conservation Science Partners, Inc., Fort Collins, CO 80521, USA; vincent@csp-inc.org 
4 Center for Resilience Science, The Nature Conservancy, Boston, MA 02111, USA; melissa_clark@tnc.org 
5 Conservation Science Partners, Inc., Truckee, CA 96161, USA; brett@csp-inc.org   
6 Landscape Conservation Initiative, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, AZ 86011, USA 
7 The Nature Conservancy, Santa Fe NM 87501, USA; ajones@tnc.org 
8 North America Science, The Nature Conservancy, Minneapolis, MN 55124, USA; jplatt@tnc.org 
9 Julia Computing, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA; viral@juliacomputing.com 
* Correspondence: kimberly.hall@tnc.org 
Abstract: The conservation field is experiencing a rapid increase in the amount, variety, and quality 
of spatial data that can help us understand species movement and landscape connectivity patterns. 
As interest grows in more dynamic representations of movement potential, modelers are often lim-
ited by the capacity of their analytic tools to handle these datasets. Technology developments in 
software and high-performance computing are rapidly emerging in many fields, but uptake within 
conservation may lag, as our tools or our choice of computing language can constrain our ability to 
keep pace. We recently updated Circuitscape, a widely used connectivity analysis tool developed 
by Brad McRae and Viral Shah, by implementing it in Julia, a high-performance computing lan-
guage. In this initial re-code (Circuitscape 5.0) and later updates, we improved computational effi-
ciency and parallelism, achieving major speed improvements, and enabling assessments across 
larger extents or with higher resolution data. Here, we reflect on the benefits to conservation of 
strengthening collaborations with computer scientists, and extract examples from a collection of 572 
Circuitscape applications to illustrate how through a decade of repeated investment in the software, 
applications have been many, varied, and increasingly dynamic. Beyond empowering continued 
innovations in dynamic connectivity, we expect that faster run times will play an important role in 
facilitating co-production of connectivity assessments with stakeholders, increasing the likelihood 
that connectivity science will be incorporated in land use decisions. 
Keywords: Circuitscape; dynamic connectivity; conservation planning; computational ecology; 
Earth observations; Julia programming language; landscape connectivity; Omniscape 
 
1. Introduction 
The conservation field is experiencing a rapid increase in the amount, variety, and 
quality of spatial data that can help us understand the dynamics of ecological systems, 
and incorporate key aspects of variation into land use decisions [1–4]. The accelerating 
pace of advances in the spatial and temporal resolution of ecologically relevant datasets 
track technology developments in remote sensing technologies, and in software and high-
performance computing [5,6]. Updated software, and access to cloud computing and 
other high-performance hardware such as computing clusters and Graphics Processing 
Units (GPUs) are essential tools of the trade for researchers in other fields like data science 
and artificial intelligence that are experiencing similar explosions in data availability [7]. 
Citation: Hall, K.R.; Anantharaman, 
R.; Landau, V.A.; Clark, M.; Dickson, 
B.G.; Jones, A.; Platt, J.; Edelman, A.; 
Shah, V.B. Circuitscape in Julia:  
Empowering Dynamic Approaches 
to Connectivity Assessment. Land 
2021, 10, 301. https://doi.org/ 
10.3390/land10030301 
Academic Editor:Megan K. Jennings 
Received: 17 December 2020 
Accepted: 10 March 2021 
Published: 15 March 2021 
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neu-
tral with regard to jurisdictional 
claims in published maps and insti-
tutional affiliations. 
 
Copyright: © 2021 by the authors. Li-
censee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. 
This article is an open access article 
distributed under the terms and con-
ditions of the Creative Commons At-
tribution (CC BY) license (http://crea-
tivecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/). 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
2 of 24 
 
However, for landscape modelers who are collaborating and co-developing analyses with 
stakeholders and local governments, uptake of new science and technological advances 
may move slowly [8], especially when implementing change means leaving behind famil-
iar tools or workflows. In this era of rapid global change, and concurrent leaps forward in 
data quality and availability, partnerships between conservation scientists and computer 
scientists that lead to updates of widely used, open-source software can help modelers 
keep pace, and more effectively support conservation decisions [7,9]. 
Here, we focus on assessments of landscape connectivity and animal movement po-
tential, a conservation field that exemplifies the exciting opportunities and computational 
challenges that accompany improvements in technology. Recent advances in remote sens-
ing and image processing have led to critically important increases in the variety of Earth 
observations available for characterizing the environment (e.g., types of ecological indica-
tors and climatic variables, and options for spatial and temporal resolution), and advances 
in animal tracking technology are providing time series data on animal locations that can 
be integrated with environmental data [1,10,11]. Growth in citizen science efforts (e.g., 
eBird [12]), the deployment of automated data collection networks (e.g., camera traps, 
acoustic monitoring networks), and data sharing portals (e.g., Movebank [13]) are further 
increasing the volume of animal observation data streams [2]. 
The specific goals and underlying theories for landscape connectivity and animal 
movement models are many and varied [14]. Similarly, many different analytical ap-
proaches, software tools, and workflows are deployed to integrate geospatial data and 
ecological observations to build connectivity models (e.g., [14–19]). For applications that 
explore how landscape characteristics such as landcover type, topography, and the pres-
ence of barriers influence movement potential, representing the landscape as a “re-
sistance” grid is a common element [15,17,20,21]. Each pixel of this surface is assigned a 
weight (or cost), that reflects, for example, habitat use patterns for an individual species, 
the likelihood of mortality in different habitats, or the “naturalness” of the landscape [20–
24]. The datasets and models used to create resistance surfaces again vary, depending on 
the application, data availability, and the study goal [17,20–24]. However, once the surface 
is created and used as input for a connectivity analysis, many modeling workflows share 
the trait of being constrained by computational demand [15,22,25,26], as representing spa-
tial patterns in a cumulative process like connectivity requires extensive calculations, of-
ten across millions of pixels. If connectivity modeling software crashes or requires weeks 
to run, these performance issues limit the scope and scale of our work. 
Yet, for many important connectivity questions, we have the data to rapidly advance 
our understanding beyond a single snapshot (i.e., one resistance grid), and explore the 
dynamic nature of animal movement and other processes. Moving the field of connectiv-
ity science toward dynamic assessments has been identified as an important research pri-
ority, a goal that motivated this Special Issue [27–30]. In our contribution, we focus on the 
essential role that partnerships between ecologists and computer scientists can play in 
shaping this rapidly growing branch of conservation science, drawing from the history of 
improvements in and applications of Circuitscape [31]. 
For connectivity tools like Circuitscape that use resistance grids as inputs, shifting 
toward a more dynamic approach typically involves additional model runs on resistance 
surfaces parameterized for different seasons, climatic conditions, or landscape patterns. 
However, if the workflow to create a single output map is already constrained by compu-
tational requirements, adding more runs may not be feasible given time or resource con-
straints. Improvements to software can empower innovation by reducing these con-
straints, but as a general rule, the programming languages that enable higher performance 
are the most challenging to use. Here, we describe how a long-term partnership to im-
prove Circuitscape supported rapid growth in the tool’s use, and also helped inspire a 
new high-performance programming language called Julia [32,33], which is now empow-
ering the most recent Circuitscape release. We suggest that when improvements in soft-
ware help users run computationally intensive models on available hardware (i.e., a 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
3 of 24 
 
personal computer, rather than a supercomputer), and are released as free, open-access 
tools, these investments play a key role in increasing accessibility, which can foster inno-
vation, and the use of connectivity science to inform decisions. By describing this long-
term collaboration, we hope to inspire ecologists to consider how similar improvements 
to other key tools could help the conservation community pursue more dynamic models, 
and take better advantage of rapid advances in the availability of ecological data. 
2. Dynamic Approaches to Connectivity: Circuitscape Applications as a Case Study 
We recently updated Circuitscape [34], a widely used, open-source connectivity anal-
ysis software package, by migrating it from Python [35] to the Julia programming lan-
guage [33]. Developed by conservation scientist Brad McRae (with a background in elec-
trical engineering) and computer scientist Viral Shah, Circuitscape allows users to apply 
the logic and mathematics of electrical circuit theory to questions of how genes, animals, 
or processes flow across heterogeneous landscapes [22,31]. Briefly, this approach treats 
the landscape as a surface of resistors (the resistance grid). The Circuitscape algorithm 
tracks where “current” flows across this resistance surface, following current flow from 
source nodes to ground nodes, and quantifying the spatial patterns of current accumula-
tion as higher resistance areas and barriers shift current flow into pathways with lower 
resistance [22]. This major update to Circuitscape was envisioned by McRae, but was car-
ried out after his death in 2017. Initially developed to provide a tool for understanding the 
spatial dynamics of gene flow [36], Circuitscape has been applied in hundreds of connec-
tivity studies on a wide range of organisms and topics, in locations across the globe. A 
recent review [16] and tributes [37,38] provide background on the underlying theory and 
history of Circuitscape’s development, and McRae’s influence within the fields of conser-
vation and genetics. Circuitscape.jl (or 5.0 [34]), redesigned in the Julia language, repre-
sents a unique milestone in the long collaboration between McRae and Shah. First publicly 
released in 2012, the Julia programming language is still in rapid development [32,33] and 
was, in part, inspired by Shah’s experience collaborating with McRae to create a powerful 
yet accessible tool for biodiversity conservation applications. 
The reach of Circuitscape reflects an unusual combination of innovative theory, ana-
lytical flexibility, and software accessibility. To date, Circuitscape has been most widely 
applied in landscape genetics, where modelers calculate “resistance distances,” a measure 
that indicates gene flow, between spatially referenced pairs of genetic samples [22,36,39]. 
As described above in an animal movement context, the spatial data surface(s) used as 
Circuitscape inputs typically represent habitat suitability, topography, climatic factors, or 
a composite surface, and resistance distance matrices may be calculated for one or many 
surfaces [20,24,40]. Later steps in the workflow focus on evaluating the relative support 
for each environmental dataset as a constraint on gene flow, a process that can involve 
multiple statistical modeling and optimization steps [41]. Some landscape genetics appli-
cations include resistance or current flow maps, but many do not—the measure of how 
environmental heterogeneity relates to genetic variation is typically the focal product. In 
contrast, in an animal movement context, producing current flow maps is the goal, with 
current magnitudes representing the relative use of different pixels by animals (or ecolog-
ical processes) moving across the landscape (resistance surface) between focal nodes (hab-
itat patches), following the assumption of a random walk [22]. 
Ecologists interested in animal movement questions have used a wide range of meth-
ods and models to create and assign weights to resistance surfaces, and these surfaces are 
typically developed from many spatial data inputs. Unlike applications in landscape ge-
netics, which by their nature have a measure of past dispersal, the challenge of obtaining 
suitable animal movement data typically limits modelers’ abilities to directly evaluate 
weightings for animal movement models. This is an active area of research, and some 
modelers incorporate outputs from animal movement models into the development of the 
resistance grid (e.g., [17,42,43]), and/or develop outputs from other landscape connectivity 
models with different assumptions (e.g., least-cost path models) to contrast or 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
4 of 24 
 
complement Circuitscape’s assumption of a random walk (e.g., [44,45]). A third broad 
group of Circuitscape applications, including much of McRae’s work at The Nature Con-
servancy (TNC), emphasizes a generalized “structural” landscape connectivity that fo-
cuses on the pattern of land use, human influence, and barriers, and does not require the 
delineation of habitat patches to connect [46–49]. Like the species-focused maps, the struc-
tural outputs provide a way to visualize movement across landscapes as a cumulative 
process where both the magnitude and spatial pattern of resistance shapes how a gener-
alized flow of organisms is channeled or spread out across multiple pathways, but source 
nodes are either aligned along the edges of the extent (e.g.,[50]), or every pixel can be a 
source and ground (as in Omniscape [46,51], see Sections 3–5). 
In support of the effort to update Circuitscape without McRae’s leadership, and in-
spired by the breadth of applications described in the Dickson et al. review [16], we as-
sembled a comprehensive set of peer-reviewed Circuitscape applications. Our intent was 
to learn more about how the tool has been applied, to add to our list of potential new 
features for the software, and to identify potential new collaborators to help us keep build-
ing from McRae’s foundation. Our ongoing work with these applications includes exam-
ination of how computing constraints influenced modeling practices and spatial data use. 
To find Circuitscape applications, we reviewed 1280 papers identified through Web 
of Science searches (end date for publication, including “early online” of December 2020, 
with the last search on 26 January 2021) that cited key foundational papers by McRae, 
Shah, and colleagues [22,31,36,39,46], or a Circuitscape user guide [25,52]. The user guides 
did not appear in searches by author, but we tracked them from the literature cited sec-
tions of a few applications; we found only a few studies that cited a user guide without 
also citing at least one of the foundational papers. From this set, we identified 572 papers 
in the natural sciences published in English from 2007–2020 where Circuitscape analyses 
were part of a research study. We included methods-focused papers if they had a case-
study application; 11 papers that did not include a case study on a real landscape, as well 
as a few applications in other branches of science, were not included in our descriptions 
of applications. We did retain one paper in materials science [53], as it addressed issues of 
complexity that may be of interest to ecological modelers. In our counts by software ver-
sion and topic, we did not attempt to control for the repeated use of the same Circuitscape 
analysis in different research papers. In a few cases the same paper used multiple versions 
of the software; we include these papers in the counts for both versions. 
This set includes papers that used Circuitscape as part of another software package, 
such as Linkage Mapper [54], which has two Circuitscape-based tools (Pinch Point Map-
per and Centrality Mapper) in addition to tools for least-cost path analyses, and Re-
sistanceGA [55] and Seraphim [56], software tools that can deploy Circuitscape to calcu-
late pairwise resistance distances for genetics applications. We likely missed applications 
of Circuitscape in these tools, as we did not search for them directly, and thus only found 
them if the study cited one of the foundational papers. We did not include applications of 
gflow [57], a version of Circuitscape designed for deployment on supercomputers. This 
body of work represents an expansion over the 277 Circuitscape applications tallied in the 
Dickson et al. review [16], in part due to our identification of applications that only cited 
McRae’s first circuit-theory paper [36], a genetics-focused paper that was not traced in 
that review, and due to the extension of the search past that effort’s early 2018 end date. 
In just two years, the collection grew by over 180 papers (Figure 1a,b). The full list, includ-
ing methods papers, is available as Supplementary Materials on https://Cir-
cuitscape.org/publications/ . 
The set of Circuitscape applications provides an interesting perspective on broad 
trends in the conservation field, including the expansion of dynamic connectivity ap-
proaches. There are many unique applications, but as described in Section 1, most Cir-
cuitscape analyses fall into three large and often overlapping categories—landscape ge-
netic applications, studies that focus on movement potential for specific species or taxo-
nomic groups, and structural connectivity approaches that provide a more general picture 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
5 of 24 
 
of how the arrangement of permeable land types and barriers shape movement potential 
(Figure 1a). We separated landscape genetics studies that provided a map(s) of resistance 
or current flow in the body of the paper (maps in supplements may have been missed) 
from those that did not, as these maps provide way to compare connectivity insights 
across multiple methods. Notably, as each Circuitscape application incorporates one or 
more resistance surfaces, the different methods used to construct these representations of 
the environment also provide an interesting view of a decade of changes in landscape 
ecology. For example, this collection illustrates the shift from patch dynamics toward con-
sideration of matrix habitats, the rapid growth of the machine-learning based species dis-
tribution modelling tool Maxent [58,59], and the increasing use of remotely sensed data 
to understand ecological processes (e.g., [60–62]). 
 
Figure 1. Count of Circuitscape applications in peer-reviewed journal articles by year, categorized by (a) type of applica-
tion and (b) version of the software. Key milestones of each software version are indicated in the legend for (b). Graph (a) 
only includes genetic and movement-related applications (569); (b) includes 3 additional ecological applications, and one 
from materials sciences (573). A few studies used two versions of Circuitscape, and the count in (b) includes them under 
both software versions. 
While it is hard to draw a clear distinction between what is “dynamic” and what is 
“static” when comparing many diverse studies, it is easy to see that some applications are 
more dynamic than others. We found Zeller et al.’s dynamic connectivity framework (see 
Figure 2 in [30]) very helpful for organizing this compelling body of Circuitscape research. 
The dynamic connectivity framework identifies three categories, landscape dynamics, 
movement dynamics, and challenges to connectivity, and then presents sets of topics un-
der each category that span a gradient of spatial and temporal scales. To help characterize 
the breadth and distribution of Circuitscape applications, we (KH) sorted the application 
papers following the framework, and present the resulting distribution across categories 
in Figure 2. We used the framework as a tool for grouping similar papers so that we could 
more easily highlight innovations in dynamic connectivity; as most papers could reason-
ably fit in more than one box, others would likely split them differently. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
6 of 24 
 
 
Figure 2. Distribution of 572 Circuitscape applications across the Zeller et al. [30] framing of topics in dynamic connec-
tivity. Applications are grouped into three broad categories (inner circle), and then arranged in categories that range 
from Figure 1. for especially dynamic examples from these categories. 
Although many Circuitscape applications are static, they are based on the dynamic 
concept of current flow across a network of resistors. For landscape genetics applications, 
each node in the network carries information on changes that occurred in the past; more 
dynamic applications include multiple genetic markers that provide insights from differ-
ent time periods. For non-genetic applications, the dynamic nature of analyses can be 
greatly enhanced when modelers compare multiple representations of resistance (e.g., 
habitat change over time), or demographic or seasonal difference in how species respond 
to the landscape. The process of sorting and revising categories led to the identification of 
natural breaks in the set of papers, and we characterize those in Table 1. We used a few 
rules, including assigning papers that incorporated two movement types (e.g., home 
range and dispersal) or multiple challenges (e.g., habitat loss and climate change) in the  
larger-scale category. While nearly all landscape genetics approaches could reasonably be 
categorized as “gene flow,” the papers we grouped here emphasize a snapshot of the re-
lationship between environmental patterns and genetic structure; when studies applied 
multiple genetic markers to capture change over time, or specifically addressed “chal-
lenges,” or “landscape dynamics” they were placed in other categories. 
For each topic, we present a brief phrase if needed to describe the studies in the cat-
egory, and a few examples of dynamic study design approaches (Table 1). These factors 
show strong overlap with topics discussed in [30], such as including multiple time steps, 
demographic factors, movement types (habitat use vs. dispersal) and seasonal variations. 
For the studies we highlight, we indicate their “Circuitscape application type” (see Figure 
1a) to show the overlap and unique contributions of each of these broad groups. To in-
clude the full set of Circuitscape applications, we added a “biodiversity patterns” category 
to the framework. We inserted this topic under movement dynamics to reflect studies 
where resistance distance measures from Circuitscape are applied to species assemblage 
data (or similar measures) to evaluate species turnover as a function of landscape hetero-
geneity (e.g., [63,64]). While we did not distinguish papers that incorporate genetic or an-
imal movement data from multiple rather than a single species in Table 1 (as we did in 
Figure 1a for animal movement), we note this as a “dynamic factor” under a few of the 
topic areas. We found examples for all topics, though some topics have received much 
more coverage than others (Figure 2). The collection includes applications across all scales, 
in freshwater, marine, and terrestrial environments, and the Zeller et al. [30] framework 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
7 of 24 
 
provided a very useful tool for characterizing this variety. Less apparent within Table 1 is 
the fact that this set of papers features research subjects that range in size from viruses 
and grains of pollen (e.g., [65,66]) through trees and elephants, and includes a subset fo-
cused on human migrations and diseases, with a few integrating interactions between 
ecological and social systems (e.g., [67–70]). This diversity of scales and topics emphasizes 
Circuitscape’s role as a “springboard” for innovation [16], and a tool that helps ideas flow 
between different branches of environmental modeling. 
Table 1. Examples of dynamic elements within Circuitscape applications, as grouped in the dynamic connectivity topics 
presented in Zeller et al.’s framework [30]. The three main columns describe key research themes; topics are arranged 
according to focal temporal and spatial scales (large to small, see “scale” column), and the color scheme links columns to 
the same research themes and topics in Figure 2. Circuitscape application types are labeled as “LG” for landscape genetics, 
“MO” for species movement data & habitat models, and “ST” for studies focused on generalized landscape structure. 
Scale 
Landscape Dynamics 
Movement Dynamics 
Challenges to Connectivity 
Longer 
time & 
Larger 
extent 
Glacial cycles 
Identify refugia & drivers of diversifi-
cation [71–74]; detect a “glaciation sig-
nature” that provides context for cur-
rent genetic variability [75–77] (LG). 
Range boundaries 
Use multiple genetic markers to capture 
environmental constraints across genera-
tional times steps [78] (LG); test multiple 
factors to identify constraints [79] (MO). 
Climate change 
Include projections of future climate 
[48,80–83] (ST & MO). 
 
Consider niche space under paleo, cur-
rent, and future climates [84–86]; eval-
uate adaptive capacity [87,88] (LG). 
 
Integrate models of climate change & 
land use change [45,89–92] (ST, MO). 
Climate cycles 
Evaluate the influence of climate varia-
bility on gene flow (“isolation by insta-
bility”) [93–95] (LG). Includes the influ-
ence of ocean currents [96] (ST). 
Gene flow 
This group includes “snapshots” of ge-
netic responses to heterogeneity. Also, in-
cludes patterns in bird song parameters 
[97] and human language [98]. 
Land use 
Evaluate broad-scale changes in land 
use in time series data [49] (ST); cap-
ture the genetic impact of forest cover 
change (pollen sources) by sampling 
trees of different ages [66] (LG).  
 
Model land use [91] (ST) or land func-
tion [99] (LG) scenarios, or the influ-
ence of land use policies [100] (ST). 
Biodiversity patterns 
Identify changes in species assemblages & 
turnover as a function of resistance. Can 
incorporate genetics, morphology [101]. 
 
Consider multiple time steps [102], or as-
sess many sites in different landscape con-
texts [103]; in freshwater consider the role 
of different hydrologic periods or [104] 
precipitation events [105]. 
Habitat loss/land use change 
Consider multiple habitat configura-
tions or loss scenarios [106–109]; inte-
grate multiple species [110,111]; evalu-
ate changes in a protected area net-
work [112–114] (MO). 
 
Use multiple genetic methods to detect 
the influence of habitat loss relative to 
historical baselines [115–121] (LG). 
 
Disturbance regimes & succession 
Incorporate ocean currents & tidal in-
fluence [122–124] (LG & ST), fire re-
gime [125], post-fire succession, [126] 
and dynamic (sand dunes) vs. static 
habitats [127] (LG). 
Migration 
Incorporate seasonal patterns or variation 
in resources [27,128–131] (MO). 
 
Use multiple models to capture habitat 
choice and movement speed [42] (MO). 
Invasive species & disease spread 
Use information from multiple regions 
or introduction events [132]; pair time 
series of high-resolution habitat data 
with on-the ground detections of inva-
sive species [62]; evaluate barrier strat-
egies [133] (MO). 
 
Use multiple waves to model viruses 
with wildlife vectors [134,135] (LG). 
 
Consider how dynamics of pathogens 
& hosts may interact [136–138], and be 
influenced by humans [139,140] (LG). 
 
Seasonality 
Change in habitat patch configuration 
due to seasonal flooding/drought (ST) 
[61,141–143]. 
 
(see migration for many seasonality ex-
amples with movement data). 
Dispersal 
Recognize differences in home range use 
vs. dispersal [144–147] (MO); evaluate use 
of microclimates [40,148,149] (LG). 
 
Incorporate life history variation, e.g., by 
sex [150,151], seed dispersal type [152], or 
response to conspecifics [153] (LG & MO). 
Shorter 
time 
& 
Smaller 
extent 
Disturbance events 
Disturbance events like fires can 
change dispersal patterns [154] (LG). 
 
Consider hurricane routes as a driver 
of species colonization [155] (LG). 
Home range 
Consider variations by sex and/or seasons 
[156,157] (LG, MO), and the influence of  
social behavior [158] (MO). 
 
 Home range may include multiple habi-
tat types [159,160]; agriculture can be a 
key connector [161,162] (MO). 
Barriers to migration 
Compare multiple sites [163,164] (LG); 
model current & future urbanization 
[165] or barrier removal [166] (MO), or 
passage structure locations [167] (MO). 
 
Consider demographic differences in 
response to barriers (LG) [168,169]. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
8 of 24 
 
Site restoration & management 
Use scenarios to evaluate the targeting 
of fire risk mitigation [170] (ST) & vege-
tation management [171,172] (MO). 
 
Integrate connectivity benefits & costs 
[173]; evaluate connectivity benefits of 
restoration [174] (MO). 
Foraging 
Consider differences in foraging mode 
(active vs. passive) [175] (LG). 
 
Understanding reproductive timing may 
help scale the linkage between a dynamic 
resource and foraging range [176] (ST). 
Human–wildlife conflict 
Incorporate season & time of day in 
studies of road crossing risk [43] (MO). 
Simulate changes in barriers [177].   
 
Integrate social science to understand 
the human side of conflicts [69,70] 
(MO). 
3. Computation as a Constraint to Dynamic Models and Driver of Innovation 
As indicated by the range of applications (Figure 2, Table 1), Circuitscape provides a 
very flexible platform for studying gene flow and connectivity, and we expect users will 
continue to advance the field by incorporating more dynamic approaches. However, the 
modeling process is very computationally intensive, a constraint that can limit how mod-
els are run, and the resolution of datasets that are deployed. To understand why compu-
tation can become a constraint, it’s helpful to understand that in a Circuitscape run, the 
landscape is represented by a grid of cells, and a resistive circuit is constructed by placing 
a resistor along the shared edge between every pair of neighboring cells. For a 1000 by 
1000 resistance grid (1 million cells), the software will need computer hardware with 
enough processing power and memory to solve a system of 1 million linear equations [34]. 
In “pairwise” Circuitscape, the mode that is used to develop distance metrics for land-
scape genetics, and is commonly applied in animal movement studies, these calculations 
are repeated for every pair of nodes (for example, habitat patches or populations) included 
in the model. Our own experiences, and stories we have heard from other modelers, in-
clude Circuitscape computations that ran for days, and sometimes weeks. If the problem 
is too large for hardware resources (typically RAM, random access memory, is the limiting 
factor), the analysis will not run to completion. In this section, we discuss computational 
demand in the context of promoting more dynamic approaches to connectivity modeling, 
and also highlight modifications in how Circuitscape has been used that arose (at least in 
part) to address computational constraints. In Section 4, we introduce the Julia language 
version, and discuss how innovations in computer science and programming languages 
have great potential to help connectivity modelers track advances in the quality of spatial 
data, and implement more dynamic connectivity models. 
Although the mathematics that describe changes in computational requirements as 
the resolution of input datasets increase are straightforward, in practice, this constraint is 
easy for connectivity modelers to overlook, especially when new, high-resolution data 
products are available. For example, if the 1 million cell landscape noted above is com-
prised of 1-km pixels (100 million ha, roughly the combined size of the US states of Utah, 
Colorado, Arizona, and New Mexico) and a modeler shifts to a data resolution of 500-m, 
that would typically quadruple the number of linear equations that need to be managed 
by the software and hardware. A more dramatic shift to a 30-m resolution dataset, the 
native resolution of many commonly used spatial data products, would increase the num-
ber of computations by a massive 1100×. The Circuitscape user guides [25,52] are clear on 
these computational challenges, and include warnings about total problem size, and sec-
tions on how to modify the input data and/or run parameters to reduce the potential for 
problems with RAM, or exceedingly long computation times. In the 572 Circuitscape eco-
logical applications, roughly one-fourth discuss issues with computation and/or or de-
scribe aspects of their workflow that were designed to address computational issues. 
These types of modifications, and their potential influence, are part the focus of our ongo-
ing review of this collection of papers. While our review is still underway, we found that 
at least 10% of authors reported aggregating pixels (reducing the resolution of the re-
sistance grid), combining nodes (reducing the number of populations or patches to con-
nect), or used some other tactic to address computational constraints. We expect that 
many more users experienced and addressed computation challenges than reported them. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
9 of 24 
 
For Circuitscape modelers who are considering more dynamic assessments, compu-
tation speed is of great practical concern, because accounting for seasonal variation, land 
use change, and other dynamic drivers requires multiple runs with different resistance 
grids. Most modelers featured in our dynamic examples (Table 1) have included several 
resistance grids, while a few of the most dynamic assessments have taken on large num-
bers of runs, including use of 40 resistance grids to explore land use and climate change 
scenarios [90], and 72 time-steps to evaluate the spread of an invasive beetle [62]. The 
mechanics of creating a dynamic representation can also include adding or removing hab-
itat nodes from the system, as was done in a set of 99 time-steps depicting changes over 
25 years of seasonal droughts and floods in Australia’s Murray-Darling Basin [61]. While 
a subset of modelers have access to computing clusters, we expect that as the researchers 
pursued many of the dynamic applications in Table 1, either data resolution, number of 
nodes, study extent, or some combination, were often reduced to make the project feasible. 
Our continued goal in terms of tool development is to reduce this constraint, facilitating 
ecologically driven choices, rather than compromises based on computation. 
The trajectory of improvements to Circuitscape’s functionality and performance re-
flects advances in computer science, and the key influence of innovative applications by 
modelers. To find additional efficiency in computation time, and also address other mod-
eling goals or bias issues, a number of studies have pursued ‘wall-to-wall’ or ‘omnidirec-
tional’ applications of Circuitscape ([47,50,79,178,179]). Instead of connecting patches, 
these applications use bands or ‘strings’ of pixels at the edge of a grid to represent the 
sources and grounds, and current is run across the full area, through all habitats, between 
these bands of pixels. From an ecological perspective, these approaches allow modelers to 
treat the landscape as a continuous gradient, avoiding the need to delineate core habitats 
or patches (e.g., protected areas) to connect, and reducing biases in current magnitudes 
that can occur near focal patches [50]. On the computation side, this shift in how Cir-
cuitscape is applied allows users to subdivide or “tile” the landscape, and conduct multi-
ple assessments on smaller problems, and then map the products together (e.g., [47]). 
Building from “wall-to-wall” approaches, McRae developed Omniscape [46], a mov-
ing-window version of Circuitscape that automated the process of breaking the landscape 
into smaller problem sizes, and combining results. Omniscape runs Circuitscape from 
“advanced mode,” iteratively calculating current flow between all (or a regularly spaced 
subset of) pixels and the center pixel in a circular moving window of a user-specified ra-
dius [46,51]. To determine how much current will flow from every pixel to this central 
ground, Omniscape requires a source strength raster, which the user can supply, or define 
as the inverse of the resistance grid. Cumulative current maps capture the total current 
when results from all of the overlapping moving windows are summed. Breaking up large 
geographies into many smaller pieces allowed McRae to map connectivity across larger 
extents without running out of memory and causing a software crash, though regional 
analyses (i.e., several western US states) with his original Python version still required 
days or weeks of compute time for relatively high resolution (180–360 m) data. 
A practical benefit of using tiles with the wall-to-wall approach, or using Omnis-
cape’s moving window method, is that modelers can expand their focal geographies with-
out aggregating pixels to keep the problem size tractable. At TNC, McRae co-led work 
with Melissa Clark and Mark Anderson to engage large steering committees of regional 
experts through a collaborative process to develop structural connectivity analyses to sup-
port land protection decisions. These “Resilient and Connected Network” components 
integrate regional flow potential maps created with wall-to-wall Circuitscape for most of 
the coterminous US (e.g., [180]), and maps using Omniscape for the Pacific Northwest and 
California [46]. The regional assessments are mapped together at http://maps.tnc.org/re-
silientland/ (see the “connectivity and climate flow” layers, and links to in-depth reports). 
This ability to produce high resolution products for large areas allows modelers to pro-
vide partners in many locations with tools to inform local decisions, as they can clip out-
put maps to fit their focal area, and combine them with other local data. Thus, while a 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
10 of 24 
 
foundational tenet of landscape ecology suggests that the appropriate resolution of data 
increases with spatial extent (e.g., [181]), a key caveat to this important concept is that it’s 
typically more efficient to run one analysis and share it, rather than run many local as-
sessments. The importance of higher resolution data will vary with the landscape and 
focal question, but if an important habitat or barrier is rare or occurs in narrow bands, 
such as riparian habitats, use of higher resolution data may provide important improve-
ments in how the connectivity network is modeled (e.g., see Figure 1 in [34]). Balancing 
computational demands and data resolution, and the goal of sharing maps that could be 
applied at local scales, were key drivers of the development of Omniscape, and McRae’s 
continued interest in improving Circuitscape’s efficiency and speed. 
4. An Introduction to the Julia Versions of Circuitscape and Omniscape 
Given enough time and memory, the Circuitscape algorithm can solve arbitrarily 
large problems, so the upper limit for any individual user will depend on their hardware 
resources, and the software’s ability to effectively use those resources. The challenge of 
increasing Circuitscape’s ability to handle large problems has been addressed multiple 
times, using different software languages [34] (Figure 1b). The first version [22] was writ-
ten in Java, followed by version 2.0 in MATLAB. While MATLAB was easier for develop-
ment, it required that users obtain a commercial license to run the software. McRae and 
Shah soon translated the code to Python for version 3.0, the first fully open-source release. 
It made heavy use of several of Python’s numerical code libraries (numpy [182], scipy [35] 
and pyamg [183]), which improved computational efficiency, and allowed users to solve 
problems with millions of nodes. In collaboration with Tanmay Mohapatra, McRae and 
Shah followed these improvements with additional steps to optimize the code for better 
performance, and added early parallelism (the ability to execute multiple processes sim-
ultaneously), creating Circuitscape 4.0 [25]. The Spatial Ecology and Telemetry Working 
Group of The Wildlife Society recognized this contribution with an award in 2013. While 
computation has been a major driver of updates, McRae and Shah also prioritized acces-
sibility, especially for practitioners without access to high-end hardware. Leonard et al. 
[57] built the gflow software by modifying Circuitscape so that it could run on high per-
formance cluster computers, but this version is out of reach for many modelers. In the 
recent update, Ranjan Anantharaman, working with Shah and following plans co-created 
with McRae, ported Circuitscape 5.0 to the high performance Julia language [34]. Cir-
cuitscape.jl is open source, runs on multiple platforms, and is very fast (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 3. Reductions in solve time for Circuitscape 5.0 in Julia (red and orange bars) relative to 
Circuitscape 4.0.5 in Python (blue) on problem sizes ranging from 1 to 24 million pixels, run in 
pairwise mode with 153 pairwise solves for each size, using 16 parallel processes. The two bars for 
the Julia version represent runs with the default solver CG + AMG (conjugate gradient algebraic 
multigrid) in red, and Suitesparse’s CHOLMOD solver in orange. Benchmarks were conducted on 
an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver 4114CPU @ 2.20 GHz with 384 GB of RAM. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
11 of 24 
 
The Julia implementation of Circuitscape represents a major leap forward in compu-
tational speed, and more effective use of the user’s hardware resources [34] (Figure 3). 
Major contributors to increased performance include a larger variety of solvers (the option 
to deploy different solvers allows the calculation approach to be more effectively matched 
to the user’s specific problem), and greatly improved support for parallel computing. To 
our knowledge, the largest problem a user has solved with Circuitscape.jl to date was 437 
million pixels, representing the full range (roughly 13 million ha) of the threatened Mojave 
desert tortoise at 30-m resolution [179]. This computation was carried out on one server-
class node in a cluster with 20 CPU (central processing unit) cores and 384 G of memory. 
We encourage modelers to download 
Circuitsape version 5 from GitHub 
(https://github.com/Circuitscape/Circuitscape.jl), and to support continued development 
through reporting issues, suggesting new functionality, and contributing code. Im-
portantly, while we hope many Circuitscape users will be inspired by the improvements 
in speed to try programming in Julia, modelers do not need to know Julia to use the Julia 
version. It is provided as a self-contained Julia package, which can be loaded and run 
without a complicated software installation process. 
To promote continued collaboration among ecological modelers and the growing 
community of Julia programmers, we highlight how the choice to use Julia reflects a major 
advance in the continued evolution of Circuitscape, and related tools like Omniscape. For 
ecologists that are less familiar with programming languages, we begin with a few basic 
concepts, drawing from several recent works [32,33,184]. Programming languages are an 
abstraction, an interface between the programmer and the computer. A key element of 
what a software program needs to communicate to the computer is information about the 
various forms of data in a program that are held in memory and operated upon as the 
program runs—this information is the “data type.” Some languages are “statically typed,” 
meaning they require this information to be spelled out by the programmer, while others, 
called dynamically typed, do not. In general, the more information the system has about 
a program’s data inputs, the faster a program can run. These differences underlie the two 
broad families of programming languages; many conservation scientists are fluent in one 
or more dynamically typed or “productivity” languages, such as Python [35,182] and R 
[185] that allow them to write a program at a higher level of abstraction and not bother 
with meticulously annotating data types. Fewer in our field are fluent in the statically 
typed “performance” languages that are built for performance, but have a steeper learning 
curve, such as C and Fortran. For tasks like dynamic connectivity modeling with Cir-
cuitscape, continuing to sacrifice performance limits our ability to innovate, and take ad-
vantage of high-resolution data sets. 
Often, a software tool may be first created in a high-productivity dynamically typed 
language, and as the tool matures and needs more performance and scale (ability to main-
tain performance as the problem size increases), it may be converted to a high-perfor-
mance statically typed language [32,33]. Writing programs twice is not a good use of the 
scientist’s time, and it is what is often referred to as the “two language problem.” Julia 
was designed to solve this two language problem. It achieves high-performance by auto-
matically inferring the data types in a user’s program, without requiring the user to pro-
vide them manually; thus achieving the speed of C and Fortran with the ease of use of R 
and Python. Further, as with a spoken language, the elements of programming languages 
are shaped by the context in which they are used. The design of Julia has in part been 
shaped by Shah (one of the Julia co-creators) and McRae’s partnership to address the chal-
lenge of getting Circuitscape to run on ever larger grid-based problems. While develop-
ment of the language continues, key aspects such as an emphasis on speed and parallel-
ism, while still being accessible to users with a wide range of expertise and computing 
resources, are well-aligned with the objective of helping to promote rapid advances in 
dynamic approaches to connectivity conservation. 
Currently, Circuitscape in Julia distributes the tasks of calculating current flow be-
tween pairs of sources and grounds (or iterations of all-to-one or one-to-all, but not 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
12 of 24 
 
“advanced” mode) across multiple CPUs using a form of parallelism called multi-pro-
cessing. The consistently high performance across increasingly large problems shown in 
Figure 3 demonstrates that this parallelism scales well with the problem size [34]; our 
testing indicates similar scaling for increasing numbers of pairwise solves. Improvements 
to Circuitscape have also been capitalized on by other software packages that depend on 
it, such as ResistanceGA [55] which now calls the Julia version (see [186]), and Omnis-
cape.jl [51], our recent re-imagination and Julia implementation of McRae’s Python-based 
Omniscape, which was led by Vincent Landau. Omniscape.jl uses another form of paral-
lelism called multi-threading to call Circuitscape on different CPU cores, allowing simul-
taneous analysis of multiple moving-window-sized problems. Tests of Omniscape.jl’s 
performance again indicate favorable scaling (no loss of performance) as more CPUs are 
used in a computation (Figure 4, [51]). Circuitscape in its next release will also offer par-
allelism via multi-threading. Omniscape uses Circuitscape’s “advanced” mode, which 
does not currently support multi-processing. However, future updates could use compos-
able multi-threading, which was introduced in Julia v1.3 (released in late 2019). Compos-
able multi-threading allows “parallelism within parallelism” to occur without interfer-
ence among the different processes. These Julia-empowered versions of Circuitscape and 
Omniscape are set up to enable continent-wide connectivity analyses, and to catalyze the 
growing wave of dynamic assessments. Every time we have improved the capabilities of 
Circuitscape computationally, the community has responded with new applications, and 
we wait with excitement to see what new applications these improved parallel computing 
capabilities will enable.5. Faster Software Facilitates Data Exploration and Stakeholder 
Engagement 
 
Figure 4. Increases in computational speed for Omniscape.jl from parallel processing via multi-
threading (deployment of moving window-sized calculations to different CPUs) scales well as the 
number of simultaneous processes (threads) increase [51]. The benchmark problem was a 132,642 
pixel grid, run with a block size of 21, and a moving-window radius of 100 pixels (approximately 
34,000 pixels per window, and 300 window-sized runs). Scaling was evaluated for three different 
solvers that are available in the software, the CG + AMG (preconditioned conjugate gradient with 
algebraic multigrid preconditioner) in blue, Suitesparse’s CHOLMOD solver in orange, and 
Pardiso compiled with Intel Math Kernel Library (MKL [187]) in red. Produced on an Intel(R) 
Xeon(R) Silver 4114 CPU @ 2.20 GHz with 20 cores and 64 GB RAM. The Julia version is 1.6.0-dev 
Commit 599d3299c9, compiled with MKL. 
Dynamic connectivity research has the power to produce models of the big landscape 
ecology questions of our time: habitat loss, fragmentation, and climate change [30]. Cre-
ating a network of connected biodiversity is an international goal identified in action tar-
gets 1 and 2 in the United Nations Convention on Biological Diversity draft of the Post-
2020 Global Biodiversity Framework 2030 mission [188]. Scientists, policy makers, re-
source managers, and outreach specialists will need to work together if we are to achieve 
these ambitious goals. With increased computational power, we expect to see rapid 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
13 of 24 
 
progress in dynamic connectivity modeling with Circuitscape and Omniscape. As we see 
such advances, we recognize it is critical to keep building bridges between scientists, gov-
ernments, and stakeholders [189–191], even as our increasing use of complex modeling 
approaches and new technology may make our work more challenging for partners to 
understand. Rather than complicating these important interactions, we hope these ad-
vances provide connectivity modelers with critical opportunities to iterate and learn more 
quickly, and to collaborate more broadly with practitioners and stakeholders. 
While our intent with modeling may be to estimate resistance distance values, or cre-
ate a specific map product, the trial and error of building and running models is most 
useful if the process itself provides insight into how systems work. The different modes 
and tools for deploying Circuitscape have different characteristics, and current flow re-
sults will reflect these differences. As we speed up the modeling process, this should make 
it easier for users to explore how different ways of applying the same tool, different pa-
rameter settings, and different datasets influence their results, which hopefully leads to 
greater understanding of movement potential. In the section below, we include one sim-
ple example of this type of exploration (Figure 5), where we ran Omniscape.jl on a re-
sistance grid of VIIRS Nighttime Lights data [192–194] for most of the US state of Colo-
rado. We chose this example to help familiarize connectivity modelers with outputs from 
Omniscape.jl, and to highlight a frequently updated data source that can be part of as-
sessing “challenges to connectivity,” the most common broad topic area (Figure 2) for 
Circuitscape applications. For a typical conservation application, we would incorporate 
multiple data sources into a resistance grid, usually starting with land cover; here our goal 
was to isolate current flow patterns derived from just the Nighttime Lights source. 
To develop the current flow map (Figure 5b), we downloaded the mean of monthly 
averages of VIRRS Nighttime Lights radiance values from Google Earth Engine for Janu-
ary—September of 2019 (Figure 5a). Next, we projected and resampled the data to 100-m 
pixels, rescaled the data to 1–100 to create the resistance grid, used the inverse of the re-
sistance grid as the source strength, and then ran Omniscape.jl with a 300-m window ra-
dius and a 49 pixel block size (meaning it selects one pixel in every 49 by 49 square of 
pixels to serve as the ground for the moving window, and all pixels in the window act as 
potential sources; even with much faster software, the tool still has options for reducing 
computation time). Note that in future work, we would likely drop the rescaling step, as 
it seemed to overcompress the values. 
To provide context for this example, we will start by describing the interpretation of 
“typical” Circuitscape outputs, i.e., assessments where modelers define a set of focal 
nodes or patches, and current is applied across pairs of nodes which act as sources and 
grounds. In these models, high current values between nodes suggest high movement 
potential, and the pattern and degree of spread of the current flow describes the network 
of pathways between patches. The highest current flow values accrue in locations where 
there are few options for movement between one or multiple patches; these “pinch points” 
arise due to a concentration of natural or anthropogenic barriers that displace current into 
a small number of pixels. Parts of the study region that are not between focal patches will 
likely have low current values, even if in reality they are a key connector to other patches 
outside of the study boundary. In this scenario, pixels with the highest current values 
(pinch points) signal a high risk of connectivity loss through a relatively small amount of 
landcover change, while broader zones of high current typically indicate multiple options, 
and thus higher redundancy in terms of support for movement. Broad movement corri-
dors are likely also of high importance for conservation, but investments to restore and/or 
provide legal protection may be less urgent. In “patch-free” applications, where current 
sources are either all around the edges of the geography (wall-to-wall approaches), or 
where current emerges from every pixel based on values in a source strength grid (Om-
niscape), appropriate interpretation of the current flow values typically requires more 
consideration of how the pattern of resistances and sources interact on the landscape. As 
with patch-based Circuitscape applications, current flow will be highest in places with the 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
14 of 24 
 
fewest options (pinch points). However, if a section of the landscape is relatively homog-
enous in terms of differences in resistance, or if displaced current can spread out in many 
directions, it will not become highly concentrated. As a result, for those expecting high 
current flow in highly intact landscapes, more moderate current magnitudes may be mis-
interpreted as indicating low movement potential. In Figure 5, the broad expanses of  
moderate current flow (purple) correspond to highly connected landscapes in terms of 
“natural” light regimes (lack of nighttime lights). These areas could easily (and incor-
rectly) be interpreted as having low connectivity value. The moderate flow values actually 
suggest diffuse, near-natural levels of connectivity, with multiple redundant pathways 
for movement, an important characteristic to consider in land conservation decisions. 
 
Figure 5. VIIRS Nighttime Lights radiance values (a) were used as the resistance and source 
strength grids for Omniscape.jl [51] to explore the influence of anthropogenic activities on struc-
Table 46. This innovation was incorporated by McRae in part to address biases in the total current 
applied to each region (i.e., to account for presence of water bodies, which would typically not be 
a source of current in a terrestrial analysis, so total current in a region with many “water” pixels 
would be lower). It’s important to remember that this simple example (Figure 5) does not include 
a land use or habitat surface—just the nighttime lights. In studies with different configurations of 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
15 of 24 
 
resistances and source strengths (e.g., incorporating higher resistance values for agriculture, a 
common land use in the eastern part of this region, rather than just the point pattern of resistance 
from nighttime lights), the patterns of variation in current would likely be quite different. The best 
way to learn about how current flow patterns change is to study your resistance and source 
strength surfaces, and run your data. 
With faster model runs, we have more capacity to test options and incorporate sen-
sitivity analyses. In applications involving the use of expert opinion to inform resistance 
grid weightings, speed enhancements can help modelers target the most important ques-
tions to ask, rather than engaging experts in multiple discussions of choices with nominal 
influence on the final map. Even better, if we can explore variations of different models in 
real time in a workshop setting, the shared understanding that develops among partici-
pants is likely to lead to better products, and higher investment in using those products 
to inform decisions [195,196]. This approach would be especially useful in considering 
dynamic conservation applications, including scenarios for land restoration, barrier re-
movals, or protection prioritization in a rapidly changing landscape and climate. 
Finally, a bit of praise for beautiful and compelling connectivity maps. Dynamic rep-
resentations of connectivity, even those built from static models, can be very powerful in 
terms of engaging people in conversations about how to protect moving targets. There are 
likely many great examples, but the “Migrations in Motion” [197] map created by Dan 
Majka is a crowd favorite with both research conference audiences and the public. This 
global map animates Circuitscape-based trajectories for species range shift in response to 
change [198] using colored lines for each species and visualizations designed for modeling 
wind patterns. Increased collaboration between ecologists, data scientists, and app and 
web developers to convey movement dynamics [199] has great potential to add even more 
impact to work with Circuitscape and other connectivity models. 
6. Dynamic Collaborations Empower Dynamic Approaches to Modeling 
For our models to keep up with our ideas and the ever-increasing flow of new input 
data, we need to continually improve them. Conversely, as is evidenced by many Cir-
cuitscape applications, sometimes constraints in computing can lead to innovations that 
take the science in new and interesting directions. In this way, the software, modeling 
philosophy, and modelers are also a dynamic system, and the more we recognize how our 
modeling tools and ability to compute shape our thinking as well as the products of our 
science, the more we are likely to learn about the patterns we are trying to describe. The 
fact that Circuitscape has been deployed in such a large and diverse number of applica-
tions in just over a decade shows both the power of Brad McRae’s ideas, but also an unu-
sual and enduring commitment to a tool—both by its developers, but also by users and 
funders. Looking at the growth of dynamic approaches to connectivity solely through the 
lens of Circuitscape obviously leaves out an extensive volume of important and innova-
tive work, but we hope that it demonstrates the dependence of science innovation on soft-
ware innovation—if you build it, and keep improving it, people will come, and do amaz-
ing things. It is our hope that in the next decade, the pace of innovation we see in Cir-
cuitscape applications can be matched or even exceeded by innovations in the outreach 
and engagement efforts that build from these tools, accelerating opportunities for new 
biodiversity protections in the process. 
Supplementary Materials: The full list of Circuitscape applications can be found at https://cir-
cuitscape.org/publications. 
Author Contributions: Conceptualization, V.B.S., K.R.H., B.G.D.; methodology, V.B.S., R.A., V.A.L., 
M.C., J.P., A.J., K.R.H.; software, R.A., V.A.L., J.P.; resources, V.B.S., A.E.; literature database, K.R.H.; 
writing—original draft preparation, K.R.H.; writing—review and editing, V.B.S., R.A., V.A.L., 
B.G.D., M.C.; visualization, A.J., R.A., K.R.H.; supervision, V.B.S., A.E.; project administration, 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
16 of 24 
 
K.R.H., V.B.S., A.E.; funding acquisition, V.B.S., K.R.H., A.E. All authors have read and agreed to 
the published version of the manuscript. 
Funding: The research to update Circuitscape was funded by NASA through the Earth Science Ap-
plications: Ecological Forecasting program, grant number 16-ECO4CAST-0018, with matching 
funds provided by The Wilburforce Foundation, and The Doris Duke Charitable Foundation. Ad-
ditional support came from NSF’s Office of Advanced Cyberinfrastructure, grant OAC-1835443. 
Data Availability Statement:  No new data were created or analyzed in this study. Data sharing is 
not applicable to this article. 
Acknowledgments: The transition to Circuitscape 5.0, and the Julia implementation of Omniscape, 
were funded through a grant from NASA’s Ecological Forecasting Program, and a grant from the 
Wilburforce Foundation. The authors also wish to acknowledge the Wilburforce Foundation’s long-
term investment in Circuitscape and related tools through several previous awards to Brad McRae, 
and the Foundation’s tremendous and broad support of both connectivity science, and scientists. 
We are grateful for the grant program officers, colleagues, and Circuitscape users who have helped 
and encouraged us to continue this work despite the loss of Brad, who we deeply miss. We also 
thank all of the Circuitscape users who have shared datasets, reported issues, and provided feed-
back on various versions of these updated tools, and look forward to continued collaboration, and 
the opportunity to learn from your next innovation. 
Conflicts of Interest: The authors declare no conflict of interest. 
Appendix A 
We invite connectivity modelers to help us continue to develop Circuitscape and 
Omniscape in Julia, and to integrate them into other tools and workflows. Julia’s modern 
Just in Time (JIT) compiler enables programmers to write generic code by generating spe-
cialized code for desired precision, index types and platform. This makes maintenance of 
the Circuitscape code base simple, and easy to integrate into other software packages. 
More broadly, we invite you to consider Julia as you develop other ecological modeling 
tools that will benefit from high performance (see [200]). The ecology and overlapping 
GIS communities in Julia continue to grow, and software packages centered around ecol-
ogy and GIS are in rapid development and beginning to mature (see https://ecojulia.org, 
and https://juliageo.org/). Julia’s extensible type system helps define hierarchies of com-
plex data structures while paradigms like multiple dispatch enable rich, natural work-
flows that define the properties or behavior of these objects [201]. For example, the pack-
age EcologicalNetworks.jl [202] defines two fundamental data types describing the par-
titeness of a graph, parameterized by the nature of the interactions in the graph. This en-
ables multiple combinations of graphs to be generated by a few lines of code. Julia’s type 
system and multiple dispatch can thus define rich behavior for complex objects at any 
level of granularity. Julia’s JIT compiler then compiles down to high performance native 
code for many hardware platforms. This performance, coupled with Julia’s expressivity, 
benefits code bases written entirely in Julia. Other notable features include the package 
environment system https://julialang.github.io/Pkg.jl/v1/environments/ which can be 
used to set up reproducible environments for research. A larger ecosystem of Julia pack-
ages for ecology, built on similar principles, may be found on the EcoJulia Github page 
(https://github.com/EcoJulia). 
References 
1. 
Pettorelli, N.; Wegmann, M.; Skidmore, A.; Mücher, S.; Dawson, T.P.; Fernandez, M.; Lucas, R.; Schaepman, M.E.; Wang, T.; 
O'Connor, B., et al. Framing the concept of satellite remote sensing essential biodiversity variables: challenges and future direc-
tions. Remote Sensing in Ecology and Conservation 2016, 2, 122-131, https://doi.org/10.1002/rse2.15. 
2. 
Farley, S.S.; Dawson, A.; Goring, S.J.; Williams, J.W. Situating ecology as a big-data science: current advances, challenges, and 
solutions. Bioscience 2018, 68, 563-576, https://doi.org/10.1093/biosci/biy068. 
3. 
Fletcher, R.; Fortin, M.-J. Spatial Ecology and Conservation Modeling; Applications with R; Springer: Cham, 2018, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-01989-1. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
17 of 24 
 
4. 
Runting, R.K.; Phinn, S.; Xie, Z.; Venter, O.; Watson, J.E.M. Opportunities for big data in conservation and sustainability. Nat. 
Commun. 2020, 11, 2003, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-020-15870-0. 
5. 
Winsberg, E. Science in the Age of Computer Simulation; University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 2010; pp. 168. 
6. 
Boyle, S.A.; Kennedy, C.M.; Torres, J.; Colman, K.; Perez-Estigarribia, P.E.; de la Sancha, N.U. High-resolution satellite imagery 
is an important yet underutilized resource in conservation biology. PLoS One 2014, 9, e86908, https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-
nal.pone.0086908. 
7. 
Gomes, C.; Dietterich, T.; Barrett, C.; Conrad, J.; Dilkina, B.; Ermon, S.; Fang, F.; Farnsworth, A.; Fern, A.; Fern, X., et al. Com-
putational sustainability: Computing for a better world and a sustainable future. Commun. ACM 2019, 62, 56-65, 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3339399. 
8. 
Enquist, C.A.F.; Jackson, S.T.; Garfin, G.M.; Davis, F.W.; Gerber, L.R.; Littell, J.A.; Tank, J.L.; Terando, A.J.; Wall, T.U.; Halpern, 
B., et al. Foundations of translational ecology. Front. Ecol. Environ. 2017, 15, 541-550, https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1733. 
9. 
Wood, K.A.; Stillman, R.A.; Hilton, G.M. Conservation in a changing world needs predictive models. Anim. Conserv. 2018, 21, 
87-88, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/acv.12371. 
10. 
Mairota, P.; Cafarelli, B.; Didham, R.K.; Lovergine, F.P.; Lucas, R.M.; Nagendra, H.; Rocchini, D.; Tarantino, C. Challenges and 
opportunities in harnessing satellite remote-sensing for biodiversity monitoring. Ecol. Inform. 2015, 30, 207-214, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2015.08.006. 
11. 
Neumann, W.; Martinuzzi, S.; Estes, A.B.; Pidgeon, A.M.; Dettki, H.; Ericsson, G.; Radeloff, V.C. Opportunities for the applica-
tion of advanced remotely-sensed data in ecological studies of terrestrial animal movement. Mov. Ecol. 2015, 3, 
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40462-015-0036-7. 
12. 
Sullivan, B.L.; Wood, C.L.; Iliff, M.J.; Bonney, R.E.; Fink, D.; Kelling, S. eBird: a citizen-based bird observation network in the 
biological sciences. Biol. Conserv. 2009, 142, 2282-2292, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2009.05.006. 
13. 
Kranstauber, B.; Cameron, A.; Weinzerl, R.; Fountain, T.; Tilak, S.; Wikelski, M.; Kays, R. The Movebank data model for animal 
tracking. Environ. Model. Software 2011, 26, 834-835, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2010.12.005. 
14. 
Hilty, J.A.; Keeley, A.T.H.; Lidicker Jr., W.Z.; Merenlender, A.M. Corridor Ecology:  Linking Landscapes for Biodiversity Conserva-
tion and Climate Adaptation, 2nd Edition; Island Press: Washington, DC, 2019. 
15. 
Wade, A.A.; McKelvey, K.S.; Schwartz, M.K. Resistance-surface-based wildlife conservation connectivity modeling:  Summary of efforts 
in the United States and guide for practitioners; U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, Rocky Mountain Research Station: 
Fort Collins, CO. Gen. Tech. Rep. RMRS-GTR-333. 93 pp., 2015; p 93 pp. 
16. 
Dickson, B.G.; Albano, C.M.; Gray, M.E.; McClure, M.L.; Theobald, D.M.; Anantharaman, R.; Shah, V.B.; Beier, P.; Fargione, J.; 
Hall, K.R., et al. Circuit-theory applications to connectivity science and conservation. Conserv. Biol. 2019, 33, 239-249 
https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13230. 
17. 
Diniz, M.F.; Cushman, S.A.; Machado, R.B.; De Marco, P. Landscape connectivity modeling from the perspective of animal 
dispersal. Landscape Ecol. 2020, 35, 41-58, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-019-00935-3. 
18. 
Keeley, A.T.H.; Ackerly, D.D.; Cameron, D.R.; Heller, N.E.; Huber, P.R.; Schloss, C.A.; Thorne, J.H.; Merenlender, A.M. New 
concepts, models, and assessments of climate-wise connectivity. Environ. Res. Lett. 2018, 13, 073002, https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-
9326/aacb85. 
19. 
Correa Ayram, C.A.; Mendoza, M.E.; Etter, A.; Salicrup, D.R.P. Habitat connectivity in biodiversity conservation: A review of 
recent 
studies 
and 
applications. 
Progress 
in 
Physical 
Geography-Earth 
and 
Environment 
2016, 
40, 
7-37, 
https://doi.org/10.1177/0309133315598713. 
20. 
Spear, S.F.; Balkenhol, N.; Fortin, M.J.; McRae, B.H.; Scribner, K. Use of resistance surfaces for landscape genetic studies: con-
siderations for parameterization and analysis. Mol. Ecol. 2010, 19, 3576-3591, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2010.04657.x. 
21. 
Zeller, K.A.; McGarigal, K.; Whiteley, A.R. Estimating landscape resistance to movement: a review. Landscape Ecol. 2012, 27, 777-
797, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-012-9737-0. 
22. 
McRae, B.H.; Dickson, B.G.; Keitt, T.H.; Shah, V.B. Using circuit theory to model connectivity in ecology, evolution, and conser-
vation. Ecology 2008, 89, 2712-2724, https://doi.org/10.1890/07-1861.1. 
23. 
Baldwin, R.F.; Perkl, R.M.; Trombulak, S.C.; Burwell, W.B. Modeling Ecoregional Connectivity; Springer: New York, 2010; 
10.1007/978-90-481-9575-6_16pp. 349-367. 
24. 
Spear, S.F.; Cushman, S.A.; McRae, B.H. Resistance surface modeling in landscape genetics.In Landscape Genetics: Concepts, Meth-
ods, Applications, Balkenhol, N., Cushman, S.A., Storfer, A.T., Waits, L.P., Eds. Wiley and Sons: Oxford. 2016; pp. 129-148. 
25. 
McRae, B.; Shah, V.; Mohapatra, T. Circuitscape 4 User Guide; The Nature Conservancy, Seattle, WA. http://www.circuitscape.org: 
2014. (accessed on September 8, 2018). 
26. 
Koen, E.L.; Ellington, E.H.; Bowman, J. Mapping landscape connectivity for large spatial extents. Landscape Ecol. 2019, 34, 2421-
2433, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-019-00897-6. 
27. 
Burke, R.A.; Frey, J.K.; Ganguli, A.; Stoner, K.E. Species distribution modelling supports "nectar corridor" hypothesis for migra-
tory nectarivorous bats and conservation of tropical dry forest. Divers. Distrib. 2019, 25, 1399-1415, https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12950. 
28. 
Draheim, H.M.; Moore, J.A.; Fortin, M.-J.; Scribner, K.T. Beyond the snapshot: Landscape genetic analysis of time series data 
reveal responses of American black bears to landscape change. Evol. Appl. 2018, 11, 1219-1230, https://doi.org/10.1111/eva.12617. 
29. 
Huang, J.L.; Andrello, M.; Martensen, A.C.; Saura, S.; Liu, D.F.; He, J.H.; Fortin, M.J. Importance of spatio-temporal connectivity 
to maintain species experiencing range shifts. Ecography 2020, 43, 591-603, https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.04716. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
18 of 24 
 
30. 
Zeller, K.A.; Lewison, R.; Fletcher, R.J.; Tulbure, M.G.; Jennings, M.K. Understanding the importance of dynamic landscape 
connectivity. Land 2020, 9, 303, https://doi.org/10.3390/land9090303. 
31. 
Shah, V.; McRae, B.H. Circuitscape:  A tool for landcape ecology. Proceedings of the 7th Python in Science Conference (SciPy 2008) 
2008, http://conference.scipy.org/proceedings/scipy2008/SciPy2008_proceedings.pdf (accessed on August 9, 2020).  
32. 
Bezanson, J.; Chen, J.; Chung, B.; Karpinski, S.; Shah, V.B.; Vitek, J.; Zoubritzky, L. Julia: Dynamism and performance reconciled 
by design. Proc. ACM Program. Lang. 2018, 2, Article 120, https://doi.org/10.1145/3276490. 
33. 
Bezanson, J.; Edelman, A.; Karpinski, S.; Shah, V.B. Julia: A fresh approach to numerical computing. SIAM Rev. 2017, 59, 65-98, 
https://doi.org/10.1137/141000671. 
34. 
Anantharaman, R.; Hall, K.R.; Shah, V.B.; Edelman, A. Circuitscape in Julia: high performance connectivity modelling to sup-
port conservation decisions. JuliaCon Proc. 2020, 1, 58, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.21105/jcon.00058. 
35. 
Virtanen, P.; Gommers, R.; Oliphant, T.E.; Haberland, M.; Reddy, T.; Cournapeau, D.; Burovski, E.; Peterson, P.; Weckesser, W.; 
Bright, J., et al. SciPy 1.0: fundamental algorithms for scientific computing in Python. Nat. Methods 2020, 17, 261-272, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41592-019-0686-2. 
36. 
McRae, B.H. Isolation by resistance. Evolution 2006, 60, 1551-1561, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.0014-3820.2006.tb00500.x. 
37. 
Novembre, J.; Beier, P.; Fargione, J.; Lawler, J.; Selkoe, K. Brad McRae (1966-2017). Mol. Ecol. 2018, 27, 3035-3036, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.14568. 
38. 
Lawler, J.; Beier, P.; Dickson, B.; Fargione, J.; Novembre, J.; Theobald, D. A tribute to a true conservation innovator, Brad McRae, 
1966-2017. Conserv. Biol. 2018, https://doi-org.proxy2.cl.msu.edu/10.1111/cobi.13247, https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13235. 
39. 
McRae, B.H.; Beier, P. Circuit theory predicts gene flow in plant and animal populations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2007, 104, 
19885-19890, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0706568104. 
40. 
Peterman, W.E.; Connette, G.M.; Semlitsch, R.D.; Eggert, L.S. Ecological resistance surfaces predict fine-scale genetic differenti-
ation in a terrestrial woodland salamander. Mol. Ecol. 2014, 23, 2402-2413, https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.12747. 
41. 
Peterman, W.E.; Winiarski, K.J.; Moore, C.E.; Carvalho, C.D.; Gilbert, A.L.; Spear, S.F. A comparison of popular approaches to 
optimize landscape resistance surfaces. Landscape Ecol. 2019, 34, 2197-2208, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-019-00870-3. 
42. 
Brennan, A.; Hanks, E.M.; Merkle, J.A.; Cole, E.K.; Dewey, S.R.; Courtemanch, A.B.; Cross, P.C. Examining speed versus selec-
tion in connectivity models using elk migration as an example. Landscape Ecol. 2018, 33, 955-968, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-018-
0642-z. 
43. 
Zeller, K.A.; Wattles, D.W.; Destefano, S. Evaluating methods for identifying large mammal road crossing locations: black bears 
as a case study. Landscape Ecol. 2020, 35, 1799–1808, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-020-01057-x. 
44. 
Crawford, J.A.; Peterman, W.E.; Kuhns, A.R.; Eggert, L.S. Altered functional connectivity and genetic diversity of a threatened 
salamander in an agroecosystem. Landscape Ecol. 2016, 31, 2231-2244, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-016-0394-6. 
45. 
Dilts, T.E.; Weisberg, P.J.; Leitner, P.; Matocq, M.D.; Inman, R.D.; Nussear, K.E.; Esque, T.C. Multiscale connectivity and graph 
theory highlight critical areas for conservation under climate change. Ecol. Appl. 2016, 26, 1223-1237, https://doi.org/10.1890/15-
0925. 
46. 
McRae, B.H.; Popper, K.; Jones, A.; Schindel, M.; Buttrick, S.; Hall, K.R.; Unnasch, R.S.; Platt, J. Conserving Nature’s Stage: Mapping 
Omnidirectional Connectivity for Resilient Terrestrial Landscapes in the Pacific Northwest; The Nature Conservancy: Portland, Ore-
gon, 2016; p 47 pp. http://nature.org/resilienceNW (accessed on January 8, 2017). 
47. 
Pelletier, D.; Clark, M.; Anderson, M.G.; Rayfield, B.; Wulder, M.A.; Cardille, J.A. Applying circuit theory for corridor expansion 
and management at regional scales: tiling, pinch points, and omnidirectional connectivity. PLoS One 2014, 9, e84135, 
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0084135. 
48. 
Littlefield, C.E.; McRae, B.H.; Michalak, J.; Lawler, J.J.; Carroll, C. Connecting today's climates to future analogs to facilitate 
species movement under climate change. Conserv. Biol. 2017, 31, 1397-1408, https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.12938. 
49. 
Baumann, M.; Kamp, J.; Potzschner, F.; Bleyhl, B.; Dara, A.; Hankerson, B.; Prishchepov, A.V.; Schierhorn, F.; Muller, D.; Holzel, 
N., et al. Declining human pressure and opportunities for rewilding in the steppes of Eurasia. Divers. Distrib. 2020, 26, 1058-
1070, https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.13110. 
50. 
Koen, E.L.; Bowman, J.; Sadowski, C.; Walpole, A.A. Landscape connectivity for wildlife: development and validation of mul-
tispecies linkage maps. Methods Ecol. Evol. 2014, 5, 626-633, https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210x.12197. 
51. 
Landau, V.A.; Shah, V.B.; Anantharaman, R.; Hall, K.R. Omniscape.jl: Software to compute omnidirectional landscape connec-
tivity. Journal of Open Source Software 2021, 6, 2829, https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.02829. 
52. 
McRae, B.; Shah, V.B. Circuitscape User Guide.  Version 3.5,  Updated December 2011. https://www.researchgate.net/publica-
tion/265494222_Circuitscape_User_Guide (accessed on October 30, 2020). 
53. 
Yao, H.M.; Hsieh, Y.P.; Kong, J.; Hofmann, M. Modelling electrical conduction in nanostructure assemblies through complex 
networks. Nat. Mater. 2020, 19, 745-751, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41563-020-0664-1. 
54. 
McRae, B.H.; Kavanagh, D.M. Linkage mapper connectivity analysis software; The Nature Conservancy: Seattle, Washington. 
http://www.circuitscape.org/linkagemapper, 2011 (accessed on August 15, 2018) 
55. 
Peterman, W.E. ResistanceGA: An R package for the optimization of resistance surfaces using genetic algorithms. Methods Ecol. 
Evol. 2018, 9, 1638-1647, https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210x.12984. 
56. 
Dellicour, S.; Rose, R.; Faria, N.R.; Lemey, P.; Pybus, O.G. SERAPHIM: studying environmental rasters and phylogenetically 
informed movements. Bioinformatics 2016, 32, 3204-3206, https://doi.org/10.1093/bioinformatics/btw384. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
19 of 24 
 
57. 
Leonard, P.B.; Duffy, E.B.; Baldwin, R.F.; McRae, B.H.; Shah, V.B.; Mohapatra, T.K. gflow: software for modelling circuit theory-
based connectivity at any scale. Methods Ecol. Evol. 2017, 8, 519-526, https://doi.org/10.1111/2041-210x.12689. 
58. 
Phillips, S.J.; Anderson, R.P.; Dudík, M.; Schapire, R.E.; Blair, M.E. Opening the black box: an open-source release of Maxent. 
Ecography 2017, 40, 887-893, https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.03049. 
59. 
Phillips, S.J.; Dudik, M.; Shapire, R.E. A maximum entropy approach to species distribution modeling. Proceedings of the Twenty-
First International Conference on Machine Learning 2004, 655-662, https://doi.org/dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1015330.1015412. 
60. 
Pelletier, D.; Lapointe, M.E.; Wulder, M.A.; White, J.C.; Cardille, J.A. Forest connectivity regions of Canada using circuit theory 
and image analysis. PLoS One 2017, 12, e0169428, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0169428. 
61. 
Bishop-Taylor, R.; Tulbure, M.G.; Broich, M. Evaluating static and dynamic landscape connectivity modelling using a 25-year 
remote sensing time series. Landscape Ecol. 2018, 33, 625-640, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-018-0624-1. 
62. 
Elmes, A.; Rogan, J.; Williams, C.; Ratick, S.; Nowak, D. Modeling the potential dispersal of Asian longhorned beetle using 
circuit theory. Prof. Geogr. 2019, 71, 580-594, https://doi.org/10.1080/00330124.2019.1611458. 
63. 
Filz, K.J.; Engler, J.O.; Stoffels, J.; Weitzel, M.; Schmitt, T. Missing the target? A critical view on butterfly conservation efforts on 
calcareous grasslands in south-western Germany. Biodivers. Conserv. 2013, 22, 2223-2241, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10531-012-0413-0. 
64. 
Brodie, J.F.; Newmark, W.D. Heterogeneous matrix habitat drives species occurrences in complex, fragmented landscapes. Am. 
Nat. 2019, 193, 748-754, https://doi.org/10.1086/702589. 
65. 
Rakotomalala, M.; Vrancken, B.; Pinel-Galzi, A.; Ramavovololona, P.; Hebrard, E.; Randrianangaly, J.S.; Dellicour, S.; Lemey, 
P.; Fargette, D. Comparing patterns and scales of plant virus phylogeography: Rice yellow mottle virus in Madagascar and in 
continental Africa. Virus Evol. 2019, 5, vez023, https://doi.org/10.1093/ve/vez023. 
66. 
Oyama, K.; Herrera-Arroyo, M.L.; Rocha-Ramirez, V.; Benitez-Malvido, J.; Ruiz-Sanchez, E.; Gonzalez-Rodriguez, A. Gene flow 
interruption in a recently human-modified landscape: The value of isolated trees for the maintenance of genetic diversity in a 
Mexican endemic red oak. For. Ecol. Manage. 2017, 390, 27-35, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.foreco.2017.01.018. 
67. 
Howey, M.C.L. Multiple pathways across past landscapes: circuit theory as a complementary geospatial method to least cost 
path for modeling past movement. J. Archaeol. Sci. 2011, 38, 2523-2535, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jas.2011.03.024. 
68. 
Tatem, A.J.; Hemelaar, J.; Gray, R.R.; Salemi, M. Spatial accessibility and the spread of HIV-1 subtypes and recombinants. AIDS 
2012, 26, 2351-2360, https://doi.org/10.1097/QAD.0b013e328359a904. 
69. 
Struebig, M.J.; Linkie, M.; Deere, N.J.; Martyr, D.J.; Millyanawati, B.; Faulkner, S.C.; Le Comber, S.C.; Mangunjaya, F.M.; Leader-
Williams, N.; McKay, J.E., et al. Addressing human-tiger conflict using socio-ecological information on tolerance and risk. Nat. 
Commun. 2018, 9, 3455, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-018-05983-y. 
70. 
Zarrate-Charry, D.A.; Massey, A.L.; Gonzalez-Maya, J.F.; Betts, M.G. Multi-criteria spatial identification of carnivore conserva-
tion areas under data scarcity and conflict: a jaguar case study in Sierra Nevada de Santa Marta, Colombia. Biodivers. Conserv. 
2018, 27, 3373-3392, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10531-018-1605-z. 
71. 
Papadopoulou, A.; Knowles, L.L. Linking micro- and macroevolutionary perspectives to evaluate the role of Quaternary sea-
level oscillations in island diversification. Evolution 2017, 71, 2901-2917, https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.13384. 
72. 
He, Q.X.; Edwards, D.L.; Knowles, L.L. Integrative testing of how environments from the past to the present shape genetic 
structure across landscapes. Evolution 2013, 67, 3386-3402, https://doi.org/10.1111/evo.12159. 
73. 
Fuchs, J.; Parra, J.L.; Goodman, S.M.; Raherilalao, M.J.; Vanderwal, J.; Bowie, R.C.K. Extending ecological niche models to the 
past 120000 years corroborates the lack of strong phylogeographic structure in the Crested Drongo (Dicrurus forficatus forficatus) 
on Madagascar. Biol. J. Linn. Soc. 2013, 108, 658-676, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8312.2012.02022.x. 
74. 
Afroosheh, M.; Rodder, D.; Mikulicek, P.; Akmali, V.; Vaissi, S.; Fleck, J.; Schneider, W.; Sharifi, M. Mitochondrial DNA variation 
and Quaternary range dynamics in the endangered Yellow Spotted Mountain Newt, Neurergus derjugini (Caudata, Salamandri-
dae). J. Zool. Syst. Evol. Res. 2019, 57, 580-590, https://doi.org/10.1111/jzs.12275. 
75. 
Yannic, G.; Pellissier, L.; Dubey, S.; Vega, R.; Basset, P.; Mazzotti, S.; Pecchioli, E.; Vernesi, C.; Hauffe, H.C.; Searle, J.B., et al. 
Multiple refugia and barriers explain the phylogeography of the Valais shrew, Sorex antinorii (Mammalia: Soricomorpha). Biol. 
J. Linn. Soc. 2012, 105, 864-880, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1095-8312.2011.01824.x. 
76. 
Lanier, H.C.; Massatti, R.; He, Q.X.; Olson, L.E.; Knowles, L.L. Colonization from divergent ancestors: glaciation signatures on 
contemporary patterns of genomic variation in Collared Pikas (Ochotona collaris). Mol. Ecol. 2015, 24, 3688-3705, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.13270. 
77. 
Koch, J.B.; Vandame, R.; Merida-Rivas, J.; Sagot, P.; Strange, J. Quaternary climate instability is correlated with patterns of 
population genetic variability in Bombus huntii. Ecol. Evol. 2018, 8, 7849-7864, https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.4294. 
78. 
Zellmer, A.J.; Hanes, M.M.; Hird, S.M.; Carstens, B.C. Deep phylogeographic structure and environmental differentiation in the 
carnivorous plant Sarracenia alata. Syst. Biol. 2012, 61, 763-777, https://doi.org/10.1093/sysbio/sys048. 
79. 
Walpole, A.A.; Bowman, J.; Murray, D.L.; Wilson, P.J. Functional connectivity of lynx at their southern range periphery in 
Ontario, Canada. Landscape Ecol. 2012, 27, 761-773, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-012-9728-1. 
80. 
Malakoutikhah, S.; Fakheran, S.; Hemami, M.R.; Tarkesh, M.; Senn, J. Assessing future distribution, suitability of corridors and 
efficiency of protected areas to conserve vulnerable ungulates under climate change. Divers. Distrib. 2020, 26, 1383-1396, 
https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.13117. 
81. 
Maher, S.P.; Morelli, T.L.; Hershey, M.; Flint, A.L.; Flint, L.E.; Moritz, C.; Beissinger, S.R. Erosion of refugia in the Sierra Nevada 
meadows network with climate change. Ecosphere 2017, 8, e01673, https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.1673. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
20 of 24 
 
82. 
Li, W.W.; Yu, Y.; Liu, P.; Tang, R.C.; Dai, Y.C.; Li, L.; Zhang, L. Identifying climate refugia and its potential impact on small 
population 
of 
Asian 
elephant 
(Elephas 
maximus) 
in 
China. 
Glob. 
Ecol. 
Conserv. 
2019, 
19, 
e00664, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2019.e00664. 
83. 
Ashrafzadeh, M.R.; Naghipour, A.A.; Haidarian, M.; Kusza, S.; Pilliod, D.S. Effects of climate change on habitat and connectivity 
for 
populations 
of 
a 
vulnerable, 
endemic 
salamander 
in 
Iran. 
Glob. 
Ecol. 
Conserv. 
2019, 
19, 
e00637, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.gecco.2019.e00637. 
84. 
Barker, B.S.; Rodriguez-Robles, J.A.; Cook, J.A. Climate as a driver of tropical insular diversity: comparative phylogeography 
of two ecologically distinctive frogs in Puerto Rico. Ecography 2015, 38, 769-781, https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.01327. 
85. 
Johnson, J.S.; Gaddis, K.D.; Cairns, D.M.; Konganti, K.; Krutovsky, K.V. Landscape genomic insights into the historic migration 
of mountain hemlock in response to Holocene climate change. Am. J. Bot. 2017, 104, 439-450, https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1600262. 
86. 
Metzger, G.; Espindola, A.; Waits, L.P.; Sullivan, J. Genetic structure across broad spatial and temporal scales: Rocky Mountain 
tailed frogs (Ascaphus montanus; Anura: Ascaphidae) in the inland temperate rainforest. J. Hered. 2015, 106, 700-710, 
https://doi.org/10.5061/dryad.2pb57. 
87. 
Razgour, O.; Forester, B.; Taggart, J.B.; Bekaert, M.; Juste, J.; Ibanez, C.; Puechmaille, S.J.; Novella-Fernandez, R.; Alberdi, A.; 
Manel, S. Considering adaptive genetic variation in climate change vulnerability assessment reduces species range loss projec-
tions. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 2019, 116, 10418-10423, https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1820663116. 
88. 
Razgour, O.; Taggart, J.B.; Manel, S.; Juste, J.; Ibanez, C.; Rebelo, H.; Alberdi, A.; Jones, G.; Park, K. An integrated framework to 
identify wildlife populations under threat from climate change. Molec. Ecol. Resour. 2018, 18, 18-31, https://doi.org/10.1111/1755-
0998.12694. 
89. 
De Kort, H.; Prunier, J.G.; Tessier, M.; Turlure, C.; Baguette, M.; Stevens, V.M. Interacting grassland species under threat of 
multiple global change drivers. J. Biogeogr. 2018, 45, 2133-2145, https://doi.org/10.1111/jbi.13397. 
90. 
Hamilton, C.M.; Bateman, B.L.; Gorzo, J.M.; Reid, B.; Thogmartin, W.E.; Peery, M.Z.; Heglund, P.J.; Radeloff, V.C.; Pidgeon, 
A.M. Slow and steady wins the race? Future climate and land use change leaves the imperiled Blanding's turtle (Emydoidea 
blandingii) behind. Biol. Conserv. 2018, 222, 75-85, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2018.03.026. 
91. 
Jennings, M.K.; Haeuser, E.; Foote, D.; Lewison, R.L.; Conlisk, E. Planning for dynamic connectivity: Operationalizing robust 
decision-making and prioritization across landscapes experiencing climate and land-use change. Land 2020, 9, 341, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/land9100341. 
92. 
Leonard, P.B.; Sutherland, R.W.; Baldwin, R.F.; Fedak, D.A.; Carnes, R.G.; Montgomery, A.P. Landscape connectivity losses due 
to sea level rise and land use change. Anim. Conserv. 2017, 20, 80-90, https://doi.org/10.1111/acv.12289. 
93. 
Bell, R.C.; Parra, J.L.; Tonione, M.; Hoskin, C.J.; Mackenzie, J.B.; Williams, S.E.; Moritz, C. Patterns of persistence and isolation 
indicate resilience to climate change in montane rainforest lizards. Mol. Ecol. 2010, 19, 2531-2544, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-
294X.2010.04676.x. 
94. 
Bell, R.C.; Parra, J.L.; Badjedjea, G.; Barej, M.F.; Blackburn, D.C.; Burger, M.; Channing, A.; Dehling, J.M.; Greenbaum, E.; 
Gvozdik, V., et al. Idiosyncratic responses to climate-driven forest fragmentation and marine incursions in reed frogs from 
Central Africa and the Gulf of Guinea Islands. Mol. Ecol. 2017, 26, 5223-5244, https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.14260. 
95. 
Garcia, J.; Moran-Ordonez, A.; Garcia, J.T.; Calero-Riestra, M.; Alda, F.; Sanz, J.; Suarez-Seoane, S. Current landscape attributes 
and landscape stability in breeding grounds explain genetic differentiation in a long-distance migratory bird. Anim. Conserv. 
2020, , https://doi.org/10.1111/acv.12616. 
96. 
Dambach, J.; Raupach, M.J.; Leese, F.; Schwarzer, J.; Engler, J.O. Ocean currents determine functional connectivity in an Ant-
arctic deep-sea shrimp. Mar. Ecol. 2016, 37, 1336-1344, https://doi.org/10.1111/maec.12343. 
97. 
Goretskaia, M.I.; Beme, I.R.; Popova, D.V.; Amos, N.; Buchanan, K.L.; Sunnucks, P.; Pavlova, A. Song parameters of the fuscous 
honeyeater Lichenostomus fuscus correlate with habitat characteristics in fragmented landscapes. J. Avian Biol. 2018, 49, e01493, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/jav.01493. 
98. 
Tarkhnishvili, D.; Gavashelishvili, A.; Murtskhvaladze, M.; Latsuzbaia, A. Landscape complexity in the Caucasus impedes ge-
netic assimilation of human populations more effectively than language or ethnicity. Human Biol. 2016, 88, 287, 
https://doi.org/10.13110/humanbiology.88.4.0287. 
99. 
Youngquist, M.B.; Inoue, K.; Berg, D.J.; Boone, M.D. Effects of land use on population presence and genetic structure of an 
amphibian in an agricultural landscape. Landscape Ecol. 2017, 32, 147-162, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-016-0438-y. 
100. Liu, X.J.; Liu, D.F.; Zhao, H.Z.; He, J.H.; Liu, Y.L. Exploring the spatio-temporal impacts of farmland reforestation on ecological 
connectivity using circuit theory: A case study in the agro-pastoral ecotone of North China. J. Geogr. Sci. 2020, 30, 1419-1435, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11442-020-1790-z. 
101. Thomassen, H.A.; Fuller, T.; Buermann, W.; Mila, B.; Kieswetter, C.M.; Jarrin, P.; Cameron, S.E.; Mason, E.; Schweizer, R.; 
Schlunegger, J., et al. Mapping evolutionary process: a multi-taxa approach to conservation prioritization. Evol. Appl. 2011, 4, 
397-413, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1752-4571.2010.00172.x. 
102. Palacio, R.D.; Kattan, G.H.; Pimm, S.L. Bird extirpations and community dynamics in an Andean cloud forest over 100 years of 
land-use change. Conserv. Biol. 2020, 34, 677-687, https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13423. 
103. Schirmel, J.; Thiele, J.; Entling, M.H.; Buchholz, S. Trait composition and functional diversity of spiders and carabids in linear 
landscape elements. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 2016, 235, 318-328, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.agee.2016.10.028. 
104. Sarremejane, R.; Canedo-Arguelles, M.; Prat, N.; Mykra, H.; Muotka, T.; Bonada, N. Do metacommunities vary through time? 
Intermittent rivers as model systems. J. Biogeogr. 2017, 44, 2752-2763, https://doi.org/10.1111/jbi.13077. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
21 of 24 
 
105. Razeng, E.; Moran-Ordonez, A.; Box, J.B.; Thompson, R.; Davis, J.; Sunnucks, P. A potential role for overland dispersal in shap-
ing aquatic invertebrate communities in arid regions. Freshwat. Biol. 2016, 61, 745-757, https://doi.org/10.1111/fwb.12744. 
106. Grafius, D.R.; Corstanje, R.; Siriwardena, G.M.; Plummer, K.E.; Harris, J.A. A bird's eye view: using circuit theory to study urban 
landscape connectivity for birds. Landscape Ecol. 2017, 32, 1771-1787, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-017-0548-1. 
107. Cameron, A.C.; Page, R.B.; Watling, J.I.; Hickerson, C.A.M.; Anthony, C.D. Using a comparative approach to investigate the 
relationship between landscape and genetic connectivity among woodland salamander populations. Conserv. Genet. 2019, 20, 
1265-1280, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10592-019-01207-y. 
108. Correa Ayram, C.A.; Mendoza, M.E.; Salicrup, D.R.P.; Granados, E.L. Identifying potential conservation areas in the Cuitzeo 
Lake basin, Mexico by multitemporal analysis of landscape connectivity. J. Nat. Conserv. 2014, 22, 424-435, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnc.2014.03.010. 
109. Schaffer-Smith, D.; Swenson, J.J.; Boveda-Penalba, A.J. Rapid conservation assessment for endangered species using habitat 
connectivity models. Environ. Conserv. 2016, 43, 221-230, https://doi.org/10.1017/s0376892915000405. 
110. Fedorca, A.; Popa, M.; Jurj, R.; Ionescu, G.; Ionescu, O.; Fedorca, M. Assessing the regional landscape connectivity for multi-
species to coordinate on-the-ground needs for mitigating linear infrastructure impact in Brasov - Prahova region. J. Nat. Conserv. 
2020, 58, 11, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jnc.2020.125903. 
111. Meurant, M.; Gonzalez, A.; Doxa, A.; Albert, C.H. Selecting surrogate species for connectivity conservation. Biol. Conserv. 2018, 
227, 326-334, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2018.09.028. 
112. Jewitt, D.; Goodman, P.S.; Erasmus, B.F.N.; O'Connor, T.G.; Witkowski, E.T.F. Planning for the maintenance of floristic diversity 
in the face of land cover and climate change. Environ. Manage. 2017, 59, 792-806, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-017-0829-0. 
113. Castilho, C.S.; Hackbart, V.C.S.; Pivello, V.R.; dos Santos, R.F. Evaluating landscape connectivity for Puma concolor and Panthera 
onca among Atlantic forest protected areas. Environ. Manage. 2015, 55, 1377-1389, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00267-015-0463-7. 
114. Schindler, A.R.; Haukos, D.A.; Hagen, C.A.; Ross, B.E. A decision-support tool to prioritize candidate landscapes for lesser 
prairie-chicken conservation. Landscape Ecol. 2020, 35, 1417-1434, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-020-01024-6. 
115. González-Serna, M.J.; Cordero, P.J.; Ortego, J. Using high-throughput sequencing to investigate the factors structuring genomic 
variation of a Mediterranean grasshopper of great conservation concern. Scientific Reports 2018, 8, 13436, 
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-31775-x. 
116. Epps, C.W.; Wasser, S.K.; Keim, J.L.; Mutayoba, B.M.; Brashares, J.S. Quantifying past and present connectivity illuminates a 
rapidly changing landscape for the African elephant. Mol. Ecol. 2013, 22, 1574-1588, https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.12198. 
117. Blair, C.; Arcos, V.H.J.; de la Cruz, F.R.M.; Murphy, R.W. Landscape genetics of leaf-toed geckos in the tropical dry forest of 
Northern Mexico. PLoS One 2013, 8, e57433, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0057433. 
118. Chávez-Pesqueira, M.; Suarez-Montes, P.; Castillo, G.; Nunez-Farfan, J. Habitat fragmentation threatens wild populations of 
Carica papaya (Caricaceae) in a lowland rainforest. Am. J. Bot. 2014, 101, 1092-1101, https://doi.org/10.3732/ajb.1400051. 
119. Landaverde-Gonzalez, P.; Baltz, L.M.; Escobedo-Kenefic, N.; Merida, J.; Paxton, R.J.; Husemann, M. Recent low levels of differ-
entiation in the native Bombus ephippiatus (Hymenoptera: Apidae) along two Neotropical mountain-ranges in Guatemala. Bio-
divers. Conserv. 2018, 27, 3513-3531, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10531-018-1612-0. 
120. Landaverde-Gonzalez, P.; Enriquez, E.; Ariza, M.; Murray, T.; Paxton, R.J.; Husemann, M. Fragmentation in the clouds? The 
population genetics of the native bee Partamona bilineata (Hymenoptera: Apidae: Meliponini) in the cloud forests of Guatemala. 
Conserv. Genet. 2017, 18, 631-643, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10592-017-0950-x. 
121. Blair, C.; Arcos, V.H.J.; de la Cruz, F.R.M.; Murphy, R.W. Historical and contemporary demography of leaf-toed geckos (Phyl-
lodactylidae: Phyllodactylus tuberculosus saxatilis) in the Mexican dry forest. Conserv. Genet. 2015, 16, 419-429, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10592-014-0668-y. 
122. Rouger, R.; Jump, A.S. A seascape genetic analysis reveals strong biogeographical structuring driven by contrasting processes 
in the polyploid saltmarsh species Puccinellia maritima and Triglochin maritima. Mol. Ecol. 2014, 23, 3158-3170, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.12802. 
123. Moore, J.A.; Tallmon, D.A.; Nielsen, J.; Pyare, S. Effects of the landscape on boreal toad gene flow: does the pattern-process 
relationship hold true across distinct landscapes at the northern range margin? Mol. Ecol. 2011, 20, 4858-4869, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2011.05313.x. 
124. Afán, I.; Giménez, J.; Forero, M.G.; Ramirez, F. An adaptive method for identifying marine areas of high conservation priority. 
Conserv. Biol. 2018, 32, 1436-1447, https://doi.org/10.1111/cobi.13154. 
125. Ruiz-Lopez, M.J.; Barelli, C.; Rovero, F.; Hodges, K.; Roos, C.; Peterman, W.E.; Ting, N. A novel landscape genetic approach 
demonstrates the effects of human disturbance on the Udzungwa red colobus monkey (Procolobus gordonorum). Heredity 2016, 
116, 167-176, https://doi.org/10.1038/hdy.2015.82. 
126. Smith, A.L.; Landguth, E.L.; Bull, C.M.; Banks, S.C.; Gardner, M.G.; Driscoll, D.A. Dispersal responses override density effects 
on genetic diversity during post-disturbance succession. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 2016, 283, 20152934, 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2015.2934. 
127. Andrew, R.L.; Ostevik, K.L.; Ebert, D.P.; Rieseberg, L.H. Adaptation with gene flow across the landscape in a dune sunflower. 
Mol. Ecol. 2012, 21, 2078-2091, https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-294X.2012.05454.x. 
128. Osipova, L.; Okello, M.M.; Njumbi, S.J.; Ngene, S.; Western, D.; Hayward, M.W.; Balkenhol, N. Using step-selection functions 
to model landscape connectivity for African elephants: accounting for variability across individuals and seasons. Anim. Conserv. 
2019, 22, 35-48, https://doi.org/10.1111/acv.12432. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
22 of 24 
 
129. Jahel, C.; Lenormand, M.; Seck, I.; Apolloni, A.; Toure, I.; Faye, C.; Sall, B.; Lo, M.; Diaw, C.S.; Lancelot, R., et al. Mapping 
livestock movements in Sahelian Africa. Scientific Reports 2020, 10, 8339, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-65132-8. 
130. McClure, M.L.; Hansen, A.J.; Inman, R.M. Connecting models to movements: testing connectivity model predictions against 
empirical migration and dispersal data. Landscape Ecol. 2016, 31, 1419-1432, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-016-0347-0. 
131. Poor, E.E.; Loucks, C.; Jakes, A.; Urban, D.L. Comparing habitat suitability and connectivity modeling methods for conserving 
pronghorn migrations. PLoS One 2012, 7, e49390, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0049390. 
132. Fischer, M.L.; Salgado, I.; Beninde, J.; Klein, R.; Frantz, A.C.; Heddergott, M.; Cullingham, C.I.; Kyle, C.J.; Hochkirch, A. Multiple 
founder effects are followed by range expansion and admixture during the invasion process of the raccoon (Procyon lotor) in 
Europe. Divers. Distrib. 2017, 23, 409-420, https://doi.org/10.1111/ddi.12538. 
133. Rees, E.E.; Pond, B.A.; Tinline, R.R.; Bélanger, D. Modelling the effect of landscape heterogeneity on the efficacy of vaccination 
for wildlife infectious disease control. J. Appl. Ecol. 2013, 50, 881-891, https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.12101. 
134. Laenen, L.; Dellicour, S.; Vergote, V.; Nauwelaers, I.; De Coster, S.; Verbeeck, I.; Vanmechelen, B.; Lemey, P.; Maes, P. Spatio-
temporal analysis of Nova virus, a divergent hantavirus circulating in the European mole in Belgium. Mol. Ecol. 2016, 25, 5994-
6008, https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.13887. 
135. Laenen, L.; Vergote, V.; Vanmechelen, B.; Tersago, K.; Baele, G.; Lemey, P.; Leirs, H.; Dellicour, S.; Vrancken, B.; Maes, P. Iden-
tifying the patterns and drivers of Puumala hantavirus enzootic dynamics using reservoir sampling. Virus Evol. 2019, 5, vez009, 
https://doi.org/10.1093/ve/vez009. 
136. Gryseels, S.; Baird, S.J.E.; Borremans, B.; Makundi, R.; Leirs, H.; de Bellocq, J.G. When viruses don't go viral: the importance of 
host phylogeographic structure in the spatial spread of arenaviruses. PLoS Path. 2017, 13, e1006073, https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-
nal.ppat.1006073. 
137. Kozakiewicz, C.P.; Ricci, L.; Patton, A.H.; Stahlke, A.R.; Hendricks, S.A.; Margres, M.J.; Ruiz-Aravena, M.; Hamilton, D.G.; 
Hamede, R.; McCallum, H., et al. Comparative landscape genetics reveals differential effects of environment on host and path-
ogen genetic structure in Tasmanian devils (Sarcophilus harrisii) and their transmissible tumour. Mol. Ecol. 2020, 29, 3217-3233, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.15558. 
138. Trovao, N.S.; Baele, G.; Vrancken, B.; Bielejec, F.; Suchard, M.A.; Fargette, D.; Lemey, P. Host ecology determines the dispersal 
patterns of a plant virus. Virus Evol. 2015, 1, vev016, https://doi.org/10.1093/ve/vev016. 
139. Talbi, C.; Lemey, P.; Suchard, M.A.; Abdelatif, E.; Elharrak, M.; Jalal, N.; Faouzi, A.; Echevarria, J.E.; Moron, S.V.; Rambaut, A., 
et al. Phylodynamics and human-mediated dispersal of a zoonotic virus. PLoS Path. 2010, 6, e1001166, https://doi.org/10.1371/jour-
nal.ppat.1001166. 
140. Young, S.G.; Carrel, M.; Kitchen, A.; Malanson, G.P.; Tamerius, J.; Ali, M.; Kayali, G. How's the flu getting through? Landscape 
genetics suggests both humans and birds spread H5N1 in Egypt. Infect. Genet. Evol. 2017, 49, 293-299, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mee-
gid.2017.02.005. 
141. Bishop-Taylor, R.; Tulbure, M.G.; Broich, M. Surface-water dynamics and land use influence landscape connectivity across a 
major dryland region. Ecol. Appl. 2017, 27, 1124-1137, https://doi.org/10.1002/eap.1507. 
142. Bishop-Taylor, R.; Tulbure, M.G.; Broich, M. Surface water network structure, landscape resistance to movement and flooding 
vital for maintaining ecological connectivity across Australia's largest river basin. Landscape Ecol. 2015, 30, 2045-2065, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-015-0230-4. 
143. Bishop-Taylor, R.; Tulbure, M.G.; Broich, M. Impact of hydroclimatic variability on regional-scale landscape connectivity across 
a dynamic dryland region. Ecol. Indicators 2018, 94, 142-150, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecolind.2017.07.029. 
144. Jackson, C.R.; Marnewick, K.; Lindsey, P.A.; Roskaft, E.; Robertson, M.P. Evaluating habitat connectivity methodologies: a case 
study with endangered African wild dogs in South Africa. Landscape Ecol. 2016, 31, 1433-1447, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-016-
0342-5. 
145. Maiorano, L.; Chiaverini, L.; Falco, M.; Ciucci, P. Combining multi-state species distribution models, mortality estimates, and 
landscape connectivity to model potential species distribution for endangered species in human dominated landscapes. Biol. 
Conserv. 2019, 237, 19-27, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2019.06.014. 
146. Rio-Maior, H.; Nakamura, M.; Alvares, F.; Beja, P. Designing the landscape of coexistence: Integrating risk avoidance, habitat 
selection and functional connectivity to inform large carnivore conservation. Biol. Conserv. 2019, 235, 178-188, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biocon.2019.04.021. 
147. Keeley, A.T.H.; Beier, P.; Keeley, B.W.; Fagan, M.E. Habitat suitability is a poor proxy for landscape connectivity during disper-
sal and mating movements. Landscape Urban Plann. 2017, 161, 90-102, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.landurbplan.2017.01.007. 
148. Mulder, K.P.; Cortes-Rodriguez, N.; Grant, E.H.C.; Brand, A.; Fleischer, R.C. North-facing slopes and elevation shape asymmet-
ric genetic structure in the range-restricted salamander Plethodon shenandoah. Ecol. Evol. 2019, 9, 5094-5105, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.5064. 
149. Castillo, J.A.; Epps, C.W.; Jeffress, M.R.; Ray, C.; Rodhouse, T.J.; Schwalm, D. Replicated landscape genetic and network anal-
yses reveal wide variation in functional connectivity for American pikas. Ecol. Appl. 2016, 26, 1660-1676, https://doi.org/10.1890/15-
1452.1. 
150. Garrido-Garduno, T.; Tellez-Valdes, O.; Manel, S.; Vazquez-Dominguez, E. Role of habitat heterogeneity and landscape con-
nectivity in shaping gene flow and spatial population structure of a dominant rodent species in a tropical dry forest. J. Zool. 
2016, 298, 293-302, https://doi.org/10.1111/jzo.12307. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
23 of 24 
 
151. Maiorano, L.; Boitani, L.; Chiaverini, L.; Ciucci, P. Uncertainties in the identification of potential dispersal corridors: The im-
portance of behaviour, sex, and algorithm. Basic Appl. Ecol. 2017, 21, 66-75, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.baae.2017.02.005. 
152. Grasty, M.R.; Thompson, P.G.; Hendrickson, E.C.; Pheil, A.E.; Cruzan, M.B. Fine-scale habitat heterogeneity and vole runways 
influence seed dispersal in Plagiobothrys nothofulvus. Am. J. Bot. 2020, 107, 413-422, https://doi.org/10.1002/ajb2.1433. 
153. DiLeo, M.F.; Husby, A.; Saastamoinen, M. Landscape permeability and individual variation in a dispersal-linked gene jointly 
determine genetic structure in the Glanville fritillary butterfly. Evol. Lett. 2018, 2, 544-556, https://doi.org/10.1002/evl3.90. 
154. Pereoglou, F.; Lindenmayer, D.B.; Macgregor, C.; Ford, F.; Wood, J.; Banks, S.C. Landscape genetics of an early successional 
specialist in a disturbance-prone environment. Mol. Ecol. 2013, 22, 1267-1281, https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.12172. 
155. Andraca-Gomez, G.; Lombaert, E.; Ordano, M.; Perez-Ishiwara, R.; Boege, K.; Dominguez, C.A.; Fornoni, J. Local dispersal 
pathways during the invasion of the cactus moth, Cactoblastis cactorum, within North America and the Caribbean. Scientific 
Reports 2020, 10, 10, https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-66864-3. 
156. Shafer, A.B.A.; Northrup, J.M.; White, K.S.; Boyce, M.S.; Cote, S.D.; Coltman, D.W. Habitat selection predicts genetic relatedness 
in an alpine ungulate. Ecology 2012, 93, 1317-1329. 
157. Mui, A.B.; Caverhill, B.; Johnson, B.; Fortin, M.J.; He, Y.H. Using multiple metrics to estimate seasonal landscape connectivity 
for Blanding's turtles (Emydoidea blandingii) in a fragmented landscape. Landscape Ecol. 2017, 32, 531-546, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-016-0456-9. 
158. Koen, E.L.; Tosa, M.I.; Nielsen, C.K.; Schauber, E.M. Does landscape connectivity shape local and global social network structure 
in white-tailed deer? PLoS One 2017, 12, e0173570, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0173570. 
159. Watson, S.J.; Watson, D.M.; Luck, G.W.; Spooner, P.G. Effects of landscape composition and connectivity on the distribution of 
an endangered parrot in agricultural landscapes. Landscape Ecol. 2014, 29, 1249-1259, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-014-0065-4. 
160. Haase, C.G.; Fletcher, R.J.; Slone, D.H.; Reid, J.P.; Butler, S.M. Landscape complementation revealed through bipartite networks: 
an example with the Florida manatee. Landscape Ecol. 2017, 32, 1999-2014, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-017-0560-5. 
161. Nogeire, T.M.; Davis, F.W.; Crooks, K.R.; McRae, B.H.; Lyren, L.M.; Boydston, E.E. Can orchards help connect Mediterranean 
ecosystems? Animal movement data alter conservation priorities. Am. Midl. Nat. 2015, 174, 105-116. 
162. Luck, G.W.; Spooner, P.G.; Watson, D.M.; Watson, S.J.; Saunders, M.E. Interactions between almond plantations and native 
ecosystems: Lessons learned from north-western Victoria. Ecol. Manage. Restor. 2014, 15, 4-15, https://doi.org/10.1111/emr.12082. 
163. DiLeo, M.F.; Rouse, J.D.; Davila, J.A.; Lougheed, S.C. The influence of landscape on gene flow in the eastern massasauga rattle-
snake (Sistrurus c. catenatus): insight from computer simulations. Mol. Ecol. 2013, 22, 4483-4498, https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.12411. 
164. Balbi, M.; Ernoult, A.; Poli, P.; Madec, L.; Guiller, A.; Martin, M.C.; Nabucet, J.; Beaujouan, V.; Petit, E.J. Functional connectivity 
in replicated urban landscapes in the land snail (Cornu aspersum). Mol. Ecol. 2018, 27, 1357-1370, https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.14521. 
165. McClure, M.L.; Dickson, B.G.; Nicholson, K.L. Modeling connectivity to identify current and future anthropogenic barriers to 
movement of large carnivores: A case study in the American Southwest. Ecol. Evol. 2017, 7, 3762-3772, 
https://doi.org/10.1002/ece3.2939. 
166. Dutta, T.; Sharma, S.; DeFries, R. Targeting restoration sites to improve connectivity in a tiger conservation landscape in India. 
PeerJ 2018, 6, e5587, https://doi.org/10.7717/peerj.5587. 
167. Xu, W.J.; Huang, Q.Y.; Stabach, J.; Buho, H.; Leimgruber, P. Railway underpass location affects migration distance in Tibetan 
antelope (Pantholops hodgsonii). PLoS One 2019, 14, e0211798, https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0211798. 
168. Chiappero, M.B.; Sommaro, L.V.; Priotto, J.W.; Wiernes, M.P.; Steinmann, A.R.; Gardenal, C.N. Spatio-temporal genetic struc-
ture of the rodent Calomys venustus in linear, fragmented habitats. J. Mammal. 2016, 97, 424-435, https://doi.org/10.1093/jmam-
mal/gyv186. 
169. Pérez-Espona, S.; McLeod, J.E.; Franks, N.R. Landscape genetics of a top neotropical predator. Mol. Ecol. 2012, 21, 5969-5985, 
https://doi.org/10.1111/mec.12088. 
170. Gray, M.E.; Dickson, B.G. Applying fire connectivity and centrality measures to mitigate the cheatgrass-fire cycle in the arid 
West, USA. Landscape Ecol. 2016, 31, 1681-1696, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10980-016-0353-2. 
171. Estrada-Carmona, N.; Martínez-Salinas, A.; DeClerck, F.A.J.; Vílchez-Mendoza, S.; Garbach, K. Managing the farmscape for 
connectivity increases conservation value for tropical bird species with different forest-dependencies. J. Environ. Manage. 2019, 
250, 109504, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jenvman.2019.109504. 
172. Reinhardt, J.R.; Naugle, D.E.; Maestas, J.D.; Allred, B.; Evans, J.; Falkowski, M. Next-generation restoration for sage-grouse: a 
framework for visualizing local conifer cuts within a landscape context. Ecosphere 2017, 8, e01888, https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.1888. 
173. Drake, J.C.; Griffis-Kyle, K.; McIntyre, N.E. Using nested connectivity models to resolve management conflicts of isolated water 
networks in the Sonoran Desert. Ecosphere 2017, 8, e01647, https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.1652. 
174. Fagan, M.E.; DeFries, R.S.; Sesnie, S.E.; Arroyo-Mora, J.P.; Chazdon, R.L. Targeted reforestation could reverse declines in con-
nectivity for understory birds in a tropical habitat corridor. Ecol. Appl. 2016, 26, 1456-1474, https://doi.org/10.1890/14-2188. 
175. de Fraga, R.; Lima, A.P.; Magnusson, W.E.; Ferrao, M.; Stow, A.J. Contrasting patterns of gene flow for Amazonian snakes that 
actively forage and those that wait in ambush. J. Hered. 2017, 108, 524-534, https://doi.org/10.1093/jhered/esx051. 
176. Afán, I.; Chiaradia, A.; Forero, M.G.; Dann, P.; Ramirez, F. A novel spatio-temporal scale based on ocean currents unravels 
environmental drivers of reproductive timing in a marine predator. Proceedings of the Royal Society B-Biological Sciences 2015, 282, 
https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2015.0721. 

Land 2021, 10, 301 
24 of 24 
 
177. Osipova, L.; Okello, M.M.; Njumbi, S.J.; Ngene, S.; Western, D.; Hayward, M.W.; Balkenhol, N. Fencing solves human-wildlife 
conflict locally but shifts problems elsewhere: A case study using functional connectivity modelling of the African elephant. J. 
Appl. Ecol. 2018, 55, 2673-2684, https://doi.org/10.1111/1365-2664.13246. 
178. Gray, M.E.; Dickson, B.G. A new model of landscape-scale fire connectivity applied to resource and fire management in the 
Sonoran Desert, USA. Ecol. Appl. 2015, 25, 1099-1113, https://doi.org/10.1890/14-0367.1. 
179. Gray, M.E.; Dickson, B.G.; Nussear, K.E.; Esque, T.C.; Chang, T. A range-wide model of contemporary, omnidirectional con-
nectivity for the threatened Mojave desert tortoise. Ecosphere 2019, 10, e02847, https://doi.org/10.1002/ecs2.2847. 
180. Anderson, M.G.; Barnett, A.; Clark, M.; Olivero Sheldon, A.; Prince, J. Resilient and Connected Landscapes for Conservation across 
Eastern North America; The Nature Conservancy, Eastern Conservation Science: Boston, MA, USA, 2016. 161 pp. http://www.na-
ture.ly/TNCResilience (acccessed on March 7, 2017). 
181. Wiens, J. Spatial scaling in ecology. Funct. Ecol. 1989, 3, 385-397. 
182. van der Walt, S.; Colbert, S.C.; Varoquaux, G. The NumPy array: A structure for efficient numerical computation. Comput. Sci. 
Eng. 2011, 13, 22-30, https://doi.org/10.1109/mcse.2011.37. 
183. Bell, W.; Olson, L.; Schroder, J. PyAMG: Algebraic multigrid solvers in python v3. 0, 2015. Release 3. Available online: 
http://www.pyamg.org (accessed on November 12, 2020). 
184. Nissen, J.N. 2020. What scientists must know about hardware to write fast code (Blog Post, April 19, 2020). Available online: 
https://biojulia.net/post/hardware/ (accessed November 12, 2020). 
185. R Core Team. R: A language and environment for statistical computing; R Foundation for Statistical Computing: Vienna, Austria, 
2013. 
186. Wilk, A.J.; Donlon, K.C.; Peterman, W.E. Effects of habitat fragment size and isolation on the density and genetics of urban red-
backed salamanders (Plethodon cinereus). Urban Ecosyst. 2020, 23, 761-773, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11252-020-00958-8. 
187. Wang, E.; Zhang, Q.; Shen, B.; Zhang, G.; Lu, X.; Wu, Q.; Wang, Y. Intel Math Kernel Library. In High Performance Computing on 
the Intel® Xeon Phi™, pages 167-188, Springer: Cham, 2014 https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-06486-4_7.  
188. Convention on Biological Diversity. Zero Draft of the Post-2020 Global Biodiversity Framework. 2020. Available online: 
https://www.cbd.int/doc/c/efb0/1f84/a892b98d2982a829962b6371/wg2020-02-03-en.pdf. (accessed on November 1, 2020). 
189. Jennings, M.K.; Zeller, K.A.; Lewison, R.L. Supporting adaptive connectivity in dynamic landscapes. Land 2020, 9, 295, 
https://doi.org/10.3390/land9090295. 
190. Fleishman, E.; Anderson, J.; Dickson, B.G. Single-species and multiple-species connectivity models for large mammals on the 
Navajo Nation. West. N. Am. Nat. 2017, 77, 237-251. 
191. Harihar, A.; Ghosh-Harihar, M.; MacMillan, D.C. Losing time for the tiger Panthera tigris: delayed action puts a globally threat-
ened species at risk of local extinction. Oryx 2018, 52, 78-88, https://doi.org/10.1017/s0030605317001156. 
192. Mills, S.; Weiss, S.; Liang, C. VIIRS day/night band (DNB) stray light characterization and correction. Proc. SPIE 2013, 8866, 
https://doi.org/10.1117/12.2023107. 
193. Elvidge, C.D.; Baugh, K.; Zhizhin, M.; Hsu, F.C.; Ghosh, T. VIIRS night-time lights. Int. J. Remote Sens. 2017, 38, 5860-5879, 
https://doi.org/10.1080/01431161.2017.1342050. 
194. NOAA. Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS) Day-Night Band (DNB) Nightly Mosaic data. 2019. Available online 
at https://www.ngdc.noaa.gov/eog/viirs.html (accessed on February 8, 2020). 
195. Wall, T.U.; McNie, E.; Garfin, G.M. Use-inspired science: making science usable by and useful to decision makers. Front. Ecol. 
Environ. 2017, 15, 551-559, https://doi.org/10.1002/fee.1735. 
196. Voinov, A.; Jenni, K.; Gray, S.; Kolagani, N.; Glynn, P.D.; Bommel, P.; Prell, C.; Zellner, M.; Paolisso, M.; Jordan, R., et al. Tools 
and methods in participatory modeling: Selecting the right tool for the job. Environ. Model. Software 2018, 109, 232-255, 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.envsoft.2018.08.028. 
197. Majka, D.R. Migrations in Motion. 2016. Available online https://maps.tnc.org/migrations-in-motion (accessed May 20, 2019). 
198. Lawler, J.J.; Ruesch, A.S.; Olden, J.D.; McRae, B.H. Projected climate-driven faunal movement routes. Ecol. Lett. 2013, 16, 1014-
1022, https://doi.org/10.1111/ele.12132. 
199. Demšar, U.; Buchin, K.; Cagnacci, F.; Safi, K.; Speckmann, B.; Van de Weghe, N.; Weiskopf, D.; Weibel, R. Analysis and visual-
isation of movement: an interdisciplinary review. Mov. Ecol. 2015, 3, 5, https://doi.org/10.1186/s40462-015-0032-y. 
200. Perkel, J. Julia: Come for the syntax, stay for the speed. Nature 2019, 572, 141-142, https://doi.org/10.1038/d41586-019-02310-3. 
201. Poisot, T. Julia in ecology: why multiple dispatch is good. 2017. Available online: https://armchairecology.blog/julia-in-ecology-why-
multiple-dispatch-is-good/ (accessed December 1, 2020). 
202. Poisot, T.; Bélisle, Z.; Hoebeke, L.; Stock, M.; Szefer, P. EcologicalNetworks.jl: analysing ecological networks of species interac-
tions. Ecography 2019, 42, 1850-1861, https://doi.org/10.1111/ecog.04310. 
 
 
 

