67
Croatian Journal of Philosophy
Vol. XV, No. 43, 2015
Mereological Essentialism 
and Mereological Inessentialism
DWAYNE MOORE
Department of Philosophy
Trent University
Mereological essentialists argue that mereological summations cannot 
change their parts. Mereological inessentialists argue that mereological 
summations can change some or all of their parts. In this paper I articu-
late and defend a position called Moderate Mereological Inessentialism, 
according to which certain mereological summations can change some, 
but not all, of their parts. Persistent mereological summations occur 
when the functional parts of mereological summations persist through 
alterations to its spatial parts.
Keywords: Mereology, mereological sum, mereological essential-
ism, mereological inessentialism.
Hansel and Gretel eat a piece of the candy from which the witch’s house 
is constructed. Is the house the same house before and after this inci-
dent? Debate rages between mereological essentialists, who answer in 
the negative, since mereological summations cannot change their parts 
(Chisholm 1973; Van Cleve 1986), and mereological inessentialists, 
who answer in the positive, since mereological summations can change 
some or all of their parts (Thomson 1983; Van Inwagen 2006). In this 
paper I articulate and defend a position called Moderate Mereological 
Inessentialism, according to which certain mereological summations 
can change some, but not all, of their parts.
This paper is divided into seven sections. First, I outline the rel-
evant principles of classical mereology which give rise to the difﬁ culties 
associated with mereological essentialism (§ 1). I then outline, and ul-
timately judge incomplete, two contemporary versions of mereological 
inessentialism: the ﬁ rst (§ 2), what I call the Weak Sum Identity view 
of Peter Van Inwagen (2006); the second (§ 3), what I call the Moder-
ate Sum Identity and Strong Sum Identity proposals of David San-
ford (2011). I then deﬁ ne several varieties of mereological summations 

68 
D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism
(§ 4), arguing that mereological essentialism is true for unstructured 
mereological summations, but there is a class of persistent mereologi-
cal summations (§ 5), where moderate mereological inessentialism is 
true for this class (§6). I then demonstrate how moderate mereological 
inessentialism overcomes the difﬁ culties that Van Inwagen and San-
ford face (§ 7).
1. Mereological Commitments
Mereology, from the Greek méros = part, is the study of the relation 
between parts and wholes. Classical mereology is that tradition within 
the twentieth century study of mereology that attempts to formalize 
mereological theory. Pioneers of this enterprise include Lésniewski 
(1916) and Leonard and Goodman (1940), while contemporary propo-
nents include Simons (1987) and Casati and Varzi (1999), of whom my 
notation follows the latter. In these works, formal mereological prin-
ciples and deﬁ nitions are established, several of which are relevant to 
the material discussed below. First, the principle of transitivity:
 
Transitivity = df (Pxy ∧ Pyz) → Pxz 
Transitivity states that if x is a part of an object y that is itself part of a 
larger object z, then x must be part of that larger object z. For example, 
if the banana stem is part of the banana peel, and the banana peel is 
part of the banana, then the banana stem is part of the banana. Sec-
ond, when two (or more) individuals, in some way, combine:
 
Overlap: Oxy = df ∃z(Pzx ∧ Pzy)
 
Underlap: Uxy = df ∃z(Pxz ∧ Pyz)
According to these deﬁ nitions, x overlaps y if z exists such that z is part 
of x and z is part of y. Imagine that two distinct roads (King St. and 
Weber St.) intersect at a junction. In this case, King St. and Weber St. 
overlap, where the overlapping portion is the individual called junc-
tion. The junction exists, and this junction is a part of King St. and a 
part of Weber St. And, x underlaps y if z exists such that x is part of z 
and y is part of z. To return to the example of the banana, the peel and 
the fruit-ﬂ esh underlap the banana, or, they are both parts of the ba-
nana. These two deﬁ nitions help to deﬁ ne the summation operation:
 
Sum: z = [x + y] = df ∃z∀w(Owz ↔ (Owx ∨ Owy)) 
That is, there is a z that exists which is the sum, and for every w, w 
overlaps z iff w overlaps x or w overlaps y. The banana, for example, is 
the sum of the peel and the fruit-ﬂ esh, so only if the stem overlaps the 
banana, the stem overlaps the peel or the fruit-ﬂ esh. In this case, the 
stem overlaps the peel. Similarly, only if the stem overlaps the peel, the 
stem overlaps the banana. 

 D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism 
69
2. Van Inwagen on Mereological Essentialism
Strong Mereological Essentialism is the view that mereological sum 
y1 = [x1 + x2] necessarily has all and only the parts x1 and x2. Strong 
mereological essentialism implies that mereological sum y1 = [x1 + x2] 
cannot change any parts. That is, if mereological sum y1 = [x1 + x2], 
and mereological sum y2 = [x1 + x3], then y1 ≠ y2. According to this view, 
the witch’s house can be composed of all and only the candy originally 
composing it. Roderick Chisholm (1973) points to Leibniz and Moore 
as historical advocates, while Chisholm and Van Cleave (1986) can be 
included as adherents as well.
Strong Mereological Inessentialism is the view that mereological 
sum y1 = [x1 + x2] can have any part, such as distinct hypothetical parts 
f4 and/or u7. Strong mereological inessentialism implies that mereologi-
cal sum y1 = [x1 + x2] can, without caveat, change any and all its parts. 
That is, if mereological sum y1 = [x1 +x2], and mereological sum y2 = [f4 + 
u7], then it may be that y1 = y2. According to this view, the house can be 
composed of a pebble on Mars and the Eiffel Tower (cp. Chisholm 1973: 
584). Strong mereological inessentialism is an extreme position that, so 
far as I know, currently lacks adherents.
Similarly, strong mereological essentialism is, even to the minds of 
its adherents, an “extreme principle” (Chisholm 1973: 586). Many have 
attempted to weaken the doctrine (Chisholm 1973; Plantinga 1975). 
Here is one such weakening: Moderate Mereological Inessentialism is 
the view that mereological sum y1 = [x1 + x2] may, within certain param-
eters, have x1 and x3, rather than x1 and x2, as parts. Moderate mereo-
logical inessentialism implies that mereological sum y1 = [x1 + x2] may, 
within certain parameters, change some of its parts. That is, if mereo-
logical sum y1 = [x1 + x2], and mereological sum y2 = [x1 + x3], then, pos-
sibly, y1 = y2. According to this view, the same house can be composed 
of different candy. Moderate mereological inessentialism has a num-
ber of adherents (Plantinga 1975; Thomson 1983: 204; Van Inwagen 
2006), though they do not label themselves as such, nor do they agree 
on the conditions requisite for summation alteration. Of course, moder-
ate mereological inessentialism is heavily dependent upon outlining 
and legitimating the conditions under which summation modiﬁ cation 
is plausible. In this section, and the next, I evaluate, and ultimately 
judge incomplete, two sets of conditions placed upon mereological sum-
mations according to which they may be capable of changing some of 
their parts.
In this section I consider Peter Van Inwagen’s (2006) argument that 
sums can change their parts. Central to his argument is his view that 
a mereological sum is actually a mereological summation of parts. This 
means that a mereological sum is an object that is distinct from its 
parts (Van Inwagen 2006: 616–617). In other words, Van Inwagen ac-
cepts the Principle of Ontological Generosity:

70 
D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism
 
Ontological Generosity: When x1 and x2 underlap, a new indi-
vidual y1 exists, which is the mereological sum of [x1 + x2], but is 
not only x1 and x2.1
A straightforward reading of classical mereology indicates that when-
ever x1 and x2 underlap a mereological summation of these two parts, 
the mereological summation is a new individual y1, or a singular term 
y1 (cp. Simons 1987: 13; Casati and Varzi 1999: 43–44, 51). To use a 
common example, Tibbles is an individual cat, Tib is the cat’s body mi-
nus the tail, and Tail is the cat’s tail (Wiggins 1979: 309–310; Noonan 
1980: 23; Simons 1987: 191). In this case, Tibbles ≠ [Tib + Tail]. 
The principle of ontological generosity has its share of detractors 
(Lewis 1991: 81; Armstrong 1978: 36; Baxter 1988). Those detractors 
argue that mereology is ontologically innocent:
 
Ontological Innocence: When x1 and x2 underlap, the new indi-
vidual y1, which is the mereological sum of [x1 + x2], is only x1 and 
x2.
According to ontological innocence the mereological sum y1 is nothing 
over and above the parts x1 and x2. The mereological sum is, as it were, 
a transparent container, leaving only the parts as content: “The fu-
sion [of several cats] is nothing over and above the cats that compose 
it. It just is them. They just are it. Take them together or take them 
separately, the cats are the same portion of Reality either way” (Lewis 
1991: 81).2
The Principle of Ontological Innocence faces several trenchant dif-
ﬁ culties, one of which is highlighted by Van Inwagen himself. Namely, 
the mereological summation has the property of being singular, while 
the parts have the property of being a plurality, so, by Leibniz’ Law, 
the mereological summation ≠ the parts (cp. Van Inwagen 2006: 614; 
Sider 2007: 55; Yi 1999; McDaniel 2008). Even Lewis is cognizant of 
this difﬁ culty: “What is true of the many is not exactly what’s true of 
the one. After all, they are many while it is one” (Lewis 1991: 87; cp. 
Sider 2007).
If the mereological summation were identical to its parts, then 
a change in the parts would necessitate a change in the mereologi-
cal summation. But, given that mereological summations are distinct 
from their parts, a change in the parts does not necessitate a change to 
the mereological summation. In other words, the distinction between 
mereological sums and their parts, as implied by ontological generos-
1 Ontological generosity is also evident in cases of the product operation of closure 
mereology as well. In this case, when x1 and x2 overlap, a new individual y1 exists, 
which is the intersection of x1 and x2, which is not only x1 and x2.
2 Casati and Varzi support Lewis’ intuition by saying “Imagine bargaining over 
two cats in a pet store. Can you buy the cats without buying their sum? Can you 
buy the sum but not the individual cats” (Casati and Varzi, 1999: 43–44)? Not all 
intuitions support mereological innocence however: imagine buying a Toyota and it 
is shipped to you in a box of pieces. You have all the parts, but you do not have the 
car.

 D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism 
71
ity, renders it possible for the parts to change without the summation 
changing. Van Inwagen exploits this opening:
 
There is an object x [i.e., a house] such that for a certain interval 
before t, x was a mereological sum of the Tuesday Bricks and, 
for a certain interval after t, x was a mereological sum of ‘the 
Tuesday Bricks minus the Lost Brick’. ‘But the Brick House was 
not the same mereological sum before and after the Lost Brick 
ceased to be a part of it.’ Well, it was not a mereological sum of 
the same things. But that does not mean that it ‘wasn’t the same 
mereological sum’ (Van Inwagen 2006: 626).
Since the mereological sum (i.e., the house) is a distinct object from its 
parts (i.e., the bricks in his example), it is possible for the same mereo-
logical sum to have different parts at different times. In other words, 
Van Inwagen endorses a Weak Sum Identity Condition:
 
Weak Sum Identity Condition: sum y1 of [x1 + x2] = sum y2 of
 
[x3 + x4] iff y1 = y2.
Van Inwagen frames weak sum identity as follows: “x is the same mere-
ological sum as y = df x is a mereological sum and y is a mereological 
sum and x = y” (Van Inwagen 2006: 626). Since y1 is a distinct object 
from x1 and x2, and y1 is an object capable of persisting through chang-
ing parts, y1 can remain the same sum through changes to its parts.   
Van Inwagen’s solution is of signiﬁ cant worth, and will be substan-
tially incorporated into the ﬁ nal solution below, but it is incomplete in 
at least one respect. While Van Inwagen is correct in demonstrating 
the distinction between the mereological sum and the parts, his solu-
tion fails to meet the following plausible condition on sum identity:
 
Overlap Condition: sum y1 of [x1 + x2] = sum y2 of [x3 + x4] iff 
 
[x1 + x2] = [x3 + x4].
Here is some motivation for the overlap condition: according to the deﬁ -
nition given in the discussion on classical mereology, only those things 
(w) that overlap some part (x1 ∨ x2) of the summation (y1), overlap, or, 
are included in, the summation. For example, only those things w that 
overlap some part (candy1 ∨ candy2...) of the Tuesday House, are in-
cluded in the Tuesday House. In this case, w overlaps candy1, which is 
a candy on the western wall of Tuesday House, so w is included in the 
Tuesday House. Also, candy1b, which is a candy on some store shelf on 
Tuesday, does not overlap any part of the Tuesday House, so candy1b 
does not overlap, or, is not included in, the Tuesday House. Imagine 
that Hansel and Gretel eat candy1 on Wednesday, so the witch replaces 
candy1 with candy1b. Now again, only (and all) those things w that over-
lap some part (candy1b ∨ candy2...) of the Friday House, are included in 
the Friday House. Since w overlaps candy1b, candy1b is included in the 
Friday House. But, since w does not overlap candy1, which has been 
digested, candy1 is not part of the Friday House. Now the question: is 
Tuesday House = Friday House? The answer is no. Why is that? It is 

72 
D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism
already established that candy1b is not included in Tuesday House, so if 
Tuesday House = Friday House, then candy1b is not included in Friday 
House. But, it is established that candy1b is included in Friday House, 
so a contradiction arises if Tuesday House = Friday House. At the same 
time, it is established that candy1 is included in Tuesday House, so if 
Tuesday House = Friday House, candy1 is included in Friday House. 
But, it is established that candy1 is not included in Friday House, so 
a contradiction arises if Tuesday House = Friday House. For both rea-
sons, it cannot be the case that Tuesday House = Friday House. So, a 
difference in the parts of the houses on Tuesday and Friday implies 
that Tuesday House ≠ Friday House (cp. Meirav 2009: 185ff; McDaniel 
2010: 419ff; Johannson 2006: 8–9).
What is needed is a principled account of how the Tuesday House = 
the Friday House while candy1 of the Tuesday House ≠ candy1b of the 
Friday House. Van Inwagen assumes, without adequately demonstrat-
ing, this is possible. Below I sketch a model that meets this Overlap 
Condition.
3. Sanford on Mereological Essentialism
In a recent paper, David Sanford (2011) offers two other possible iden-
tity conditions for sums. According to Sanford, the ﬁ rst condition, call it 
the Strong Sum Identity Condition, entails mereological essentialism. 
Meanwhile, the second condition, call it the Moderate Sum Identity Con-
dition, offers more hope in permitting sums to change their parts. I argue 
that the second substantially reduces to the ﬁ rst, thus neither models 
permit sums to change their parts. I will begin with the ﬁ rst condition:
 
Strong Sum Identity Condition: sum y1 of [x1 + x2] = sum y2 of [x3 
+ x4] if [x1 + x2] = [x3 + x4], and the parts [w1 + w2 + w3 + w4] of the 
parts [x1+ x2] = the parts [w5 + w6 + w7 + w8] of the parts [x3 + x4] 
(cp. Sanford 2011: 235–236).
Strong sum identity says that y1 = y2 if y1 has all the same parts, and 
the same parts of parts, as y2. Sanford explains it as follows, where the 
ys are parts of the mereological sum x: “Every part of every y shares a 
part with some z, and every part of every z shares a part with some y” 
(Sanford 2011: 235). To return to the example of the house: the house 
on Tuesday has four walls, a roof and a ﬂ oor, where these parts are 
each composed of candy. On Wednesday one gummy bear is removed 
from the western wall. The Friday house has the same parts as the 
Tuesday house (i.e., four walls, roof and ﬂ oor), but the parts of these 
parts are not the same (i.e., one of the gummy bears on the western 
wall is gone). So, according to strong sum identity, the Tuesday House 
≠ the Friday House. Sanford, therefore, is correct in arguing that this 
strong identity condition entails strong mereological essentialism.
Sanford’s second sum identity condition, the Moderate Sum Iden-
tity Condition, more plausibly enables sums to change their parts:

 D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism 
73
 
Moderate Sum Identity Condition: sum y1 of [x1 + x2] = sum y2 of 
[x3 + x4] if [x1 + x2] = [x3 + x4] (cp. Sanford, 2011, 237).
According to this condition, the Tuesday house (i.e., wall with all the 
candy) has the same wall as the Friday house (i.e., wall with the miss-
ing gummy bear), so the sum identity appears to go through. Sanford 
argues that the moderate sum identity condition is “logically indepen-
dent” (Sanford 2011: 237) from the strong sum identity condition. This 
is because, among other things, it is possible to imagine a scenario 
whereby the Strong Sum Identity Condition renders two sums identi-
cal while the Moderate Sum Identity Condition renders the same two 
sums distinct. Here is his example:
 
Four brick walls constitute a brick house. A is the sum of the 
walls on Tuesday. B is the sum of the walls on Friday. This time 
a brick is removed from one of the walls without destroying the 
wall. It is the same wall with one less brick. Because the re-
moved brick is a part of one of the walls on Tuesday that is not a 
part of any wall on Friday, A =1 B. Because the walls on Tuesday 
and Friday are the same walls, A ≠2 B for the same reason as 
before (Sanford 2011: 238).
According to Moderate Sum Identity, Tuesday House = Friday house, 
since all their parts are the same, including Tuesday Wall = Friday 
Wall. According to Strong Sum Identity, however, Tuesday House ≠ 
Friday House, since not all the parts of the parts are the same. Speciﬁ -
cally, candy1 in Tuesday Wall ≠ candy0 in Friday Wall.
As it turns out, at least in this regard, the moderate sum identity 
condition reduces to the strong sum identity condition, thereby entail-
ing that the Tuesday House ≠ Friday house on the moderate sum iden-
tity condition. There are two different ways to show this. First, the 
moderate sum identity condition assumes that Tuesday Wall = Friday 
Wall, so Tuesday House = Friday House. But Tuesday Wall does not 
have the same parts as Friday Wall, so, due to the overlap condition, 
Tuesday Wall ≠ Friday Wall. Since Tuesday Wall ≠ Friday Wall, the 
house composed of four walls, including Tuesday Wall, is not the same 
sum as the house composed of four walls, including Friday Wall.
Secondly, as outlined in Section One, one of the basic principles of 
classical mereology is the principle of transitivity: if x is a part of an 
object y that is itself part of a larger object z, then x must be part of that 
larger object z. While the transitivity principle has been questioned 
(Lyons 1977: 313; Cruse 1979), it is widely accepted. And, plausibly, 
the transitivity principle is symmetrical, so it entails the transitivity 
of summation:
 
Transitivity of Summation: if z has part y, and y has part x,
 
then z has part x.
So, the Tuesday House has Western Wall as part, and the Western 
Wall has all of its candy as parts. The Friday House has Western Wall 

74 
D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism
as part, and the Western Wall has all but one of its candies as parts. 
Since Western Wall does not have the same parts on Tuesday and Fri-
day, Tuesday House ≠ Friday House.
One way to overcome this difﬁ culty is to ﬁ nd a principled reason for 
why the house may have only four walls, a roof and a ﬂ oor as essential 
parts, without also having the parts of these parts as essential parts. In 
other words, the principle of transitivity of summation can be rejected 
if the following principle is true:
 
Principle of Parthood Immediacy: if z has y as part, and y has x 
as part, it is not necessarily the case that z has x as parts.
Sanford, in arguing that the Friday House = Tuesday House since 
Tuesday Wall = Friday Wall, despite the fact that Tuesday Wall has 
a part that Friday Wall lacks, appears to suggest such a move. His 
reason is that the Friday Wall is the same object as the Tuesday Wall, 
where objects can change parts and sums cannot change parts (Sanford 
2011: 238–239). In other words, the Tuesday Wall Sum ≠ Friday Wall 
Sum, but the Tuesday Wall Object = Friday Wall Object, and the Fri-
day House is composed of the Friday Wall Object, not the Friday Wall 
Sum. But now the question arises, and this is similar to the question 
that arises in the discussion on Van Inwagen: how does Tuesday Wall 
Object = Friday Wall Object despite the fact that Tuesday Wall Sum ≠ 
Friday Wall Sum? What is needed, and what I shall outline below, is an 
explanation of how the wall can remain the same wall, despite changes 
to some of its parts.
4. Varieties of Mereological Summations
According to classical mereology, mereological summation is unstruc-
tured. That is, the only existence condition on mereological sum y1 is 
that it must have x1 and x2 as proper parts. Thus, since spatial proxim-
ity and/or ordering are omitted, it is plausible that my left arm and a 
pebble on Mars compose a mereological sum. And, since temporal prox-
imity and/or ordering are omitted, it is plausible that Socrates and the 
ﬁ rst teleportation devise compose a mereological sum.3 Unstructured 
mereological summations are often called aggregates (Burge 1977; El-
der 2004: 60), but I shall call them the cumbersome but more precise 
title of Maximally Unstructured Mereological Summations. As before, 
I symbolize these as y1 = [x1 + x2], but I intend this to indicate that no 
other conditions or relations need obtain.
Many agree that mereological summations have structure, though 
agreement on gradations of structure is not universal (cp. Fine 1994: 
139; Burge 1977; Donnelly and Bittner 2009). I shall provide some argu-
mentation for the claim that mereological summations have structure, 
3 Moreover, since modal considerations are left out, it is plausible that a billion 
grains of sand compose the mereological sum of the beach, even though this is an 
unusual result when conceiving of them as scattered throughout the universe.

 D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism 
75
but ﬁ rst I will provide a non-exhaustive list of some relevant structured 
mereological summations.4 First, there is a category of mereological 
summations that includes the requirement for summations to be spa-
tially proximate. A forest, for example, is a summation of trees that 
stand in spatially proximate relations.5 Rivers and lakes are likewise 
summations of water that essentially stand in spatially proximate rela-
tions to each other. These sorts of mereological summations are some-
times called collections or groupings, but I shall call them Spatially 
Proximate Mereological Summations, where the mereological sum has 
requisite spatial proximity among the parts (cp. Whitehead 1920: 76; 
Van Inwagen 1990; Barnett 2004: 90). Hence, if the same parts do not 
stand in spatially proximate relations, then the spatially proximate 
mereological summation no longer exists (Wiggins 1980: 27; Thomson 
1983: 201; Sanford 2003). I leave the condition of sufﬁ cient spatial prox-
imity open to slight variation (so long as it conforms to the conditions 
outlined below). After all, the requisite proximity of the planets in the 
solar system may be different from the requisite proximity of the water 
molecules in a puddle (cp. Laan 2010: 137). I also leave the strength 
of the bond between grouped parts open: the group can be strongly 
bonded (i.e., a cemented brick wall, covalently bonded molecules), or 
loosely bonded (i.e., pebbles on a beach).
Some summations have temporal structure as well. Imagine, for 
example, that on some African plain a tree grows and dies, and then 
another tree grows immediately after and immediately beside where 
the ﬁ rst tree dies, and so on for thousands of years. The result is that, 
without consideration of temporal structure, these trees are spatial-
ly proximate, and yet they do not compose a forest. Or, imagine that 
Mario makes a salad. The maximally unstructured summation of [let-
tuce + tomatoes + bacon + olive oil] in various ﬁ elds scattered across 
the planet over a variety of times is different from the salad, which 
Mario makes by bringing these ingredients into spatial proximity at a 
time (cp. Fine 1999: 62). Mario’s salad is not only a spatially proximate 
mereological summation, but also a Temporally Proximate Mereologi-
cal Summation, where the mereological sum is temporally proximate if 
the parts stand in a synchronous relation with the other parts.
4 As examples, in addition to the structured mereological summations listed 
here, Donnelly and Bittner (2009) distinguish between maximally unstructured 
mereological summations and ‘portions of stuff’, which are summations of the same 
stuff, and Fine (1994) distinguishes between maximally unstructured mereological 
summations and compounds, which are summations of more than one thing.
5 It is possible to object that mereological summations are exhaustively composed 
of their parts, so spatial, temporal or other relations should be excluded from 
mereological summations. In response, it is worth pointing out that mereological 
summations are, longwindedly, mereological summation relations between parts. 
So, (summation) relations are already included within mereological summations, so 
spatial and/or temporal relations are not anathema.

76 
D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism
Spatially proximate mereological summations lack requisite spatial 
ordering relations among the parts. This is to say that they are commu-
tative (x + y = y + x). Other mereological summations have parts that 
stand in requisite spatial ordering relations. A bicycle is a mereological 
summation whose parts are essentially spatially arranged. The bicycle 
spokes necessarily stand in an inside-of relation to the bicycle wheels, 
the bicycle frame necessarily stands in an on-top-of relation to the bi-
cycle wheels, etc... Chairs, tables, and pizzas are similar examples. Call 
these Spatially Ordered Mereological Summations, where the mereo-
logical summation is spatially ordered because the parts stand in sufﬁ -
ciently spatially arranged relations to one another. That is to say, they 
are not commutative. Examples include mechanisms as well as words 
and sentences: “dog” ≠ “god”, and “the sky is blue” ≠ “the blue is sky”.
Similarly, temporally proximate mereological summations do not 
have parts that necessarily stand in any temporally ordered relation 
with the other parts. This is to say they are associative [x + (y + z) = 
(x + y) + z]. Other mereological sums have requisite temporal order-
ing. A car is a mereological summation with essentially temporally ar-
ranged parts. The car’s pedal is depressed before the car’s gas rushes 
into the car’s engine, the car’s gas rushes into the car’s engine before 
the car’s wheel turns, etc... Call these Temporally Ordered Mereologi-
cal Summations, where the mereological summation is temporally or-
dered when the parts necessarily stand in ordered temporal relations 
with the other parts. That is to say, they are not associative. Examples 
include the car and mathematical equations involving various opera-
tions, such as [2 + (4 × 8) ≠ (2 + 4) × 8].
There is a further condition that can be placed on mereological sum-
mations, which allows mereological summations to survive alterations 
to their parts and/or spatial/temporal ordering over time. Some argu-
mentation for this type of summation (§ 5), and explanation of how this 
type of summation persists (§6), will be provided below, but for now it 
is sufﬁ cient to register the category. First, some mereological summa-
tions appear capable of changing some parts: a salad is still the same 
salad, even if one leaf of lettuce is replaced by another before the meal 
begins; the car is still the same car, even if one wheel is replaced by 
another wheel. Second, some mereological summations appear capable 
of persisting through some change to some of the spatially ordered re-
lations: the house persists even if the western wall is moved in/out a 
foot. Third, with respect to changes to some of the temporally ordered 
relations: an amoeba moves around over time and performs its func-
tions with different temporal sequencing, indicating contortion to its 
temporal (and spatial) structure, but the amoeba continues to persist 
as the same individual. Some call these continuants (Simons 1987), but 
I shall call them Persistent Mereological Summations, where mereo-
logical summations are persistent when the mereological summation 
remains the same despite alterations to some of its parts and/or spa-
tial/temporal proximity/ordering relations.

 D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism 
77
5. Arguments for Persistent 
Mereological Summations
The existence of persistent mereological summations is, without a 
doubt, controversial. Indeed, it lies at the centre of our controversy, 
with mereological essentialists denying their existence and mereologi-
cal inessentialists granting their existence. In this section I motivate 
the existence of the category by providing four arguments in support of 
the view that persistent mereological summations exist.
First, there is a common sense argument: a stingy restaurant owner 
charges Sally 400$ for eating seventy salads at the restaurant—a dif-
ferent salad for every bite. Few will agree that the owner’s tactics are 
plausible. Or, with respect to spatial ordering: Benji barks at the strang-
er, which causes the stranger to walk over to the owner and threaten 
him. The owner replies that his dog did not bark at the stranger. After 
all, the dog that was barking had a different spatial ordering than his 
current dog has. Few will agree with this line of reasoning, and this is 
because it is pre-theoretically intuitive to endorse the view that persis-
tent mereological summations exist (cp. Meirav 2009: 176).
There is also a linguistic argument: language often captures con-
stancy through part replacement and alterations to spatial/temporal 
relations. The Amazon rainforest has been called the same name for 
many years, though the trees composing the rainforest, and the spatial 
boundaries of the rainforest constantly shift. There are three options 
here. One, agree that the rainforest stays the same through changes, 
thereby rendering our language accurate. Two, argue that the rain-
forest does not stay the same through changes, so, in order to keep 
our descriptions accurate, we must re-label the rainforest with every 
changing tree. This move, while preserving linguistic accuracy, is un-
livable. Third, argue that the rainforest does not stay the same through 
changes, but, rather than re-labeling the forest with every change, 
admit that human labeling is inaccurate but convenient. This move, 
while livable, sacriﬁ ces accurate reference. All things being equal, the 
ﬁ rst option appears most palatable (cp. Turner 2013: 313–315).
There is also an argument from nature. Nature, as it so happens, 
contains persistent mereological summations. That is, sometimes parts 
group together in space and time in such a way as to allow for part re-
placement. The same beach exists after the wind blows a pebble away. 
Similarly, sometimes parts group together in space and time, with spa-
tial and temporal order, in such a way as to allow for part replacement. 
The same bird exists after she loses a feather. The same bird exists if 
all the molecules in her heart are gradually replaced by new molecules. 
Since nature contains homeostatic clusters of parts, it is the philoso-
pher’s duty to, with natural submission, express them by granting the 
existence of persistent mereological summations of parts.6
6 There are worries that this attitude leads to the overpopulation of our ontology. 
But such worries are benign. Including temporal/spatial proximity/ordering relations 

78 
D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism
Finally, persistent mereological summations retain their intrinsic 
qualities through changes to some of their parts, which is further rea-
son to conclude that the mereological summation is the same through 
changes to some of its parts. Here is an example from mathematical 
summation: 3 + 4 = 7. Can the mathematical summation ‘7’ survive 
changes to its parts 3 + 4? Imagine that we replace 3 in the left side of 
the equation with 2 at the same time we replace 4 with 5, resulting in 2 
+ 5 = 7. In this case the mathematical parts on the left side of the equa-
tion have changed: (3 + 4) ≠ (2 + 5); but the mathematical summation 
on the right side of the equation remains the same: 7 = 7. Likewise, a 
house retains its own intrinsic qualities through changes to many of its 
parts. A child could sleep through many changes to the house and wake 
up thinking it is the same house, since it retains its native essence. The 
preservation of the intrinsic qualities of the mereological summation 
through changes to its parts is possible because, according to ontologi-
cal generosity, the mereological summation is distinct from its parts, 
so, a change in the parts does not necessitate a change to the mereologi-
cal summation. While ontological generosity renders persistent mereo-
logical summations possible, it is nature that validates the existence 
of persistent mereological summations—nature contains wholes that 
retain their native essence and homeostatic unity throughout changes. 
A model explaining this phenomenon follows below (§ 6), but for now it 
sufﬁ ces to conclude that certain mereological summations retain their 
intrinsic qualities through some transitioning parts. I do not take this 
argument, even when combined with the other three, to be decisive. I 
do think, however, that they shift the burden of proof on to those who 
deny persistent mereological summations.
6. A Model of Persistent 
Mereological Summations
Persistent mereological summations are those mereological summations 
that remain the same despite alterations to some of their parts and/or 
spatial/temporal proximity/ordering relations. In this section I provide 
an account of how persistent mereological summations are possible.
I begin, however, with an immediate difﬁ culty. Namely, persistent 
mereological summations cannot persist through unlimited modiﬁ ca-
tion to their parts and/or spatial/temporal proximity/ordering rela-
tions. With respect to part replacement, imagine that the tomato in the 
among parts, and persistent mereological summations, within our ontology, is 
innocent. By this I mean that it does nothing more than include the mundane 
spatial/temporal grouping/ordering relations that nature already does. There are 
also worries that this attitude is false, due to the atomistic truth that everything is 
ultimately reducible to (microphysical) parts. Atomism, however, is also problematic 
due to these same intuitive and linguistic arguments. That is, the view that a bee is 
only its parts is unintuitive, and goes against our linguistic practices of calling them 
‘bees’, rather than calling them ‘many atoms’ or perhaps ‘atoms arranged bee-wise’.

 D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism 
79
salad is replaced by a wrench, and the lettuce is replaced by screws, 
etc... There is no salad anymore. With respect to the modiﬁ cation to 
the spatial relations among the parts of the summation: imagine the 
ingredients in the salad are lined up, one by one, horizontally. This is 
likely not a salad anymore. Or, imagine that the house’s western wall 
is moved such that it is pressed against the house’s eastern wall. The 
house does not exist anymore; there is only a three sided run-in with 
a thick eastern wall. Thus, persistent mereological summations with-
stand some, but not unlimited, modiﬁ cation to both their parts and 
their requisite spatial/temporal relations.
How is the range of acceptable replacement parts determined? Here 
is a straightforward answer: so long as the replaced part’s function 
continues to be adequately performed by the replacement part and/
or through the altered spatial/temporal relations, then the persistent 
mereological summation remains intact (cp. Simons 2006: 609ff; Gar-
bacz 2007). The western wall, for example, can be replaced by any wall 
that continues to function as the house’s western wall. That is, it can be 
replaced by any substance that can function as a wall (i.e., brick, candy 
canes), and cannot be replaced by any substance that cannot function 
as a wall (i.e., oxygen, soap bubbles). Likewise, the western wall can be 
spatially modiﬁ ed in any way, so long as it continues to function like a 
wall (i.e., touching the house’s northern wall, southern wall, roof and 
ﬂ oor without touching the house’s eastern wall), and it cannot be modi-
ﬁ ed in any way that prevents it from functioning as the house’s western 
wall (i.e., by being pressed against the eastern wall, or by being discon-
nected from the northern wall).
This response introduces the crucial distinction between spa-
tial parts and functional parts of mereological summations.7 While 
it is common to distinguish between several different types of parts 
in mereological summations (Nagel 1952; Winston, Chafﬁ n and Her-
rmann 1987; Johannson 2004), only spatial parts and functional parts 
are important for my purposes.8 Spatial parts are those parts of mereo-
7 The introduction of functional parts also solves a lingering difﬁ culty. The 
difﬁ culty is that it is possible to construct mereological summations that are 
spatially/temporally proximate/ordered, though the parts are otherwise unrelated. 
For example, the mereological summation of myself and the ground is spatially and 
temporally proximate (so long as I am not jumping in the air), and is necessarily 
ordered in an on-top-of relation, but myself and the ground lack essential relatedness. 
The introduction of functional parts of mereological summations solves this problem. 
The ground plays no functional role in maintaining my existence, and I play no 
functional role in maintain the existence of the ground.
8 Strictly speaking, spatial/temporal proximity/ordering relations among the 
parts of the mereological summation are important as well, but these relations are 
included within the functional parts. That is, functional parts are deﬁ ned in such a 
way as to include these relations. For example, the functional part of being a western 
wall is any wall-like spatial part that is spatially ordered in a connecting-the-
western-edges-of-northern-and-southern-walls way, and is temporally synchronous 
relation.

80 
D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism
logical summations that occupy a region of space (at a time). While 
functional parts have been variously deﬁ ned (Rescher and Oppenheim 
1955; Simons 2006; Garbacz 2007; Johannson 2006), for my purposes, 
functional parts are those parts of mereological summations that de-
ﬁ ne an essential function of the mereological summation. A house, by 
deﬁ nition, has four walls, a roof and a ﬂ oor. So, these are the functional 
parts of the house. The functional parts are deﬁ ned in terms of the rela-
tions they bear to the rest of the parts of the house. Thus, the western 
wall is deﬁ ned as that wall with appropriate spatial parts and is tem-
porally proximate to the other parts, and is spatially ordered such that 
it touches the house’s ﬂ oor, roof, northern and southern walls, without 
touching the house’s eastern wall. These functions are necessary for a 
house—without a western wall, there is no house. These functions are 
also deﬁ nitional, or abstract, which implies that they are not essen-
tially tied to a particular spatial part or spatial/temporal relation. This 
is what renders it plausible for persistent mereological summations to 
change some parts. If the house’s functional part of being the Western 
Wall was performed by Tuesday Wall, and continues to be performed 
by Friday Wall, then the house continues to exist through this modi-
ﬁ cation since the western wall function was still being realized. Or, 
if the house’s functional part of being a western wall continues to be 
performed through alternating spatial relations, such as the wall mov-
ing in six inches, then the house remains the same since there was still 
something acting as the western wall.9
Having established that persistent mereological summations have 
functional parts and spatial parts and spatial/temporal proximity/
ordering, the pieces are now in place to demonstrate how persistent 
mereological summations can remain the same through some altera-
tions to some of their parts. Before beginning, it is worth noting that 
mereological essentialism is the doctrine that the parts of a mereologi-
cal sum are essential to, or necessary for, their mereological sum. Es-
sential and necessary parts are parts that the mereological sum cannot 
exist without. So, my strategy is to study which parts are essential to 
a mereological sum, in order to shed light on whether mereological es-
sentialism is true or not.
9 Here is an important objection: since functional parts are deﬁ nitional, or 
abstract, it may be tempting to imagine the functional parts of the mereological 
summation without some spatial parts performing the function. The house, in the 
architect’s mind, before anything construction, has four walls, a roof and a ﬂ oor. To 
avoid this possibility, persistent mereological summations have been deﬁ ned in such 
a way as to include some spatial part as a necessary realizer of the function. That is, 
according to the deﬁ nition outlined above, if persistent mereological summation y1’s 
functional part yf1, which was performed by spatial part x1, continues to be performed 
by spatial parts x1b, then the mereological summation y1 continues to exist. Or, to 
return to the example, if the house’s western wall is realized by Tuesday Wall and 
then by Friday Wall, which both function as the house’s western wall, then the house 
continues to persist across changes to its spatial parts.

 D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism 
81
Consider the mereological sum y1, which is the maximally unstruc-
tured mereological summation of my dinner plate and the moon. Can 
this aggregation change its parts? Intuitively, the answer is no. Imag-
ine that I replace my dinner plate with another one. This appears to be 
a different aggregation y2. This is because there is nothing preserving 
their identity, since maximally unstructured mereological summations 
are composed of just their spatial parts, and the spatial parts are not 
the same. Or, due to the overlap condition, since y1 has parts plate1 and 
moon, while y2 has plate2 and moon as parts, y1 does not have the same 
parts as y2, so y1 ≠ y2.
Matters grow murkier when considering persistent mereological 
summations. Consider, for example, a ﬁ nicky chef who, in preparation 
for the grand opening, makes a salad on Tuesday. On Wednesday he 
replaces a leaf of lettuce, since it is slightly wilted. On Thursday he re-
places the cucumber for a green pepper, and re-tosses it. Is the Tuesday 
salad the same as the Thursday salad? Intuitively, the answer is yes. 
This is unsurprising, since the replaced parts were functionally equiva-
lent, and the alterations to the spatial relations among the parts were 
within acceptable functional parameters. But now on Friday the chef 
replaces the lettuce with screws and the other vegetables with ham-
mers and wrenches. Moreover, he also lines up all the ingredients one 
by one. Is the Tuesday salad the same as the Friday salad? Intuitively, 
the answer is no. This is unsurprising, since the replaced parts were 
not functionally equivalent, and the alterations to the spatial relation 
among the parts was not within accepted functional parameters. There 
are several lessons here: (1) the salad persists when the particular spa-
tial parts are replaced, so the particular spatial parts are unnecessary 
for the salad; (2) the salad persists when the particular spatial rela-
tions among the parts are altered, so the particular spatial relations 
are unnecessary for the salad; (3) the salad does not persist when the 
functional parts perish (that is, when there are no longer any salad-like 
parts and/or no salad-wise spatial/temporal relation, there is no salad), 
so the functional parts are necessary for the salad. Necessity, as men-
tioned above, indicates essentiality, so speciﬁ c spatial parts, and specif-
ic spatial/temporal proximity/ordering are unnecessary for persistent 
mereological summations, but functional parts are necessary. Or, in 
other words, since speciﬁ c spatial parts and speciﬁ c spatial/temporal 
relations are unnecessary for, or inessential to, persistent mereologi-
cal summations, persistent mereological summations can change some 
spatial parts and spatial/temporal relations without perishing. Thus, 
moderate mereological inessentialism is true for persistent mereologi-
cal summations.

82 
D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism
7. The Overlap Condition 
and the Transitivity Condition
In this section I further unpack this model by demonstrating how it 
can accommodate both the overlap condition that Van Inwagen’s model 
did not, and overcome the transitivity condition, which Sanford’s model 
did not.
Van Inwagen’s model faces difﬁ culty supporting the overlap condi-
tion on mereological summations, according to which identical mereo-
logical summations must have the same parts. That is, returning to 
the example of the gummy bear that is eaten from the western wall on 
Wednesday: Tuesday House is underlapped by Eastern Wall, Western 
Wall1, Northern Wall, Southern Wall, Roof, and Floor. Friday House is 
underlapped by Eastern Wall, Western Wall2, Northern Wall, South-
ern Wall, Roof, and Floor. Since Tuesday House does not have the same 
spatial parts as Friday House, Tuesday House ≠ Friday House. 
It is possible to accept the overlap condition while simultaneously 
arguing that persistent mereological summations remain the same 
through changes to some of their parts. According to the model pre-
sented above, persistent mereological summations are essentially sum-
mations of functional parts. That is, since their functional parts are 
necessary for their existence, persistent mereological summations are 
essentially summations of these parts. How does this insight help in 
meeting the overlap condition? The overlap condition states that sum 
y1 of [x1 + x2] = sum y2 of [x3 + x4] iff [x1 + x2} = [x3 + x4]. Since, how-
ever, the only essential parts of persistent mereological summations 
are functional parts, it is plausible to interpret this as saying: sum 
y1 of [functional parts x1 + functional part x2) = sum y2 of [functional 
part x3 + functional part x4] iff [functional parts x1 + functional part 
x2] = (functional part x3 + functional part x4]. Persistent mereological 
summations do have the same functional parts across changes, so the 
overlap condition is met. In fact, since the same functional parts are es-
sential for persistent mereological summations, the overlap condition 
is necessarily true: the same persistent mereological summations must 
have all the same functional parts, or it will cease existing. For exam-
ple, assume the Tuesday House necessarily has the functional parts of 
a western wall, an eastern wall, a southern wall, a northern wall, a roof 
and a ﬂ oor and the Friday house necessarily has the functional parts 
of a western wall, an eastern wall, a southern wall, a northern wall, a 
roof and a ﬂ oor. Since [western wall + eastern wall + southern wall + 
northern wall + roof + ﬂ oor] = [western wall + eastern wall +southern 
wall + northern wall + roof + ﬂ oor], Tuesday House = Friday House. 
The overlap condition is met since the Tuesday House has the same 
functional parts as the Friday House.
Here is an objection: perhaps the overlap condition does not read 
that in order for sum1 = sum2, they must both have the same functional 

 D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism 
83
parts. Rather, perhaps it says that in order for sum1 = sum2, they must 
have all the same parts. This concern leads to the transitivity problem 
that Sanford’s Moderate Sum Identity view faces. That is, the response 
just given is akin to the moderate sum identity view where two sums 
are identical if they have the same (functional) parts, regardless of 
whether they have the same parts of these functional parts. The objec-
tion, then, is that because of the principle of transitivity, moderate sum 
identity entails strong sum identity. That is, two sums are actually 
only identical if they have the same (functional) parts, and the same 
parts of those functional parts. Thus, the Tuesday House with the same 
functional parts (i.e., four walls, roof, ﬂ oor), but differing parts of func-
tional parts (i.e., a missing candy in the western wall), are actually not 
the same houses.
There are two ways in which my model overcomes this transitiv-
ity difﬁ culty facing Sanford’s moderate sum identity condition. First, 
according to my model, persistent mereological summations require 
the same functional parts because they are essential to the existence 
of the mereological summation. And, according to my model, persis-
tent mereological summations do not require the same spatial parts 
because speciﬁ c spatial parts are inessential to the existence of the 
mereological summation. This account provides a principled and intui-
tive reason for endorsing the principle of parthood immediacy rather 
than transitivity. Namely, if z has y as part, and y has x as part, it is 
not essentially, or necessarily, the case that z has x as parts because 
there is ample evidence that persistent mereological summation z can-
not continue to exist without parts y, but can continue to exist without 
ys speciﬁ c parts [x1 + x2]. 
Secondly, it is common in the literature to argue that the principle 
of transitivity does not apply to functional parts. Numerous examples 
prove this point: a handle is a (functional) part of a door, and a door is 
a (functional) part of a house, but a handle is not a (functional) part of 
a house (Cruse 1979); Simpson’s ﬁ nger is a (spatial) part of Simpson, 
and Simpson is a (functional) part of the philosophy department, but 
Simpson’s ﬁ nger is not a (spatial or functional) part of the philosophy 
department (Winston, Chafﬁ n and Herrmann 1987: 431). Numerous 
explanations are given for this fact: transitivity applies only to spatial 
and temporal part-whole relations (Garbacz 2007; Pribbenow 2002), so 
transitivity does not apply to functional part-whole relations (Casati 
and Varzi 1999: 34; Varzi 2006). This would explain the example of 
the handle and the house—although the door requires a functioning 
handle, and the house requires a functioning door, a house does not re-
quire a functioning handle. Alternatively, some argue that transitivity 
applies to intra-categorical part-whole relations, but not to inter-cate-
gorical relations (Winston, Chafﬁ n and Herrmann 1987). That is, if x is 
a spatial part of y, and y is a spatial part of z, then x must be a spatial 
part of z. But, if x is a spatial part of y, and y is a functional part of z, 

84 
D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism
then x is not necessarily a part of z. After all, would x be a spatial part 
of z, or a functional part of z? Neither is intuitive. This would explain 
the example pertaining to Simpson—Simpson’s ﬁ nger is no functional 
part of the philosophy department, nor does the philosophy department 
have spatial parts like Simpson’s ﬁ nger.
In summary, mereological essentialism is true for maximally un-
structured mereological summations, since they are composed of only 
and all their speciﬁ c spatial parts. However, moderate mereological 
inessentialism is true for persistent mereological summations. This is 
partially a mereological essentialist view, since persistent mereologi-
cal summations are necessarily composed of all their functional parts. 
However, it is partially a mereological inessentialist view as well, since 
persistent mereological summations can endure certain modiﬁ cations 
to their spatial parts and/or spatial/temporal relations. Certain mereo-
logical summations, therefore, can, within a functional range, change 
certain parts.
References
Armstrong, D. 1978.  A Theory of Universals, vol. 2. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Barnett, D. 2004. “Some Stuffs are not Sums of Stuff”. Philosophical Re-
view 113: 89–100.
Baxter, D. 1988. “Identity in the Loose and Popular Sense”. Mind 97: 575–
582.
Burge, T. 1977. “A Theory of Aggregates”. Nous 11: 97–117.
Casati, R. and Varzi, A. 1999. Parts and Places: The Structures of Spatial 
Representation, Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.
Chisholm, R. 1973. “Parts as Essential to Their Wholes”. Review of Meta-
physics 26: 581–603.
Cruse, D. 1979. “On the Transitivity of the Part-Whole Relation”. Journal 
of Linguistics 15: 29–38.
Donnelly, M. and Bittner, T. 2009. “Summation Relations and Portions of 
Stuff”. Philosophical Studies 143: 167–185.
Elder, C. 2004. Real Names and Familiar Objects. Cambridge: MIT.
Fine, K, 1994. “Aggregates and Compounds”. Nous 28 (2): 137–158.
Fine, K. 1999. “Things and Their Parts”. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 
23: 61–74.
Garbacz, P. 2007. “First Order Theory of Functional Parthood”. Journal of 
Philosophical Logic 36: 309–337.
Johansson, I. 2004. “On the Transitivity of Parthood Relations”. In H. 
Hochberg and K. Mulligan (eds.). Relations and Predicates. Frankfurt: 
Ontos: 161–181.
Johansson, I. 2006. “Identity Puzzles and Supervenient Identities”. Meta-
physica 7: 7–33.
Laan, D. 2010. “A Relevance Constraint on Composition”. Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy 88 (1): 135–145.
Leonard, H. and Goodman, N. 1940. “The Calculus of Individuals and Its 
Uses”. Journal of Symbolic Logic 5: 45–55.

 D. Moore, Mereological Essentialism and Mereological Inessentialism 
85
Leśniewski, S. 1916. “Foundations of the General Theory of Sets. I”. In Col-
lected Works, S. J. Surma, J. Srzednicki, D. I. Barnett, and F. V. Rickey 
(eds.), D. I. Barnett (trans.). Dordrecht: Kluwer: 129–173.
Lewis, D. 1991. Parts of Classes. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lyons, J. 1977. Semantics I. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McDaniel, K. 2008. “Against Composition as Identity”. Analysis 68: 128–
133.
McDaniel, K. 2010. “Parts and Wholes”. Philosophy Compass 5 (5): 412–
425.
Meirav, A. 2009. “The Principle of Summation”. Erkenntnis 71: 175–190.
Nagel, E. 1952. “Wholes, Sums, and Organic Unities”. Philosophical Stud-
ies 3 (2): 17–32.
Noonan, H. W. 1980. Objects and Identity. The Hague: Nijhoff.
Plantinga, A. 1975. “On Mereological Essentialism”. The Review of Meta-
physics 28 (3): 468–476.
Pribbenow, S. 2002. “Meronymic Relations”. In R. Green, C. Bean, and 
S.H. Myaeng (eds.). The Semantics of Relationships. Kluwer: Dordrecht: 
35–50.
Rescher, N. and Oppenheim, P. 1955. “Logical Analysis of Gestalt Con-
cepts”. The British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 6 (22): 89–106.
Sanford, D. 2003. “Fusion Confusion”. Analysis 63: 1–4.
Sanford, D. 2011. “Can a Sum Change its Parts”. Analysis 71 (2): 235–
239.
Sider, T. 2007. “Parthood”. Philosophical Review 116: 51–91.
Simons, P. 1987. Parts. A Study in Ontology. Oxford: Clarendon.
Simons, P. 2006. “Real Wholes, Real Parts”. Journal of Philosophy 103 (12): 
597–613.
Thomson, J. 1983. “Parthood and Identity Across Time”. Journal of Phi-
losophy 80: 201–220.
Turner, J. 2013. “Existence and Many-One Identity”. The Philosophical 
Quarterly 63 (251): 313–329.
Van Cleve, J. 1986. “Mereological Essentialism, Mereological Conjunctiv-
ism, and Identity Through Time”. Midwest Studies in Philosophy 11: 
141–156.
Van Inwagen, P. 1990. Material Beings. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Van Inwagen, P. 2006. “Can Mereological Sums Change Their Parts”. Jour-
nal of Philosophy 103 (12): 614–630. 
Varzi, A. 2006. “A Note on the Transitivity of Parthood”. Applied Ontology 
1 (2): 141–146.
Whitehead, A. 1920. The Concept of Nature. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.
Wiggins, D. 1979. “Mereological Essentialism”. Grazer Philosophische Stu-
dien 7/8: 297–315.
Wiggins, D. 1980. Sameness and Substance. Oxford: Blackwell.
Winston, M., Chafﬁ n, R., and Herrmann, D. 1987. “A Taxonomy of Part-
Whole Relations”. Cognitive Science 11: 417–444.
Yi, B.-U. 1999. “Is Mereology Ontologically Innocent”. Philosophical Stud-
ies 93: 141–160.


