1 23
Philosophical Studies
An International Journal for Philosophy
in the Analytic Tradition
 
ISSN 0031-8116
Volume 161
Number 2
 
Philos Stud (2012) 161:309-325
DOI 10.1007/s11098-011-9740-3
Biological-mereological coincidence
Judith K. Crane

1 23
Your article is protected by copyright and
all rights are held exclusively by Springer
Science+Business Media B.V.. This e-offprint
is for personal use only and shall not be self-
archived in electronic repositories. If you
wish to self-archive your work, please use the
accepted author’s version for posting to your
own website or your institution’s repository.
You may further deposit the accepted author’s
version on a funder’s repository at a funder’s
request, provided it is not made publicly
available until 12 months after publication.

Biological-mereological coincidence
Judith K. Crane
Published online: 21 May 2011
 Springer Science+Business Media B.V. 2011
Abstract
This paper presents and defends an account of the coincidence of bio-
logical organisms with mereological sums of their material components. That is, an
organism and the sum of its material components are distinct material objects
existing in the same place at the same time. Instead of relying on historical or modal
differences to show how such coincident entities are distinct, this paper argues that
there is a class of physiological properties of biological organisms that their coin-
cident mereological sums do not have. The account answers some of the most
pressing objections to coincidence, for example the so-called ‘‘grounding problem’’,
that material coincidence seems to require that coinciding objects have modal
differences that do not supervene on any other properties.
Keywords
Material coincidence  Leibniz’s Law  Grounding problem 
Biological organisms  Mereological sums  Supervenience
1 Introduction
This paper defends a particular kind of material coincidence, involving biological
organisms and mereological sums of their material components. This type of
coincidence is illustrated by the case of Descartes and D-minus, where Descartes is
a biological organism and D-minus is all of Descartes except the left leg.1 Descartes
is larger than D-minus, so they are distinct. But suppose Descartes’ left leg is
J. K. Crane (&)
Department of Philosophy, Southern Illinois University Edwardsville,
Box 1433, Edwardsville, IL 62026, USA
e-mail: jcrane@siue.edu
1 The example is from van Inwagen (1981). Other widely discussed examples that are essentially similar
include Peter Geach’s case of Tibbles and Tib (see Wiggins 1968), and Chrysippus’ puzzle about Dion
and Theon (see Burke 1994).
123
Philos Stud (2012) 161:309–325
DOI 10.1007/s11098-011-9740-3
Author's personal copy

amputated. Descartes survives the loss of a limb, and D-minus survives being
distanced from an adjacent entity. As neither is destroyed, both still exist. At the
moment immediately following amputation, Descartes and D-minus occupy exactly
the same region of space and are composed of the same parts, so they are coincident.
But such coincidence is widely thought to be implausible. It seems to violate
commonsense intuitions about ordinary material objects, as well as Leibniz’s Law,
or the Identity of Indiscernibles, according to which distinct things must differ in
properties. Post-amputation, Descartes and D-minus have all the same parts, and
they cannot be distinguished by their shape, size, location, mass or volume. If they
are distinct, there must be some difference between them. Identifying differences
that can plausibly explain their distinctness has proved not an easy task.
That Descartes and D-minus are coincident post amputation seems to follow from
just the assumptions that Descartes and D-minus exist, and that they continue to
exist under circumstances where they are no longer spatially distinct. It is a common
strategy to address the coincidence problem by rejecting one or more of the
assumptions that lead to coincident entities. In Sect. 2, I discuss these assumptions,
and the motivations for retaining them. I propose to accept them, and to show why
the kind of coincidence exempliﬁed by Descartes and D-minus is not implausible.
Rather than trying to explain away coincidence, I hope to explain it. Section 3
discusses the historical and modal differences that are often cited as distinguishing
purportedly coincident objects in a way that does not violate Leibniz’s Law. The
appeal to historical differences between Descartes and D-minus is unsatisfying, as it
leaves the central puzzle of coincidence untouched. The appeal to their modal
differences invites a difﬁculty known as ‘‘the grounding problem’’.2 What the
defender of coincidence needs to respond to the challenge from Leibniz’s Law is an
account of the nonmodal, occurrent differences between entities like Descartes and
D-minus. In Sect. 4, I argue that there is a class of physiological properties
possessed by biological organisms but not by their coincident mereological sums.
This difference in properties provides a defense of a limited kind of coincidence,
exempliﬁed by the case of Descartes, a biological organism, and D-minus, a
mereological sum of the material components of Descartes at a particular time. My
defense of biological-mereological coincidence will not apply straightforwardly to
other standard coincidence claims, such as those involving artifacts, e.g., statues and
lumps, or to the alleged coincidence of persons and bodies. Whether similar
accounts, modeled on this one, can explain satisfactorily these other coincidence
claims is left open, though I raise worries about their prospects. In Sect. 5, I return to
the grounding problem and address the related issue that coincidence is thought to
violate certain supervenience principles. I show how one supervenience principle is
not violated by biological-mereological coincidence and that the differences
between coincident entities discussed in Sect. 4 provide a satisfactory solution to the
grounding problem. There remains a stronger supervenience principle that
biological-mereological coincidence does violate, but I show how this principle
may be plausibly rejected.
2 This problem has been widely discussed, but the name ‘‘grounding problem’’ appears to have been
coined by Bennett (2004).
310
J. K. Crane
123
Author's personal copy

2 The generation of the problem
The coincidence of Descartes and D-minus follows from the assumptions that both
Descartes and D-minus exist, and that they continue to exist under circumstances in
which they are not spatially distinct. There are three families of assumptions here.
(1) Those concerning Descartes: what Descartes is, what sort of persistence
conditions Descartes has, and why we should think things like Descartes exist; (2)
those concerning D-minus: what D-minus is, what sort of persistence conditions
D-minus has, and why we should think things like D-minus exist; and (3) those
concerning the nature of persistence: in particular, the problem is generated in part
by assuming an endurantist account of persistence. I will address each of these in
turn.
I understand Descartes to be a human biological organism. I set aside the
question whether this organism is identical to a person, or whether it bears any other
relation to a person. I will also refrain from speaking of Descartes as a ‘‘body’’, or as
‘‘having a body’’, since the term ‘‘body’’ can refer to either the organism or the
matter composing it. I am supposing we have excellent reason for thinking such
biological organisms exist. Biological organisms are the primary subjects of study in
several areas of biology and they have a variety of distinctive features, including the
ability to reproduce, to respond to stimuli, and to metabolize energy sources from
the environment. A biological organism has a life span that includes a beginning,
a middle, and an end. Thus it is part of the ordinary and scientiﬁc concept of
organisms that they are persisting things. While even the scientiﬁc concept is not
very precise as to what constitutes the beginning and the end of an organism, it is
not terribly imprecise either. For these reasons, any satisfactory account of
Descartes and D-minus ought to accommodate the existence of Descartes as a
persisting biological organism.
I understand D-minus to be the matter that constitutes Descartes at a particular
time. D-minus is introduced into the story as all of Descartes except his left leg. This
is a description of a quantity of matter picked out by the spatiotemporal region that
it occupies. We can circumscribe a spatiotemporal region by talking about Descartes
at a particular time before amputation, leaving out that region of space occupied by
Descartes’ left leg at that time. The matter occupying this spatiotemporal region is
referred to using this description, and given the name D-minus. D-minus is a part of
the matter that composes Descartes at a certain time, and thus is a material part of
Descartes at that time. van Inwagen (1981) calls such things as D-minus ‘‘arbitrary
undetached parts’’, and suggests a solution to the coincidence problem that denies
that arbitrary undetached parts exist. What exists are just whatever simples occupy
the spatiotemporal region we referred to in describing D-minus, but these simples
do not compose anything—at least not until after the amputation, when they
compose Descartes. van Inwagen solves the coincidence problem by denying that
there are two coincident entities. Descartes exists, the simples that compose him
exist, but there is no D-minus. I want to resist this move. In describing D-minus, it
seems obvious that we succeed in referring to something. Surely there are
spatiotemporal regions, and where there is matter occupying a certain spatiotem-
poral region, it is extremely plausible that that quantity of matter is something,
Biological-mereological coincidence
311
123
Author's personal copy

which we can refer to and name as we like. Not only do we have no trouble talking
about D-minus in the somewhat artiﬁcial context of philosophical discourse, but we
can easily imagine non-philosophical circumstances in which it matters that we can
refer to D-minus. Descartes might visit a tattoo parlor and request that the artist
tattoo all of him except his left leg.
D-minus is divisible into smaller pieces of matter—its material parts. We can
think of D-minus as the mereological sum of these material parts. If there are
material simples, D-minus is the mereological sum of those simples. If there are no
simples, but indeﬁnitely divisible material ‘‘gunk’’, we can still usefully think of
D-minus in mereological terms. Classical mereology is noncommittal as to whether
there are simples.3 Even if all the material parts of D-minus themselves have parts,
D-minus is a sum composed of those parts, and has the persistence conditions of a
mereological sum. That is, since D-minus is identiﬁed simply as a certain quantity
of matter, any entity consisting of distinct matter—either more or less than that
composing D-minus—is a distinct entity. Given the way D-minus is picked out, it is
an extensional object that has its parts essentially. In maintaining that we are able to
pick out mereological sums like D-minus by circumscribing any region of space–
time and referring to the matter occupying that region, I am also supposing that
mereological universalism is true. There is no reason we cannot circumscribe and
refer to a ‘‘scattered’’ region of space–time, which would allow us to refer to all
manner of mereological sums. Given the apparent ease with which we can refer to
spatiotemporal regions and the matter that occupies them, mereological universal-
ism is on the face of it more plausible than either nihilism (the view that there are no
composite objects) or restricted composition principles.4 Thus we have good reason
to think that D-minus exists and that it is an extensional mereological sum. One of
the most troubling consequences of mereological universalism is the rampant
coincidence to which universalists ﬁnd themselves committed. If the world is ﬁlled
with mereological sums such as D-minus, as well as things like Descartes with very
different sorts of persistence conditions, we will be left with distinct material objects
occupying the same place at the same time and consisting of the same parts at that
time. Rather than rejecting mereological universalism, I propose to accept it, and to
show how coincidence cases such as that of Descartes and D-minus can be accepted
plausibly.
The story about Descartes and D-minus assumes an ordinary, endurantist picture
of how objects persist through time. Descartes endures through the amputation in
the sense that Descartes-before-amputation and Descartes-after-amputation are
numerically identical. Alternatively, perdurantism can solve the coincidence
problem by denying that Descartes-before-amputation and Descartes-after-amputa-
tion are numerically identical. They are distinct temporal parts of Descartes, who
persists through time in the sense that he consists of a series of momentary temporal
parts, and is in this way ‘‘spread out in time’’. D-minus also consists of momentary
temporal parts, but the series of temporal parts that makes up D-minus is distinct
3 See Simons (1987, p. 41).
4 There may be plausible restrictions, for example a formal mereological restriction that prohibits the
summing of overlapping individuals.
312
J. K. Crane
123
Author's personal copy

from the one that makes up Descartes. Descartes and D-minus consist of the same
material parts at the moment following amputation, since the matter post-
amputation is a temporal part of both entities. Yet they are numerically distinct,
since Descartes occupies a longer spatiotemporal region than does D-minus. Rather
than being coincident entities, they temporally overlap at the moment following
amputation when they share a temporal part. Though this is in many respects a neat
solution, I will set it aside, and attempt to deal with the coincidence problem within
an endurantist framework. I take endurantism to provide a more natural and intuitive
picture of how objects persist through time, a picture worth retaining if possible.
3 Historical differences and modal differences
At the moment immediately following amputation (let’s call it t0), it is true of
Descartes that he once had a left leg. This is not true of D-minus, who never had a
left leg. This difference in historical properties might be employed to answer the
challenge from Leibniz’s Law to identify a difference in virtue of which Descartes
and D-minus are distinct. But the appeal to historical differences alone to show that
Descartes and D-minus are distinct is unsatisfying, since it is still mysterious how
they could have all the same occurrent properties at t0 when they coincide. It is true
of this case of coincidence, and of all the coincidence cases I defend, that the
coincident entities have different temporal properties. I will not be dealing with
cases in which two entities occupy the same spatial region during their entire
careers, such as Gibbard’s (1975) example of Lumpl and Goliath. It is also true that
facts about Descartes at times other than t0 will play a role in my explanation of his
distinctness from D-minus. But the appeal to historical differences alone seems to
sidestep the central problem of coincidence. Gibbard’s example of entities
apparently coincident their entire careers helps to focus our attention on that
problem. I cannot construct a case in which a biological organism is coincident with
a mereological sum over its entire career,5 yet the puzzle remains that at t0,
Descartes and D-minus appear to have all the same occurrent properties, even while
we are inclined to say they are two things.
To the extent that we think Descartes and D-minus are two distinct things, it is
because we are thinking of Descartes and D-minus as different kinds of things. That
Descartes is an organism and D-minus a hunk of matter motivates the intuition that
they are numerically distinct while coincident. Different kinds are associated with
different essential properties and persistence conditions, which constitute their
modal proﬁles. Organisms like Descartes can survive changes in parts (e.g., through
growth) while mereological sums cannot. Mereological sums like D-minus can
survive radical re-arrangement of parts (e.g., being run through a blender) while
organisms cannot. The difﬁculty is that appealing to these modal differences
5 This highlights an important difference between my case and Gibbard’s case of Lumpl and Goliath.
Lumpl is a lump of clay, not a mass or a sum. It is the sort of thing that can come into being when two
smaller lumps are stuck together, and can persist through small changes in parts. This is why Lumpl can
have the same career as Goliath. In the cases I am considering, one of the entities is a mereological sum,
so it cannot have the same career as an organism, because it doesn’t survive any change in parts.
Biological-mereological coincidence
313
123
Author's personal copy

between Descartes and D-minus as an answer to the challenge from Leibniz’s Law
does not solve the problem, but only refocuses it. Could a difference in modal
proﬁle be the sole difference between two otherwise indiscernible objects? The
difﬁculty of locating other features that could explain the different modal proﬁles of
allegedly coincident objects is the ‘‘grounding problem,’’ as discussed in Bennett
(2004), Burke (1992), Heller (1990), Olson (2001), Sosa (1987) and Zimmerman
(1995). The coincidentalist might accept that there is no other difference, and that
the different modal proﬁles are just brute differences.6 Or the coincidentalist could
accept that something grounds the modal differences but claim ignorance about
what that is. Another option is that coincident entities each have a unique ‘‘thisness’’
or haecceity, which individuates them and determines their distinct modal proﬁles.
These responses are problematic in that they all leave the coincidentalist committed
to objects that are apparently empirically indistinguishable but still modally and
(hence) numerically distinct. This invites the suspicion that the distinction between
allegedly coincident objects, along with their different modal proﬁles and the kinds
with which they are associated, is a matter of convention. We are simply conceiving
the same object in different ways, referring to it under different sortal concepts,
rather than discerning any ontological distinction between coincident entities.
Coincidence is not plausible without convincing grounds for an ontological
distinction between coincidents.
In order to make plausible the appeal to different modal proﬁles of purportedly
coincident objects, some nonmodal, empirically discernible difference ought to
explain the different modal proﬁles. Modal proﬁles should supervene on nonmodal
properties in the sense that two entities perfectly alike in every other discernible
respect are also perfectly alike in their modal proﬁles. The ways an object can be
should depend in some way on how it is. According to this supervenience claim, a
difference between Descartes and D-minus in their modal proﬁles requires some
other difference between them. But they appear to be perfectly alike in every other
respect, at least at t0 when they coincide, which is why we were led to distinguish
them by their persistence conditions in the ﬁrst place. This is a serious problem for
the coincidentalist. A satisfactory account of coincidence should identify differ-
ences between coincident objects that are nonmodal and occurrent properties.7 Such
6 Zimmerman (1995) ﬁnds the appeal to ungrounded persistence conditions ‘‘absurd’’ (p. 87). Bennett
(2004) provides an interesting exploration of the unfortunate consequences of accepting primitive
‘‘sortalish’’ properties in defense of coincidence. To be clear: the ‘‘primitivism’’ at issue here is the view
that there is really nothing in virtue of which an object has its modal proﬁle–it is just a brute fact. This is
distinct from the ‘‘modal primitivism’’ according to which modal concepts cannot be completely analyzed
in nonmodal terms–as Lewis (1986) attempted to do by postulating real but non-actual possible worlds.
One could be a modal primitivist in this second sense and still maintain (plausibly I think) that essential
properties and persistence conditions are not brute, but supervene on the nonmodal.
7 One type of nonmodal occurrent property sometimes appealed to in distinguishing purportedly
coincident objects is a certain kind of relational property. Fine (2003) for example, claims that the statue
but not the alloy of which it is made may be ‘‘defective, substandard, well or badly made, valuable, ugly,
Romanesque, exchanged, insured, or admired’’ (p. 206). I won’t address this suggestion in detail here, but
I do wish to raise a worry about the appeal to these sorts of properties. These have to do with the way the
statue but not the alloy is perceived or related to by a community that recognizes the statue as a work of
art. While there is nothing objectionable about distinct objects differing only in their relational properties
(as in qualitative duplicates differing only in their spatial relations to other objects), in order for an art
314
J. K. Crane
123
Author's personal copy

an account would be even more satisfying if these differences can explain the
differences in persistence conditions. I offer such an account below.
4 The solution: physiological processes and P-properties
Physiological processes include processes such as respiration, digestion, circulation,
ovulation, and photosynthesis, that are commonly observed in biological organisms.
Physiological processes typically involve interactions between cells, tissues, and
organs, and the exchange of matter between an organism and its environment. Like
all processes they take time, so that anything undergoing such a process persists
through that process. There is a class of physiological properties of biological
organisms that depend in some way on an organism’s undergoing one or more
physiological processes. For example, a female mammal’s being fertile depends on
her undergoing certain physiological processes, including ovulation. Certain
medical conditions also constitute properties of this kind. Descartes’ being, for
example, hypertensive, depends among other things on the circulation of blood. If
he is diabetic, this depends on how efﬁciently he metabolizes glucose. Perhaps the
most general property of this kind is simply being alive. An organism’s being alive
depends on its undergoing a family of metabolic processes involving the production
of energy, the breaking down and synthesizing of complex molecules, and so forth.
These properties, being fertile, being hypertensive or diabetic, and being alive, are
properties that depend on physiological processes in such a way that an organism
can have these properties only if it undergoes one or more physiological processes
that extend over a period of time. Most female mammals cannot be fertile unless
either currently ovulating, or in a phase of a process preceding ovulation. An
organism cannot be alive unless it is undergoing metabolic processes that extend
over a period of time. Properties that depend on physiological processes in this way
I call P-properties, and deﬁne as follows:
P-properties are physiological properties that are (1) associated with
physiological processes in such a way that a biological organism O’s having
P-property F at time t depends on O’s undergoing certain physiological
processes over a period of time that includes times other than t; and (2) such
that a biological organism O that has P-property F over a period of time t1–tn
has that same property F at each ti in t1–tn.
The ﬁrst condition has the consequence that nothing that exists instantaneously at
a time t could have a P-property at t, since P-properties depend on the thing’s
undergoing processes over a period of time that extends beyond t. This presents a
certain epistemic limitation that is indicative of P-properties: one can determine that
an organism has a P-property only by observing that organism over a period of time.
Footnote 7 continued
community to deem the statue but not the alloy valuable, e.g., it seems that it must antecedently be able to
distinguish them. In the absence of differences between the statue and the alloy other than the ways we
relate to them, the anti-coincidentalist can plausibly claim that this is another case of our thinking of the
same thing in two different ways.
Biological-mereological coincidence
315
123
Author's personal copy

A human organism is diabetic at t due to processes occurring over a period of time
that includes times before and after t. Merely having a high blood glucose level at t
is insufﬁcient to be diabetic at t. Physiological properties that are not P-properties
include having a blood glucose level of 140 mg/dL, being female, and having blood
type AB. These are properties that an organism could have at a time t that do not
depend on anything occurring at times other than t. One could observe an organism
at an instant, for example by taking a blood sample, and determine that it has any of
these properties. An instantaneous ‘‘swamp creature’’, created by a random
lightning bolt and destroyed the next moment by a second bolt, could have any of
these properties.8 On the other hand, to determine whether an organism O is alive at
t, we need to look beyond O’s properties just at t. We need to see what is going on in
the organism for a period of time surrounding t to see if it is undergoing metabolic
processes. It is not sufﬁcient for O to be dead at t that O skips a heart beat at t, nor is
a momentary period of ﬂat-lining sufﬁcient for O to be dead. To determine whether
O is alive or dead we need to see whether O shows signs of life over an extended
period of time. Determining that an organism is fertile also requires observations
over a period of time. For a human female, it requires observing her menstrual cycle
over a period of time in order to determine that she is in an appropriate phase of that
process. Our instantaneous ‘‘swamp creature’’, even if it is an organism, would lack
P-properties.
The second condition in the deﬁnition is meant to make explicit that not every
predicate we can apply to an organism is a candidate for a P-property. We have a
number of linguistic devices that allow us to formulate predicates from terms for
processes, where these predicates denote no new property, but merely express the
fact that something is undergoing a process. One such device is taking the gerund of
a process term. For example, an organism in the process of a sneeze extending from
t1–tn can be said to be sneezing at a time t between t1 and tn. Participles do similar
work. A cow is being milked if it is undergoing a milking. While it is not obvious
that the milking, especially if performed by a dairy farmer, counts as a physiological
process, the sneeze surely does. Since an organism’s sneezing at t depends on the
sneeze that extends from t1–tn, this satisﬁes the ﬁrst condition for being a
P-property. But the second condition is not met because there is no single property
sneezing that the organism has at each ti in t1–tn. At each ti during which the
organism is sneezing it is simply undergoing a segment of a sneeze, and it
undergoes a distinct segment at each ti. In general, gerundive predicates such as
sneezing, as well as participles like being milked, do not pick out any single property
that an object has continuously at each moment during which it is undergoing the
associated process. The second condition excludes both gerundive and participle
‘‘properties’’ from the class of P-properties. Probably these are not properties at all,
but just predicates that ﬂow from convenient grammatical devices. Indeed I suspect
the second condition is strictly unnecessary as a condition for P-properties, because
it expresses a necessary condition for properties in general. That is, if we can apply
8 ‘‘Swampman’’ was originally introduced by Davidson (1987), though in a very different context, to
illustrate a claim about mental content. While Davidson’s ‘‘swampman’’ is produced in the same way as
my ‘‘swamp creature’’, he is not instantaneous. My instantaneous ‘‘swamp creature’’ is meant to represent
an instantaneous replica of a biological organism.
316
J. K. Crane
123
Author's personal copy

a predicate to an object in virtue of its undergoing certain processes over a period of
time, then unless that predicate expresses a single property possessed by the object
continuously over that period of time, the predicate expresses nothing more than the
process. However, the account provided here does not depend on this general
condition on properties. It only requires the speciﬁc restriction on P-properties
stated in the deﬁnition. As spelled out more explicitly below, this restriction is
important for the account because features that violate the second condition, such as
those associated with gerundives and participles, can be attributed plausibly to each
of a pair of purportedly coincident entities.
My proposal is that Descartes but not D-minus has P-properties, and that these
are sufﬁcient to distinguish the two entities, even while they are coincident. At the
time t0 immediately following amputation, while Descartes and D-minus share
precisely the same parts, Descartes is alive and D-minus is not. Perhaps Descartes is
diabetic at t0, but D-minus certainly is not. Descartes’ being alive or diabetic at t0 is
explained by the fact that Descartes is the subject of a variety of metabolic
processes, processes that are temporally extended to include times before and after
t0, and that involve the gain and loss of parts. Because D-minus is a certain quantity
of matter, it is not identical to anything consisting of distinct matter, and so does not
undergo any processes involving changes in its material parts. Physiological
processes such as respiration and metabolizing glucose involve the exchange of
matter between an entity and its environment, so no extensional mereological sum
could be the subject of such a process. Descartes’ P-properties—being alive and
perhaps being hypertensive or diabetic—are nonmodal, occurrent properties he has
at t0, that D-minus lacks. These properties are sufﬁcient to distinguish Descartes
from D-minus.9
In order for P-properties to distinguish biological organisms from sums of their
material components, it is important that these are properties possessed continuously
by an organism over a period of time, as speciﬁed by the second condition in the
deﬁnition. An organism O would need to have the same P-property at distinct times,
so that the property is not reducible to those physiological processes on which it
depends. If the property is nothing more than being the subject of one or more
processes, then since processes consist of distinct stages, O would have distinct
properties at different times, each corresponding to a different stage of a process.
Being alive is a complex property involving a variety of characteristics and
dispositions, and is distinct from the metabolic processes on which it depends.
A living organism encodes information about proteins in its DNA and RNA, and has
dispositions to use such information to assemble proteins for growth, reproduction,
healing, etc. Such characteristics are partly what it is to be alive, and Descartes has
9 Doepke (1982) also employs a strategy of defending coincidence by attempting to identify nonmodal,
occurrent properties possessed by a constituted entity (a person in the case he considers) but not by the
collection of parts that constitutes it. His example is having a true memory, which he thinks requires that
the person who has the memory persists through a period that includes the time at which the memory is
acquired. I ﬁnd this example unpersuasive. It is an adequate explanation of an entity’s having a true
memory at a time t that it be causally related in the right way to an entity that received the right sort of
sensory input. The collection of parts that is supposed to constitute the person at t can be a relatum in this
sort of causal relation.
Biological-mereological coincidence
317
123
Author's personal copy

this same complex property being alive continuously, that is, at each ti in the period
t1–tn during which he is alive, even while his being alive at any ti depends on
processes occurring at times other than that ti. If Descartes is diabetic, then he has
all the characteristics and dispositions constitutive of diabetes at each moment of the
period of time during which he is diabetic. Being diabetic depends on an organism’s
metabolizing glucose in a certain way, but Descartes remains diabetic even between
meals when he is not metabolizing glucose.
In contrast, to attribute sneezing to an organism is to say nothing more than that it is
currently in the process of a sneeze, and that for any time t at which it is sneezing, it is
undergoing a segment of that sneeze. To attribute being milked to an organism (a cow,
say) is to say nothing more than that it is currently undergoing a milking, and that for
any time t at which it is being milked, it is undergoing a segment of that milking.
Unlike the complex properties I’ve suggested as examples of P-properties, these
involve no characteristics or dispositions other than the processes on which they
depend. The processes, consisting of distinct process segments, exhaust the features
associated with those processes. At each ti in t1–tn during which an organism is
sneezing, it is undergoing a distinct sneeze segment, and does not have any additional
property continuously in virtue of the sneeze. Such properties, if they are properties at
all, which are reducible in this way to the processes on which they depend, cannot
plausibly distinguish purportedly coincident entities. If an organism O is sneezing at a
time t, then at t it is undergoing a particular sneeze segment. Any feature we can
attribute to O at t in virtue of its undergoing that sneeze segment is also a feature of the
matter that coincides with O. By contrast, P-properties can do the job of distinguishing
organisms from their coincident matter because they both require the undergoing of
processes and also are real properties distinct from those processes, which an
organism can possess continuously over a period of time.
Because of this limitation on the types of properties that can distinguish
coincident entities, I am not optimistic that the account provided here can be
extended, by ﬁnding analogs of P-properties, to explain cases of alleged coincidence
involving statues, for example. Certainly it is not difﬁcult to ﬁnd properties
attributed to statues that depend on processes. We might say that a statue is
corroding, or being repaired, and we might think that the bronze cannot survive the
sorts of changes required to corrode or to be repaired. But these are just the sorts of
gerundive and participle ‘‘properties’’, that, while depending on processes, are really
nothing more than those processes on which they depend. If a statue is corroding or
being repaired at a time t, this is simply its being in a particular segment of a process
of corrosion or reparation. The bronze that is supposed to be coincident with the
statue at t has whatever features the statue has at t in virtue of its being in that
particular process segment. There is no extra property of the statue in virtue of this
process that is not also a property of the bronze. We can insist that the statue just is
the bronze, and that for the statue (and the bronze) to be corroding at t is just for it to
exemplify a certain process segment at t. Neither the statue nor the bronze need
persist through any changes of parts to do that. The entire corrosion process could
be exempliﬁed by a series of distinct masses of bronze, each consisting of different
parts with different chemical compositions, as parts are added and lost during
318
J. K. Crane
123
Author's personal copy

oxidation. Thus we still have no grounds for saying the statue and the bronze are
distinct coincident entities.
Attempts to extend the account to explain the alleged coincidence of persons and
bodies should also be met with caution. One must be clear about what is meant by
‘‘body’’ in such coincidence claims. ‘‘Body’’ can refer to the matter that makes up a
person at a given time, or it can refer to the biological organism, as distinguished
from the person. Suppose by ‘‘body’’ we mean the constituent matter, understood in
mereological terms, so that bodies do not survive changes in parts. In that case, there
are certainly properties we attribute to persons that can play the role of P-properties
and thereby distinguish persons from bodies. Plausible candidates include all those
we used to distinguish organisms from their material components. Persons can be
alive, diabetic, hypertensive, etc., while their constituent matter is not. This leads to
the more interesting question whether persons are distinct from but coincident with
bodies understood as organisms. That is, is there a third entity in addition to
D-minus and Descartes (the organism), which is a person? Here the strategy I’ve
used to explain the coincidence of biological organisms and their material
components is of no use, since both the organism and the person are supposed to be
things that persist through changes in parts. Certainly there could be no
mereological considerations for denying that a property of the person belongs to
the organism as well. Other strategies would be needed to show that persons are
distinct from biological organisms.
5 Supervenience and the grounding problem
One of the most serious problems for coincidence is that it runs afoul of powerful
intuitions regarding supervenience. The ‘‘grounding problem,’’ discussed in Sect. 3,
is a concern about distinguishing purportedly coincident entities solely by their
modal proﬁles. If the different modal proﬁles of Descartes and D-minus were the
only difference between them, this would violate the supervenience principle that
there cannot be a modal difference between two entities without some other
difference. The intuition behind this is that modal properties cannot come from
nowhere; they must somehow be grounded in how things actually are. It was this
worry about the grounding of modal properties that motivated our search for a
nonmodal difference between Descartes and D-minus. Since we’ve now determined
that Descartes has P-properties that D-minus lacks, the two entities can be
coincident without any violation of modal supervenience. That is, while they have
different modal proﬁles, this is not the only difference between them. Their different
essential properties and persistence conditions are accompanied by differences in
P-properties.
But this just shows that the supervenience principle is not violated, since
biological organisms and mereological sums of matter will not differ just in their
modal proﬁles. What about the intuition behind the supervenience principle, that
modal differences depend on, or are grounded in the nonmodal? Can P-properties
explain the modal properties in a way that offers a satisfactory solution to the
grounding problem? I believe they can. Consider the property of being alive. If an
Biological-mereological coincidence
319
123
Author's personal copy

organism O is alive at t, then it is undergoing a family of metabolic processes over
a period of time surrounding t, processes that involve its changing parts during that
period. Given the dependence of this P-property on metabolic processes, a
necessary condition for an organism O’s being alive is that it actually persists
through changes in parts. O’s actually persisting through certain kinds of changes
entails that it can persist through these changes. Other P-properties will yield the
same results, since the physiological processes on which they depend involve the
exchange of matter between an organism and its environment. Hence if an
organism has P-properties we can explain why it has the persistence conditions that
it has. The different modal proﬁles that indicate a distinction between biological
organisms and coincident mereological sums are explained by their differences in
P-properties. P-properties are empirically discoverable, occurrent, nonmodal
properties of biological organisms, which entail persistence conditions distinct
from those of mereological sums.
But are the P-properties I’ve mentioned really nonmodal properties? In arguing
that P-properties like being alive and being diabetic are properties of biological
organisms that could not be possessed by mereological sums, I maintained that these
are complex properties involving various characteristics and dispositions. That they
are dispositional helped to establish that P-properties were real properties not
reducible to the processes on which they depend. One might worry at this point that
dispositions are after all modal, involving what would happen in various actual and
counterfactual situations. If P-properties are ultimately modal, then it appears I have
smuggled in modal properties to explain differences in modal proﬁles. It is not
obvious that dispositions ultimately must be understood modally. Certainly they are
importantly different from the modal properties that raise the worries expressed in
the grounding problem. Unlike essential properties and persistence conditions,
which I take to constitute a modal proﬁle, dispositions seem to be a matter of how a
thing is, not just of how it could be. Dispositions certainly have modal
consequences, but properties with modal consequences are exactly what one would
expect to ground an entity’s essential properties. If, less plausibly I think,
dispositions are modal in the same sense that essential properties are, and if
dispositions are, as I’ve suggested, indications of real properties, then it is not clear
what could count as a nonmodal property. The grounding problem would lose its
force if properties are modal in the same sense all the way down, for then modal
properties are never grounded in the nonmodal. What gives the grounding problem
its urgency is the worry that the only differences between coincident entities are
differences in essential properties and persistence conditions. These modal
properties could not come from nowhere, and any claim that they do invites the
worry that such free-ﬂoating differences in modal proﬁle are a matter of mere
convention, of our conceiving the same object in different ways, and imposing
different modal proﬁles and sortal concepts on the same object. Even if we grant
that dispositions are in some sense modal (since they have modal consequences),
these are not the sort of properties that motivate the grounding problem. It is the
prospect of free-ﬂoating essential properties and persistence conditions that must be
avoided.
320
J. K. Crane
123
Author's personal copy

In discussing the grounding problem, Sosa (1987) speaks of the sort of property
‘‘whose essential possession can be explained by its actual possession’’ (p. 80). He
offers as examples being even and being a person. These might help as a way of
grounding certain modal properties, but are not relevant to the coincidence cases
that concern us here. P-properties generally are not properties that organisms have
essentially (if Descartes is diabetic, he is not essentially so), so it is not generally the
case that their actual possession explains their essential possession. The way
P-properties ground essential properties and persistence conditions is different.
Their actual possession explains why they persist as certain parts come and go, so
their actual possession explains why other properties are essential or not. A female
mammal’s being fertile, for example, requires that she can persist through the
development and eventual degradation of an ovarian follicle. The property being
alive might be an exception here, as it is plausible that it is an essential property of
biological organisms. After losing this property, the remaining corpse is not
undergoing any physiological processes, and hence loses all its P-properties. After
death, there seems no candidate left for a nonmodal, occurrent difference between a
mereological sum and a biological organism. What we ought to say here is that with
death, the organism does not survive. All that is left is the matter which formerly
composed it. But that an organism does not survive death is exactly what we want to
say. Perhaps being alive is one of the properties Sosa was seeking, whose essential
possession is explained by its actual possession.
There remains another supervenience principle that has been employed against
coincidence. Coincident entities are supposed to be composed of the same parts, and
thus friends of coincidence need to reject a principle van Inwagen (1990) calls
Uniqueness, that any objects compose at most one thing. Descartes and D-minus
have the same parts, but those parts compose two distinct things at the moment
when they coincide. van Inwagen argues in the following manner that Uniqueness
follows from the Identity of Indiscernibles together with a supervenience principle
(1990, p. 53):
(1)
If x, y share all the same intrinsic and relational properties, then x = y.
(Identity of Indiscernibles.)
(2)
For any xs, if the xs compose an object z, then both the intrinsic and relational
properties of z are completely determined by the intrinsic and relational
properties of the xs. (Supervenience.)
Therefore,
(3)
For any xs, if the xs compose an object z, then for any w such that the xs
compose w, w = z.
According to van Inwagen, in order to reject Uniqueness, the coincidentalist must
reject the supervenience principle, since coincident objects have different modal
properties while being composed of the same parts. Note that he employs a stronger
supervenience principle than the one considered above. I have shown how the
biological-mereological coincidentalist can uphold the supervenience principle that
modal differences require (and are determined by) nonmodal differences. van
Inwagen’s supervenience principle states that all differences (including modal
Biological-mereological coincidence
321
123
Author's personal copy

differences) are determined by differences in the properties of the parts of distinct
things. Let us call this Composition Supervenience.10 Any coincidentalist would
need to reject Composition Supervenience, since coincidence explicitly involves
modally distinct entities sharing the same parts, and in the same arrangement.11 But
at least in the case of biological-mereological coincidence, doing so does not leave
us with brute modal differences. The modal differences are always grounded in a
difference in P-properties, even if there is no difference in parts. It is also a violation
of Composition Supervenience that at t0, Descartes but not D-minus has certain
P-properties while they share the same parts. Again, we do not want to say this
difference is brute; it deserves an explanation. The explanation is that P-properties
have a broader supervenience base than that suggested by Composition Superve-
nience. The supervenience base of P-properties includes the properties of the parts
that compose an organism over a period of time that includes times other than the
time at which the organism has the P-property. The P-properties Descartes has at t0
depend on the organism undergoing time-consuming physiological processes, so
that they supervene not just on the features of Descartes’ parts at t0, but also on the
features of distinct collections of parts that compose Descartes at times other than t0.
Consider Descartes’ property of being alive at t0. In order for Descartes to be alive
at t0, it is required that Descartes undergo metabolic processes for a period of time
extending beyond t0, such that Descartes is composed of distinct sets of parts at
different times during that period of time. Descartes’ being alive at t0 depends not
just on the properties of Descartes’ parts at t0, but also on the properties of
Descartes’ parts at times other than t0. Given the explanations for supervenience I
have provided, Composition Supervenience can be rejected by the biological-
mereological coincidentalist in good conscience, together with the principle of
Uniqueness. Composition Supervenience is too restrictive in supposing that all
properties of an object at a time t are determined by the properties of its parts at t.
The modal properties of an organism may be determined in part by its P-properties,
and its P-properties are determined by the properties of its parts across different
times.
An additional worry that may arise for this account of biological-mereological
coincidence is that it gets the order of dependence reversed: only something that can
persist through changes in parts can be alive, so P-properties depend on an
organism’s persistence conditions. If this is right, it is not obvious we have solved
the grounding problem, for it is the different modal proﬁles that distinguish
coincident entities, and these remain unexplained. Two points should be emphasized
in response. First, an important feature of the account is that it avoids any
commitment to coincident entities that differ only in their modal proﬁles. In
biological-mereological coincidence cases, the different modal proﬁles are always
10 Olson (2001) also emphasizes this supervenience principle as one the coincidentalist cannot
accommodate.
11 At least in the sense van Inwagen intends, Composition Supervenience must be rejected by the
coincidentalist. For van Inwagen, ‘‘parts’’ are material parts. A coincidentalist could accept Composition
Supervenience by developing an account of parts of objects that are not material parts, and which would
not be shared by coincident entities. See for example Paul’s (2006) account of qualitative parts, and
Koslicki’s (2008) account of structural parts.
322
J. K. Crane
123
Author's personal copy

accompanied by the obtaining of P-properties by one entity and not the other. The
truly mysterious cases we wished to avoid involved empirically indistinguishable
but modally and numerically distinct entities. These cases are avoided, and
supervenience is not violated. Second, I do not think the account gets the order of
dependence wrong. P-properties depend on what an organism actually does, not on
what it can do. It is alive because it is actually the subject of certain physiological
processes extending through a period of time. For this reason, an organism’s
P-properties supervene not on its modal properties but on its temporal properties.
Consider again the instantaneous ‘‘swamp creature’’ created by a random lightning
bolt and destroyed the next moment by another. Nothing exists in that moment with
any P-properties. There is a mass of matter, certainly with an interesting
organization, but no living thing coincident with the mass of matter. We might
wish to call it an ‘‘instantaneous organism’’ nonetheless, just as we might wish to
call a corpse a ‘‘dead organism’’. But we have no grounds for saying such
instantaneous or dead ‘‘organisms’’ are numerically distinct from masses of matter.
If there had not been a second lightning bolt, certain processes would have ensued,
caused by the arrangement of matter produced by the ﬁrst lightning bolt. Had such
processes ensued, there would have existed a second object as the subject of those
processes and the possessor of a distinctive set of P-properties. And it would have
existed from the ﬁrst, since the ensuing processes include the initial state. This
reﬂects the fact that P-properties supervene on temporal properties. Whether there
are any P-properties and hence a living thing that has those P-properties at the initial
moment following the ﬁrst lightning bolt depends on what happens next. An
organism’s P-properties at a time t depend on its undergoing physiological
processes over a period of time that includes times other than t. Furthermore, while
P-properties supervene on temporal properties, they are not themselves temporal
properties. P-properties are occurrent properties that an organism has at a time when
it coincides with a mereological sum, and which distinguish the organism from that
mereological sum.
6 Concluding remarks
I have provided an explanation for how biological organisms and mereological sums
can be distinct while occupying the same spatial region at a time and sharing the
same parts at that time. The distinction between these two types of entities is
explained by a difference in a certain class of physiological properties, what I have
called P-properties, that we commonly attribute to biological organisms and that
mereological sums lack. This is a difference in occurrent, nonmodal properties, that
serves to distinguish coincident entities. This difference explains why the distinct
entities have different modal proﬁles: P-properties require that their possessors
actually persist through certain kinds of changes of parts, and such actual
persistence entails certain persistence conditions. We do not need to impose a sortal
concept and a set of persistence conditions onto the living things we encounter, but
we can actually discover that something has a particular modal proﬁle based on its
having certain observable properties requiring such a modal proﬁle, properties like
Biological-mereological coincidence
323
123
Author's personal copy

being fertile, being diabetic, and being alive. My solution to the problem of
coincident biological organisms and mereological sums allows us to retain intuitions
regarding the existence of both biological organisms and mereological sums. We
can also retain an endurantist picture of the persistence of biological organisms, and
can accept the supervenience of modal properties on the nonmodal. The
P-properties employed to explain the distinction between coincident entities are
not esoteric properties discovered by the metaphysician, but standard biological
properties that we would want to be able to attribute to biological organisms on any
account of their metaphysics.
The biological-mereological coincidence I have defended is an important kind of
coincidence, even if it does not entail a more general account of coincidence. In
fact, it may be more illuminating precisely because it identiﬁes a special
metaphysical structure of a natural category—biological organisms—as distin-
guished from artifacts. When considering statues and lumps of bronze, it is much
easier to reject coincidence. It is not a major loss to our ordinary way of thinking
about statues if we say there is no material object in the vicinity other than some
bronze in a particular shape. The analogous claim about biological organisms is less
plausible. Because of the important role that organisms play as the subjects of
biological investigations, and because of the distinctive properties attributed to
biological organisms, it is much harder to deny that organisms are material objects
distinct from mere masses of matter or collections of parts. Aristotle got us started
using artifacts—bronze spheres—as a way to understand the metaphysical structure
of primary substances—viz. individual organisms.12 However useful it may be to
think about the metaphysics of artifacts, organisms and artifacts do not need to be
treated as on the same footing ontologically.
Acknowledgments
For helpful comments and feedback on this paper I am indebted to Berit Brogaard,
Dan Korman, Skip Larkin, Bill Lycan, Laurie Paul, John Roberts, and Irem Steen.
References
Bennett, K. (2004). Spatio-temporal coincidence and the grounding problem. Philosophical Studies, 118,
339–371.
Burke, M. (1992). Copper statues and pieces of copper: A challenge to the standard account. Analysis,
52(1), 12–17.
Burke, M. (1994). Dion and Theon: An essentialist solution to an ancient puzzle. Journal of Philosophy,
91(3), 129–139.
Davidson, D. (1987). Knowing one’s own mind. Proceedings and addresses of the American
Philosophical Association, 60(3), 441–458.
Doepke, F. (1982). Spatially coinciding objects. Ratio, 24,45–60 (Reprinted in Material constitution:
A reader, pp. 10–24, by M. Rea, Ed., 1997, Lanham: Rowman and Littleﬁeld).
Fine, K. (2003). The non-identity of a material thing and its matter. Mind, 112, 195–234.
Gibbard, A. (1975). Contingent Identity. Journal of Philosophical Logic, 4, 187–221 (Reprinted in
Material constitution: A reader, pp. 93–125, by M. Rea, Ed., 1997, Lanham: Rowman and
Littleﬁeld).
Heller, Mark. (1990). The ontology of physical objects: Four-dimensional hunks of matter. Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
12 See for example Metaphysics viii 6.
324
J. K. Crane
123
Author's personal copy

Koslicki, K. (2008). The structure of objects. New York: Oxford University Press.
Lewis, D. (1986). On the plurality of worlds. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Olson, E. (2001). Material coincidence and the indiscernibility problem. Philosophical Quarterly,
51(204), 337–355.
Paul, L. A. (2006). Coincidence as overlap. Nouˆs, 40(4), 623–659.
Simons, P. (1987). Parts: A study in ontology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Sosa, E. (1987). Subjects among other things. In J. E. Tomberlin (Ed.), Philosophical perspectives, 1,
metaphysics. Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview Publishing (Reprinted in Material constitution: A reader,
pp. 63–89, by M. Rea, Ed., 1997, Lanham: Rowman and Littleﬁeld).
van Inwagen, P. (1981). The doctrine of arbitrary undetached parts. Paciﬁc Philosophical Quarterly, 62,
123–137 (Reprinted in Ontology, identity, and modality, pp. 75–94, by P. van Inwagen, 2001,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press).
van Inwagen, P. (1990). Material beings. Ithica: Cornell University Press.
Wiggins, D. (1968). On being in the same place at the same time. Philosophical Review, 77, 90–95
(Reprinted in Material constitution: A reader, pp. 3–9, by M. Rea, Ed., 1997, Lanham: Rowman and
Littleﬁeld).
Zimmerman, D. (1995). Theories of masses and the problem of constitution. Philosophical Review,
104(1), 53–110.
Biological-mereological coincidence
325
123
Author's personal copy

