
Division Algebras: 
Octonions, 
Quatemions, 
Complex Numbers 
and the Algebraic Design of Physics 

Mathematics and Its Applications 
Managing Editor: 
M. HAZEWINKEL 
Centre for Mathematics anti Computer Science. Amsterdam. The NetherlantIs 
Volume290 

Division Algebras:
Octonions,
Quaternions,
Complex Numbers
and the
Algebraic Design
of Physics
by
Geoffrey M. Dixon
BrandeisUniversity, U.S.A.
Springer-Science+Business Media, B.\(

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Dlxon, Geoffrey M. 
Division algebras : octonlons, quaternions, co~plex numbers, and 
the algebralc design of physlcs I by Geoffrey M. Dixon. 
p. 
cm. --
(Mathematlcs and Its appllcations ; v. 290) 
Includes Index. 
1. Algebra. 
2. Mathematical physlcs. 
I. Tltle. 
II. Serles: 
Mathematlcs and Its applicatlons (Kluwer Academic Publlshers) ; v. 
290. 
OC20.7.A4D59 
1994 
512' .57--dc20 
94-13948 
ISBN 978-1-4419-4746-8 
ISBN 978-1-4757-2315-1 (eBook) 
DOI 10.1007/978-1-4757-2315-1 
Printed on acid-jree paper 
This printing is a digital duplication of the original edition. 
All Rights Reserved 
©, 1994 Springer Science+Business Media Dordrecht. Second Printing 2002. 
Originally published by Kluwer Academic Publishers in 1994 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1 st edition 1994 
No part of the material protected by this copyright notice may be reproduced or 
utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, 
including photocopying, recording or by any information storage and 
retrieval system, without wriUen permission from the copyright owner. 

Table of Contents 
I U nderpinnings 
1 
1.1' The Argument 
1 
Screed I 
1 
Screed 11 
3 
Screed 111 
7 
1.2 Clifford Aigebras 
11 
Clifford Algebra R3,1 
16 
Pauli Algebra 
18 
Clifford Algebra Rl,3 
19 
Clifford Algebra Rl,9 
20 
1.3 Conjugations and Spinors 
22 
Nilpotent Clifford Aigebras 
24 
Symplectic Nilpotent Clifford Aigebras 
25 
1.4 Aigebraic Fundamentals of the Standard Model 
29 
11 Division Aigebras Alone 
31 
2.1 Mostly Octonions 
31 
2.2 Adjoint Aigebras 
35 
2.3 Clifford Aigebras, Spinors 
40 
2.4 Resolving the Identity of 0 L 
43 
2.5 Lie Aigebras, Lie Groups, from 0 L 
46 
2.6 From Galois Fields to Division Aigebras: An Insight 
49 
111 Tensor Aigebras 
59 
3.1 Tensoring Two: Clifford Aigebras and Spinors 
59 
3.2 Tensoring Two: Spinor Inner Product 
61 
Link to Internal Symmetry 
64 

vi 
Table oE Contents 
3.3 Tensoring Three: Clifford Algebras and Spinors 
66 
3.4 Tensoring Three: Spinor Inner Produet 
68 
Resolving the Identity of T 
68 
The Traee of X 
70 
3.5 Derivation of the Standard Symmetry 
73 
3.6 SU(2) x SU(3) Multiplets, and U(I) 
78 
U(I) Charges 
81 
IV Connecting to Physics 
83 
4.1 Connecting to Geometry 
83 
Dimensional Reduction 
85 
4.2 Connecting to Particles 
90 
4.3 Parity Nonconservation 
94 
Righthanded Dirae Operator 
94 
Lefthanded Dirae Operator 
95 
Full Parity Violating Dirac Operator 
96 
4.4 Gauge Fields 
97 
4.5 Weak Mixing 
100 
4.6 Gauging SU(3) 
105 
V Spontaneous Symmetry Breaking 
109 
5.1 Sealar Fields 
109 
5.2 Scalar Lagrangians 
111 
5.3 Fermions and Scalars 
115 
VI 10 Dimensions 
117 
6.1 Fermion Lagrangian 
117 
Matter / Antimatter Mixing 
120 
6.2 More SU(3) 
122 
6.3 Freedom from Matter-Antimatter Mixing 
124 
6.4 (1,9)-Scalar Lagrangian 
126 
6.5 Charge Conjugation on TL(2) 
128 
6.6 Charge Conjugation on T 2 
130 
The Meaning of Majorana 
132 
6.7 10 Other Dimensions 
133 
The Clifford Algebra 
137 

Table oi Contents 
VII Doorways 
7.1 Moufang and Other Identities 
Two Identities 
The Moufang Identities 
7.2 Spheres and Lie Algebras 
S3 
S7 
Sphere Fibrations 
7.3 Triality 
Triality Representations of 80(8) 
The Tri in Triality 
Freudenthal's Principle of Triality 
7.4 LG2 and Tri 
LG2 Triality Triplet 
7.5 LG2 Triplets and the X-Produet 
LG: General Solution 
LG: and the X-Adjoint Algebra OLX 
VIII Corridors 
8.1 Magie Square 
8.2 The Ten MSKK, 
8.3 SpinorKKI Outer Produets 
C Outer Produet 
Q Outer Produets 
o Outer Produets 
8.4 LF4 ~ MSRO 
8.5 Jf and F4 
8.6 More Magie Square 
Appendix i. OL Aetions: Produet Rule eaea+1 = ea+5 
Appendix ii. OR Aetions: Produet Rule eaea+l = ea+5 
Appendix iii. 0 L Aetions: Product Rule eaea+l = ea+3 
Appendix iv. OR Actions: Product Rule eaea+1 = ea+3 
Bi bliography 
Index 
vii 
141 
141 
145 
148 
150 
151 
153 
159 
160 
164 
165 
169 
170 
171 
175 
180 
187 
191 
191 
192 
198 
198 
200 
202 
203 
208 
213 
217 
221 
225 
229 
233 
235 

Preface 
I don't know who Gigerenzer is, but he wrote something very clever that I 
saw quoted in a popular glossy magazine: 
"Evolution has tuned the way we think to frequencies of co-occurances, as 
with the hunter who remembers the area where he has had the most success 
killing game." 
This sanguine thought explains my obsession with the division algebras. 
Every effort I have ever made to connect them to physics - to the design 
of reality - has succeeded, with my expectations often surpassed. Doubtless 
this strong statement is colored by a selective memory, but the kind of game 
I sought, and still seek, seems to frowst about this particular watering hole in 
droves. I settled down there some years ago and have never feIt like Ieaving. 
This book is about the beasts I selected for attention (if you will, to ren-
der this metaphor politically correct, let's say I was a nature photographer), 
and the kind of tools I had to develop to get the kind of shots Iwanted (the 
tools that I found there were for my taste overly abstract and theoretical). 
Half of thisbook is about these tools, and some applications thereof that 
should demonstrate their power. The rest is devoted to a demonstration of 
the intimate connection between the mathematics of the division algebras 
and the Standard Model of quarks and leptons with U(l) x SU(2) x SU(3) 
gauge fields, and the connection of this model to lO-dimensional spacetime 
implied by the mathematics. 
If you understand what I have written to this point, then there is a good 
chance you have the background to understand this book. As to agreeing 
with its philosophical premises, you probably won't. I've never yet found two 
mathematicians or physicists who agree on the connection between mathe-
matics and physics, and its depth. However, such agreement is not required 
to appreciate the material presented. 
ix 

x 
Preface. 
I owe thanks to several people: to my wife, Suzanne Young of Harvard, 
whose work in archaeometry compelled me in some weird way to write the 
book; to my thesis advisor, Hugh Pendleton of Brandeis, for his advice, in-
terest, and forbearance; and to Rafal Ablamowicz, Martin Cederwall, Pertti 
Lounesto, Corinne Manogue, lan Porteous, and Tony Smith, all of whom at 
my instigation converged on Göteborg, Sweden, this last January (1994) to 
talk about division algebras, Clifford algebras, and physics. Each played a 
crucial role at this meeting, and the breadth and depth of their insights has 
greatly enriched this monograph. 
Geoffrey Dixon, Waltham, Massachusetts, 21 February 1994. 

1. Underpinnings. 
This is a book of ideas. Most of them arise out of my fascination with 
the division algebras and their tantalizing potential for a deep connection 
to physies. Part of the book is a development of ideas that compellingly 
demonstrate that there is a connection. The rest is mathematies, applica-
tions of techniques originally developed for physies, but here applied to some 
of the special algebraie and geometrie notions, like triality, associated with 
the division algebras. Inevitably many of these mathematieal ideas will be 
shown to be intimately linked to the design of our physieal reality. 
1.1. The Argument. 
Shortly after I began this monograph, in an attempt to crystallise the math-
ematieal ideas that had motivated, and continue to motivate, this work, I 
wrote aseries of essays, whieh 1 called Screeds, on Truth in physies, and 
how the mathematieal ideas presented here conform to my not ion of what 
that Truth should look like. The first two of these I call Gedanken Fantasies: 
SCREED I 
As you crack your eyes one morning your reason is assaulted by astrange 
sight. Over your bed, humming quietly, there floats a monitor, an ethereal, 
otherworldly screen on which is written a curious message: "I am the Screen 
of ultimate Truth. I am bulging with information and ask not hing better 
than to be allowed to impart it." In an attempt to establish the bonafides 
of the thing, or failing that, to drive it away that you may be about your 
business, you mumble a question. 
"What is the proof of Fermat's last theorem?" 
The screen fliekers slightly, goes blank, and then there, in its righthand 
1 

2 
CHAPTER 1 
margin, under the heading "A Proof', is a proof. 
So Fermat was wrong, you think. It does fit in the margin of a page. 
[Of course, subsequent mathematical his tory has rendered this piece of the 
screed outdated, but although now proven, or perhaps only nearly proven, 
there is still no proof that will fit in the margin of a page.] 
Excitement builds as you realize that you, a theoretical physicist, have 
before you the last word in labor-saving devices. What should you ask it? 
The screen flickers again, ;:tnd a new message appears: "You have but 
one hour more." No doubt it has many calls on its time. 
What should you ask? 
Should you ask how the uni verse came into being? But what if this 
question has no answer in the context of ultimate Truth? Perhaps it were 
better to ask why, than how. 
What abotit your own work on modelling physical reality? Do you sup-
pose it could tell you if you are at least on the right path? Do you want to 
know? 
Then a sobering thought occurs: there is no reason to believe you will 
understand the answers you are given. Do you believe sincerely that we 
have already at our disposal nearly an of the mathematical and physical 
concepts required to ans wer ultimate questions, and that, given time and 
some talented juggling of those concepts, a best fit to Truth may be found? 
What of the principles underlying the best fit to physical reality? What of 
the principles underlying the existence of physical reality? Do you believe in 
ultimate truths? Do you believe that evolution has given rise in the human 
cranium to an instrument capable of understanding? 
Not wishing to disturb the person snoring softly at your side, you lean 
carefully forward and whisper a question. 
Wh at question? 
The thought that the human brain, even taken collectively and over the 
entire past and future of the species, may ultimately prove inadequate to the 
task, occured to me as I wrote. Once I had argued the contrary view. But 
why should Nature produce a creature capable of stripping Nature bare? 
One needs first, perhaps, to believe that Nature has a plan, and that we 
fit prominently into it. And ultimately selfreferentiality may preclude any 
creature arising out of Nature from fuHy understanding the Nature whence it 
sterns. But long before we encounter problems of that sort, we shall doubt-
less become bogged down by arbitrary and prejudiced human nature; it i8 

UNDERPINNINGS 
3 
our lower brain that drives us to strive, and which will finally keep us from 
succeeding. 
The second Gedanken Fantasy follows from the first: 
seREED 11 
To airy not hing give a local habitation and a name. 
Uruk lay back in bed and stared at the ceiling. The Monitor of ultimate 
Truth had departed, and he little doubted he would not see it again. He had 
asked it but one question: why does the universe exist? The monitor had 
responded with a faint crackling, what sounded like a weary sigh, and then 
the screen had filled with symbols and words for which Uruk had no context. 
Ignoring his pleas to cease, it used up his hour with notions too abstruse for 
Uruk to comprehend even in part. At the end of an hour it stopped and a 
message appeared: 
"1 am of course not done, but my time is up. 1 am sorry if you feel 
cheated by what you saw, for 1 know you can not have understood even 
a small fraction of the answer. But I have been strangely remiss if I have 
left you with the impression that the answer is not deep. Let me leave you 
with a thought. Those theorists accounted by you as great were humans of 
intelligence, but the magnitude of their accomplishments sterns more from 
the paths they chose than it does from their mental powers. When all the 
world is mired even a single individual who finds a right path can accomplish 
seeming wonders. But right paths are harder to find than identify. If you find 
one you will experience a sudden lack of resistance, new realms of thought 
and application open rapidly and compellingly before you. To find one you 
must be guided by a right philosophy, by right principles, and luck. Without 
these, though all the greatest minds on earth should commit their energies 
to the search, no path from the mire will be found. Look about you and see 
if it is not so. Be prepared to unlearn when faced with discovery, to relearn 
in a new light." 
Uruk watched the ceiling - it wasn't doing anything - and thought. Had 
he harbored any notion that the ans wer to his question might be religious, 
he was now disabused. In no conventional sense could the monitor's answer 
be so construed. He had been looking at ... what? Mathematics? Perhaps, 
but not as he knew it. Metamathematics? But of what else could the answer 
have consisted? Perhaps he had imagined he might be told the universe ex-
isted because of quantum bubbles, or something of that sort, but that would 

4 
CHAPTER 1 
beg the question. Whence quantum? Whenee bubble? Whenee any of the 
form with which he was familiar? The answer had to He in mathematics, 
but not as done by mathematicians. The universe of Uruk's experience is 
very specifie. Conventional mathematics is full of generalizations, mostly of 
ideas drawn from the universe. The attention of physicists is focussed on 
the extant, with a hand in mathematics. Mathematicians keep a hand in 
physics, but gloved, lest their fingernails get dirty. One studies the tail, the 
other the trunk, of an elephant. Neither is even much aware of the vast body 
twixt the two ends that unifies them into a single science. In part, thought 
U ruk, it is the science of mathematical specialness. Is it an accident that of 
an the general notions of our mathematics, those we fin~ that help us best 
to deseribe our universe are so often in so me sense seleet? Could this be a 
guiding principle? Uruk shut his eyes and listened to the softly sussurating 
snoring of the sleeper sleeping soundly at his side. If custom reconciles us to 
everything, he thought, is custom binding us to the mire? Look about you 
said the monitor, and see if it is not so. 
In another unfinished and more aeerbic Screed, the Screen of ultimate 
Truth had more to say: 
"The form of reality, that you as theorists are slowly beginning to un-
derstand, was before you were. The Truth that underlies it was before you 
were, and was before the invention of your mathematical formalisms. When 
you are gone, and a time will come when all of you are gone, the Truth will 
continue to exist, without the benefit of your formalisms, your definitions, 
theorems, your rigor. 
"Do you believe that were I to explainas mueh of what I know as you 
could comprehend that you would recognize it, that you would say, oh yes, 
this is but an extension of what we have already done, and though the math-
ematics is broader, the principles deeper, I am not surprised? Do you think 
you have asked even a fraction of the questions you need to ask?" 
The Screeds were intended to be read by others (which they were), the 
thought being that by posing such questions as those above, the readers' 
preeonceptions might be softened, and their minds might be opened to what 
I subsequently had to say about the division algebras and physics. But we are 

UNDERPINNINGS 
5 
most easily persuaded by ideas we are on the verge of discovering ourselves, 
and I have discovered that among physicists there is nothing remotely like 
a philosophical consensus. Still, a summation of my beliefs, or faith, if you 
will, just might prove a useful preamble. 
27 million years ago there was a reality governed by the same mathe-
matical/physical Truth that governs ours. The Truth was and iso It does 
not change. What we call mathematics is founded on a formal system. The 
system is a tool adapted to the human brain that it might see into this Truth 
a little, to give Truth a comprehensible shape. The tool, the system, is an 
invention. Gödel's famous undecidability theorem, for example, says nothing 
about Truth. It pertains to the system, and to its shortcomings, An eye 
may not see all of itself. 
Truth is 'not an invention. With our mathematics we may discover parts 
of it, but in being undiscovered, even undiscoverable, Truth functions. 27 
million years ago there was matter composed of quarks, and the quarks were 
subject to an SU(3) symmetry. In a very real sense SU(3) existed and func-
tioned during all that vast his tory of the uni verse prior to our formulation 
of the notion of Lie group. 
More significantly, the symmetry of the quarks was not, and is not, 
SU(7), SO(39), Sp(12), or G2• It was and is SU(3). There are layers 
of Truth underneath this fact, which, in my opinion, force it to be so. They 
force observable space-time to have a (1,3)-pseudometric, and force isospin 
SU(2) to break. They force reality to take the fundamental form it has taken. 
In showing that the alteration of a given feature, or collection of features, of 
our physical reality would lead to an inconsistent theory, we have not nec-
essarily uncovered another layer of Truth. We should expect reality to be 
consistent, and any alteration of reality that leads to inconsistency to be im-
possible. Consistency, after all, is a concept that connects our mathematical 
system to reality. It is acheck, both of the system, and of our application of 
it. I personally would be surprised, confronted with the Screen of ultimate 
Truth, if in telling me what it knows, it needed our mathematical axioms 
and physical principles, and that consistency was other than a consequence 
of something far more profound. 
If one is to believe the literature most physicists think of mathematics 
as a collection of methods. Mathematics is accounted secondary to primary 
reality. It is laid on. Differential geometry applied to gravitation, algebraic 
topology [o,pplied to string theory, group representation theory applied to 
GUTs, are all mathematical methods. 
Again judging from the literature, mathematicians are no doser to think-

6 
CHAPTER 1 
ing that deep beneath their scienee, and physical s~ienee, there is a Truth 
to which both are profoundly tied. Mathematicians spend mueh time either 
in a selfreferential study of the system, or in using the system to generalize 
not ions spawned by reality. So, for example, geometers do not study merely 
3-spaee or 4-space, but n-spaee. Curiously they diseovered that the most 
rem ar kable of all such geometries has dimension = 4. This fascinating result 
leads one to wonder if this is related to the fact that our reality's geometry 
has 4 apparent dimensions. 
Conjeeture of this sort - stemming from the observation of mathematical 
seleetness in many aspeets of the design of reality as we pereeive it - arises 
out of the attraetive notion that this design may not be arbitrary. It is an 
admission of faith that there is an undiscovered prereality Truth governing 
the features of this design. 
While we may not be, perhaps never will or can be, in a position to 
formulate comprehensibly such a Truth, never-the-Iess faith in its existence 
can have a practical influenee on research. The association of truth to beauty 
is such an influence, but this association is evidently one-way. Not all that 
is considered beautiful is true. Attesting to this is the pie thora of often 
incompatible theoretical models each ofwhose adherents considers their baby 
beautiful. 
Adding to beauty the not ion of selectness results in a more usefully strin-
gent guiding principle. It is this eombination of qualities that so excites 
those theorists interested in applying the division algebras to physics. These 
algebras are eertainly select. There are only four real normed division al-
gebras: the reals, R (dim=l); the complexes, C (dim=2); the quaternions, 
Q (dim=4) (often denoted H, for Hamilton, their discoverer); and the oe-
tonions, ° (dim=8) (sometimes called the Cayley algebra). And there the 
sequence ends. There are at least two ways to extend the sequence (the 
so-called Cayley-Dickson prescription is one, and I outline a more natural 
prescription in ehapter 2), but none can result in more division algebras. 
There are only four. 
As it turns out, in being division algebras they are also extremely gen-
erative. The Lie algebras so( n; K) of nxn traceless, antihermitian matrices 
over the division algebra K, are just the sequenees so( n) (K =R), su( n) (K 
=C), and sp(n) (K = Q). (0 is nonassociative, so it can not generate a Lie 
algebra in this way.) The Lie algebras of the five exceptional groups, G2, 
F4 , Ek, k=6,7,8, are all associated with the oetonions (see ehapters 2, 7 and 
8). The three parallelizable spheres, Si, i=1,3,7, arise from C, Q, and 0, 
and the sphere fibrations, Sk ~ S2k+l ~ Sk+1 , for k=O,1,3,7, are intimately 

UNDERPINNINGS 
7 
linked to R, C, Q, and ° (see chapter 7). The list goes on. 
In physics most attention has been paid to their link to quantum me-
chanics, this interest principally spawned by the work of von Neumann and 
Jordan. Quantum meehanics must rest on a division algebra (C is the usual 
choiee). In addition, the algebraie underpinnings of modern particle/field 
theory ean be shown to arise from the division algebras. The Pauli alge-
bra is isomorphie to C 0 Q (whieh is just the complexification of Q, or 
the quaternionization of C). Via exponentiation the imaginary element of C 
generates U(l); those of Q generate SU(2); and the automorphism group of 
0, G2 , has an SU(3) subgroup that is the stability group of a fixed imag-
inary direction. U(1) X SU(2) X SU(3) is, of course, the famous standard 
symmetry of quark and lepton theory. 
This brings us to the final Screed, whieh will serve as a segue to wh at 
follows: 
SCREEDIII 
Lest too frequent repetition should blunt the foree of the rant, herewith 
the deed. 
The real normed division algebras are the reals, complexes, quaternions, 
and octonions (R, C, Q, 0). There are no others. For this reason there are 
no other classes of classieal Lie groups than orthogonal, unitary, symplectie, 
and exceptional, for they arise out of the division algebras. The Clifford al-
gebras of the real pseudo-orthogonal geometries are all isomorphie to matrix 
algebras over R, C, and Q (if we use the left-adjoint algebras, RL = R, 
CL = C, QL = Q, OL = R(8), then the octonions can be included as weH). 
Many (most?) of the special structures of analysis and topology are associ-
ated with the division algebras. The parallelizable spheres, for example, SI, 
S3, S7, arise direetly from exponentiation of the hypercomplex elements of 
C, Q, and 0, and they are parallelizable because C, Q, and 0 are division 
algebras. 
In mathematics the division algebras are fundamental and generative. 
Accepting that there is a subtle conjoining of mathematies and physies at 
depths beyond our present understanding, it would be impossibly strange 
did not the division algebras surface on the physies end of the pool equally 
fundamental and generative. Given that R®C0Q = RL0CL0QL (tensor 
product ) [Note: R is unnecessary in these tensor products over the reals. It 
was added only for emphasis.] is just the Pauli algebra in another guise; that 
RL ® CL 0 QL 0 OL (isomorphie to C(16)) is to the increasingly important 

8 
CHAPTER 1 
(1,9)-geometry what the Pauli algebra is to the (1,3)-geometry, and that 
the individual groups of the standard symmetry, U(1), SU(2), SU(3), have 
direct links to C, Q, and 0, it would require an effort of will to deny it is 
so. 
But an even stronger case has been made. Let T = R ® C ® Q ® 0, 
TL = RL ® CL ® QL ® 0L. T is the object or spinor space of TL. T is 64-
dimensional, so the T inner product has an SO(64) symmetry. This is not 
gaugable, but the mechanism of the inner product has an U(1) x SU(2) x 
SU(3) symmetry that iso With respect to this symmetry the elements of 
T transform precisely, down to the quantum numbers, as the direct sum of 
a family and antifamily of quark and lepton Pauli spinors. Moreover, this 
can happen in two ways, one precisely like left-chiral matter, right-chiral 
antirnatter, and the other like right-chiral matter, left-chiral antirnatter. So 
the mathematics accounts for the observed violation of parity. Moreover, 
spontaneous symmetry breaking can break U(1) x SU(2), while SU(3) is 
necessarily exact. This is a mathematical result. Moreover, a phase arises 
from the mathematics that weak mixes the quarks, not the leptons, mathe-
matics again in agreement with observation. 
The spinors naturally link to (1,9)-space-time, in that TL is the "Pauli" 
algebra of this geometry. With respect to this geometry leptons and quarks, 
even matter and antirnatter, are indistinguishable. With respect to the de-
rived U(1) x SU(2) x SU(3) symmetry the spinors ofTL (ie., T itself) split 
into matter and antirnatter, and into the individual quark-lepton, antiquark-
antilepton parts. The (anti)matter projector of the algebra reduces (1,9) to 
(1,3) (one for matter, one for antirnatter). 
All of the algebraic features of the standard model are derived from T and 
its adjoints (internal SU(2) is actually associated with QR, the right adjoint 
algebra of Qj the right adjoint algebra of ° is the same as the left), including 
quarks, leptons, the standard symmetry, parity nonconservation, symmetry 
breaking, quantum numbers, family structure, family replication, and weak 
mixing. These are associated via the identificatioll of the component spinors 
as of Pauli type with the appropriate (1,3)-space-time. And going beyond 
the experimentally confirmed, T and TL give rise to a link to a (1,9)-space-
time, and that link is precisely determined. 
To dismiss the exact correspondence of T-maths to observed reality as 
accidental or insignificant is wrong. Theories of which the standard model 
is a desired part but that are not based on T-maths are wrong. Extended 
theories, like string theories, that require a (1,9)space-time, but link it to the 
standard model in a way different from that derived in T-maths, are wrong. 

UNDERPINNINGS 
9 
They are wrong in the same way theories of the electron not based upon 
the Pauli and Dirac algebras and their spinors are wrong. 
Uruk lay back with a sigh. 
End of Screeds. 
The words at the end of this Screed were written with generous strength, 
but I wished to avoid the mistake of the fellow who was so afraid of making 
a bad impression, he made no impression at all. In particular I wish now to 
avoid leaving the reader with the idea that I consider the division algebras 
to be a mathematical method, interchangeable with other methods, like the 
theories of matrix Clifford algebras and associated spinors, and Lie groups 
and associated multiplets and representations, by means of which the al-
gebraic features of the standard model may be easily represented. Such a 
representation is sewn together by arbitrariness. There are infinitely many 
Clifford algebras and Lie groups, and having picked from these, there are 
infinitely many multiplets and representations. And when one has chosen a 
phenomenologically suitable collection, one has shot one's bolt. Laying on 
the methods of quantum field theory can give rise, of course, to many testable 
results, but in a broader sense the theory is a elosed context with few or no 
pointers to deeper Truth. Even worse, like many scientific paradigms, this 
one is an ideological cage. It is filled with an infinite number of blocks with 
which to play, and amidst these blocks have been discovered some golden 
nuggets, but the rush that inevitably resulted from this discovery stranded 
a generation amidst boulders of basalt. 
The division algebras not only represent the standard model, they come 
very elose to deriving it. All the multiplets and algebra representations, 
even the allowable partiele transitions, are fixed by the mathematics. What 
I shall present in this monograph is a development of this mathematics. The 
algebraic features of the standard model drop out en route. This is not an 
accidentj this is a layer of Truth, and a doorway to deeper layers. 
Finally, the physical consequences of the mathematics do not stop with 
the standard model. As I shall demonstrate, this theory beautifully con-
nects the standard model to (1,9)-space-time. But waiting in the wings are 
all the little explored connections to those special topological and analytical 
structures associated with the division algebras. This is a seed waiting to 
germinatej a vast cavern waiting to be explored. Indeed, I do not wish to 
give the impression that I believe the division algebras to be a universal cure 

10 
CHAPTER 1 
for all that aHs uso Our symbolic mathematics is a tool, the microscope with 
which we attempt to see wh at we can not directly touch, and from which 
we are in all likelihood precluded from touching. But the Truth of Reality 
gives every indication of being accreted about the most select and beautiful 
of mathematical ideas, and the division algebras are just apart of the web 
of these. 
This monograph begins in ehapter 2 with a development of general divi-
sion algebra theory with the focus on the octonions. The eyclic multipliea-
tion tables I employ are not new, but they are also not eommon in physical 
applications. They make ealculations eonsiderably easier than the eonven-
tional multiplieation tables, whieh rely on the Cayley-Diekson proeess, which 
I will not cover. In section 2.6 I present a mathematical motivation for the 
approach which I hope will be viewed as compelling. 
Heavily stressed throughout this monograph is the notion that with re-
speet to the left, right, or two-sided adjoint actions of a division algebra 
on itself, the adjoint algebras behave like Clifford algebras, and the division 
algebras themselves, which are the objeets of the adjoint actions, behave like 
spinor spaees. This idea is not new, but I am unaware of any treatment of 
the matter that makes the relation as obvious as that developed here. 
In chapter 3 tensor products of the division algebras and their adjoints 
are considered, and inner products on the tensored division algebras (the 
spinor spaees) are developed. In the ease of the tensor product of C, Q, and 
0, there is associated with this inner produet a symmetry from which the 
standard symmetry of elementary particle theory is drawn. 
In chapters 4 and 5 the mathematies developed in ehapters 2 and 3 is 
applied to physics in the obvious way, as outlined already in this section. 
This includes identifying the quark and lepton fields, developing gauge fields 
from the internal symmetry, weak mixing, and the identification of the Higgs 
fields, whose action on the fermion fields is heavily restricted by the mathe-
maties. These are used to spontaneously break the symmetry. 
In chapter 6 it is shown that this entire theory can be seen to result from 
a theory of fermions based on a lO-dimensional space. With respect to this 
lO-dimensional space quarks and leptons, even matter and antirnatter, are 
subsumed into one big hyperfield in which all are indistinguishable. Only 
by restricting the dependence on the extra six dimensions of the various 
identifiable quark and lepton bits of the hyperfield (these extra dimensions 
carry SU(3) eh arges ) does the theory dimensionally reduce to a more familiar 
form. The further eonsequenees of this lO-dimensional theory are in the 

UNDERPINNINGS 
11 
developmental stage. 
At the end of chapter 6 I take a brief look at the link of the division 
algebras to string theory, especially focussing on applications of the octonions 
to string theory on 10-dimensional spacetime. 
In chapter 7 some of the mathematical ideas used in the construction 
of the physical application of chapters 3 through 6 are applied to other 
problems, in particular to the parallelizable spheres, the Moufang identities, 
and 80(8) triality. 
Chapter 8 continues the furt her application of the mathematics, begin-
ning with an unconventional development ofthe Lie algebras ofthe Freudenthal-
Tits Magic Square. The commutation relations of one of these algebras, the 
exceptional F4 , are explicitly developed as an example. 
Several appendices are inc1uded, the use of which can make algebraic 
calculations easier. 
In the remainder of this chapter some background material is developed, 
beginning with a review of Clifford algebra theory. 
1.2. Clifford Aigebras. 
To any m ::; n linearly independent vectors in an n-dimensional Euclidean 
space there corresponds an antisymmetric m-tensor (m-form) representing 
the oriented m-volume of the m-parallelopiped determined by the vectors. 
This m-form can be constructed via an antisymmetrie "outer" product of 
the vectors. 
Of equal importance is the symmetrie "inner" product of vectors from 
which a scalar norm can be constructed. 
Clifford algebras are associative algebras with identity that embody these 
outer and inner products in an elegant algebraic formalism [1]. Via the Dirac 
algebra, the foundation of the Dirac equation, and also the complexified 
Clifford algebra of (1,3 )-spacetime (with pseudo-orthogonal metric signature 
{+ - - - }), the importance of Clifford algebras to physics has been cemented 
and solidified. 
The (mtiversal) Clifford algebra of (p,q)-spacetime (RP,q), denoted Rp,q, 
is generated by n = p + q linearly independent elements, T GO 
Q = 1, ... , n, 
satisfying 
(1.1) 

12 
CHAPTER 1 
where 
TJCiß = 0, a f:. ß, 
TJCiCi = 1, 1 :::; a :::; p, 
TJCiCi = -1, p + 1 :::; a :::; p + q 
(E = identity). Therefore, if x = Ea xai Ci and y = Ea yai Ci are algebraic 
representations of RP,q vectors in Rp,q, then 
(1.2) 
where ECiß XCiTJCißyß is the Rp,q inner product ofthe vectors with components 
{XCi} and {yCi}. 
The elements i Ci are a basis for the 1-vector subset of Rp,q (when p=l 
the values of the index a will be taken from {O, 1, ... , n - I}). The 2-vector 
subset is spanned by the ( ~ ) = 2!(:~2)! distinct 
If x and y are defined as above, then 
~(xy-yx) 
~ ECiß(xCiyßiCiiß - yßxCiißia) 
ECiß xCiyßi Ciß 
ECiß ~(XCiyß - yCixß)iCiß 
(1.3) 
(1.4) 
where !(xCiyß - yCiXß) in the (p = n, q = 0) or (p = 0, q = n) case are the 
components of the oriented 2-form representing the area (2-volume) of the 
parallelogram determined by the two vectors. 
Likewise, a basis for the space of general m-vectors consists of the ( ; ) 
distinct elements of the form 
(1.5) 
where al, a2, ... , a m , are distinct (in which case this element is antisymmetric 
in the indices). 
A "universal" Clifford algebra satisfies 
(1.6) 

UNDERPINNINGS 
13 
This element is called the pseudoscalar of the Clifford algebra. Unless oth-
erwise specified the term Clifford algebra will mean universal Clifford al-
gebra. Only certain (p,q)-spacetimes admit non universal Clifford algebras. 
Some of these will appear in chapter 8. Universal Clifford algebras are 2n _ 
dimensional, while the nonuniversal are 2n - 1-dimensional. 
The subspace of 2-ve.ctors of Rp,q is easily shown to elose under com-
mutation, and in this case it is isomorphie to the Lie algebra so(p, q). In 
particular, the set of all 
U = exp«(JaßYaß) 
form a Lie group under multiplication. If x = xcvya , then the action 
(1. 7) 
results in an SO(p, q) rotation on th~ components {XCV} of x, and this rotation 
leaves the bilinear form 1.2 invariant. 
This same element U, if acting on the spinor space of Rp,q (a column 
vector space upon which a matrix representation of Rp,q naturally acts; 
the concept is further developed on the following pages) is an element of 
Spin(p, q), which defines what this means. Spin(p, q) is a double covering 
of SO(p,q). 
There is a well-known table of isomorphisms between the Clifford alge-
bras Rp,q and matrix algebras over R, C, or Q. 1'11 present the table in a 
slightly unconventional way, splitting it into two tables, one for p + q = n 
even, and one for p + q = n odd. 

14 
CHAPTER 1 
Clifford Algebras: n even 
n= 
0 
2 
4 
6 
8 
10 
p-q 
10 
R(32) 
8 
R(I6) R(32) 
6 
Q(4) 
Q(8) 
Q(I6) 
4 
Q(2) 
Q(4) 
Q(8) 
Q(16) 
2 
R(2) 
R(4) 
R(8) 
R(I6)' R(32) 
0 
R 
R(2) 
R(4) 
R(8) 
R(I6) R(32) 
-2 
Q 
Q(2) 
Q(4) 
Q(8) 
Q(16) 
-4 
Q(2) 
Q(4) 
Q(8) 
Q(16) 
-6 
R(8) R(i6) R(32) 
-8 
R(i6) R(32) 
-10 
Q(16) 
There are some obvious patterns. In particular note the 
... RRQQRRQQ ... 
pattern of the columns, and along the constant p and constant q diagonals 
in the n even table. 

UNDERPINNINGS 
15 
Clifford Algebras: n odd 
n= 
1 
3 
5 
7 
9 
11 
p-q 
11 
C(32) 
9 
2R(16) 
2R(32) 
7 
C(8) 
C(16) 
C(32) 
5 
2Q(2) 
2Q(4) 
2Q(8) 
2Q(16) 
3 
C(2) 
C(4) 
C(8) 
C(16) 
C(32) 
1 
2R 2R(2) 2R(4) 
2R(8) 
2R(16) 
2R(32) 
-1 
C 
C(2) 
C(4) 
C(8) 
C(16) 
C(32) 
-3 
2Q 
2Q(2) 
2Q(4) 
2Q(8) 
2Q(16) 
-5 
C(4) 
C(8) 
C(16) 
C(32) 
-7 
2R(8) 
2R(16) 
2R(32) 
-9 
C(16) 
C(32) 
-11 
2Q(16) 
The pattern across the rows is clear in both tables. In the second table, 
for example, 2R(2) is the algebra of matrices of the form 
[~ ~ l, 
(1.8) 
where X, Y E R(2), and 0 is the 2 X 2 zero matrix. 

16 
CHAPTER 1 
CLIFFORD ALGEBRA R3,1 
Of particular interest to physicists, and to the application to be developed 
in chapters 3 to 6, are the spacetimes R 1,3 and R 3,1, and R 1,9 and R 9,1. 
Consider first the Clifford algebra 
R3,1 ~ R(4). 
(1.9) 
We can represent the generators by the matrices 
[1 .. ] 
[,,1,] 
. 
1 
. 
l' _. 
1 
-1 
. 
' 
2 -
1 
.' 
-1 
. 1 
(1.10) 
[: -1 -1 1 
T, = [~1 -1 ; 1 
In this representation 
l' 1234 = [
. 
. 
-1 .] 
. 
. 
1 
1 
. 
' 
-1 
(1.11) 
The elements of R 3,1 can be viewed as endomorphisms of the real vector 
space of 4 X 1 matrices, which are in this context called the spinors of the 
Clifford algebra. Nature, however, seems unimpressed with this scheme, 
prefering instead the complexification of the Clifford algebra and its spinors. 
In particular, the Dirac algebra, upon which the physlcS of fermions is based, 
is the complexification of R 3,1, and its spinors are 4 x lover C (Dirac 
spinors), instead of 4 x 1 over R (Majorana spinors). The addition of the 
complex unit i allows the construction of the following more interesting and 
physically more relevant representation of the generators of R3,1, which we 

UNDERPINNINGS 
17 
now denote by the more conventional lcx, a = 1,2,3,4: 
11 ~ [; 1 1 1 12 ~ [; -i ; ~1 
(1.12) 
13 ~ [i -I 1 ~I], 1. ~ [ -I -I 1 J 
where now all the 10 are 2 X 2 block off-diagonal, and the laß, which generate 
the Lorentz group SO(3, 1), are block diagonal, as is the pseudoscalar 
(1.13) 
Prom this we define 
IS = h1234 = [ ~. i -·1 -:.1]. 
(1.14) 
Cis anticommutes with 10' a = 1,2,3,4, and it is not an element of R 3,t, 
the real Clifford algebra. Hence the set {'Yl, 12, 13, 14, IS} can be viewed as 
a basis for the 1-vector subspace of R 4,1 ~ C( 4).) Nature employs IS in the 
following way. Let 'P ~ [ ~ ] be a Dirac spinor, and define 
'Pt ~ ~(I h)'P ~ [ T ] , 
and 'P, ~ ~(1-1S)'P ~ [ i: ] . ( 1.15) 
These are the so-called left and right (chiral) Weyl spinors of which the Dirac 
spinor tp is composed, and the !(1 ± IS) are the chiral projection operators. 

18 
CHAPTER 1 
Note that because the generators of the Lorentz group are block diagonal, 
Lorentz rotations map the spaces of left/right Weyl spinors to themselves. 
Note also that without the complex unit i, ,5 is not constructable. 
Weyl spinors, instead of Dirac spinors, are the indecomposible bits upon 
whieh fermion physies is based. For example, the left and right chiral parts 
of the electron's Dirac spinor interact differently with the gauge fields aris-
ing from the electroweak gauge symmetry, U(l) x SU(2). In partieular, 
SU(2) gauge fields arise as though the lefthanded electron and its associated 
lefthanded neutrino are an SU(2) doublet, while the righthanded electron 
interacts as though a singlet. Its associated righthanded neutrino is often as-
sumed not to exist at all. So although mathematieally the block off-diagonal 
representation of the ,-matriees in 1.12 is not singled out, a representation 
of this sort is singled out by the physics. Because the left and right chiral 
projections of spinor fields corresponding to real fermionic particles interact 
differently with some gauge bosons, nature requires the complexification of 
the R 3,1 Clifford algebra, for without the complex unit i, the chiral projec-
tors ~(1 + /5) can not be constructed. 
PAULI ALGEBRA 
More interestingly, we see that the Dirac algebra is not so much 4 x 4 
over C as.it is 2 X 2 over P=Pauli algebra; that P more properly constitutes 
the parts of wruch the Dirac algebra is composed. 
The Pauli algebra 
(1.16) 
and its basis of generating I-vectors is conventionally represented by 
(1.17) 
Let 
(1.18) 
then 
" = [ 0 
J 
aj aj ]. 
3 
[0 
ao ] 
o ,] = 1,2, ,'4 = -ao 
0 
. 
(1.19) 
The linear subspace ofP with basis {ao, iaj,j = 1,2,3} is a subalgebra of 
P isomorphie to the quaternion algebra Q 
(ao -+ 1, iaj -+ -qj,j = 1,2,3.) 

UNDERPINNINGS 
19 
Hence, 
(1.20) 
CLIFFORD ALGEBRA R1,3 
The Clifford algebra R 1,3 ~ Q(2), and we may represent the 1-vector 
basis by 
qj l' 2 
'V' 
[1 0 1 
o ,)=1, ,3, ~4= 0 -1 
' 
(1.21 ) 
so that 
(1.22) 
This algebra can be viewed as an algebra of endomorphisms on the space 
of 2 X 1 matrices over Q, which is an unconventional spinor space for R 1,3, 
being neither real nor complex. It is interesting in that the algebra of left 
actions of Q(2) on this spinor space is incomplete, and is only completed by 
induding right actions of Q on the space of column spinors. This algebra 
of right actions commutes with the larger algebra of left actions, and is in 
that sense "internaI" with respect to the algebra of left actions, which, in 
representing the Clifford algebra of the relevant Minkowski geometry, are 
considered "external" . In that the set of unit quaternions is the Lie group 
SU(2), which in the context just outlined could be viewed as an internal 
symmetry, it is curious that this representation of R 1,3 has never been em-
pIoyed (although something similar will be empIoyed in this monograph). 
In complexifying R 1,3 we are again able to define a chiral projection 
operator. In particular redefine in this new context, 
[ 0 1] 
[0 
-iqj 1 . 
10 = 
1 0 "j = 
iqj 
0 
,) = 1,2,3, 
(1.23) 
where now we use the index 0 to denote the time direction. Given this basis, 
(1.24) 

20 
CHAPTER 1 
and from this we define 
. 
[1 0 1 
/5 = Z/0123 = 0 -1 
. 
(1.25) 
As before, /5 together with the /P.' J.l = 0,1,2,3, form a 1-vector basis for a 
larger Clifford algebra, in this case R 2,3. 
This is an unconventional representation still, involving as it does the 
quaternions. The more conventional representation is 
[ 0 0'0] 
[0 
O'j l' 
3 
/0 = 
0"0 
0 
,/j = 
-O'j 
0 
,} = 1,2, . 
(1.26) 
This has the conventionally perceived advantage that its spinor space is the 
space of 4 x 1 complex column matriees, while the spinor space of the repre-
sentation 1.23 is the space of 2 x 1 column matrices over C®Q. That the rep-
resentation 1.23 has an associated inherent intern al symmetry U(1) x 8U(2) 
is largely unrecognized, but a detailed study ofthis will follow in subsequent 
chapters. 
CLIFFORD ALGEBRA R 1,9 
Both R 1,9 and Rg,l are isomorphie to R(32), and they can be similarly 
analysed. We will develop a representation of R 1,9. 
Let 
(= [~ ~], a = [~ ~1 1 ' 
ß = [~ ~ 1 ,w = [~1 ~ 1 
be a basis for R(2). Define, for example, in R(4), 
(1.27) 
(1.28) 
the tensor product of ß and a, where the first matrix, ß, determines the 
block structure, and the second, a, what goes in the blocks. Therefore, 
(1.29) 

UNDERPINNINGS 
21 
This easily generalizes to tensor products of arbitrary length, and in this 
manner we can construct anyelement of any R(2k ). In particular, define in 
R(32), 
10 = ß.f.f.f.f 
11 = W.a.f.f.f 
12 = w·ß·ß·ß.ß 
13 = w·ß·a.a.a 
14 = w·ß·f..a.ß 
(1.30) 
15 = w·ß·ß·f.a 
16 = w·ß·a·ß·f 
17 = w.w.w.a.ß 
18 = w.w.ß·w.a. 
19 = w.w.a·ß.w 
where for the sake of simplicity I've replaced the symbol ® with a dot. These 
10 elements of R(32) satisfy 
1 
"2(1k 11 + 111k) = "lklf32, 
(1.31) 
where {"lkl} = diag( + - - - - - - - --), and f32 is the 32 x 32 identity 
matrix. Furthermore, the pseudoscalar 
[ f16 
0 1 
101 1 ••. 1 9 = ±a.f.f.f.f = ± 
0 
-f.16 
(1.32) 
(I leave it to the reader to work out the sign). Clearly then the 1k, k=0, ... ,9, 
are I-vector generators of the Clifford algebra R 1,9' (Note: Rg,l is easily 
constructable by changing the lead ß in 10 to w, and the lead w's in 1k, 
k=I, ... ,9, to ß's.) 
Note that in this case the chiral projectors 
1 ( 
[f16 0] 
"2 f.f.f.f.f ± a.f.f..f.f.) = 
0 
0 
and 
(1.33) 

22 
CHAPTER 1 
are elements of the Clifford algebra R 1,9. Therefore it is not necessary to 
complexify the Clifford algebra and its spinors to project Weyl spinors. So 
R 1,9 spinors can be simultaneously Majorana and Weyl. In the present 
representation a Majorana spinor would be a 32 X 1 real column, and a Ma-
joranajWeyl spinor would be all zero in the first or last 16 positions. 
1.3. Conjugations and Spinors. 
There is a pair of natural (product reversing) conjugations on any Clifford 
algebra [1] determined by their action on the 1-vector generators: 
(1.34) 
and 
(1.35) 
In both cases, because these maps are antiautomorphic, 
(1.36) 
In general, 
1 - vector 
XII = +x 
XV =-x 
2 - vector 
XII = -x 
XV =-x 
3 - vector 
XII = -x 
XV = +x 
4 - vector 
XII = +x 
XV = +x 
5 - vector 
XII = +x 
XV =-x 
6 - vector 
XII = -x xV =-x 
7 - vector 
XII = -x 
XV = +x 
(1.37) 
8 - vector 
XII = +x 
XV = +x 
9 - vector 
XII = +x 
XV =-x 
10 - vector 
XII = -x 
XV =-x 
11 - vector 
XII = -x 
XV = +x 
12 - vector 
XII = +x 
XV = +x 
In certain cases these conjugations correspond to ordinary Hermitian 

UNDERPINNINGS 
23 
conjugation, denotedx t: 
x" = xt : xE Rn,a, n = 1,2,3, ... ; 
( 1.38) 
Xv = xt .. 
xE R a,n, n = 1,2,3, .... 
In all other cases the conjugations are more difficult to define. 
In the representations 1.19 of R 3,1, and 1.23,26 of R 1,3, these conjuga-
tions are defined the same for each. Given x, y, u, v E C(2) (for the 1.19 and 
1.26 cases), or (equivalently) x,y,u,v E C0Q (for the 1.23 case), we define 
(1.39) 
and 
(1.40) 
These conjugations are generalizable to within a sign or phase to the 
spinors of the complexifications of R 3,1, and R 1,3. In particular, let 
and 
w = [ ~~ 1 
E c4, 
a Dirac spinor for the Dirac algebra, C 0 R 1,3, as represented in 1.26. Then 
we define 
(1.41) 
and 
WV = [ ~: r 
= [# -1/Jt], (WV)V = -Wo 
(1.42) 
The former I shall call the spinor conjugate associated with the Clifford 
algebra. Note that in both cases, 
(1.43) 

24 
CHAPTER 1 
(1.44) 
Also note that in the Dirac algebra case lJIA is usually denoted q, ,and 
(1.45) 
NILPOTENT CLIFFORD ALGEBRAS 
The reader is warned that what follows is an unconventional approach 
to Clifford algebra theory and to the best of my knowledge it has not found 
its way into the mainstream literat ure on physieal model building [2][3][4]. 
It will also play no role in what folIows, although the attentive reader will 
see how it might. 
Define 
(1.46) 
This is wh at I refer to as the nilpotent Clifford algebra of the pseudo-
orthogonal space RP,q. Note that unlike the ordinary Clifford algebra case, 
where Rp,q and Rq,p are seldom isomorphie, Np,q is always isomorphie to 
Nq,p' For example, 
N1,3 ~ N3,l ~ C(4), 
the Dirac algebra for (1,3)-spacetime. 
Let 
(1.47) 
(1.48) 
be a 1-vector basis for Rp+1,q, where n = p + q. The Y':VI a = 1, ... , n are 
assumed to satisfy 1.1, while 
y2 = 1, 
(1.49) 
YY cx + Y cx Y = O. 
(Note that the collection of 1-vectors 1.48, given the commutator product, 
generates the conformal Lie algebra so(p + 1, q + 1).) 
Define 
(1.50) 
whieh are orthogonal projection operators (Jl±JlT = 0), and define 
(1.51 ) 

UNDERPINNINGS 
25 
Because of 1.49 these elements are nilpotent. In fact, for all (x, ß E {I, ... , n}, 
T;T~ = P-± TO/JL± Tß = JL±JL~ TO/ Tß = O. 
(In the (1,3)-case, p-± are the chiral projectors, so nilpotent Clifford algebras 
have chirality buHt in.) Also, if (x, ß, v E {I, ... , n}, then 
T;T;T~+l~l;T; = JL±(TO/lvTß+TßTvTO/) 
2T;1Jvß + 2T~1JvO/ -
21~1JO/ß' 
We shall write these results in the following ways: 
and 
SYMPLECTIC NILPOTENT CLIFFORD ALGEBRA 
(1.52) 
(1.53) 
The equations 1.52 and 1.53 are sufficient to completely determine Np,q' 
They are presented in what must seem a peculiar way to allow for a gener-
alization to the symplectic (or alternating) case, as opposed to the pseudo-
orthogonal. 
In particular, replace T; by S;, i = 1,2, so n = 2, and replace 1JO/ß by 
Eij, such that 
E12 = -E21 = 1; EU = E22 = O. 
In this case the equations 1.52,53 reduce to 
(1.54) 
and 
st S; st + st S; st = 2EijSt + 2EkjSt, 
(1.55) 
s; sj Sk + Sk sj Si- = 2S; Ejk + 2Sk Ej;. 

26 
CHAPTER 1 
Therefore, 
st s:; st = 2St; SI Si SI = -2S1; 
(1.56) 
st s:; Si + si s:; st = 2Si; SI Si s:; + s:; si SI = -2S:;; 
U sing the equations 1.54,56 one can show that the algebra generated by 
the Sr is isomorphie to the 18-dimensional matrix algebra 2R(3). We can 
represent the generators as 
S+ -
1 -
S+ -
2 -
[j.l 
G.l 
. . 1 
. . -1 
. . . 
.. 
. 
[J 
.. ' 
w·· 
. . . 
. . . 
-1 1 . 
1 1 . 
SI = 
[J.. 
w·· 
. . . 
. .. 
-1 1 . 
1 1 . 
U·-1
' 
U·-
1 
.. -1 
.. 
1 
.. . 
.. 
. 
(1.57) 
In the pseudo-orthogonal case, the elements la = lt + l~ are ordinary 
Clifford algebra I-vectors, and the set of all commutators 
1 
laß = "2[la, lßl 

UNDERPINNINGS 
27 
form a basis for so(p, q), which generates the invariance group ofthe bilinear 
form associated with 17Ciß. 
In the symplectie case we define 
ISi = st+S;, i= 1,2,1 
(1.58) 
and we replace commutators with anticommutators: 
(no entry, or a dot entry, signifies a zero component). These matriees consti-
tute a basis for sp(2), whieh generates the invariance group of the alternating 
bilinear form associated with (ij. Together with the Si, i = 1,2, and given 
the appropriate mix of commutator and anticommutator products, these five 
elements constitute a basis for the Lie superalgebra osp(1, 2) [5]. 
Clearly this approach to the idea of geometrie algebra is rieher than the 
conventional one. To this point, however, little has been done to apply these 
symplectie nilpotent Clifford algebras, nor is much known about their gen-
eral mathematical properties. They are presented here just as an idea. 

28 
CHAPTER 1 
A final word about Clifford algebras in general: they are, like Lie groups, 
profligate. There are too many ofthem, an infinite number ofboth Lie groups 
and Clifford algebras that are physieally irrelevant, not apart of the design 
of reality. This is and always was the problem with GUT theories based on 
a unifying large Lie group, and it is and always will be the problem with 
unification theories based on large Clifford algebras .. In both cases it is the 
principal of the educated guess that leads to the choiee of unifying algebraic 
object. This is unsatisfactory. Nature can not be so aruitrarily ugly. The 
first three division algebras, R, C, and Q, are clearly intimately linked to 
Clifford algebras in general, and it will be demonstrated in chapter 2 that 
the octonions, despite their nonassociativity, give rise to Clifford algebras 
as weH (the algebra of left adjoint actions of 0 on 0 is isomorphie to the 
associative algebra R(8), so it could be incorporated into the Clifford algebra 
tables listed in this section (for that matter, in the isomorphisms listed that 
involve Q it should be specified that it is Q's left adjoint algebra that is 
being used, for it is this that acts on the column spinor space)). As will 
be pointed out in chapter 6 the sequence of division algebras R, C, Q, and 
o is linked to the sequence of Clifford algebras of spacetimes of dimension 
3,4,6, and 10, critieal dimensions for classieal string theory. This monograph, 
however, is not about string theory, and it is not this link of the division 
algebras to the critieal dimensions of string theory that gave birth to my 
interest in these algebras. Instead it was the isomorphism P ~ C ® Q, 
linking the Pauli algebra of 4-dimensional spacetime to the tensor product 
of the first two hypercomplex division algebras, and the fact that the use 
of C ® Q instead of P in building the Dirac algebra leads automatieally to 
the consideration of a U(l) x SU(2) internat symmetry. Tensoring C ® Q 
with 0 connects to 10-dimensional spacetime in the same way, and leads 
to the inclusion of an SU(3) internal symmetry and the reduction of 10-
dimensional spacetime to 4-dimensional [6]. In my opinion these are the 
cleanest and clearest links of the division algebras to the design of physieal 
reality. This is not to say that the string theory links [7][8], or, for that 
matter, the quantum mechanieallinks via Jordan algebras [9], are wrong or 
irrelevant, just that their ultimate relevance has not been demonstrated. It 
is my personal hope, in that these different approaches to application are 
not inherently incompatible, that eventually they may combine, and their 
union be more universally unifying than any is individuaHy. 

UNDERPINNINGS 
29 
1.4. Aigebraic Fundamentals ofthe Standard Model. 
Our observable spacetime has 1 time and 3 space dimensions. However, in-
stead of housing physical fermion fields in the spinor spaces of either the 
Clifford algebra R 1,3 or R3,b Nature requires a complexification ofthe Clif-
ford algebra, 
C ® R 1,3 ~ C ® R3,1 ~ C(4), 
and She exploits Dirac spinor fields involving 4 complex components. How-
ever, these are not the fundamental spinors of physics, for it is observed that 
the two Weyl spinors of which a Dirac spinor is composed behave differently 
in the real world. 
Each fundamental fermion (leptons and quarks) is representable by a 
pair of complex 2 component Weyl spinor fields (left and right Chiral pro-
jections). [Righthanded neutrino fields are thought by some not to exist in 
Nature, as they evidently can have no interactions save for gravitational. 
However, no evidence for their absence exists.] 
The internal gauge symmetry from which vector boson gauge fields arise 
has been discovered to be 
U(1) X SU(2) x SU(3), 
the so-called standard symmetry. Lepton and quark fields interact with each 
other via these 1 + 3 + 8 = 12 gauge fields. The nature of each fermion field 
is determined by its U(1) X SU(2) X SU(3) charges, which in turn determine 
how the fermions will interact with the gauge bosons of the theory. 
The standard symmetry is put into the theory by hand, as are the vari-
ous leptoquark charges. 
Lepton and quark fields are observed to fall into either SU(2) singlets or 
SU(2) doublets. Lefthanded Weyl spinor fields fall into doublets; righthanded 
Weyl spinor fields fall into singlets. Hence SU(2) is said to be chiral; it vio-
lates parjty. 
Leptons fall into SU(3) singlets, and quarks into SU(3) triplets. This 
js independent of handedness, so SU(3) js said to be nonchiral; it conserves 
parity. 

30 
CHAPTER 1 
The leptoquark multiplet structure associated with SU(2) and SU(3) is 
put into the theory by hand, as is the chiral nature of SU(2). 
An exact symmetry will mix the fields of a multiplet while preserving 
masses. Not all of the groups of the standard symmetry are observed to be 
exact. SU(3) is exact (hence its gauge fields, the gluons, are massless), as is 
a U(1) C U(1) X SU(2) giving rise to the massless photon, the gauge field of 
electromagnetism. The rest of U(1) X SU(2) is broken, and the correspond-
ing gauge fields (W±, ZO) are massive. Scalar fields are introduced that are 
designed to break most of U(1) X SU(2), but leave a U(1) x SU(3) symme-
try exact. This process, called spontaneous symmetry breaking, accounts 
for the mass differences observed between the charge (-1) and charge (0) 
leptons, and between the charge (-1/3) and (2/3) quarks. Because SU(3) 
is exact, the three "colors" of quarks in an SU(3) triplet have the same mass. 
Finally, this pattern of fermion multiplets, which accounts at lowest level 
for the electron and its neutrino, the up-quark and down-quark (3 colors 
eachj a total of 2(1 + 3) = 8 fermion fields called a family), is replicated at 
least twice more. Each of these additional families is distinguished from the 
first, and from each other, only in the masses of its fields. For example, each 
of the masses of the particles in the second family, the muon and its neutrino, 
the strange-quark and charm-quark, is more massive than the corresponding 
fields of the electron family. 
The explication of these algebraic features via the mathematics of the 
division algebras is a central goal of the first half of this monograph. 

2. Division Algebras Alone. 
2.1. Mostly Octonions. 
The octonion algebra, 0, is generally developed as an extension of the 
quaternion algebra, Q. Let % i=1,2,3, be a conventional basis for the hyper-
complex quaternions. These elements associate, anticommute, and satisfy 
q; = -1. Together with the cyclic multiplication rule 
(2.1) 
i=1, ... ,3, indices modulo 3, from 1 to 3, this completely determines the mul-
tiplication table for Q. 
Relabel these quaternion units ei, i=1,2,3, and introduce a new unit, e7, 
anticommuting with each of the ei, which satisfies e~ = -1. Define three 
more units: 
(2.2) 
Let 0 be the real algebra (with identity) generated from the ea a=1, ... ,7, 
such that 
{ql ~ ea , q2 ~ eb, q3 ~ ec} 
defines an injection of Q into 0 for 
(a,b,c)= (1,2,3),(1,7,4),(2, 7,5),(3, 7,6),(1,6,5),(2,4,6),(3,5,4). 
Therefore, for example, 
31 

32 
CHAPTER 2 
So unlike the complexes and quaternions, the octonions are nonassociative. 
In general, if ea, eb, and ec generate a quaternion subalgebra of 0, then they 
associate, and if not, then they do not. 
Like C and Q, however, 0 is a division algebra, and it is normed. In 
particular, if x = xO + xaea, (sum a=1, ... ,7), and 
(an antiau tomorphism), then 
(2.3) 
defines the square of the norm of x (so 
This octonion multiplication is not, how,ever, the most natural (see sec-
tion 2.6), and it will not be employed here. Again let ea , a = 1, ... , 7, represent 
the hypercomplex units of 0, but now adopt the cyclic multiplication rule 
(2.4) 
a=1, ... ,7, all indices modulo 7, from 1 to 7 . In particular, 
define injections of Q into 0 for a=1, ... ,7. I am accustomed to using the 
symbol eo to represent unity, and I bot her to remember that although 7 = 0 
mod 7, e7 ::I eo, and in the multiplication rule 2.4 the indices range from 1 to 
7, and the index 0 is not subject to the rule. (In [10] 00 is used as the index 
for unity, and this has advantages, which I find intermittently persuasive.) 
[Note: Another cyclic multiplication rule for 0, dual to that above in a 
way outlined in section 2.6, is 
(2.5) 
This one is more commonly used than 2.4. Indeed, of the two cyclic multi-
plication rules 2.4 and 2.5 I may be the only one who uses 2.4. None of the 
mathematical or theoretical development of this monograph depends on the 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
33 
choice, and both are pretty in the same way. Using 2.5 the three octonion 
units {eI, e2, e4} (aH subscripts powers of 2) associate: 
el(e2e4) = (ele2)e4 = -1. 
In this case they generate a Q subalgebra. U sing the rule 2.4 these same 
units do not associate: 
el(e2e4) = -(ele2)e4 = e7. 
In this case they generate the whole of O. I thought that a nice property, 
and on that questionable basis I made my choice.] 
Both the octonion multiplication rules 2.4 and 2.5 have some very nice 
properties. For example, 
1 if eaeb = ec, then e(2a)e(2b) = e(2c) ·1 
2.6 in combination with 2.4 immediately implies 
(so 
or 
eaea+2 = ea+3, 
eaea+4 = ea+6 
eaea+b = [b3 mod 7]ea-2b4, b = 1, ... ,6, 
(2.6) 
(2.7) 
where b3 out front provides the sign of the product (modulo 7, 13 = 23 = 
43 = 1, and 33 = 53 = 63 = -1 )). Also, 2(7)=7 mod 7, so 2.6 and 2.4 imply 
(2.8) 
These modulo 7 periodicity properties are reflected in the fuH multipli-
cation table: 
1 
el 
e2 
e3 
e4 
es 
e6 
e7 
el 
-1 
e6 
e4 
-e3 
e7 -e2 -es 
e2 
-e6 
-1 
e7 
es 
-e4 
el -e3 
e3 
-e4 -e7 
-1 
el 
e6 -es 
e2 
(2.9) 
e4 
e3 -es -eI 
-1 
e2 
e7 -e6 
es 
-e7 
e4 -e6 -e2 
-1 
e3 
el 
e6 
e2 -eI 
es 
-e7 -e3 
-1 
e4 
e7 
es 
e3 -e2 
e6 -eI -e4 
-1 

34 
CHAPTER 2 
The naturalness of this table is reflected in the matrix of signs derived from 
2.9: 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 -1 
1 
1 -1 
1 -1 -1 
1 -1 -1 
1 
1 -1 
1 -1 
0= 
1 -1 -1 -1 
1 
1 -1 
1 
(2.10) 
1 
1 -1 -1 -1 
1 
1 -1 
1 -1 
1 -1 -1 -1 
1 
1 
1 
1 -1 
1 -1 -1 -1 
1 
1 
1 
1 -1 
1 -1 -1 -1 
[This is what is called a normalized Hadamard matrix of order 8 [10]. It is 
normalized because the first row and column are an1 's, and it is a Hadamard 
matrix in containing only l's and -1 's, and in satisfying oot = 81, where 
ot is the transpose of 0, and I is the 8x8 identity matrix.] 
Note that if a :f 0, b :f 0, then the components Oa,b = Oa+l,b+l' indices 
from 1 to 7, modulo 7 (first row and column of 0 are given the index 0). 
Let Oa be the ath row of 0, a=0,1, ... ,7, and define the product 
Oa. Ob = Oa,bOe, 
where the components of Oe are 
Oe,d = Oa,dOb,d, 
(2.11) 
for each d=O,1, ... ,7, and Oa,b gives a sign to the product. For example, 
= +[1 . 1, (-1) . ( -1), 1 . ( -1),1 . 1, ( -1) . 1,1 . ( -1), ( -1) . 1, ( -1) . ( -1)] 
= +[1,1, -1, 1, -1, -1, -1, 1] = 0 6, 
where the plus sign out front arises from the component 0 1,2 = +1. The 
resulting multiplication table of the 0~8 is exactly the same as 2.9, giving 
rise to the obvious isomorphism ea ~ Oa, a = 0, 1, ... ,7. 
The quaternion algebra arises in exact1y the same way from the Hadamard 
matrix of order 4: 
1 1 
1 -1 
-1 
1 
. 
-1 -1 
(2.12) 
1 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
35 
In this case, while index cycling (modulo 3) is an automorphism, index 
doubling is a (product reversing) antiautomorphism. 
Likewise the complexes arise from the order 2 Hadamard matrix 
C = [~ _ ~ ]. 
(!d3) 
Index cycling and doubling, both modulo 1, have no effect here. 
2.2. Adjoint algebras. 
The octonion algebra is nonassociative and so is not representable as a matrix 
algebra. The adjoint algebras of left and right actions of 0 on itself are 
associative. For example, let Ul, ••• , Un , x be elements of o. Consider the left 
adjoint map 
(2.14) 
The nesting of parentheses forces the products to occur in a certain or-
der, hence this algebra of left-actions is trivially associative, and it is rep-
resentable by a matrix algebra. One such representation can be derived 
immediately from the multiplication table 2.9. For example, the actions 

36 
CHAPTER 2 
(only nonzero entries are indicated). Note that 
[] 
(
0 
I 
2 
3 
4 
S 
6 
7) 
eLt x = el x eo + x et + x e2 + x e3 + x e4 + x es + x e6 + x e7 
-1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
1 
which gives rise to the first of the matrix identifications in 2.16 (please note 
that we can identify these adjoint elements with matrices because of the 
associativity of OL, the algebra of left actions of 0 on itselfj this is not 
possible for the nonassociative 0). 
Note that e2e6 = e3e4 = eSe7 == e}, but because of the nonassociativity 
of 0, for example, 
(2.17) 
xo 
xl 
x2 
x3 
x4 
XS 
x6 
x7 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
37 
in general. In particular, 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
1 
-1 
eL34 --+ 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
1 
1 
eL57 --+ 
1 
-1 
(2.18) 
-1 
-1 
1 
These matrices highlight a peculiar trait of the octonions. They satisfy 
I eRl = (-eLl + eL26 + eL34 + eL57 )/2·1 
(2.19) 
This is because for all x in 0 
Likewise, 
so 
(2.20) 

38 
CHAPTER 2 
In general, any product from the right can be reproduced as the sum of 
products from the left, and visa versa (see chapter 7). 
[Note: Because of the cyclic nature of the octonion product, together with 
the index doubling automorphism, the rules 2.19 and 2.20 are quite general. 
For example, via doubling 2.20 implies 
Cycling the indiees by -1, we get in turn, 
eR34 = (eLl + eL26 -
eL34 + eL57)/2 
(the terms have been arranged in the order they appear in 2.20).] 
This property provides a great contrast with the quaternion algebra. If 
x and b are in Q, then there is no general method of expressing the right 
product xb of b on x as the sum of left products. The left and right adjoint 
algebras of Q on Q are distinct and commute with one another (assured by 
the associativity of Q). Also assured by the associativity of Q, the left and 
right adjoint algebras are each isomorphic to Q itself. 
In the octonion case this is clearly not true. The left and right adjoint 
algebras (0 Land 0 R) are the same algebra, and this algebra is larger than 
o itself. In fact, it is isomorphie to R(8). It is not difficult to prove that 
eLa ... bc ... d = -eLa ... cb ... d 
if b =f:. c, all indices from 1 to 7. So, for example, 
In addition, 
eLab ... pp .•• c = -eLab ... c 
(cancellation of like indices). Together with 
eL7654321 = 1L 
(2.21) 
(2.22) 
(2.23) 
(the left adjoint identity, also denoted eLo), 2.22 and 2.23 imply that a 
complete basis for the left=right adjoint algebra of 0 consists of elements 
of the form 
(2.24) 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
39 
This yields 1+7+21+35=64 as the dimension of the adjoint algebra of 0, 
also the dimension of R(8). 
(2.25) 
The 8-dimensional 0 itself is the object, or spinor, space of the adjoint al-
gebra. 
Since the left(right) adjoint algebra of 0 is isomorphie to R(8), and 0 
is 8-dimensional, we call 0 left( right) complete. Again there is a contrast 
to the other hypercomplex algebras. Q is 4-dimensional, but QL = QR = 
Q (QL and QR are isomorphie, but distinct). Therefore, since neither is 
isomorphie to R(4), Q is neither left nor right complete. However, QA, the 
combined left-right adjoint algebra, with a 16 dimensional basis consisting 
of the actions 
x -
X, qiX, xqj, qixqj, i,j E {l, 2, 3}, 
(2.26) 
is isomorphie to R(4). Hence we may call Q two-sided complete. 
(2.27) 
(I shall occasionally let the context distinguish qLj from qRj, and denote 
both qj.) 
The case for Cis even worse. In being both commutative and associative 
C is complete in neither of the above senses. 
(2.28) 
and all are identieal. To generate a full R(2) algebra of actions for the 2-
dimensional (over the reals) ob ject algebra C, one has to resort to actions 
arising outside the algebra. In particular, the four actions 
* . * . 
x -
x, x , zx , zx 
(2.29) 
form a basis for a complete R(2) algebra of actions on C (x* = the complex 
conjugate of x: note that the last three actions in 2.30 anticommute). 
All of this brings up an interesting point. Because C is a subalgebra of 
Q is a subalgebra of 0, quite often one finds in applications of the division 

40 
CHAPTER 2 
algebras to physies that they are applied singly. Why, after-all, in applying 
o should one separately include Q and/or C? But the properties that define 
an algebra or sub algebra are anthropogenie. It is not recorded that there 
were any higher deities hanging about at the time who could speak with ab-
solute authority on the relevance of these properties to the Truth underlying 
the design of reality. These adjoint completeness properties set the algebras 
apart. In the next section, in which the adjoint algebras are identified as 
Clifford algebras, and the division algebras upon which they act as spinor 
spaces, these distinctions become more pronounced. And in section 2.6 it 
will be seen that the fact that "C is a sub algebra of Q is a subalgebra of 
0" is not as fundamental as it might seem, and in one light it can even be 
viewed as accidental. 
2.3. Clifford Algebras, Spinors. 
The left adjoint algebras are 
whieh imply the Clifford algebra isomorphisms 
(Rp,q the Clifford algebra associated with (p( +), q( - ))-space-time). In par-
ticular, multivector bases for 0 L ~ Ro,6 may be represented as below: 
Clil lord Algebra OL ~ Ro,6 
scalar 
lL 
vector 
eLp 
2-vector 
eLpq 
3-vector 
eLpqr 
(2.30) 
4-vector 
eLpq7 
5-vector 
eLp7 
6-vector 
eL7, 
p, q, rE {I, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6} (note that each of these multivector bases is invariant 
under index doubling). 
The spinor space of Ro,6 ~ R(8) is the space of real 8-spinors, but if 
represented as in 2.30, the spinor space is just 0 itself, the 8-dimensional 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
41 
object space of OL. The basis {1, ea , a = 1, ... , 7} ofO is also an orthonormal 
basis for the spinor space, orthonormal with respect to the inner product 
(2.31 ) 
where xt is the conventiomiJ. Hermitian transpose antiautomorphism of 0, 
changing the signs of the ea , a = 1, ... , 7. In general, on C, Q, and 0, 
(XO + Li xaea)t = xO - Li xaea, 
(ZO + zli)t = (zO + zli)* = zO - zli, 
and 2.31 defines the inner product on each. 
(2.32) 
Product reversing Hermitian transposition can be extended to 0 L in the 
obvious way: 
(2.33) 
t 
eLabc 
-eLcba 
eLabc, 
(a,b,c distinct, from 1 to 7). These actions are consistent with the matrix 
representations 2.16 and 2.18. Each of those matrices is antisymmetric. It 
is worth pointing out that even though, for example, eL235[1] = et, we have 
eL235 =F eLt. and the matrix associated with eL235 (in the representation o( 
2.16 and 2.18) is 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
which is Ijymmetric, consistent with 4235 = eL235' With the definition 2.33 
in hand one can easily prove that for all x and y in 0, and A in OL, 
< x, A[y] >=< At[x], Y > . 
(2.34) 

42 
CHAPTER 2 
Certain subsets of 0L elose under eommutation and so beeome Lie alge-
bras. The 2-veetor subspaee of the Clifford algebra 2.30 is an example (see 
also seetion 5): 
I 
{eLpq :p,q::J 7} -t 8u(4) ~ 80(6) ~ 8pin(6)I 
(2.35) 
(see seetion 2.5 and ehapters 7 and 8 for a more eomplete development). 
The ease for the quaternions, Q, is in some respects more eomplieated, 
beeause Q is less algebraieally complete than O. Multivector bases of QL, 
identified with R O,2, are (r=1,2): 
Clil lord Algebra QL ~ R O,2 
sealar 
1 
veetor 
2-vector 
(2.36) 
The spinor spaee of QL, namely Q itself, seems larger than it need be, and 
indeed the elements {qRi, i = 1,2, 3} eommute with the Clifford algebra 
2.36, and so ean be considered 'internal' actions relative to the 'external' 
or geometrie actions 2.36. This extra set of internal actions generates an 
internal SU(2), whieh will play an important role in what follows. That is, 
the span of the set {qRi, i = 1,2, 3} eloses under commutation, and 
I {qRi, i = 1,2, 3} -t 8u(2)·1 
(2.37) 
The inner produet of Q is defined as it was for O. If Ais an element of 
QL, then 2.34 is valid in this context as well. In addition, if x -t xU is an 
internal SU(2) action (from QR), then 
< xU,yU >=< xuut,y >=< xUU-1,y >=< x,y >. 
(2.38) 
As pointed out in 2.27, only the 1-sided adjoint algebras of Q are al-
gebraically incomplete. QA ~ R( 4), whieh is the clifford algebra R 3,1. Its 
spinor spaee, which we expect to be 4-dimensional, is also Q, which is 4-
dimensional. The multivectors of QA, identified with R 3,1l are representable 
as follows (i E {1,2,3}): 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
Clil lord Algebra QA ~ R 3,1 
scalar 
1 
vector 
2-vector 
3-vector 
4-vector 
qLlqRi, qL2 
qRi, qL3qRi 
qL2qRi, qLl 
QL3· 
43 
(2.39) 
With respect to QA, the 4-dimensional object (spinar) space Q has no in-
ternal degrees of freedom. 
2.4. Resolving the Identity of 0 L. 
An algebraic idempotent, A, is by definition a nonzero element satisfying: 
(2.40) 
A is nontrivial if A .:p 1, the identity. In this case 
A( 1 - A) = A - A 2 = A - A = 0 
(2.41 ) 
and 
(1 - A)2 = 1- 2A + A2 = 1 - 2A + A = 1- A. 
(2.42) 
So by 2.42 1 - A is also an idempotent, and by 2.41, A and 1 - Aare 
orthogonal. 
Because of 2.41, nontrivial idempotents are divisors of zero, hence the 
identity is the sole idempotent of any division algebra. This applies to C, Q, 
their left and right adjoint algebras, and to 0, but not to OL = 0R ~ R(8), 
which is not a division algebra. In particular, if a, b, cE {1, ... , 7} are distinct, 
then 
(2.43) 
is an idempotent (note: eLabc = eLabcabc = 1L, by 2.21 and 2.22). So is 
1 
1L - A = 2(lL -
eLabc). 
Certain elements of 0 L are diagonal in the adjoint representation. A 
basis for these consists of the identity, 1L, together with the eLabc satisfying 
(2.44) 

44 
CHAPTER 2 
(ie., ql -
ea, q2 -
ec, q3 -
eb defines an injection of Q into 0, in which 
case, 
ea(ebec) = (eaeb)ec = eaebec = qlq3q2 = 1). 
In particular, define 
(2.45) 
(indices from 1 to 7, modulo 7), and let 10 be the identity. Their adjoint 
representations are 
10 = 1L -
diag( + + + + + + ++), 
lt = eL476 -
diag(+ - - - + - ++), 
12 = eL517 -
diag(+ + - - - + -+), 
13 = eL621 -
diag( + + + - - - +-), 
14 = eL732 -
diag(+ -+ + - - -+), 
15 = eL143 -
diag(+ + - + + - --), 
ls = eL254 -
diag(+ - + - + + --), 
17 = eL365 -
diag(+ - - + - + +-). 
(Thus, for example, 
eL517[ea] = -ea,a = 2,3,4,6.) 
Being diagonal, the la clearly commute. They also satisfy 
(2.46) 
(2.47) 
a E {I, ... , 7} (had eaea+I = ea+3 been chosen as the multiplication for 0, 
then 2.47 would change to lala+I = la+S, so these choices are in this manner 
dual to each other (see section 2.6)). Likewise, if laIb = le, then 
1(2a)I(2b) = 1(2c)' 
Notice that (2·7) = 14 = 7 mod 7, and 
(2.48) 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
45 
(only h is invariant with respect to this index doubling operation). 
These elements satisfy some other fascinating properties. For example, 
for all x in 0, 
(2.49) 
(This result is not obvious, but it will be more easily provable after the tools 
of chapter 7 are developed, which will happen, not coincidentally, in chapter 
7.) Moreover, 
X ---4 la[x] 
(2.50) 
is an octonion automorphism (see the next section), so 
(2.51 ) 
for all x, y in O. 
Finally, the identity of 0 L can be elegantly resolved into orthogonal 
primitive idempotents using the I a • A primitive idempotent can not be 
expressed as the sum of two other idempotents. So, for example, 
1 
1 
4(1 + h + 12 + 14 ) and 4(1 + 11 - h - 14 ) 
are both idempotents, and so is their sum, !(1 + It) (note: h/2 = 14), The 
sum is therefore not a primitive idempotent. As it turns out, neither are the 
initial two. 
Let iac = ± 1 be the cth sign on the diagonal of the adjoint representation 
of the la in 2.46, c=0,1, ... ,7. Define 
So, for example, 
These satisfy 
PaPb = OabPb 
(no sum; a, bE {O, 1, ... , 7}), and 
7 Epa = 10 . 
a=O 
(2.52) 
(2.53) 
(2.54) 

46 
CHAPTER 2 
And they are primitive idempotents (in the adjoint representation Pa is the 
8x8 real diagonal matrix with 1 in the (a, a) position, all other components 
zero). Hence they resolve the identity of 0L. Finally, if x = xo + L:~=I xaea, 
then 
Po[x] = xo, 
Pa[x] = xaea (no sum), a E {l, ... , 7}. 
(2.55) 
So, for example, 
(Po + PI + P2 + P6)[x] = xO + xIel + x2e2 + x6e6' 
That is, (PO+P1 +P2 +P6) is an idempotent projecting fr um 0 a subalgebra 
isomorphie to Q: 
Likewise, for example, 
and of course, 
PolO] ~ R. 
2.5. Lie Algebras, Lie Groups, from 0 L. 
The automorphism group of 0 is the 14-dimensional exceptional Lie group 
G2• A basis for the Lie algebra of G2 (denoted, LG2 ) is simply represented 
in OL: 
I {eLab - eLcd : eaeb = eced} -+ LG21 
(this result will be proven in chapter 7). 
(2.56) 
For example, e1e5 = e2e3(= e7), therefore eL15 - eL23 is an element of 
LG2• Therefore, for all realO, 
G(O) = 
= !(1 + h) + !(1- h)cosO + !(eLI5 - eL23)sinO 
is an element of G2• Let () = 71": 
1 
1 
G(7I") = 2(1 + It) - 2(1- h) = h 
(2.57) 
(see 2.46), thus confirming that 11 (hence all the I a ) is an (sign changing) 
automorphism. 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
In 0 R the basis is much the same: 
{eRab - eRcd : eaeb = eced} -+ LG2, 
and in fact it is not difficult to prove that 
eLab - eLcd = -(eRab - eRcd) 
when eaeb = eced. 
47 
It is easily verified that G(O) defined in 2.57 leaves 1, e4, e6, and e7 in-
variant. In general, eLab - eLcd E LG2 will generate G2 actions that leave 1 
and e J invariant for f ::J a, b, c, d. 
The stability group of any fixed octonion direction is the 8-dimensional 
SU(3) C G2 • Therefore, for example, a basis for the Lie algebra of the 
stability group of e7 is: 
{eLpq - eLrs E G2 : p, q, T, S ::J 7} -+ su(3). 
(2.58) 
This su(3) is the intersection of LG2 with spin(6), defined in 2.35, and it 
will appear as color-su(3) in coming chapters. 
Note that the index doubling isomorphism of 0 is an element of the 
SU(3) stability group of e7, since e2x7 = e14 = e7. This can be explicitly 
represented as 
= [!(1 + 12) + !(eL24 - eL63)][!(1 + lt) + !(eL12 - eL35)), 
and index quadrupalling as 
exp[~(eL35 -
eL12)]exp[~(eL56 - eL4t)) 
Bases for some other subsets of 0L that dose under commutation, and 
their representation types, are listed below: 
{eLab} -+ so(7), spinor, 
(2.59) 

48 
CHAPTER 2 
These three examples become more obvious when we tensor OL with 
R(2). A basis for R(2) consists of the four matriees 
€=[~ ~],O=[~ ~1]' 
ß = [~ ~] ,w = [~1 ~]. 
(2.60) 
OL(2) ~ R(8)®R(2) ~ R(16), whieh is the Clifford algebra R s,o• Bases for 
the vector and 2-vector parts of R s,o are 
vector 
ß, eLaW,. 
2-vector 
eLao, eLab€. 
(2.61) 
The subspace of 2-vectors closes under commutation and is isomorphie to 
so(8). 
The commutator of a 2-vector with a vector is a vector, this giving rise 
to the vector representation of 80(8). Let XL = xo + L:i xaeLal and if A is 
in OL, let At be the conjugation defined in 2.33. Then 
The operation of eLaXL + xLeLa on the identity of 0 yields (let x = (Xo + 
L:i xaea) E 0) 
(2.62) 
Likewise 
[[ eLObC 0 l, [0 
XL II = [ 0 
(eLbcxL + xLeLbc) 1 ' 
eLbc 
xl 
0 
(same)t 
0 
and 
(2.63) 
= eLbe[X]- eRa[X], 
where ea = eb( ee1) = ebec' This justifies the claim that the third of the 80(8) 
representations in 2.59 is vector. 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
49 
The other two are simpler. The spinor space of OL(2) is 0 2 , 2x1 matrices 
over o. Let X and Y be in O. The 2-vector (80(8)) actions from 2.61 on 0 2 
take the forms 
[ e La 
0 
] [ X ] = [ e La [X] ], 
o 
-eLa 
Y 
-eLa[Y] 
(2.64) 
[ eLbc 
0 1 [ X ] = [ eLbc[X] 1 ' 
o 
eLbc 
Y 
eLbc[Y] 
thereby justifying the two spinor representations in 2.59. Thus the two spinor 
representations and the vector representation all aet on 8-dimensional o. 
These three 80(8) representations are also linked by what is known as 80(8) 
triality. This coneept will be developed more eompletely in section 7.3. 
2.6. From Galois Fields to Division Aigebras: An 
Insight. 
The real numbers are the paradigm for mathematical field theory. There 
is addition (and subtraction), an additive identity, 0, and every element 
X has an additive inverse, -x. There is multiplieation (and division), a 
multiplieative identity, 1, andevery element x " 0 has a multiplicative 
inverse, X-I. Multiplication by zero gives zero, and for all x " 0 and Y =f 0, 
we also have xy " 0 (no divisors of zero). Finally, xy = yx (eommutative), 
and x(yz) = (xy)z (associative). 
R is an infinite field, but there also exist finite fields. For any prime p 
there exist (unique up to isomorphism) fields of order pk for all k = 1,2,3, ... , 
denoted GF(pk) (G for Galois, their ill-fated founder, F for field). For no 
other positive integers are there fields of that order. 
The pk elements of GF(pk) are easily written: {0,1,h,h2, •.• ,hpk- 2}, 
where his the multiplicative generator. That is, the multiplication of G F(pk) 
is eyelic and for all x =f 0 in G F(pk), 
(2.65) 
( • 
hpk_I 
1) 
le., 
=. 
All that remains then is to eonstruct an addition table for G F(pk) eon-
sistent with its being a field. This problem ean be redueed to finding what is 
ealled a Galois sequenee for GF(pk), which eonsists of pk -1 elements of Zp 

50 
CHAPTER 2 
(the integers modulo p). Its furt her properties can be best illustrated byan 
example. (Mathematicians have a more elaborate development in terms of 
polynomials and quotient modules; the elements of a Galois sequence appear 
in that context as coefficients of a polynomial. ) 
[0 1 1 2 0 2 2 1] is a Galois sequence for GF(32 := 9). We 
identify it with hO == 1, the multiplicative identity of GF(9), and we'H iden-
tify its kth cyclic permutation with hk • That is, 
h1 == [1 0 1 1 2 0 2 2], 
h2 == [2 1 0 1 1 2 0 2], 
h3 == [2 2 1 0 1 1 2 0], 
h4 = [0 2 2 1 0 1 1 2], 
h5 == [2 0 2 2 1 0 1 1], 
h6 == [1 2 0 2 2 1 0 1], 
h7 == [1 1 2 0 2 2 1 0], 
h8 = [0 1 1 2 0 2 2 1], 
(2.66) 
where h8 = hO := 1 gets us back to where we started from (any cyclic per-
mutation of the initial sequence would have been a valid starting point). 
Notice that the first k := 2 elements of each sequence are unique, and 
can be used as labels for the elements (we are using instead the expo-
nents). And notice that by adjoining to this colJection the zero sequence, 
0=[00 00 0000J,wehaveasetof pk:=32 :=9vectors(se-
quences), each pk - 1 := 32 - 1 == 8-dimensional over Zp := Z3, and that the 
set is closed with respect to Z3 vector addition. Let +p represent addition 
modulo p. Then for example, 
h2 +3 h4 := [2 1 0 1 1 2 0 2] +3 [0 2 2 1 0 1 1 2 1 
:= [2 0 2 2 1 0 1 1] = h5• 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
51 
A fuH addition table for GF(9) resulting from this sequence is listed below: 
0 h1 h2 h3 h4 h5 h6 h7 h8 
h1 h5 h8 h4 h6 
0 
h3 h2 h7 
h2 h8 h6 h1 h5 h7 
0 
h4 h3 
h3 h4 h1 h7 h2 h6 h8 
0 h5 
h4 h6 h5 h2 h8 h3 h7 h1 
0 
(2.67) 
h5 
0 
h7 h6 h3 h1 h4 h8 h2 
h6 h3 
0 
h8 h7 h4 h2 h5 h1 
h7 h2 h4 
0 
h1 h8 h3 h3 h6 
h8 h7 h3 h5 
0 h2 h1 h4 h4 
(recall that h8 = 1). Note that 
hk +3 hk = hkH 
and 
hk +3 hk +3 hk = hk +3 hkH ::: o. 
Also, 
hk +3 hk+1 = hk+7• 
Because for any x and y in any G F( 3m ), 
( 
)3 
3 
3 
X +3 Y = X +3 Y , 
(2.68) 
cubing the last equation above results in 
hk +3 hk+3 = hk+5 
(exponents are taken modulo 8 from 1 to 8, and although strictly speaking 
the exponents k cube to 3k, because 3 and 8 are relatively prime we are 
aHowed to replace 3k by k in constructing new addition rules), and cubing 
this leads back to hk +3 hk+1 = hk+7. There is also, 
hk +3 hkH = hk+3 , 
which cubed yields, 
and finaHy 

52 
CHAPTER 2 
which cubed yields, 
Of more interest to us here are the fields G F(2n ), n = 1,2,3. In partic-
ular, a Galois sequence 
for GF(21) is [ 1 ], 
for GF(22) is [ 0 1 1 ], 
for GF(23 ) is [ 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 ]. 
In this last case we define 
e1 = [ 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 ], 
e2 = [ 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 ], 
e3 = [ 1 1 1 0 0 1 o ], 
e4 = [ 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 ], 
e5 = [ 1 0 1 1 1 0 o ], 
e6 = [ 0 1 0 1 1 1 o ], 
e7 = [ 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 ]. 
(2.69) 
Addition in this case can also be completely described by cyclic equations 
in the ea • To begin with, 
(2.70) 
(every element is its own additive inverse, and +2 is the binary vector addi-
tion). Also, 
(2.71) 
Since in this case (p = 2) 
( 
) 2 
2 
2 
X +2 Y = X +2 Y , 
(2.72) 
squaring the above addition rule leads to a new rule, 
(2.73) 
and squaring this leads to 
(2.74) 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
53 
(exponents are taken modulo 7 from 1 to 7). 
The link of GF(8) to the octonions should now be obvious. The matrix 
of signs in 2.10, used to construct an octonion multiplication, could have 
been replaced by the following matrix of elements of Z2 (ie., O's and l's): 
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 
0 1 0 0 1 0 1 1 
0 1 1 0 0 1 0 1 
0'= 
0 1 1 1 0 0 1 0 
0 0 1 1 1 0 0 1 
(2.75) 
0 1 0 1 1 1 0 0 
0 0 1 0 1 1 1 0 
0 0 0 1 0 1 1 1 
Note that (_l)o~b = Oab (see 2.10), so if we define 
O~ * O~ = (-l)O~b[O~ +2 O~], 
(2.76) 
then we have on ce again ereated an octonion product, where this time the 
rows of 0' are identified with the basis of the octonions. Note! We have 
used GF(8) addition to ereate an octonion multiplieation. The first row of 
0' is the multiplicative identity of 0, and we must ereate a new 0 to play 
the role of the additive identity of O. With respeet to 0 addition, the rows 
of 0' are now treated as linearly independent, a basis for a real algebra. 
Relabel the rows of 0' as ea,a = 0,1, ... , 7. So the exponents of GF(8) 
in 2.69 have beeome the subseripts of the oetonions. Beeause the oetonion 
product (now denoted just eaeb) is derived direet1y from the GF(8) addi-
tion, the exponent rules 2.71,73,74 are valid for the octonion pr~duct, the 
rules now applied to subseripts (see 2.4,7). In addition, the index doubling 
automorphism for the octonions (2.6) is now seen to follow from 2.72. 
[Note: The sum rules 2.71,73,74 for GF(8) correspond to 2.4,7, but in gen-
eral we ean only make such eorrespondenees up to a sign. For example, while 
it is true in GF(8) that ea +2 ea+5 = eaH , in 0 we have eaea+5 =-eaH' 
Index doubling is also tricky, and in Q it works out slightly differently.] 
[Also not\:!: In GP(8), e7 = eO = 1. The reason that it was listed as e7 
in 2.69 is to make the eorrespondenee e7 ---7 e7 of GF(8) to O. Therefore, 
sinee eO == e7, we have eO ---7 e7, too! That is, we use eo to denote the oeto-
nion identity, 1, and it has no correspondence to any power of e1 E GF(8). 

54 
CHAPTER 2 
In [10] the identity is given the suhscript 00, so we could write eoo = 1. This 
notation has distinct advantages, hut also for our purposes disadvantages. 
Pd apologize for the confusion of all this were it not that this section is only 
intended to highlight the naturalness of the chosen 0 product, and this ma-
terial will not playapart in what follows.] 
[Finally note: the transpose of 0' also results in a valid GF(8) addition 
and 0 multiplication. In this case, however, eaea+1 = -ea+3 in O. Except 
for the sign change, this is the dual multiplication mentioned in section 2.4. 
If we replace 2.76 by 
we generate the 0 multiplication rule, eaea+1 = -ea+5; and if we use the 
transpose of 0', the rule ea ea+1 = ea+3. So strictly speaking there are 4 
cyclic octonionic multiplication rules, 2 for the quaternions, and 1 for the 
complexes.] 
Having made the correspondence between GF(8) addition and 0 multi-
plication, one is naturally led to consider the role of G F( 8) multiplication 
in O. Since in G F( 8), ea eb = ea+b, this operation on the indices of 0 is just 
a cyclic shift (of the index a for a = 1, ... ,7; eo is left unaltered). Let S he 
the 0 automorphism that shifts the indices of eb, b = 1, ... , 7 hy 1. So sa 
shifts the 0 indices by a, and S7 = SO is the identity map. Let <p be the zero 
map, mapping all x E 0 to O. Obviously this collection of eight maps can 
be made into the field G F(8) if given the appropriate addition. This may or 
may not be of interest, but this is as far down that road as I am willing to 
go at present. (Note that although sa is an element of G2 , unlike the index 
doubling automorphism it is not an element of the stability SU(3) subgroup 
for any eb except when a = 0.) 
In the quaternion case one makes a correspondence with GF(4). Ev-
erything works out much the same, save that 2.72 doesn't give rise to as 
simple a relation in Q as it did in O. By inspection we see in this case that 
if qiqj = qk, then 
(2.77) 
(therefore index doubling can be regarded as an antiautomorphism in this 
case). lildex quadrupalling gets us back to qiqj = qk, since 4=1 mod 3. 
Hence in 0, eaeb = ec could not imply e(2a)e(2b) = -e(2c), since 23 = 8 = 1 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
55 
mod 7, and three (an odd number of) applications of index doubling must 
get us back to eaeb = ec• 
The binary matrix generating both Q multiplication and G F( 4) addition 
is 
Q'=[~ I 
~ ~l 
(2.78) 
In both 0' (see 2.75) and Q', the first row of each after the zeroth must 
be either the one shown, or the first row of the respective transposes, for 
algebras isomorphie to 0 and Q to result from the process outlined. In 
partieular, consider 
B=[~f;1 
(2.79) 
[Bn B12 Bd = [0 11] is also a Galois sequence for GF(4), but in this case 
the algebra multiplication 
(2.80) 
does not result in Q, but rather an algebra isomorphie to that generated by 
the adjoint elements, QL1qR3, QL2QR2, QL3QR1. 
Addition on GF(2n ) can be turned into an algebra multiplication in the 
way outlined for n > 3 as weH. For example, let 
91 = [0 0 0 1 0 0 1 1 0 1 0 1 1 1 1], 
15-dimensional over Z2. This is a Galois sequence for GF(16), and it can 
be used to construct a new 16-dimensional algebra, extending the sequence, 
R, C, Q, 0 (this is distinct from the Cayley-Diekson prescription, whieh is 
founded on the inclusion property, and in fact 0 is not a subalgebra of this 
new 16-dimensional algebra, whieh is noncommutative, nonassociative, and 
nonalternative). 
One final path down whieh I have no intention of travelling far: we should 
be able to construct algebras in like manner from any GF(pn), for any prime 
p. For example, take the hk , k = 1, ... ,8, in GF(9) listed in 2.66, and map 

56 
CHAPTER 2 
them to hk, k = 1, ... ,8, part of a basis for a new algebra. Map the zero 
sequence to 1, completing the basis. Form the stacked sequences in 2.66 into 
a matrix, H (8 x 8). If hi +3 hi = hk in GF(9), then define 
(2.81) 
If j - i = 4 mod 8, then replace hk by 1. At this point I'm just spewing 
out ideas without a dear not ion of their interest or vi ability, so 1'11 shift 
directions a bit in hopes of bringing order out of chaos. 
It would seem in light of the material presented to this point in this 
section that the division algebras are four out of an infinite co11ection of 
possible algebras constructable in like manner. Worse, it is a co11ection, not 
a sequence. Highlighting this is the fact that the first rows of Q' and 0' 
(ignoring the intitial O's) had to be [1 0 1] and [1 0 0 1 0 1 1] 
for Q and 0 with the multiplication rules we are adopting to result. Com-
pletely different algebras result from most of the other cydic permutations 
of these sequences. 
We could just as weH have begun with the dual sequences [1 1 0] 
and [1 1 1 0 1 0 0] (ending with the same element, but reverse the 
order of the sequence). These sequences also give rise to Q and 0, and they 
are Galois sequences for GF(4) and GF(8). They are in addition quadratic 
residue codes of lengths 3 and 7 over GF(2) (see [10]). For example, the 
quadratic residues modulo 7 are 02 = 72 = 0, 12 = 62 = 1, 22 = 52 = 4, 
32 = 42 = 2, so confusingly renumbering the positions of the sequence 
[1 1 1 0 1 0 0] from 0 to 6, we see that the l's appear in the 0,1,2, 
and 4 positions, which are determined by the quadratic residues. Likewise, 
modulo 3, 02 = 32 = 0, 12 = 22 = 1, and the l's of [1 1 0] appear in 
the 0 and 1 positions. The quadratic residue code oflength lover GF(2) is 
[ 1 ], also the Galois sequence of GF2, and associated with C. 
There are no other examples of quadratic residue codes over GF(2) that' 
correspond to Galois sequences. To even have a chance we must have a code 
of length 2k - 1, and 2k - 1 must be prime. So 15 is out. The quadratic 
residue codeof length 31 is 
[1110110111100010101110000100100]; 
(2.82) 
and a Galois sequence, equal to 2.82 in the first seven positions, is 
[1110110001111100110100100001010]. 
(2.83) 

DIVISION ALGEBRAS ALONE 
57 
Let U be the 31x31 matrix formed of the first of these sequenees and all its 
cyclic permutations, and let V be the 31x31 matrix formed from the second. 
The first has the nice property shared by all quadratic residue codes over 
GF(2) that 
(2.84) 
In the 22 - 1 = 3 and 23 - 1 = 7 eases this gives rise to the noneommutativity 
among the imaginary basis elements (# 1) of Q and 0, which together with 
(2.85) 
ensures that Q and 0 are division algebras (replaee U by the appropriate 
3x3 and 7x7 matrices). Unfortunately the rows of U are not closed under 
Z2 addition. Those of V are: 
(2.86) 
for some c, with a # b. Without this property the matrix will not give rise 
to an algebra in the manner outlined (of course, an initial eolumn and row 
of O's has to be tacked on). Requiring of our generating sequences that they 
be both Galois and quadratic residue is a heavy restriction, and the division 
algehras are the only algehras that result. They onee again form a sequence, 
hut it is definitely finite. 

3. Tensor Algebras. 
3.1. Tensoring Two: Clifford Aigebras and Spinors. 
Continuing the policy of viewing adjoint division algebras as Clifford alge-
bras, and the division algebras themselves as spinor spaces, define 
whieh is isomorphie to C(2) and is identified with the Clifford algebra R 3,o. 
Multivector bases for PL ~ R3,o are listed below 0=1,2,3): 
Clil lord Algebra PL ~ R 3,o 
scalar 
1 
vector 
iqLj 
2-vector 
qLj 
(3.1) 
3-vector 
t. 
As usual the subspace of 2-vectors closes under commutation. In this 
case it is isomorphie to 
Iso(3) ~ su(2) ~ spin(3).1 
Let 
j 
j 
and let 'IjJ E C ® Q, the spinor space of P L. Then the action 
X _ UXU-1 
is an SO(3) rotation of the Euclidean vector {xj}, and the action 
59 

60 
CHAPTER 3 
is and SU(2) = Spin(3) rotation of the spinor t/J. 
The object space of C(2) is the space of 2xl complex Pauli spinors. The 
object (spinor) space of PL is P = C ® Q, which is 4-dimensional over the 
complexes, hence it has twice the dimension of the space of Pauli spinors. 
With the help of orthogonal Hermitian idempotents, P can be decomposed 
into the sum of two Pauli spinor spaces. Let x = L:~ xj qj, xj real, such that 
x2 = -1. Define 
I A± = !(1 ± ix),1 
(3.2) 
These satisfy 
ArAs = orsAr, 
(3.3) 
and 
A+ + A_ = 1. 
(3.4) 
As they are primitive idempotents, by 3.3 and 3.4 they constitute aresolution 
of the identity of P. The subspaces P A± are stable under the action of P L. 
Each is 2-dimensional over C and each transforms as a Pauli spinor with 
respect to PL. 
In particular, if we set 
.... 
2 + 3 
X=xq2 
xq3 
(3.5) 
(which is done for the purposes of chapter 4), then {qt,X,qlX} form an 
orthonormal basis for the hypercomplex part of Q. Since 
(3.6) 
any element Z of PA± will, with this choice for x, reduce to the form 
(3.7) 
ZO, zl E C. Therefore, for example, the action 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
61 
is equivalent to the action 
which is the action of a Pauli matrix on a Pauli spinor. All of the elements 
of 
{1L, iL, qLl, iqLt. XL = x2qL2 + x3qL3' iXL, qLIXL, iqLIXL} 
can be be similarly identified with elements of C(2). 
Note that the subspaces {PA±} transform as an su(2) doublet with re-
spect to the right action of the qj. For example, 
Xe 8x = XA+e8x + XA_e8x = XA+e- i8 + XA_ei8 • 
(3.8) 
So the action X -
Xx = X A+( -i) + X A_(i) can be written as the matrix 
action 
(3.9) 
which is recognizably su(2). 
Note that the action 3.8 is an element of QR, and that QR commutes 
with PL = R 3•o, which is the "external" geometrie (Clifford) algebra. Any 
action on the spinor space which is not an element of the Clifford algebra, 
and commutes with the action of the Clifford algebra, is considered "in-
ternal" relative to that algebra. The set of elements of QR of unit length 
is isomorphie to SU(2) (the action 3.8 arises from this group), hence this 
SU(2) is inherently internal. 
3.2. Tensoring Two: Spinor Inner Product. 
Let A and B be elements of P. Each decomposes with respect to A± into a 
pair of Pauli spinors: 
(3.10) 
Consider the expression 
(3.11) 

62 
CHAPTER 3 
where the < At B >± are complex. This follows from the fact that all X E P 
may be expressed as 
where X m E C, m = 0,1,2,3. Since 
and 
therefore 
In fact, < AtB >± is just the conventional complex inner product of the 
Pauli spinor AA± with the Pauli spinor BA±. We define the real inner 
product of A and B to be 
(3.12) 
< A,B > is just the real part of AtB (or BtA). To see this, let X E P, 
and define the four components of X with respect to the A± by AsX Ar 
(r,8 = ±). In particular, the diagonal components are 
(3.13) 
where the X± are complex (so< AtB >± are the diagonal components of 
AtB). Define the trace of X with respect to the A± by 
tr(X) = X+ + X_. 
(3.14) 
Let X -+ X- be the antiautomorphism on P that reverses the signs of 
% i = 1,2,3, but not the sign of i (so X- = xt*, Hermitian conjugation 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
63 
followed by complex conjugation). Therefore, A± = AT' Then 
X++X_ = X+(A+ + A_) + X_(A+ + A_) 
= X+A+ + (X+A+t + (X_A_t + X_A_ 
= A+XA+ + (A+XA+)- + (A_XA_)- + A_XA_ 
= A+X A+ + A_X-A_ + A+X-A+ + A_X A_ 
(3.15) 
= A+(X + X-)A+ + A_(X + X-)L 
= (X + X-)A+ + (X + X-)A_ 
= (X + X-)(A+ + A_) 
= X+X-, 
where X + X- is clearly complex, so A±(X + X-)A± = (X + X-)A±. 
Therefore 
tr(X) = X+ + X_ = X + X-
is just twice the complex part of X. 
Define 
Mo(X) = X, 
the identity map, 
an automorphic involution (note, * is complex conjugation on P, not on 
C(2». The inner product may now be constructively expressed: 
I< A, B >= i {[2:rs Mr«AAs)t(BAs»] + [same]t} I 
(3.16) 
(r = 0,1,8 = ±). This follows from the fact that 
M1(A±) = AT' 
so that, for example, 

64 
CHAPTER 3 
Another, simpler, expression for < A, B > is the following: 
The expression 3.16 has the advantage that it highlights the connection be-
tween the Pauli spinor parts of A and B. In seetion 4 this form will be 
generalized to the more elaborate case of C ® Q ® O. In both cases it facil-
itates the ultimate connection to physics, to be made in chapter 4, and the 
derivation of important symmetries. 
LINK TO INTERNAL SYMMETRY 
In particular, if in 3.16 we replace A± by I\;± satisfying 
(3.17) 
then the result is the same. This is so because by 3.17 the components of 
the identity of P with respect to I\;± are the same as the components with 
respect to >'± (see 3.13), namely, Crs. 
The symmetry of 3.17 is 
I U(1) X U(1) X SU(2).\ 
Note first that 
= 
(3.18) 
If xt X = 0, X E P, then X = O. Therefore, 
That is, 
!I\;± E P>'±.! 
(3.19) 
Therefore I\;± may be expressed in the form 
(3.20) 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
u± and V± complex (i in the form 3.5, see 3.7). From 3.17 we obtain 
4K± = (u±u± + V±V±)A± = A±, 
implying 
65 
(3.21 ) 
(3.22) 
The symmetry of the equations 3.22 is U+(1) X U_(1) x SU(2). The SU(2) 
arises from the left action of the qj. Relative to this action u+ and v+ 
transform as the components of an SU(2) doublet, as do u_ and v_ (see 
3.7). U±(1) arises from the action of iA± from the right. In particular note 
that 
= A_ + A+ + A+[iO] + A+[!(iO)2] + ... 
A_ + A+[1 + iO + !(iO)2 + ... ) 
A_ + A+[eili ). 
Therefore, for example, 
K+eiAtO = K+(A_ + A+eill ) = K+eiO , 
so iA± from the right acts nontrivially only on K±. 
We may re-express all this in a more conventional way using matrices, 
which is done to help the reader get a handle on the mathematics before 
we get to the more complicated tripie tensor product algebra of the next 
section. T.lte A± can be represented as follows: 
so that 

66 
CHAPTER 3 
[ 0 U_] = ei9 [0 -~+]. 
o v_ 
0 
u+ 
In this case the left action of a 2 X 2 representation of U(1) X SU(2) on A+ 
accounts for ~+ = [~: ~], and the map MI takes this to [~ ~~+]. 
Finally the U(1) phase ei9 completes the action of [U(1) X SU(2)] X U(1). 
Schematically 
A+ 
[U(1) X SU(2)] 
A_ [U(l) X SU(2)] xU_(1) 
-+~_ 
(3.23) 
We may now re-express 3.16 in the general form 
(3.24) 
3.3. Tensoring Three: Clifford Aigebras and Spinors. 
Let 
and 
As PL is viewed as the Pauli algebra of (1,3)-space-time, from which the 
Dirac algebra for that space is built, so too will we view TL as the "Pauli" 
algebra of (1,9)-space-time, from wh ich the "Dirac" algebra of that space 
will be built. In particular note that since P L ~ C(2), and 0 L ~ R(8), 
then 
I TL ~ C(16), t 
and so we may identify it with the Clifford algebra Ro,9' 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
67 
The object space of RO.9 ~ C(16) is the space of 16 x 1 complex spinors. 
As was the case for P and PL, the P idempotents A± defined in 3.1 resolve 
the elements X of T (whieh is 32-dimensional over C) into X A+ and X A_, 
a pair of 16-dimensional (over C) R O•9 ~ TL spinors. And again, the SU(2) 
action 3.5 on X in T commutes with TL and is therefore internal. The 
example action developed in 3.6-8 go es through without change. 
It should seem surprising that T relative to TL has the same internal 
structure as P relative to P L. In both cases the extra internal structure 
arises from QR, which commutes with QL, hence also with the external 
geometrie algebras PL and TL. No internal depth arises from the C be-
cause i E TL and is identified below as a basis for the 9-vector subspace 
of RO•9 (when we expand to Dirac algebras, i will regain its independent, 
nongeometrie status). Also, although 0 is noncommutative, never-the-Iess 
OL = OR (see chapter 2). Hence the parts of TR, or PR, distinct from and 
commuting with TL, or PL, are all associated with QR, and so the internal 
structures of T and P are the same. 
The chosen multivector bases for TL ~ R O•9 are (j E {I, 2, 3}, p, q, r E 
{I, ... , 6}: 
Clil lord Algebra TL ~ R O•9 
scalar 
vector 
2-vector 
3-vector 
4-vector 
5-vector 
6-vector 
7-vector 
8-vector 
9-vector 
1 
ieL7qj,eLp 
qj, eLpq, iqjeLp7 
ieL7, iqjeLpq7, qjeLp, eLpqr 
qjeLpq, eLpq7, ieLp7' iqjeLpqr 
iqjeLpq, ieLpq7, eLp7, qjeLpqr 
eL7, qjeLpq7, iqjeLp, ieLpqr 
iqj, ieLpq, qjeLp7 
eL7qj, ieLp 
t. 
(3.25) 
As usual the space of 2-vectors c10ses under commutation, and is in this case 
isomorphie to 
80(9) ~ 8pin(9). 
The sub set {qj} is a basis for 
so(3) ~ su(2) ~ spin(3), 

68 
CHAPTER 3 
and the subset {e Lpq} a basis for 
80(6) ~ 8u(4) ~ 8pin(6). 
As has been pointed out, the intersection of this 80(6) with LG2 is 8u(3) 
(see 2.58). This 8u(3) generates the color symmetry in what follows, hence 
color SU(3)is intern al only relative to RI,3, not to RI,9, and in this latter 
case SU(3) rotations are space rotations (see chapter 6). 
3.4. Tensoring Three: Spinor Inner Product. 
If A and B are elements ofT, then A>.± and B>.± are four Ro.9 spinors. Put 
into the righthand side of 3.16, the result of this algebraically more compli-
cated case is no Ion ger real, but is linear in the identity, and the 21 elements, 
qjea , j=1,2,3, a=1, ... ,7. No automorphism or antiautomorphism will simul-
taneously change the signs of all these 21 elements, so the introduction of 
another conjugation (beyond Mt and Hermitian conjugation) into 3.16 will 
not reduce the righthand side to areal number. 
However, the expression 3.16 for the inner product is constructed from 
aresolution of the identity of P, and a group of automorphisms permuting 
the idempotents of the resolution. The same technique may be successfully 
applied to T, although some care is required, for T is not only nonassociative 
(inherited from 0), but, as will be shown below, also nonalternative. 
RESOLVING THE IDENTITY OF T 
Not surprisingly the structure of T = C 0 Q 0 0 is more complicated 
than that of P. T admits at least three inequivalent resolutions of its identity 
into 4 orthogonal primitive idempotents. For example, let 
ao = H1 + qtet + q2e2 + q3e6), 
(3.26) 
(recall that {et, e2, e6} are a quaternion tripie of 0 ). These satisfy 
(3.27) 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
69 
Note, however, that 
This curious result (O'o( O'Oe7) =1= (O'ö)e7) demonstrates that T is not an al-
ternative algebra (0 by itself is). Furthermore it demonstrates that while 
the O'm may be idempotents, they are not projection operators. 
This suggests we restrict the definition of aresolution of the identity to 
consist of orthogonal primitive projection operators. (In fact this is what 
is generally required of an idempotent, but so rarely does the issue of non-
alternativity arise that it is seldom necessary explicitly to specify this.) In 
particular, ß m , m = 0,1,2,3, will be considered to resolve the identity of T 
if for all X in T, 
In particular, define 
ßo = (1 + ix)(l + ie7)/4 = AOP+, 
ß2 = (1 + iy)(l- ie7)/4 = A2P-, 
ß3 = (1- iy)(1- ie7)/4 = A3P-, 
-2 
-2 
1 
x=y=-, 
and P± = (1 ± ie7 )/2, which alone resolve the identity of C ® o. 
(3.28) 
(3.29) 
The x into yflexibility in the idempotents ß m is allowed because p+p_ = 
o ensures that ßo and ßl are orthogonal to ß2 and ß3. If we set x = y, 
then an additional degree of freedom can arise in the octonion. For example, 

70 
CHAPTER 3 
the four idempotents 
ßo = (1 + ix)(l + ie7)/4, 
ßl = (1- ix)(1 + ies)/4, 
ß2 = (1 + ix)(1 - ie7 )/4, 
ß3 = (1 - ix)(l - ies)/4, 
(3.30) 
also resolve the identity of T, and they satisfy 3.28. But thp ß m also satisfy 
(3.31) 
which the ßm do not. So components of X in T with respect to the ß m , 
namely ßmX ß m are consistently definahle in this case, hut in neither the 
Qm nor ßm cases. 
THE TRACE OF X 
For all X in T, 
ßmX ß m = Xmß m , 
where X m , m = 0,1,2,3, are complex. Again we define 
tr(X) = EXm . 
m 
[ It is easy to prove 3.32. For p = 1, ... ,6, 
(parentheses unnecessary). Also, 
Any element X of T may he written as 
7 
X = XO + L Xaiea, XO, X a E C ® Q, a = 1, ... ,7. 
a=l 
(3.32) 
(3.33) 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
71 
Therefore, for example, 
We have already seen that for elements Y E C ® Q, 
Yo E C. Therefore, 
Xo E C. (This confusing use of indices is now at an end.) 
Let Mm , m = 0,1,2,3, be a group of automorphisms on T defined by 
x, 
h[X*], 
(3.34) 
(h could have been replaced with Ip,p = 3,5,6), where 
X~X" 
is complex conjugation, and 
changes the signs of the quaternion units qn r = 1,3. h is defined in chapter 
2 (if p = 3,5,6,7, then I p(e7) = -e7, and in particular 
I 7(e p ) = -ep , p = 1,2,4,7). 
We may assume without a loss in generality that 

72 
CHAPTER 3 
Therefore, 
Mm('ö'o) = 'ö'm 
(3.35) 
(in addition, Ml M2 = M3 , M~ = Mo for all m). The actions of the auto-
morphisms Mm, and the Mm followed by Hermitian conjugation, on T are 
given below (r = 1,2, P = 1,2,4,7, q = 3,5,6): 
Mo MI 
M2 M3 Mt 
0 
Mt 
1 Mt 
2 
Mt 
3 
1 
+ + + + + + + + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
qr 
+ + 
+ + 
q2 
+ + + + 
ep 
+ 
+ 
+ + 
eq 
+ + + + 
~qr 
+ 
+ + 
+ 
iq2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
~ep 
+ + 
+ + 
(3.36) 
ieq 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
qrep 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
q2ep + 
+ + 
+ 
qreq 
+ + 
+ + 
q2eq + + + + + + + + 
iqrep + + + + 
iq2ep + + 
+ + 
iqreq + 
+ 
+ + 
iq2eq + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Therefore, 
Xo + Xl + X2 + X3 = L Am[X + Ml(Xt) + M2(X) + M3(Xt)]Am. (3.37) 
m 
The term in the brackets of 3.37 is 4 times those parts of X linear in 1, i, q2ep, 
and iq2ep, p = 3,5,6. But AmepAm = 0, p = 3,5,6 (because p±epp± = 
P±P'fep = 0), therefore I: Xm is just four times the complex part of X. 
Using 3.37 we can constnict an inner product of A and B in T, which 
is just the real part of At B. We employ an expression far the inner product 
identical in form ta 3.16: 
< A, B > = 
~(tr(AtB + BtA)) 
(3.38) 
= 
~{[I:mn Mm((AAn)t(B'ö'n))] + [same]t}. 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
73 
3.5. Derivation of the Standard Symmetry. 
As was done in 3.24 relative to 3.16, the expression 3.38 for < A, B > can be 
generalized by replacing ß n in 3.38 by the algebraically more complicated 
r n, n = 0,1,2,3: 
(3.39) 
We require that with respect to the r n the components of the identity be 
the same as those obtained from ß n . That is, 
(3.40) 
(see 3.17). In addition we need a consistency requirement, that the com-
ponents of any X in T, with respect to the r n, be free of nonassociativity 
problems. That is, 
(r~x)r m = r~(Xr m), n, mE {O, 1,2, 3}. 
(3.41) 
From 3.40 we obtain 
so 
ßm(r~r n)ßm = (r nßm)t(r nßm) = omnßn, 
(making use of the fact that p±(AB)p± = (p±A)(Bp±), and ßt = ß n ). But 
if A E T, and AtA = 0, then A = O. Therefore, 
So 
That is, 
(3.42) 
For the sake of simplicity, and without loss of generality, we now put the 
2-dimensional degree offreedom in x and yin ß m (see 3.29) in the (Q2,Q3)-
plane. That is, set 

74 
CHAPTER 3 
-
-
2 
3 
Y = -q2 Xq2 = X q2 -
X Q3· 
So {Ql, X, ql X} and {ql! y, qd} are two orthonormal bases for the hypercom-
plex parts of Q. Therefore, since 
x(l ± ix)/2 = =fi(l ± ix)/2, 
y(l ± iy)/2 = =fi(l ± iy)/2, 
(3.43) 
and e3 = -e2er, es = -eIer, and e6 = -e4er, the elements f n of T~n can 
be written in the reduced form 
(3.44) 
where the u, v coefficients are complex. 
This can be further simplified by imposing the associativity condition 
3.41 at this point. Suppose ~ 
n f; 0 and/or +v n f; O. For example, let 
f o = el~O = eIAOp+. Consider in this case the (0,0) component of e2 (note: 
(p+el)e2 = p-(ele2)): 
(f6e2)fo = -[(AoP+el)e2]( elAoP+) 
= -[ Aop_( el e2)]( elAoP+) 
= -(p-e6)( elP+ )Ao 
= -p+(e6(elP+))Ao 
= -p+((e6edp-)Ao 
= -AoP+e2P-
= -AOe2' 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
75 
It's bad enough that this diagonal component is nonzero (it should pick out 
the complex (C) part of e2, which of course is zero), but in addition, 
r6(e2ro) = -e2 ß O # -ßOe2 = (r~e2)rO. 
A voidance of these problems is possible only if 
+--
+--
° 
U n = 0, V n = 0, n = ,1,2,3, 
that is, if 
(3.45) 
n=0,1,2,3, Un and Vn complex. In this case, because P±P=F = 0, it follows au-
tomatically that r~r m = ° 
if n=O,l (or 2,3), and m=2,3 (or 0,1). T~erefore 
the only nontrivial equations left in 3.40 are 
r6rl = 0, 
(3.46) 
and their Hermitian conjugates. But because of 3.45, the symmetry of 
rtnrm = ßm,m = 0,1, 
r~rl = 0, 
is the same as the symmetry of 3.17, that is, 
The same is true of the equations 
r~rm = ßm,m = 2,3, 
r~r3 = 0, 
the 
U2(1) X U3(1) X SU_(2) 
symmetry of this case being independent of that of the (O,l)-case. So the 
total symmetry to this point is 
(3.47) 
('+' associated with m=0,1, '-' with m=2,3). 

76 
CHAPTER 3 
The SU(2)'s arise from the qj,j = 1,2,3, and the U(I)'s from the com-
plex unit i, or the octonion unit e7. In particular, if a± = Li ai±qj, ai± 
real, and ()m real, m=0,I,2,3, then 
(3.48) 
performs the rotation 3.47. For example, 
exp( a-p_)r n 
(3.49) 
The symmetry 3.47 of 3.40 and 3.41 is not complete. The SU(3) stability 
subgroup of G2 leaving e7 fixed (see 2.57) also clearly maintains the validity 
of 3.40 and 3.41, for the 6.n and r n are invariant under this SU(3). (Since 
SU(3) is a subgroup of the automorphism group G2 , it may be extended to 
the spinors A and B as wen.) So each of the 6.m is subject to a symmetry 
I U(I) x SU(2) x SU(3) I 
(3.50) 
(the SU(3)'s may be considered independent for m=0,I,2,3, but as all the 
r m 's are invariant, this is irrelevant). 
In 3.48 one method of generating the SU(2) actions was presented. There 
is another way that will prove more useful in applications. First redefine 
I A± = MI ± i(X2q2 + x3ie7q3» = ~(I ± ix) I 
(x 2 = -1), so that 
(note: ie7P± = ±p±). 
Define 
A+P+ = AOP+ = 6.0 , 
A_P+ = AIP+ = 6.1, 
A+P_ = A2P- = 6. 2 , 
A_P_ = A3P- = 6.3 
(3.51) 
(3.52) 
(3.53) 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
77 
(note that the real span of the set {ie7Ql, Q2, ie7Q3} closes under commutation 
and is isomorphie to su(2). Let 
-
1 + 2 + 3 
er = er ql 
er q2 
er q3. 
(3.54) 
Then 
eo,ßo 
eäßo 
Mo(e&ßo), 
e&ßl = 
eäßl 
M1(e&ßo), 
. (3.55) 
eo,ß2 
e-q2äq2ß2 
M 2(e&ßo), 
eo,ß3 
e-q2äq2ß3 
M3(e&ßo) 
(note that Mn(ii) = ii). That is, ii generates an SU(2) that is carried intact 
by the Mn from ßo to the other ß n. (There is an additional SU(2) degree 
of freedom on ß2 and ß3 (see 3.47 and 3.48). We can ac count for this by 
an SU(2) action like 3.49 that acts nontrivially only on ß2 and ß3') . 
For each n=O,1,2,3, ß n and qlßn form an SU(2) doublet with respect 
to eo,. The diagonal SU(2) generator is x. In particular, 
= 
(see 3.52). 
The standard symmetry is then identified with a single copy of U (1) x 
SU(2) x SU(3) that is associated with ßo and ro, and carried from there by 
the Mn to the remaining ß n and r n' The other symmetry degrees offreedom 
that arise on the ßj, j = 1,2.,3, then arise separately. In particular, the 
symmetry 3.47, together withSU(3), can be rewritten 
(3.56) 
where [U(.t) x SU(2) x SU(3)] is shared by all the r n (carried along by the 
maps Mn), Uj(l),j = 1,2,3, acts only on rj, and SU23(2) acts only on r 2 

78 
CHAPTER 3 
and r3 • Note that the SU_(2) in 3.47 is a mix of SU23(2) and the SU(2) in 
brackets. Schematically, 
Llo [U(l) X SU(2) X SU(3)] 
--t r o 
Ll1 [U(l) X SU(2) X SU(3)] xU1(l) 
--t r 1 
Ll2 [U(l) X SU(2) X SU(3)] xU2(1) 
XSU23(2) 
--t r2 
Ll3 [U(l) X SU(2) X SU(3)] xU3(1) 
XSU23(2) 
--t r3• 
[ Curiously U(l)4 X SU(2)2 X SU(3) also arises in [11], where the division 
algebras are applied to the problem of particle masses. It is not yet known 
if there is a connection. ] 
3.6. SU(2) X SU(3) Multiplets, and U(l). 
Let X = X O + Ei Xaea be an element of O. 
(3.57) 
The p+Zo part of 3.57 transforms as a singlet with respect to SU(3). The 
rest of P+X transforms as a triplet. This may be seen most explicitly by 
representing a basis for su(3) in 0 L adjointly as 3x3 matrices acting on the 
column [ ~: ]. Tm, I. done bclow 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
79 
!(eL34 - eL26) - [ : J 
~(eL63 - eL24) ~ [ 
i ] , 
i 
-1 
!(eL61 - eL4s) - [; 
~ ] , HeL56 - ew) ~ 
[ ~1 1 
(3.58) 
~(eL52 - eLl3) ~ [ ; 
: ] ,~(eL3' - eL12) ~ [ ~1 
1 :]. 
!(eL46 - eL23) - [ 
. i 
:.] ,~(eL23 - ew) ~ [ 
~ 
-i :] 
-~ 
For example, 
!(eL34 - eL26)(p+€1) = !p+[e3(e4et} - e2(e6el)] = 0, 
!(eL34 - eL26)(p+e2) = !p+[e3(e4e2) - e2(e6e2)] = !P+( - 2e6) = ip+e4, 
!(eL34 - eL26)(p+e4) = !p+[e3(e4e4) - e2(e6e4)] = !P+( -2e3) = ip+e2. 
Assigning p+X the multiplet structure 
1$3 
(singlet plus triplet ) means p_ X transforms as 
(antisinglet plus antitriplet). At this stage, however, the P+X and p_X 
multiplets are merely conjugates of each other, hence not independent. 
Now let X E C ® 0, so xa E C,a = 0,1, ... ,7, in 3.57. In this case P+X 
and p_X have independent multiplets (ie., they are no longer conjugates of 
each other). Therefore, under 
I SU(3) : C ® 0 -
1 $ 3 $ 1 $ 3.1 
(3.59) 

80 
CHAPTER 3 
Therefore, T = (C ® 0) ® Q has the same multiplet structure as C ® 0, 
but times four. Explicitly, 
(3.60) 
Suppose in addition that X transforms with respect to SU(2) as r~. 
That is, 
(3.61) 
So X transforms like SU(2) doublets (see 3.9 and 3.56). 
[Note: of course we could as weH have let X transform with respect to SU(2) 
as rn , so that X --t i" X, but for two reasons 3.61 is preferable. Firstly, with 
that action the product xr n will be SU(2) invariant; and secondly, if SU(2) 
acts on the spinor X from the right, then it is internal with respect to the 
action of the geometrie algebra R 1,3 from the left. This aspect is developed 
in chapter 4.J 
Thus SU(3) divides T into 8 spinor bits (see 3.59), and SU(2) divides 
each of these in two, making 16 bits in al1. Each of these 16 SU(2) X SU(3) 
bits is 64/16=4-dimensional over the re als , 2-dimensional over C. In fact 
they are Weyl spinors., 
Consider for example the SU(3) singlet, SU(2) doublet, 
Each ofthese subspaces is SU(3) invariant, and they are mixed by the action 
of e-ci from the right. They are also stable under the action of P L, the Pauli 
algebra, and with respect to that algebra they transform as Pauli spinor 
spaces. 
We conclude, then, that with respect to SU(2) X SU(3), T transforms 
exactly like the direct sum of a family of lefthanded leptons and quarks, and 
an antifamily of righthanded antileptons and antiquarks. 

TENSOR ALGEBRAS 
81 
U(l) CHARGES 
As was done in 3.55 for SU(2), we may carry a U(l) charge from f o to 
the other fj, j=1,2,3, via the Mj. That is, 
f o -t 
eillfo 
Mo(eillfo) 
f 1 -t e-iof1 = 
M1(eiOfo) 
M (e- e70f ) 
1 
0 , 
(3.62) 
f 2 -t 
eiof2 
= 
M2(eiOfo) = 
M (e- e70f ) 
2 
0 , 
f 3 -t e-iof3 
M3(eiOro) = 
M3(Ce70fo). 
In 3.55, f 1 and f 3 transform under a conjugate SU(2) representation relative 
to f o and f 2 (see 3.56). The same is true of the U(l) in 3.62. Therefore 
they combine to form 
U(l) x SU(2) -t U(2). 
(3.63) 
The remaining three U(l) degrees of freedom can be performed separately 
on rj, j=1,2,3. 
One final note: the U(l) transformation 
(3.64) 
(the factor 1/6 sets a conventional scale) acts triviallyon the f m , but on 
the other elements of T combines with SU(3) to form U(3). Note that if 
XE T, then 
X -t e-,per!6Xe,per!6 = p+Xp+ + p_Xp_ + ei,p/3p+Xp_ + e-i,p/3p_Xp+. 
(3.65) 
So p+X P+ -t 1 and p_X p_ -t i are invariant', and p+X p_ -t 3 and 
p_X P+ -t 3 transform as U(l) conjugates. So the total symmetry carried 
by the Mm from f o to the other f m, including the trivial U(l) 3.64, is 
U(2) x U(3), 
(3.66) 
and the quantum numbers arising from this group on the various Pauli 
(Weyl) spinor components are precisely those of a lefthanded lepto quark 
family, and righthanded antifamily. Obviously to assurne this is coincidental 
requires a faith and vested interest in some other scheme. To assurne it is 
not coincidental requires a faith and vested interest in this scheme. On the 
persuasiveness of this latter faith does half of this book rest. As to the other 
half, while strictly mathematical, it will be seen to bolster the first half. 

4. Connecting to Physics. 
4.1. Connecting to Geometry. 
The parity violation of Dirac spinor fields occurs to the level of the Pauli 
(or Weyl) subspinor fields. So in physies the fundamental fermion fields are 
Pauli spinors instead of Dirac spinors. Dirac spinors consist of a pair of 
Pauli spinors; the Dirac algebra is the Pauli algebra tensored with R(2). 
This extra R(2) is required not only of this physieal context, but also of 
mathematieal contexts, like using OL(2) to represent RS,Q and triality op-
erations (see chapter 7), and in the construction of the groups of the magie 
square (see chapter 8). This paradigm, that the Clifford algebra of spacetime 
starts with a Pauli algebra for just space, and that this when tensored with 
R(2) provides room for time, will also be used below in the construction of 
a Clifford algebra for (1,9)-spacetime. 
Define in R(2), 
ß = [~ ~ 1 ,w = [~1 ~]. 
(4.1) 
These four matriees form a basis for R(2), and a, ß, and w mutually anti-
commute. 
P L(2) ~ C( 4), the Dirac algebra, whieh is the complexification of the 
Clifford algebra R 1,3' Therefore a basis for R 1,3 can be represented in terms 
of the elements i and qLj of P L, and the matriees in 4.1. 

84 
CHAPTER 4 
MultivectoT bases fOT R 1,3 are (j = 1,2,3): 
scalar 
vector 
(4.2) 
3-vector 
4-vector 
ia, 
and we define 
1'0 = ß, 1'j = iqjW, 1'5 = -i')'01'11'2'Y3 = a. 
(4.3) 
The spinor space of P L(2) is p2, 2x1 matrices over P. An element A of p 2 
can be decomposed into AAr, T = 0,1, and each of these is a 4-dimensional 
(complex) Dirac spinor. Left multiplication by the chiral projectors ~(f±1'5) 
project a pair of Weyl spinors from each Dirac spinor. 
TL(2) ~ C(32), which is the complexification of R 1,9. So TL ~ R 9,o is, 
so-to-speak, the "Pauli" algebra to the (1,9)-"Dirac" algebra TL(2). 
[Note: The generalization I am making is an obvious one. CL ® QL be-
comes CL ® QL ® OL, This is a mathematically motivated generalization, 
for it will be remembered that the principal reason the Clifford algebra of 
(1,3)-spacetime requires complexification is a physical one, for without com-
plexification we can not construct a chiral projector, which is phenomeno-
logically required. In the Clifford algebra for (1,9)-spacetime, however, no 
such complexification is required, for chiral projectors can be constructed 
in the absence of the complex unit i. Hence, mathematics, as opposed to 
physics, is leading us in what folIows. The results will speak for themselves.] 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
85 
M ultivector bases for R t ,9 are (j = 1,2,3; p, q, r = 1, ... , 6) : 
scalar 
€ 
10-vector 
a. 
( 4.4) 
Of course, only half of TL(2) appears in 4.4 - the rest arises from multi pli-
cation by i. Note that with the aid of the pseudovector (lO-vector basis) we 
can in this case construct chiral projectors without complexification. But 
we are already complexified, and without the indusion of the algebra C in 
T we could not have constructed a basis for the Clifford algebra R t ,9' In 
this case complexification is mathematically required. 
DIMENSIONAL REDUCTION 
The object space of TL(2) is T 2 , 2xl matrices over T. Each A in T 2 
can be decomposed into a pair of complex (1,9)-Dirac spinors, AAr, r = 0,1. 
T 2 can also be decomposed into SU(2) X SU(3) family plus antifamily bits 
using the projectors P± and ß m (see chapter 3, section 5). In particular, 

86 
CHAPTER 4 
Family (SU(2) doublets) 
{p+ T2ßo, P+ T 2ßd SU(3) -t 1, 
{p+T2ß2, p+T2ß3} SU(3) -t 3, 
Antifamily 
{p_ T2ß2, p_ T2ß3} SU(3) -t i, 
{p_ T2ßo, p_ T 2ßd SU(3) -t 3. 
(4.5) 
Therefore, P+ T 2 is the family half of T 2, and p_ T 2 the antifamily half. 
Corresponding to the family projection on the spinor space, 
is the projection 
I TL(2) -t PL+ TL(2)pL+ I 
on the Clifford algebra, where 
PL+ = ~(1 + ieL1)' 
So 
(PL+TL(2)PL+)[p+T2] = p+T2. 
(4.6) 
PL+ TL(2)pL+ is a subalgebra of TL(2) isomorphie to C(16). While C(16) 
is isomorphie to a Clifford algebra, PL+ TL(2)pL+ should not be thought of 
in this way. Rather, from the Clifford algebra R 1,9 C TL(2) is projected the 
Clifford algebra R 1•3 crossed with the 15 generators of 80(6) ~ 8pin(6) ~ 
8u(4), and this Lie algebra contains the generators for color SU(3), so they 
survive the projection, while the extra 6 space dimensions do not. 
The (1,9)-multivectors surviving the projection 4.6 are 0=1,2,3; p,q = 
1, ... ,6): 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
87 
Dimensionally Reduced Rt,9 
scalar 
I fPL+ I 
veetor 
I ßPL+, iqjWPL+ I 
2-veetor 
I qjfPL+, iqjapL+, I eLpqfpL+, 
3-vector 
I iWPL+, qjßPL+, I eLpqßPL+, iqjeLpqWpL+ 
4-vector I iapL+, I iqjeLpqapL+, qjeLpqfPL+, ieLpqfpL+ 
5-veetor 
qjeLpqßPL+, ieLpqßPL+, ieLpqwPL+, qjeLpqWPL+ 
(4.7) 
6-veetor 
ÜPL+, iqjeLpqfpL+, qjeLpqapL+, ieLpqapL+ 
7-veetor 
ißPL+, qjWPL+, eLpqwPL+, iqjeLpqßpL+ 
8-veetor 
qjapL+, iqjfPL+, eLpqapL+ 
9-veetor 
WPL+, iqjßPL+ 
lO-veetor 
apL+ 
For example, the reduction of the I-veetors of 4.4 occurs as follows: 
leaving the veetor basis in 4.7, which is a basis for the vector part ofR1,3PL+ 
(see 4.2). The rest of this isomorphie eopy of R 1,3PL+ is indicated by boxes 
in 4.7. 

88 
CHAPTER4 
The ten (1,9)-vectors reduce to the four (1,3)-vectors (pL+ tacked on), 
but higher multivectors do not similarly reduce simply from (1,9) to (1,3). 
Under commutation the 2-vectors of R 1,9 form the Lie algebra 80(1,9). The 
projection 4.6 reduces this to 80(1,3) x 80(6). In all cases, however, the 
sub algebra 4.7 has a nontrivial effect only on the matter half P+ T 2 of T 2 • 
The antirnatter projection 
(4.8) 
has a similar result, the only change being that in 4.6 each PL+ becomes 
PL-. The subalgebra PL-TL(2)PL- is also isomorphie to C(16), and its ob-
ject space is the antirnatter subspace p_ T2 of T 2 • PL± T L(2)PL± account for 
only half of TL(2). The remaining elements mix the matter and antirnatter 
subspaces of T 2• More on this in chapter 6. 
On specific elements of R 1,9 the reductions 4.6 and 4.8 are illuminating 
in their distinctions. For example, the (1,9)-Dirac operator, 
reduces via 4.6 to the {1,3)-matter-Dirac operator 
(the signs in 4.9 were arranged so that the signs in 4.10 would be conven-
tional), and via 4.8 to the {1,3)-antimatter-Dirac operator 
Likewise, if 
then 
3 
0" 
. 
fjl,3- = PL- fjl,9PL- = (ß8 - L.J iqjw{)3)PL_. 
1 
(4.11) 
( 4.12) 
This associates left( right )handed matter with right(1eft )handed antirnatter , 
and of course that is the observed associatioll. 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
Perhaps a word of explication is needed here. The matrices 
{'o = ß, {'j = iqjw,j = 1,2,3, 
via the maps 
89 
1 = qo -
[~ ~ 1 ' iql -
[~ ~ 1 ' iq2 -
[~ -~ 1 ' iq3 -
[-~ ~ 1 ' 
transform to 
{'o -
o i 1 
-~ ~ , 
. . 
which are Dirac {'-matrices as commonly represented. The context with 
w'hieh we are dealing precludes the use of these conventional{'-matrices. We 
must play the hand we are dealt, and that is TL(2) ~ C ® R I ,9. Let 
io = ß, '::0 = -eL7qjW,j = 1,2,3, ih = -ieLhw, h = 4, ... , 9, 
be the R I ,9 generators (l-vector basis) listed in 4.4 (signs specified to ac-
comodate 4.9, leading to 4.10). The (1,3)-part of this basis consists of the 
il-',11 = 0,1,2,3, but at this point these operators are not matter / antimatter 
specific - the same set is valid for both. In making the projections 
io - PL±ioPL± = {'OPL±, 
ij - PL±ijPL± = ±{'jPL±,j = 1,2,3, 
we achieve the more conventional{'l-" with the antimatter {"s space reflected 
relative to the matter {"~so In addition, the matter/antimatter {"s are a8-
sociated with the matter/antimatter projectors, PL±. They do not appear 
without these projectors. And finally, 
ih -
PL±ihPL± = 0, h = 4, ... ,9. 
The matter/antimatter projectors kill the extra six dimensions. We shall 
look at these issues in greater detail in chapter 6. 

90 
CHAPTER4 
4.2. Connecting to Particles. 
Let \{I be an element of T 2 transforming with respect to U(2) x U(3) like r~ 
(any rtn would do). That is, 
( 4.13) 
(the factor 1/2 sets a conventional scale), so 
\{IrQ -U(2) 'lirQ 
(invariance) 
(4.14) 
(recall that 
Ö = a1ierql + a 2q2 + a3ierq3 ~ ÖP± = (±a1ql + a 2q2 ± a 3q3)p±, 
hence it is natural to associate the U(1) generator (-er) with Ö, since 
-erP± = ±ip±). It will be understood henceforth that by the symbol \{I 
we mean the canonical T 2 spinor such that \{IrQ = \{I~Q (modulo U(3)). 
However, even though this will be understood, the former notation will be 
used to avoid confusion with the ~Q in the decomposition \{I = E~ \{I~m. 
With respect to U(3) the situation is different, for all the r mare U(3) 
invariant. The action of U(1) C U(3) on \{I is the inverse of 3.64: 
( 4.15) 
With respect to SU(3) \{I transforms as 1 EB I EB 3 EB 3 (corresponding to 
the respective terms in 4.15). In particular, 
( 4.16) 
where W'l and the 'li a , a = r,g,b,each consist ofan SU(2) doublet ofDirac 
spinors. The subscripts r= red, g= green, b= blue, are conventional SU(3) 
'color' labels. We assign them conventional SU(3) color charges: 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
91 
Let Ja be the quantum number of SU(2). It is associated with the action 
13w,>,± = W'>'±ii/2 = ±~W'>'±. 
Y2, the hypercharge of U(l) C U(2), is associated with the action, 
Y2Wp± = Wp±(-ie7/2) = +~WP±, 
and Y3 , the hypercharge of U(l) C U(3), with the action 
1 
Y3p+Wp± = (-ie7/6)p+Wp± + p+Wp±(ie7/6) = 0 or - 3P+WP-. 
Below is a table of values for 13 , Y2, Y3 for the SU(3) singlet and triplet parts 
of W, together with the charge Q = 13 + Y2 + Y3 . 
Ja 
Y2 
Y3 
Q 
p+Wp+'>'+ = WIßO 
+~ 
1 
0 
0 
-2 
p+Wp+.>._ = WIßl 
1 
1 
0 
-1 
-2 -2 
( 4.17) 
p+\lfp_.>.+ = \lf3ß2 
+~ +1 
1 +3 
2 
-'3 
p+\lfp_.>._ = W3ß3 
1 +1 
1 
1 
-2 
2 
-'3 -'3 
The obvious particle assignments are: 
P+ \lf P+'>'+ -+ neutrino, 
p+Wp+.>._ -+ electron, 
p+Wp_.>.+ -+ up-quark, 
P+ \lf p-'>'- -+ down-quark. 
(4.18) 
The antifamily charges are 
13 
Y2 
Y3 
Q 
p_\lfp_.>._ = Wiß3 
1 
+~ 
0 
0 
-2 
p_Wp_,>,+ = \lfiß2 
+~ +~ 
0 
+1 
( 4.19) 
p_\lfp+.>._ = Waßl 
1 
1 +1 
2 
-2 -'2 
3 
-'3 
p- Wp+.>.+ = Waßo +1 
1 +1 +l 
2 -'2 
3 

92 
CHAPTER4 
In fact, however, due to parity nonconservation the quantum numbers 
4.17, and the particle assignments 4.18, are not entirely correct. Only the 
lefthanded Weyl spinor parts of the associated Dirac spinors have these quan-
tum numbers. The righthanded spinors are SU(2) singlets (h = 0), and have 
different values of Y2. 
Spinors with the correct righthanded quantum numbers arise as follows. 
The inner product of q, with any other spinor in T 2, a la equation 3.39, 
associates q, with the r m' New spinors, q,r m, arise in this way. The action 
of SU(2) on q, was defined so as to cancel the action on r m: 
( 4.20) 
So each of the eight spinors P± q,r m is SU(2) chargeless. 
The Y2 charges for the r mare carried by the automorphisms Mm from 
ro to rj, j=1,2,3 (see 3.62). Therefore, if 
then 
The U (3) charges of q, r mare the same as those for q, ~m above. S U (3) is 
a subgroup of the automorphism group of 0, so its action on P± q,r m is the 
same as that on p±q,~m, as the only term in either not SU(3) invariant is 
q,. Likewise, the Y3 charges are the same since e7 commutes with r m, and 
if e7 ~m = ±idm , then e7 r m = ±ir m too. 
In particular, it should be emphasized that the fact that parity nonconser-
vation occurs with respect to SU(2), but not SU(3), is being demonstrated 
to arise from the fact that the r m are not SU(2) invariant, but are SU(3) 
invariant. 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
Quantum numbers for the p+ wr mare listed below: 
h 
Y2 
Y3 
. p+ wfo = Wlf O 
0 
0 
0 
p+ wrt = WIrt 
0 -1 
0 
p+wr2 = War2 
0 +1 
t 
-3 
o 
For example, under the action of the U(1) of Y2 , 
P+ wr2 
_ 
P+ We(}er!2e i(}!2f2 
'() 
= 
P+ wr2et • 
93 
Q 
0 
-1 
( 4.21) 
+~ 
The quantum numbers 4.21 give rise to the same particle assignments as 
4.17, but this time they are those of righthanded leptons and quarks. The 
question therefore arises, how can we mathematically associate the quantum 
numbers 4.17 with 
I 
~(f. + 1's)P+ W d m = lefthanded family, I 
and the quantum numbers 4.21 with 
I 
~ (€ - 1'5 )p+ wf m = righthanded family? 
The antifamily charges corresponding to 4.21 are 
h 
Y2 
Y3 
Q 
p_wr3 = wi f 3 
0 
0 
0 
0 
o +1 
p_ wft = Wsft 
0 -1 
+~ -~ 
p- wfo = wsro 0 0 +~ +1 
(4.22) 
( 4.23) 
(4.24) 

94 
CHAPTER4 
In this case we'd want to associate the charges 4.19 to 
!( f - 'Ys)p_1lJ ß m = righthanded antifamily, 
(4.25) 
and those in 4.24 to 
I !( f + 'Ys)p_llJr m = lefthanded antifamily. 
(4.26) 
4.3. Parity N onconservation. 
RIGHTHANDED DIRAC OPERATOR. 
Define 
1 
L± = '2( f + 'YS)PL±, 
1 
R± = '2(f-'YS)PL±. 
Define 
(4.27) 
( 4.28) 
where 0'0 = 1, and O'j = iqj, j=1,2,3. Let llJ in T 2 be a space-time field 
(for nOWj later we'll consider llJ a (l,9)-space-time field). Consider the inner 
product 
where 
( 4.30) 
and 
(4.31) 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
95 
is the spinor eonjugate. In 4.29 eonsider the term 
( 4.32) 
The derivative in 4.32 'sees' both WR and r n, so it sees the U(2) x U(3) ae-
tions on eaeh. That is, in making this internal symmetry loeal, gauge fields 
arise eonsistent with the eh arges 4.21 associated with righthanded lepto-
quark fields. Note that SU(3) gauge fields survive beeause the rn are in-
variant, and so have no effect on the gauge fields arising from the action of 
SU(3) on q,. 
LEFTHANDED DIRAC OPERATOR 
A trick is used to manifest the eorreet gauge fields for lefthanded leptons 
and quarks. Define 
( 4.33) 
where CfÖ = Cfo, Cf; = -Cfj, j=1,2,3, and 
is differentiation from the right. That is, it is assumed that since 
[ 0 
0 1 
[0 Cf,.,. 1 
t 
Cf;; 
0 
PL+ = M1( 
0 
0 
PL+), 
( 4.34) 
where A -+ M1(A)t is an antiautomorphism (product reversing), that this 
reverses the direction of the action of the derivative (ie., under the action of 
this antiautomorphism, 
Take the inner produet 
< q" ~L+ q, >= ~([L Mm((q,r n)t\(~L+ q,r n))] + [same]t}, 
mn 
( 4.35) 

96 
CHAPTER4 
( 4.36) 
-
In 4.36 the derivative ()J.' sees only 
3 
Ilf L = I: Ilf LD.m , 
o 
hence only the U(2) x U(3) actions on this field. Therefore gauge fields as-
sociated with the charges 4.17 arise in this case, those of lefthanded leptons 
and quarks. SU(3) gauge fields are the same as the righthanded case. 
FULL PARITY VIOLATING DIRAC OPERATOR 
The operator 
( 4.37) 
differs from "1,3+ (our earlier (1,3)-matter-Dirac operator defined in 4.10) 
only in the direction of the derivative in the lefthanded part, so it is also a 
valid (1,3)-matter-Dirac operator. Its advantage, of course, is that its use in 
the spinor Lagrangian term 
l.co =< 1lf,"+1lf >= 1 {[Emn Mm((wrn)"(,,+wrn))] + [same]t} I (4.38) 
results after gauging in the ohserved lepto-quark gauge field interactions. To 
this point the only unconventional result is the appearance of a chargeless 
righthanded neutrino. And, of course, the structures heing manifested are 
intrinsic to the mathematics. 
Because of the appearance of p+ in "+' .co is only a matter Lagrangian, 
and it gives rise to only matter to matter transitions. That is, 
.co =< Ilf, ~+ Ilf >=< p+ Ilf, ~+p+ Ilf > . 
The p_1lf parts of W fall out in taking the inner product, hecause in general 
< p±A,B >=< A,p±B >=< p±A,p±B > 
(p± could he replaced by any Hermitian associative projection operator). An 
antirnatter version of .co is easily constructed along the lines outlined ahove, 
hut in the next few sections attention will he restricted to matter and .co. 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
97 
4.4. Gauge Fjelds. 
The core of the Lagrangian Co consists of the terms 
where 
Define 
( 4.40) 
These are alternate SU(2) generators, and T3 = x is diagonal with respect 
to the projection operators A± = !(1 ± ix). Consider the n=O term of the 
lefthanded part of 4.39. U(2) gauge fields arise as follows (p+ q,"ro is U(3) 
invariant ): 
(q," LrO)t( a; p+ W d~gAJ.ljTj - !g' BJ.le7]rO) 
= (q,"LrO)t(a;p+q,"L(ßo + ßl)[!gAlLjTj + !g'iBJ.ljro) 
(ß2,ß3 terms drop 01 
= (q,"LrO)t(a;p+q,"LßO[!gAIL3x + !g'iBIL]ro) 
(ßO(TI + T2)rO = 0) 
+(q,"LrO)t(a;p+WLßl[!g(AJ.llql + AJ.l2q1X )]rO) 
(ßt(T3 + i)ro = 0) 
~ (NLrO)t(a; Nd!ßoi(g'BIL - gAJ.l3)jrO) 
(ßoxro = -iro) 
+(NLrO)t(a; Ed!ßlqlg(AJ.ll - iAJ.l2)]ro) 
(4.41) 
(summation over repeated indices), where 
is a lefthanded neutrino field, and 
is a lefthanded charged lepton field. The last step in 4.41 is not a strict 
equality hecause (q,"LrO)t = «p+ + p_)q,"LrO)t, hut in completing the inner 
product 4.38 the (p_ q," LrO)t term drops out. 9 and g' are conventional gauge 
coupling constants for SU(2) and U(l). 

98 
CHAPTER 4 
In like manner, setting n=1 in the lefthanded part of 4.39, we obtain 
(IJILfdt(a;p+lJld!gAi'jTj - !g'Bi'e7]fd 
~ (ELfdt(a; Ed!ß1i(g' Bi' + gAi'3)]ft) 
+(ELr1)t(a; Nd!ßOqlg(Ai'l + iAi'2)]f1). 
(4.42) 
Another word in explication is needed here. The last lines of 4.41 are those 
parts of the first line that survive the inner product. The gauge field terms, 
and the indecomposable (with respect to U(2) X U(3)) Pauli spinor bits of 
IJI, are all easily identifiable with physical particles. Combinations of these 
algebraic pieces of the gauged Lagrangian that survive the inner product 
correspond to viable transitions; those that do not are not viable. They will 
not occur. No actual cross-sections or probabilities are being calculated here. 
As yet we may only read from the mathematics a binary resu1t: yes, this 
transition is allowed; no, that one is not. 
The algebraic gauge fields are indicated by square brackets in the last 
terms of 4.41 and 4.42, and from these we can figure their Y2, 13 (and Q = 
Y2 + h) charges (U(3) invariant). Only two of these charges are nonzero. 
The first is: 
. 
where we have exploited the fact that 
1'_ A 
A 
1._ 
A 
-2" zxulql + ulql2"ZX = uIQ1· 
So h = 1 for this gauge field, and 
Q = h + Y2 = 1 + 0 = 1, 
and we make the conventional identification 
( 4.44) 
So the last term in 4.41 represents the transition 
( 4.45) 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
99 
Likewise, 
(4.46) 
(J3 = -1, Y2 = 0) and the last term in 4.42 corresponds to the transition 
(4.47) 
It will be noted that the issue of second quantization has not yet arisen. 
When algebraic fields identifiable with particular particles (by their symme-
try transformation properties) appear in combination in a Lagrangian, and 
the combination survives the inner product, then an allowable transition re-
sults. Part of the U(2) X U(3) gauging of Lo, denote it Lg (ie., Lg is distinct 
from Lo and contains all the gauge field-fermion interaction terms), is 
1 
< EL, 0';; Nd .J2ßOQ19WiL-j >1 0, 
which in having a non zero real part implies 4.47 is an allowable transition. 
On the other hand, 
1 
< EL, 0';; Ed .J2ßOQ19 WiL-j >= 0, 
so EL -
EL + W- is not allowed. 
and 
so 
Two other conventional definitions are made: 
g' B/J _ 9 AiL3 
Z iL = ::'-':---::,.,....,...,c::-
(92 + 912)1/2 
(with 
99' 
e -
---:...:..--..,-= 
-
(g2 + g/2)1/2 
the electromagnetic coupling constant). These arise in the terms 
( 4.48) 
(4.49) 
(4.50) 
(4.51) 

100 
CHAPTER4 
from 4.41 (neutral current), and 
from 4.42 (electromagnetic and neutral currents). 
The righthanded term in 4.39 also gauges in the conventional manner. 
However, this term contains the following: 
( 4.53) 
(NR = p+WRrO). NR is a righthanded neutrino. Since it is U(2) x U(3} 
chargeless, it does not appear in Cg • The presence of a righthanded neu-
trino in this theory is a prediction, along with all that it would imply in 
astrophysics, in particular regarding the problem of dark matter. Its only 
inter action may be gravitational. 
4.5. Weak Mixing. 
The symmetry of equation 3.40 is larger than U(2) x U(3). There are extra 
U(1)'s and an extra SU(2) (see 3.47). Let 
( 4.54) 
U1 E U(1), U2 E SU(2). The remaining rj,j = 1,2,3, differ from Mj(ro} 
by the extra U(1} and SU(2} phases. Let 
and let 
Therefore, 
P = exp(ßp_). 
pr m = r m, m = 0,1, 
prm = eßrm , m = 2,3 
(see 3.48). Since P has a nontrivial effect only on r 2 and r 3 , it can be used 
to account for the additional SU(2) freedom in the r m • We may express the 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
101 
r m as follows: 
(4.55) 
In the square brackets are incorporated the additional symmetry bits, but 
outside there appears a revamped 
Since 
pu2P- 1r m = u2r m , m = 0,1, 
the SU(2) gauge fields of the previous section are unaltered by this change. 
This is true even if we alter the U (2) action on the matter spinor field p+ W: 
p+1I1 
-+U(2) p+II1(PU;lp-l)U1- 1 
+p+ Wß2(eßU;le-ß)Ul-l + P+ II1ß3(eßU;le-ß)Utl. 
( 4.56) 
That is, the neutral and charged lepton fields, p+ 111 ßo and p+ W ßl, are 
unaltered. Not so the quark fields, p+ 111 ß2 and p+ 111 ß3. 
It is necessary in wh at follows to specify that the Bj, j = 1,2,3, and the 
components of 13, are to be treated as constant phases. Only the U(2) x 
U(3) previously defined will give rise to gauge fields. For the moment the 
justification for this a8sumption will rest on its consequences. 
Making use of 4.55,56, the lefthanded n=2 part of the Co terms 4.39 
transform into 
{(WL(PUi 1 p-l )U1- 1U1(PU2P-l )[ei92 Pß2])tX 
(0'; P+ W L(PU;l p-1 )Ut 1{FUl(PU2P-1 )[ei92 Pß2])} 
( 4.57) 

102 
CHAPTER4 
Including U(l) C U(3), but ignoring SU(3), this gauges as follows: 
(p+'I1LPr2)t(u;;p+'I1LP[!gAlLiTj -
~g'Bl'e7]r2) 
(4.58) 
~ (p+'I1LPr2)t(U;;P+'I1L(~2 + ~3)P[!gAlLiTj -
~g'BlLe7]r2) 
(reverting back to the symbol r2 instead of the ~2 appearing in 4.57). Now 
set 
ß real, so that 
Also, 
for the canonical r 2 (= ~2)' In this case 4.58 reduces to 
(p+ '11 Le-iß/2r 2)t( u;; p+ '11 L~2e-iß/2[ !gAl'jTj -
~gl Bl'e7]r2) 
+(p+ '11 Le-iß/2r 2)t( u;; p+ '11 L~3e+iß/2[!gAl'iTj - ig' Bl'e7]r2) 
P+'I1~2 is a Q = ~ quark, P+'I1~3 a Q = -! quark. Let 
U = up-quark, C = charm quark, and 
(4.59) 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
D = down-quark, S = strange quark. Then 4.59 can be written 
+«UL + iCL)r2)t(u;(DL + iSL)eiß[~qlgw+/Llr2) 
= ((UL)r2)t(u;(UL)[i( -~eA/L + 392_9'2! z/L]r2) 
6(g2+gl2) 
+(ULr2)t(u;(DLCOS({3) - SLsin({3))[hq19W+/Ljr2) 
+(CLr2)t(U;(SLCOS({3) + DLsin(ß))[~qlgW+/Ljr2) 
+i{(ULr2)t(U;(SLCOS({3) + DLsin(ß))[~qlgW+/Ljr2) 
-(CLr2)t(u;(DLCOS(ß) -
SLsin(ß))[~qlgW+Jl]r2)}. 
By replacing 
p+ W, = (electron family) + i(muon family) 
P+W' = (electron family) - i(muon family), 
103 
( 4.60) 
the terms in 4.60 delimited i{ ... } change sign, so in adding the Wand w' 
versions tagether, these terms drop out. What remains are the U-to-U and 
C-to-C electromagnetic and neutral currents, plus charged currents with 

104 
CHAPTER 4 
families mixed. For example, 
(ULf2)t((1;;(DLCOS(ß) -
SLsin(ß))[~qlgW+lLlf2) 
= (ULf2)t( (1;;(D L)[~qlgW+lLlf2)cos(ß) 
-( U Lf 2)t( (1;; (SL)[ ~qlgW+lLlf 2)sin(ß) 
indicates a transition of DL via W+ to UL, proportional to cos(ß), and a 
transition of SL via W+ to UL, proportional to sin(ß), this latter transition 
intergenerational. The angle ß is just the Cabbibo angle, and the mixing is 
just conventional weak mixing. Leptons do not similarly mix because the 
extra SU(2) phase does not appear in those cases (see 4.56, where p+"\[Ißo 
and p+"\[I ßl are lepton terms). As to righthanded fields, because they are 
free of SU(2) charged currents, they are free of mixing as weIl. 
Certainly this is not a derivation of the Cabbibo angle. It nicely explains 
why leptons are immune to weak mixing, but it doesn't explain the exact 
SU(2) phase needed for this purpose. Nor does it explain why there should 
be another family, nor force the inclusion of a third. When I first began 
work with the tensored division algebras I assumed that the occurance in 
T of a family plus antifamily was an indication that eventually there would 
be found to be an even number of families. Experimental evidence seems to 
indicate there are only three. For the time being, therefore, I consider the 
generation structure of this model an open question, with the ideas presented 
in this section an indication of how things might work out for the first two 
generations. 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
105 
4.6. Gauging 8U(3). 
A set of eight generators for SU(3) are: 
Al 
= ~(eL26 - eL34), 
A2 
= ~(eL45 - eL6t), 
A3 
= ~(eL56 - eL41), 
A4 
= !(eL13 - eL52), 
(4.61) 
A5 
= ~(eL63 - eL24), 
A6 
= ~(eL35 - eL12), 
A7 
= ~(eL23 - eL15), 
A8 = H -eL23 - eL15 + 2eL46) 
(we'lliet the context distinguish the A-projection operators from these gen-
erators, which will only be employed in this section; this notation for SU(3) 
generators is conventional, and originated with Gell-Mann). The last two 
~re diagonal. We see this by operating the Hermitian generators ~A7 and 
~'\8 on p+er, r = 1,2,4 (since 
and we have identified the p+en r = 1,2,4, directions as red-green-blue). 
For example, 

106 
CHAPTER4 
and 
= -![p+el]' 
In like manner we determine a complete table of SU(3) charges for p+er. r = 
1,2,4: 
. 
1 
p7[p+el] = -'2[p+el] 
and 
~A8[p+el] = -~[p+el]' 
~A7[p+e2] = +![p+e2] 
and 
~A8[p+e2] = -~[p+e2]' 
( 4.62) 
~A7[p+e3] = 0[p+e3] 
and 
~A8[p+e3] = +Mp+e3]' 
These quantum numbers justify the red-green-blue labels above, and the use 
of the Gell-Mann symbols Aa , a = 1, ... ,8, to signify the generators. The 
antimatter eh arges of p_1T! are opposite those above (beeause ie7P± = ±p±). 
SU(3) gauge fields arise from the (1,3)-matter Lagrangian 4.38 as follows: 
( 4.63) 
where the G/Ja are the gluon fields (I' = 0,1,2,3, a = 1, ... ,8). Onee again 
we ean obtain from those parts of CSU(3) that ean eontribute a nonzero part 
to the result of the inner produet 4.63 a list of possible transitions. For 
example, eonsider the simpler looking term 
1 
= -2'(e4P+)(p+(e6(e3e2) - e2(e4e2))) 
= (e4P+ )(p+e4) 
= e4P+p+e4 
= e4P+e4 
= p_(e4)2 
= -p-
I 
1. 
= -2' + 2ze7 
( 4.64) 

CONNECTING TO PHYSICS 
107 
(the nonassociativity of 0 plays no role after the second line), which has 
a nonzero real part. The occurance of this expression in .cSU(3)' together 
with its contributing a non zero real value to the inner product, tells us that 
the green quark, p+e2, can interact with "Yp.Gp.5 A5 to produce a blue quark, 
p+e4· 
In addition, 
1 
= -"2(e2P+)(p+(e6(e3e4)- e2(e4e4») 
= -(e2P+)(p+e2) 
= -e2P+p+e2 
= -e2P+e2 
= -p_(e2)2 
= P-
1 
1. 
= "2 - 2U7 ' 
which again has a nonzero real part, so with the help of "Yp.Gp.5 A5, a blue 
quark, p+e4, can trans form to a green quark, p+e2. 
However, 
= (etP+)(p+e4) 
= (( etP+ )p- )e4 
= (et (P+P- »e4 
=0 
(nonassociativity is responsible for P+ --j. p_ in the second line), so the green 
quark, p+e2, can not interact with "Yp.Gp.5 A5 to produce a red quark, p+et. 
On the other hand, although 
= (etp- )(p+e4) 
= ((etp-)p-)e4 
= (etp-)e4 
= (p+et)e4 
= p-(ete4) 
= -P-e3 
~ 0, 

108 
CHAPTER4 
it has no real part, hence drops out of the inner product, so the green quark, 
p+e2, can not interact with 'Y/JG/J5AS to produce an antired antiquark, P-el, 
either. 
Note that the space index J.L in 4.63 appears in 'Y/J' not just (T/J' and 
that W is the fullleft-right spinor hyperfield. That is, parity is conserved in 
this case, which is a direct consequence of the SU(3) invariance of the r m, 
in contrast to SU(2). In the next chapter we shall see that SU(3) is also 
necessarily exact. 
Also note that index doubling takes el -+ e2 -+ e4 -+ el, and makes 
corresponding changes in the Aa • Index quadrupalling takes el -+ e4 -+ e2 -+ 
e}, with yet another set of Aa • Doubling again gets us back where we started. 
One mlght conjecture that these three representations are somehow linked to 
there being three generations, but this is admittedly numerological groping, 
and it will not be pursued here. In fact, please forget I even mentioned it. 
There are more likely candidate explanations for family replication. 

5. Spontaneous Symmetry 
Breaking. 
5.1. Scalar Fields. 
Of the positive attributes of model building with T, rigidity ranks high on 
the list. The ability to mirror the structural features of our physieal reality 
with flexible mathematies bespeaks more the talents of the model builder 
than any fundamental connection of the mathematics to reality. Ta lay claim 
to such a connection a mathematieal idea must, in my opinion, satisfy at 
least the three qualities that so distinguish T: selectness; inflexibility; and 
consistency with those aspects of physieal reality it is intended to explicate. 
This chapter should highlight these qualities. 
Two kinds of fields have already been defined on this developing context: 
the fermion hyperfield, '1; and the gauge fields BI-', AI-'i, and GiJa • The 
former resides in T 2 , the spinor/object space for the external, or geometrie 
algebra TL(2), and also for the internal algebra PR. The latter fields reside 
in, or are associated with, these adjoint algebras. The former are in same 
sense primary, the latter derived or secondary. The inner product, < ... , ... >, 
is defined for primary fields, elements of T or T2, and in what follows we 
shall be considering scalar Lagrangians of the form 
where </> is a scalar field. Because our </> is not a gauge field, and because we 
shall be required to take its inner product, it is defined here to be a primary 
field. This, as it turns out, is a nontrivial constraint. 
We may define a field to be scalar with respect to a given geometry if its 
algebraic action on a spinor field commutes with the action of the geometrie 
(Clifford) algebra of the geometry on the same spinor. For example, let</> be 
109 

110 
CHAPTER 5 
a scalar with respect to R 1•9 s:; T L(2). In this case we may assurne 4> E P, 
and that its algebraic connection to 111 takes the form, 
(5.2) 
Note that as 
OL = OR s:; R 1•9, 
4> must be free ofhypercomplex octonions, and if dependent on hypercomplex 
quaternions it must connect to 111 from the right to commute with QL s:; R 1•9 • 
A second possibility is to consider scalars with respect to the subalgebras 
PL± TL(2)PL± (see 4.7), the matter and antirnatter projections from TL(2). 
Multiplication from the left by e7 on 111 commutes with these algebras, so the 
dimension of the scalar space is doubled, and we may define a new action on 
111 by, 
(5.3) 
where 4>± E P. 
[Note that although OL = OR, eL7 =f eR7, and in fact eR7 does not commute 
with PL± TL(2)PL±, even though eL7 does. For example, 
hut 
Hence the commutator 
[PL+eL12 , eR7] =f 0, 
so eR7 does not commute with PL+ TL(2)pL+.] 
This scalar has the advantage that it distinguishes matter from antirnat-
ter, but it has the problem that in giving masses to leptons (via spontaneous 

SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING 
111 
symmetry breaking), it is unable to do the sam.e for the quarks, which are 
not diagonal with respect to the resulting mass operator. 
Consequently we shall loosen the definition one final step (the last pos-
sible) and take our scalars with respect to the matter and antirnatter Dirac 
algebras, R 1,3PL± (R1,3PL+ is the boxed subalgebra in 4.7). These algebras 
commute with eR7 as weH as eL7, which again doubles the dimension of our 
algebraic scalar space. In this case we define the connection to \l1 by 
I P+ \l1 P+4Jo + P+ \l1 P-4JI + P- \l1 P+4J2 + P- \l1 P-4J3, I 
(5.4) 
where 4Jm E P, m=O,1,2,3. 
Recall that we have made the following identifications: 
P+ \l1 P+ = lepton doublet; 
P+ \l1 p_ = quark doublet, color triplet; 
p_ \l1 p_ and p_ \l1 P+ respective antirnatter hyperfields. Each of the cPm is 
an element of P, hence SU(3) singlets, so they mix the doublet parts of 
these hyperfields, but not the SU(3) triplet parts. Consequently spontaneous 
symmetry breaking can occur only to the SU(2) level. SU(3) is necessarily 
exact. As was the case with parity nonconservation (see section 4.3), the 
exactness of SU(3), and the breaking of SU(2), follow from the mathematics. 
5.2. Scalar Lagrangians. 
Let cP E P be one of the scalar fields defined in 5.4. Define 
l.coP = E~=o < ovcP,E)vcP > _j.t2 < cP, cP > -A < cP, cP >2 .1 
(5.5) 
This is very nearly as conventional a scalar Lagrangian as it looks, even 
though cP in its present form is not an SU(2) doublet, or even a pair of 
doublets. If 
eä/ 2 E SU(2) 
(see 3.55 and 4.13), it is natural to define the SU(2) transformation of 4J by: 
(5.6) 
(so cP would be U(l) invariant». cP therefore transforms like the direct sum 
of an SU(2) singlet and triplet. 

112 
CHAPTER 5 
However, 
and under SU(2), 
(5.8) 
That is, <pr n is an SU(2) doublet, and SU(2) gauge fields arise in 5.7 con-
sistent with 5.8, not 5.6, because the derivatives act on <pr n. (Confession: 
were the directions from which the partia.ls act in 5.5 reversed, gauge fields 
would arise consistent with 5.6 instead of 5.8, and the result would be less 
conventional. I'm pretending that this is for some reason precluded.) 
Gauging U(l) is slightly more complicated. Because the <p are U(l) in-
variant (e8e7<pe-8e7 = ei8<pe-i8 = <p), the U(l) charge of <prn derives entirely 
from rn (see 3.62). Consequently there is no single covariant derivative that 
can replace ßJJ in 5.7. Instead, U(2) gauge fields arise as folIows: 
ßJJ<prn -+ 
(ßJJ - !g'iBIJ - !gAlJiTj)<prn, n = 0,2, 
(5.9) 
(the Ti are defined in 4.40). To simplify what folIows, note that 
where 
= (-!g'iBIJ + !giAIJ3)A+ - (!g(AlJl + iAIJ2))qlA_ 
-( !g(AlJl _ iAIJ2))qlA+ + (-!g'iBIJ - !giAIJ3)A_ 
= -[igz1ZIJ]A+ - [2t/2 WJJ-]qlA_ 
-[-#t2WIJ+]qlA+ - [i(eAIJ + gz2ZIJ)]A_, 
(5.10) 

SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING 
113 
and 
Likewise, 
[+!g'iBIl - !gAlliri ] = [i(eAIl + 9z2ZIl )]A+ - [72WIl-]qt A-
(5.11) 
_[~WIl+]qlA+ + [igzlZIl]A_. 
Recall that prior to U(2) rotations, ro = A+P+, r1 = >'_p+, r 2 = >'+p_, 
r 3 = >'_p_ (unrotated, r m = ß m ), and that >.+>._ = >._>.+ = 0, >.~ = >.±. 
Also, ql>'± = >'=Fql. Decompose 
1> = >'+1>>'+ + A+1>>'- + >'-1>>'+ + >'-1>A-
where 1>++,1>+-,1>-+,1>-- E C. Therefore, for n=0,2, 
[-~g'iBIl -
~9Alliri]1>r n 
= [ ... ](1)++A+ + 1>-+Qt>.+)r n 
+{~WIl- - i(eAIl + 9z2 ZIl )Qd1>-+rn , 
(5.13) 
where the >.± have been absorbed into r n in the last step. Likewise, for 
n=1,3, 
[+!g'iBIl- !gAJtiri ]1>rn 
= 
[ ... ](A+Ql1>+- + >'-1>-_)rn 
= {i(eAIl + 9z2ZIl)Ql + ~WIl+}1>+_rn 
+{ -~ WIl- Qt - igztZIl}1> __ r n' 
(5.14) 
As usual, when J.l2 in 5.5 is taken negative, 1> takes on a nonzero vacuum 
expectation value (vev) [12], in this case somewhere on the 7-sphere 
< 1>,1> >= constant 
(5.15) 

114 
CHAPTER 5 
(which is the equation of a 7-sphere). Because AI' is identified with the 
massless photon field, the vacuum expectation values of <p-+, associated 
with AI' in 5.13, and <p+-, associated with AI' in 5.14, must be zero. <p-+ 
and <p+- are the charged parts of <p. 
Let v+ and v_ be the vev's of <p++ and <p-- (the neutral bits of <p). 
Including only these chargeless parts of <p, 5.13 and 5.14 reduce to (n=O,2) 
[-!g'iBJL - !gAJLiTj]<prn 
-+ {-igz1ZJL -
~WJL+}v+rn, 
(5.16) 
and (n=1,3) 
[+!g'iBJL - !gAJLiTj]<prn 
-+ {-igz1ZJL -
~WJL-}v_rn. 
(5.17) 
The resulting mass terms in 5.5 are: 
l{[Em Mm ((( -igz1 ZJL -
~W:qt}v++(ro + r2))t(same, J.t up)) 
+ Ern Mm«( -igz1ZJL -
~W;q1)V_-(rl + r3))t(same, J.t up))] + [same]t} 
(assuming r mare rotated to their canonical, values ß rn , so that 
ro + r2 = A+, r1 + r3 = A_) 
= l{[Em Mm(A+(igz1Zt + ~(W:)tqd« -igz1ZJL -
~(W:)ql)A+V~+) 
+ Ern Mm(A_(igz1 zt + ~(W;)tqt)« -igz1ZJL -
~(W;)q1)A_V:_)] + [sar 
= ~{[Em Mm(A+(g;1 ZJL ZJL + a;(W:)tw"'+)v~+ 
+ Ern Mm (A_(g;l ZJL ZJL + ~(W;)tw"'-)v:_l + [same]t} 
(5.18) 
where v2 = v~+ + v:_. Therefore, as expected (Ow = Weinberg angle), 
Mw 
9 
Mz = (g2 + g'2)1/2 = cosOw • 
(5.19) 

SPONTANEOUS SYMMETRY BREAKING 
115 
5.3. Fermions and Scalars. 
In 5.4 four scalar fields were defined, 4>m, m=0,1,2,3, along with their links 
to the fermion hyperfield '11. Including only the non zero vev's of each, these 
connections reduce to: 
(5.20) 
Consider the inner product of this with '11, and in particular the term 
(5.21) 
where in line 2 it is assumed that ro is unrotated, ie., ro = ßo, and in line 
3 just the part ofline 2 that survives the inner product is indicated, which 
in the last step is seen to imply a mass for the neutrino proportional to vo+. 
Following these same steps for the other terms yields: 
Mneutrino '" vo+ 
Mlepton( -1) 
f'V 
vo-
Mquark(2/3) 
f'V 
Vl+ 
Mquark( -1/3) 
f'V 
Vl-
(5.22) 
Mantiquark(I/3) 
f'V 
V2+ 
Mantiquark( -2/3) 
f'V 
V2-
M antilepton( + 1) '" V3+ 
M antineutrino '" V3-
(see 4.17 and 4.19; '" means "proportional to" here). 
The mass proportions indicated in 5.22 are for Dirac masses, hut no exact 
values are determined. It is now only worth pointing out that neutrinos have 
Dirac masses, and there is sufficient freedom to distinguish the family and 
antifamily at the mass level. 

6. 10 Dimensions. 
6.1. Fermion Lagrangian. 
There is every reason to believe that the (1,3)-Minkowski geometry is sec-
ondary. Our model building is not based upon the Pauli algebra, P L, from 
which is made the Dirac algebra for R 1,3, but upon TL, which bears a similar 
relations hip to Rl,9 (see 4.2 and 4.4). Define 
äo = 1, äj = -eL1qj,j = 1,2,3, ap+3 = -ieLp,p= 1, ... ,6. 
(6.1) 
These are related to the Clifford algebra R 1,9 given in 4.4 as the elements 
0'0 = 1, O'j = iqj,j = 1,2,3, 
are related to the Clifford algebra R 1,3 given in 4.2. We should require, there-
fore, that a field theory founded upon TL and T should involve functions of 
R 1,9, not just R 1,3. 
We shall consequently need to replace the (1,3)-Dirac operator, ~+, em-
ployed in 4.38 in the definition of Co, with a (1,9)-Dirac operator. To ensure 
that it violate parity as does ~+, we define 
(6.2) 
where 
0'0 = 0'0, ä;; = -aa,a = 1, ... ,9. 
(6.3) 
Also define 
(6.4) 

118 
CHAPTER 6 
and 
I i10,6 = i11,9 -
~1,3·1 
(6.5) 
Note that 
= PL+~1,3PL+ + PL+i10,6PL+ 
The second term drops out because 
PL+eLpPL+ = PL+PL-eLp = 0, p = 1, ... , 6; 
so PL+i10,6PL+ = O. Also, because PL+eL7PL+ = -iPL+, 
so 
PL+ i11,3PL+ = i11,3PL+ = i1+. 
(In replacing PL+ by PL-, space components are refiected.) 
Assume now that the fermion hyperfield W is a function of R 1,9 coordi-
nates, and define a new fermion Lagrangian: 
(6.6) 
Since i11,9 = i11,3 + i10,6' and PL+ + PL- = 1, 
i11,9 = i11,3PL+ + ~1,3PL- + ~O,6PL+ + i10,6PL-
(6.7) 
= ~+PL+ + i1-PL- + i10,6PL+ + i10,6PL-, 
where i1- is the antimatter version of i1+. Note that i1±PL± 
i1±; the 
projection operators PL± can be absorbed into i1±, but they are left in place 
in 6.7 to clarify what follows. 
First note that if X, Y E T, then 
(6.8) 

10 DIMENSIONS 
That is, 
< p_X, p+Y >= 0 
in general. Even more generally, 
119 
(6.9) 
To prove this we need only prove that for a, b E {O, ... , 7}, the expression 
(eaP- )(p+eb) can have no non zero real part. It is not hard to see that if ea, 
eb, and e7 do not associate (that is, (eaeb)e7 = -ea(ebe7», then 
Since ea, eb, and e7 do not associate, eaeb = ±ep for sorne p = 1, ... , 6, hence 
eaeb)p+ has no real part. If, on the other hand, (eaeb)e7 = ea(eber), then 
since p_p+ = o. This proves 6.8 and 6.9. 
Therefore, noting that 
we have 
~O,6PL± = PL"T ~O,6PL±, 
~±PL± = PL±fj±PL±, 
< W, fj+PL+ iI! > + < W, ~-PL- iI! > + < iI!, ~O,6PL+ iI! > 
+ < W, fjO,6PL- iI! > 
< p+iI!,p+(~+(p+iI!» > + < p_iI!,p_(fj_(p_iI!» > 
+ < p_iI!,P-(fjo,6(P+W» > + < p+iI!,P+(~O,6(P-W» > 
= < (p+iI!),fj+(p+W) > + < (p_iI!),fj_(p_iI!) > 
+ < (p- iI!), ~O,6(P+ iI!) > + < (p+ iI!), ~O,6(P-iI!) > . 
(6.10) 

120 
CHAPTER 6 
The first equality follows from 6.8 and 6.9. The first term after the last 
equality is just 
(6.11) 
the fermion Lagrangian studied in chapter 4. The second term is the anti-
matter version of Co. Both, as we have seen, give rise to reasonably conven-
tional leptoquark gauge models, matching the Standard Model in most of 
their salient features. The former takes matter (p+ w) to matter (p+ W)j the 
latter, antimatter (p_W) to antimatter (p_W). 
MATTER/ ANTIMATTER MIXING 
The last two terms of 6.10 are new, and they are a problem. The first 
takes matter (p+ w) to antimatter (p_W), the second the reverse. Such tran-
sitions are not observed, but they disappear from C1,9 if 
(6.12) 
identically. The conditions for this are developed below. 
First we'lllook at the term C_+ =< (p_W), f'O,6(P+W) > in more detail. 
Recall that we may make the decomposition, 
(6.13) 
where W±" m=0,1,2,4 are in p 2 • In particular, we designated the matter 
fields W+' m=0,1,2,4, lepton, red-, green-, and blue-quark. Consider the 
expression 
f'0,6(P+ w~et} 
which occurs in C_+. Because of nonassociativity, 
Also recall, 
ep(p+el) = (epp+ )eI. P = 0,1,5,7, 
ep(p+et) = (epp_)el' P = 2,3,4,6. 

10 DIMENSIONS 
Therefore, 
iJO,6(p+'li~etl = iwl:~eLp8P+3[p+'li~el1 
= iwp_[(el(84 + WS) + e2(85 - W6) + e4(87 -
i89))w~ell. 
Continuing along this line we can show 
I iJO,6(P+W+) = I 
iw(p_el(84 + ißS) + p_e2(ß5 + iß6) + p_ e4(ß7 + i(9»)['li~1 
+iW(P_el (84 + i8S) + p+e2( 85 - i(6) + p+e4( 87 -
iß9))[iI1~ed 
+iw(p+el(ß4 - i8S) + P_e2(ß5 + i86) + p+e4(ß7 -
i(9»['li~e21 
+iw(p+el(84 - ißS) + p+e2(ß5 - i(6) + p_e4(ß7 + iß9))['lite41 
= p_iW[(ß4 + ißS) + e2(ß5 + i(6) + e4(87 + i(9»iI1~1 
+p_iw[(el(84 + ißS) + e2(ß5 - iß6) + e4(ß7 -
i89»iI1~el1 
+p_iw[(el(84 - i8B) + e2(85 + iß6) + e4(87 -
i(9»W~e21 
+p_iw[(el(84 - ißB) + e2(85 - UJ6) + e4(87 + i(9»'lite41 
Therefore C_+ may be written 
< p- 'li, ~O,6(P+ w) > 
= < p_(iI1~ + iI1~el + iI1:'e2 + iI1~e4)' p_{iw(el(ß4 + i8S)'li~ + ... ) > . 
(6.15) 
Since, for example, < P_el,p_el >f:. 0, the last line above indicates a tran-
sition 
. 
W~ = lepton --+ antired-quark = 'li ~. 
(6.16) 
121 

122 
CHAPTER6 
In fact, the last line in 6.15 gives rise to all possible transitions from fields 
with SU(3) color white, red, green, and blue, to antifields of all anticolors 
save the one initiating the transition. That is, the red-quark may go to 
antiwhite (antilepton), antigreen, or antiblue, but not antired. In any case, 
baryon and lepton numbers are not conserved in these transitions. It is also 
curious that these transitions are not mediated by any gauge fieldsj it is 
the operator fJo 6 itself that provides the necessary compensating charges. 
Reca11 that as c~lor SU(3) = Spin(6) n G2, the color symmetry SU(3) is a 
subgroup of the (1,9)-Lorentz group, and the operator fJo,6 is not an SU(3) 
singlet. 
An objection might be made to this on the grounds that color SU(3) is 
an internal symmetry, and therefore ought to commute with the spacetime 
Clifford algebra. However, there is absolutely no evidence that SU(3) must 
commute with any Clifford algebra larger than R 1,3, that of our observable 
spacetime. Indeed, there is also no evidence for the extra six dimensions 
of Rl,9. That there are an extra six dimensions, and that they carry color 
SU(3) charges, is a prediction of model building on T. To better understand 
these charges, and to figure out some conditions sufficient to rid us of the 
last two terms of 6.10, we must first look more closely at SU(3). 
6.2. More 8U(3). 
The action of SU(3) on p+X, where X E 0 (or C ® 0 or T), was developed 
in section 3.6. For convenience 1'11 reproduce the principal results here. In 
particular, SU(3) is generated by elements of the form: eLpq -
eLrs, where 
epeq = eres , and p, q, T, S i= 7. These generators leave 1 and e7 invariant, 
hence also W~. Their action on W±, m= 1 ,2,4, can be represented as a C( 3) 
action on the eolumn [ :f ]. The corresponding matriees are: 

10 DIMENSIONS 
123 
!( €L34 -
€L26) - [ : 
: ] , ~(eL63 - eL24) ~ [ 
i ] , 
-1 
!( €L61 -
eL4S) - [ ; : ] , ~(eL56 - eL',) ~ 
[ ~l 1 
(6.17) 
~(eL5' - eL13) ~ [ ; : 1 ' ~(eL35 - ew) ~ [ ~1 
1 J 
~(eL46 - eL23) ~ [ : i 
:.] , ~(eL23 - ew) ~ [ : 
-i J 
-z 
Th. eo"esponding matrie .. ",ting on th. eolumn [ :~ ] are the cornplex 
conjugates of those in 6.12. 
SO(6), hence also SU(3), acts on RO,6. The action of SU(3) may be 
determined by commuting the generators listed in 6.17 with the element 
6 
X = EXP+3iW€Lp 
1 
of R 1,9 ~ TL(2). Since these generators commute with iw, we may look only 
at their action on the eLp. For example, the commutator 
6 
[~( €L34 -
€L26), E X P+3eLp] = X geL2 - X 7 €L3 + X 6€L4 - X S€L6. (6.18) 
1 
Therefore, under the action 6.18, 
[ 
:. -i 

124 
CHAPTER 6 
Likewise the commutator 
6 
[~(eL56 - eL4t) , EXP+3eLp] = -X7eLl + X 4eL4 - X geL5 + X 8eL6. (6.20) 
1 
[ X7 + iX9 ]_ [. . -1] [ X: + ~X: ] 
-+ 
0 
-... 
X +zX 
. 
- X 4 - iX8 
1. 
X7 + iX9 
[ 
X4 + iX8 ] 
(6.21) 
Therefore 
X5 + iX6 
transforms with respect to SU(3) under a represen-
X7+iX9 
tation the inverse O[f ~~t~ni~~l]e 6.17, which acts on P+ W p_, a quark-matter 
spinor. Likewise, 
X5 - iX6 
transforms under a representation the in-
X 7 - iX9 
verse of that on p_ W P+, an antiquark-antimatter spinor. 
6.3. Freedom from Matter-Antimatter Mixing. 
If fis a suitably smooth function of a complex variable, z = x + iy, then 
(8x + i8y)f(x + iy) = O. 
(6.22) 
Likewise, 
(8x - i8y)f(x - iy) = O. 
(6.23) 
The parts of .c1,9 (see 6.5) that give rise to matter-antimatter mixing are 
those in which the differential operator tJo 6 appears. In 6.9 it was shown 
that tJ06(P+W) can be rewritten using the ~peratorR 84 ± i88 , 85 ± i86, and 
87 ± i89• Combining 6.14 with 6.22 and 6.23, it is apparent that if 

10 DIMENSIONS 
125 
where I-" = 0,1,2,3, then 
(6.25) 
identically (for the corresponding bits of p_1)} we would require the complex 
conjugate dependencies). 
The grou p U (3) acts transitivelyon S5, the 5-sphere determined by 
9 
}:)xP)2 = r2• 
4 
Consequently, since I)}~ is supposed to be U(3) invariant, we should expect 
that its only dependence on xP, P = 4, ... ,9, be radial (a function of r). But 
this is not possible given the functional dependence in 6.24, for no nontrivial 
function of the complex tripie 
(x4 + ix8,x5 + ix6,x7 + ix9) = (zt, z2,z4) 
can be dependent only on 
r = (zl zh + z2z2 .. + z4Z4*)L 
Arguing along these phenomenologicallines we might then expect I)}~ to be 
independent entirely of xP, p = 4, ... , 9. 
Likewise we might expect I)}~, identified as the red quark, to be inde-
pendent of x5 , x6 , x 7, x9 , which transform nontrivially with respect to the 
SU(2) subgroup of SU(3) that leaves red (ie., et, e5, and xl + ix5) invariant. 
Carrying on like this leads to reduced dependencies: 
where , ., indicates independence of that coordinate. 
Because of the results of section 6.2 it is clear that the Ro,6 dependencies 
in 6.24 have complicated SU(3) transformation properties. The dependen-
ci .. 6.26 are phenomenologically preferable. Let w\''''' ~ [n l' and 

126 
CHAPTER 6 
z = [ ~: ~ ~~: ]. Then if U E SU(3), we have the transformation 
X 7 + iX9 
(6.27) 
where even after such mixing, for example, we expect (Uq,~ark)l (first com-
ponent) to be independent of the second two components of U-1 Z. 
Finally, the dependencies 6.26 (or 6.24) reduce Cl ,9 to 
ICl,9 =< P+ 1l1, 9Jl,3P+ ll1 > + < p_ll1, 9Jl,3P- ~ >, I 
(6.28) 
which is where we want to be. Although I am not astring theorist, it is 
interesting that in both string theory and the context developed here the 
space Rl,9 should playaprominent role. Morevover, in string theory the 
extra six dimensions are balled up into a small complex 3-manifold, inorder 
to ren der them unobservable, and in the T context, inorder to be rid of 
matter-antimatter mixing, the extra six dimensions should also appear as a 
complex tripie (although it is unclear if there is a unique compactification 
arising from this context, much less if there is an associated SU(3) holonomy 
group). 
6.4. (1,9)-Scalar Lagrangian. 
Redefine 
IC", = L~=O < oa4J, oa4J > _J.L2 < 4J,4J > -A < 4J,4J >2 .1 
(6.29) 
This is the obvious generalization of 5.1 from R l ,3 to R l ,9. That is, now it 
is assumed 
4J = 4J(xa),a = 0,1, ... ,9, 
(6.30) 
rat her than merely 4J( xlJ.), J.L = 0, 1,2,3. Euler's equations, 
(6.31) 
applied to 6.24, imply 
9 
-2J.L2</>i - 4A</>i < 4J,4J >= 2 ~)OaOa)4Ji. 
o 

10 DIMENSIONS 
127 
Therefore 
3 
9 
'2) {}jJ{}jJ )(Pi + '2) {}p{}P)<Pi + [J.l2 + 2-\ < <p, <P > ] <Pi = O. 
(6.32) 
o 
4 
This is only unconventional in the second term. Note however that if 1 is a 
function of x ± iy, with 0;1 and {};I defined and continuous, then 
({); + (}~)/(x ± iy) = O. 
(6.33) 
Therefore, if <P is, for example, dependent on xP, P = 4, ... ,9 as "i[1~ in 6.24, 
then 
9 1: ( {}p{}P )<Pi = 0 
(6.34) 
4 
identically, and 6.32 reduces to the conventional form (obviously there are 
other dependencies on the extra six dimensions that would do as well). C"" 
however, does not. If we wish it to, then we need take the same extra steps 
taken in the last section to get from 6.24 to 6.26. That is, as <P is an SU(3) 
scalar, we might expect it to be independent of the xP, P = 4, ... ,9, which 
carry SU(3) charges. In which case, of course, 6.29 reduces to 5.1, and we 
are back where we started from, quite possibly where we'd like to be. As 
Higgs scalar fields are presently unobserved, much that could be said about 
them must be considered conjectural. 

128 
CHAPTER 6 
6.5. Charge Conjugation on T L(2). 
The Clifford algebra R 1,9, which is represented in 4.4 by elements of TL(2), 
is also representable by R(32), to which it is isomorphie. The spinors of this 
latter representation are 32 X 1 real columns, the so-called Majorana spinors, 
and R 1,9 maps this space to itself. The .spinors of TL(2) are elements of the 
128-dimensional T 2, the space of 2 X 1 columns over 64~dimensional T. This 
space has 4 times the dimensionality of an R 1,9 Majorana spinor. 
Half of that extra dimensionality arises from the quaternions, since QR 
is distinct from and commutes with TL(2). In chapter 3 the idempotents 
(6.35) 
were used in conjunction with P± = ! (1 ± ie7) to project the lepton, quark, 
antilepton and antiquark parts of T 2 spinors. In particular, if 
(6.36) 
then WA± are 64-dimensional R 1,9 Dirac spinors, the complexification of 
Majorana spinors (and an isodoublet; see chapters 3 and 4). 
The complexification of R(32) is C(32), the (1,9)-spacetime Dirac alge-
bra, with 32 X 1 complex column spinors. Add such a spinor to its complex 
conjugate and you end up with a 32 X 1 real spinor, whieh is Majorana if 
R 1,9 is represented by real matrices. Take an element of C(32) and add it 
to its complex conjugate and you get an element of R(32) ~ R 1,9, whieh of 
course is complex conjugate invariant. In this case complex conjugation and 
charge conjugation, which by definition leaves Majorana spinors invariant, 
are the same operation. 
This simple definition of charge conjugation can be used to construct the 
charge conjugation map on TL(2) and its spinors. In particulaI' we require 
first an automorphism on TL(2) that sends 
but that leaves the R 1,9 sub algebra of TL(2), given in 4.4, invariant. Every 
element of TL(2) can be written as M + iLN, where M,N E R 1,9' Define 
(6.37) 

10 DIMENSIONS 
129 
The TL(2) automorphism 6.36 can be extended to the spinor space T 2, 
but not uniquely. As a first step, note that since 
€=[~ ~],a=[~ ~l],ß=[~ ~]'W=[~l ~]ERlI9' 
it is therefore true that 
(6.38) 
So if A, B, C, D E TL, then 
[~ ~r 
(6.39) 
That is, the action of this conjugation on TL fully determines its action on 
all of TL(2). 
An examination of the Clifford algebra 4.4, together with if = -iL, 
determines the following actions on TL: 
pE {1, ... ,6}, 
etpq = +eLpq, 
p, q E {1, ... , 6}, 
(6.40) 
etp7 = -eLp7, 
pE {1, ... , 6}, 
efpQ7 = +eLpq7, p, q E {1, ... , 6}, 
efpqr = -eLpqr, p, q, rE {l, ... , 6}, 
Together with products of these elements, this completely determines the 
A -t A# conjugation on TL, hence also on TL(2). 

130 
CHAPTER 6 
6.6. Charge Conjugation on T 2• 
If x, Y E T, then we expect the ~xtension of the Dirac algebra conjugation 
6.39,40 to the corresponding Dirac spinors to act as folIows: 
(6.41) 
This is a consequence of 6.39. We also expect 
(6.42) 
Therefore we may concentrate on just TL and T, the action of the conjuga-
tion on the former determined by 6.40. 
[Note: while we expect 1t = 1L, we will find that 1# =/:- 1, where it should 
be remembered that 1 E T is an element of the spinor space.] 
We begin with the action on x E T, 
In particular observe that 
et = et6[1 #] = -eL6[1 #], 
and also that 
In general, if p, q, r E {1, ... , 6} are distinct, epeq = er, then 
e! = -eLr[l#] = +eLpq[l#]. 
This necessarily implies that 
where k is an as yet undetermined element of C ® Q. 
(6.43) 
(6.44) 
(6.45) 
Since x --+ x# is supposed to be a kind of complex conjugation on the 
spinor x, we expect 
(6.46) 

10 DIMENSIONS 
131 
Therefore, 
1 = (1#)# = (ke7)# = ktef7[1#] = kfeL7[ke7] = -kf[k]. 
(6.47) 
So 
kt[k] = -1. 
Using 6.40 we determine 
1f[1] = 1L[1] = it[i] = -idi] = 1, 
q[j[qj] = qLj[qj] = (hqLj)#[iqj] = -hqLj[iqj] = -1. 
From 6.48,49 it is not difficult to determine that 
k = ei8ü, 
where ü is a unit quaternion. For the sake of simplicity we will set 
k = q2, 
so that in general, the charge conjugate of x E T is 
I x# = xt[q2e7] = q2e7M3(X),1 
(6.48) 
(6.49) 
(6.50) 
(6.51) 
(6.52) 
where M3(x) = -q2X*q2 was defined in chapter 3, and in chapter 4 we saw 
that it reverses all charges (the last equality above is left as an exercise for 
the reader). 
[Note: Although we are fixing k, it is interesting that given the form 6.50, 
k E U(l) X SU(2), in which case 6.45 has a U(l) X SU(2) X SU(3) form 
invariance, SU(3) C G2 the stability group of e7.] 
Therefore, for example, if 
x = 4(x"\± + Q2e7M3(X"\±)), 
Y = 4(y"\± + Q2e7M3(y"\±)), 
(6.53) 
then [ : 1 is a Majorana spinor, and [ ~ ] and [ ~ ] are Majorana-Weyl, 
Rl t9 being one of that class of Clifford algebras the spinofs of which can be 
both Majorana and Weyl. 

132 
CHAPTER6 
As an ex am pie of the action of the charge conjugation 6.52, recall that 
if W E T2 is a general complex (1,9)-spinor field, then 
1 
1 
1 
2 
p+WP_A+: h = 2' Y2 = 2' Y3 = -a' Q = a 
(6.54) 
is a charge ~ quark color triplet spinor field (see 4.17). In this case 
(6.55) 
where 
1 
1 
1 
2 
p_W'P+A_: h = -2' Y2 = -2' Y3 = a' Q = -a 
(6.56) 
is a charge -~ antiquark. 
THE MEANING OF MAJORANA 
The general field W may be written 
I W = P+ W + p- W = F! + Ff, I 
(6.57) 
where F1 and F2 are complete leptoquark families, and Ff is the antifamily 
of F2: 
(6.58) 
We can now see the difference hetween a (1,9)-Dirac spinor, and a (1,9)-
Majorana spinor. The former, F1 + Ff is actually an SU(2) doublet of 
(1,9)-Dirac spinors, and its family and antifamily parts are independent. 
The latter, from 6.53, is 
!(W + 111#) = !(F! + Ff + (F! + Ff)#) 
(6.59) 
= 
!(Fl + F2 + (Fl + F2)#), 
where now we see that the matter and antirnatter halves are conjugates of 
each other. The (1,9)-Dirac spinors allow for weak mixing a la section 4.5, 
and presumably contain information re family replication. A (1,9)-Majorana 
spinor still consists of a family of (1,3)-Dirac spinors (NOT (l,3)-Majorana!), 
summed with its charged conjugate, hut offers no opening for weak mixing, 
nor any hints as to family replication. I emphasize these distinctions as in 
the context of super string theory only (1,9)-Majorana spinors are employed. 
In the next section we will look a little doser at this context. 

10 DIMENSIONS 
133 
6.7. 10 Other Dimensions. 
10-dimensional space is by-and-large an ineluctable aspect of the application 
of T. It is apart of the message of the mathematics, and coincidentally it 
also plays a key role in string theory, the largest contemporary arena of 
theoretical physics. 
In classical string theory there are four critical dimensions: 3, 4, 6, and 
10. These are naturally linked to R, C, Q, and O. To see this note that 
(6.60) 
This link of the Hermitian matrices of C(2) to (1,3)-space-time is well-known, 
and it establishes the paradigm for linking the Hermitian matrices of R(2), 
Q(2), and 0(2) to space-times of other dimensions. In particular, 
det [ xo; x2 xO ~ x2 ] = (xO)2 _ (x1)2 - (x2)2 
(6.61) 
links R(2) to R 1,2; 
= (xO)2 _ (X I)2 _ (x2)2 _ (x3)2 _ (x4)2 _ (x5)2 
links Q(2) to Rl,5; and 
[ 
xO + x9 
det 
8 
,,7 a 
X 
-
L...I X ea 
= (XO)2 _ (xl)2 _ (X2)2 _ (x3)2 _ (x4)2 
_(x5)2 _ (x6)2 _ (x7)2 _ (x8)2 _ (x9)2 
links 0(2) to R 1,9. 
(6.62) 
(6.63) 
These links of the 2 X 2 Hermitian matrices over R, C, Q, and 0 to 3, 
4, 6, and 10-dimensional spacetimes allow an easy algebraic construction of 
twistors (conformal group spinors) for these spacetimes. In particular, let 
(6.64) 

134 
CHAPTER 6 
where 
Ko = R, K1 = C, K 2 = Q, K3 = O. 
If we define 
(6.65) 
then 
(6.66) 
is a 2 x 2 Hermitian matrix over Km, and 
SO 11'11' t represents a (1,1 + 2m )-spacetime vector in the forward light-cone 
(forward because the time component, 
Lorentz transformations on the spacetime vector can be achieved via an 
S L(2, Km) action on 11' [14]. In particular, define 81(2, Km), the Lie algebra 
of S L(2, Km), to be the L-commutator elosure of the set of traceless 2 x 2 
matrices over Km. By L-commutator elosure I mean that once the traceless 
2 X 2 matrices over Km are formed, we map the components to KLm, the 
left adjoint algebra (only in the case of 0 will this make a difference), then 
use commutation to find the elements needed to elose the algebra. Bases for 
81(2, Km), m = 1,2,3, are given below: 

10 DIMENSIONS 
135 
81(2, C) : [IL 
0 ] 
o -IL 
' [iL 
0 ] 
o -iL 
' 
[OlL 1 
1L 
0 
' 
[0 iL 1 
iL 
0 
' 
(6.67) 
[ 
0 
lL 1 
-IL 
0 
' 
[ 0 
iL 1 
-iL 0 
' 
81(2, Q) : [IL 
0 ] 
o -lL 
' 
[ q~j -~Lj] , 
[OlL 1 
1L 
0 
' 
[ q~j qLj 1 
o ' 
[ 
0 
lL] 
[ 
0 
qLj] 
(6.68) 
-IL 
0 
' 
-qLj 
0 
' 
[qLj 
0]; 
o qLj 
81(2,0) : [IL 
0 ] 
o -IL 
' [eLa 
0 ], 
o 
-eLa 
[OlL 1 
lL 
0 
' 
[0 
eLa 1 ' 
eLa 
0 
[ 
0 
lL 1 [ 
0 
eLa l, 
(6.69) 
-lL 
0 
' 
-eLa 
0 
[eLab 
0 ]. 
o 
eLab 

136 
CHAPTER 6 
In each of these cases there are respectively 
3(2m ) = 6, 12, 24 
traceless matrices over KLm. 
181(2, C) ~ 80(1,3) I 
closes on its 6 traceless generators. But because Q is noncommutative, 
[81(2, Q) ~ 80(1,5) I 
requires 3 additional generators, making 3 + 12 = 15 in all. And because 0 
is both noncommutative and nonassociative, 
181(2, 0) ~ 80(1,9) I 
requires another 21 generators, making24 + 21 = 45 in all. 
The Lie groups 8L(2, Km) generated by the 81(2, Km) above act on the 'Ir 
given in 6.65, and this results in a Lorentz transformation of the (1,1 + 2m )_ 
spacetime vector 'Ir 'Ir t. 
'Ir is not yet a conformal group spinor. In particular, consider the case of 
K 3 = O. Define in OL(2), 
0"0 = [ 1t 1: ] , 
O"a = [ -~La 
eLa ] 
o ' a = 1, ... , 7, 
(6.70) 
0"8 = [ 1: 
1L J 
o ' 
[ 1L 
0"9 = 
0 
-~L J. 
Then 
9 
'Ir'lrt = P = EpkO"k 
(6.71) 
0 
is a (1,9)-momentum vector for a massless particle. 
With the O"k we can construct a representation of 80(2,10), the conformal 
group of R l ,9. Let 

10 DIMENSIONS 
137 
Then the 66 distinct matrices 
[ Urs 
0 1 [Uk 
0 1 [0 Uk 1 [0 0 1 
o 
Urs 
' 
0 
-Uk 
' 
0 
0 
' 
Uk 0 
' 
(6.72) 
(k = 0, ... ,9) represent 80(2,10). Let 
(6.73) 
then 
(6.74) 
can be chosen to represent a translation. In this case, 
where the full algebraic twistor [ ; 7r ] is a conformal group spinor. 
Similar constructions are possible for the other division algebras. Octo-
nionic twistors have been exploited by [8]. 
THE CLIFFORD ALGEBRA 
More generally, in octonionic approaches to string theory over R 1,9, an 
(6.76) 
representation of the (1,9)-Clifford algebra is used. 
[Note: In [7] and [8] things looks different. They start with 0(4) and nest 
matrices, whereas I nest 0 to get 0 L, then incorporate 0 L into matrices, 
which has the advantage of being generally applicable.] 
Given the Uk, k = 0, ... ,9, in 6.70, we can define R 1,9 ;-matrices as 
follows: 
[ 0 
Uk 1 
;k = u; 
0 
' 
(6.77) 

138 
CHAPTER 6 
where as usual, 
O'ö = 0'0, 0'; = -O'T, r = 1, ... ,9. 
The spinors of the resultant Clifford algebra are elements of 0 4 (4 X 1 
columns over 0). These (4)(8) = 32-dimensional spinors are (1,9)-Majorana 
spinors. And as has been pointed out more than once, in this case Weyl 
spinors may be projected without complexification, as the (1,9)-pseudoscalar 
is 
[ 0'0 
0 ] 
/0/1 .. · /9 = 
0 
-0'0 
(6.78) 
(to within a sign), from which the chiral projectors, 
[ 0'0 0 1 [0 0 1 
o 0 
' 
0 
0'0 
' 
(6.79) 
are easily contructable. 
This context differs from that developed in this monograph in another 
important sense. Although six of the /k defined in 6.75 are associated with 
the octonion directions ep , p = 1, ... ,6, this fact is not linked to color SU(3). 
Although these ten /-matrices can be reduced via the projectors PL± = 
!(1 ± ieL7) to R 1,3 /-matrices, just as was done in the T context, the reality 
condition required of the string context evidently precludes this form of 
dimensional reduction. This reduction is so neat and pretty, and links so 
nicely to the color SU(3) leptoquark multiplet structure, it is hard for me 
to believe that it can not playa role in the elegant octonionic constructions 
of string theory. 
There are of course other ways to distinguish the octonionie string con-
text, with OL(4) ~ R1,g and 0 4 spinors, from my context, with TL(2) ~ 
C 0 R 1,g, T 2 spinors, and internal QR. While it is true that 
as pointed out in the last section, the Majorana spinors of 0 L( 4) do not 
have as rieh a family structure as the Dirac spinors of TL(2), and of course 
the OL(4) spinors are SU(2) isosinglets, because there is no QR to generate 
the SU(2) internal symmetry. In string theory the standard symmetry is 
generally assumed to be a subgroup of some larger GUT group, like Es. 

10 DIMENSIONS 
139 
This curious connection of the critical dimensions of string theory to the 
division algebras has spawned a minor industry devoted to the search for 
deeper meaning. The applications [7] [8] simplify, generalize, and explicate 
some of the results of classical lO-dimensional string theory. Given their 
results it seems clear that there is a connection of the octonions to string 
theory - leaving open the ultimate connection of string theory to reality. 
In pursuing such connections we must eventually address the question of 
what it means for an algebra like 0 to be "applied" to physics? Which 
is fundamental, the underlying mathematics, or the physics? If 0 merely 
provides a simplifying representation, the universe takes on a prosaic aspect 
that to me is disappointing. If on the other hand the design of reality arises 
from a web of select and beautiful mathematical notions (a poor word, but 
there may not be one that is more appropriate), apart of which is division 
algebra theory, then the universe, in my possibly perverse view, 'acquires 
elegance, even refulgence. Perhaps physicists resist this idea as it would 
pull their science out of the realm of the cause and effect of things on each 
other - the what-happens-if-this-happens view of physical truth - and into a 
realm from the perspective of which almost all that they do is secondary to 
something more fundamental. Physicists are prone to smugness in pointing 
out that chemistry is a less fundamental science, derivable from physics. I 
would suggest we are on the doorstep of a new science, one more fundamental 
than physics as it is conventionally defined, and from which physics may be 
derived. Physics is historically a nuts-and-bolts science, but Truth is not. 
Truth explains the nuts and holts, and not in terms of other nuts and holts. 

7. Doorways. 
7.1. Moufang and other Identities. 
We have defined 
Po = 1(1 + eL476 + eL517 + eL621 + eL732 + eL143 + eL254 + eL365), 
P2 = 1(1 - eL476 -
eL517 + eL621 + eL732 -
eL143 + eL254 -
eL365), 
P3 = ~(1 - eL476 -
eL517 -
eL621 + eL732 + €L143 -
eL254 + €L365)' 
(7.1) 
P4 = ~(1 + €L476 -
€L517 -
€L621 -
€L732 + €L143 + eL254 -
€L365), 
P5 = 1(1- eL476 + eL517 -
eL621 -
eL732 -
eL143 + eL254 + eL365), 
P6 = 1(1 + €L476 -
€L517 + €L621 -
eL732 -
€L143 -
€L254 + €L365), 
P7 = 1(1 + eL476 + €L517 -
eL621 + €L732 -
eL143 -
€L254 -
€L365)' 
(We will dispense with the subscript L on the identity 1L of 0 L in most of 
what follows.) These satisfy 
7 Epa = 1, 
(7.2) 
a=O 
and 
PaPb = {jabPb· 
(7.3) 
141 

142 
CHAPTER 7 
They are orthogonal primitive idempotents resolving the identity of OL. 
They are related as follows (a E {O, 1, ... , 7}): 
PaeLa = eLaPO; 
eLaPa = POeLa; 
if eaeb = ec (a, b, cE {I, ... , 7}), then 
In what follows, let x, y, Z E 0, so that 
_ ,,7 a 
y -
L...OY ea, 
,,7 a 
YL = L...O Y eLa, 
_ ,,7 a 
XR -
L...O x eRa, 
_ ,,7 a 
YR -
L...O Y eRa, 
For a = 0, ... ,7, 
_ ,,7 a 
Z -
L...O Z ea , 
_ ,,7 a 
ZL -
L...O Z eLa, 
,,7 a 
ZR = L...O Z eRa· 
! Pa [x] = xaea ( no sum).! 
In particular, 
! Po[x] = xo,1 
the real part of x. 
Define 
Ta = 2Pa -1. 
Then 
To[x] = 2xo -
X 
XO - x1el - ... - x7 e7 
xt. 
So 
To[xy] = (xy)t = ytxt = To[y]To[x]. 
(7.4) 
(7.5) 
(7.6) 
(7.7) 
(7.8) 
(7.9) 
(7.10) 
(7.11) 
(7.12) 
(7.13) 

DOORWAYS 
143 
Therefore, 
(7.14) 
So in general, 
(7.15) 
(the last three of these equations are derived in a like manner). Furthermore, 
TJ = (2PO)2 - 4Po + 1 = 4Po - 4Po + 1 = 1. 
(7.16) 
Therefore, 
XL = ToxkTo, 
(7.17) 
U sing TJ = 1 we derive 
(7.18) 

144 
CHAPTER 7 
Therefore, for a, b, cE {1, ... , 7} distinct, 
It should be dear that the map 
A ---+ ToATo 
on A E OL is an OL automorphism. 
In the last equation above, consider the special cases 
Ia = eL(3+a)(6+a)(5+a) 
(see 2.46), indices from 1 to 7, modulo 7. (Note, for example, that 
1 
7 
Po = 8(1 + Lla ).) 
1 
The I a mutually commute: 
laIb = Ibla 
(in fact, IaPo = Pola = Po). Combining 7.18,19,21 yields 
TolaTo = IaTJ = I a· 
(7.19) 
(7.20) 
(7.21) 
Therefore, if eLabc[l] = ±1 (so eLabc = ±Id, for some d E {1, ... , 7}), then 
TOeLabcTO = eRabc = eLabc· 
(7.22) 
Equation 7.22 makes it dear that in the definitions of the Pa in 7.1, it was 
unnecessary to specify left-action. Specifically, 
Po = 1(1 + eL476 + eL517 + eL621 + eL732 + eL143 + eL254 + eL365) 
1(1 + eR476 + eR517 + eR621 + eR732 + eR143 + eR2S4 + eR36s). 
(7.23) 

DOORWAYS 
145 
TWO IDENTITIES 
One of the principal identities of this section is the following: 
(7.24) 
from which it immediately follows that 
(7.25) 
Therefore, for a, bE {l, ... , 7} distinct, it.is now not difficult to prove 
(7.26) 
Proo! o! 7.24. 
We may prove these identities by considering their pieces. Since el = 
eZe6, it is clear that (eZe6)L = eLl. Consider the element 
(7.27) 
Being the sum of orthogonal idempotents, this too is an idempotent. 7.27 
implies 

146 
CHAPTER 7 
Therefore, 
-(e2e6)L = -eLl 
= -eL26eL621 
eL26TOTI T2T6 
Toe L2 ToTt e L6TO 
= TOeL2[1 - 2Po - 2PtleL6To 
ToeL2[(! - 2Po) + (! - 2Pt}]eL6TO 
ToeL2(! - 2PO)eL6TO + ToeL2(! - 2Pt}eL6To 
(7.28) 
= ToeL2(! - 2PO)eL6To - ToeL6(! - 2PO)eL2To 
= ToeL(2Po - !)eL6To - Toe16(2Po - !)eL2To 
= eR2(2Po - !)ek6 - eR6(2Po - !)ek2 
= 
T. t 
T. t 
1( 
t 
t ) 
eR2 OeR6 - eR6 OeR2 + "2 eR2eR6 - eR6eR2 
= -[eR2ToeR6 - ek6Toek2 + eR2eR6]. 
This proves 7.24 for the case x = ea , y = eb, a, bE {I, ... , 7}, a =I b. 

DOORWAYS 
Likewise, for a E {I, ... , 7}, 
= -(2Po + 2Pa - l)eka 
= -(2Pa - !)eha - (2Po - !)eka 
-eka(2Po - !) - (2Po- !)eka 
= 1R(2Po - !)eRa - eka(2Po - !)lk 
t 
t 
= 1RToeRa - eRaTolR + IReRa' 
Clearly, therefore, we may reverse 1 and ea to arrive at 
This proves 7.24 in the case x = 1 and y = ea , and visa versa. 
Penultimately, since eRaeRa = ekaeka = -IR = -lL, 
since eRaTOeRa - ekaToeka = O. 
Finally it should be dear that 
which completes the proof of 7.24, and by extension 7.25. 
147 
(7.29) 
(7.30) 
(7.31) 
(7.32) 

148 
CHAPTER 7 
THE MOUFANG IDENTITIES 
These results can be used to prove the Moufang identities, 
(xy)(ax) = x(ya)x, 
(7.33) 
and 
(xax)y = x(a(xy)), 
(7.34) 
which can be written in adjoint notation as 
(7.35) 
and 
! YRXLXR = YRXRXL = XL(XY)R.! 
(7.36) 
First observe that as Re( ax) = Re( xa) for all a, x E 0, 
(7.37) 
in general. Also, xRe(a) = Re(a)x, so 
(7.38) 
in general. 
The associator is defined by 
! (y, a, x) = y(ax) - (ya)x = (YLXR - XRYL)[a].! 
(7.39) 
It is well-known that the associator is antisymmetric in y, a and x, and that 
it has no real part. Therefore, 
PO(YLXR - xRYL)[a] = Re(y,a,x) = 0, 
which implies 
(7.40) 
With these results in hand we are ready to prove the Moufang identities. 

DOORWAYS 
149 
Together with 7.24, and starting with the lefthand side of 7.35, 
(XY)LXR = xRToYRXR - YhToxkxR + XRYRXR 
= 2XRPoYRXR - YhToxkxR 
= 2XRPoYRXR - YhTollx II 2 
= 2XRPoYRXR - ToYLllxII 2 
= 2XRPoYRXR - TollxII 2YL 
= 2XRPoYRXR - ToxhxRYL 
(7.41) 
= 2XRPoYRXR - xLToXRYL 
= 2XRPoYRXR - 2XLPoXRYL + XLXRYL 
= 2XLPoYLXR - 2XLPoXRYL + XLXRYL 
= 2XLPO(YLXR - XRYL) + XLXRYL 
= XLXRYL, 
wh ich is the Moufang identity 7.35. Equation 7.36 can be proven similarly. 
To finish this section we mayas weIl prove that the real part of the 
associator is zero. Note that 
Re(x, y, z) = Re(x(yz) - (xy)z) 
= Re(xLyL[z] - (xy)L[z]) 
= PO(XLyL[Z] - (xy)L[zJ). 
Therefore proving Re(x, y, z) = 0 is equivalent to proving 
PoXLYL - PO(XY)L = O. 
(7.42) 
Using all the tools developed in this section, together with the somewhat 
obvious 
(7.43) 

150 
CHAPTER 7 
equation 7.42 is not difficult to prove: 
= 
o. 
7.2. Spheres and Lie Algebras. 
The parallelizable spheres are so, s1, S3, and S7. Let K be a division 
algebra, and let Ku be the set of elements of K of unit length. Then 
(7.44) 
The trivial sphere Ru ~ SO consists of the two points {-I, I} and is of 
little interest. The others are easily generated by exponentiation. Let (), 
cf) ,j = 1,2,3, and {ja, a = 1, ... , 7, be real, then 
(7.45) 
Parallelizing tangent vector fields are easily constructed on these spheres 
given the representations 7.45. (1 shallleave it to the readers, should they 
so choose, to cloak these simple structures in the elaborate symbollism of 
differential geometry.) At each point of sh, h = 1 i 3, 7, the h basis vectors 
(7.46) 
span the tangent space at the point, and they clearly map smoothly around 
the spheres as the values of the parameters change. To prove these vector 

DOORWAYS 
151 
directions in C-, Q-, and O-space are tangent to the sp~eres, we need merely 
prove they are perpendicular to the points to which they are attached. That 
is, let u be an element of Sh,h =·1,3,7, and let Ck denote i, qi, or ea , 
respectively. Then 
(7.47) 
= 
!(utcku - utckU) = 0, 
thereby proving that the vectors 7.46 are tangent to the spheres 7.45 (note 
that u t ( Ck u) = (u t Ck)U even in the nonassociative 0 case). 
Let 
(7.48) 
Then Tx, the tangent space at X, is spanned by the orthonormal basis 
{qiX: i = 1,2,3}. 
(7.49) 
Any infinitesimal tangential movement from X can be represented by an 
action of the form 
X -t X + EOiqiX. 
(7.50) 
Consider a pair of such transformations: 
(7.51) 
where q3X E Tx. Reversing the order of these transformations leads to 
(7.52) 
Therefore, as expected, these two transformations do not commute. 
Any infinitesimal tangential movement from X E S3 should be repre-
sentable in the form 7.50. In particular, the elements 
(7.53) 

152 
CHAPTER 7 
form a basis for the Lie algebra 80(4), the infinitesimal rotations on the 3-
sphere. Rotations along the first three directions are easily representable in 
the form 7.50. That is, 
(7.54) 
Along the remaining three directions it is only slightly more difficult. Using 
the fact that xtx = 1, we derive: 
(7.55) 
where the infinitesimal 8i(X) are position dependent, and we have made use 
of the fact that qi ~ X qiXt is an SO(3) rotation of q;, linear in {q}, q2, q3}. 
In the S3 case the Lie algebra of the isometry group of the manifold, 
so( 4), is generated by the elements {qLi, qRj}. The sub set {qLi} closes under 
commutation, as does the subset {qRj}, and each is isomorphie to 80(3) ~ 
su(2) = spin(3). Actions arising from the former subalgebra, qLi[X] = qiX, 
generate bases for the chosen Tx . (Of course, one obvious other choiee for 
a basis for Tx would be elements of the form X qj, which also parallelize the 
sphere.) 
Note that because the {qLi} elose under commutation, the Lie group of 
all elements of the form 
(7.56) 
Finally, the set of elements 
{qLi - qRi}, 
(7.57) 
with action on X E S3, 
(7.58) 
leaves the identity direction invariant. Exponentiated they generate the 
group SO(3) on the remaining purely hypercomplex coordinates, which is 
the automorphism group of Q. The subgroup of this SO(3) that leaves an 
additional Q direction invariant, in particular Q3, is SO(2), generated in that 
case by the single element 
(7.59) 

DOORWAYS 
153 
The automorphism on Q defined by 
is an element of this 50(2). This is index doubling with a twist (index dou-
bling is an antiautomorphism on Q that takes q3 ---T Q3). 
Now let 
7 
X = eLl1aea = XO + L:Xaea E 57. 
1 
Tx, the tangent space at X, is spanned by the orthonormal basis 
{eaX: a = 1, ... , 7}, 
(7.60) 
(7.61) 
and again any infinitesimal tangential movement from X can be represented 
by an action of the form: 
(7.62) 
In the quaternion case consecutive transformations of the form 7.50 were 
also of that form. Here things are different. Consider the consecutive trans-
formations below: 
(7.63) 
In reverse order 
(7.64) 
The problem here is that whereas the {qLä} elose under commutation, 
hence give rise to a group manifold, the {eLa} do not. Therefore, even though 
the elements 
7 
XL = eLl1aeLQ = XO + L:XaeLa 
1 
(7.65) 

154 
CHAPTER 7 
constitute another copy of S7, the set of such elements is not a group mani-
fold (S7 is the unique parallelizable manifold not also a group manifold). 
The Lie algebra of the isometry group of S7 is 80(8), a basis for which 
in this context consists of the 28 elements 
(7.66) 
The action of the eLa on X E S7 generates the given basis for Tx: 
(7.67) 
As we have seen, however, and in distindion to the quaternion case, these 
actions do not elose under commutation. 
(7.68) 
That is, they generate the remainder of the 80(8) Lie algebra. 
The set of elements of the form {eLab} does elose under commutation, 
constituting a representation of the Lie algebra 80(7). It is well-known that 
SO(8)/ SO(7) ~ S7. 
(7.69) 
Highlighting this holomorphism is the fact that the set of XL in 7.65 is also 
S7. In that case, however, it is not so easy algebraically to parallelize the 
sphere, as 
(7.70) 
where eLaa = -1L. That is, the set of {eLa}, unlike the {ea}, do not elose 
under multiplication, so eLaXL does not reside in the same space as XL. 
Back to {X} = S7. The infinitesimal 80(7) transformations arising from 
{eLab} must be representable in terms of movements along the directions 
eaX, since these span Tx . In fact, using the fact that (Y xt)X = Y for all 
Y E 0, and X E S7, 
(7.71) 
(see [8]), where we set 
7 
«ea(ebX»Xt) = L: 6~b(X)ec. 
(7.72) 
c=l 

DOORWAYS 
155 
That is, (ea(ebX»Xt has no real part. This is easily demonstrated. Since 
ea( ebX) = eLab[X] is an infinitesimal 80(8) rotation of X, the term eLab[X] E 
Tx must be perpendicular to X. Since in general, for all Y, Z E 0, 
Po[YZ] = Po[(YZ)t] 
= ! Po[Y Z + (Y Z)t] 
= !po[y(zt)t + ztyt] 
= !Po[2< Y, zt >] 
= < Y,zt >, 
then 
= < eLab[X], X> 
(7.73) 
= o. 
This justifies writing (ea(ebX»Xt in the form 7.72. 
[Note: 7.72 can also be written 
(7.74) 
This is equivalent to 
U sing 7.24 we note that 
(eaX)LXl = 2eRaPoxRxl- xhToekax l 

156 
CHAPTER 7 
this proving 7.74 (a couple of steps are left for the reader to justify). Note 
that for any XE S7, the product (eaX)(xteb) defines a new octonion mul-
tiplication, which in [8] is called the X-product . That this gives rise to an 
altered octonion multiplication is due to the nonassociativity of 0, for in 
any other division algebra the X and xt would immediately cancel. This 
new product was used in [8] to give S7 a group-like structure.] 
To illustrate another oft he tools applicable in this context, we'll calculate 
the coefficients 6~b(X) for the case a = 1, b = 2. That is, 
7 
t 
L:-
«el(e2X ))X ) = 
8f2(X)eC' 
(7.75) 
c=l 
Consider the table below of actions of 1L and eLa on X: 
1 
el 
e2 
e3 
e4 
e5 
e6 
e7 
1L 
XO 
Xl 
X 2 
X 3 
X 4 
X 5 
X 6 
X 7 
eLI 
_Xl 
XO 
-x6 _X4 
X3 
_X7 
X2 
X 5 
eL2 _X2 
X6 
XO 
_X7 _X5 
x4 
_Xl 
X 3 
(7.76) 
eL3 _X3 
X 4 
X 7 
XO 
_Xl _X6 
X 5 
_X2 
eL4 
_X4 _X3 
X5 
Xl 
XO 
_X2 _X7 
X 6 
eL5 _X5 
X 7 
_X4 
X 6 
X 2 
XO 
_X3 _Xl 
eL6 _X6 _X2 
Xl 
-X5 
X7 
X3 
XO 
-X4 
eL7 _X7 _X5 _X3 
X 2 
_X6 
Xl 
X 4 
XO 
That is, for example, 
eLI[X] = elX = -Xleo+Xoel-X6e2-X4e3+X3e4-X7e5+X2e6+X5e7' 
So the zeroth row gives the components of X E S7, and the remaining rows 
the components of eaX E Tx. 
Let Mx denote the 8 X 8 matrix of coefficients in 7.76. Since the rows 
constitute an orthonormal basis for R8, it is clear that 
Mt 
M-I 
x= x· 
-
th 
8 
. 
Let X a , a = 0, ... , 7, be the a 
row of Mx, an R umt vector. 
Observe that 
(7.77) 

DOORWAYS 
157 
Define 
x - [_X6 _X2 Xl X 5 _X7 _X3 X O X 4] E R 8 
12 -
, 
, 
" 
, 
" 
. 
7.75 implies 
7 
((eL12[X])Xt)X = eL12[X] = .E 8i2(X)ecX. 
(7.78) 
c=l 
Define 
(7.79) 
Then 7.78 is equivalent to 
7 
X12 = L6~2(X)Xb = l12(X)Mx. 
b=O 
-
-
1 
Therefore, b12(X) = X 12M; ,or 
(7.80) 
where (l12(X))t and i12 are column vectors. This implies 
((eL12[X])xt) = (elX)(Xte2) 
= ((XO)2 + (Xl)2 + (X2)2 + (X6)2 _ (X 3)2 _ (X4)2 _ (X5)2 _ (X 7)2)e6 
(7.81) 
That is, 8t2(X) = 0 for b = 0,1,2, and is given by the terms in parentheses 
for b = 3,4,5,6,7. 
All the'remaining eLab[X] can be computed by index doubling and cycling 
on the index set {1, ... , 7} as they appear in 7.81. For example, to calculate 

158 
CHAPTER 7 
eL74[Xj we note that 7 = 4(1)+3 mod 7, and 4 = 4(2)+3 mod 7. So perform 
the operation a -
4(a)+3 (modulo 7) on all a E {1, ... , 7} appearing in 7.81. 
This has the effect of taking 
We conelude that 
((eL74[X])Xt) 
1- 7 -
3 -1, 
2 -
4 -
5 -
2, 
6- 6. 
= ((XO)2 + (X7)2 + (X4)2 + (X6)2 _ (Xl)2 - (X5)2 _ (X2)2 - (X3)2)e6 
(7.82) 
As pointed out in [8], the 8~b(X) are the components ofthe parallelizing 
torsion of S7 = {X}, which, unlike the case for group manifolds, is position 
dependent (this is a direct consequence of the nonassociativity of 0). 
As we did for the quaternion case, we can construct the subalgebra of 
80(8) that leaves the identity invariant. A basis for this consists of the 21 
distinct elements of the form 
(7.83) 
This set generates a vector representation of SO(7) via exponentiation, ro-
tating the seven imaginary dimensions of O. 
The sub algebra of 80(7) leaving another octonion direction invariant, in 
particular e7, is 80(6), with basis 
80(6) -
{eLa - eLbc,eL7 - eL23,eLpq - eLrs : 
(7.84) 

DOORWAYS 
159 
The automorphism group of 0 is G2 , with a Lie algebra basis a subset 
of that of 80(7) in 7.83: 
LG2 -
{eLab - eLcd : eaeb = eced}. 
(7.85) 
The intersection of LG2 with the 80(6) in 7.84 is 8u(3): 
8u(3) -
{eLpq - eLrs : epeq = eres, p, q, T, 8 ::j:. 7}. 
(7.86) 
Note that 80(7) has another basis: 
80(7) -
{eLab}. 
(7.87) 
However, these do not leave any elements of 0 invariant, and via exponen-
tiation generate a half spinor representation of Spin(7) acting on R8 .~ O. 
The sub algebra 
80(6) -
{eLpq : p,q::j:. 7} 
(7.88) 
also leaves no elements of 0 invariant, and via exponentiation generates a 
representation of SU(4) acting on C 4 ~ O. Spin(7)jG2 is also holomorphic 
to S1. 
The intersection of the vector 80(6) of 7.84, and spinor so(6) of 7.88, is 
again su(3). 
SPHERE FIBRATIONS 
Let Ul, U2 be elements of the sphere Sh, h = 1,3, or 7, so Ul and U2 are 
unit elements of C, Q, or O. Let c.p be real, then 
S2h+l = {[ UIC~Sc.p l}. 
(7.89) 
U2smc.p 
The Hermitian matrix 
[ Ul cosc.p 1 [ t 
• 
U1COSIn 
U2smc.p 
r 
(7.90) 

160 
CHAPTER 7 
defines an element of Sh+! (the term inside the braekets in the last line of 7.90 
lies on the unit sphere Sh+l), henee also defines a map from S2h+! -t Sh+!. 
Note, 
1 
t 
t 
Ul X U2 = "2(UIU2 - U2Ul)' 
Let U E Sh, and define the map 
(7.91) 
of Sh -t S2h+!, which, via the map 7.90, 
[ ~ ] -t [ ~ ] [ut 0] = [~ ~], 
(7.92) 
a single point in Sh+l. In this way, via rotations of S2h+! the map 7.87 ean 
be generalized and lead via 7.88 to any point in Sh+l. This is summarized 
by the exaet sequenee 
(7.93) 
which defines an Sh fibre over eaeh point of Sh+l. 
The paraHelizable spheres and these sphere fibrations are the only ones 
of their kind, apart of the seleet web of mathematical objects surrounding 
the division algebras, and,I believe, an inevitable part ofthe design ofreality. 
7.3. Triality. 
At the end of seetion 2.5 triality was briefly mentioned. We'H develop the 
idea more earefuHy here as another application of the ideas underlying the 
physieal application of chapters 3 to 6. 
We begin with the Clifford algebra Rg,o, with I-veetor basis 
(7.94) 

DOORWAYS 
161 
This acts on the spinor space 0 2 of octonion doublets. Let x, y, z E 0, with 
XL,YL,ZL,XR,YR,ZR defined as in sections 7.1 and 7.2. Define 
XL ] 
o . 
(7.95) 
On 0 define the trilinear form 
(7.96) 
!« 
yt,xL[z] > + < z,xl[yt] > 
= <yt,xz> 
Po[Y(xz)] = Po[(yx)z], 
since 
< z, xl[yt] >=< xdz], yt >=< yt, xL[z] > . 
The 2-vector basis of Rs,o corresponding to 7.94 consists of the elements 
(7.97) 
Under commutation these elements generate the Lie algebra 80(8), and under 
exponentiation Spin(8). Let UL be such a group element. The action 
(7.98) 
is SO(8), and 
(7.99) 
is Spin(8). It is clear that the trilinear form 7.96 is invariant rinder these 

162 
CHAPTER 7 
actions: 
<X,y,Z> -
[ yt 1 
1 
[yt 1 
! < UL 
z 
' ULXLUi UL 
z 
> 
= 
1 
[ yt 1 
[ yt 1 
2 < UL 
z 
' ULXL 
z 
> 
1 
t 
[yt 1 [ yt 1 > 
(7.100) 
= 
2 < ULUL 
Z 
,XL 
z 
= ! < [ ~t 1 ' XL [ ~t 1 > 
= <x,y,z>, 
. 
Ut 
U-1 
SIllce 
L = L . 
Using 7.96 we may expand the trilinear form explicitly as follows: 
(7.101) 
where { ... } indicates sum over cyclic permutations of indices in the last two 
terms, which as usual are taken from 1 to 7, modulo 7. It is clear from 7.101 
that < x,y,z > is invariant with respect to permutations of {x,y,z}. That 
is, the vector and two spinor representations of Spin(8) are interchangeable. 
We can explicitly construct these representations as operators in 0 Land 
On. In particular, operation of the 80(8) basis elements listed in 7.97 (with 
an extra factor ! thrown in) on the spinor [ ~t 1 yields the simultaneous 
actions, 
together with 

DOORWAYS 
163 
However, 
(see 7.19), and 
The corresponding actions on x are a little more difficult to extract. 
We start by taking the commutator of the generators 7.97 with the Clifford 
algebra vector XL given in 7.95. This implies in the first case, 
XL 
-+ 
1 
1 
-"2eLaXL - "2XLeLa 
= -! L:~=O(eLaXCeLc + xCeLceLa) 
= -! L:~=O(eLac + eLca)X C 
-(xOeLa - xaeLO) 
= 
-(xOea - XaeO)L 
= 
(-HeLa + eRa)[X])L 
(-(eLaPO + PoeLa)[X])L 
= 
(-(eRaPO + POeRa)[X])L, 
where the last line is a result of 7.37,38, and is added to emphasize the 
leftjright arbitrariness of this action on x (note that the action on z was 

164 
CHAPTER 7 
left, and on y was right). The second action on x comes from 
XL 
-+ 
1 
1 
'2 eLabXL - '2xLeLab 
1 2::7 
( 
C 
C 
) 
'2 
c=o eLabx eLc - X eLceLab 
! 2::~=o(eLabc - eLcab)X C 
= (xaeLb - xbeLa) 
= (Xaeb - xbea)L 
(!(eLab - (eaeb)R)[X])L 
= ((eLaPOeLb - eLbPOeLa)[X])L 
These results are summarized below. 
TRIALITY REPRESENTATIONS OF 80(8) 
Spinorl 
Spinorl 
Z -+ !eLa[Z] 
Z -+ !eLab[Z], 
Spinor2 
Spinor2 
Y -+ !eRa[Y] 
Y -+ -!eRab[Y], 
(7.102) 
Vector 
Vector 
x -+ -(eLaPO + POeLa)[X] 
x -+ (eLaPOeLb - eLbPOeLa)[X] 

DOORWAYS 
165 
It is interesting to note that the sum of those on the lefthand side is 
1 
1 
1 
"2eLa + "2eRa - "2{ eLa + eRa) = 0, 
(7.103) 
and on the righthand side is 
1 
1 
1 
1 
2eLab -
2eRab + 2(eLab - eRc) = eLab -
2(eRab + eRc), 
(7.104) 
where eaeb = ec. My principal reason for mentioning this is that if I don't 
my equation numbers will be loused up for the rest of the chapter. 
THE Tri IN TRIALITY 
The map defined by 
eLa -+ eRa, a = 1, ... , 7, 
(7.105) 
defines the triality map on the representations 7.102. That is, it cyclically 
permutes them. To see this we first complete the construction of the map 
7.105: 
(7.106) 
and 
(7.107) 
[NOTE! It may appear from the derivation of the actions 7.106,107 that 
we have defined an algebraic automorphism. That this is not so, that in fact 
the map from OL -t 0R = OL is only a linear automorphism, can be seen 
by extending this construction one more step. Recall that 
so that, for example, 
eL123 = eL7654321eL123 = -eL7654· 
According to 7.107, under the triality map 

166 
CHAPTER 7 
However, assuming the map is a homomorphism we derive, 
contradicting 7.107. Since every element of the adjoint octonions, whether 
a left or a right action, can be written as a linear combination of 1L (trans-
forming into itself), eLa, eLab, and eLabc, the maps 7.105,106,107 completely 
determine a linear automorphism on OL = OR. Oddly, this map does pre-
serve products (ie., acts as an algebra homomorphism) as long as the result 
of the product contains no elements of fourth or higher order!] 
Denote the action of the triality map Tri. We observed above that 
(7.108) 
It is simply demonstrated that after taking the products and sums on the 
righthand side of 7.108, all surviving terms are of second order or less. There-
fore, 
Tri{~eRa} = Tri{Po}Tri{eLa} + Tri{eLa}Tri{Po} - Tri{~eLa}. (7.109) 
o bserve that 
Tri{Po} = Tri{1(1 + eL476 + eL517 + eL621 + eL732 + eL143 + eL254 + eL365)} 
= 1(1- eL476 - eL517 - eL621 - eL732 - eL143 - eL254 - eL365) 
~ - Po. 
(7.110) 

DOORWAYS 
167 
Therefore, 
TriHeRa} = 
(~- Po)eRa + eRa(~ - Po) - !eRa 
(7.111) 
Likewise, 
Tri{ -(POeLa + eLaPO)} = -« ~ - PO)eRa + eRa(~ - Po» 
(7.112) 
Demonstrating that Tri cyclically permutes the Lie algebra actions on 
the righthand side of 7.102 is a slightly more complicated problem. We 
already have that 
(7.114) 
It should be clear that for all a, bE {1, ... , 7}, a:/: b, such that eaeb = ec, 
(7.115) 

168 
CHAPTER 7 
Therefore, 
(7.116) 
The reason for the last equality above is that the map Tri acts homomor-
phically on the last line, but does not on the penultimate line. That is, using 
the last equality above, 
= 
le 
le 
2 Lab - 2 Re, 
(7.117) 
since 
By 7.25, 
(7.118) 
Therefore, 
(7.119) 
as expected. 

DOORWAYS 
169 
Finally 
(7.120) 
completing the tricycle. In summary, 
Spinor-Spinor 
Spinor-Vector 
Vector-Spinor 
(7.121) 
FREUDENTHAL'S PRINCIPLE OF TRIALITY 
Let go, gt, and g2 be triality related elements of 80(8). That is, 
The invariance 7.100 can then be written in the infinitesimal (Lie algebraic) 
form, 
I< gdx], y, z > + < x,go[y], z > + < x, y,g2[Z] >= 0·1 
(7.122) 

170 
CHAPTER 7 
By 7.96 the second term can be expressed 
<x,go[y],z> = «go[y])t,xz> 
= < Togo[Y], xz > 
= < TogoTo[ytJ, xz > 
< yt, (TogoTo)t[xz] > 
= < yt, -TogoTo[xz] > . 
inner product 
Together with 7.96, this implies we may rewrite 7.122 
< yt,(gl[X])Z > + < yt,-TogoTo[xz] > + < yt,X(g2[Z)) >= 0, 
which implies 
(7.123) 
(7.124) 
wh ich is an expression of Freudenthal's principle of triality [1]. We see from 
7.123 that 80(8) almost acts as a derivation on the octonions (and of course, 
elements of LG2, a Lie subalgebra of 80(8), do act as derivations, since G2 
is the automorphism group of 0). 
7.4. LG2 and Tri. 
In order to prove that some 9 in the adjoint algebra of 0 is an element of 
LG2 we need merely prove it acts as a derivation on O. That is, that 
g[xz] = (g[x))z + x(g[z]). 
(7.125) 
Our claim is that LG2 is spanned by elements of the form 
9 = eLab - eLcd : a, b, c, d E {1, ... , 7} distinct, g[lJ = O. 
(7.126) 
Notice that in the particular case a = 2, b = 3, c = 4, d = 6, 
Tri{eL23 -
eL46} 
-eR23 + eR46 
(7.127) 
= 
eL23 -
eL46· 

DOORWAYS 
171 
Also, 
(7.128) 
As this same result can be duplicated for any gof the form 7.126, it should 
now be dear in general that for 9 of this form 
Tri{g} = g, 
and 
Tog7'o = g. 
Combined with 7.124 this implies that 
TogTo[xz] 
g[xz] 
(Tri{g }[x])z + x(Tri2{g }[z]) 
(g[x])z + x(g[ z]). 
Therefore gis a derivation of 0, and 
Since the set of such 9 is 14-dimensional, as is LG2 , the span of all such 9 is 
in fact LG2 , as daimed. 
LG2 TRIALITY TRIP LET 
The copy of LG2 spanned by elements of the form 7.126 generates the 
automorphism group of O. Each element of this Lie algebra is invariant with 
respect to the action of the triality map Tri (and with respect to the map 
9 ~ TogTo). In this sense this copy of LG2 is a triality singlet. There is also 
a triality triplet of copies of LG2 which is constructed below. 
The LG2 defined by 7.126 can be seen to arise in the following way from 
the Clifford algebra RO,6 ~ 0 L. This can be represented in two natural ways 

172 
CHAPTER 7 
(p,q,rE {1, ... ,6}): 
scalar 
1L 
1L 
vector 
eLp 
eLp7 
2-vector 
eLpq 
eLpq 
3-vector 
eLpqr 
eLpqr 
(7.129) 
4-vector 
eLpq7 
eLpq7 
5-vector 
eLp7 
eLp 
6-vector 
eL7 
eL7 
Recall that under the commutator product the 1- and 2-vectors of Ra,n 
generate so(n + 1). Therefore, both the sets 
{eLp, eLqr : p, q, rE {I, ... , 6}} 
(7.130) 
and 
{eLp7, eLqr : p, q, rE {I, ... , 6}} = {eLab : a, bE {I, ... , 7}} 
(7.131) 
form bases for so(7). And in both cases the Lie subalgebras which kill the 
identity are co pies of LG2 • 
In the case of 7.131 this yields the LG2 defined in 7.126. In the case 
7.130 it yields a copy of LG2 spanned by elements of the form 
9 = eLpq - eLrs : p, q, r, sE {I, ... , 6} distinct, 9[1] = 0, 
(7.132) 
which generate su(3), together with the 6-dimensional subspace of elements 
ofthe form (one for each p = 1, ... ,6) 
9 = 2eLp ~ eLqr - eLst : p, q, r, s, tE {I, ... , 6}, 9[1] = o. 
(7.133) 
That yields 8 + 6 = 14 elements all together. The 8-dimensional su(3) 
sub algebra is shared by this copy of LG2 and that defined in 7.126, so it is 
invariant under the action of Tri. The remaining 6-dimensional subspace is 
not shared, and is not Tri invariant. In particular, consider the action of 
the triality map on the element 2eLl - eL26 - eL34 of this subspace. 
Tri{2eLl - eL26 - eL34} = 2eRl + eR26 + eR34 

DOORWAYS 
173 
Therefore Tri maps the 6-dimensional space of elements 7.133 to the 6-
dimensional space of elements of the form 
Ig = 2eLp1+ eLqr +eLst: p,q,r,s,tE {1, ... ,6}, g[e11 = 0·1 
(7.134) 
These elements, together with the su(3) in 7.132, elose under the commutator 
product to form another copy of LG2• In this case, however, the G2 generated 
by these elements leaves e1 invariant, instead of the identity. 
Carrying on in this manner, we note that 
= 
-2eR51 - eR26 - eR34 
= -( eLl + eL26 + eL34 - eL51) 
(7.135) 
= 
-2eLl - eL26 -
eL34· 
Therefore Tri maps the 6-dimensional space of elements 7.134 to the 6-
dimensional space of elements of the form 
9 = -2eLp - eLqr - eLst : p, q, r, s, tE {I, ... , 6}, g[e1] = 0, 
(7.136) 
which again with the su(3) in 7.132 elose under the commutator product to 
form another copy of LG2• 
Finally, 
Tri3{2eLl -
eL26 - eL34} = Tri{ -2eLl - eL26 - eL34} 
= 
-2eRl + eR26 + eR34 
= -( -eLl + eL26 + eL34 + eL51) 
= 
2eLl - eL26 - eL34, 

174 
CHAPTER 7 
which is where we started from. 
Therefore, the three LG2's consisting ofthe su(3) 7.132 together with the 
6-dimensional spaces 7.133, or 7.134, or 7.136, form a triplet with respect to 
Tri. The first of these, like the LG2 defined in 7.126, generate copies of G2 
that leave the identity invariant, hence act nontriviallyon the 7-dimensional 
subspace of 0 spanned by {ea , a = 1, ... , 7}. The last two generate G2'8 that 
leave e7 E 0 invariant, hence act nontriviallyon the 7-dimensional 8ubspace 
ofO spanned by {l,ep,p= 1, ... ,6}. 
It is interesting how often the (1,3)-motif arises in the context of the di-
vision algebras, but no speculation on the meaning of this example is offered 
at this point. 
As noted earlier, if 9 takes the form 7.126, then 
TogTo = g. 
(7.137) 
Likewise, if 9 takes the form 7.132, then, for example, 
= -( -eLl + eL26 + eL34 + eL57) 
That is, elements 9 of the form 7.132 also satisfy 7.137. 
On the other hand, 
-!( +eLl + eL26 -
eL34 + eL57) 
-2eLl -
eL26 -
eL34· 

DOORWAYS 
175 
Therefore, 
So elements ofthe form 7.134 and 7.136 are interchanged by the map, 9 ~ 
T09To. 
Therefore, for example, if 90 is an element ofthe first LG2 (7.132,133),91 
the second (7.132,134), and 92 the third (7.132,136), then by 7.124 (Freuden-
thal's principle of triality), for all x, z E 0, 
since 90 satisfies 7.137. 
In the next section we'll give some meaning to this, and other, LG2 tri-
ality triplets. 
7.5. LG2 Triplets and the X-Product. 
Some preliminary results are needed. Let 9 E 80(8), spanned by the set 
{eLa, eLab: a, bE {I, ... , 7}}. Note that 
Tri{ToTri{ eLa}To} = Tri{ToeRaTO} 
= Tri{ -eLa} 
= -eRa 
= TOeLaTO' 
and 
Tri{ToTri{ eLab}To} = Tri{To( -eRab)To} 
= Tri{eLab} 
= -eRab 
= TOeLabTO· 

176 
CHAPTER 7 
That is, in general, 
I Tri{ToTri{g}To} = TogTo, I 
(7.138) 
where the second equality follows immediately from the first. These results, 
together with Tri3 = identity, imply 
I Tri{TogTo} = ToTri2{g}To, I 
(7.139) 
As noted in section 7.2, if A, B E 0, and X is a unit octonion (that is, 
XE S7 j xxt = XtX = 1), then 
IA °X B = (AX)(XtB) I 
(7.140) 
defines a modified octonion product. 
Let 9 E 80(8), and note that To(TogTo)To = g. This, together with 
7.138,139, and multiple applications of 7.124, implies 
g[A 0x B] = g[(AX)(XtB)] 
= (Tri{TogTo}[AX])(XtB) + (AX)(Tri 2{TogTo}[XtB]) 
= (ToTri 2{g}To[AXJ)(XtB) + (AX)(ToTri{g}To[XtB]) 
= (Tri3{g}[A]X + ATri4{g}[X])(XtB) 
+(AX)(Tri2{g}[Xt]B + XtTri3{g}[BJ) 
= (g[A]) 0x B + A 0x (g[B]) 
+(ATri{g}[X])(XtB) + (AX)(Tri2{g}[Xt]B). 
(7.141) 

DOORWAYS 
177 
Let Gf be the automorphism group ofthe product Aox B, and let LGf 
be its Lie algebra. Then by 7.141, 
I gE LGf iff (ATri{g}[X])(XtB) + (AX)(Tri2{g}[Xt]B) = 0 I (7.142) 
for all A, B E O. 
Consider the special case of 
1 
X = EXaea ==> X t = -X ==> X E S6, 
1 
and in particu1ar, and without a 10ss of genera1ity, set 
X = e1. 
Let 
g E eL1eR1LG2eR1eL1. 
That is, there exists an h E LG2 such that 
Note that 
(7.143) 
(7.144) 
(7.145) 
(7.146) 
(7.147) 
LG2 can be divided into two parts: the 8-dimensional su(3) spanned by 
{h = eLpq - eLrs : p, q, r, sE {I, ... , 6} distinct , h[1] == O}j 
(7.148) 
and the six dimensional subspace spanned by 
{h=2eLp1-eLqr-eLst: p,q,r,s,tE {1, ... ,6}distinct, h[1]=O}. (7.149) 
If h 'E su(3), then Tri{h} = Tri2{h} = h, and h[e1] = O. In addition, 
h E su(3) ==> eL1eR1heR1eL1 = h. 
(7.150) 
Therefore, 7.142 is trivial1y satisfied as 
Tri{g}[e1] = h[e1] = 0 = h[-e1] = Tri2{g}[et]. 
(7.151) 

178 
CHAPTER 7 
Now suppose his an element of the span of the set 7.149. In particular, 
and again without a loss of generality, set 
(7.152) 
With the help of multiple applications of the equations 
(7.153) 
which are also valid with the subscripts Rand L interchanged, we derive 
9 = 
eR7eL7(2eL57 - eL26 - eL34)eL7eR7 
= 
eR7(2eL57 + eL26 + eL34)eR7 
eR7(2eRl + eR26 + eR34)eR7 
(7.154) 
= 
2eRl - eR26 -
eR34 
= 
-2eLl + eL26 + eL34· 
Therefore, 
Tri{g} = -2eRI -
eR26 -
eR34 
-2eL57 -
eL26 - eL34 
(7.155) 
= -eL7heL7, 
and 
Tri2{g} 
2eR57 + eR26 + eR34 
= TogTo 
(7.156) 
= -eR7heR7, 

DOORWAYS 
179 
since TohTo = h for all hE LG2. This implies 
(7.157) 
0, 
and 
= eR7h[1] 
(7.158) 
o. 
Therefore, 
9 E LG~7. 
Finally, since -eL7su(3)eL7 = -eR7su(3)eR7 = su(3), every element of 
the 14-dimensional eL7eR7LG2eR7eL7 is in LG~7. In summary, on dimen-
sional grounds we conelude that 
(7.159) 
(7.160) 
(7.161) 
This LG2-triality triplet is the same as the one developed in the previous 
section. However, we can now generalize this result to all of S6. That is, 
(7.162) 

180 
CHAPTER 7 
LG?f GENERAL SOLUTION 
Nowassume 
7 
7 
X = XO + EXaea; XO i' 0, EXaea i' O. 
1 
1 
In particular, and again without a 10ss of generality, we may set 
X = XO + X7e7; XO =I- 0, X 7 =I- o. 
(7.163) 
Let 9 E LG?f C 80(8), and let 
Z = Tri{g }[X). 
(7.164) 
Since any infinitesimal 80(8) rotation of X E S7 is orthogonal to X (see 
section 7.2), 
< Z,X >= !(ZtX + XtZ) = !(ZXt + XZt) = O. 
2 
2 
(7.165) 
Therefore, Z takes the form 
(7.166) 
9 E LG?f implies 
g[(AX)(XtB)J = (g[AJX)(XtB) + (AX)(Xtg[BJ) 
(7.167) 
for all A, BE O. Setting A = B = 1 implies 
g[IJ = g[l] + g[I], 
so 
Ig E LG?f ==? g[l] = 0·1 
(7.168) 
g[IJ = 0 implies 9 is an element of the vector 80(7) spanned by 
{eLa - eLbc: (eLa - eLbc)[IJ =O}. 
(7.169) 

DOORWAYS 
Consider the 80(7) element eL7 - eL23, which satisfies 
Tri{eL7 - eL23} = eR7 + eR23 
= 
eL15 + eL46· 
181 
Therefore, the elements of this Tri{ 80(7)} are linear in the 0 L bilinears 
eLab, which satisfy 
So 
1 gE LG; =} Tri2{g} = ToTri{g}To·1 
By 7.139 this implies 
Tri 2{g} = Tri2{TogTo}. 
Applying Tri to both si des implies 
Ig E LGf =} 9 = To9To·1 
Again setting Z = Tri{g }[X], we find 
Tri2 {g}[ xt] = ToToTri2 {g} To[ X] 
= ToTri{g}[X] 
= To[Z] 
= zt. 
Therefore, 7.142 may be written in the form 
Given 7.166 this may be written 
H(A, B) = m(Ae7X)(XtB) - m(AX)(e7XtB) 
+n(AU)(XtB) - n(AX)(U B) 
= O. 
(7.170) 
(7.171) 
(7.172) 
(7.173) 
(7.174) 

182 
CHAPTER 7 
So 
H(A,X) = m(Ae7X) - m(AX)e7 + n(AU) - n(AX)(UX) = O. 
But m(Ae7X) - m(AX)e7 = 0, since X = X O + X7e7, so 
H(A,X) = n(AU) - n(AX)(UX) = n(AU) - n(AX)(XtU) = O. (7.175) 
Since U is orthogonal to X and xt, the only way 7.175 can hold for all 
A E 0 is if n = O. Therefore, 
But 
H(elXt,Xe2) = m(ele7)e2 - mel(e7e2) = -2me4 = 0, 
so finally, m = 0 too, and in general 
I 9 E LG~ iff Tri{g }[X] = Tri2{g }[xt] = 0, I 
(7.176) 
so each of the terms in 7.142 is separately zero (given 7.142, the reverse 
implication is trivial). 
Now we are ready to derive more central results. Application of the 
results above, together with 7.124, imply 
In addition, 
g[Axt] = TogTo[AXtj 
= (Tri{g }[A])Xt + A(Tri2{g }[xt]) 
= (Tri{g }[A])Xt. 
g[AXt] = g[((AXt)X)(Xt(1))] 
= ((g[AXt]X)Xt + ((AXt)X)(Xtg[1]) 
since g[1] = O. Therefore, 
I 9 E LG~ ~ 
Tri{g} = XR9Xk'\ 
(7.177) 

DOORWAYS 
Together with 7.170,171, this implies 
Ig E LG~ ==> Tri2{g} = Xlg X L·1 
(7.178) 
These results are entirely consistent with 7.159,160,161, but they do not 
actually solve for LG~ in this general case the way that 7.159 does in the 
case X = e7. 
Note that with X = XO + X 7 e7, and identifying 
su(3) = {g E LGz : g[e7) = O} 
(7.179) 
(as usual, the Lie algebra of the stability group of e7), then 
183 
g[(AX)(XtB») = (g[A)X)(XtB) + (Ag[X))(XtB) + (AX)(g[Xt)B) + (AX)(Xtg[BJ) 
= (g[A)X)(XtB) + (AX)(Xtg[B)), 
(7.180) 
since 
g[X) = XOg[1) + X7 g[e7) = O. 
(7.181) 
That is, 
Isu(3) C LGf,1 
(7.182) 
accounting for 8 of the 14 dimensions of LG~. 
The other 6 dimensions of LGz (not LGf) are found in 
span{h = 2eLp7 - eLqr - eLst : p, q, r, s, tE {1, ... , 6} distinct ,h[l] = O}. 
(7.183) 
My claim is (and I will spare you the tedious details of its derivation) 
span{g = 2XLeLp7 - Xh(eLqr + eLst) : 2eLp7 - eLqr - eLst E LGz/su(3)}. 
(7.184) 

184 
CHAPTER 7 
We investigate this claim with the element (the different forms of which 
are derived using 7.153 and its cyclic variations) 
9 = 2XLeL57 - Xh.(eL26 + eL34) 
= 2XLeL57 - Xk(eRl + eR57) 
XO(2eL57 - eL26 - eL34) 
+X7(2eL5 - eL63 - eL24) 
= XO( -2eR57 + eR26 + eR34) 
+X7( -2eR5 + eR63 + eR24) 
= - 2XheR57 + XL(eLl + eL57) 
= !XL(3eL57 + eLt} - !Xk(3eR57 + eRl). 
The last equality above makes it clear that 
9 = TogTo. 
From this equality we also derive 
g[1] = !XL(3eL57 + eLt}[1]- !Xt(3eR57 + eRt}[1] 
= Xd2el] - Xk[2el] 
= 
0, 
since X ep = epXt, p = 1, ... ,6. This verifies 7.171 and 7.168. 
(7.185) 
(7.186) 
(7.187) 

DOORWAYS 
185 
Using the third equality in 7.185 we determine (again using 7.153) 
Tri{g} = XO( -2eR57 + eR26 + eR34) 
Therefore, 
+X7(2eR5 + eR63 + eR24) 
= -2(XOeR57 + X 7eR7eR57) + XO(eLl + eL57) + X 7(eL5 + eL71) 
= -2XReR57 + XL(eLl + eL57) 
= -2eR57Xk + (eLl + eL57)X!. 
Tri{g}[X] = -2eR57Xk[X] + (eLl + eL57)Xl[X] 
= -2eR57[1] + (eLl + eL57)[1] 
= 
0, 
(7.188) 
which verifies half of 7.176. As to the other half, using 7.153 rewrite 
Tri{g} = XO(2eL57 - eL26 - eL34) 
+X7(2eL71 + eL63 + eL24), 
so that 
Tri2{g} 
XO( -2eR57 + eR26 + eR34) 
+X7( ~2eR71 - eR63 - eR24) 
= XO(2eL57 - eL26 - eL34) 
(7.189) 
+X7(-2eL5 - eL63 - eL24) 
= ToTri{g}To 
= 2eL57X L - (eR! + eR57)XR. 

186 
Therefore, 
Tri2{g}To[X] 
ToTri{g }[X] 
O. 
Finally, in satisfying all of 7.176, this proves 
gE La:, 
CHAPTER 7 
and proves 7.184in general. I leave it to the reader to prove 7.177 and 7.178. 
Note, for example, that 7.177 may be rewritten 
and that 
(eLl + eL57). 
Finally note that if X O = 1, and X 7 = 0, then by 7.185 
And if X O = 0, and X 7 = 1, then 
where 
which verifies that 

DOORWAYS 
187 
LG~ AND THE X-ADJOINT ALGEBRA 0LX 
Let 0 X be the X -product modified octonions, and let eax, a = 1, ... , 7, 
be a basis for the pure hypercomplex subspace of Ox, arranged so that 
For simplicity again set 
In this case if we set 
emX = Xem, m = 1,2,3,5, 
ekX = ek, k = 4,6,7, 
then 7.188 is satisfied. 
To see this let 
J + = ~ (1 + 1t) = Po + P4 + P6 + P7 , 
L = ~ (1 - 11) = Pt + P2 + P3 + Ps, 
and note that for an A E 0, 7.192 is equivalent to 
lAx = J+[A] + X L[A] = J+[A] + J_[A]xt.1 
Then 7.190 is equivalent to 
lAx °x Bx = (AB)x I 
for an A, B E O. 
It is easily proven that 
J+[AB] = J+[A]J+[B] + J_[A]L[B], 
J_[AB] = J+[A]J_[B] + L[A]J+[B], 
for all A, BE O. Also, 
(J+[A]X)(XtJ+[B)) = J+[A]J+[B], 
XL[A]X = J_[A] = XtJ_[A]Xt. 
(7.190) 
(7.191) 
(7.192) 
(7.193) 
(7.194) 
(7.195) 
(7.196) 
(7.197) 

188 
By 7.74 
(J+[A]X)J_[B] = (J+[A]X)(Xt(X L[B))) 
= (J+[A](X L[B]X»Xt 
= (J+ [A]L [B])Xt 
= X(J+[AlJ_[B]), 
since J+[A]L[B] is linear in em , m = 1,2,3,5. 
CHAPTER 7 
(7.198) 
Taking the Hermitian conjugate of 7.74, and interchanging the indices a 
and b, implies 
Therefore, 
L[A](xtJ+[B)) = ((J_[A]Xt)X)(XtJ+[B)) 
= X((XtL[A]Xt)J+[B)) 
= X(L[A]J+[B]). 
Combining 7.196-200 implies 
Ax 0x Bx = ((J+[A] + L[A]Xt)X)(Xt(J+[B] + X L[B))) 
= (J+[A]X + J_[A])(XtJ+[B] + L[B]) 
(7.199) 
(7.200) 
= (J+[A]J+[B] + J_[A]L[B]) + ((J+[A]X)J_[B] + L[A](XtJ+[B] 
= J+[AB] + X(J+[A]L[B] + L[A]J+[B]) 
= J+[AB] + X L[AB] 
= (AB)x, 
thereby proving 7.195. 
(7.201) 
Let OLX be the associative left adjoint algebra of Ox. Let A,B E 0, 
and Ax, Bx E Ox their images via the isomorphism 7.194. Then we define 
I ALX[Bx] = Ax 0X Bx·1 
(7.202) 

DOORWAYS 
Therefore, for k = 4,6,7, 
eLkx[Bx] = (ekX)(XtBx) 
= (ek(Bx X))Xt 
But if k = 7, then 
Also, for m = 1,2,3,5, 
eLmx[BxJ = (emxX)(XtBx) 
= (X emX)(XtBx) 
= em(XtBx) 
eLmXl[Bx] 
= XLeLm[Bx]. 
Because of the ea ~ eax isomorphism it is now clear that 
189 
(7.203) 
(7.204) 
(7.205) 
(7.206) 
Consider the specific case X = er. The equations 7.203-205 imply in this 
case, 
(7.207) 
Let SU X (3) C Gf be the stability group of erx = er. A basis for its 

190 
CHAPTER 7 
8-dimensional Lie algebra consists of 
€L2X€L6X -
€L3X€L4X = €L24 -
€L63 E su(3), 
€L6X€LIX 
-
€L4X€L5X = €L41 -
€L56 E su(3), 
€L4X€LIX 
-
€L5X€L6X = -€L61 + €L45 E su(3), 
€L5X€L2X 
-
€LIX€L3X = €L52 -
€L13 E su(3), 
(7.208) 
€UX€L3X 
-
€L2X€L4X = -€L34 + €L26 E su(3), 
€LIX€L2X 
-
€L3X€L5X = €L12 -
€L35 E su(3), 
€L2X€L3X 
-
€L4X€L6X = €L23 -
€L46 E su(3), 
€L2X€L3X -
€LIX€L5X = €L23 -
€L15 E su(3). 
That is, sue7 (3) = su(3), as expected (su(3) = su1(3)). 
As to the rest of LG~7 , consider the element 
(7.209) 
which is what you get from 7.185 if you set XO = 0, and X 7 = 1. Similar 
results hold for the other elements of LG~7 / su(3), which demonstrates the 
consistency of the 0 LX approach with what went before. 
Using SU(3) we can construct a nicer looking isomorphism from 0 to 
o x. Redefine (where now X E S7 is arbitrary), 
(7.210) 
(note that Xl/3 is not uniquely defined.) In this case, 
(7.211) 
which gives S7 an almost group structure (what I would call a sliding group 
structurej sliding on the X -product). This also makes it c1ear that if X = ±1 
(that is, Xl/3 is a 6th root of unity), then the X -product is ordinary octonion 
multiplication, and A -t X 1/ 3 AX-1/ 3 is a G2 action (see also [7],[8]). 
Much more could be said, and I dare say it eventually will be. 

8. Corridors. 
8.1. Magie Square. 
The Freudenthal-Tits Magie Square [15] is a 4 X 4 array of groups associated 
with the Jordan algebras of 3 X 3 Hermitian matriees over R, C, Q, or 0, 
complexified by (tensored with) R, C, Q, or O. That is, each group is 
associated with a pair of division algebras. 
The mathematical context upon whieh the model building of chapters 3 
through 6 rests relied heavily on treating the (tensored) division algebras as 
spinor spaces of their left adjoint algebras (identified as Clifford algebras), of 
tensoring those adjoint algebras with R(2) (doubling the size of the spinor 
space), and of treating the parts of the right adjoint algebras that commute 
with the left as internal. These exact same methods will be employed here 
to generate bases for the Lie algebras of the groups of aversion of the magie 
square. Each will be derived from a tensor product of two division algebras, 
and as the order in whieh they are taken is immaterial, only ten distinct Lie 
algebras will result. 
The foundation upon whieh the method rests is R(2). In R(2) define 
again 
€=[~ ~],a=[~ _~], 
ß = [~ ~] ,w = [_~ ~]. 
(8.1) 
Let K ® K' be the tensor product of two of the four division algebras. Let 
Ck and cI denote bases for the pure hypercomplex parts of K and K' (ie., i, 
qj, or ea ). In KL ® K' L(2) the elements 
w, CLka, 
c'rAß 
(8.2) 
191 

192 
CHAPTER 8 
anticommute (and associate) and form the basis for the 1-vector generators 
of a (possibly nonuniversal, meaning the product of these 1-vectors may 
equal the identity) Clifford algebra with negative definite Euclidean metric. 
Under commutation they generate the 2-vectors 
(8.3) 
Together the elements 7.2 and 7.3 form a basis for a representation of the 
Lie algebra so( dimK + dimK'). I'll denote this ExternaIKK" and call it the 
external subalgebra. 
To this collection we now add the spinors of KL ® K' L(2), namely the 
elements of (K ® K')2, without yet specifying a commutator product on this 
linear space. I'll denote this SpinorKKI. 
Finally we add an the elements of KR ® K' R whose action on the spinor 
space is distinct from and commutes with (ie., is internal with respect to) 
the action of so( dimK + dimK') on the spinor space, and which together 
generate a compact subgroup. I'll denote this InternaIKK" and call it the 
internal subalgebra. Note that because of the nonassociativity of 0, only 
OR will be excluded by these conditions (CR and QR both commute with 
ExternaIKK" whatever the algebras K and K'). That OR can be excIuded 
is in a sense responsible for the existence of the exceptional Lie groups F4 , 
Es, E7 , and Es. 
The total resulting linear space will be denoted M S K K', M S for magie 
square. 
8.2. The Ten MSKK'. 
R®R 
R has no complex part, so the external subalgebra is spanned by w (1-
vector basis for Ro,d. 
ExternalRR = u(1) = 80(2) 
(8.4) 
(there is no InternaiRR). SpinorRR is 2-dimensional, so MSRR has a total 
of 3 dimensions and we make the identification: 
M SRR = 80(3) = su(2). 
(8.5) 

CORRIDORS 
193 
R®C 
ExternalRc is spanned by wand iß (l-vector basis for Ro,2), and ia 
(2-vector). 
ExternalRc = su(2) = so(3). 
(8.6) 
SpinorRc is 4-dimensional, and 
Interna/Rc = u(l) = so(2) 
(8.7) 
is spanned by iR (ie., its action on [ : ] E SpinorRc is iR [ : 1 = [ : ] i = 
i [ : l). That's 8 elements altogether, and we make the identification: 
M SRC = su(3). 
(8.8) 
R®Q 
ExternalRQ is spanned by wand qLjß (l-vector basis for RO,4)' and 
qLja, qLj€ (2-vectors). 
ExternalRQ = sp(2) = so(5). 
(8.9) 
SpinorRQ is 8-dimensional, and 
InternaiRQ = sp(l) = so(3) 
(8.10) 
is spanned by qRj . That's 10+8+3 = 21 elements altogether, and we make 
the identification: 
M SRQ = sp(3). 
(8.11) 

194 
CHAPTER8 
R®O 
ExternalRo is spanned by wand eLaß (l-vector basis for Ro,s), and 
eLaa, eLab( (2-vectors). 
ExternalRO = 80(9). 
(8.12) 
SpinorRO is 16-dimensional, hut because OL = OR, InternalRo is 
empty. (The inclusion of OR causes 80(9) to expand to 80(16), leading 
to a quite different result.) That's 36+16 = 52 elements altogether, and we 
make the identification: 
MSRO = LF4 , 
where LF4 is the Lie algebra of F4. 
(8.13) 
Let i and i' he distinct imaginary units that commute with each other. 
ExternalRc is spanned by w, ia, i'ß (l-vector basis for nonuniversal Ro,3), 
and iß, i'a, ii'w (2-vector). 
Externa1cc = 80(4) = 8u(2) X 8u(2). 
(8.14) 
Spinorcc is 8-dimensional, and 
Internalcc = u(l) X u(l) 
(8.15) 
is spanned by iR and iR . That's 6+8+2 =16 elements altogether, and we 
make the identification: 
M Scc = 8u(3) X 8u(3). 
(8.16) 

CORRIDORS 
195 
C®Q 
ExternalcQ is spanned by w, ia:, qLjß (l-vector basis for RO,5), and iß, 
qLja:, iqLjW, qLj€ (2-vectors). 
ExternalcQ = 80(6). 
(8.17) 
SpinorcQ is 16-dimensional, and 
InternalcQ = u{l) X su(2) 
(8.18) 
is spanned by i and qRj . That's 15+16+4 = 35 elements altogether, and 
we make the identification: 
M SCQ = 8u(6). 
(8.19) 
Externalco is spanned by w, ia:, eLaß (l-vector basis for Ro,9), and iß, 
eLaa:, ieLaW, eLab€ (2-vectors). 
Externalco = 80(10). 
(8.20) 
Spinorco is 32-dimensional, and again because OL = OR, InternalRo is 
spanned only by iR' 
Internalco = u(l) = 80(2). 
(8.21) 
That 's 45+32+ 1 = 78 elements altogether, and we make the identification: 
MSco = LE6• 
(8.22) 

196 
CHAPTER8 
Q®Q 
Let qj and qj be distinct and mutually commuting bases for the hyper-
complex quaternions. ExternalQQ is spanned by w, qLjCX, qtjß (l-vector 
basis for nonuniversal R O,T), and qLjß, ql,jCX, qLjqhw, qLjf, ql,jf (2-vectors). 
ExternalQQ = 80(8). 
(8.23) 
SpinorQQ is 32-dimensional, and 
InternalQQ = 8u(2) X 8u(2) 
(8.24) 
is spanned by qRj and qRj . That's 28+32+6 = 66 elements altogether, and 
we make the identification: 
M SQQ = 80(12). 
(8.25) 
Q®O 
ExternalQo is spanned by w, qLjCX, eLaß (l-vector basis for nonuniversal 
Ro,n), and qLjß, eLaQ!, qLjeLaW, qLjf, eLabf (2-vectors). 
ExternalQo = 80(12). 
(8.26) 
SpinorQo is 64-dimensional, and again because OL = OR, InternalRo is 
spanned only by qRj. 
InternalQo = 8u(2) = 80(3). 
(8.27) 
That's 66+64+3 = 133 elements altogether, and we make the identification: 
(8.28) 

CORRIDORS 
197 
000 
Let eLa and eLb be distinct and mutually commuting bases for the hyper-
complex octonions. Externaloo is spanned by w, eLaa, eLaß (l-vector basis 
for nonuniversal RO,l5), and eLaß, eLaa, eLaeLbw, eLabf, eLabf (2-vectors). 
Externaloo = 80(16). 
(8.29) 
Spinoroo is 128-dimensional, and again because OL = OR, InternalRo 
is empty. That's 120+128 = 248 elements altogether, and we make the 
identification: 
MSOO = LEB. 
(8.30) 
Part of the significance of these constructions is the manner in which 
they parallel the construction of a physical model in the earlier chapters. In 
particular, that model was based on TL(2) 0 PR acting on T 2 , with TL(2) 
identified as 'external', and PR 'internal'. Some important distinctions can 
be made, however. TL(2) can be viewed as either the complexification of 
R1,9, or as the Clifford algebra Rl,lO• For example, the elements 
(8.31) 
are a 1-vector basis for R1,l0 ~ TL(2) (see the Q ® 0 case abovej this is 
only a slight modification of the 1-vector basis for RO,ll used there). For 
that matter, the set 
(8.32) 
is another 1-vector basis for R 1,9• Why is the 1-vector basis given in 4.4 
preferable to this? Perhaps it isn't, but there is a difference. The former 
basis is buHt up from a "Pauli" algebra underlying the (1,9)-Dirac algebra 
(see 6.1), just as the (1,3)-Dirac algebra is buHt up from the conventional 
Pauli algebra. The basis 8.31 is not so constructed. It should be possible to 
generate a basis for the Lie algebra of E7 starting from the 1-vector basis 
for Ro,lt. 
(8.33) 
(a slight modification of the I-vector basis for Rl,9 in 4.4, where the basis 
above is founded on the "Pauli" algebra 6.1). To this add the basis of 

198 
CHAPTER8 
corresponding 2-vectors, completing the external subalgebra, 80(12). The 
internal space should be the same (ie., we are ignoring the presence of the 
complex unit i in 8.33), 8u(2). The spinor space should be half (a Majorana 
doublet) of T 2, where the other half is obtained by' multiplication by i, and 
each half is closed under the action of 80(12) X su(2)). This construction of 
LE7 , however, is not valid for all of the other algebras of the magie square. 
Questions arise from these ideas, for whieh there are presently no an-
swers. Do these constructions signify a connection of the T-model to some 
GUT (for example, the E6 GUT)? Or is the attractiveness of GUTs acciden-
tal, arising from algebraie similarities to the T-model? In either case, how 
may we naturally determine the global structure of the varivus manifold bits 
of the T-model? 
8.3. SpinorJ{J{1 Outer Products. 
In the next section we shall define commutator products for the M SRO case 
(LF4 ). As a first step in that direction we define the outer product of spinors. 
Three cases are developed here: C, Q, and O. Only the last is relevant. This 
is because in this section I am treating 2-dimensional C and 4-dimensional 
Q as spinor spaces for R(2) and R(4), but CL ::j:. R(2), and QL ::j:. R(4) (the 
Q spinor outer product below is valid for QA ~ R( 4) (see 2.28), in whieh 
case 4-dimensional Q is the complete spinor space). On the other hand, 
8-dimensional 0 is the full spinor space for OL, because OL ~ R(8). The 
first two cases establish the method. 
C OUTER PRODUCTS 
Consider the example of CL acting on the spinor space C. C is 2-
dimensional over Rand as areal column spinor space its elements can be 
represented by 
(8.34) 
This leads naturally to the representations 
[ 1 0 1 . 
[0 -1 1 
1L -t 
0 1 
' 
ZL -t 
1 
0 
. 

CORRIDORS 
199 
We expect the outer product of 1 with its transpose to be representable as 
(8.36) 
which is not a linear combination of the matrices 8.35. We need to expand 
the set by 
1 
* 
[1 0 1 .* 
[0 1 1 
L --+ 
0 -1 
' 
zL --+ 
1 0 
' 
(8.37) 
the former just complex conjugation, the latter complex conjugation followed 
by iL (see 2.30). Therefore, 
Re = 11 >< 11 = ~(1L + 11), 
which is the projector of the real part of C. That is 
1 
"2(1L + 1L)[x] = Re(x) 
far all x E C. 
(8.38) 
(8.39) 
Any element x of C can be mapped to an element XL of CL by appending 
the subscript 'L'. We may now define a general outer product of x and y in 
C: 
Ix >< yl = xLReyL 
where yt = y* in this case. For example, 
(8.40) 
(8.41 ) 
so we expect 11 >< il to map i (= li » to 1 (= 11 », and to map 1 to zero. 
Using 8.41, 
11 >< il = 1LRe( -iL) = -~(1L + 1iJiL = ~(i'i - iL), 
(8.42) 
and 
as expected. 
~(i'i - iL)[i] = ~(i(-i) - i(i» = 1, 
~(i'i - iL)[l] = ~(i(l) - i(1» = 0, 

200 
CHAPTER 8 
Equation 8.42 has exact counterparts when we replace C by Q or O. 
The problem is to define RQ and Ra, which project the real parts of those 
algebras (Ra = Po; see sections 2.4 and 7.1). 
Q OUTER PRODUCTS 
In the case of QL and QR acting on the spinor sp~ce Q, if we represent 
the basis for Q by 
1 -
[ ~ l' q, -
[ ~ 1 ' 
q2 -+ [n %-[n 
(8.43) 
then 
qLl - [~ 
-1 0 
_~] ,QL2 -
[~ 
0 -1 n 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 0 
0 
0 
0 1 
-1 
0 
qu- [~ 
0 
0 
-~ 1 
0 -1 
1 
0 
o ' 
0 
0 
0 
(8.44) 
qRl -
[ ~ 
-1 
0 ! 
1 
,qm -
[ ~ 
0 -1 
-~ ] 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
0 
o ' 
0 -1 
1 
0 
0 
qru -
[ ~ 
0 0 
-~ ] 
0 1 
-1 0 
o ' 
0 0 
0 

CORRIDORS 
201 
so that 
-9L!9R1 ~ [~ 
0 
0 i ] , 
-QL,qR2 ~ [ ~ 
0 0 i], 
1 
0 
-1 0 
0 -1 
0 1 
0 
0 -1 
0 
0 0 -1 
(8.45) 
-Q~qm~ [~ 
0 
o 0] 
-1 
o 0 
0 -1 0 
. 
0 
o 1 
Therefore, 
[ 1 
0 0 
n. 
1
3
0 0 0 
(8.46) 
RQ = 4(1L -
~qLjqRj) -
0 0 0 
;=1 
0 0 
0 
and for all X and Y in Q we define 
, 
t 
Ix >< Yl = xLRQYL' 
(8.4 7) 
As an example, 
Iq, >< q,1 ~ QLlRQ( -qL>J ~ [ ~ 
0 0 n 
0 1 
0 0 
0 0 
This should map q2 -
q1, and everything else to zero. 
-qL1RQqL2[1] = -qL1RQ[q2] = -qLdRe(q2)] = 0, 
-qL1 RQqL2[q1] = -qL1RQ[-q3] = -qLdRe( -q3)] = 0, 
-qL1RQqL2[q2] = -qL1RQ[-1] = -qL1[Re( -1)] = -qLd-1] = qll 
-qL1RQqL2[q3] = -qL1RQ[q1] = -qL1[Re(q1)] = O. 

202 
CHAPTER 8 
o OUTER PRODUCTS 
In the case of the octonions, 
(see sections 2.4 and 7.1), and for all x,y E 0, 
(8.49) 
Therefore, for example, 
(8.50) 
And the vector 80(8) generators in 7.102 can be written, 
(8.51) 
For a, bE {O, ... , 7}, this yields all 28 of the vector 80(8) generators on the 
last line of 7.102. 
Note that if X E T, then 
So the inner product 
Ro[X] E C® Q, 
RQRo[X] E C, 
RcRQRo[X] E R. 
(8.52) 
which is SO(64). invariant. This expression for the inner product, however, 
hides the U(1) X SU(2) X SU(3) symmetry that is manifested by construct-
ing the inner product using projection operators from T, the spinor space, 
instead of TA. 

CORRIDORS 
203 
8.4. LF4 ~ M S RO. 
A basis for ExternalRo ~ 80(9) consists of the 36 elements 
(8.53) 
Denote these elements Jj, f = 1, ... , 36 (the order is immaterial). SpinorRo 
is just 0 2,2 xl matrices over O. Together ExternalRo and SpinorRo define 
a representation of LF4 (InternalRo is empty). Let A, B E ExternalRo, 
and X, Y E SpinorRo. The commutator 
[A,B] = AB - BA, 
(8.54) 
as expected. External/ Spinor commutators are also simply defined: 
[A, X] = -[X, A] = A[X]. 
(8.55) 
It only remains to define Spinor / Spinor commutators. Following [Baaklini], 
we define 
1 36 
[X,Y] = 4 L < X,J1[YJ > J1 
1=1 
(8.56) 
(note: the spinor conjugation used in the definition of the inner product is 
in this case ordinary Hermitian transposition). 
We can gain some insight into 8.57 by considering a few examples. Start 
with 
(8.57) 
For the inner product on the righthand side of 8.58 to be nonzero, we must 
have 
This occurs for J1 = eLlO, eL26f, eL34f, eL57f. Therefore 
[[ e~ ], [~]J = HeL10+eL26f+eL34E+eL57f) 
= 
HeLl + eL26 + eL34 + eL57)oal 
(8.58) 

204 
CHAPTER8 
where 
ae = -(€ - a) = 
1 
[ 0 
2 
0 
The coefficient of aE!), using table i.1 in appendix i, is just the outer product 
= lel >< 11- 11 >< ell 
= eLlPO - PoeL 
= eLlPO + POeLl· 
The coefficient of a e is recognized to be (see 2.20) 
(8.59) 
(8.60) 
Likewise, it is simply determined using table i.6 in appendix i, that 
1 
"4( -eL6a + eL74€ - eLl2€ + eL3S€) 
1 
E!) 
= "4( -eL6 + eL74 - eLl2 + eL3S)a 
1 
e 
+:t( eL6 + eL74 - eLl2 + eL3S)a . 
In this case the coefficient of aE!) is 
= lel >< e21-le2 >< ell 
= eLlPoe12 - eL2PoeL 
(8.61) 
= eRlPOeh2 - eR2Poehl' 
(8.62) 
and the coefficient of a e is 
(8.63) 
where 

CORRIDORS 
205 
The pattern is dear. In general, 
= (xRPoYk- YRPoxh)aE9 
1 
t 
t 
e 
+4(XRYR - YRxR)a , 
(8.64) 
Note: From the results of section 7.3 we see that the coefficient of a E9 is 
vector 80(8), and of ae is spinor 80(8). That this should be so is related to 
the fact that F4 is the automorphism group of the Jordan algebra of 3 x 3 
Hermitian matrices over 0, which is also intimately linked to the notion of 
triality. Indeed, note that by 7.113 and 7.119, under the triality map Tri, if 
a, bE {I, ... , 7}, 
Tri{ !eRoeha} = Tri{ -!eRa} 
= eLaPO + POeLa 
= eLaPoelo - eLoPoeL, 
and 
Tri{ !eRaehb} 
Tri{ -!eRaeRb} 
Tri{~eRab} 
= -eLaPOeLb + eLbPOeLa 
= eLaPoelb - eLbPoeL· 
Therefore, in general, 
(8.65) 
So 
(8.66) 
That is, the coefficient of a E9 in 8.64 is minus the triality rotation of the 
coefficient of ae . 

206 
CHAPTER 8 
In like manner we determine 
Now consider the commutator 
[[ ~ l,[~l]=~t.< [e~ ],Jj[~l >Jj. 
(8.68) 
In this case the inner product on the righthand side of 8.68 is nünzero only 
if 
This üccurs in the single case Jj = eLIß. Hence, 
(8.69) 
Similarly, 
< [ e~ ] ,Jj [ ~6 ] >~ 0 
only if Jj = eLIß. Since eLl[e6] = -e2, 
(8.70) 
Therefore, using the identities of section 7.1, if a, bE {O, ... , 7} are distinct, 
then 
[[ ~ 1 ,[ ~]l = HeRa(2Po - ~)ekb - eRb(2Po - ~)ekalß 
Finally, für all a E {O, ... , 7}, 
(8.72) 

CORRIDORS 
207 
Define 
(8.73) 
Combining these results, we see in general that 
[[ ~ ] , [ ~]J = HXR(2Po - ~)Yh- YR(2Po - !)xtJß + ~[xRYh + YRxtJW 
= ß[XR(2Po - !)Yh- YR(2Po - !)xkJ + l[xRYh + YRxknß E 
+H[XR(2Po - !)Yh- YR(2Po - !)xkJ - ~[xRYh + YRxkn, 
= {!(xRPoYh- YRPoxk) + hRxt}ßEll 
+H(XRPOYh- YRPoxk) -
~xRYh}ße 
= ~(xyt)LßEll -
~(yxt)Lße. 
(8.74) 
Fiddling with all these commutators leads to a unified expression of a 
general LF4 spinor commutator: 
[[ x] [u]l - {! [ XRPO ] [ Pt ut 
PtovRt J - (same)t} + {same}T 
Y 'v 
-
2 
YRPo 
0 R 
+~ [ ~~R ] [-vh ut 1- (same)t, 
(8.75) 
where AT is the transpose of the matrix A. Taking advantage of the triality 
map, we may rewrite 8.75, 
(8.76) 

208 
CHAPTER 8 
8.5. J§> and F4• 
Let Jp be the set of all 3 X 3 Hermitian matrices over the octonions (a 
27 -dimensional real vector space). This set is closed under the symmetrie 
Jordan product 
1 
X 0 Y = "2(XY + Y X), 
(8.77) 
for all X, Y E Jp, and in addition, 
X 0 (Y 0 X 2) = (X 0 Y) 0 X 2 • 
(8.78) 
These conditions make Jp a Jordan algebra [9], a dass of algebras initially 
studied for their connection to quantum theory. Jp is the exceptional Jordan 
algebra, the only one not representable (given the product 8.77) by a set of 
associative matrices (another in a growing list of exceptional mathematical 
objects associated with 0). 
The automorphism group of Jp is F4 , and in this section we will con-
struct a representation of its Lie algebra, LF4 , that will look quite different 
from that developed in the previous section. 
Let 
X = [ : t ; 
; t ] E Jp, 
Y 
xt c 
(8.79) 
a,b,c ER, and x,y,z E O. Clearly xt = X. Let Y be another element of 
Jp. Since 
XoY 
!(XY+YX) 
= H(X + y)2 _ X2 _ y 2), 
F4 consists of those maps M on Jp satisfying 
(8.80) 
for all X E Jp. Therefore, LF4 consists of those maps mon Jp satisfying 
I m[X2] = (m[X])X + X(m[X])·1 
(8.81) 
The most obvious of such maps arise from the 80(3) subalgebra of LF4 
arising from commutation of X in 8.79 with the 80(3) basis 
[ -~ ~ ~], [~ ~ -~], [ ~ 
~ ~]. 
(8.82) 
o 0 0 
1 0 
0 
0 -1 0 

CORRIDORS 
209 
If u is a 3 x 3 real matrix linear in the matrices 8.82, and U = exp( u), then 
the SO(3) action of the form 
x -jo UXUt = UXU- 1 
(8.83) 
clearly maps Jp -jo Jp and is an Jp automorphism. The matrices 8.82 
account for 3 of the 52 dimensions of LF4 • 
The remaining 49 arise from octonion actions and can be most easily 
constructed using the triality map Tri defined in section 7.3. Recall that 
the set 
{eLa, eLbc : a, b, cE {l, ... , 7}} 
(8.84) 
forms a basis for a representation of 80(8), and that if 90 is linear in the 
elements 8.84, then 
(8.85) 
form a triality tripie of 80(8) actions on 0 satisfying Freudenthal's principle 
of triality, 
(8.86) 
the indices taken modulo 3, from 0 to 2. 
N ow define the following action on X E JP: 
[0 g,[ z] (g,[y])t 1 
m[X] = 
... 
0 
90[X] 
...... 
0 
(8.87) 
[ ,0, g,[z] T09'TO[yt]l 
= 
o 
90[x] 
, 
... 
... 
0 
where for the rest of this section, ... in a matrix will indicate that what 
belongs in that position is the Hermitian conjugate of the term across the 

210 
CHAPTER 8 
principal diagonal. Then 
(m[X])X + X(m[X]) 
~ [ (g'[Z])zt~: (gI [y])ty g,[z]b ~ ~~y])txt ---j 
- --
(8.88) 
+ [ z(g,[z])t ~ yt(91[Y]) a9'[z]:+- ~t(go[X])t ---j 
- --
The one diagonal and one off-diagonal terms shown in 8.88 will prove suffi-
dent to finish its construction. The rest of the terms are analysed similarly. 
The diagonal term is 
= 2 < g2[Z]), Z > +2< gt[y], Y > 
= 0, 
since, for example, 92[Z], an infinitesimal 80(8) rotation of z, is perpendicular 
to z. The off-diagonal term is 
g2[z](a + b) + (xgl[Y] + go[x]y)t = g2[z](a + b) + (TOg2To[xy])t 
= g2[z](a + b) + ToTog2TO[xy] 
= g2[z](a + b) + g2[ytxt] 
Therefore, 
= g2[z(a + b) + ytxt]. 
(m[X])X + X(m[X]) 
= [ .~. 
... 
g2[z(a + b) + ytxt] 
o 
- - - .j 
o 
(8.89) 
(8.90) 

CORRIDORS 
211 
The square of the matrix X is 
X' = [ .' + z~t + yty z(a H)+ ytxt ~ ~ ~ 1 
(8.91) 
Therefore 
g2[z(a +~) + ytxt] = = = 1 
... 
0 
(8.92) 
= 
(m[X])X + X(m[X]). 
That is, the actions m defined in 8.87, the collection ofwhich is 28-dimensional 
(80(8», are elements of LF4. Together with the the 80(3) actions defined 
above, this accounts for 3 + 28 = 31 of the 52-dimensional LF4 • 
The remaining 21 dimensions of LF4 arise from 80(3) commutators with 
80(8). Let S be the first ofthe matrices 8.82. Then the following commutator 
establishes the pattern for all [80(3),80(8)] commutators: 
m[S, X] - [S,m[X]] 
(8.93) 
__ [ -2R:o:9: 2[Z] g2[b - a] 
(-gO + ToYtTo)[x] 1 
2POg2[z] 
(-gO + T~YITo)[yt] 
, 
since x + xt = 2Po[x]. 
Note that 
(8.94) 

212 
CHAPTER 8 
So if we give go the general form 
7 
7 
1 '" a 
1 '" be 
go = 2 L... goeLa + 2 L... go eLbe, 
1 
1 
g8 and gge real, then 
7 
- go + TOgITo = - LgoeLa. 
I 
Furthermore, 
g2 = Tri2{go} 
= Li gö(eLaPO + POeLa) 
+ EiggC(eLbPOeLe - eLePOeLb) .. 
Therefore, since POeLaPO = 0, a = 1, ... ,7, and pJ = Po, 
7 
Pog2 = LgoPOeLa' 
I 
Also, if r is real, then PoeLa[r] = 0, and Po[r] = r. This implies 
7 
g2[b - a] = EgoeLa[b - al· 
I 
Finally, using 8.96,98,99, we may rewrite 8.93 
m[S, X] - [s, m[X]] 
[ 
-2 Li g8eLa[Z] Ei g8eLa[b - a] 
- Ei g8eLa[X] 1 
= 
... 
2 Li g8eLa[zl 
- Li g8eLa[ytl 
. 
... 
... 
0 
(8.95) 
(8.96) 
(8.97) 
(8.98) 
(8.99) 
(8.100) 
That is, the commutator of the so(3) action ([S, Xl) with the so(8) action 
(m[X]) is the 7-dimensional action 8.100. Carrying on in this way, com-
muting the other two so( 3) basis actions (associated with the other two 
generators in 8.82), yields similar results. Together with 8.100 that yields a 
21-dimensional subspace of LF4 generators. Since 
3 + 28 + 21 = 52, 
that completes. this new basis for LF4• 
Notiee that S, together with the 28 generators 8.87, and the subsequent 
7 generators 8.100 resulting from commutation, form a 36-dimensional sub-
algebra of LF4 isomorphie to so(9) ~ ExternalRo, 

CORRIDORS 
213 
8.6. More Magie Square. 
The Lie algebra of the automorphism group of Jl' (Jordan algebra of 3 X 3 
real Hermitian matrices) is just so(3), with basis given in 8.82; that of Jf 
(3 X 3 complex Hermitian matrices) is su(3), with five additional generators 
[ i 
00] riO 
0] 
o -i 0 
, 
0 i 
0, 
o 
0 0 
0 0 -2i 
(8.101) 
[ 0 i 0] 
[0 ° i] [000] 
iOO, 000, OOi. 
000 
iOO 
OiO 
The space of matrices C ® Jp is the set of all 3 X 3 matrices over C ® 0 
satisfying 
x'" = X, 
(8.102) 
where X'" is transposition together with octonion conjugation. That is, if 
X* is simple complex conjugation, no transposition, then 
X'" = X*t, 
(8.103) 
where now 
(8.104) 
a,b,c E C, and x,y,z E C ® O. 
If U E SU(3) is generated from the matrices in 8.82,101, then the set 
C ® Jp is invariant under the action 
X -+ UXU'" = UXUT , 
(8.105) 
where UT is the transpose of U (UT = U*t). Of course, an action ofthe 
form 8.104 is not an automorphism of C ® Jp given the product 8.77. 
The infinitesimal (Lie algebra) version ofthe action 8.105 is commutation 
for the matrices 8.82, and anticommutation for the matrices in 8.101. Let R 
be the first ofthe matrices in 8.101, T the third (both nonzero in the upper 
left 2 X 2 block). Then the anticommutator 
[ 
2ia 
{R,X}= 
? 
zy 
o 
iy'" 1 
-2ib -ix 
, 
-ix'" 
0 
(8.106) 

214 
CHAPTER 8 
and 
[ 
0 
0 T091TO[iytPll 
m{R,X} = 
.~ .. 
~. 
9o[~ixl 
= {R,m[X]} 
(8.107) 
(note that if y E C ® 0, then To[Y] = ytP). That is, 
m{R,X} - {R,m[X]} = 0; 
(8.108) 
the commutator of the action 8.106 arising from the diagonal su(3) generator 
R, and the action 8.87, which is also in a sense diagonal (in that while x, y, z 
may be changed, they are not shifted from their matrix component slots), is 
zero. 
On the other hand 
m{T, X} - {T, m[X]} 
[ 
0 92[i(b + a)) T091TO[iX)l 
... 
0 
90 [iytP] 
... 
... 
0 
[ 
i(92[Z) + (92[Z])tP) 
-
0 
o 
i(92[Z) + (92[Z])tP) 
i9o[X] 1 
iT091~O[YtP) 
(8.109) 
[ 
2iPo92[Z] 
i~2[b + a) 
= 
... 
2zPo92[Z] 
... 
. .. 
A quick comparison of this commutator with the commutator 8.93 should 
be enough to convince the reader that the COITlmutator above, like 8.93, 
gives rise to 7 additional generators. The same will be true of the other 
two off-diagonal matrices in 8.101. And there the Lie algebra closes, with 
28 elements from 8.87, 8 from 8.82,101, and then from the 6 off-diagonal 
elements of su(3), 6 X 7 = 42 additional elements, for 
28+ 8 + 42 = 78 
all together. That is, once again from a combination of C and 0 we have 
arrived at LE6• 

CORRIDORS 
215 
Again note that the 28 elements 8.87, together with the generators R, S, T 
(the 8u(2) subalgebra of 8u(3) nonzero in the upper left 2 X 2 matrix block), 
and their commutators with 80(8) (8.87) (which give rise to 14 additional 
elements, 7 for the off-diagonal S, 7 for T), yields a sub algebra of LE6 of 
order 28 + 3 + 14 = 45 isomorphie to 
80(10) ~ Externalco. 
LE7 arises in the same way if we replace C by Q. That is, we extend 
80(3), the automorphism Lie algebra of Jp., to 8p(3), the automorphism Lie 
algebra of J~ (3 X 3 Hermitian matrices over Q), by augmenting the 380(3) 
generators 8.82 with the 18 additional generators 
[ 
qj 0 
o 0 
o 0 
(8.110) 
If U E Sp(3) is generated from a linear combination ofthe matrices 8.82,110, 
then the action 8.105 on X E Q 0 J:p maps this set to itself. Again, this 
translates to an anticommutator Lie algebra action on X arising from the 
extra generators 8.110. 
Of these, 9 are diagonal, 9 off-diagonal, and as was the case with 8u(3), 
commutators of the form 8.93,105 give rise to non zero results only for the 
off-diagonal generators of 8p(3), and in each case the resultant space of new 
generators is 7-dimensional. This closes the algebra on the 
28 + 21 + 84 = 133 
elements of a new representation of LE7• 
Getting LEB from 0 ® Jp is slightly trickier. In this case there are two 
distinct copies of 0 commuting with each other (denote them 0 1 and O2), 
and while X E 0 1 ® JP2 is still of the form 8.103, where a, b, C E Ob and 
x, y, z E 0 1 0 O 2 , the map x -t xl/> conjugates only the O2 part of x. 

216 
CHAPTER8 
We begin again with the 28 80(8) generators 8.87, and the 3 80(3) gener-
ators 8.82. As before we expand the set of 80(3) generators. In the C ® Jp 
case we expanded 80(3) to 8u(3), the Lie algebra of the automorphism of 
Jfj in the Q ® Jp case we expanded 80(3) to 8p(3), the Lie algebra of the 
automorphism of J~j in the 0 1 ® J?2 case we expand 80(3) to LF4, the Lie 
algebra of the automorphism of J?l. That gives us 28 elements from 80(8), 
and 52 elements from LF4 (which contains another distinct 80(8)). Of the 
52 generators of this new LF4 , 28 are diagonal in the sense that the maps 
8.87 are diagonal, and 24 are off-diagonal. Commutators of the 28 diagonal 
generators (the 80(8) of 0d with the 80(8) of O2 yield nothing new, but 
each of the 24 off-diagonal generators gives rise to a 7-dimensional space of 
new generators. That yields, 
28 + 52 + 168 = 248 
generators a11 together, and the set closes he re on LEs. (The interested 
readers may carry out the details for themselves, as weH as the identification 
of the 80( 16) ~ E xternaloo of L Es in this case.) 

Appendix i. 0 L Actions: 
Product Rule eaea+l == ea+5. 
Given the octonion multiplication, 
eaea+l = ea+s, 
the resulting multiplication table is 
1 
el 
e2 
e3 
e4 
es 
e6 
e7 
el 
-1 
e6 
e4 
-e3 
e7 
-e2 -e5 
e2 
-e6 -1 
e7 
es 
-e4 
el 
-e3 
e3 
-e4 -e7 -1 
el 
e6 
-es 
e2 
(LO) 
e4 
e3 
-es -eI 
-1 
e2 
e7 
-e6 
es 
-e7 
e4 
-e6 -e2 -1 
e3 
el 
e6 
e2 
-eI 
e5 
-e7 -e3 -1 
e4 
e7 
es 
e3 
-e2 
e6 
-eI -e4 -1 
o is the object space of the 64-dimensional OL. In the tables listed below 
are the actions of the basis elements of 0 L on the basis of O. 
As an example of how to use these tables, consider the bold-faced ele-
ments in table i.O. These indicate that 
where the sign is drawn from the slot in the relevant row and column. As 
another example, from table i.1 we see that 
eL34[eS] = -e7, 
where es is on the left side, determining the row, e7 is on the right at the 
end of the same row, and eL34 is on the top, determining the column. A 
217 

218 
APPENDIX 1. 
minus sign is in the appropriate row and column, which is the sign of the 
action. The La table is associated with ea , where eo = 1. Note that the 
adjoint elements along the top of table LO are the diagonal elements of OL, 
denoted I a in 2.46. These were used to resolve the identity of 0L in section 
2.4. 
1 
eL476 
eLS17 
eL621 
eL732 
eLl43 
eL2S4 
eL36S 
1 + + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
ea + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
ea 
(i.1) 
e4 + + 
+ 
+ 
e4 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
e6 + + 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e7 + + 
+ 
+ 
e7 
eLI 
eL26 
eL34 
eLS7 
eLS46 
eL23S 
eL427 
eL367 
1 + + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e2 + + 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
(i.2) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
(:2 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
eL2 
eL37 
eL4S 
eL61 
eL657 
eL346 
eL531 
eL471 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
(i.3) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
es 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 

219 
eL3 
eL41 
eL56 
eL72 
eL761 
eL457 
eL642 
eL512 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e1 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
(iA) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e1 
e5 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
eL4 
eL52 
eL67 
eL13 
eL172 
eL561 
eL753 
eL623 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e1 
(i.5) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e5 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
eL5 
eL63 
eL71 
eL24 
eL213 
eL672 
eL164 
eL734 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e1 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
(i.6) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e5 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e1 

220 
APPENDIX 1. 
eL6 
eL74 
eL12 
eL35 
eL324 
eL713 
eL275 
eL145 
1 + + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e5 
(i.7) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e5 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e7 + + 
+ 
+ 
e4 
eL7 
eL15 
eL23 
eL46 
eL435 
eL124 
eL316 
eL256 
1 + + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
el + + 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
(i.8) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e5 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 

Appendix ii. 0 R Actions: 
Product Rule eaea+l = ea+5. 
For the sake of completeness, the actions of the basis of 0R on 0 are also 
given. 
1 
eR476 
eR517 
eR621 
eR732 
eR143 
eR254 
eR365 
1 + + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
(ii.O) 
e4 + + 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e5 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e6 + + 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e7 + + 
+ 
+ 
e7 
eR! 
eR26 
eR34 
eR57 
eR564 
eR253 
eR472 
eR376 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
(ii.1 ) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e5 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 

222 
APPENDIX 11. 
eR2 
eR37 
eR4S 
eR61 
eR675 
eR364 
eRS13 
eR417 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e1 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
(ii.2) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
eR3 
eR41 
eR56 
eR72 
eR716 
eR475 
eR624 
eR521 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
(H.3) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
es 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
eR4 
eRS2 
eR67 
eR13 
eR127 
eRS16 
eR73S 
eR632 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
(H.4) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
es 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 

223 
eRS 
eR63 
eR71 
eR24 
eR231 
eR627 
eRl46 
eR743 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
(ii.5 ) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
es 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
eR6 
eR74 
eRl2 
eR35 
eR342 
eR731 
eR2S7 eRIS4 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
(ii.6) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
eR7 
CRIS 
CR23 
CR46 
eR4S3 
CR142 
eR361 
CR26S 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
C2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
(ii. 7) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
C7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 

Appendix iii. 0 L Actions: 
Product Rule eaea+l == ea+3. 
Given the octonion Illultiplication, 
eaea+l = ea+3, 
the resulting multiplicatioll table is 
1 
el 
ez 
e3 
e4 
e5 
e6 
e7 
el 
-1 
e4 
e7 
-ez 
e6 
-e5 
-e3 
ez 
-e4 
-1 
e5 
el 
-e3 
e7 
-e6 
e3 
-e7 -e5 
-1 
e6 
e2 
-e4 
el 
(iii.O) 
CI 
e2 
-Cl 
-e6 
-1 
e7 
C3 
-e5 
e5 
-e6 
e3 
-e2 
-e7 
-1 
el 
e4 
e6 
e5 
-e7 
e4 
-e3 -eI 
-1 
e2 
e7 
e3 
e6 
-eI 
e5 
-e4 -e2 
-1 
The resulting adjoint actions are 
1 
eL325 
eL436 
eL547 
eL651 
eL762 
eL173 
CL214 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
(iiU) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e5 + + 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 

226 
APPENDIX III 
eLl 
eL37 
eL56 
eL24 
eL453 
eL764 
eL572 
eL632 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
(iii,2) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e5 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
eL2 
eL41 
eL67 
eL35 
eL564 
eL175 
eL613 
eL743 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e5 
(iii.3) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e5 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
eL3 
eL52 
eL71 
eL46 
eL675 
eL216 
eL724 
eL154 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
(iii.4 ) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 

227 
eL4 
eU3 
eL12 
eLS7 
eL716 
eL327 eL13S 
eL26S 
1 + + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
(iiL5 ) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e6 + + 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
eLS 
eL74 
eL23 
eL61 
eL127 
eL431 
eL246 
eL376 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
(iii.6) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
es 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
eL6 
eL1S 
eL34 
eL72 
eL231 
eLS42 
eL3S7 
eL417 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
(Hi.7) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
es 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 

228 
APPENDIX III 
eL7 
eL26 
eL4S 
eL13 
eL342 
eL6S3 
eL461 
eLS21 
1 + + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e2 + + 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
(iii.8) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
es 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 

Appendix iv. 0 R Actions: 
Product Rule eaea+l == ea+3. 
Finally 
1 
eR325 
eR436 
eR547 
eR651 
eR762 
eR173 
eR214 
1 + + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e2 + + 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e3 + + 
+ 
+ 
e3 
(iv.O) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e5 + + 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
eR! 
eR37 
eR56 
eR24 
eR453 
eR764 
eR572 
eR632 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
et 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
(iv.1 ) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e5 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
es-
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e5 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
229 

230 
APPENDIX IV 
eR2 
eR41 
eR67 
eR3S 
eRS64 
eR17S 
eR613 
eR743 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
(iv.2) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e7 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
eR3 
eRS2 
eR71 
eR46 
eR675 
eR216 
eR724 
eR154 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
el + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
.+ 
es 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
(iv.3) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e5 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
eR4 
eR63 
eR12 
eRS7 
eR716 
eR327 
eR135 
eR265 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
(iv.4 ) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e5 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e7 + 
+ 
-
+ 
+ 
es 

231 
eRS 
eR74 
eR23 
eR61 
eR127 
eR431 
eR246 
eR376 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
e1 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
(iv.5) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
es 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e1 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
eR6 
eR1S 
eR34 
eR72 
eR231 
eRS42 
eR357 
eR417 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e1 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
e2 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
e3 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
(iv.6) 
e4 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
e6 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
eR7 
eR26 
eR4S 
eR13 
eR342 
eR6S3 
eR461 
eRS21 
1 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e7 
el 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e3 
e2 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e6 
e3 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
el 
(iv.7) 
e4 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
es 
es + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e4 
e6 + 
+ 
+ 
+ 
e2 
e7 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
1 

Bibliography 
[1] I.R. Porteous, Topological Geometry, (Cambridge, 2nd Ed., 1981). 
R. Ablamowicz, P. Lounesto, J. Maks: Report on the Second "Workshop 
on Clifford Aigebras and Their Applications in Mathematical Physics," 
Found. Phys. 21 (1989) 201. 
[2] G.M. Dixon, Aigebraic Unification, Phys. Rev. D 28 (1983) 833. 
[3] G.M. Dixon, Generalized Clifford Aigebras: Orthogonal and Symplectic 
Cases, Lett. Math. Phys. 5 (1981) 411. 
[4] G.M. Dixon, Fermionic Clifford Aigebras and Supersymmetry, Clifford 
Algebras and their Application in Mathematical Physics, (D. Reidel 
Publishing Co., 1986) 393. 
[5] V.G. Kac, A Sketch of Lie Superalgebra Theory, Comm. Math. Phys. 
53 (1977) 31. 
[6] G.M. Dixon, Derivation of the Standard Model, Il Nuovo Cimento 105B 
(1990) 349. 
[7] C.A. Manogue, A. Sudbery, General Solutions of Covariant Superstring 
Equations of Motion, Phys. Rev. D 40 (1989) 4073. 
C.A. Manogue, J. Schray, Finite Lorentz Transformations, Automor-
phisms, and Division Aigebras, J. Math. Phys. 34 (1993) 3746. 
[8] I. Bengtsson, M. Cederwall, Particles, Twistors and Division Aigebras, 
Nuc. Phys. B302 (1988) 81. 
/\ 
M. Cederwall, C.R. Preitschopf, S1 and S1, hep-th-9309030. 
233 

234 
BIBLIOGRAPHY 
[9J M. Günaydin, G. Sierra, P.K. Townsend, Exeeptional Supergravity The-
ories and the Magie Square, Phys. Lett. 133B (1983) 72. 
[10] J.H. Conway, N.J .A. Sloane, Sphere Paclcings, Lattices and Groups, 
(Springer-Verlag, 2nd Ed., 1991). 
[l1J F.D. Smith, Calculation of 130 GeV Mass for T-quark, hep-ph-9301210. 
F.D. Smith, SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l), Higgs, and Gravity from Spin(O, 8) 
Clifford Algebra Cl(O, 8), hep-th-9402003. 
[12J E.s. Abers, B.W. Lee, Phys. Rep. 9C (1973) 1. 
[13J P. Candelas, G.T. Horowitz, A. Strominger, E. Witten, Super-
string Phenomenology, Symposium on Anomolies, Geometry, Topology, 
(World Scientifie Publishing Co. Pte. Ltd., 1985) 377. 
[14J A. Sudbery, Division Algebras, (Pseudo)orthogonal Groups and 
Spinors, J. Phys. A 17 (1984) 939. 
[15J M. Günaydin, G. Sierra, P.K. Townsend,The Geometry of N=2 
Maxwell-Einstein Supergravity and Jordan Algebras, Nue. Phys. B242 
(1984) 244. 

Index 
Adjoint Division Algebras, 35,39 
Charge Conjugation, 128 
Chirality, 29 
Chiral Projeetor, 17,21 
CL, CR, 39 
Clifford Algebra, 11,40,59,137 
- universal, 12,192 
- nonuniversal, 13,192 
- tables of, 14,15 
Dimensional Reduetion, 85 
Dirae Operator, 88,94,117 
- parity violating, 96,117 
Division Algebra, 32 
Family (Lepto-quark), 30,79,90 
G2,46 
Galois Field, 49 
Galois Sequenee,49 
Gauge Fields, 97,105 
Hadamard Matrix, 34 
Idempotent, 43,60,69 
- primitive, 43,60,69 
Internal Symmetry, 64,73 
Jordan Algebra, 208 
Lepton, 29,90 
LE6 , 195,214 
LE7, 196,215 
LEs,197,216 
LF4 , 194,203,208 
LG2,46,170 
- triality triplet 
LG~, 176,179,187 
Lie Superalgebra, 27 
Magie Square, 191,213 
Matter / antimatter Mixing, 120,12 
Moufang Identities, 148 
Multiplets, 78 
Nilpotent Clifford Algebra, 24 
- symplectic, 25 
Oetonion, 31 
OL,36,39 
OLX, 187 
OR,37,39 
Po,45,141 
Parity Noneonservation, 29,92,94 
Pauli Algebra, 18,60 
Periodicity (Index), 32,33,53 
Pseudosealar, 13,17 
QL, QR, 39 
Quadratie Residue Code, 56 
Quark, 29,90 
Quaternion, 31 
R O,2,42 
R 3,o, 18,59 
R 1,3, 19,84 
R 3,11 16,43 
R O,6,40 
Rs,o,48 
Ro,g, 67 
Rt,g, 20,85,137 
Resolution ofthe Identity, 43,60,68 
Sealar Field, 109,126 
Special Linear Groups, 135 

236 
Spheres (parallelizable), 150 
Sphere Fibrations, 159 
Spin Group, 13 
Spinor, 13,40,59 
- conjugations, 22 
- Dirac, 16,132 
- inner product, 61,68 
.. Majorana, 16,132 
- Majorana-Weyl, 22,138 
- outer product, 198 
- Pauli, 16,61 
- Weyl, 17 
Spontaneo.us Symmetry Break-
ing, 30,109 
Stability Group, 47 
Standard Model, 29 
Standard Symmetry, 29,73 
SU(3),47,105,111,122,177 
To, 142 
Tangent Space, 151 
Tensored Division Algebra, 59,66 
Torsion, 158 
Triality, 160,209 
- Freudenthal's principle, 169 
- Tri, 165,167,169,209 
- trilinear form, 161,162 
Twistor, 133 
Weak Mixing, 100 
X -Product, 155,175 
INDEX 

Other Mathematics and Its Applications titIes of interest: 
F. Langouche, D. Roekaerts and E. Tirapegui: Functional Integration and Semiclas-
sical Expansions. 1982,328 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1472-X 
N.E. Hurt: Geometric Quantization in Action. Applications of Harmonie Analysis in 
Quantum Statistical Mechanics and Quantum Field Theory. 1982,352 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1426-6 
c.P. Bruter, A. AragnaI and A. Lichnerowicz (eds.): Bifurcation Theory, 
Mechanics and Physics. Mathematical Developments and Applications. 1983, 400 
pp. 
out ofprint, ISBN 9Q-277-1631-5 
N.H. Ibragimov: Transformation Groups Applied to Mathematical Physics. 1984, 
414 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-1847-4 
V. Komkov: Variational Principles of Continuum Mechanics with Engineering 
Applications. Volume 1: Critical Points Theory. 1986,398 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2157-2 
R.L. Dobrushin (ed.): Mathematical Problems of Statistical Mechanics and 
Dynamics. A collection ofSurveys. 1986,276 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2183-1 
P. Kree and C. Soize: Mathematics of Random Phenomena. Random Vibrations of 
Mechanical Structures. 1986,456 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2355-9 
H. TriebeI: Analysis and Mathematical Physics. 1987,484 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2077-0 
P. Libermann and Ch.M. Marle: Sympletic Geometry and Analytical Mechanics. 
1987,544 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2438-5 (hb), ISBN 90-277-2439-3 (pb). 
E. Tirapegui and D. ViIIarroeI (eds.): Instabilities and Nonequilibrium Structures. 
1987,352 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2420-2 
W.I. Fushchich and A.G. Nikitin: Symmetries of MaxweU's Equations. 1987, 228 
pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2320-6 
V. Komkov: Variational Principles of ((ontinuum Mechanics with Engineering 
Applications. Volume 2: Introduction to Optimal Design Theory. 1988, 288 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2639-6 
M.J. 
Vishik and A.V. Fursikov: 
Mathematical Problems in Statistical 
Hydromechanics. 1988,588 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2336-2 
V.I. Fabrikant: Applications of Potential Theory in Mechanics. A Selection of New 
Results. 1989,484 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0173-0 
E. Tirapegui and D. Villarroel (eds.): lnstabilities and Nonequilibrium Structures 
(Il). Dynamical Systems and Instabilities. 1989,328 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0144-7 
V.G. Bagrov and D.M. Gitman: Exact Solutions of Relativistic Wave Equations. 
1990,344 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0215-X 

Other Mathematics and lts Applications titles of interest: 
0.1. Zavialov: Renormalized Quantum Field Theory. 1990,560 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2758-9 
S.S. Horuzhy: Introduction to Algebraic Quantum Field Theory. 1990, 360 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2722-8 
V.G. Makhankov: Soliton Phenomenology. 1990,461 pp. 
ISBN 90-277-2830-5 
S. Albeverio, PH. Blanchard and L. Streit: Stochastic Processes and their Applica-
tions in Mathematics and Physics. 1990,416 pp. 
ISBN 0-9023-0894-8 
V.A. Malyshev and R.A. Minios: Gibbs Random Fields. Cluster Expansions. 1991, 
248 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-0232-X 
E. Tirapegui and W. Zeller (eds.): Proceedings ofthe 3rd Workshop on Instabilities 
and Nonequilibrium Structures. 1991,370 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1153-1 
C.A. Marinov and P. Neittaanmaki: Mathematical Models in Electrical Circuits. 
Theory and Applications. 1991, 160 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1155-8 
C. Bartocci, U. Bruzzo and D. Hernandez-Ruiperez: The Geometry of Super-
manifolds. 1991,242 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1440-9 
E. Goles and S. Martinez: Statistical Physics, Automata Networks and Dynamical 
Systems. 1992,208 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-1595-2 
A. van der Burgh and J. Simonis (eds.): Topics in Engineering Mathematics. 1992, 
266 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2005-3 
L. Aizenberg: Carleman 's Formulas in Complex Analysis. 1993,294 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2121-9 
E. Tirapegui and W. Zeller (eds.): Instabilities and Nonequilibrium Structures IV. 
1993,371 pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2503-6 
G.M. Dixon: Division Aigebras: Octonions, Quaternions, Complex Numbers and 
the Algebraic Design of Physics. 1994, 246pp. 
ISBN 0-7923-2890-6 

