
English Algorithmic Grammar

This page intentionally left blank 

English Algorithmic Grammar
Hristo Georgiev
continuum

Continuum
The Tower Building 
15 East 26th Street
11 York Road 
New York
London SE1 7NX 
NY 10010
© Hristo Georgiev 2006
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopying,
recording, or any information storage or retrieval system, without prior permission in
writing from the publishers.
First published 2006
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
ISBN: 
0-8264-8777-7 (hardback)
Typeset by BookEns Ltd, Royston, Herts.
Printed and bound in Great Britain by MPG Books Ltd, Bodmin, Cornwall

Contents
Preface
Part One
1 
Algorithmic recognition of the Verb 
3
1 
Introduction 
3
2 
Basic assumptions and some facts 
4
3 
Algorithm for automatic recognition of verbal and nominal
word groups. Algorithm No 1 
5
4 
Conclusion 
12
2 
Division of the sentence into phrases 
13
1 
Introduction 
13
2 
Presentation 
13
3 
Algorithm for division of the sentence into phrases.
Algorithm No 2 
14
4 
Discussion 
16
3 
Algorithmic recognition of Parts of Speech 
18
} 
Introduction 
18
2 
Presentation 
19
3 
Algorithm for recognition of Parts of Speech. Algorithm No 3 
21
4 
Discussion 
22
5 
Examples of the performance of the algorithm 
23
6 
Lists of words used by Algorithm No 3 
25
7 
Algorithmic procedure to determine the use of Adjectives,
Nouns, Participles, Numerals and Adverbs as attributes to
the Noun 
27
4 
Algorithmic recognition of the Tenses 
34
1 
Presentation 
34
2 
Presentation of the algorithm. Algorithm No 6 
35
3 
Discussion 
37

CONTENTS
Part Two
5 
Syntactical structure of the sentence 
41
1 
Introduction 
41
2 
Syntactic Structures 
42
3 
The segment 
44
4 
Presentation of the segment 
47
6 
Composition of the segments 
49
1 
Introduction 
49
2 
Examples of manual extraction of segments from a text 
50
3 
Types of segments 
51
7 
Parsing algorithm 
17 7
1 
Identification of the segment 
177
2 
Parsing of the segment 
184
8 
Links of predicates and incomplete segments 
197
1 
Links of PI 
197
2 
Links of Pi 
199
3 
Links of the j-segment 
202
4 
Links of the G-segment 
203
5 
Links of the v-segment 
204
6 
Links of the and-segment 
205
7 
Links of the Infinitive 
205
8 
Other links and discussion of the links 
206
9 
Reference 
208
1 
Reference within the segment 
208
2 
Pronominal Reference 
209
10 Recognition of the Independent and Dependent Clauses 
220
1 
Algorithm No 20 
220
2 
Role and meaning of Conjunctions 
223
3 
The sentence 
225
4 
Creation of Interrogative Sentences 
229
11 Further applications 
231
Appendix 1: List of Prepositions and Conjunctions and their
most characteristic meaning 
237
Appendix 2: Internet downloads 
241
General index of abbreviations 
243
References 
250
Index 
252
vi

Preface
The main purpose of this book is to bridge the gap between traditional and
computational grammar, showing how traditional grammar can be turned
into computational without losing readers. There have been no previous
attempts made in this direction, since all computational linguists have used
Artificial Languages for their algorithmic notation. By doing so they have
excluded those readers who are unfamiliar with formal languages and
computers and how they operate, but are eager to learn. Some of those
readers are English language students and teachers.
A computational grammar can be read and understood by humans and by
computers only if it is written in a language they can both comprehend. For
the humans, this is the Natural Language (in our case, English); for the
computers, this is the rigid and unequivocal algorithmic language. When the
algorithmic language is expressed in Natural Language, say English, it can be
made legible for humans and at the same time it can be easily turned into a
computer software program using one of the artificial languages to program
it.
So, in this book we will provide a formal description of English grammar
(syntax) for the computer, in two parts. In Part 1 we will introduce
procedures for automatic recognition (disambiguation) of the Parts of Speech
in a text. Part 2 will deal with the sentence and the interrelationships of its
constituent elements, including Parsing and Pronominal Reference.
The algorithmic approach to grammar is a step by step approach, in line
with the digital thinking of the computer. Such an approach leaves nothing
unresolved, since the computer cannot take a step further without having first
solved the task presented at the previous step. The algorithmic approach
leaves no room for errors. Errors accumulate if not corrected in time and
frustrate the operation of the whole system. The functioning of the algorithm,
and hence the performance of the computer software program, is entirely
dependent on the formal method of description of the language. If this
method is inadequate, if it cannot describe every word and every sentence,
then this method is useless to the computer. The algorithmic approach, unlike
other methods, can be verified. We can check each step of the algorithm
manually and be personally convinced whether the decision taken by the
computer at this step is true or false.

viii 
PREFACE
English grammar, as seen through the digital eyes of the computer, looks
like an endless chain of operations (instructions) and decisions aimed at
resolving a particular grammatical or semantic task.
The present grammar is designed for text analysis, not for text synthesis,
though, after some additions and exclusions, it can be used for the latter
purpose if one is willing to generate syntactically correct but meaningless
sentences on a computer. In the classroom, for teaching purposes, the students
may use it to generate meaningful sentences by adding words to the list of
syntactical structures. English Algorithmic Grammar has a very wide scope of
application. It can be used to study, teach and exercise English grammar
(syntax) at all levels. It could serve to introduce the linguist at under-
graduate, postgraduate or faculty level to computers and to the computer
way of thinking and decision-making, and the computer scientist or hobbyist
to linguistics. Many Natural Language Processing teams in the world may
find its algorithms preferable for implementation. English Algorithmic Grammar
is both a textbook and a reference book. It is accompanied by a Dictionary of
Segments, available for free download on the Internet (see Internet
Downloads at the end of the book), containing some 27,000 syntactically
correct structures permitted by English grammar. The structures are pre-
parsed and can be used for reference by English speakers and non-English
speakers alike. The reader needs no special knowledge of the related fields
(mathematics and computational linguistics) in order to be able to
understand this book.

PART ONE

This page intentionally left blank 

1 Algorithmic recognition of the Verb
In the present study an attempt is made to describe the Verb in the English
sentence formally for the computer, by means of flow charts. The flow charts
are procedures for text analysis. These procedures are based on the formal
grammatical and syntactical features called 'markers' present in the text. The
procedures, in the form of instructions (in English), show how to
clisambiguate those wordforms which potentially belong to more than one
Part of Speech, one of which is a Verb. The implementation of the present
algorithmic description will help improve the quality of Machine Translation
where English is the input language.
1 Introduction
The advent and the subsequent wide use of formal grammars for text
synthesis and for formal representation of the structure of the Sentence could
not produce adequate results when applied to text analysis. Therefore a
better and more suitable solution was sought. Such a solution was found in
the algorithmic approach for the purposes of text analysis. The algorithmic
approach uses series of instructions, written in Natural Language and
organized in flow charts, with the aim of analysing certain aspects of the
grammatical structure of the Sentence. The procedures — in the form of a
finite sequence of instructions organized in an algorithm - are based on the
grammatical and syntactical information contained in the Sentence.
The method used in this chapter closely follows the approach adopted by
the all-Russia group Statistika Rechi in the 1970s and described in a number
of publications (Koverin, 1972; Mihailova, 1973; Georgiev, 1976). It is to be
noted, however, that the results achieved by the algorithmic procedures
described in this study by far exceed the results for the English language
obtained by Primov and Sorokina (1970) using the same method. (To
prevent unauthorized commercial use the authors published only the block-
scheme of the algorithm.)

4 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
2 Basic assumptions and some facts
It is a well known fact that many difficulties are encountered in Text
Processing. A major difficulty, which if not removed first would hamper any
further progress, is the ambiguity present in the wordforms that potentially
belong to more than one Part of Speech when taken out of context. Therefore
it is essential to find the features that disambiguate the wordforms when used
in a context and to define the disambiguation process algorithmically.
As a first step in this direction we have chosen to disambiguate those
wordforms which potentially (when out of context, in a dictionary) can be
attributed to more than one Part of Speech and where one of the possibilities
is a Verb. These possibilities include Verb or Noun (as in stay), Verb or Noun
or Adjective (as in pain, crash), Verb or Adjective (as in calm), Verb or
Participle (as in settled, asked, put), Verb or Noun or Participle (as in run, abode,
bid), Verb or Adjective or Participle (as in closed), and Verb or Noun or
Participle or Adjective (as in cut).
We'll start with the assumption that for every wordform in the Sentence
there are only two possibilities: to be or not to be a Verb. Therefore, only
provisionally, exclusively for the purposes of the present type of description
and subsequent algorithmic analysis of the Sentence, we shall assume that all
wordforms in the Sentence which are not Verbs belong to the non-verbal or
Nominal Word Group (NG). As a result of this definition, the NG will
incorporate the Noun, the Adjective, the Adverb, the Numeral, the Pronoun,
the Preposition and the Participle 1st used as an attribute (as in the best selected
audience) or as a Complement (as in we'll regard this matter settled). All the
wordforms in the Sentence which are Verbs form the Verbal Group (VG).
The VG includes all main and Auxiliary Verbs, the Particle to (used with the
Infinitive of the Verb), all verbal phrases consisting of a Verb and a Noun
(such as take place, take part, etc.) or a Verb and an Adverb (such as go out, get
up, set aside, etc.), and the Participle 2nd used in the compound Verbal Tenses
(such as had arrived).
The formal features which help us recognize the nominal or verbal
character of a wordform are called 'markers' (Sestier and Dupuis, 1962).
Some markers, such as the, a, an, at, by, on, in, etc. (most of them are
Prepositions), predict with 100 per cent accuracy the nominal nature of the
wordform immediately following them (so long as the Prepositions are not
part of a phrasal Verb). Other markers, including wordform endings such as
-ing and -es, or a Preposition which is also a Particle such as to, etc., when
used singly on their own (without the help of other markers) cannot predict
accurately the verbal or nominal character of a wordform. Considering the
fact that not all markers give 100 per cent predictability (even when all
markers in the immediate vicinity of a wordform are taken into considera-
tion), it becomes evident that the entire process of formal text analysis using
this method is based, to a certain degree, on probability. The question is how
to reduce the possible errors. To this purpose, the following procedures were
used:

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF THE VERB
5
a i the context of a wordform was explored for markers, moving back and
forth 
up to three words to the left and to the right of the wordform;
b; some algorithmic instructions preceded others in sequence as a matter of
rule in order to act as an additional screening;
c) no decision was taken prematurely, without sufficient grammatical and
syntactical evidence being contained in the markers;
d) no instruction was considered to be final without sufficient checking and
tests proving the success rate of its performance.
The algorithm presented in Section 3 below, numbered as Algorithm No 1
iGeorgiev, 1991), when tested on texts chosen at random, correctly
recognized on average 98 words out of every 100. The algorithm uses Lists
of markers.
3 Algorithm for automatic recognition of verbal and nominal word
groups. Algorithm No 1
The block-scheme of the algorithm is shown in Figure 1.1.
Input
text
Recognition of
Auxiliary Words,
Abbreviations,
Punctuation Marks
and figures of up
to ^-letter length
'.presented in Lists)
Words over 3-lettcr length:
search first left, then right
(up to 3 words in each direction)
for markers (presented in Lists)
until enough evidence is gathered
for a correct attribution of the
running word
Output result: attribution of the running
word to one of the groups (verbal or nominal)
Figure 1.1 
Block-scheme of Algorithm No 1
Note; The algorithm. 302 digital instructions in all, is available on the
Internet (see Internet Downloads at the end of the book).
3.1 Lists of markers used by Algorithm No 1
(i) 
List No 1: for, net, two, one, may, fig, any, day, she, his, him, her, you,
men, its, six, sex, ten, low, fat, old, few, new, now, sea, yet, ago, nor, all,
per, era, rat, lot, our, way. leg, hay. key, tea, lee. oak, big, who, tub,
pet, law, hut, gut, wit, hat. pot, how, far, cat, dog, ray, hot, top, via,
why. Mrs. ..., etc.
(ii) 
List No 2: was, are, not, get, got, bid, had, did, due, see, saw, lit, let, say,
met, rot. off, fix, lie, die, dye, lay, sit, try, led, nit, . . ., etc.

6 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(iii) List No 3: pay, dip, bet, age, can, man, oil, end, fun, dry, log, use, set,
air, tag, map, bar, mug, mud, tar, top, pad, raw, row, gas, red, rig, fit,
own, let, aid, act, cut, tax, put, ..., etc.
(iv) List No 4: to, all, thus, both, many, may, might, when, Personal
Pronouns, so, must, would, often, did, make, made, if, can, will, shall,
..., etc.
(v) 
List No 5: when, the, a, an, is, to, be, are, that, which, was, some, no,
will, can, were, have, may, than, has, being, made, where, must, other,
such, would, each, then, should, there, those, could, well, even,
proportional, particular(ly), having, cannot, can't, shall, later, might,
now, often, had, almost, can not, of, in, for, with, by, this, from, at, on,
if, between, into, through, per, over, above, because, under, below,
while, before, concerning, as, one, ..., etc.
(vi) List No 6: with, this, that, from, which, these, those, than, then, where,
when, also, more, into, other, only, same, some, there, such, about,
least, them, early, either, while, most, thus, each, under, their, they,
after, less, near, above, three, both, several, below, first, much, many,
zero, even, hence, before, quite, rather, till, until, best, down, over,
above, through, Reflexive Pronouns, self, whether, onto, once, since,
toward (s), already, every, elsewhere, thing, nothing, always, perhaps,
sometimes, anything, something, everything, otherwise, often, last,
around, still, instead, foreword, later, just, behind, ..., etc.
(vii) List No 7: Includes all Irregular Verbs, with the following wordforms:
Present, Present 3rd person singular, Past and Past Participle.
(viii) List No 8: -ted, -ded, -ied, -ned, -red, -sed, -ked, -wed, -bed, -hed, -ped,
-led, -ved, -reed, -ced, -med, -zed, -yed, -ued, . .., etc.
(ix) List No 9: -ous, -ity, -less, -ph, -'s (except in it's, what's, that's, there's,
etc.), -ness, -ence, -ic, -ee, -ly, -is, -al, -ty, -que, -(t)er, -(t)or, -th (except
in worth), -ul, -ment, -sion(s), ..., etc.
(x) 
List No 10: Comprises a full list of all Numerals (Cardinal and Ordinal).
3.2 Text sample processed by the algorithm
Text 
Word Group
She 
NG
nodded 
VG
again and 
NG
patted 
VG
my arm, a small familiar gesture which always 
NG
managed to convey 
VG
both understanding and dismissal. 
NG
3.3 Examples of hand checking of the performance of the algorithm
Let us see how the following sentence will be processed by Algorithm No 1,
word by word:

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF THE VERB 
7
Her apartment was on a floor by itself at the top of what had once been a single
dwelling, but ivhich long ago was divided into separately rented living quarters,
First the algorithm picks up the first word of the sentence (of the text), in our
case this is the word her, with instruction No 1. The same instruction always
ascertains that the text has not ended yet. Then the algorithm proceeds to
analyse the word her by asking questions about it and verifying the answers to
those questions by comparing the word her with lists of other words and
Punctuation Marks, thus establishing, gradually, that the word her is not a
Punctuation Mark ('operations 3-5), that it is not a figure (number) cither
(operation 5•-?), and that its length exceeds two letters (operation 8). The fact
that its length exceeds two letters makes the algorithm jump the next
procedures as they follow in sequence, and continue the analysis in operation
No 31. Using operation No 31 the algorithm recognizes the word as a three-
letter word and takes it straight away to operation No 34. Here it is decreed
to take the word her together with the word that follows it and to remember
both words as a NG. Thus:
Her apartment 
~ 
NG
Then the algorithm returns again to operation No 1, this time with the
word was and goes through the same procedures with it till it reaches
instruction No 38, where it is seen that this word is in fact was. Now the
algorithm checks \fwas is preceded (or followed) by words such as there or it
(operation No 39, which instructs the computer to compare the adjacent
words with there and it], or if it is followed up to two words ahead by a word
ending in -/)' or by such words as never, soon, etc., none of which is actually the
case. Then, finally, operation No 39d instructs the computer to remember the
word was as a VG
was 
— 
VG
and to return to the start again, this time with the next word on. Going
through the initial procedures again, our hand checking of this algorithm
reaches instruction No 9 where it is made clear that the word is indeed on.
Then the algorithm checks the left surroundings of on, to see if the word
immediately preceding it was recognized as a Verb (No 10), excluding the
Auxiliary Verbs. Since it was not (was is an Auxiliary Verb), the procedure
reaches operation Nos 12 and 12a, where it becomes known to the algorithm
that on is followed by a. The knowledge that on is followed by an Article
enables the program to make a firm decision concerning the attribution of the
next two words 112a): on and the next two words are automatically attributed
to the NG:
on a floor 
~ 
NG
After that the program again returns to operation No 1, this time to
analyse the word by. The analysis proceeds without any result till it reaches
operation No 11. where the word by is matched with its recorded counterpart

8 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(see the List enumerating the other possibilities). In a similar fashion (see on),
operation No 12b instructs the computer to take by and the next word
blindfoldedly (i.e. without analysis) and to remember them as a NG. Thus we
have:
by itself 
= 
NG
We return again to operation No 1 to analyse the next word at and we
pass, unsuccessfully, through the first ten steps. Instruction No 11 enables the
computer to match at with its counterpart recorded in the List (at}. Since at is
followed by the (an Article), this enables the computer to make a firm
decision: to take at plus the plus the next word and to remember them as a
NG:
at the top 
= 
NG
We deal similarly with the next word - of— and since it is not followed by a
word mentioned in operation No 12, we take only the word immediately
following it (12b) and remember them as a NG:
of what 
= 
NG
Since the next word - had-exceeds, the two-letter length (operation No 7),
we proceed with it to operation No 31, but we cannot identify it till we reach
operation No 38. Operation No 39 checks the immediate surroundings of had,
and if we had listed once with the other Adverbs in 39b, we would have ended
our quest now. But since once is not in this list, the algorithm proceeds to the
next step (39d) and qualifies had as a VG:
had 
= 
VG
Now we proceed further, starting with operation No 1, to analyse the next
word, once. Being a long word, once jumps the analysis destined for the shorter
(two- and three-letter) words and we arrive with it at operation No 55.
Operations No 55 and 57 ascertain that once does not coincide with either of
the alternatives offered there. Through operation No 59 the computer
program finds once listed in List No 6 and makes a correct decision - to
attribute it to the NG:
once 
= 
NG
Now we (and the program) have reached the word been in the text. The
procedures dealing with the shorter words are similarly ignored, up to
operation No 61, where been is identified as an Irregular Verb from List No 7
and attributed (No 62b) to the VG:
been 
= 
VG
Next we have the word a (an Indefinite Article) which leads us to
operations No 11 and 12 (where it is identified as such), and with operation
No 12b the program reaches a decision to attribute a and the word following
it to the NG:

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF THE VERB 
9
a single
Next in turn is dwelling. It is somewhat difficult to tag, because it can be
either a Verb or a Noun. We go with it through all the initial operations,
without significant success, until we get to operation No 69 and receive the
instruction to follow routines No 246-303. Since dwelling does not coincide
with the words listed in operation No 246, is not preceded by the syntactical
construction defined in No 248 and does not have the word surroundings
specified by operations No 250, 254, 256, 258, 260, 262, 264, 266, 268, 270,
272. 274. 276. 278 and 280, its tagging, so far, is unsuccessful. Finally,
operation No 282 finds the right surrounding - to its left there is, up to two
words to the left, an Article (a) - and attributes dwelling to the NG:
dwelling 
~ 
NG
However, in this case dwelling is recognized as a Gerund, not as a Noun. If we
were to use this result in another program this might lead to problems.
Therefore, perhaps, here we can add an extra sieve in order to be able to
always make the right choice. At the same time, we must be very careful
when we do so. because the algorithms arc made so compact that any further
interference (e.g. adding new instructions, changing the order of the
instructions) might well lead to much bigger errors than this one.
Now, in operation No 3, we come to the first Punctuation Mark since we
started our analysis. The Punctuation Mark acts as a dividing line and
instructs the program to print what was stored in the buffer up to this
moment.
Next in line is the word but. Being a three-letter word it is sent to operation
No 31 and then consecutively to Nos 34. 36, 38 and 40. It is identified in No
42 and sent by No 43 to the NG as a Conjunction:
but 
= 
NG
Next, we continue with the analysis of the word which, starting as usual
from the very beginning (No 1) and gradually reaching No 55, where the real
identification for long words starts. The word which is not listed in No 55 or
No 57. We find it in List No 6 of operation 59 and as a result attribute it to
the NG:
which 
- NG
The word long follows, and in exactly the same way we reach operation No
55 and continue further comparing it with other words and exploring its
surroundings, until we exhaust all possibilities and reach a final verdict in No
89:
long 
= 
NG
Next in turn is the word ago. As a three-letter word it is analysed in
operation No 31 and the next operations to follow, until it is found by
operation No 46 in List No 1, and identified as a NG (No 47):
NG

10 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
ago 
= 
NG
Following is the word was, which is recognized as such for the first time in
operation No 38. After some brief exploration of its surroundings the program
decides that was belongs to the VG:
was 
= 
VG
Next in sequence is the word divided. Step by step, the algorithmic
procedures pass it on to operation No 55, because it is a long word. Again, as
in all previous cases, operations No 55, 56, 57, 59, 61 and 63 try to identify it
with a word from a List, but unsuccessfully until, finally, instruction No 65
identifies part of its ending with -ded from List No 8 and sends the word to
instructions No 128—164 for further analysis. Here it does not take long to see
that divided is preceded by the Auxiliary Verb was (No 130) and that it should
be attributed to the VG as Participle 2nd (No 131):
divided 
= 
VG
The Preposition into comes next and since it is not located in one of the
Lists examined by the instructions and none of its surroundings correspond to
those listed, it is assumed that it belongs to the NG (No 89):
into 
= 
NG
Next, the ending -ly of the Adverb separately is found in List No 9 and this
gives enough reason to send it to the NG (No 64):
separately 
— 
NG
Now we come to a difficult word again, because rented can be either a Verb
or an Adjective, or even Participle 1st. Since its ending -ted is found in List No
8, rented is sent to instructions No 128—164 for further analysis as a special
case. With instructions No 144 and 145 the algorithm chooses to recognize
rented as a Participle (1st) and to attribute it to the NG:
rented 
= 
NG
Next comes living. At first it also seems to be a special case (since it can be
Noun, Gerund, Verb — as part of a Compound Tense — Adjective or
Participle). Instruction No 69 establishes that this word ends in -ing and No
70 sends it for further analysis to instructions No 246—303. Almost towards the
end (instructions No 300 and 301), the algorithm decides to attribute living to
the NG:
living 
—
acknowledging that it is a Present Participle. If the program were more
precise, it would be able also to say that living is an Adjective used as an
attribute.
The last word in this sequence is quarters. The way it ends very much
resembles a verbal ending (3rd person singular). Will the algorithm make a
NG

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF THE VERB 
11
mistake this time? Instruction No 67 recognizes that the ending -s is
ambiguous and sends quarters to instructions No 165 245 for more detailed
analysis. Then the word passes unsuccessfully (unrecognized) through many
instructions till it finally reaches instruction No 233, where it is evidenced that
quarters is followed by a Punctuation Mark and this serves as sufficient reason
to attribute it to the NG:
quarters 
= 
NG
Finally, our algorithmic analysis of the above sentence ends with
commendable results: no error.
However, in the long run we would expect errors to appear, mainly when
we deal with Verbs, but these are not likely to exceed 2 per cent. For
example, an error can be detected in the following sample sentence:
.Not only has his poetic fame - as was inevitable - been overshadowed by that of
Shakespeare but he was long believed to have entertained and to have taken frequent
opportunities of expressing a malign jealousy of one both greater and more successful
than himself.
This sentence is divided into VG and NG in the following manner:
Text 
Word Group
.\'ot 
VG
on.lv 
NG
has 
VG
his poetic fame 
NG
as 
NG
was 
VG
inevitable 
NG
been overshadowed 
VG
by that of Shakespeare 
NG
but he 
' 
NG
was long believed to have entertained 
VG
and 
NG
to have taken 
VG
frequent opportunities of expressing 
NG
a malign jealousy of one both greater 
NG
and 
' 
NG
more successful than himself. 
NG
As is seen in the above example, the word long was wrongly attributed to
the VG (according to our specifications laid clown as a starting point for the
algorithm it should belong to the NG).
The reader, if he or she has enough patience, can put to the test many
sentences in the way described above (following the algorithmic instructions),
to prove for himself (herself) the accuracy of our description.
Though this is a description designed for computer use (to be turned into a
computer software program), nevertheless it will surely be quite interesting

12 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
for a moment or two to put ourselves on a par with the computer in order to
understand better how it works. Of course, that is not the way we would do
the job. Our knowledge of grammar is far superior, and we understand the
meaning of the sentence while the computer does not. The information used
by the computer is extremely limited, only that presented in the instructions
(operations) and in the Lists.
Further on we will try to give the computer more information (Algorithm
No 3 and the algorithms in Part 2) and correspondingly increase our
requirements.
4 Conclusion
Most of the procedures to determine the nominal or verbal nature of the
wordform, depending on its context, are based on the phrasal and
syntactic structures present in the Sentence (for example, instructions 11
and 12, 67 and 68, 85, etc.), i.e. structures such as Preposition + Article +
Noun; will (shall] + be + (Adverb) + Participle; to + be + (not) +
Participle 2nd + to + Verb; -ing + Possessive Pronoun + Noun, etc. (the
words in brackets represent alternatives).
When constructing the algorithm it was thought to be more expedient to
deal first with the auxiliary and short words of two-letter length, then with
words of three-letter length, then with the rest of the words - for frequency
considerations and also because they represent the main body of the
markers.
The approach presented in this study is not based on formal grammars and
is to be used exclusively for text analysis (not for text synthesis). One
should not associate the VP (Verbal Phrase) with the VG and the NP
(Noun Phrase) with the NG - for these are completely different notions as
has been shown by the presentation.
The algorithm can be checked by feeding in texts through the procedures
(the instructions) manually and if the reader is dissatisfied he or she may
change the instructions to improve the results. (See Section 3.3 for details
of how the performance of the algorithms can be hand checked.)
The algorithm can be easily programmed in one of the existing artificial
languages best suited for this type of operation.
The algorithm presented in this study was mentioned, only as a block-
scheme, in a previous publication as Algorithm No 1 (Georgiev, 1991).

2 Division of the sentence into phrases
1 Introduction
For multiple purposes, in Text Processing and Machine Translation, often
there is a need to divide the sentence into smaller units that can be processed
more easily than the whole sentence, especially when the sentence happens to
be a long one. To that purpose we have devised an efficient algorithm based
on the assumptions presented in the next section.
2 Presentation
When we say that we are going to divide the sentence into phrases, we must
state first how we will define the phrase and what our understanding of the
phrase will be 
where it starts and where it ends. For the purposes of the
present algorithm (and not for any other, especially theoretical, purposes) the
phrase is delimited on its left and on its right by Punctuation Marks and
Auxiliary words. The phrase usually starts with an Auxiliary word and ends
with the appearance of a Punctuation Mark or an Auxiliary word.
The Auxiliary words, marking the boundaries of the phrases, are presented
in tables (Lists). Each table lists Auxiliary words of a particular type. It was
observed that some Auxiliary words (as well as some sequences of
consecutively used Auxiliary words) start usually longer and more
independent phrases than others. For example, in a sentence like
the Auxiliary word through followed by the Article the (another Auxiliary
word) starts a phrase that ends with the appearance of a Punctuation Mark,
while the Auxiliary word of starts a sub-phrase which is part of a longer
phrase. In our algorithm (see Algorithm No 2 in Section 3) this subdivision of
the sentence into longer phrases and the subdivision of the longer phrases into
smaller constituent phrases is expressed by leaving different lengths of space
between one phrase and another. The longer the space left before the phrase,
the more self-sufficient and independent the phrase is thought to be. In this
study we have established five types of phrases, depending on their relative
It is often difficult to sek solutions throuh the curtailment of consumptin

14
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
independence within the sentence. This independence is expressed by a
particular Auxiliary word (or words) or by a Punctuation Mark. The longest
and the most self-sufficient and relatively independent phrase starts and ends
with a Punctuation Mark. The second most independent phrase starts with a
word from List No 1 and ends with a Punctuation Mark or with the
appearance of another Auxiliary word from List No 1. For example:
(6 spaces left) One US government study estimated
(5 spaces left) that there are 68 large manufacturing complexes
(4 spaces) in the region
(5 spaces left) that have significant idle capacity, (end)
The full stop at the start of the sentence is equivalent to six spaces. In
other words, a smaller space following after a larger space to the left means
that the phrase starting after the smaller space is dependent on, and a
constituent of, the larger phrase. The smaller space in the example above
(4 spaces) shows that the phrase following after it is dependent on the
previous phrase that there are 68 large manufacturing complexes and explains it (or
brings additional information about it, here location), while the five spaces
left after region signify that the next phrase is dependent on the previous large
phrase (the one that has a longer space left in front), in this case One US
government study estimated that there are 68 large manufacturing complexes.
The space left between the phrases depends on the actual Preposition (or
Punctuation Mark) used or on the sequence of Punctuation Mark and/or
Auxiliary words, as specified (for more details see the instructions for
Algorithm No 2 below).
3 Algorithm for division of the sentence into phrases. Algorithm No 2
The block-scheme of the algorithm is shown in Figure 2.1.
Comparing of each word entry
with the Auxiliary words or
Punctuation Marks (presented
in Lists) and identifying the
Auxiliary words or Punctuation
Marks
Searching left or right
(up to two words) for
other Auxiliary words
or Punctuation Marks
Output result: a phrase
Figure 2.1 Block-scheme of Algorithm No 2
Note: The algorithm (27 digital instructions in all) is available for free
download on the Internet (see Internet Downloads at the end of the book).
Input
text

DIVISION OF THE SENTENCE INTO PHRASES 
15
3.1 Lists used by Algorithm No 2
NB The words not registered in the Lists are recorded as they follow, in the
same sequence, after those registered in the Lists.
(i) 
List No 1: besides, therefore, however, whereas, thus, hence, though,
despite, with, nevertheless, throughout, through, during, that, only,
but, if, otherwise, again, which, although, thereby, already, against,
unless, thereafter, .. ., etc.
(ii) 
List No 2: over, as. what, toward(s), for, into, about, by, so, from, at,
above, under, beside, below, onto, since, behind, in front of, beyond,
around, before, after, then, altogether, among(st), between, beneath,
.. ., etc.
fiii) List No 3: both, neither, none, .. ., etc.
;iv) 
List No 4: of, to (as Preposition)
(v) 
List No 5: the, a, an
,'vi) List No 6: so much as, so far as, so far, as long as, as soon as, so long as,
in order that, in order to. lest, as well as, and, or, nor, ..., etc.
(vii) List No 7: such, than, onto, until, all. near, even, when, while, within,
last, next, also, less, more, most, whether, much, once, one, any, many,
some, where, another, other, each, then, whose, who, whoever, till,
until, what, across, whence, according, due to, owing, whereby, prior,
wherever, whenever, already, moreover, likewise, however, . . ., etc.
I'viii) List No 8: out. in, on, down, .. ., etc.
3.2 Some examples of the performance of Algorithm No 2
Below we will present a text divided into phrases according to the instructions
for the algorithm:
f i) 
Many countries also have established or have 
under construction 
a free none,
where exporters have access 
to shipping facilities, a pool 
of labour and
freedom from exchange controls.
(ii) 
The Caribbean Basin Initiative, a US package 
of aid and trade incentives to
encourage manufacturing, has given 
an added boost 
to industrial devel-
opment 
in this region.
The analysis of the sentence starts with checking the contents of the memory
and taking to print any information stored up to this moment (this is done at
(he start of each new sentence), also with ascertaining whether the sentence
has ended or not and recording the analysed word in the memory it it is not
recorded yet ia procedure carried out after each word). Then the algorithm
reads the next word fin No 4a), which in the case of (i) above is many, and
proceeds to analyse it in 5. Since it is not a full stop or any other Punctuation
Mark (5, 7). nor a word specified in 9, 11, 13, 15, 17 or 19, the analysis yields
no result until the program gets to operation No 21, where the word many is
located in List No 7. Here the program, through operation No 22, checks

16 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
whether many is followed by yet another word from the Lists. Operation 22ab
certifies that it is not, and instructs the program to cut the sentence at this
point and to leave three spaces (before many] when recording it, then to
return to operation No 2 to start the analysis of the next word. The next
word, countries, could not be identified (it is not registered in the Lists),
therefore operation 27 instructs the program to record it in the memory as the
next consecutive word of the phrase and to return to 2 to continue the
analysis of the sentence.
The word also follows next. The program cannot locate the word and
proceeds further, after registering it. The next words have and established are
dealt with in a similar way. Next comes the Conjunction or. The program
locates the word in operation No 17, then it checks if other words from the
Lists follow (18). A single space is left before recording it (No 18b). The word
have is registered next and the program reaches under (15) to draw a dividing
line by leaving four spaces (16ab), and this carries on till the end of the text.
These procedures can be applied to any English language texts. The actual
users of the algorithm can improve it by adding new words to the Lists or by
changing the dividing lines to suit other strategies and other interpretations of
the boundaries of the English phrase.
4 Discussion
Algorithm No 2 was developed with the special purpose of aiding the overall
automatic analysis of the sentence. The division of the sentence into smaller
units helps us understand better its meaning, though the division, as
presented in this section, is not based on meaning but on formal features. The
reader will find somewhat different and much more accurate interpretation of
the existing boundaries within a sentence in Part 2.
In the course of this study it was observed that each foregoing phrase finds
further interpretation of its meaning in the next phrase. In other words, the
first phrase of a sentence carries a certain meaning, which with each
successive phrase becomes more and more clear and complete - the next
phrase simply adds more information to the meaning of the previous phrase.
The phrases have varied mutual interdependence, which we tried to express
with a margin left between them. We will express this graphically in Figure
2.2, which considers two sentences.
The brackets show the dependence of each succeeding phrase both on the
previous one and on all preceding ones. In the second sentence, the phrases
are separated with equal space left between them. In those cases where the
space left is smaller, this means that the tie with the previous phrase is
stronger (i.e. the next phrase is an integral part of the preceding one). A
sudden surge of the interval signals the division between two phrases, as in the
example in Figure 2.3. In this example, the second large phrase (Clause)
explains the meaning of the first. This is indicated with the interval left and
with the brackets.

DIVISION OF THE SENTENCE INTO PHRASES
17
All Caribbean societies,
with the exception
of Cuba,
are consumer societies.
fa new line)
(4 spaces left)
(a new line)
fa new line'i
l-'rom this experience,
I many of these countries realized
._ that an export-based economy relying solely_
_ on traditional exports to generate growth left them vulnerable
to the erratic price swings characteristic
of agricultural commodities. 
I
(a new line)
(4 spaces left)
~T~|(4 spaces left)
,lj (4 spaces left)
(4 spaces left)
(a new line)
Figure 2.2 
Graphic representation of interdependence of phra;
•ases
;6 spaces) 
The US quota system actually affords little protection —
j4 spaces) 
against the volatile world market—|
75 spaces; 
that sets"!
12 spaces! 
the price_J
(4 spaces; 
ol most exported sugar.
Figure 2.3 
Representation showing division between two large phrases

3 Algorithmic recognition of Parts of Speech
One of the first grammatical difficulties found in using English as an input
language in a computerized Text Processing system is the recognition of Parts
of Speech in a text. In this chapter, an algorithmic procedure is offered for
recognition of Parts of Speech in the text, capable of yielding 99.93 per cent
correct results. The algorithmic procedure is based on the contextual analysis
of every running word in the sentence. The contextual analysis is carried out
on the level of Parts of Speech. All available grammatical, syntactical and
some lexical and semantic information is used in the process.
1 Introduction
In a language like English, almost every individual word belongs to more
than one Part of Speech when taken out of context and placed in a dictionary.
Since every Text Processing system inevitably uses a dictionary, the task of
disambiguating the grammatical meaning of the words when used in a text is
of primary importance for any further success in grammatical and semantic
text analysis. It is well known that the wordforms (the running words, or the
word from space to space) are unambiguous with respect to their Part of
Speech. The way, however, that humans and computers disambiguate the
wordforms when they see them in the text is essentially different.
The computers don't know the language: they don't know the
grammatical structure and the meaning of the sentence unless humans teach
them this. As a result, the computer knows as much as we are able to tell it
using a language it can understand, a language capable of explaining step by
step (because the computer is digital) what to do in order to recognize the
Part of Speech of a word when in a text. In this case we will provide the
explanation in English, in the form of flow charts (algorithmically) so that
everybody can read it and understand it. The flow charts can be easily
programmed later in one of the existing computer languages most suitable for
the task, or programmed directly into machine language.
In the first chapter, an algorithm was presented for 98 per cent correct
recognition of the Verb in a text, using the so-called 'markers' present in the
context of a wordform. In this chapter, in order to determine the Part of

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF PARTS OF SPEECH 
19
Speech of every running word in the text a different procedure is used, based
on the actual or possible attribution of the adjacent wordforms (left or right
from the wordform under consideration) to one (or more) Part(s) of Speech.
As a result, the rate of successful recognition has been improved considerably
it is 99.93 per cent correct.
So, our aim in this chapter is to teach the computer to recognize,
algorithmically, the following Parts of Speech: Verb, Noun, 
Adjective
(Attribute, Predicative), Participle, Adverb, Pronoun, Numeral, Auxiliary
word 'Particle, Preposition, Conjunction) and Interjection. Particular
emphasis is laid on the Verbs, the Nouns, the Participles and the Adjectives,
since almost all of them have more than one homograph.
2 Presentation
The present algorithmic procedure is constructed on the assumption that the
computer uses, as a reference table, a full and comprehensive dictionary of the
English language in which every wordform is marked according to its
membership of one or more Partfs) of Speech.
2.1 Presentation of the electronic Dictionary of Wordforms
a) Those words in the Dictionary that belong to only one Part of Speech are
marked as follows: Noun only, Adjective only, Verb only, Preposition only,
Numeral only, Personal Pronoun Nominal Case (PPNC), Reflexive
Pronoun (Reil. Pr), Personal Pronoun Objective Case (PPOC), Recipro-
cal Pronoun (Rcc. Pr), Possessive Pronoun (Poss. Pr), Demonstrative
Pronoun ;Dem. Pr), Interrogative Pronoun (Inter. Pr), Relative Pronoun
(Rel. Pr), Indefinite Pronoun (Indef. Pr), Indicative Pronoun (Indie. Pr.),
Particle, Participle 1st, Participle 2nd, Gerund, Conjunction, Interjection,
Adverb, Person 
human being (d), Geographical name (r), Abbreviation
(Abbr.i, Punctuation Mark.
b) Those wordforms in the Dictionary that belong to more than one Part of
Speech are marked as follows: Noun or Adjective (NA), Adjective or Verb
(AV), Noun or Verb (NV), Adjective or Noun or Verb (ANV), Verb or
Adjective or Participle (VAP) - all wordforms ending in -ed and all past
Participles of the Irregular Verbs - Participle or Adjective or Noun or
Verb (PANVj - all words ending in -ing - Participle or Adjective or Verb
(PAV) - all words ending in -ing - Participle or Adjective (PA) words
ending in -ed and Past Participles of the Irregular Verbs - Participle or
Verb ;PV ), Adverb or Adjective (AA), Verb or Noun or Participle (VNP)
for example run, abode. The reader can find more examples in any English
language dictionary that lists the Part(s) of Speech of a word.
NB Explanation of the terms covered by PANV and PAV:
1. Participle -1, as a Verb in a Compound Tense:

20 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
He was building a house.
2. Gerund -1 (functioning as Noun):
The building of a new society ...
3. Gerund -2 (operating as a Verb) (= to + Verb):
... an important way of keeping them together ..., ... start speaking ...
4. Present participle -2: - operating as a Verb in a non-finite clause:
Walking in the street, he saw ...
5. Present participle -3 (a variant of 4):
... adult men staying at a hotel ..., ... people gathering in front o f . . .
6. Present participle -4 (another variant of 4):
He spoke without winking.
7. Noun:
A new building
N.B. This distinction was made to facilitate translation into other languages.
c) With a view to the above-mentioned codes, the electronic Dictionary used
by the computer program would be presented as follows:
Wordform 
Part of Speech
answer 
NV
answers 
NV
answering 
PAV
answered 
VAP
arrive 
V (Verb)
arrives 
V
arrived 
PV
arriving 
PANV
arrival 
N (Noun)
building 
PANV
buildings 
N
calm 
ANV
calming 
PANV
calmness 
N
calmly 
Adv (Adverb)
etc.
Geographical and personal names are also recorded in the Dictionary and
coded respectively. All abbreviations like I'm, can't, won't, etc. are also listed
and their full forms registered.
2.2 Presentation of Algorithm No 3
The algorithm uses routines (instructions) directing the computer to take a
running word from the text and to compare it with the wordforms recorded in

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF PARTS OF SPEECH 
21
the Dictionary. When the corresponding word in the Dictionary is found, the
computer takes its grammatical record for further examination (the computer
also keeps a record of the grammatical information of the words preceding the
word under scrutiny, up to several words to the left). If the word under
scrutiny belongs to only one Part of Speech, there is no need to analyse this
word any further and the computer proceeds to the next word. If the word
belongs to more than one Part of Speech, then this word is sent for further
analysis in the respective subroutine of the algorithm.
Apart from the Dictionary, the algorithm uses also tables (Lists) of words.
These Lists include lists of the Possessive Pronouns, PPNC, PPOC,
Prepositions, Conjunctions, Adverbs, etc. These Lists are not presented here
since they can be found elsewhere in the literature. For the purposes of the
present algorithm, the Punctuation Marks are regarded as separate words.
When a search is carried out (in order to collect additional information) to
the left or to the right of the word under scrutiny, this search should stop as
soon as a Punctuation Mark is reached, unless specified otherwise. When the
search is carried out to the left of the wordform under examination, it is
assumed that the words to the left are already 'recognized' with respect to
their contextual Parts of Speech (unless for specific purposes their original
Parts of Speech - as registered in the Dictionary - are preferred). Therefore,
in the algorithm these words (the words to the left of the word under
examination) are mentioned with the Parts of Speech which they have in that
particular context after recognition, for example N, Adj, V, etc. This means
that their Parts of Speech are already established and known to the computer.
Sometimes, however, when analysing the words to the left of the wordform
under examination, it is necessary to use the Part(s) of Speech of particular
words as registered in the Dictionary (before the analysis carried out by the
algorithm): NV, ANY, AV, PANV, etc.
When the search is carried out to the right of the wordform under
examination, the words are named as they are before the analysis (since their
attribution to a particular Part of Speech is not known yet): Adj only, N, V,
N"V, PAY, AV, NA, PANV, YAP, etc.
When, in the algorithm, we use the phrase Is this word followed (or preceded)
by: ..., it should be understood 'immediately' (unless specified otherwise); the
enumerated words following the colon are alternatives.
Some of the Lists (of words) used by the present algorithm are presented at
the end of the algorithm, in Section 6 below.
3 Algorithm for recognition of Parts of Speech. Algorithm No 3
This algorithm was presented (Georgiev, 1991) only as a block-scheme and
was referred to as Algorithm No 3. The block-scheme of the algorithm is
shown in Figure 3.1.

22
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Compare each running
word (one by one, as they
come in sequence) with
the words in the
Dictionary. Find the
corresponding word in
the Dictionary and take
its recorded information
as Part(s) of Speech.
If the word belongs to more than
one Part of Speech, go left or
right (up to 3 words in each
direction) and see what Part(s)
of Speech the surrounding words
belong to, until enough evidence
is gathered to make a right
decision about the attribution
of the word to its correct Part
of Speech in this particular
context.
Output result: Save or print
the relevant (in this particular
context) Part of Speech of
that particular running word.
Figure 3.1 Block-scheme of Algorithm No 3
Note: The algorithm, 1701 digital instructions in all, including the Lists it
uses for reference, can be downloaded from the Internet (see Internet
Downloads at the end of the book).
4 Discussion
The present algorithm does not satisfactorily recognize: in, out, over, up, down,
away, ..., etc., because these words can be an integral part of the Phrasal
Verbs or they can be used as Prepositions or Adverbs. The ambiguity arising
on this purely grammatical level can be overcome at a later stage.
In this study, we have also given a more specific interpretation of the '-ing'
forms to facilitate their translation into other languages.
This algorithm recognizes correctly (hand checked) 993 words out of every
thousand. The other methods known to the author could not achieve better
results. This makes the algorithm suitable for implementation in Text
Processing systems, especially for Machine Translation, where English is used
as a source language. The algorithm will resolve the existing ambiguity on the
level of Parts of Speech, and thus will narrow the choice of the relevant word
in a particular context. For example, if the word conflict is used as a Noun in a
specified context, the computer will ignore its meanings as a Verb (recorded
in the Dictionary alongside its meanings as a Noun), and will have to choose
only between its meanings as a Noun: struggle, quarrel, collision.
Input
text

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF PARTS OF SPEECH 
23
5 Examples of the performance of the algorithm
Below we have provided an example obtained at the output after an input
text was processed by the above algorithm. The input text is in the left
column, the results are shown in the right column:
Wordform 
Part of Speech
from 
Preposition
the 
Article
window 
Noun
nil 
Indefinite Pronoun
that 
Demonstrative Pronoun
could 
Auxiliary Verb
be 
Auxiliary Verb
seen 
Participle 2nd
was 
Auxiliary Verb
a 
Article
receding 
Adjective
area 
Noun
of 
Preposition
grey 
Noun
We will give yet another example to show how the performance of
Algorithm No 3 can be hand checked in order to prove its accuracy on
randomly chosen texts. Let's analyse the following text:
With the first peep of day I opened my eyes, to find myself in a great chamber, hung
with stamped leather, furnished with fine embroidered furniture, and lit by three fair
windows.
The algorithm (or the program developed on its basis) reads the first word of
the text and takes it to the Dictionary to iind its match there and to see its
grammatical record (the reader can use any full English language dictionary
that records the grammatical information of the words, but must comply with
our abbreviations for it). In this case, the first word is with. In our Dictionary
there will be only one possibility registered - a Preposition:
with 
= 
Preposition
Then the algorithm picks up the next word, the, and finds it in the
Dictionary. There it is registered as an Article:
the 
~ 
Article
Next comes the wordjirst. This word can be either an Adjective or a Noun
or a Numeral, Since the Numeral Ordinal can be a Noun too, we will find the
following grammatical record in the dictionary: NA (Noun or Adjective).
From this point on we deal only with the grammatical information of the
word, not with the word itself. Then we compare the 
grammatical
information of the word with the grammatical information required by the

24 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
algorithmic instructions, step by step: it is not a full stop (No 3), it is not a
Preposition or an Article (No 5), it is not a figure or a Numeral (No 7), etc.,
till we finally arrive at operation No 87, where the algorithm asks for just this
particular grammatical information - NA. The next instruction (88) sends
NA for further analysis in subroutine 370—466.
Starting with 370, all the next steps establish the environment of the word
under examination (first}. 
Finally, operation 388 matches the exact
environment required for a correct decision: an Article to the left of the
word (the] and a word that can be either an Adjective or a Noun or a Verb
(ANV) on its right side (peep}. Instruction No 389 declares that this is an
Adjective:
first 
= 
Adjective
and reverts the analysis back to operation No 1.
Next the algorithm reads the word peep, and sees (in the Dictionary) that
its grammatical information equals ANV (Adjective or Noun or Verb). Again
the procedures carry the word through all the initial steps, until operation No
93 identifies the grammatical information as correct and sends it (94) for
further analysis to subroutines 880-1124. Here it does not take long to match
the environment of peep. Operation No 884 requires a Preposition to follow
(List No 1) and an Adjective to precede. As a result, a decision is triggered
(885):
peep 
= 
Noun
The next word of can only be a Preposition, so the analysis goes on to the
word following it. This is another Noun or Adjective (NA), day. We will omit
how we arrive at the right place - subroutines 370-466. Here again a search
starts for matching surroundings and it does not take long to find out that the
Preposition of enforces a pre-determined decision (372—373):
day 
= 
Noun
Next comes the Personal Pronoun Nominal Case (PPNC), /, and since it
can be PPNC only, it requires no further attention:
/ 
= 
PPNC
Coming next is the word opened. It can be a Verb or an Adjective or a
Participle (VAP). Of course, we know what it is, because we are humans, but
the computer knows nothing yet. Therefore the computer must process VAP
till at long last it reaches operation No 1212, which requires a PPNC to
precede, so that a correct decision (1213) is finally taken:
opened 
= 
Verb
The next word my can only be a Possessive Pronoun:
my 
= 
Possessive Pronoun
The word coming next is eyes. It can be either a Noun or a Verb (NV),

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF PARTS OF SPEECH 
25
therefore it is dispatched to operations No 550-874, where in 552 an easy
solution is found for if - a Noun, because it is preceded by a Possessive
Pronoun and followed by a Punctuation Mark (from List No 1). So we
record:
eves 
= 
Noun
Now we have arrived at a difficult (for the algorithm) point, because our
next word to can be either a Preposition or a Particle used as Infinitive of the
Verb (85 j. Subroutine 330- 365 will decide what exactly. One of the questions
asked (356) is if the next word can be NV, AV or ANV. Since find can be
either Noun or Verb ('NVi, the condition is met and the decision is taken
(357):
In 
= 
Particle (Infinitive)
Then the ambiguity of find is resolved by operations 656-657b. After
eliminating numerous other possibilities it is being thought that since find is
preceded by to and does not end in -s (finds), it must be a Verb:
find 
— 
Verb
Of course this decision could have been taken automatically, as soon as it was
known that to is an Infinitive, but then, if the algorithm was wrong, it would
have made two errors at the same time. Procedures like this one are designed
to reduce the possibility of errors.
Since the following words myself, in, a etc. are unambiguous we will omit
them and concentrate on the word hung, which can be either a Participle or a
Verb 
• PVj. This is one of the difficult grammatical ambiguities in the English
language that has to be described for the computer. However, in this case, the
algorithm finds a quick solution - it takes only a few steps to see (1663) that
since lumg is preceded by a comma it must be Participle 1st.
hung 
~ 
Participle 1st
If this rule is not 100 per cent secure, then we must raise serious doubts about
the freedom of use of Punctuation Marks and Participles.
At this point we will leave the rest of the above text to the readers in the
hope that they will not be satisfied with this example and will check the
performance of the algorithm on other texts.
An algorithm for recognition of the Verbal Tenses can easily be
constructed on the basis of the results obtained by the present algorithm
(see further for details;.
6 Lists of words used by Algorithm No 3
i 
List No 
1: Conjunctions, Prepositions. Particles, Auxiliary words,
Punctuation Marks, the Article, Pronouns, Interjections, Adverbs, all

26 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
words registered in the Dictionary as VAP or PV, and all Verbs
(Auxiliary included)
(NB List No 1 is used by Algorithms No 3, No 4 and No 5, in Part 1
only.)
(ii) 
List No 2: All Prepositional Verbs (used with in, up, out, down, over, away,
aside, at, on, ..., etc.)
(iii) List No 3: All Phrasal (or Compound and Separable Compound) Verbs
(Verbs that are sometimes used in combination with another word, e.g.
take place, take part, become evident (or clear), there is (or are, was, were], make
clear ..., etc.)
(iv) List No 4: besides, therefore, however, whereas, thus, hence, though,
despite, with, nevertheless, throughout, through, during, that, only,
but, if, otherwise, again, which, although, thereby, already, against,
unless, thereafter, over, as, what, toward (s), for, into, about, by, so,
from, at, above, under, beside, below, onto, since, in, behind, in front of,
beyond, around, before, after, about, against, then, altogether, among,
between, beneath, both, neither, none, of, Article, so much as, so far as,
so far, as long as, as soon as, so long as, in order that, in order to, lest, as
well as, and, or, nor, such, than, onto, until, all, near, even, when,
while, within, last, next, also, less, more, most, whether, much, once,
one, any, many, some, where, another, other, each, then, whose, who,
till, what, across, whence, hence, according, due to, owing, whereby,
prior, wherever, despite, already, moreover, likewise, however, out,
down, over ..., etc.
(v) 
List No 5: no, what, how, much, some, any, into, in, where, when, how,
while, after, more, most, less, least, each, against, Possessive Pronouns,
but, as, from, Article, on, at, with, without, by, to, for, of, if, neither, nor
etc.
(vi) List No 6: any, with, such, without, for, no, from, much, many, less,
least, how, more, most, where, when, after, before, lest, of, at, on, other,
another, toward (s), Possessive Pronouns, same, every, Article, in, into,
per, a word ending in -'s or -s' ..., etc.
(vii) List No 7: would(n't), will, won't, shall, shan't, should(n't), can(not),
can't, could(n't), not, may, may not, might(n't), must(n't), ought(n't),
... ought to ..., etc.
(viii) List No 8: Article, a word ending in -'s or -s' - genitive of the Noun,
Possessive Pronouns, every, where, when, how, all, no, some, against,
by, for, after, before, beyond, at, under, other, as, in, into, of, any, for,
on, onto, from, such, same, only, with, another, toward (s) ...
(ix) List No 9: no, no use, beyond, in, into, with, without, any, before, after,
what, how, how much, where, some, each, from, as, about, and, while,
on, onto, since, by, to, for, of, much ...
(x) 
List No 10: am, am not, is(n't), are(n't) was(n't), were(n't), ..., etc.

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF PARTS OF SPEECH 
27
7 Algorithmic procedure to determine the use of Adjectives, Nouns,
Participles, Numerals and Adverbs as attributes to the Noun
After chc analysis of the text with Algorithm No 3, each wordform receives its
correct Part of Speech, depending on the context. But. as we know, the Parts
of Speech represent the most general level of description of the language. The
Parts of Speech are word groups formed on the basis of our study of both text
and vocabulary. As such, the Parts of Speech provide very general
information about the word relationships within the sentence. This
information is not sufficient when we come to sentence level and want to
establish the role of each individual word in the sentence. On sentence level
many Nouns, Adverbs, Participles and Numerals can be used as Adjectives
(attributes to the Noun), while the Adjective can be used either as an
attribute to the Noun or as a Predicative. Let's consider the following
examples:
(i; 
She has ten suitcases.
(where ten is used as an Adjective and as an attribute to the Noun) or
( i i j 
She looks nice.
(where nice is used as a Predicative). Compare the other use of nice as an
attribute to the Noun in:
(iii) 
She is a nice girl.
The following algorithm (No 5) is designed specifically for this purpose - to
analyse the sentence and to decide whether the Nouns, the Participles, the
Numerals and the Adverbs play an adjectival and attributive or predicative
role. Algorithm No 5 cannot be used without Algorithm No 3 and Algorithm
No 4. Algorithm No 4 splits the sentence into smaller parts to facilitate the
operation of Algorithm No 5.
7.1 Algorithm No 4. A preparatory procedure for Algorithm No 5
1. 
Read the words from left to right as they follow in the text, one by one.
After reading each consecutive word the following question is asked
about it:
2. 
Has the text ended?
3. 
Yes. Stop. End operation.
4. 
No. Record this word in the memory. The words are stored in the
memory, one after another, as they follow in the text.
4a. 
Read the next word and proceed to 5.
5. 
Is this a Punctuation Mark?
6. 
Yes. Cut the sentence just before the Punctuation Mark, leaving five
spaces before recording the next word in the memory. Go to 2.
7. 
No. Is this a word from List No 1 (see List No 1 in Algorithm No 3)? NB
Exclude from List No 1 all Punctuation Marks and add to it all words

28 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
registered as PANV and PAV (in the Dictionary), in order to make it
suitable for the procedures that follow below.
8. 
Yes. Is this word followed by another word from List No 1?
8a. 
Yes. Is this second word followed by yet another word from List No 1?
8aa. Yes. Cut the sentence just before the word in question and leave five
spaces before recording this word and the other two words that follow it
in the memory. Go to 2.
Sab. No. Cut the sentence just before the word in question and leave five
spaces before recording this word and the word following it in the
memory. Go to 2.
8b. 
No. Cut the sentence just before the word in question leaving five spaces
before recording it in the memory. Go to 2.
9. 
No. Record the word in the memory. Go to 2 (all words that are not
registered in List No 1 are recorded in the memory as they follow,
without leaving extra space between them).
A sample of the output of the algorithm is presented below:
He was pleased 
, too , about the scheduled return 
by air 
next Saturday 
.
7.2 Algorithm No 5 — a procedure to determine the attributes and
the predicatives in a sentence
NB In this algorithm by a word from List Mo 1 should be understood the
margin of five spaces left at the output of Algorithm No 4.
1. 
Read the next word (till the end of the text is reached).
2. 
Is this an Adjective?
3. 
Yes. Go to subroutine 1—37.
4. 
No. Is this a Noun?
5. 
Yes. Go to subroutine 39—51.
6. 
No. Is this a Participle?
7. 
Yes. Go to subroutine 52—62.
8. 
No. Is this a Numeral?
9. 
Yes. Go to subroutine 78 82.
10. 
No. Is this an Adverb?
11. 
Yes. Go to subroutine 63-77.
12. 
No. Is this a name, or an abbreviation, or a capital letter word
(excluding the first word of the sentence)?
13. Yes. Go to subroutine 83-91.
14. 
No. Is this a Gerund, or Participle '-ing'?
15. Yes. Is it preceded by a word from List No 1 (the original List for
Algorithm No 3, not the one modified for Algorithm 4 and 5) and at the
same time followed by an Adjective, which in turn is followed by an
Adjective or by a Noun?
15a. Yes. Record in the memory against it: an Adjective. Go to 1.
15b. No. Go to 1.
16. 
No. Is this all, that, ... etc.?

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF PARTS OF SPEECH 
29
17. 
Yes. Is it preceded by is(n't), was(n't), be, arid at the same time
followed by a word from List No 1?
17a. Yes. Record in the memory against all or that ..., etc.: a Predicative.
Go to 1.
17b. No. Record in the memory against all or that .. ., etc.: a Pronoun. Go
to 1.
18. 
No. Go to 1.
subroutine 1-37 (for the Adjective)
1. 
Is the Adjective (Adj) preceded by a word from List No 1 and at the
same time followed by a Noun, which in turn is followed by a word from
List No 1?
2. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: an Adjective. Go to 1.
'A. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by and, which in turn is preceded by a
Predicative?
4. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
5. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by an Adverb, which in turn is preceded by a
Punctuation Mark and at the same time followed by to. which in turn is
followed by a Verb?
6. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
7. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by a word from List No 1 and at the same time
followed by an Adjective, which in turn is followed by a word from List
No 1?
8. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
9. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by an Adjective, which in turn is preceded by a
word from List No 1 and at the same time followed by a word from List
No 1?
10. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
11. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by a Verb (Auxiliary included) or by a
Participle 1st and at the same time followed by a word from List No 1?
12. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
13. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by a comma and at the same time followed by a
word from List No 1?
14. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
15. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by an Adverb, which in turn is preceded by the
word only and at the same time followed by a word from List No 1?
16. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
17. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by an Adverb, which in turn is preceded by:
not, is(n't), am, am not, are(n't), was(n't), were(n't) and at the
same time followed by a word from List No 1?
18. Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
19. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by a word from List No 1 and at the same time
followed by a word from List No 1?
20. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: an Adjective. Go to 1.
21. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by: most, more, less, least ..., etc., which in
turn is preceded by a Verb and at the same time followed by a word
from List No 1?

30 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
22. 
Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
23. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by an Adverb, which in turn is preceded by a
Verb and at the same time followed by a word from List No 1?
24. Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
25. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by an Adverb and at the same time followed by
a word from List No 1 (excluding the word and from the List)?
26. Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
27. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by of and at the same time followed by a word
from List No 1?
28. Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
29. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by a comma and at the same time followed by a
Verb?
30. Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
31. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by an Article, which in turn is preceded by:
is(n't), be, am, am not, are(n't), was(n't), were(n't) and at the
same time followed by a Noun?
32. Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
33. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by still, which in turn is preceded by: not,
is(n't), are(n't), am, be, was(n't), were(n't) ..., etc., and at the same
time followed by a word from List No 1?
34. Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
35. 
No. Is the Adj preceded by: not, be, is(n't), are(n't), am, am not,
was(n't), were(n't) ..., etc. and at the same time followed by a word
from List No 1?
36. Yes. Record in the memory against the Adj: a Predicative. Go to 1.
37. 
No. Go to 1.
subroutine 39-51 (for the Noun)
39. 
Is the Noun (N) preceded by: an Adjective, Numeral, Participle 1st
(used as attribute), Participle '-ing', Gerund ..., etc., which in turn is
preceded by a word from List No 1 and at the same time followed by a
Noun, which in its turn is followed by a word from List No 1?
40. 
Yes. Record in the memory against N: an Adjective. Go to 1.
41. 
No. Is N preceded by no, which in turn is preceded by a Verb and at
the same time followed by a word from List No 1?
42. Yes. Record in the memory against N: a Predicative. Go to 1.
43. 
No. Is N preceded by an Article or Possessive Pronoun and at the same
time followed by an Adjective, which in its turn is followed by a Noun?
44. Yes. Record in the memory against N: an Adjective. Go to 1.
45. 
No. Is N preceded by an Adjective, which in turn is preceded by an
Article, which in its turn is preceded by: is(n't), are(n't), be, am, am
not, was(n't), were(n't) ..., etc. and at the same time followed by a
word from List No 1?
46. Yes. Record in the memory against N: a Predicative. Go to 1.
47. 
No. Is N followed by a Noun and at the same time preceded by a word
from List No 1?
48. Yes. Record in the memory against N: an Adjective. Go to 1.

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF PARTS OF SPEECH 
31
49. 
No. Is N preceded by: an Article, am, am not, is(n't), are(n't),
was(n't), were(n't) ..., etc., and at the same time followed by a word
from List No 1?
50. 
Yes. Record in the memory against N: a Predicative. Go to 1.
51. 
No. Go to 1.
subroutine 52-62 (for Participle 1st)
52. 
Is Participle 1st (PI) 
the past participle of all regular and irregular
Verbs • preceded by a word from List No 1 and at the same time
followed by a Noun?
53. 
Yes. Record in the memory against PI: an Adjective. Go to 1.
54. 
No. Is PI followed by and, which in turn is followed by PI, which in its
turn is followed by a Noun?
55. 
Yes. Record in the memory against PI: an Adjective. Go to 1.
56. 
No. Is PI preceded by an Adjective or an Adverb and at the same time
followed by a Noun?
57. 
Yes. Record in the memory against PI: an Adjective. Go to 1.
58. 
No. Is PI preceded by a Participle '-ing' or Gerund, and at the same
time followed by a word from List No 1?
59. 
Yes. Record in the memory against PI: a Predicative. Go to 1.
60. 
No. Is PI preceded by a word from List No 1 and at the same time
followed by a word from List No 1?
61. 
Yes. Record in the memory against PI: a Predicative. Go to 1.
62. 
No. Go to 1.
subroutine 63—77 (for the Adverb 
b)
63. 
Is the Adverb (b) preceded by an Article or an Adjective and at the
same time followed by a Noun?
64. 
Yes. Record in the memory against b: an Adjective. Go to 1.
65. 
No. Is b preceded by a Punctuation Mark and at the same time
followed by to, which in turn is followed by a Verb?
66. 
Yes. Record in the memory against b: a Predicative. Go to 1.
67. 
No. Is b preceded by a comma and at the same time followed by a
Noun, which in its turn is followed by a comma?
68. 
Yes. Record in the memory against b: an Adjective. Go to 1.
69. 
No. Is b preceded by a word from List No 1 arid at the same time
followed by an Adjective, which in its turn is followed by a Noun?
70. 
Yes. Record in the memory against b: an Adjective. Go to 1.
71. 
No. Is b preceded by of and at the same time followed by a Noun?
72. 
Yes. Record in the memory against b: an Adjective. Go to 1.
73. 
No. Is b preceded by a word from List No 1 or an Adjective and at the
same time followed by a Noun or by a Participle 1st?
74. 
Yes. Record in the memory against b: an Adjective. Go to 1.
75. 
No. Is b followed by and, which in turn is followed by an Adverb,
which in its turn is followed by a Participle 1st or a Noun?
76. 
Yes. Record in the memory against b: an Adjective. Go to 1.
77. 
No. Go to 1.
subroutine 78—82 (for the Numeral - M)

32 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
78. 
Is the Numeral (M) preceded by an Article and at the same time
followed by a Noun (or by an Adjective, which in its turn is followed by
a Noun, as second alternative)?
79. 
Yes. Record in the memory against M: an Adjective. Go to 1.
80. 
No. Is M preceded by a word from List No 1 and at the same time
followed by a Noun or by an Adjective?
81. 
Yes. Record in the memory against M: an Adjective. Go to 1.
82. 
No. Go to 1.
subroutine 83—91 (for names, abbreviations, capital letter words)
83. 
Is the Abbreviation (F) or name (Name) preceded by a word from List
No 1 and at the same time followed by an Adjective, which in its turn is
followed by an Adjective or a Noun?
84. 
Yes. Record in the memory against F or N: an Adjective. Go to 1.
85. 
No. Is F or N preceded by an Adjective or a Numeral and at the same
time followed by a Noun or an Adjective?
86. 
Yes. Record in the memory against F or N: an Adjective. Go to 1.
87. 
No. Is F or N preceded by a dash (—), which in its turn is preceded by a
name or by an abbreviation and at the same time followed by a Noun?
88. 
Yes. Record in the memory against F or N: an Adjective. Go to 1.
89. 
No. Is F or N preceded by a word from List No 1 and at the same time
followed by a dash, which in its turn is followed by an abbreviation or a
name, which in its own turn is followed by a Noun?
90. 
Yes. Record in the memory against F or N: an Adjective. Go to 1.
91. 
No. Go to 1.
7.3 A text sample showing the performance of Algorithms 4 and 5
We will return to the text from Section 5 which we have already analysed
with Algorithm No 3. At the output of Algorithm No 4 this text will look like
this:
With the first peep 
of day I opened my eyes, 
to find myself in a great chamber,
hung 
with stamped leather, furnished 
with fine embroidered furniture, 
and
lit 
by three fair windows.
Let's now see how Algorithm No 5 will manage to determine the role of the
following words in the sentence: first (Numeral), stamped (Participle 1st),
embroidered (Adjective) and three (Numeral).
Operation 78 asks if the -word first has an Article on its left and a Noun on
its right, if so, then first is an Adjective (79). The same question is asked (52)
for the word stamped and we have the same answer: an Adjective (53). The
surroundings of the word embroidered are slightly different, but it is found by
operation 56 and the word is declared to be an Adjective (57). The
surroundings of the word three are spotted by operation No 80 and the word is
recognized as an Adjective. Note that the Adjectives in the sentence are
attributes to the Noun.

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF PARTS OF SPEECH 
33
7.4 How some of the algorithmic instructions look when
programmed in C (C+ +)
case 34: // in a *.c or *.cpp file
if ; Lstricmpiwrd- > inword, "the")){
wrdm- > syn =• 'N';
wcount = copysyn(quc, wp);
i = mpos; continue;
i;
if ! vvrd- > numb = = wrdm- > nnmb'!{
i = mpos; continue;
i
f
break;
{"S<A>Z", 
"S$V", 34}, 
// in the *.h file file
N denotes a Noun, Z denotes the ambiguity Noun or Verb, V denotes a
Verb, S denotes an Article or Indicative Pronoun, and < A > and $
denote the possibility of an intervening Adjective, which may be positioned
between S and Z. The code wrd denotes the preceding word; wrdm denotes
the word immediately following. In other words, this rule says that if the
analysed word is ambiguous (Noun or Verb), in this particular context it is a
Noun if preceded by the Article the. In another example:
case 41: /'*** in a *.c or *.cpp file ***/
if fwrd-> e.V.controli = = 0){
if ; Istrrchn'wrdm- > cw, 'N')') 
/* Noun or Adjective */
wrdm-> syn = 'A';
else
wrdm- > syn =~ 'N';
copysyn; que, wp);
i = mpos; continue;
i/
break;
nFA7]<TA()>[#N]7", 
IV", 41}, 
/*** in the *.h file ***/
case 41 says lhat if the word is ambiguous (Noun, or Adjective), it is an
Adjective if preceded by a Verb or Participle [EV] and followed by another
ambiguous word (Noun or Verb) Z. The sign <TAO> denotes possible
intervening words (Article T, Adjective A, Possessive Pronoun O).
Some rules are expressed only in the respective *.h file. For example
{"VNZfPXxLT, "(«;AN'\ },
means that if the Noun N is preceded by Indefinite Article 'a' and followed by
another ambiguous word Z (Noun or Verb), which in turn is followed by a
Preposition or by an Auxiliary Verb [PXxU] then, in this context, this Noun
N plays the role of an Adjective A and at the same time, this rule resolves the
ambiguity of Z (Noun and Verb), declaring it to be a Noun N.
We have used this programming code only to illustrate how closely it
matches our algorithmic rules.

4 Algorithmic recognition of the Tenses
In this chapter we'll present an algorithmic procedure for automatic
recognition of the Verbal Tenses in English texts, on the understanding that
the computer has already determined the Part of Speech of every running
word of the text to be processed (by means of Algorithm No 3).
1 Presentation
Having processed the text using Algorithm No 3, and having attributed the
running words of the text to a particular Part of Speech, we proceed as
follows: all words marked as Verbs, together with the Personal Pronoun
Nominal Case (PPNC) attached to them (or personal name, if there is such a
name), are taken out of the sentence, preserving their order of occurrence in
the sentence and the distance between them (measured in words).
Those Verbs that are separated from the rest of the sentence by dashes are
analysed separately — the computer is instructed to ignore (to jump) the
dashes and to find the remaining part of the Verbal Tense (if there is one).
For example:
Not only has his poetic fame 
as was inevitable - been overshadowed by that of
Shakespeare, but he .. .
In the example shown above, the algorithm will ignore was and connect has
been overshadowed.
In the present analysis we use the following types of Verbs: (i) the
Auxiliary; (ii) the Verb Proper (Present form); (iii) the Verb in its Past
form; (iv) the Verb ending in '-ing' (Participle '-ing'), as part of a
Compound Tense; and (v) the Verb in its Participle form, as part of a
Compound Tense.
The Auxiliary Verbs are presented in Tables (Lists). The Verbs Proper
and their Past and Participle forms are presented in the Dictionary used by
Algorithm No 3 to disambiguate the Verbs and their Past and Participle
forms (if according to the Dictionary they face more than one attribution).
The present algorithm uses a Table for the Verbal Tenses such as:

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF THE TENSES 
35
am (are, is) + -ing form of the Verb = Present Continuous Tense
was (were) + ing form of the Verb = Past Continuous Tense
has (have) 4 Participle 2nd = Present Perfect Tense
had 
~*~ Participle 2nd = Past Perfect Tense
. .. etc.
2 Presentation of the algorithm. Algorithm No 6
1. 
Read the next word (till the end of the sentence is reached). (Then
read the next sentence word by word, etc.)
2. 
Is this a Present form of the Verb (Verb or Participle - PVj?
3. 
Yes. Is it preceded by a PPNC or by a name?
3a. 
Yes. Record in the memory against it: Present Simple Tense. Go to 1.
3b. 
No. Is it preceded by: should(n't), would(n't)?
3c. 
Yes. Record in the memory against it (RM): Future in the Past.
Present Conditional Mood. Go to 1.
3d. 
No. Is it preceded by to?
3e. 
Y'es. RM: an Infinitive. Go to 1.
3f. 
No. Is it preceded by: shall, will, shall not (shan't), will not
(won't)?
3g. 
Yes. RM: Future Simple Tense. Go to 1.
3h. 
No. RM: Present Simple Tense. Go to 1.
4. 
No. Is this a past form of the Verb (Participle or Verb - PV)?
5. 
Yes. Is it preceded by a PPNC or by a name (the appearance of an
Auxiliary verb stops the search}?
5a. 
Yes. RM: Past Simple Tense. Go to 1.
5b. 
No. RM: Past Simple Tense. Go to 1.
6. 
No. Is this a Participle 2nd (or Past Participle of an Irregular Verb, or
Past form of the Verb)?
7. 
Yes. Is it preceded by have?
7a. 
Yes. Is have preceded by: shall, will, shall not (shan't), will not
(won't)?
7aa. 
Y'es. RM: shall, will (etc. ) 4 have 4 Participle 2nd = Future
Perfect Tense. Go to 1.
7ab. No. Is have preceded by: should(n't), would(n't)?
7ac. 
Yes. RM: should(n't), (would(n't) + have 4 Participle 2nd = (i)
Perfect Tense in Conditional Mood, (ii) Future Perfect in the Past. Go
to 1.
7ad. No. RM: have 4- Participle 2nd = Present Perfect Tense. Go to 1.
7b. 
No. Is it preceded by been?
7c. 
Yes. Is been in turn preceded by have(n't)?
7ca. 
Yes. Is have(n't) in its turn preceded by: shall, shan't, will, won't?
7caa. Yes. RM: shall, will (etc.) 4- have + been + Participle 2nd =
Future Perfect Tense. Go to 1.
7cab. No. Is have(n't) in its turn preceded by: should(n't), would(n't)?

36 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
7cac. Yes. RM: should, would (etc.) + have + been + Participle 2nd =
Future Perfect in the Past. Go to 1.
7cad. No. RM: have(n't) + been + Participle 2nd = Present Perfect
Tense. Go to 1.
7d. 
No. Is it preceded by being?
7e. 
Yes. Is being preceded by: was(n't), were(n't)?
7ea. Yes. RM: was(n't), (were(n't) + being + Participle 2nd = Past
Continuous Tense, Passive Voice. Go to 1.
7eb. No. Is being preceded by: am, am not, is(n't), are(n't)?
7ec. 
Yes. RM: am (etc.) + being + Participle 2nd = Present Continuous
Tense, Passive Voice. Go to 1.
7f. 
No. Is it preceded by be?
7g. 
Yes. Is be in turn preceded by: should(n't). would(n't)?
7ga. Yes. RM: should(n't), would(n't) + be + Participle 2nd = Future
in the Past, Passive Voice. Go to 1.
7gb. No. Is be in turn preceded by: shall, shan't, will, won't?
7gc. 
Yes. RM: shall (etc.) + be + Participle 2nd = Future Tense. Passive
Voice. Go to 1.
7gd. No. Is be preceded by to?
7ge. Yes. RM: to + be + Participle 2nd = Infinitive, Passive Voice. Go to
1.
7h. 
No. Is it preceded by: am, am not, is(n't), are(n't)?
7i. 
Yes. RM: am (etc.) + Participle 2nd = Present Tense, Passive Voice.
Go to 1.
7j. 
No. Is it preceded by: has(n't), have(n't)?
7k. 
Yes. RM: have(n't) or has(n't) + Participle 2nd = Present Perfect
Tense. Go to 1.
71. 
No. Is it preceded by had?
7m. 
Yes. RM: had + Participle 2nd = Past Perfect Tense. Go to 1.
7n. 
No. RM: Past Simple Tense. Go to 1.
8. 
No. Is this -ing form of the Verb?
9. 
Yes. Is it preceded by been?
9a. 
Yes. Is been in turn preceded by have(n't)?
9aa. 
Yes. Is have(n't) in its turn preceded by: should(n't), would(n't)?
9aaa. Yes. RM: should(n't) would(n't) + have + been + Participle -ing
= Future Perfect Continuous in the Past. Go to 1.
9aab. No. Is have(n't) in its turn preceded by: shall, shan't, will, won't?
9aac. Yes. RM: shall (etc.) + have(n't) + been + Participle '-ing' =
Future Perfect Continuous Tense. Go to 1.
9aad. No RM: have(n't) + been + Participle '-ing' = Present Perfect
Continuous Tense. Go to 1.
9ab. No. Is been preceded by: has(n't) or have(n't)?
9aba. Yes. RM: has(n't), have/n't) + been + Participle '-ing' = Present
Perfect continuous Tense. Go to 1.
9abb. No. Go to 1.
9b. 
No. Is it preceded by be?

ALGORITHMIC RECOGNITION OF THE TENSES 
37
9c. 
Yes. Is be in its turn preceded by: should(n't), would(n't)?
9ca. Yes. RM: should(n't), would(n't) + be + Participle '-ing' =
Future Continuous in the Past. Go to 1.
9cb. 
No. Is be in turn preceded by: shall, shan't, will, won't?
9cc. 
Yes. RM: shall (etc.; + be + Participle '-ing' = Future Continuous
Tense. Go to 1.
9cd. 
No. Go to 1.
9d. 
N'o. Is it preceded by: am, am not, are(n't), is(n't)?
9e. 
Yes. RM: am (etc.) + Participle '-ing' = Present Continuous Tense.
Go to 1.
9f. 
No. Go to 1.
10. 
No. RM: unrecognized Tense. Ask the operator for help. Go to 1.
3 Discussion
At this stage of description and recognition it is not always possible to
differentiate some of the Verbal Tenses, especially for example when
homographs such as put, cut, etc. are involved, therefore the algorithm states
both Tenses: 
(i'j Past or Present Simple Tense; (ii) Perfect Tense in
Conditional Mood, or Future Perfect in the Past.
All the above-mentioned homographs are arranged in a separate Table,
for reference. The ambiguity arising on this level of description can be
resolved with other algorithms, using semantic information. For example,
compare the sentences:
( i i 
I put my hat on my head every day. (Present Simple Tense;
( i i j I put my hat on my head a few minutes ago. (Past Simple Tense)
This algorithm, when tested manually on randomly chosen texts yields
perfect results (100 per cent correct recognition). Note that Algorithm No 6
was programmed 
and incorporated in the English parsing program
SYNTPARSE (see Internet Downloads at the end of the book).

This page intentionally left blank 

PART TWO

This page intentionally left blank 

5 Syntactical structure of the sentence
1 Introduction
In Part 2 we will continue with the algorithmic description of English
grammar. Our focus will be English syntax for the computer 
syntax,
without lexical semantics. The presentation of knowledge will be similar to
that in Part 1 
How charts and a database accessible to both human and
artificial intellects. The expected results at the output will be:
to recognize each word's grammatical role in the sentence:
a; as Part of Speech 
Noun, Verb, Adjective, Adverb, Particle, Pronoun,
Numeral. Preposition. Conjunction, Interjection. The 
algorithmic
procedures offered here do not duplicate those presented in Part 1,
Algorithm No 3. The method used in Part 2 is completely different and
has much wider application. In Part 2 the same goal is achieved with
fewer instructions and greater accuracy.
b) as Part of the Sentence - Subject, Object (Direct and Indirect),
Complement Subject and Object, Infinitival Complement, Predica-
tive, Verb, Verbal Tense, Infinitive, Adverb, etc. Differentiation is
made between attributive and predicative adjectives, adjuncts and
disjuncts.
to offer a satisfactory algorithmic solution of Pronominal 
Reference
(procedures based entirely on syntax with the aim of finding the Nouns to
which the Pronouns refer, with minimal error);
to present the syntactic structure of the sentence in a programmable way,
so that the computer can:
a) recognize all simple sentences;
b) recognize the Independent and the Dependent Clauses, including the
Adverbial Clauses in a Complex or Compound Sentence;
c; connect all disconnected syntactic structures (phrases) within the
sentence;
d! transform the sentence into simple statements each of which expresses
one single aspect of the meaning of the sentence.
All this done, the computer will become intelligent enough to be able to
understand, without difficulty, some aspects of English grammar and syntax.

42 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
However, at this level of knowledge, the computer cannot understand the
meaning of the sentence, cannot reason yet — cannot make logical inferences,
cannot make independent decisions, cannot assess the meaning of the text as a
whole and cannot judge its significance and meaning in relation to other
texts.
What the computer can do in fact, at this stage, is simply to identify a
portion of the text (a sequence of words) with what is being registered in its
memory as a portion of English syntax (a sequence of syntactical elements).
Still, this is an excellent achievement, because since the advent of
Computational Linguistics, the computational identification of the syntac-
tical structure of the sentence has not transcended its experimental stage -
only 50 per cent correct results are reported by McEnery (1992: 82) in his
reviewal of the Constituent Likelihood Grammar (Garside, 1986).
It should be noted, however, that some ambiguities on the syntactic level
still remain, but the computer will recognize an ambiguity and ask the
operator for help.
The algorithmic description of English grammar, presented in Part 1 and
Part 2, is not simply something which ought to be applied in a Text
Processing System: it is a Text Processing System itself.
2 Syntactic Structures
The idea of Syntactic Structures is closely associated with an earlier work in
the field (Chomsky, 1957) and ever since then it has found wide
interpretation and application, mainly in the construction of artificial
languages. But although this idea was derived from the structure of the
natural language it was never applied fully to it (to cover every possible
sentence and utterance), for two reasons:
a) because the representation of the sentence as a sequence of Noun Phrases
(NP) and Verbal Phrases (VP), though universal in truth and simple to
understand, has only a theoretical, not a practical value (Shanks, 1993:
27-31);
b) because of the enormous diversity of the syntactic structures involved -
their number was thought to be practically infinite, taking into account
the combinatorics of their constituent elements, the Parts of Speech.
Artificial Intelligence in general, and Machine Translation and Informa-
tion Retrieval in particular, require a suitable procedure to analyse and
understand natural language texts on a computer if mankind wants to make
further progress in these fields.
In an attempt to satisfactorily resolve this outstanding problem
algorithmically, we propose the formal definition given below of a Syntactic
Structure that would apply to every individual sentence.
A syntactic structure begins with one of the following Punctuation Marks
; . : ! ? ( ) - or with one of the words listed in List No 1 (in this section List

SYNTACTICAL STRUCTURE OF THE SENTENCE 
43
No 1 includes all Auxiliary words - excluding the Auxiliary Verbs 
see
further for details) and ends just before one of the 
above-mentioned
Punctuation Marks or just before a word listed in List No 1. Often, the
new structure begins at the point where a Prepositional Adverbial Clause has
ended. Then there is no need of a Punctuation Mark or of a word from List
No 1 to signal the start of the new structure (see further for examples). In this
case, the ensuing structure can start with any Part of Speech.
The structures encompassed within these left and right boundaries do not
always coincide with the Syntactic Structures in the traditional sense. They
are of the following types:
a) Syntactic Structures, as known traditionally in the literature - all
grammatically correct and simple sentences (i), or Independent (Main)
Clauses f i i ) of the sort:
(i) 
Peter eats an apple.
i i i ) 
she is reading a bonk
b) structures that coincide with the Dependent (Subordinate) Clauses of the
sentence:
(He told me]
>'iii) 
I hat she was asked to attend the conference.
(Predicative Clause)
liv) 
by a man', at an adjacent table, etc.
(Prepositional Adverbial Clauses)
i The man,}
(v) 
who was invited to attend the party. ...
'Relative Clause!
c) structures that play an appositional role in the sentence, such as:
Peter Smith,
i.vij 
ii writer oj romantic fiction, . . .
d) incomplete structures, like those used for enumeration (vii), or a structure
interrupted by a comma or by another structure (viii), etc.:
(vii) 
. .., sings, laughs, cries, . . .
i viiij 
The book on the table is mine.
i viii a) 1.1 mine.
e) grammatically incorrect structures, permitted sometimes in texts.
Therefore, to avoid any misunderstanding, we propose to call all structures
mentioned above 'portions of the text' (the sentence) or 'strings of words'.
Each natural language word in such a portion can be substituted by its
equivalent Part of Speech. Then the abbreviated representation of a portion
of a text (of a sentence) as a sequence of Parts of Speech will be called a
segment (see further for details).

44 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
3 The segment
The term segment used in this study has a vague resemblance to, but is
distinct from, that used by Hausser (1989).
As a result of our formal definition of the segment, we were able to reduce
the text (the sentence) to a finite number of segments and to list those
segments in a Dictionary (see: Dictionary of Segments, available for
download on the Internet, in the chapter Internet Downloads at the end of
the book). This type of Dictionary has a full right to existence on a par with
all other dictionaries. Not only can it be used by the computer, it can also be
used by anyone who studies or teaches English as a native or foreign
language and by anyone who wants to have a better and more varied style
of writing.
The segments listed in the Dictionary of Segments were extracted
manually from the text, on a statistical basis. The text consisted of two
million running words, divided into 40 samples. The text samples were taken
from various sources, the object being to cover all possible styles.
However, some less common and rare segments are not listed. Some
incomplete or grammatically incorrect segments are listed and marked with
the sign *.
We hope that with the use of the Dictionary of Segments in the Text
Processing System or at home on a personal computer the missing segments
will take their due place.
At present, the segments listed in this study represent 98 per cent of all
possible segments in English texts (or sentences). We deem this database to be
quite sufficient to write an English Algorithmic Grammar based on it and also
to prove our belief that segments, like morphemes and words, can be
enumerated and can be used as individual units of expression of syntax and
grammar, in the same way, for example, as words or morphemes are used to
express lexical meaning and grammar.
The segments are sequences of grammatical and syntactical elements
represented simultaneously on three different language levels:
1. On the level of natural language wordforms only. These segments have
fixed terminological, phrasal or idiomatic meaning, therefore they are left
as they are used in natural language. Their constituent words cannot (or
rather, should not) be substituted with Parts of Speech. For example:
(i) 
in any case; in a way; by no means, etc.
2. On the level of Parts of Speech only: Noun, Verb, Adjective, etc. Here, for
example, all Nouns are marked with n, all Verbs are marked with v, all
Adjectives are marked with G, etc. All Nouns form a set of Nouns; all Verbs
form a set of Verbs, etc. When we register a segment using only the
abbreviations of Parts of Speech to replace the constituent words of a portion
of a text, we mean that any Noun can be placed in the position marked by i»,
any Verb can be placed in the position marked by v, etc. For example:

SYNTACTICAL STRUCTURE OF THE SENTENCE 
45
;ii; 
n v n
;iii) 
n v G n
The segments are a substitute for a great number of English language
sentences (statements, phrases, Clauses, even single words), for example:
! iv) 
People like presents. 
= 
d v n
; v) 
Peler eats apples. 
= 
c] v n
i'vi) 
Ann speaks good English. 
— 
d v G n
fvii) 
Cornel 
= 
v
(d is a subclass of the Noun, marking all words denoting a human being.)
Since the gender and number of the Nouns and Pronouns and the
person of the Verbal Tense were not specified, the segments can generate
grammatically incorrect utterances. Here are some examples of gramma-
tically incorrect sentences that can be formed on this basis:
iv a) 
Peter eat apple. 
= 
d v n
ivi a) Ann speak good English. 
= 
d v G n
because the third person singular of the Present Tense of the Verb was not
marked specifically I'v stands for all forms, Present and Past Simple) and
because n stands for both singular and plural of the Noun, while d stands
for singular and plural, masculine and feminine. However, syntactically,
the segments show the correct sequence of Parts of Speech as permitted by
English grammar.
The fact that some grammatical features (concord, agreement) within
the segment were not specified should not be regarded as a failure, because
this was done to reduce the number of the segments and because the
segments were designed for text analysis, not for text synthesis. This means
that the segments would be used to match grammatically correct and
meaningful sentences, and not to generate such.
If we were to use the segments for text generation, we would have to add
the missing grammatical information. For example, we can use v' to mark
third person singular Present Tense, n' to mark the plural of the Noun,
and k to mark human being, female, etc. This will undoubtedly treble the
present list of 27,000 segments.
3. Mixed level. On this level, the segments are expressed using natural
language wordforms, the abbreviations for Parts of Speech and the
abbreviations for semantic, groups. The semantic group is a set of words
sharing the same meaning and fitting a particular position specified in the
segment. As such, the semantic group is a subset of the respective Part of
Speech. For example, the semantic group marked with d (all words
denoting people, including proper names and PPNC) is a subclass of all
words marked with n. The semantic group marked with FB (year, month,
second, moment, season, etc.) is also a subclass of n. In order to make the
segments more specific in meaning, in many cases we have preferred to use
the abbreviation of a semantic group instead of the abbreviation for a Part
of Speech. For example:

46 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(viii) v R UF = tell me something, give us everything, ask him nothing, etc.,
instead of
(ix) v R n = teach us English, give him money, etc.
where UF (something, nothing, etc.) is a subset of n and this means that no
other n can assume this position in the segment, except those Nouns which
belong to the semantic group UF. Let's take another example:
(x) on the S of FB-BE = on the first of January
where S is a Numeral Ordinal and FB-BE is a subset of FB, and as such no
other word from FB can assume this position in the segment, except those
belonging to FB-BE. Therefore the semantic subgroup restricts the choice
of the words that can be used in a specified position in a segment. The use
of a natural language wordform instead brings this choice down to a single
word. In the above example (x) on is a natural language word, a
Preposition, and no other word can take its place in this segment.
The mixed level of representation of the segment resembles a pulsation
with gradual surges and declines, and brings the segment nearer to the
natural language text by balancing the entropy and the redundancy inherent
in Natural Language. The pulsation reflects the choice of natural language
words permitted by the grammar at a specified position in the segment.
The Auxiliary words, especially the Prepositions and the Conjunctions,
play a special role in the formation of the Sentence (and in our case, of the
segment) by bringing the choice down to zero; therefore they deserve
particular attention.
As part of this mixed-level representation, each Verbal Tense was
presented separately, with its own abbreviations, with some exceptions (for
more details see Section 3.1.1 in the next chapter). For example, Present
Simple and Past Simple Tense were both marked with v (see also the Index of
Abbreviations) because being Simple, they function syntactically in an
identical way.
The simultaneous representation of the segments on three different
language levels is simply a reminder that these levels coexist in the text; it
is only the grammarians that delineate them to study them better.
Below we list more examples of the mixed level of presentation of the
segment:
(xi) 
by means of G n
(used instead of by n of G n), where by and means are English language
words and no other word can take their place in this position and in this
segment; or, another example:
(xii) 
d has also P2 A n of EBB
(used instead of d has also P2 A n ofri), where d is a human being, has stands
for the have paradigm (excluding having), also stands for also, not, Adverb,

SYNTACTICAL STRUCTURE OF THE SENTENCE 
47
etc. (see the Index of abbreviations), P2 stands for Participle 2nd, A marks
the Article, of is the irreplaceable Preposition of used in genitive
constructions, n is a Noun and EBB is a semantic group (somebody, someone,
nobody, etc.!. No other natural language words, semantic groups or
grammatical categories can assume the specified positions in this segment
i'xii), except those indicated.
On this mixed level of presentation of the segment, some positions allow
greater choice (like that of n), other positions considerably restrict the choice
(like that of d, or even more so that of EBB, because EBB is a subclass of d)
arid still other positions allow no choice - there is only one possibility, a
specific English word (such as of, on, by, means, etc.).
in the present study, we have preferred the mixed level of presentation of
segments for two reasons:
a) because it is impossible to enumerate all sequences of natural language
words (all portions of texts);
b) because using only Parts of Speech, as substitutes for the natural language
words, makes the segment very generalized in its syntactical meaning. For
example, if we were to mark all Prepositions with C and substitute them
with C, we would not be able to differentiate the Prepositional Adverbial
Clauses for time, place, means, etc.
4 Presentation of the segment
The interrelation between the constituent elements of a segment is
predetermined by the very construction of the segment. This relation is
pretty obvious to the grammarian, but it is not understood by the computer.
To make the computer understand the interrelation of the constituent
elements of a segment, we have marked the interrelation using different signs
see the Index of Abbreviations). For example Sj stands for Subject, Od for
Object Direct, " means that the second word marked with '' relates (or refers)
to the first one marked with ", etc.
Each segment is followed by its Parsing (on the line below). For example:
i i; 
cl v A G n
Sj v Od
When several segments in a row have the same Parsing, we have shown it
under the last segment. For example:
;ii) 
d v O (i G n
:iiij 
d v O G n
i i v ) 
d v O n
'. v) 
cl v O n of n
; vi) 
d v O n of G n
Sj v Od
(O is a Possessive Pronoun)

48 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
In those cases where the Parsing of a segment is not presented, we have
placed a sequence of dots:
(vii) 
and b to v
(viii) 
and b v
(b is an Adverb)
In those cases where a segment has more than one possible Parsing, the
next alternative Parsing is shown on the line below. The Parsing of the
segment is predetermined. The Verbal Tenses arc presented individually.
The reader can find more about the presentation of the Verbal Tenses in
Chapter 6, Section 3.1.1.
The Parsing of the segments is discussed in greater detail in Chapter 7,
Section 2.
NB Those words that have the same abbreviation can assume only the
syntactical position marked with the abbreviation (unless specified other-
wise). In addition, some words can belong to a group (as in (ix) below) and at
the same time be stand-alone words (as in (x)):
(ix) 
Merry will go on with this.
d 
shall v up with I
Here on is part of a larger group abbreviated with up (see the Index of
Abbreviations: up = on, with, at, up, off, etc.).
(x) 
Merry arrived on time.
d 
v 
on FB
Here on marks the Preposition on the only alternative permitted, or in other
words on = on. In example (ix) with is also a stand-alone word and marks the
only alternative permitted.

6 Composition of the segments
1 Introduction
The segment is the grammatical and syntactical framework within which the
semantic (lexical, grammatical, syntactical, etc.) meaning finds expression in
communication. It is a grammatical norm, like many other norms in the
language, that keep it from falling apart. The acquisition of this syntactical
framework starts from the very early stages of childhood and runs parallel
with the acquisition of the vocabulary. It is, in a sense, a syntactical word and
those people who learn English as a first or second language should,
eventually, know all the syntactical words in the language. Some English
writers are more versatile - they use a wider range of syntactical words
(segments) 
than others. Some writers have a preference for certain
syntactical expressions. Therefore, it can be said that the segments are an
integral part of the style of writing. It takes some effort, but it can be easily
proven that about 80 per cent of the segments reappear within the first 100
pages of a novel.
The syntactical framework expressed by the segments is not something
permanent in the language: it changes slowly over the centuries. For example,
in primitive expression (Curme, 1955: 106) the predicate Noun, the Adjective
and the Adverb were used as a Complement Subject without a linking Verb.
The introduction of linking Verbs was a marked improvement of speech.
A comprehensive List of the segments existing in the English language,
under the heading Dictionary of Segments, can be downloaded from our
homepage on the Internet (see Internet Downloads at the end of the book).
The list comprises some 27,000 segments, which represent 98 per cent of all
possible segments in English. This fact was proven statistically, by comparing
the segments from an unknown text with those listed in the Dictionary of
Segments. In order to make this calculation, we took one hundred texts (from
various sources), each containing one hundred segments and went through
the Dictionary of Segments to locate each one of the segments. On average,
two segments out of every hundred were not registered in the Dictionary of
Segments. These usually were rare, odd or grammatically incorrect
syntactical constructions used, sometimes, in writing. The latter can be
found more often in speech (speech was beyond our scope of study).

50 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
2 Examples of manual extraction of segments from a text
Below we will list several sentences and show how they divide into segments
(see Sections 2 and 3 of the previous chapter for the dividing rules).
Ann ran past her, through the kitchen and into the hall. Pier footsteps slowed as she
reached the door of Mr Paton's room, and she stood outside, it for a moment, her heart
thumping. Mr Paton was a bad man and he had left them in the cellar to die.
The portion of the text is shown first. Then each portion of text is presented as
a sequence of Parts of Speech (words, semantic groups) - the segment. Then
the segment is followed by its Parsing.
(i) 
Ann ran past her,
d 
v up R
Sj 
v 
Od
(ii) 
through the kitchen
through A n
bdl: (Adverbial phrase for direction and location)
(iii) 
and
and
(Conjunction)
(iv) 
into the hall.
into A n
bdl
(v) 
Her footsteps slowed
O n 
v
Sj 
v
(vi) 
as
as
(Conjunction)
(vii) 
she reached the door of Mr Paton's room,
d v 
A n 
ofN"s 
n
Sj v 
Od
(viii) 
and
and
(Conjunction)
(ix) 
she stood
d v
Sjv
(x) 
outside, it
outside R
bdl
(xi) 
for a moment,
for A FB
bm (Adverbial clause for time)

COMPOSITION OF THE SKGMENTS
51
Later on in this study it will be shown how the computer program can
connect to die to he had left them.
In the next example, the segments will be separated by /':
(xviiiy Suddenly I there came a flashing light j
b 
there v 
A G 
n
into his clouded mind. / It shot dear / across
into O G 
n 
it v 
j 
across
the perplexed field of the consciousness. / Like a
A G 
n 
of A n 
like A
bursting thunderbolt clarifying the murky
G 
n 
Pi 
A G
atmosphere j it burned away the little thoughts
n 
it v 
up 
A G 
n
and fears.
and n
We leave the task of Parsing the above segments to the reader.
3 Types of segments
In this section the reader will find a detailed description of the segments listed
in the Dictionary of Segments and more information on how to interpret and
use them in practice.
According to the initial element of the segment, the segments can be
subdivided into three major categories:
1) Nominal segments. These are the segments that begin with one of the
following Parts of Speech or Natural Language words:
fxii) 
her heart thumping.
O 
ri 
Pi
Sj 
Cs
(xiii) 
Mr Pat on was a bad man
d 
am A G n
Sj 
v 
Cs
(xiv) 
and
and
(Conjunction!
(xv) 
he had left them
d had P2 R
Sj v 
Od
fxvi) 
in the cellar
in A n
bdl
(xvii) 
to die.
to v

52
(i) 
An Article (A-segments);
(ii) 
Numeral (M-segments);
(iii) 
Noun (n-segments);
(iv) 
Indicative Pronoun (i-segments);
(v) 
all - plural quantifier and plural indefinite determiner (all-
segments);
(vi) 
Noun denoting a human being (d-segments);
(vii) 
it - PPNC, neutral (it-segments);
(viii) 
Adjective (G-segments);
(ix) 
•who — relative or interrogative pronoun (who-segments);
(x) 
both - pronoun (both-segments);
(xi) 
which — determiner, also interrogative determiner (which-
segments);
(xii) 
whose — determiner for possessiveness, also interrogative
determiner (whose-segments);
(xiii) 
whom — one of the relative pronominal forms and interrogative
pronoun (whom-segments);
(xiv) 
whoever - relative pronominal form (whoever-segments);
(xv) 
Possessive Pronoun or genitive of the Noun (O-segments, N"s-
segments);
(xvi) 
other - pronoun (other-segments);
(xvii) 
such — pronoun (such-segments);
2) Verbal segments. These segments begin with a proper (Main) or an Auxiliary
Verb, an Infinitive starting with the Particle to (to + Infinitive), or with a
Participle.
Most of these segments constitute the Predicative. The Predicative
includes the second argument, the Object, the Complement (Subject,
Object) and the Infinitive, following after the Main or the Auxiliary Verb.
In this case, the Predicative is cut off from the Nominal part representing
the Subject by an intervening segment. Some of those Verbal Segments
that start with a Main Verb are Imperative. A certain number of those
segments that start with an Auxiliary Verb are Interrogative. Other
segments start with the Infinitive used as a Subject.
According to their first element, the Verbal segments are classified as:
(i) 
Participle -ing (Pi-segments);
(ii) 
Verb proper, including have and do (excluding doing)
paradigms (v-segments);
(iii) 
am - the be paradigm, but excluding be and being (am-
segments);
(iv) 
to - as an Infinitive to the Verb (to v-segments);
(v) 
Second argument (such as busy, ready, etc., usually used after a
word from the be paradigm) (j-segments);
(vi) 
Participle 1st (Pi-segments);
(vii) 
did - comprising do, does and did (did-segments);
(viii) 
has — the have paradigm, but excluding having (have-segments);
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
53
(ix) 
can 
modal auxiliary Verb comprising can, could, may, might,
shall, should, will, would, would better, ought to, must, have to (can-
segments);
(x) 
should - modal auxiliary Verb comprising should, will, would,
may, might, shall, must (should-segments);
(xi) 
not 
particle for negation (not-segments);
(xii) 
there are 
comprising there are, there v, there was, there were, there
is (there are-segments);
(xiii) 
there has 
comprising there has, there had, there have (there has-
segments);
(xiv) 
there can - comprising there can (and the other modal verbs),
there xeem(s), there seemed (there can-segments).
Note: be, being, called, calling and noted are listed with the Auxiliary segments.
3) Auxiliary segments. These segments begin with an Auxiliary word
(Preposition, Conjunction, Interjection), Verb (be, being, called, calling],
Adverb, or some of the quantifiers and modifiers, etc. When the
Preposition is not an integral part of a Phrasal Verb it is used to start a
Prepositional Adverbial Clause.
NB The Prepositions and the Conjunctions listed here are part of List
No 1 used by Algorithms No 2 and No 3 in Part 1 and all other algorithms
in Part 2. The Auxiliary words presented below represent List No 1 used
by Algorithms No 2 and No 3 (Part 1) and Algorithms No 7 and No 20
(Part 2).
(i) 
from 
Preposition (from-segments);
(ii) 
over 
Preposition (over-segments);
(iii) 
of 
Preposition (of-segments);
(iv) 
at 
Preposition (at-segments);
(v) 
on 
Preposition (on-segments);
(vi) 
-with 
Preposition (with-segments);
(vii) 
without 
Preposition (\vithout-segments);
(viii) 
within - Preposition (within-segments);
(ix) 
by 
Preposition (by-segments);
(x) 
into 
Preposition (into-segments);
(xi) 
in 
Preposition (in-segments);
(xii) 
onto 
Preposition (onto-segments);
(xiii) 
for -- Preposition (for-segments);
(xiv) 
to 
Preposition (to-segments);
(xv) 
past 
Preposition (past-segments);
(xvi) 
next 
Preposition (next-segments);
(xvii) 
against •- Preposition (against-segments);
(xviii) 
through 
Preposition (through-segments);
(xix) 
under 
Preposition (under-segments);
(xx) 
only -- Conjunction, Adverb (only-segments);
(xxi) 
between 
Preposition (between-segments);

54
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(xxii) 
above - Preposition (above-segments);
(xxiii) 
than — Conjunction (than-segments);
(xxiv) 
that - Conjunction (thai-segments);
(xxv) 
allhough — Conjunction (although-segments);
(xxvi) 
or - Conjunction (or-segments);
(xxvii) 
and •- Conjunction (and-segments);
(xxviii) 
if- Conjunction (if-segments);
(xxix) 
even - Conjunction (even-segments);
(xxx) 
though - Conjunction (though-segments);
(xxxi) 
but - Conjunction (but-segments);
(xxxii) 
so - Conjunction (so-segments);
(xxxiii) 
because — Conjunction (because-segments);
(xxxiv) 
as - Conjunction (as-segments);
(xxxv) 
since - Conjunction, Preposition (since-segments);
(xxxvi) 
before - Preposition (before-segments);
(xxxvii) 
after 
Preposition (after-segments);
(xxxviii) when — Conjunction, Pronoun (when-segments);
(xxxix) 
where - Conjunction, Pronoun (where-segments);
(xxxx) 
why — Conjunction, Interrogative Pronoun (why-segments);
(xxxxi) 
what - Relative Pronoun used as Conjunction (what-
segments);
(xxxxii) 
then - Conjunction (then-segments);
(xxxxiii) just — Adverb used as Conjunction (just-segments);
(xxxxiv) until, till - Conjunction, Preposition (until-segments);
(xxxxv) 
while 
Conjunction (while-segments);
(xxxxvi) yet - Adverb used as Conjunction (yet-segments);
(xxxxvii) once - Adverb used as Conjunction (once-segments);
(xxxxviii) about - Conjunction, Preposition (about-segments);
(xxxxix) how - Conjunction, Interrogative Pronoun (how-segments);
(1) 
aboard - Preposition, Adverb (aboard-segments);
(li) 
anything - comparative modifier (anything-segments);
(lii) 
according to - Conjunction (according to-segments);
(liii) 
across -• Preposition (across-segments);
(liv) 
ahead of- Preposition (ahead of-segments);
(Iv) 
albeit — Conjunction (albeit-segments);
(Ivi) 
almost - Conjunction (almost-segments);
(Ivii) 
alone — Adverb (alone-segments);
(Iviii) 
along - Preposition (along-segments);
(lix) 
already — Conjunction (already-scgments);
(Ix) 
also - Conjunction (also-segments);
(Ixi) 
altogether — Conjunction (altogether-segments);
(Ixii) 
always - Adverb (always-segments);
(Ixiii) 
among - Preposition (among-segments);
(Ixiv) 
any — comparative modifier (any-segments);
(Ixv) 
anyway — Conjunction (anyway-segments);
(Ixvi) 
apart from - Conjunction (apart from-segments);

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
55
(Ixvii) 
around 
Preposition (around-segments);
(Ixviii) 
away from 
Preposition (away from-segments);
(Ixixi 
be - Auxiliary Verb be (be-segments);
(Ixx) 
behind 
Preposition (behind-segments);
(Ixxii 
being 
Participle (being-segments);
(Ixxii) 
beside 
Preposition (beside-segments);
(Ixxiii) 
besides 
Conjunction (besides-segments);
(Ixxiv) 
better 
Adjective, Comparative (better-segments);
(Ixxv) 
beyond 
Preposition (beyond-segments);
(Ixxvi) 
called 
Participle (called-segments);
(Ixxvii) 
calling 
Participle (calling-segments);
(Ixxviii) depending on - Conjunction (depending on-segments);
(Ixxix) 
despite 
Conjunction (despite-segments);
(Ixxx) 
down 
Preposition (down-segments);
(Ixxxi) 
during 
Preposition (during-segments);
(Ixxxii) 
e.g., i.e. 
Conjunction (e.g.-segments);
(Ixxxiii) 
each 
modifier (each-segments);
(Ixxxiv) earlier 
Adjective (earlier-segments);
(Ixxxv) 
either 
Conjunction (cither-segments);
(Ixxxvi) 
enough 
Conjunction (enough-segments);
(Ixxxvii) every (incl. everybody, everyone] - modifier (every-segments);
(Ixxxviii) except 
Conjunction (except-segments);
(Ixxxix) 
far enough (incl. far from and far less) (far-segments);
(Ixxxx) 
given 
Conjunction (given-segments);
(Ixxxxi) 
halfway - Conjunction (halfway-segments);
(Ixxxxii) having - Participle (having-segments);
(Ixxxxiii) hence 
Conjunction (hence-segments);
(Ixxxxiv) however -- Conjunction (however-segments);
(Ixxxxv) indeed 
Conjunction (indeed-segments);
(Ixxxxvi) inside 
Preposition (inside-segments);
flxxxxvii) instead 
Conjunction (instead-segments);
(Ixxxxviii)irrespective (of) — Conjunction (irrespective-segments);
(Ixxxxix) last 
Adverb (last-segments);
(c) 
late(-r) 
Adjective (later-segments);
ici) 
less 
modifier (less-segments);
(cii) 
let, let's 
Verb (let-segments);
(ciii) 
more 
comparative modifier (more-segments);
(civ) 
moreover 
Conjunction (moreover-segments);
(cvj 
most 
comparative modifier (most-segments);
(cvi) 
near 
Preposition (near-segments);
(cvii) 
needless - Conjunction (needless-segments);
(cviii) 
neither 
Conjunction (neither-segments);
(cix) 
nevertheless — Conjunction (nevertheless-segments);
(ex) 
nice 
Adjective (nice-segments);
(cxi) 
nonetheless - Conjunction (nonetheless-segments);
(cxii) 
nor 
Conjunction (nor-segments);

56
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(cxiii) 
noted 
Participle (noted-segments);
(cxiv) 
nothing - determiner (nothing-segments);
(cxv) 
now — Adverb (now-segmeiits);
(cxvi) 
often - Adverb (often-segments);
(cxvii) 
oh - Interjection (oh-segments);
(cxviii) 
please (please-segments);
(cxix) 
one - Numeral, Pronoun, Noun (one-segments);
(cxx) 
others — Noun (others-segments);
(cxxi) 
otherwise - Conjunction (otherwise-segments);
(cxxii) 
out — Adverb (out-segments);
(cxxiii) 
overall - Adjective, Adverb (overall-segments);
(cxxiv) 
per - Preposition (per-segments);
(cxxv) 
perhaps (perhaps-segments);
(cxxvi) 
quite — Adverb (quite-segments);
(cxxvii) prior - Preposition (prior-segments);
(cxxviii) rather 
Adverb, Conjunction (rather-segments);
(cxxix) 
regarding (also concerning) - Preposition (regarding-seg-
ments);
(cxxx) 
round - Preposition (round-segments);
(cxxxi) 
some - quantifier, determiner (some-segments);
(cxxxii) 
somehow — Adverb (somehow-segments);
(cxxxiii) somewhat - Adverb (somewhat-segments);
(cxxxiv) somewhere — Adverb (somewhere-segments);
(cxxxv) 
thereby - Conjunction (thereby-segments);
(cxxxvi) therefore - Conjunction (therefore-segments);
(cxxxvii) throughout - Preposition (throughout-segments);
(cxxxviii) thus - Conjunction (thus-segments);
(cxxxix) together - Adverb (together-segments);
(cxxxx) 
toward(s) - Preposition (towards-segmcnts);
(cxxxxi) too - Adverb (too-segmcnts);
(cxxxxii) unless - Conjunction (unless-segmcnts);
(cxxxxiii) upon - Preposition (upon-scgments);
(cxxxxiv) via - Preposition (via-segments);
(cxxxxv) whatever — Conjunction (whatever-segments);
(cxxxxvi) whenever 
Conjunction (whenever-segments);
(cxxxxvii) whereas - Conjunction (whereas-segments);
(cxxxxviii) whether - Conjunction (whether-segments);
(cxxxxix) up - Adverb, including up, off, out, down, over, in at the start of
the segment (up-segments);
(cl) 
like - Conjunction, Preposition (like-scgments);
(cli) 
b 
Adverb (b-segments)
There are also some other Auxiliary Clauses listed only in the Dictionary of
Segments, namely those starting with been, FB, following, P (Gerund), P2,
S (Numeral Ordinal), T, very^ well, X (Reflexive Pronoun) and yes. The
list also includes a number of semantic groups used as a first element of the

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
57
segment to restrict the choice of words at this initial position (EAL, EAW,
EBB, EBI, EBK, EBL, EBO, EBR, UF, UG, UI, UK).
The above List is used by Algorithm No 7 to identify the first element of
the segment before starting to identify the next element, etc.
The above listed words and Parts of Speech either interrupt the previous
segment (if that is not already done by a Punctuation Mark) or appear
because the previous segment has ended, so that they can start a new
segment. Then, as soon as the segment started by one of them ends, the end
signals the beginning of a new segment (regardless of whether there is a
Punctuation Mark or not to make the interruption) and the search for a new
beginning starts, going through the above List again, and so on, from full stop
to full stop.
These beginnings of segments (about 150 in all) are formal features (again we
shall call them "markers') which turn out to be quite useful in text processing.
In addition, these 150 beginnings have approximately 27,000 possible
continuations (the total number of entries in the Dictionary of Segments).
3.1 Nominal segments
The first element(s) of a Nominal segment is (are) always a Subject (Sj),
provided that the nominal start is followed by a Verb (Verbal Tense) (see vii—
x below). If not (if there is no Verb to follow and the Nominal segment ends),
then the Nominal segment can be either a Subject or an Object (Od) (i—vi
below). An algorithmic procedure must determine which by analysing the
context.
( i ) 
A b G n of i G n (e.g. the undoubtedly excellent performance of this
German gymnast)
(ii) 
all A n of n (e.g. all the presents of Jim]
(iii) 
n of () G n of n (etc.)
(iv) 
i n
f v ) 
d of n of n
(vi) 
Sj or Od
(vii) 
A b G n shall also v
(viii) 
d has P2
fix) 
O n are to v
(x) 
Sj v
In those cases when the nominal start is followed by a Verbal Tense, the
conjugation of the Auxiliary Verb is presented in an abbreviated form:
(xi) 
d are P2
ixii) 
O G n are P2
(where are stands for is, are, were, was)
fxiii) 
i n has been P2
(xiv) 
O n of n has been P2
(where has stands for has, have, had)

58 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
The abbreviated conjugation comes as a result of the abbreviated Noun - it is
not known whether the Noun is used in the singular (or what person in the
singular) or in the plural 
and also as a result of the abbreviated Tense (it is
not specified whether it is Present or Past, or what person), and room has been
allowed for all possibilities. The Verbal Tense will be discussed in detail below.
The third part of the Nominal segment, the one following after the Verbal
Tense, represents the Predicative and can be either an Object or a
Complement:
(xv) 
n has also to be P2 to v A n
(xvi) 
all I n v R
(xvi a) d am Pi A n
Sj v 
Od
(xvii) d shall also v R A n
(xviii) d should have also P2 R A n
Sj v 
Oi Od
Sj v 
Od Co
(xix) 
d v A n of n PI
d v to v R PI
Sj v 
Od Co
(xx) 
d has also been A n of A G n
(xxi) 
M of A G n has also been j
(xxii) O n are j
(xxii a) d am j
(xxii b) d am n
(xxii c) d am A G n
Sj v Cs
(xxiii) d shall v R to v O n
(xxiv) d has P 2 O n v t o v A G n
Sj v 
Od 
Ic
(xxv) d shall v G
(xxvi) A n shall v S
Sj 
v 
Pr
As was seen from the above examples, the complement can be a Complement
Sj (xxi, xxii), Complement Object (xvii, xviii, xix), or an Infinitival
Complement (xxiii, xxiv). The Object can be Object Direct (xvii, xviii,
xix) or Object Indirect (xvii, xviii). In those cases (xvii, xviii) where it is not
known if we have Object Indirect or Complement Object, further algorithmic
analysis is needed before a decision is taken.
The Nominal segments xvi a, xx, xxi, xxii and xxii a bear examples of the
use of the second argument (the second argument follows after the Auxiliary
Verb). The Nominative agreement, using the paradigm of the Auxiliary Verb
be, is exemplified by xxii b and xxii c.

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
59
In many cases the nominal part preceding the Verbal Tense is identical to
the nominal part following after the Tense:
(xxvii) () n v C) n
(xxviii)d v A S G n of n
A S G n o f n v O n
This means that we have to select the identical patterns (O n, A S G n, A S G
n of n, etc.) that compose the segments (their number will be only a few
thousand) and use them in studying and teaching the language, in the same
way as the morphemes are used in studying and teaching the composition of
the word. A suitable name for this branch of syntax would perhaps be
Morphology of Syntax. (The identical patterns in this study will be called
Syntactical Words. The Syntactical Words are the building blocks of the
segment and of the sentence.)
The second part of the Nominal segment is taken up by the Verbal Tense.
In the next section we will briefly review the Tenses and explain the
abbreviations used to code them.
3.1.1 
Verbal Tenses and constructions. The Infinitive
The Verbal Tenses in the Nominal segment, as well as in all other types of
segments, are presented as follows:
a) The Present Simple and the Past Simple Tense are marked with v (no
differentiation is made between them). For example:
(i) 
A n v A n
can mean either
(i a) 
The boy takes the money, or
(i b) 
The boy took the money.
Present Tense third person singular is not specified.
b) All forms of the Future Tense, the Future in the Past and the Present
Conditional are marked with shall v (no distinction is made between
them). For example:
(ii) 
d shall v
can be interpreted as
(ii a) 
You will work.
(ii b) 
You would work.
(ii c) 
We do work.
(ii d) 
He did work.
The first person (singular and plural) is not differentiated from the second
and the third person shall stands for all, also for all modals that can assume
this position, and for the do paradigm, with the exception of doing.

60 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
c) The Present and the Past Continuous Tenses are marked with am Pi.
For example:
(iii) 
d am Pi
(iii a) Jim is practising.
(iii b) Ann was sleeping.
The Auxiliary Verb am stands for the whole be paradigm with the
exception of be and being.
d) No differentiation is made between the Future Continuous and the Future
Continuous in the Past. Both tenses are marked with shall be Pi. For
example:
(iv) 
A n shall be Pi
can be equivalent to
(iv a) 
The engine will be working.
(iv b) 
The engine should be working.
No differentiation is made between first, second and third person, and
shall stands for all modals that can assume this position.
e) The Present Perfect and the Past Perfect are also marked identically, for
example:
(v) 
O n has P2
which can be interpreted as
(v a) 
Her husband has arrived.
(v b) 
Their car had stopped.
f) The Future Perfect, the Future Perfect in the Past and the Perfect
Conditional are marked identically with shall have P2. For example:
(vi) 
d shall have P2
can mean
(vi a) 
You will have worked.
(vi b) 
Ton should have worked.
(shall represents all modals that can assume this position; have stands for
have)
g) The Present Perfect Continuous Tense and the Past Perfect Continuous
Tense are also marked identically with has been Pi. For example:
(vii) i n has been Pi
can mean

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
61
(vii a; This man has been sleeping.
(vii b) Such people had been playing.
(has represents the paradigm, having is excluded)
h') The Future Perfect Continuous Tense and the Future Perfect Continuous
in the Past are also marked with an identical sign. For example:
(viii) 
d shall have been Pi
can mean
(viii a) / shall have been reading.
(viii b) You would have been staying.
(shall represents all modals specified in the Index)
i) The Present Tense and the Past Tense in the Passive Voice are marked
identically, with am P2:
(ix) 
d am P2
can mean
(ix a) / am asked . . .
(ix b) He was asked . ..
j; The Future Tense and the Future in the Past, Passive Voice, are also
marked identically:
(x) 
M n shall be P2
which can mean
(x a) 
Ten items will be chosen.
(x b) 
Several boxes should be opened.
(shall stands for all modals that can assume this position)
k) The Present Continuous Tense and the Past Continuous Tense, Passive
Voice, are not differentiated. They are denoted with am being P2. For
example:
(xi) 
d am being P2
can be interpreted as
(xi a) 
We are being asked . . .
;xi b) He was being asked .. .
(am represents the paradigm, be and being are excluded; being = being)
1) The Present Perfect Tense and the Past Perfect Tense, Passive voice, are
also marked identically:
fxii) 
n has been P2

62 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
which can mean
(xii a) Food has been eaten.
(xii b) Wine had been drunk.
(has represents the have paradigm, with the exception of having)
All those Tenses that are marked in an identical way have an identical
syntactical role in the sentence and occupy identical positions in the segments.
Another reason for merging those Tenses was to compress the description of
the segment (and hence, the description of English grammar for the
computer), using the entire paradigm of an Auxiliary Verb or several such
paradigms in a single, specified position in the segment. This fully accorded
with the grammatical and syntactical rules governing the construction of the
sentence.
The difference in meaning as a result of bringing all modals together
(under shall, can or should) and placing them in one single position is
ignored. Compare:
(xiii a) I shall came, (plan, belief, etc.)
(xiii b) / could come, (possibility)
(xiii c) / must come, (necessity, etc.)
Our purpose was to capture the underlying grammatical (syntactical)
construction
(xiii) 
d shall v
identical for all those meanings.
Similarly, we have incorporated in also all Adverbs including the
negation expressed by not
(xiv) 
d shall also v
to represent segments (portions of text) such as
(xiv a) / could not come.
(xiv b) / must surely come.
regardless of the ensuing difference of meaning. The important thing was that
all these portions of text or simple sentences, have the same underlying
syntactical construction.
The segments can be in the Active or Passive Voice:
(xv) d v G n (e.g. Chris achieved remarkable results]
d v to v j (etc.)
d v to v b G n
d v to v G n
A G n v A n A n
are Active Voice segments.

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
63
(xvi) 
A n should have been P2 (e.g. The food should have been eaten.}
A n has been P2 (e.g. A decision has been taken.)
d am P2 (e.g. / was asked.}
are Passive Voice segments.
Those segments that contain a Possessive Pronoun or a Genitive of the
Noun are Gentive segments:
(xvii) O n are b j (e.g. Her horses are always ready.}
N"s n are j (etc.)
A G N"s n are j
Following the above description, the reader can easily identify all
constructions and the Tenses found both in the text (any English language
text) and in the Dictionary of Segments.
The Verbal Tense is often followed by a Participle '-ing', a Gerund, or an
Infinitival Complement used as an Object of the Verb (xviii):
(xviiia) d has P2 Pv (started practising}
(xviii b) d has P2 Pi
(xviii c) d has P2 P
(xviii d) d v to v (to sing)
S j v l c
The to Infinitive (expressed with the Particle to) can be Present (xix) or
Passive (xx):
(xix) 
They will have to do the painting of the house.
d 
shall v 
to v A n 
of A n
(xx) 
The chairman agreed to be re-elected.
A 
n 
v 
to be P2
The to Infinitive can be positioned before the Object (xxi) or after it (xxii),
used with a Verbal Tense (xxiii). or used in a Prepositional Adverbial Clause
(xxiv):
(xxi) 
A n v to v A G G n
A n should have to be Pi to v A G n
d am also to v A G n
(xxii) 
A n v G n to v A G n
(xxiii) 
d am P2 to v M G n
(xxiv) 
for A n to v
(xxiv a) with R to v A n
The Verbs that may be followed by an Infinitive or Gerund can be found
listed in Graver (1971: 157-65) or Hornby (1958: 48-9).
3.1.2 
A-segments
The A-segments start with an Article (definite or indefinite). The Article is

64
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
followed most often by the following sequences of Parts of Speech (up to the
start of the Verbal Tense):
S, M, m and N"s can always be equated with G and G can be optional - it
can be omitted from the position specified for it.
For example:
(xxxi a) 7he man selling this beautiful house.
(xxxi b) The man selling this house.
It is worth noting that all sequences starting with an Article (A) must end
with a Noun (n) before another Part of Speech or another sequence is allowed
to proceed. The only Parts of Speech allowed to intervene between the Article
and the Noun are the Adjective (G), the Adverb (b), the Participle 1st and
the Numeral, only as attributes to the Noun:
A (G) (G) (G) n
A (G) (G) (m) n
A b G (G) n
A b PI n
The choice in brackets is optional; the attribute after the Adverb is
obligatory. There can rarely be more than three attributes in a row between
A and n.
The above nominal patterns (syntactical words) can be used by all English
language students, whether in the classroom or at home, to exercise their
knowledge of English by filling them with words. This will be a preparatory
exercise before trying to fill a whole segment with words.
The Nominal sequence before the Verbal Tense is always a Subject (viii).
Often, the Subject can be followed by a Complement Subject (xix, xxxii). If
(i) 
A b G
(ii) 
A b G G G n
(iii) 
A G G G n
(iv) 
A G G G n of n
(v) 
A G G m n
(vi) 
A G G G n o f A G n
(vii) 
A G G n of
(viii) 
A G G n of G n
(ix) 
A G G n of i n
(x) 
A G G n of m n
(xi) 
A G G n of O G n
(xii) 
A G G n Pi A G n
(xiii) 
A G n Pi G G n
(xiv) 
A G n b
(xv) 
A G n of A n of A G n
(xvi) 
A n of A n of G G n
(xvii) 
A G n of A G n
(xviii) 
A n of A n PI b
(xix) 
A n of A n PI
(xx) 
A n of A n Pi
(xxi) 
A n of A N"s G G n
(xxii) 
A G ii of all A n
(xxiii) 
A G n of all i
(xxiv) 
A n of b G G n
(xxv) 
A n of G G G n
(xxvi) 
A n of i G n (where i = I)
(xxvii) 
A n of M n
(xxviii) 
A n of P A G n
(xxix) 
A n Pi A m G n
(xxx) 
A n Pi G G n
(xxxi) 
A n Pi i G ri
(xxxii) 
A n Pi A n of O N"s n
(xxxiii) 
A N"s G G n
(xxxiv) 
A S G n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
65
the Nominal sequence is not followed by a Verbal Tense, it can be interpreted
either as Subject or as Object (viii).
(viii) 
the pillars of wisdom
A n 
of n 
(G omitted)
Ixix) 
The leaves of the trees fallen
A 
n 
of A n 
PI
Sj 
Cs
(xxxii) 
The dust covering the yard of his brother's house ...
A 
n 
Pi 
' A n 
of O N"s 
n
Sj 
Cs
(xxxii a) The man reading the book is 
hungry.
A 
n 
Pi 
A n 
are j
Sj 
Cs 
v Cs
The segments xxxii and xxxii a are examples of a Reduced Relative Clause in
the role of Complement Subject. Compare:
i xxxii b) '1 he man who reads the book is hungry.
Since the Verbal Tenses were discussed in the previous section (they are
identical for all Nominal, Verbal and Auxiliary segments), we will omit them
and will start to describe the second part of the A-segment, that coming after
the Verbal Tense. Below is a list of the most characteristic sequences met after
the Verbal Tense:
(xxxv) 
A G G n b
(xxxvi) 
A G G n m
(xxxvii) 
A G G n of m n
(xxxviii) A G G n to v A n
( xxxix) 
A G n b
i xxxx) 
A G n of A G n
; xxxxi) 
A G n of all i n
(xxxxi i) 
A ( i n of b G G G n
(xxxxiii) A G n of n PI to v G n
xxxxiv) A G n of R
xxxxv) 
A G n PI
' xxxxvi} A G n to v
;xxxxvii) A G n to v up
xxxxviii) A G n up
xxxxiX) A G N"s n
1) 
A G P2
li) 
A m G n PI b
lii; 
A n of G G n
i l i i i i 
A n of i G G n
' liv) 
A n of M n
; Iv i 
A n of R
i'lvi) 
A n PI to v
(Ivii) 
A n up
(Iviii) 
A S G n to v
(lix) 
A S PI
(Ix) 
A S to v
(Ixi) 
b G
(Ixii) 
b j
(Ixiii) 
b Os
(Ixiv) 
G
(Ixv) 
G G G n
(Ixvi) 
G n
(Ixvii) 
G n of G n
(Ixviii) 
j
(Ixix) 
j of n
(Ixx) 
j to v
flxxi) 
j to v A G n
(Ixxii) 
j to v G n
(Ixxiii) 
less j
(Ixxiv) 
less P2
(Ixxv) 
M G n of A G n
(Ixxvi) 
M n
(Ixxvii) 
M n to v A n
(Ixxviii) 
n of A G n

66 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(Ixxix) 
O G G n 
(Ixxxvii) R A n
(Ixxx) 
O less G n 
(Ixxxviii) R all
(Ixxxi) 
O N"s n 
(Ixxxix) 
R all up
(Ixxxii) 
of A G G n 
(Ixxxx) 
R M n
(Ixxxiii) 
of G n 
(Ixxxxi) 
R n
(Ixxxiv) 
Os 
(Ixxxxii) R up
(Ixxxv) 
R 
(Ixxxxiii) X
(Ixxxvi) 
R A G n o f G G n
The G, b, up and M are optional; M is equal to G. Some of the sequences
used before and after the Verbal Tense coincide.
What is characteristic of the third part of the A-segment? Most of all the
use of the Personal Pronoun Objective Case (PPOC), marked as R, and the
positioning of the Adverb (b, up) at the very end of the sequence. At the very
end we also find positioned the up part of the Prepositional and Phrasal Verb
(compare bring up, take off, put aside, etc.). This last feature hampers
considerably the automatic processing of English texts, because the
Preposition, as part of a Prepositional Verb, can be easily mistaken for a
Preposition at the start of an Adverbial segment.
The nominal sequence following after the Verbal Tense can be either an
Object (liii a, Ixvi, Ixxxi a) or a Complement Subject (liii b, Ix, Ixxxi b).
Some sequences can be both, depending on the Verb that precedes them.
Those sequences that start with PPOC (R) are always the Object of the
segment. When R is followed by a Noun, then R is the Indirect Object
(Ixxxxi).
(He saw)
(liii a) 
the president of this small mountainous country.
A n 
of i 
G 
G 
n
Od
(He is)
(liii b) 
the president of this small mountainous country.
A n 
of i 
G 
G 
n
Cs
(He likes]
(Ixvi) 
sweet wine.
G 
n
Od
(He bought)
(Ixxxi a) his sister's house.
O N"s 
n
Od
(This is)
(Ixxxii b) his sister's house.
O N"s 
n
Cs

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
67
i / am ]
fix ) 
the first to arrive.
A S 
to v
Cs
(I gave]
(Ixxxxi) him monev.
R n
Oi Ocl
Below is a sample extract from the A-scgments of the Dictionary of Segments:
A b G n shall also v A G n 
A d of N"s G n = d
A b G n shall also v A G n b 
A d of N"s n = d
A b G n shall also v A n 
A d of some m FB = d
A b G n shall also v A n b 
Sj
A b G n shall v A G n 
A G G G n has also P2 A G N"s n
A b G n shall v A G n b 
A G G G n has also P2 A N"s n
A b G n shall v A n 
A G G G ri has P2 A G N"s n
A b G n shall v A n b 
A G G G n has P2 A N"s n
Sj v Od 
Sj v Od
A b*G n v 
A G G G n of NAME
A b G n v off 
Sj
Sj v 
Od
A b G n v O n 
A G G G n PI
Sj v Od 
Sj
A b~G n" Pi" n v 
Od
Sj C'.s v 
A G G G n PI b v
A b G n" Pi" ' n' 
Sj v
A b (i 
A G G G n shall also v n
Sj 
A G G G n shall v n
Od 
A G G G n shall also v A n
A d NAME = d 
A G G G n shall also v R
A d of A cl of Os = d 
A G G G n shall v A n
A d of A G d = d 
A G G G n shall v R
A d of A G n = rl 
Sj v Od
A rl of A G l\"s G G n = d 
A G G G n TCv
A d of A G iV's G n = d 
A G G G n v
A d of A G N"s n = d 
Sj v
A d of A n ~= d 
A G G G n v A n to v G n
A d of A N"s G G n = d 
A G G G n v A n to v G n of n
A d of A N""s G n = d 
A G G G n v A n to v n
A d of A N'"s n = d 
A G G G n v A n to v n of n
A d of i G n = d 
A G G G n v A n to v
A d of i n = d 
A G G G n v A n to v A n
A d of m FB - d 
A G G G n v A n to v R
A rl of n = d 
Sj v Od Ic
A d of n NAME = rl 
A G G m n are also P2 to be less j

68
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
A G G m n are also P2 to be less PI 
A G G n shall be j to v
A G G m n are P2 to be less PI
Sj v Ic
AG G n
Sj
Od
A G G n are O n
Sj v Cs
A G G n arc
Sj v
A G G n are A G P2
A G G n are A n
A G G n are A n of A G n
A G G n are A n of A n
A G G n are also A G P2
A G G n are also A n
A G G n are also A n of A G n
A G G n are also A n of A n
A G G n are also j
A G G n are also j to v
Sj v Cs
A G G n are also ahead
Sj v b
A G G n arc also m NAME m
Sj v Cs
A G G n are NAME
Sj v Cs
A G G n at n are NAME
Sj b v Cs
A G G n has also P2 A G N"s n
A G G n has also P2 A N"s n
A G G n has P2 A G N"s n
A G G n has P2 A N"s n
Sj v Od
A G G n shall also v A n of A n
A G G n shall also v A n of n
A G G n shall also v G n of n
A G G n shall also v n of n
A G G n shall also v A n of G n
A G G n shall also v n of G n
A G G n shall also v n
A G G n shall also v A ri
A G G n shall also v A n up
A G G n shall also v R
A G G n shall also v R up
Sj v Od
Sj v Cs Ic
A G G n shall v A n
A G G n shall v A n up
A G G n shall v A n of A n
A G G n shall v A n of G n
A G G n shall v A n of n
A G G n shall v G n of n
A G G n shall v n
A G G n shall v n of n
A G G n shall v n of G n
A G G n shall v O G G ri
A G G n shall v O G n
A G G n shall v O n
A G G n shall v O less G n
Sj v Od
A G G n shall v R
A G G n shall v R up
Sj v Od
A G G n shall v R A n
A G G n shall v R n
Sj v Oi Od
Sj v Od Co
A G G n shall v R O G n
A G G n shall v R O n
Sj v Oi Od
A G G n TCv
A G G n v
Sjv
A G G n v A n to v G n
A G G n v A n to v G n of n
A G G n v A n to v n
A G G n v A n t o v
A G G n v A n to v n of n
A G G n v A n to v R
A G G n v A n to v A n
A G G n v A n t o v A n o f n
A G G n v A n t o v A n o f A n
Sj v Od Ic
A G m n n P i A G n
Sj Cs
Od Co
A G n are also P2 to be less j
A G n are also P2 to be less PI
A G n are P2 to be less PI
Sjv

COMPOSITION OF THE SKGMENTS 
69
A G n 
A G n has also P2 A G n of R
Sj 
A G n has also P2 A G N"s n
Od 
A G n has also P2 A m n
A G n are O n 
A G n has also P2 A n of G G n Pi
S j v Cs 
A G n has also P2 A 11 of G n Pi
A G n are A n 
A G n has also P2 A n of n Pi
A G n are A n of A G n 
A G n has also P2 A ri of R
A G n are A n of A n 
A G n has also P2 A N"s n
A G ri are also j 
A G n has also P2 G n
A G n are also j lo v 
A G n has also P2 it be P2
A G n are also ahead 
A G n has also P2 M n to v A n
A G n are also G 
A G n has also P2 m of R
A G n are also up 
A G n has also P2 n
A G n are also m NAME m
A G n are j 
A G n has also P2 n to v G n of G n
A G n are j to v 
A G n has also P2 n to v G n of n
A G n are ahead
 
A 
G 
n 
has 
alsQ 
p2 
n 
tQ 
y 
n 
of 
G 
n
A G n are G
A G n has also P2 n to v n of n
A G n are n
A G n are NAME
0 r»
A G n has also P2 O n
A G n are no less j
. •' Sj v Od
A G n are less i
A G n has also P2 off M n to v A n
A G n are also n ot A n 
,„.
\ r< i n \ /-> r A S) v Od Ic
A G n are also m G n to v A G n ot A
A G n has also P2 off R
A G n are also m G n to v A G n
A G n are also m G n to v
A G n are also less j
A G n arc also j of G n
A G n are also h ri of A n
A G n are also b n
A G n are A G n Pi of A n of G n A G n ha
A G n are up 
M n P1
gj v QS 
A G n has also P2 to v G n to v up M
A G n also v A n of A G G n 
n P1
A G n are Pi A n of n 
A G n has also P2 to v n to v up M n
A G ti are Pi up A n of n 
I 1
Sj v Od 
Sj v Od
A G a at n are NAME 
A G n has also P2 up
Sj b v Cs 
Sj v
A G n d v to v R v are 
A G n has also within R A n of O G n
A G n d v to v R v 
Sj v b Od
Sj Sj v Od 
A G n has been
A G 11 d - d
A G ii b 
A G n has been j
Sj 
Sj v Cs
Od 
A G n has been P2
. •' Sj v Od
A G n are A G n Pi of A n of G n A G n has also P2 to v G G n to v up
name
sJ V oD
GN
A
N
SJ V OD
A G N HAS ALSO P2 R
SJ VOD
A G N HAS ALSO P2 TO V A n
a g n has also p2 to v An of d
sj v

70
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
A G n has been P2 up
Sjv
A G n has been Pi G n j
A G n has been Pi n j
A G n has G G G n
A G n has G G n
A G n has G n
A G n has m NAME m
A G n has n
Sj v Od
A G n has not
A G n has P2
Sjv
A G n has P2 A G n of R
A G n has P2 A G N"s n
A G n has P2 A m n
A G n has P2 A n of G G n Pi
A G n has P2 A n of G n Pi
A G n has P2 A n of n Pi
A G n has P2 A n of R
A G n has P2 A N"s n
A G n has P2 G n
A G n has P2 it be P2
Sj v Od
A G n has P2 M n to v A n
Sj v Od Ic
A G n has P2 m of R
A G n has P2 n
A G n has P2 no n
Sj v Od
A G n has P2 n to v G n of G n
A G n has P2 n to v G n of n
A G n has P2 n to v n of G n
A G n has P2 n to v n of n
Sj v Od Ic
A G n has P2 O n
A G n has P2 off M n to v A n
A G nhas P2 offR
A G n has P2 R
A G n has P2 to v A n
A G n has P2 to v A n of d NAME
Sj v Od
A G n has P2 to v G G n to v up M n
PI
A G n has P2 to v G n to v to v up M
n PI
A G n has P2 to v n to v up M n PI
Sj vOd
A G n has P2 up
A G n has to be P2
A G n has to v
Sjv
A G n has UF b
A G n having P2 X v A S
A G n having P2 X v A n
A G n having P2 X
Sj v Od
A G n of A n are also P2
A G n of A n are also P2
A G n of A n are also Pi
A G n of A n are P2
A G n of A n be P2 *
A G n of A n can be P2
A G n of A n has P2
A G n of A n has P2 up
Sjv
A G n of A n of A G n
A G n of A n of A n
A G n of A n of n
etc.
3.1.3 
M-segments
The segments starting with a Numeral Cardinal (number, plural quantifier,
comparative modifier) also have one, two or three constituent parts. The first
part stands for the Subject or the Object (if the segment is of one part only,
without a Verbal Tense to follow). The second part is the Verbal Tense. The
third part is the Object and the Complement.
The M-segment usually begins with one of the following sequences of Parts
of Speech:

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
71
(i) 
M
mi 
M %
liii) M % of A m n
(iv) 
M % of A m n PI
(v) 
M % of A n
i v i j 
M % of A n PI
(vii) M % of all n
iviii; M % of all n PI
( i x j 
M % of G n
(x) 
M A n
(xi) 
M G n
(xii) 
M m G n
(xiii) M n b
(xiv) 
M n of A G G n
(xv) 
M of A G G n
(xvi) M of A less j
(xvii) M of A m n b
(xviii) M of O G n
(G is optional, in — G)
For example:
iviii a) 
10 % of all people asked
Sj or Od
(xviii a) two of her children
Sj or Od
The most characteristic feature of the first part of the M-segment is the
additional use of m and of % at the start of the segment, with %
occupying the second position. Other frequent candidates for the second
position are the Noun, (he Adjective or yet another Numeral used as an
attribute to the Noun, are (the paradigm of be without be and being) and
the Preposition of used with the genitive of the Noun (of can be followed
either by A or O;.
In the first position, before a Noun, M is an attribute to the Noun (xiv),
denoting the total number (specified or unspecified) involved.
ixiv a; M n v up !e.g. Ten people turned up.]
-Sj 
v
When M is followed by the Preposition of, which in turn is followed by a
Noun, then the M-segmcnt means that only a certain number (specified or
unspecified) are involved (xv).
;xv a; 
M of A n v up (e.g. Ten of the women came down.)
Sj 
v
; xviii a; M of O n v (e.g. Two oj his books disappeared.}
Sj
The second and the third parts of the M-segments are identical to those of
the A-segments. An interesting feature that deserves attention is the use of up
to three Complements for the same Subject and the fact that here M is one of
them ; xvi'i.
i xvi) 
M of A less j are A G n PI
Cs Sj 
v 
Cs 
Cs
This can be a sentence such as Ten of the best-known are the watercolour portraits
painted (. . . bv the famous portraitist \.
v

72 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Compare: 7ke best are ten.
A less j are M
(In other words The best painted portraits are, ten.}
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the M-scgments:
M % lias also been P2 
M % has also been P2
M % has been P2 
M % has been P2
Sj v 
Sj v
m % of A m n" PI" TCv A n shall 
M % of A n PI
alsov 
m % o f a l l n P l
m % of A m n" PI" TCv A G n shall v 
Od Co
m % of A m n" PI" TCv A n shall v 
m % of all n PI v m % G n
Sj v Sj v 
m % of all n PI v m % n
M % of A n PI 
m % of all n PI v G n
m % of all n PI 
m % of all n PI v n
Od Co 
Sj Cs v Od
m % of all n PI v m % G n 
m % of G n are also j of n
m % of all n PI v m % n 
m % of n are also j of n
m % of all n P1 v G n 
m % of n are j of n
m % of all n PI v n 
Sj v Cs
Sj Cs v Od 
m % of then PI
m % of G n are also j of n 
Od
m % of n are also j of n 
M
m % of n are j of n 
Sj
Sj v Cs 
M v up
m % of the n PI 
Sj v
Od Co 
m %
Sj Cs 
Sj
m % of the n PI v m % G n 
Od
m % of the n PI v m % n 
m % of A m n" PI" TCv A G n shall
m % of the n PI v G n 
also v *
m % of the n P1 v n 
Sj Cs v Sj v
Sj Cs v Ocl 
M % has also been P2
M % v 
M % has been P2
Sj v 
Sj v
m % v A n A last FB 
m % of A m n" PI" TCv A n shall
Sj v Od b 
also v
M % v d can also be P2 
m % of A m n" PI" TCv A G n shall v
M % v d can be P2 
m % of A m n" PI" TCv A n shall v
Sj v Sj v 
Sj Cs v Sj v
M % v d has no n 
M % of A n PI
Sj v Sj v Od 
m % o f a l l n P l
M A n 
Od Co
Sj 
m % of all n PI v m % G n
Od 
m % of all n PI v m % n

COMPOSITION OK THE SEGMENTS
73
M A n are j to v n
Sj v Cs v Od
M F
m and a half = M
Sj
Od
M are also j
M are also G n
M are also much fun to be with
Sj v Cs
M are also Pi to v up G n
M are also Pi to v up n
M are also Pi to v G n
M are also Pi to v n
Sj v Od
M are also Pi of A n of G n
M are also Pi of A n of n
Sj v
M are j
M are j of n
M are G n
M are much fun to be with
Sj v Cs
M are n v A n can be P2
Sj v Cs v Sj v
M v up
Sj v
etc.
(xi) 
n of G n b
(xii) 
n of i n
(xiii) ii of O G G n
i'xiv) 
n of O G n of n
(xv) 
n of X
(xvi) 
n PI
(xvii) n Pi G G n
(xviii) n Pi O G n
(xix) 
n Pi PI
(xx) 
n Pi up
m % of all n PI v G n
m % of all n P1 v n
Sj Cs v Od
m % of G n are also j of n
m % of n are also j of n
m % of n are j of n
Sj v Cs
m % of the n P1
Od Co
m % of the n P1 v rn % G n
m % of the n P1 v m % n
m % of the n PI v G n
m % of the n PI v n
Sj Cs v Od
M % v
Sjv
in % v A n A last FB
Sj v Ocl h
M % v d can also be P2
M % v d can be P2
M % v d has no n
Sj v Sj v
M A n
Sj
Od
M A n are also j to v up n
M A n are also j to v n
M A n are j to v up n
3.1.4 
it-segments
The n-scgmcnts start with a Noun. They also have three constituent parts,
like the previous Nominal segments.
The first part is composed mainly of the following sequences of Parts of
Speech:
(i i 
n
( i i i 
n b
l i i i i 
n in
(iv i 
n m P1
i v ) 
n n
i v!) 
n of A b G n
f v i i ) n of A G G (j n
! viii'j n of A X"s G n
i ix; 
n of A N"s m G n
( X ; 
n of G G (i n

74 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
The use of G is optional.
For example:
(vii a) brother of the former president
n 
of A G 
n
Each one of these sequences is a Subject when it is followed by a Verbal
Tense. If not, it can be either a Subject or an Object. Some Subjects have
Complements (xviii, xix)
(xviii a) n Pi O G n
Sj Cs
(xix a) 
n Pi PI (e.g. bottles slaying opened}
Sj Gs
as a result of a Reduced Relative Clause.
The second and the third parts of the n-segment are identical to those of
the previous segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the n-segments:
n are A G 
n are also A n to v
n are A G n 
Sj v Cs
n are A G n to v up 
n are also being P2
n are A G n to v 
11 are also b up
n are A less G n 
n are also being P2 up
n are A n 
Sj v
n are A n of A n 
n are also being v to help v A n
n are A n of O G n 
n are also being v to v A n
n are A n of O n 
Sj v Od
n are A n of G G n 
n are also G
n are A n of G n 
n are also G n
n are A n of n 
n are also G than n
n are A n to v up 
n are also j
n are A n to v 
n are also j of n
n are also A n of A n 
n are also less j
n are also A less G n 
n are also m of A less j
n are also A n of O n 
n are also m of A less G
n are also A n of O G n 
n are also m of A less G G n j b
n are also A G n 
n are also m of A less G G n j
n are also A n 
n are also m of A less G n j b
n are also A n of G G n 
n are also m of A less G n j
n are also A n of G n 
n are also n of A n
n are also A n of n 
n are also n
n are also another n 
n are also of i n
n are also A G n 
n are also O n
n are also A G n to v up 
n are also O G n
n are also A G n to v 
Sj v Cs
n are also A n to v up

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
75
n are also Pi n of less G n
Sj v Od
n arc also Pi to v up
n are also Pi to v
Sj v
n are also Pi up A n of A N"s n
n are also Pi A n of A N"s n
n are also Pi up A n
n are also Pi A NT's G n
n are also Pi A N"s n
Sj v Od
n are also P2
Sjv
n are also P2 to v 11
Sj v Od
n are also P2 up
Sj v
n are also P2 j to v M of A G n
n are also P2 j to v M of A n
Sj v Cs v Od
n are also Pi to v A G G n
n are also Pi to v A G n
n are also Pi to v A n
n are also Pi to v n
n are also Pi to v R
n are also Pi to v A S G n
n are also Pi to v A S n
n are also Pi UF less
n are also Pi G G n
n arc also Pi G n
n arc also Pi n
Sj v Od
n are also P2 to v
n are also Pi
S j v
n are also P2 and P2
Sjv
n are also P2 j
ti are also up
Sj v
n are also UF n
n are another n
n are another G n
Sj v Cs
n are being P2
n are being P2 up
Sj v
n are being P2 to help v A n
n are being P2 to v A n
Sj v Od
n are G
n are G G n Pi A G n
n are G G n Pi A G n of A n
n are G n
n are G than n
n are j
n are j of n
n are less j
n are in of A less j
n are m of A less G
n are m of A less G G n j b
n are m of A less G G n j
n are m of A less G n j b
n are m of A less G n j
ri are n
n are n of A n
Sj v Cs
n are not
Sjv
n are O G n
n are O n
n are of course b G
n arc of course G
n are of i n
n are O G G n
Sj v Cs
n are P2
n are P2 and P2
Sjv
n arc P2 j
Sjv
n are P2 j to v M of A G n
n are P2 j to v M of A n
Sj v Cs v Od
n arc P2 to v n
Sj v Od
n are P2 to v
n are P2 up
n are Pi
Sjv

ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
n are Pi to v A S G n
n are Pi to v A G G n
n are Pi to v A G n
n are Pi to v R
n are Pi to v A S n
n are Pi to v n
n are Pi to v A n
n are Pi UF less
n are Pi up A n of A N"s n
n are Pi up A n
Sj vOd
etc.
(G is optional)
The sequences preceding the Verbal Tense are the Subject of the
segment, but if there is no Verbal Tense to follow, they can be either Subject
or Object.
The Indicative Pronoun (or the words equivalent to it) is used as a Subject
(xiv), together with the Noun it specifies (xv).
(xiv) 
i are n (e.g. This is London,}
Sj v 
Cs
(xv) 
i n of Os are also j (e.g. This habit oj hers is extremely annoying.}
Sj 
v 
Cs
Only the attribute (Adjective or Numeral — ii, viii, xix, xx, xxiii) or the
Gerund + of phrase (xxii) ean till the space between the Indicative Pronoun
76
n are Pi A n of A N"s n
n are Pi A N"s G n
n are Pi A N"s n
n arc Pi A n
n are Pi G G n
n are Pi G n
n are Pi n
n are Pi R
n are Pi n of less G n
Sj v Od
n are Pi to v up
n are Pi to v
Sjv
3.1.5 
I-segments
(See also such-segments.) The I-segments start with an Indicative Pronoun,
Article or last, such, next. They also have up to three parts. The most
characteristic constituent elements of the first part are:
(i) 
i
(ii) 
i G n
(iii) i G n b
(iv) i G n of m n
(v) 
i G n Pi G G n
(vi) i G P of G n
(vii) i m
(viii) i m G n
(ix) 
i n of A G n
(x) 
i n of A G n j
(xi) i n of A n
(xii) i n of m n
(xiii) 
i n of n
(xiv) 
i n of Os
(xv) 
i n of P
(xvi) 
i n PI
(xvii) 
i n Pi
(xviii) i n Pi G G n
(xix) 
i one
(xx) 
i one G n
(xxi) 
i other n
(xxii) 
i P of G n
(xxiii) i S n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
77
and the Noun indicated by it. When the Indicative Pronoun is used on its
own (xiv) then it replaces the Noun indicated by it, or in other words, it is
equivalent to the Noun it indicates.
The second and the third parts of the I-segment are identical with those of
the other Nominal segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the I-segments:
I are A G n 
I are also A G n of n
I are A G n to v 
I are also A n of n
I are A G n of n 
I are also A G n of G n
I are A G n of G n 
I are also A n of G n
I are A G n of A n 
I are also A G n of A n
Sj v Cs 
I are also A n of A n
I are A G n d has P2 
I are also A G G n
Sj v Cs Sj v 
I are also A n of A G n
I are A less G n 
I are also A n
Sj v Cs 
I are also all i G n
I are A m n d v 
I are also all i n
Sj v Cs Sj Y 
I are also A n of I n
I are A m n 
I are also b j
Sj Y Cs 
Sj v Cs
I are A m n d has P2 
I are also called P
Sj v Cs Sj Y 
I are also called G G n
I are A n 
I are also called G n
Sj Y Cs 
I are also called n
I are A n d has P2 
Sj v Od
Sj Y Cs Sj v 
I are also G n Pi A n
I are A n of EBB 
I are also G n to v
I are A n of n 
I are also G
Sj Y Cs 
I are also just A n
I are A n of n d v 
I are also j either
Sj Y Cs Sj Y 
I are also j
1 are A n of G n 
I are also j up
I are A n of A G n 
I are also less j
I are A n of A n 
I are also less G
I are A n of I n 
I are also M of A n
I are A n to v 
I are also M to v
I are A n to v up 
I are also n to v
I are all 
I are also n
I are all i G n 
I are also O n
I are all too j 
I are also O S G n
I are also A G n 
I are also O S n
I are also A G 
I are also O n
I are also A n of EBB 
Sj v Cs
I are also A G n 
I are also Pi to be O G n

78
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
I are also Pi to be O n
Sj vOd
I are also Pi
I are also P2 Pv
I are also P2
Sj v
I are also Pi to he A n
Sj vOd
I are also R
I are b all
I are b G n
Sj v Cs
I are called P
I are called G G n
I are called G n
I are called n
Sj vOd
I are G
I are G n Pi A n
I are G n to v
I are j
I are j either
I are j up
I are less G
I are less j
I are m b G n
Sj v Cs
I are m n d v
Sj v Gs Sj v
I are M of A n
I are M to v
I are n
I are n to v
I are no G n
I are no n
I are not all
I are O n
I are O S G n
I are O S n
I are Os
Sj v Cs
I are P2
I are P2 Pv
I are Pi
Sjv
I are Pi less of A n
Sj v b
I are Pi to be O G n
I are Pi to be O n
I are Pi to be A n
Sj v Od
I are Pi up less of A n
Sj v b
I are R
Sj v Cs
I are UF d should have P2 up
I are UF d should have P2
Sj v Cs Sj v
I are what are b P2 n
I are what d shall also v
I are what d shall v
1 are what d am Pi up
I are what d am Pi
I are what d v
I b are all
Sj v Cs
I b
I bG
I bG n
Sj
Od
I b G n are also j
I b G n are j
I can also be j
Sj v Cs
I can also be P2 up
Sj v
I can also be A n
I can also be O G n
I can also be O n
Sj v Cs
I can also be Pi
I can be
Sjv
I can be A n
I can be b to v
I can be j
I can be O G n
I can be O n
I can be only A n
Sj v Cs

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
79
I can be P2 up 
I G G n
I can be Pi 
Sj
1 can he too much to v 
Od
Sj v 
I G G n has also P2 R
I can be why d am also j 
I G G n has P2 R
I can be why d am j 
Sj v Od
Sj v Sj v Cs 
I G n
I cl = d 
I G n and G n
Sj 
Sj
] d shall also v 
Od
1 cl shall v 
I G n are A G G G n being P2
I d v 
reference to previous 
1 G n are A G G n being P2
segment 
I G n are A G n being P2
] d v not to v 
I G n are A n being p2
I d v to v 
Sj v Cs
Sj v 
1 G n arc also P2
I EAW v 
Sj v
Sj b v 
I G n are also Pi M n
I FB 
Sj v Od
I G n are also j
I FB M of O n v 
Sj v Cs
b Sj v 
I G n are also Pi
I G 
Sj v
Sj 
I G n are also A G G G n being P2
Ocl 
I G n are also A G G n being P2
1 G d = cl 
I G n are also A G n being P2
Sj 
I G n are also A n being P2
Sj v Cs
etc.
3.1.6 
all-segments
These segments start with the plural quantifier (plural indefinite determiner)
all
The first part (up to the Verbal Tense) of the all-segment looks like this:
i'vii'! all of i
(viii) all the n of n
(ix) 
all the other n
(x) 
all b
1'xi'i 
all b b
The Adjective (G) and the Adverb (b) are optional.
The plural quantifier all means all specified objects, situations, conditions,
etc., without exception.
i i ) 
all
j i i i 
all A G n
f i i i j 
all G n
i. iv i 
all 
i
( v ) 
all i G n
!vi; 
all O n

80
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(vi a) all O n (e.g. all her clothes)
(Compare the difference between M n, all A n and M of A n.)
When the all part of the segment is followed by a Verbal Tense, it is the
Subject of the segment (vii).
(vii a) all of i are
Sj
Otherwise it can be either a Subject or an Object (vi a), depending on its
relationship with the other segments within the sentence.
The second and the third parts of the all-segments are identical with those
of the previous segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the all-segments:
all can be Pi up
all can be Pi
all can be up
Sjv
all d am Pi
Sjv
all d am Pi are also A n to v R O n
all d am Pi are A n to v R O n
Sj Sj v 
v Sj v Od Co
all d am Pi was to v R O n
Sj Sj v 
v Oi Od
Sj Sj v 
v Od Co
all day FB-BH(A-H)
all day long
all d v to v are to v up
all d v to v are v up
Sj v
all EBN
all except
Sj
allFB
all G n has to be P2
all G n shall be P2
Sjv
all I
Sj
Od
all I are
Sjv
all I are also Os
all I are also n of n
all I arc also n
all I are G
all I are j
all I are j and also j
all I are n of n
all I are n
Sj v Cs
all I are not
Sjv
all I are Os
Sj v Cs
all I are P2 to v
all I are P2 to v was v j
all I are P2
all I are P2 up
all 
arc P2 to v A n
all 
arc Pi
Sjv
all 
are Pi up less of A n
all 
are Pi less of A n
all 
are Pi up M of A n
all I are Pi M of A n
Sj v Od
all 1 are up
all I can also be
all I can also be P2
all I can be
all I can be P2
Sjv
v

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
81
alii b
all i n of n
all i d = d - R
Sj
Od
all J d v are n Pi up O n
all I d v arc n Pi O n
Sj Sj v v Cs
all I d v are n Pi
Sj Sj v Cs
all I FB
all i G d = d = R
all I G n
all i G n
all I j
all i n
Sj
Od
all i n are Pi to v A n
Sj v Od
all i n are Pi to v
Sjv
all i n are also Pi to v R
all i n are also Pi to v A n
Sj v Od
all i n are also Pi to v
Sj v
all i n are Pi to v R A n
Sj v Oi Orl
Sj v Od Co
all i n are Pi to v R
all I n v R
all I n v A n
all I ri v ri
Sj v Od
all i n are also Pi to v R A n
Sj v Oi Od
Sj v Od Co
all i n shall also v
all i n shall v
Sj v
all I shall v up less of A n
all I shall v less of A n
all I shall v up M of A n
all I shall v M of A n
Sj v Od
all I sort of n
Sj
Od
all like A n
all like n
all like R
Sj
all m
Sj
Od
all m of R = d
Sj
all m of R shall v
all m of R should have to v
all m of R v
all m of R v to v up
Sjv
all n
all n of n
Sj
Od
all n has to be P2
Sjv
all n PI
all n Pi
Sj Cs
all n v
Sjv
etc.
3.1.7 
d-segments
This is the largest body of segments and the reader will find here many new
sequences of Parts of Speech.
The sign used to designate a human being (d) is a compound sign,
representing a dozen sequences of Parts of Speech denoting a human being
isee the Index at the end of the book).

82
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
The d-segment consists of three parts, like all Nominal segments: a) the
initial part, preceding the Verbal Tense and acting as a Subject or Object; b)
the Verbal Tense; c) the final part, acting as an Object or Complement.
The following sequences of Parts of Speech characterize the first part (the
part preceding the Tense):
(i)
(ii)
d
d all
(Hi)
(iv)
d b
d X
As we said above, d is a compound sign, having sequences of its own,
AGd of A G G
A d of i G n
A d of n
A S d o f A G n
GGG d
d of A n
d of G n
M d
etc.
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
d
which is why the first part of the d-scgment is presented quite succinctly.
The Verbal Tenses constituting the second part are identical to those
described in 3.1.1.
The third part of the d-segments is much more diverse than that of the
other segments, therefore we will provide a more detailed list for reference:
(i) 
A b G G G n
(ii) 
A b G n
(iii) 
A b G n of n
(iv) 
A G G n
(v) 
A G G n of m
(vi) 
A G G n of m m
(vii) 
A G n b
(viii) 
A G n o f A G G n
(ix) 
A G n of O n
(x) 
A G n of P A n
(xi) 
A less G G n
(xii) 
A n of A n of G n
(xiii) 
A n of A N"s n
(xiv) 
A n of M G G n
(xv) 
A n o f n P l
(xvi) 
A n of O G n
(xvii) 
A n of O own
(xviii) 
A n of P A n of A G n
(xix) 
A n of R
(xx) 
A n off
(xxi) 
A n X
(xxii) 
A n X b
(xxiii) 
A only n of n
(xxiv) 
b j
(xxv) 
b j X
(xxvi) 
G G n
(xxvii) 
G n b
(xxviii) 
G n o f A M n o f A G G n
(xxix) 
G n ofi n
(xxx) 
G n of n
(xxxi) 
G n of O G n
(xxxii) 
i
(xxxiii) 
i G n
(xxxiv) 
j
(xxxv) 
j of A G n
(xxxvi) 
j o f A N " s n
(xxxvii) j of G n
(xxxviii) j of i G n
(xxxix) 
j of O n
(xxxx) 
j of R
n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
83
(G is optional; M is equal to G; N"s is also equal to G). The reader can find
more information in the Dictionary of Segments.
The nominal sequences of the third part can have the following Parsing:
Od (iv, ix), Od Co (xv), Oi Od or Od Co (Ixxviii), Cs (xxiv, xxxiv, xxxv).
Most of them can be followed by an Infinitival Complement.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the d-segments:
d am A n of M G G n
d am A n of M G n
d am A n of M n
d am A n of n
d am A n of n PI
d am A n to v
d am A n to v R
d am A n to v A n
d am A n to v n
d am A n to v up
d am A N"s n
d am A only n of n
Sj v Cs
d am about to v
(xxxxi) 
j of X
(xxxxii) 
j to v
(xxxxiii) M
(xxxxi v) M G G n
(xxxxv) 
M m n
(xxxxvi) M n
(xxxxvii) M n G
(xxxxviii) M n of A n
(xxxxix) M n of G n
(1) 
M o f A G n
(li) 
M of A less G n of G n
(lii) 
M of m n
(liii) 
m of O G G n
(liv) 
M of O G m G n
(Iv) 
n
(Tvi) 
n of G G n
flvii) 
n of i n
(Iviii) 
O G G n
ilix) 
O n b
i Ix) 
C) n b G
(Ixi) 
() n j
llxii) 
O n PI
dxiii) 
O n PI up
(Ixiv) 
O n Pi
ilxv) 
O N T s j o f M
ilxvi) 
O N"s n
(Ixvii) 
O N"s P
(Ixviii) 
of i n
(Lxix) 
of P
(hex) 
o f P G n
(Ixxi) 
Os
(Ixxii) 
P
(Ixxiii) 
P A G G n
(Ixxiv) 
P b
(Ixxv) 
P G n
(Ixxvi) 
P X
(Ixxvii) 
R
(Ixxviii) 
R A G n
(Ixxix) 
R A G n o f G n P l
(Ixxx) 
R A n of G n
(Ixxxi) 
R A n o f n P l
(Ixxxii) 
R all
(Ixxxiii) 
R b n
(Ixxxiv) 
R G
(Ixxxv) 
R i n
(Ixxxvi) 
R i n of n
(Ixxxvii) R j
(Ixxxviii) R n
(Ixxxix) 
R O G n
(Ixxxx) 
R Pi A G n
(Ixxxxi) 
R Pi A n of A G n
(Ixxxxii) R Pv
(Ixxxxiii) R up
(Ixxxxiv) R X
(Ixxxxv) X
(Ixxxxvi) X b
(Ixxxxvii) X Pv A n
(Ixxxxviii) X Pv O n
etc.

84
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
d am about to v O n
d am about to v off
Sjv
d am also A n P i A G n o f A n
d am also A n of A n
d am also A n of i n
d am also A n of m
d am also A n of M G G n
d am also A n of M G n
d am also A n of M n
d am also A n of n
d am also A n of n P1
d am also A n to v
d am also A n to v R
d am also A n to v up
d am also A n to v A n
d am also A n to v n
d am also A N"s n
d am also A only n
d am also A only n of n
Sj v Cs
d am also about to v
Sj v
d am also about to v O n
Sj vOd
d am also about to v off
Sj v
d am also after n
d am also after n b
d am also after R
d am also after n
d am also after A n
d am also after R b
d am also against A n
Sj v b
d am also all j to v
d am also all that j
d am also b
d am also b A G n
d am also b A n
d am also b j
Sj v Cs
d am also b P2
d am also b Pi
d am also b through P
d am also b to be P2
d am also b j
d am also b P2 A n
d am also b to v A n
d am also b to v A n of n
d am also being j
d am also being P2
d am also up
Sj v
d both v n
d both v n to n
d both v O G n
d both v O n
Sj vOd
d both v to v
d both v up
d can
Sjv
d call(s)
R NAME
d called A n "G n
Sj v Od
d can also b be j
Sj vCs
d can also be
Sj v
d can also be A G G n of O n
d can also be A G n
d can also be A G n of A n
d can also be A G n of O n
d can also be A less G G n
d can also be A less G n
d can also be A n
d can also be b
d can also be b j
Sj v Cs
d can also be b j to v A n
d can also be b j to v A n b
Sj v Cs v Od
d can also be G
d can also be j
d can also be j b
d can also be j of R
d can also be j to
d can also be j to v
Sj v Cs did it also
Sj vOd

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
85
d did just so
d did less
d did much of I
Sj v
d did R up
Sj v Od
d has A G G n of m rri
d has A G G n of m
d has A G n of G n
d has A G n of m m
d has A G n of m
d has A G n of P A n
Sj v Od
d has A G n to v A G G n to v
d has A G n to v A n
d has A G n to v R
Sj v Od Ic
d has A n
d has A n b
Sj v Od
cl has P2 R Pv
d has P2 R up b
d has P2 R v to v R
d has P2 R v up b
d has P2 R v up to v R
d has P2 to v n of A n Pi n
d has P2 to v n to v A n
d has P2 to v O n
d has P2 to v up
rl has P2 to v X
d has P2 to v X up
Sj v Od
d should have P2 R A n
Sj v Oi Od
Sj v Od Co
d should have P2 R off A n
Sj v Od Co
d should have P2 to v
d should have P2 to v up
Sjv
d should have P2 to v A n
d should have P2 to v R to v
d should have P2 to v R to v S
Sj v Od
d v A b G G G n
d v A b G G n
d v A b G n
d v A b G n
d v A b G n of A n PI to v R
d v A G
d v A G G G 11
d v A G G n
Sj v Od
d v A G G n A n
d v A G G n b A n
d v A G G n b b A 11
Sj v Od Go
d v A G G n b has A G n of P
d v A G G n b has A G n to v A n
Sj v Sj b v Od
d v A G G n d has P2
Sj v Od Sj v
d v A G G n of N"s n
d v A G G n v
d v A G less PI n
d v A G G n of A n
d v A G G n Pi
d v A G n
d v A G n A n
Sj v Od
d v A G n d has P2
Sj v Od Sj v
d v A G n G
Sj v Od Co
d v A G n of A G n of A n
d v A G n of A n of A G n
d v A G n of A n
d \ A G n of A n b being P2
d v A G n of A n being P2
Sj v Od
d v AG n of A n Pi A G n
d v A G n of m G *
d v A G n of n Pi n
Sj v Od Co
d v A G n of N"s n
Sj v Od
d v A G n ofn" Pi"
d v AG n ofG n" Pi"
d v A G n of A G n" Pi" A n
d v A G n of A n" Pi" A n
Sj v Od Co
cl v A G n of ii

86 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
d v A G n o f P A n 
d v A G one
d v A G n o f f 
d v A G P o f n o f A n
Sj v Od 
d v A HEADING
d v A G n P l 
d v A i n
d v A G n Pi 
d v A less G n
d v A G n P i A n 
d v A less G n of O n
d v A G n P i A n o f A n 
d v A m
d v A G n P v O j 
d v A M G G n o f A G n
d v A G n P v O n 
d v A m G G n o f A n
Sj v Od Co 
d v A M G G n of A n
d v A G n t o v R 
d v A m G n
d v A G n to v R all 
d v A M G n of A G n
Sj v Od Ic 
d v A m G n of A n
d v A G n shall v 
d v A M G n of A n
Sj v Sj v 
d v A m n
d v A G n t o v 
d v A m n out of A n
d v A G n up 
d v A m of R
d v A G n v 
d v A m o f R b
d v A G n v up 
d v A M n of A G n
d v A G n v A n 
d v A m n o f A n
d v A G n v A n of n" 
d v A M n of A n
d v A G n v O n 
d v A n
d v A G n v o f f A n 
d v A n A n
d v A G n v off A n of n 
Sj v Od
d v A G 
etc.
3.1.8 
it-segments
The word it is a PPNC third person, neutral.
The it-segments were separated from the d-segments (it being part of
PPNC is also part of d) for two reasons: a) to help the respective algorithm
responsible for the Pronominal Reference; b) to see if the combinatorics of
Parts of Speech is any different compared to that of the d-segments and the
rest of the Nominal segments.
The only difference found was phraseological rather than syntactical.
Certain phrases had to be used only with it, and nothing else:
(i) 
it can be time 
(iv) it seems (-ed) no matter
(ii) 
it hardly matters to whom 
(v) 
it was (high) time
(iii) it occurred to R 
etc.
As for the algorithm, we found that it was of much help to separate the it-
segments and to add some more specifications of the sort:
(vi) 
it was A G G n itself

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
87
which is a clear indication that itself refers to it, within the boundaries of the
same segment.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the it-segments:
it shall v M FB to v A G n of less G n
it shall v M FB to v A n of less G n
it shall v M FB to v A G n
it shall v M FB to v A n
it shall v M n to v A G n of less G n
it shall v M n to v A n of less G n
it shall v M n to v A G n
it shall v M n to v A n
Sj v Od Ic
it shall v so
Sj v
it should have been just about A n of
O n
it should have been just about j
it should have been just about A n
it should have been j to v up
it should have been j to v
Sj v Cs
it takes FB
Sj v Od
it UM occurs to R
it v
S j v
it v b j to v up
it v b j to v
S j v P r
it v b R to v to v
Sj v b Od Ic
it v G
it v G and G
it v G b G
it v j
Sj v Pr
it v n
Sj v Od
it v O n to v n
Sj v Od Ic
it was
Sj v
it was A G G n itself
it was A G G n
it was A G n
it was A G n itself
it was A G n to v
it was A n
it was A n itself
it was A n of A n
it was A n to v
it was A n to v A n
it was all b to v off R
it was all b to v R
it was all b Pi
it was all b j
it was all right
it was also j to v
Sj v Cs
it was j to be j to v O n
Sj vOd
it was d
it was n
it shall be A G n
S j v C s
it shall be A G n to v up A n
it shall be A G n to v A n
Sj v Cs Ic
etc.
3.1.9 
G-segments
The sign G was used to denote the attribute to the Noun (in some cases G was
placed in the position of the Predicative, instead of j). The Adjective (G) is
optional. It can be omitted if there is need for that, for example to simplify the
sentence.

ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
88
It was important to observe the combinatorial behaviour of G in the
segments, especially in the G-segments. The English sentence seldom starts
with an Adjective and it is quite surprising to see how often the sentence can
be interrupted just before an Adjective. Sometimes this is done for
enumeration. It is also worth noting that in the English sentence there could
hardly be found more than four Adjectives in a row (i. ii).
(i) 
G G G G n has also P2 n Pi M G G n
(ii) 
G n v G G G G n
The first part of the G-segment (the part preceding the Verbal Tense)
consists only of attributes followed by a Noun. There can be one, two, three or
four attributes to the Noun. Most often there is only one. No other Part of
Speech is allowed to intervene before the Noun except an Adjective.
If the first part of the G-segment is followed by a Verbal Tense, then it is a
Subject, but if not, it can be either Subject or Object.
The only Part of Speech allowed between the first and the second part (the
Verbal Tense) of the G-segment is the Adverb (iii):
(iii) 
G n b v A G n (of n)
Sj 
b v Od
All other observations coincide with those already made for the other
Nominal segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the G-segments:
G G G G n has also P2 n Pi M G G n 
G G G n Pi A n
G G G G n has also P2 n Pi M n 
Sj Cs
G G G G n has P2 n Pi M G G n 
Od Go
G G G G n has P2 n Pi M G n 
G G G n v
G G G G n has P2 n Pi M n 
Sj v
Sj v Od Co 
G G n 
explains Subject
G G G n 
Sj
Sj 
Od
Od 
G G n has also P2 n Pi M G G n
G G G n has also P2 n Pi M G G n 
G G n has also P2 n Pi M G n
G G G n has also P2 n Pi M G n 
G G n has also P2 n Pi M n
G G G n has also P2 n Pi M n 
Sj v Od Co
G G G n has P2 n Pi M G G n 
G G n has also P2 to v up G G G n
G G G n has P2 n Pi M G n 
G G n has also P2 to v up G G n
G G G n has P2 n Pi M n 
G G n has also P2 to v up G n
Sj v Od Co 
G G n has also P2 to v up n
G G G n just v 
G G n has also P2 to v G G G n
Sj v 
G G n has also P2 to v G G n
G G G n n has also P2 n Pi M G n 
G G n has also P2 to v G n
Sj v Od Co 
G G n has also P2 to v n
G G G n PI 
Sj v Od

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
89
G G n has P2 up 
G n are also P2 to v
G G n has P2 
Sj v
Sj v 
G n arc also A n
G G n has P2 n Pi M G G n 
Sj v Cs
G G n has P2 n Pi M G n 
G n has also P2 A G n
G G n has P2 n Pi M n 
G n has also P2 n
Sj v Od Co 
G n has also P2 m n of A G n
G G n has P2 to v up G G G n 
G n has also P2 m n of A n
G G n has P2 to v up G G n 
G n has also P2 to v up G G G n
(j G n has P2 to v up G n 
G n has also P2 to v up G G n
G G n has P2 to v up n 
G n has also P2 to v up G n
G G n has P2 to v G G G n 
G n has also P2 to v up n
G G ri has P2 to v G G n 
G n has also P2 to v G G G n
G G n has P2 to v G n 
G n has also P2 to v G G n
G G n has P2 to v n 
G n has also P2 to v G n
G G n just v n 
G n has also P2 to v 11
G G n just v n to v A n of A n 
G n has also P2 to v G n of n
Sj v Od 
G n has also P2 to v n
G G n just v 
Sj v Od
Sj v 
G n has been Pi
G n are also being P2 to v R 
G n has been Pi up
G n arc also P2 to be P2 up Pi in m 
G n has P2
G n are also P2 to be P2 up Pi m 
G n has also P2 up
G n are also P2 to be P2 Pi m m 
G n has also P2
G n are also P2 to be P2 Pi m 
Sj v
Sj v Od 
G n has P2 A G n
G n are also A G n 
G n has P2 A n
G n are also A n 
G n has P2 m n of A G n
G n are also n 
G n has P2 m n of A n
Sj v Cs 
Sj v Od
G n are also Pi n 
etc.
Sj v Od
3.1.10 O-segments
The sign O is used to designate the Possessive Pronoun and the genitive of the
Noun:
( i ) 
my books
Jim's car
O n
Apart from all other similarities with the Nominal segments, there is one
striking similarity between the O-segments and A-segments in the use of the b
G n sequence after O or A, as a Subject or Object (ii):

90
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(ii) 
A b G n (e.g. the extremely high prices)
O b G n (e.g. her slowly aging face)
Sj or Od
Here the Adverb cannot be joined to the Noun without a minimum of one
and a maximum of two Adjectives to stand between. Of course the sequences
A b G (G) n and O b G (G) n can be met in all other types of segments. The b
G (G) n sequence is universal and can often be met either as a Subject or as
an Object in all types of segments.
No other Part of Speech is allowed to intervene between the Possessive
Pronoun or the genitive of the Noun and the Noun except the Adverb, only as
part of the b G (G) n sequence, and the Adjective or the Numeral used as
attributes. After O there can be a maximum of three Adjectives in a row used
as attributes:
(iii) 
O (G) (G) (G) n
(the brackets indicate that the Adjective is optional)
Everything else that could be said about the O-segments also applies to all
Nominal segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the O-segments:
O G G n are also of G n
O G G n are also of n
O G G n are also m m n b
O G G n are also m n b
O G G n are also m m n
O G G n are of G n
O G G n are of n
O G G n are m n b
O G G n are m n
Sj v Cs
O G G n are also P2
O G G n are P2
O G G n are up
Sj v
O G n can also be P2 j
Sj v Cs
O G n can also be P2
Sjv
O G n can also be A G n
O G n can also be A n
O G n can be P2 j
O G n can be A n
Sj v Cs
O G n has also been A n
Sj v Cs
O G n has also been Pi
Sj v
O G n has also P2 A n
O G n has also P2 R
O G n has also P2 A n of A n
O G n has also been m %
Sj v Od
O G n has been Pi
Sj v
O G n has been m %
Sjv Cs
O G n has P2 A n
O G n has P2 n R
O G n h a s P2 An of An
O G n has P2 An ofN"s n
Sj v Od
O G n having been P2
O G n having P2 up
Sj v
etc.

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
91
3.1.11 other-segments
The other-segments start with the Adjective (modifier), Noun, Pronoun,
Determiner or Numeral (as part of M) other, or another, used as an
attribute and expressing alternative (i) or addition (ii):
(i) 
other n are
(ii) 
another m FB (bm)
The word another is usually followed by an Adjective or a Numeral used as
an attribute (ii) or by an 'of phrase (iii):
(iii) 
another of N"s n v
The word other is connected either directly to the Noun (iv), or through the
mediation of up to two attributes (v). When % is used instead of a Noun, then
the whole phrase represents the Noun (vi):
(iv) 
other n are P2 to v R
(v) 
ther G G n v G n
(vi) 
other m % v A n shall also v
The first part of the other-segment is always used as Subject if it is followed
by a Verbal Tense, otherwise it can be either a Subject or an Object.
Like the other Nominal segments, the first part of the other-segment may
contain a Reduced Relative Clause, used as Complement Subject (vii):
(vii) 
other n Pi A G G n are n
Sj 
Cs 
v Cs
The second and the third parts of the other-segments are not different
from the second and the third parts of the other Nominal Segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the other-segments:
other G n are also P2 up to v A n 
other G n are NAME
other G n are also P2 to v n 
Sj v Cs
other G n are also P2 up to v R 
other G n v G n
other G n are also P2 to v R 
Sj v Od
other G n are P2 up to v A n 
other G n v up
other G n are P2 up to v R 
Sj v
other G n are P2 to v A n 
other G n v G
other G n are P2 to v R 
Sj v Pr
Sj / Od v Od 
other G n v
other G n are G G n 
Sj v
other G n are G n 
other m % v A n shall also v
other G n are n 
other m % v A n shall v
Sj v Cs 
Sj v Sj v
other G n are also P2 
other n
other G n are P2 
Sj
Sj v 
Od

92 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
other n are also P2 up to v A n 
other n
other n are also P2 up to v R 
Sj
other n are also P2 to v A n 
Od
other n are also P2 to v R 
other n also v
other n are P2 up to v A n 
other n are Pi and Pi
other n are P2 up to v R 
other n are also P2 up
other n are P2 to v A n 
Sj v
other n are P2 to v R 
other n are G G n
Sj / Od v Od 
Sj v Cs
etc.
3.1.12 both-segments
The word both is a Pronoun used as a Numeral indicating a pair (the pair
of). The combinatorics of the Parts of Speech (PS) following both is slightly
different to that for the other Nominal segments.
As a matter of necessity both has some unique sequences of PS in the part
preceding the Verbal Tense, especially (ii):
(i) 
both C A n 
(viii) both n of A n
(ii) 
both d and d 
(ix) both n of n
(iii) both G and G n 
(x) 
both O G n
(iv) both I n 
(xi) both of I n
(v) 
both I n and next 
(xii) both of R
(vi) both n and n 
(xm) both of which
(vii) both n 
(xrv) both
The both-segment, in the case when it is not followed by a Verbal Tense, is
either a Subject or an Object.
The Verbal Tense and the Nominal sequence after the Tense are identical
to that of the other Nominal segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the both-segments:
both n of n v A n of A less PI 
both n o f n v A G n o f A less PI
both n of n v up A n of A PI 
both n v A G n of A less PI
both n of n v A n of A PI 
both n v A G n of A PI
both n of n v up A G n 
both n v A G n
both n of n v up A n 
both n v A G n up
both n of n v A G n 
both n v A n of A less PI
both n of n v A G n up 
both n v A n of A PI
both n of n v A n 
both n v A n
both n of n v A n up 
both n v A n up
both n of n v up A G n of A less PI 
both n v d
both n of n v up A G n of A PI 
both n v d up
both n of n v up A n of A less PI 
both n v O G n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
93
both n v O n 
both of which
both n v up A G n of A less P1 
Sj
both n v up A n of A less PI 
both of which shall v G n
both n v up A G n of A P I 
Sj v Od
both n v up A G n 
both of which shall v
both n v up A n of A PI 
both of which had P2
both n v up A n 
both of which v
Sj v Od 
both of which are Pi
both O G n 
both of which are P2
both O G n and O less G n 
both of which had P2
both O n 
Sj v
both O n and O less G n 
both Pi and Pi
both O n and O ri of 11 
Sj Gs
both O n and O n 
both shall v
Sj 
Sj v
Od 
both shall v A G n
both of I ri are A n to v n 
both shall v n
Sj v Cs 
both shall v A n of A n
both of R = d 
Sj v Od
Sj 
both shall be A S m
Od 
Sj Cs
both of R Pi A G G n 
both shall be P2
Sj Cs 
Sj v
Od Co 
etc.
3.1.13 who-segments
The word who is a Relative and Interrogative Pronoun and starts Relative or
Interrogative segments (i):
(The postman)
(i) 
who brought the newspapers ...
who v A 
n
Sj v 
Od
Cs
(i a) 
Who brought the newspapers!
The Pronoun who can be replaced by the Noun defined by it (i b, ii a).
Compare:
(i b) 
The postman brought the newspapers.
The Pronoun who acts as a Subject (Sj) in the Relative and in the
Interrogative Clause (i) and (i a). The entire Relative who-Clause acts as a
Complement to the previous Noun: Complement Subject to ( The postman) in
(i) and Complement Object to (the man) in (ii).

94 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(ii) 
You saw the man who came last night.
d 
v 
A n 
who v 
b
Sj 
v 
Od 
Sj 
v 
b
Co
(ii a) 
The man came last night.
The Pronoun who is almost always followed by a Verbal Tense (except in
Who?). No other PS can stand between it and the Verbal Tense, except an
Adverb. Compare:
(iii) 
who b has M n
(iv) 
who b shall also v A n
The Relative Pronoun who is used mostly in Defining Relative Clauses (v,
vi). Compare:
(v) 
Peter likes women who paint their faces.
d 
v 
n 
who v 
O n
(vi) 
A wife is 
a person who is married.
A n 
are A n 
who is P2
The second and the third parts of who-segments are the same as those for
the other Nominal segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the who-segments:
who v O b G n 
who v R A b G n
who v O n 
Sj v Oi Od
who v O n to be n 
Sj v Od Co
who v O n to v A n 
who v R of P to v O N"s n
who v O n to v off A n 
who v R of P to v O N"s G n
who v O n to v G n 
who v R out of G n
who v O n to be G n 
who v R out of n
who v O n to v n 
Sj v Od
Sj v Od 
who v rather like I n
who v of A G n 
who v rather like I n of A n
who v of A G G n 
who v rather like I n of A n of n
who v of A n 
who v so b against O n
Sj v b 
Sj v b
who v off Pi n 
who v to be P2
Sj v Od 
who v to be P2 up
who v Pi 
who v to v
Sj v 
Sj v
who v Pi n 
who v t o v A G n u p A G G n
who v R 
who v t o v A G n u p A G n
Sj v Od 
who v to v A n
who v R v up 
who v t o v A G n u p A n
Sj v Od v 
who v to v A n has also P2

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
95
who v to v A n up A G n 
Sj v
who v to v A ii up A G G n 
who v up n
who v to v A n has P2 
Sj v Od
who v to v A n up A n 
who v up of A G n
who v to v no other n 
who v up of A n
who v to v no n 
who v up of A G G n
who v to v no G n 
who v what
who v to v n 
who v what A n are Pi
who v to v O n 
Sj v
who v to v only A n 
who v what d should have P2
who v to v R 
Sj v Sj v
Sj v Od 
who v what shall v
who v to v up 
Sj v
who v up 
who v when d am Pi
Sj v 
who v where d am Pi
who v up A G n 
Sj v Sj v
who v up A G G n 
who was d NAME
who v up A n 
Sj v Gs
Sj v Od 
who has also P2 R v
who v up b 
Sj v Od
who v up j
3.1.14 which-segments
The determiner which starts Relative Clauses (defining and non-defining)
and Interrogative sentences (segments). It can be followed by a Nominal
segment or an Adverbial Clause, or by a Verbal Tense.
In those cases when -which is followed by a Verbal Tense, it acts as a
Subject of the Relative Clause (the segment). Otherwise, the entire which-
segmeiit is a Complement to the Noun it refers to. In the following case (i) it
refers to a Subject and therefore is a Complement Subject:
(The airline)
which was opened this year
(i) 
which are P2. 
bm (was the best in Europe.)
Sj 
v
Cs
Compare:
(i a) 
The airline was opened.
(i b) 
The airline was the best in Europe.
If which is followed by a Nominal sequence, it can be regarded either as
an Object (as in ii a, since it refers to the airline], or as a Subject (as in ii b, ii
aa), depending on how we view the sentence. For example:

96 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(The airline)
which the president opened
(ii) 
which A n 
v (this year wax the best in Europe.)
Cs
Compare:
(ii a) 
The president opened the airline this year.
A n 
v 
A n 
b m
Sj 
v 
Od 
bm
(ii aa) The airline was the best in Europe.
(ii b) 
The airline the president opened this year was the best in Europe.
A 
n 
A n 
v 
I 
FB are A n 
in n
Sj 
Cs 
bm 
Cs
However, in both cases (i, ii) the which-segment is a Complement Subject (Cs).
If the which-segment refers to the Object of the previous segment, then
the entire which-segment is a Complement Object (iii).
(iii) 
/ want a computer which is 
waterproof.
d v 
A n 
which are j
Sj v Od 
Co
The second and the third parts of the which-segment are identical to those
of the other Nominal segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the which-segments:
which are A 11 
which are also less j
which are A n of I n 
which are also M
which are A n of O G n 
which are also n
which are A n of O n 
which are also n of G n
which are A n" Pi" A n to v n 
which are also n of n
which are A very n of O G n 
which are also O own
which are A very n of O n 
Sj v Cs
which are also A G n" Pi" A n to v n 
which are also P2
which are also A less j 
Sj v
which are also A n 
which are also P2 G G n
which are also A n" Pi" A n to v n 
Sj v
which are also b j 
which are also P2 less b j
which are also called NAME 
which are also P2 less j
which are also G 
Sj v Pr
which are also G n 
which are also P2 to be N"s G n
which are also G n of G n 
which are also P2 to be N"s n
which are also G n of n 
which are also P2 to v A n of G n
which are also in n 
which are also P2 to v A n of G n j
which are also j 
which are also P2 to v A n of n
which are also j to v A n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
97
which are also P2 to v A n of n j 
which b v G n
Sj v Od 
which b v G n of G n
whirh are also Pi 
which b v G n of n
Sj v 
which b v M n to v A n
which are also Pi A n Pi A n 
which b v M n to v A n of O own
which are also Pi O G n 
which b v n
which are also Pi O n 
which b v n of G n
which arc also Pi O n 
which b v n of n
which are also to v G n 
which b v no n
which are also ro v n 
which b v O n
Sj v Od 
which b v R
which are also up 
which b v up A n
Sj v 
Sj v Od
which are P2 to be N:'s G n 
which can also be G
which arc P2 to be N"'s n 
which can also be j
which are P2 to v A n of G n 
which can also be less b P2
which are P2 to v A n of G n j 
which can also be Os
which are P2 to v A n of n 
which can also be Os b
which are P2 to v A n of n j 
which can also be Os by right
Sj v Od 
Sj v Cs
which b v A m n 
etc.
which b v A n
3.1.15 
whose-segments
The word whose is a Possessive Relative Pronoun (genitive case) that starts
Relative (defining or non-defining) and Interrogative segments (Clauses).
The pronoun whose is never followed directly by a Verbal Tense (except for
fire, is or were in Interrogative sentences). It is always followed by a Noun, or
by an Adjective and Noun.
The whose-seginent acts as a Complement Subject to the preceding
Subject. Otherwise the word whose, within its own segment, is always a
Subject. For example:
(i; 
The man. u.'hose cat had been damaged, is 
my uncle.
A 
n 
whose n has been P2 
are O n
Sj 
Sj 
v 
v 
Cs
Sj 
Cs
The whose-scgment can also act as a Complement Object, if it refers to the
Object of the previous segment.
The other parts of the whose-segments are identical to those of the other
segments, described above.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the whose-segments:

98
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
whose
whose G n
Sj
whose G n are also to v
whose G n are also j
whose G n are j
whose G n are also G
whose G n are G
Sj v Cs
whose G n are to v
whose G n are also up
whose G n are up
whose G n b are to v
Sj v
whose G n b
Sj
whose G n b are also to v
Sj v
whose G n d am Pi to v
Sj Sj v
whose G n d has also P2
whose G n d has P2
whose G n d v
Sj Sj v
whose G n d v O G n
whose G n d v O ri
Sj Sj v Od
whose G n seemed to have been P2
whose G n seem(s) to have been P2
Sjv
whose G n should have P2 M n
Sj v Od
whose G n v
Sjv
whose G n v of less j n
Sjv
whose G n v X
Sj vOd
whose n
Sj
whose n are
whose n are also to v
Sjv
whose n are A n
whose n are also j
whose n are j
whose n are also G
whose n are A G G n
Sjv Cs
whose n are also P2 j
whose n are P2 j
Sjv
whose n are A G n
whose n are A less j to v up
whose n are A less j to v
Sj vCs
whose n are up
whose n are P2
Sj v
whose n are G
whose n are j
Sj v Cs
whose n are also P2
Sj v
whose n are also j
Sj v Cs
whose n are P2
whose n are to v
whose n are also up
Sjv
whose n b
Sj
whose n b arc also to v
whose n b are to v
whose n can also be P2
whose n can be P2
Sj v
whose n has P2 A n of R
whose n has A G n
whose n has also P2 A n of R
whose n has also A G n
Sj v Od
whose n of n arc O n
whose n of n are also O n
whose n of n are O only n
whose n of n arc also O only n
Sj v Cs
whose n seemed to have been P2
whose n seem(s) to have been P2
whose n shall also v
whose n shall v
Sj v
etc.

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
99
3.1.16 whom-segments
The Relative Pronoun whom is interpreted as to whom and as such it is
related to the Adverbial to-scgments, expressing direction and location. For
example:
!'ij 
Was the girl whom you spoke to a few minutes ago four sister?
are A n 
whom d 
v 
up M 
FB 
ago O 
n
Compare: Was the girl to whom you spoke your sister?
When used at the start of a Relative Clause, the Pronoun whom is usually
followed by an Article or by a Noun (ii).
(ii) 
whom A n are also Pi
whom d has also P2
When used to start an Interrogative Clause, it is followed by an Auxiliary
Verb (iiij.
('iii) 
whom shall d v up?
In all other cases it can be replaced by who
The whom-segment can act as Complement Subject or Complement
Object, depending on whether it refers to the Subject or to the Object.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the whom-segments:
whom d has also been P2 
whom d shall v up
whom d has also been P2 to v 
whom d shall v to v up
whom d has also P2 only 
whom d shall also v
whom d has been P2 to v 
whom d v
whom d has P2 
whom d v to v
whom d has P2 up 
whom d v up
whom d has P2 only 
whom G n v
whom d shall also v to v 
whom G n v of
whom d shall to? 
Sj Sj v
whom d shall also v to v up 
whom shall d v up?
whom d shall v to v 
Sj v Sj v
whom d shall v? 
etc.
3.1.17 such-segments
The such-segments start with the Pronoun and determiner such. The next
element after such can be a Conjunction as in (i), a Noun (ii), or occasionally
an Indefinite Article (iii). An Adjective was recorded in one case only (iv).
( i i 
such as A n 
(iii) such A G G n
(in 
such n has P2 R 
(iv) such G n

100 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
All other features of the such-segment are identical with those of the other
Nominal segments.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the such-segments:
such are O G n 
such as I PI 
by
such are O n 
Sj b
Sj v Cs 
such n shall also v R to v O n
such as 
such n shall v A n to v O n
such as A G G ri 
by 
such n shall v n
such as A n m 
such n shall also v R to v A N"s n
such as A n 
such n shall v A n to v A N"s n
such as A NAME 
such n shall also v A n to v A N"s n
such as G G G n 
such n shall v R to v A N"s n
such as G G n 
by 
Sj v Od
such as G n 
by 
such n shall also v
Sj b 
Sj v
such as G n shall also P2 G n 
such n shall also v A n to v O n
such as G n shall also P2 n 
such n shall also v R
such as G n shall P2 G n 
such n shall v R to v O n
such as G n shall P2 n 
such n shall also v n
Sj v Od 
such n shall v A n
such as G n v less j 
Sj v Od
such as G n v less G 
such n shall v
Sj v Pr 
Sj v
such as I 
by 
etc.
3.1.18 thai-segments
When that is used as a Conjunction, it introduces a Subordinate Clause. The
that-segments can be of two different types: a) referring to the Noun
preceding that (i); b) not referring directly to the Noun preceding that (ii).
In the Dictionary of Segments, the reader will find those referring to the
preceding Noun marked as that'. When that refers to the previous Noun, it is
usually followed by a Verbal Tense.
(i) 
The rumour that was spreading proved to be untrue.
A 
n 
that are Pi 
v 
to be j
Sj 
Sj 
v
Sj 
Cs
Compare:
(i a) 
A rumour was spreading.
Sj 
v
When that refers to the Subject, then the whole that-segment is a
Complement Subject (ii).

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
101
(ii) 
The rumour that he was resigning was not 
confirmed.
A 
n 
that d arn Pi 
are also P2
Sj 
Sj 
v 
v
Cs
The that-segment can also act as an Object (Od) (iii), or as a
Complement Subject (iv), or as a Complement Object (iii a).
(iii) 
The legal words are all there to ensure
A 
G 
n 
are all b 
to v
Sj 
v 
Cs
that the will is 
properly executed.
that A n 
are also 
P2
Od
(iii a! / saw the house that was built on the hill.
d v 
A n 
that was P2 on A n
Sj v 
Od 
Co
iivj 
The truth is 
that he will not come.
A 
n 
are that d shall also v
Sj 
v 
Cs
The more common Prepositions and Conjunctions to be used after that as
a Conjunction are:
i'v! 
that tor M n 1 are n
that for R n are A n
! vi! 
that if d am also j d can also v
that if d am to v
that if no n are P2
ivii) 
that in A n has P2 n
that in m v
(viiii 
that instead of A n
that instead of P n
fix! 
that what d v was also j
that what v A n A G n are A G n
ix) 
that within m ri m G G n shall also v n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the that-scgments:
that n are also Pi to v n 
that n are P2 up
that n are also Pi to v n of n 
Sj v
that u are being P2 to v R 
that n are Pi to v n
Sj v Od 
that n are Pi to v n of n
that n are G 
Sj v Od
that n are j 
that n be P2 *
that n are n 
that n can also be
Sj v Cs 
Sj v

102
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
that n can also be j
that n can also be j to v
that n can also be j to v A n
that n can also be j to v n
that n can also be j to v R
Sj v Cs
that n can also be P2
that n can also be P2 up
that n can be
Sjv
that n can be j
Sj v Cs
that n can be j to to v
that n can be j to v A n
that n can be j to v n
that n can be j to v R
Sj v Cs Ic
that n can be P2
that n can be P2 up
Sj v
that n has also b P2 A n
that n has also P2 A n
Sj vOd
that n has P2
Sjv
that n has P2 A n
that n has P2 R
Sj v Od
that n it seem(ed) has also P2
that n it seem(ed) has P2
that n just v G n
Sj v Od
that n not only shall v
that n of O n has P2 up
that n of M n has P2 up
Sjv
that n of A n has also P2 i n
that n of A n has P2 i n
that n shall also v G G n
that n shall also v G n
that n shall also v m m n
that n shall also v m m n b
that n shall also v m n
that n shall also v m n b
that n shall v G G n
that n shall v G n
that n shall v m m n
that n shall v m m n b
that n shall v m n
that n shall v m n b
that n shall v to v M n
SjvOd
that n should have to be G
that n should have to be G up
that n should have to be j
SjvCs
that n should have to be P2
that n should have to be P2 up
Sj v
that n to v R
Sj v Od
that n v
Sj v
that n v A G G n are also j to v
that n v A G G n are also j to v up
that ri v A G G n are j to v
that n v A G G n are j to v up
that n v A G n are also j to v
that n v A G n are also j to v up
that n v A G n are j to v
that n v A G n are j to v up
that n v A n are also j to v
that n v A n are also j to v up
that n v A n are j to v
that n v A n are j to v up
Sj v Sj v Cs Ic
that' are Pi M n of A G n
that' are Pi M n of A n
that' are Pi O n
that' are Pi to be A G n
that' are Pi to be A n
Sj v Od
that' are Pi up
that' are there
that' are there b
Sjv
that' are to v A n of G n j
that' are to v A n of n j
Sj v Od
that' b v
Sj b v

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
103
that' b v A NT's G n PI 
that' b v R
that' b v A N"s G ri PI up 
that' b v to v O n
that' b v A N"s G n right up A n 
that' b v A n
that' b v A N"s n PI 
that' b v n
that' b v A N"s n PI up 
Sj v Od
that' b v A NT's n right up A n 
etc.
3.2 Verbal segments
The Verbal segments can be divided into three main groups according to
their initial element:
i\l segments starting with a Main Verb;
hi segments with an Auxiliary Verb coming first;
c; segments beginning with an Infinitive or Participle '-ing'.
The Verbal segments can also be dependent or relatively independent. The
dependent Verbal segments need to be linked to a Subject, because they were
cut off from it by a Punctuation Mark or by another segment (i):
! i j 
v n
f i a) 
7 he people in the bus are German.
A 
n 
in A n v 
n
Sj 
bdl 
v Cs
Compare: The people are German.
For more details on how to link the v-segment to the Subject see Links in
Chapter 8.
The segments that are relatively independent need not be linked to
another part of the sentence; they can stand alone as a complete sentence or
as a clause. For example:
!ii) 
Staying upside down is a difficult matter.
Pi 
b 
v A G 
n
Compare: // is a difficult matter to slay upside down.
iiii) 
To drink means to be thirsty.
to v 
v 
to be j
i i v j 
Are the people German?
v 
A n 
n
;v) 
\o smokingl
no P
In ( v ; there is an example of a missing Verb, substituted by the negative
Particle no.
NB In the Dictionary of Segments, the Interrogative and the Imperative
segments are not marked as such (with a few exceptions). This is either
evident from the very construction of the segment (vi), or the construction of

104 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
the segment does not provide sufficient evidence for that (vii). In the latter
case, the segment can be Interrogative or non-Interrogative, Imperative or
non-Imperative, depending on the context. In this case, the Text Processing
System will need an algorithmic procedure to find out which possibility to
choose. More about this can be found in Links, in chapter 8.
(vi) 
can A n v A G n
v 
Sj 
v Od 
?
did not d b v to be O G n
v 
Sj b v 
Od 
?
(vi a) v up A n d v
v 
Od Sj v ?
(vii) 
am A G n v up
v 
Cs
v Sj v Pr 
?
(vii a) v up
Pr
3.2.1 
Pi-segments
This type of segment starts with a Participle '-ing' and most, often is a
Complement (Cs, Co), with some exceptions (sec further).
( i ) 
P i A n o f A G G G n
(ii) 
Pi A n of O G n
(iii) 
Pi O G G n
(iv) 
The clerk came not to complain but to
A 
n 
v 
also to v 
but to
Sj
commiserate, asking me to pass on their regrets to
v 
Pi 
R to v 
on O 
n 
to
Cs
the princess.
A n
bdl
Compare: The clerk was asking me.
(v) 
/ cantered Cat dawn to the start trying to
d v 
n 
down to A n 
Pi 
to
Sj v 
Od bdl 
Cs
wind up a bit of life-force for us both,
v 
up M
br
Compare: / was trying to wind up a bit of life-force.
Quite often the Pi is followed by an Infinitival Complement (v, vi, vii,
viii):
1
v
n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
105
( v i > 
Pi to v O n
v Ic
f v i i ) 
Pi to v R O G n
v Ic
In some constructions, the Infinitival Complement follows after the Object
I viii j:
(viiij 
Pi R to v A n
v Od Ic
Constructions that start with taking into consideration, according to, concerning,
Jollowing, including, considering, etc. are also Pi-segments:
including A G G n
taking into consideration A n of O n
Here Pi acts as a Conjunction. For example:
f x i ) 
He had difficulty 
in remembering, which wasn't surprising,
considering 
the panic of her flight.
considering A n 
of O n
All Conjunctions ending in '-ing' were recorded as natural language words in
the Dictionary of Segments, as in example (xi), because of the existing
ambiguity.
Most Pi-segments arc dependent segments and as such they should be
linked to the part of the sentence they refer to. For more details see the section
Links in Chapter 8.
Below the reader' will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the Pi-segments:
Pi O G G n 
Pi O n to v R
Pi O G n 
Pi O n to v O n
Pi O G n of n 
v Ocl Ic
Pi O G n v A n 
Pi O n up
v Od 
v Ocl
Pi O G n to v R 
Pi O n" to v O" G n was less j
Pi O G n to v O n 
Pi O n" to v O" n was less j
v Od Ic 
v Od Pr
Pi O n 
Pi O N"s G n
Pi O n of An 
Pi O N"s n
Pi O n b 
v Od
Pi O n G 
Pi O worst
v Ocl 
v bp
Pi O n j 
Pi of all i n d shall also v
v Od Co 
Pi of all i n d has not still P2
Pi O n of G n 
v Od Sj v
Pi O n of n 
Pi of all i n
vOd 
v Od
(
(

106
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Pi of all i n d has also P2
Pi of all i n d shall v
Pi of all i n d has P2
v Od Sj v
Pi of I
Pi of i n
vOd
Pi of i n d has not still P2
Pi of i n d shall also v
Pi of i n d has also P2
Pi of i n d shall v
Pi of i n d has P2
v Od Sj v
Pi of n of n
Pi of O G n
Pi of O n
PiofR
Pi off A G nof G n
Pi off A G n of n
Pi off A G n
Pi off A n
vOd
Pi off An ofO G G n are n
v Od v Pr
Pi off An of A n b
Pi off A n of A n
vOd
Pi off A n of O n are n
v Od v Pr
Pi oif A n of G n
Pi off A n of G n of n
vOd
Pi off A n of O G G G n are n
Pi off A n of O G n are n
v Od v Pr
Pi off A n of n
Pi off A n Pi A n
Pi off A n Pi "n"
Pi off A n Pi n
P i o f f A S G n
P i o f f A S n
P i o f f G n
Pi off I n of Os
Pi off n
Pi off n of n
vOd
Pi offO G n to v
v Od Ic
Pi off O G n
Pi off O n
vOd
Pi off O n to v R
v Od Ic
Pi off other n of n
vOd
Pi off to v
R
Pi off to v A n of O G n
Pi off to v A n
Pi off to v A n of O n
Pi off to v out of A n to v
v Ic
Pi other n of n
vOd
etc.
3.2.2 
v-segments
The v-segments are usually cut off from the Subject by an intervening
segment. All v-segments start with a Main (proper) Verb.
(i) 
The crowd, at the far end of the square, became suddenly silent.
A 
n 
at A G n of A n 
v 
also 
j
Sj 
bl 
v 
Pr
Since became is a linking verb, equivalent in meaning to is (or am, are, was,
were), the sign for the Predicative (Pr) can be substituted for the sign for the
Complement Subject (Gs).

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
107
The Verbal Tense of the Main Verb, marked as v, is either Present Simple
or Past Simple. Both Tenses are marked with v. The Verbal Tense can be
followed by an Object (ii) or Infinitival Complement (iii):
(ii) 
v A n of n
v Od
(iii) 
v to v
v Ic
When the v-segment ends with an Exclamation Mark (when it is used in
Imperative Mood), then it is a stand-alone, independent sentence:
iiv') 
(,'ome!
v
iv! 
Take a seat!
v 
A n
( v i ) 
v up A G n!
Most v-scgments are dependent segments and should be connected to the
Subject of the sentence (see the algorithmic procedures in Links in Chapter
8, for how to do i t ) .
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the v-segments:
v A G G n PI 
v A G n" v"
v A G G n" v'' 
v Od
v A G n 
v A G n to v G n
v Od 
v A G n to v n
v A G G n b b A n 
v A G n to v O n
v A G n d v 
v A G n to v O n off n
v Od Sj v 
v A G n to v A n
v A G n G n 
v A G n to v O n up b
v Od 
v A G n to v O n up
v A G n has also been A G n 
v A G n to v R A G n
v A G n has also been A n 
v Od Ic
v A G n has been A G n 
v A G n up
v A G n has been A n 
v A G n v
v Od v Cs 
v A m m of R b
v A G n n 
v A m of R b
v A G n n to v A n 
v A m G G G n
v A G n of A n" Pi" A G n 
v A m G G n
v A G n of A n" Pi" A n 
v A m G n
v A G n of A HEADING 
v A m n
v A G n of G n 
v A n
v A G n of n 
v A n j
v A G n of P n 
v Od
v A G n" Pi" 
v A n d v
v A G n Pi 
v (3d Sj v
v A G n PI 
etc.

108 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
3.2.3 ant-segments
The segments starting with the be paradigm (excluding be and being) can
assume the role of:
a) a Complement Subject (i), where the am paradigm is the only Verb;
b) an Object, following after Present or Past Tense, Passive Voice, or Present
and Past Continuous Tense, Active Voice (ii, iii);
c) an Infinitival Complement (iv);
d) an Independent Interrogative sentence (v).
(i) 
is the father of ten small children
am A n 
of M G 
n
v Cs
(ii) 
was asked to bring the two bottles (of wine)
am P2 
tov 
A M n 
(ofn)
v 
Od
(iii) 
is singing a song
am Pi 
An
v 
Od
(iv) 
was to go
am to v
v 
Ic
In all these cases, the am-segment is cut off from the Subject by an
intervening (usually Adverbial) segment.
(v) 
Are you ready?
am d j
v 
Sj Cs
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the am-segments:
am A n of A n 
am A n v up
am A n of A n of M G n 
v Cs
am A n of A n of G n 
am A S n d has also P2 R v
am A n of A n of M n 
am A S n d has P2 R v
am A n of A n of n 
v Cs Sj v Od
am A n of G n 
am about to v O n
am A n of M G n 
am about to v up
am A n of M n 
am about to v
am A n of n 
am about to v A n
am A n of O N"s G n 
am about to v R
am A n of O N"s n 
am about to v n
am A n of O G n 
v Pr
am A n of O n 
am almost b Pi
am A n of P 
am almost Pi
am A n v 
v

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
109
am also
v
am also A G n
arn also A G n of (.) n
am also A G n of O G n
am also A G n of G n
am also A G n of n
am also A n of A n
am also A ri of A G n
am also A n of A n
am also A n
am also A n of A n d has P2
am also A n of G n
arn also A n of n
am also A n of A G G G n PI
am also A n of A G G n PI
am also A n of A G n PI
am also A n of A n P1
am also A n of A n of M G n
am also A n of A n of G n
am also A n of A n of M n
am also A n of A n of n
am also A n of M n
am also A n of C) n
am also A n of O G n
am also b j
v Gs
am also b P2 to be P2 up
am also b P2 to be P2
am also being P2
v
am also called A n
am also called A G n
am also cl Pi to v R
am also even all that j
am also G
am also G n of m
am also j
am also j of (J n
v Gs '
am also j to v up
am also j to v
am also j to be
am also j to v A G N"s n
am also j to v A fV's n
am also j to be P2 up
am also j to be P2
v Cs tc
am also less j
am also less
am also less G
am also m
am also m % up
am also rn %
am also m FB old
arn also ri
am also n of A n
am also n of A G ri
am also n of A G G n
am also n of m
am also O less G n
am also O n P2
am also O S n
am also of A n
v Cs
am also on the receiving end
v b
am also P2
am also P2 j
am also P2 to v
v
am also P2 to v A G m n b
am also P2 to v A G m n
am also P2 to v A m n b
am also P2 to v A rn n
am also P2 to v
am also P2 to v up
am also P2 to be P2 up
am also P2 to be P2
am also P2 to v P
am also P2 up b to v
am also P2 up to v
v Ic
am also P2 up
am also Pi
v
am also Pi A b G n of n
am also Pi A n of n
am also Pi A b G n
am also Pi A b G n of G n
am also Pi A n of G n
am also Pi A n to v A n

110 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
am also Pi A n to v R 
am also Pi O G n of A n
am also Pi n 
am also Pi O n of A n
am also Pi n to v to v 
am also Pi O G ri
am also Pi O G n 
v Od
am also Pi O n 
etc.
3.2.4 
to v-segments
The to v-segment represents the Infinitive, starting with the Particle to.
These segments are Infinitival Complements. They are either separated
from the Subject by an intervening segment, or are relatively independent
(iii, iv) when the Infinitive can be used as the Subject of the sentence. The
Nominal sequence of Parts of Speech that follows the Infinitive can be an
Object (i, ii).
(i) 
He watched her from time to time to see the
d v 
R from n 
to n 
to v A
Sj v 
Od bm 
Ic
expression on her face.
n 
onO n
Od 
bl
Compare: 
He watched to see the expression on her face.
d v 
to v A n 
on O n
Sj v 
Od 
bl
(ii) 
She went home on time, to watch television.
d 
v 
n 
FB 
to v 
n
Sj v 
Od 
bm 
Ic
Compare: 
She went to watch television.
d 
v 
to v 
n
Sj v 
Od
(iii) 
To spend money on horse races is 
a pleasure.
to v 
n 
on G 
n 
are A n
Ic 
bdl 
v 
Cs
Sj 
bdl 
v 
Cs
Compare: 
It is a pleasure to spend money.
Sj v 
Cs 
Ic
or 
/ like to spend money on horse races.
Sj v 
Od 
bdl
(iv) 
To learn a computer language takes time.
to v 
A G 
n 
v 
ri
Sj 
v Od

COMPOSITION OF 'I'HE SEGMENTS 
111
3.2.5 
j-segments
The j-segments start with an Adjective used as a Predicative and continue
either with an Adverb (i), or with a construction starting with the Preposition
of (ii), or with an Infinitival Complement (iii). In all these cases they are a
Complement Subject and arc separated from the Subject by an intervening
segment.
The j sequence following the Object as Complement Object is inseparable
from the Object and is an integral part of a segment - in all such cases the j
sequence is not a j-scgment.
( i i 
bus\ runt'
J " b
Cs
i i i ) 
j of A n of n
j of A P of n (e.g. unaware of the sounding of drums}
i i i a] 
j of G n
Cs
(iii) 
read}' to wash myself
j 
to v 
X
Cs
There arc some exceptions, when the j-segment is a Verb (iv) or is an
integral part of an Adverbial Clause (v):
i i v ) 
Ready! (Equivalent to Be ready!)
j
iv) 
right in the middle of R
j
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the j-segments:
of A G n of n 
j to v
of A n 
j to v A G n
of A n of n 
j to v A G n of G n
of A P of n 
j to v A G n of n
of G n 
j to v A G n" Pi"
of n 
j to v A n
of O G n 
j to v A n of A n
of O n 
j to v A n of G n
of O n of n 
j to v A n of n
of O N"s n 
j to v A n of A G n
to be 
j to v A n of O n
to be G 
j to v A n" Pi"
to be j 
j to v i n
j to be P2 
j to v n
j to be P2 of R 
j to v O G n
jjj
j
j
j
j
j
j
j
j
jj

112 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
j to v O n 
j to v up
j to v O S n 
j to v X
j to v of A n 
j with X
j to v of R 
Pr
j to v of n 
right in the middle of R
j to v R 
right in the middle
j to v R PI 
etc.
3.2.6 
Pi-segments
The Participle 1st is not part of a Compound Verbal Tense and has the role of
a Complement Subject (i, ii) or Complement Object (iii). When it is cut off
from the Subject by an intervening segment and starts a segment of its own, it
can be followed by an Adverbial Clause (i) or an Infinitival Complement (ii):
(i) 
They remained in the attic obsessed with fear.
d 
v 
in A n 
PI 
with n
Sj 
v 
bl 
Cs 
bx
Compare: They are obsessed with fear.
(ii) 
PI to v A n of n
Cs Ic
(iii) 
Ann found the glass on the floor, broken.
d 
v 
A n 
on A n 
PI
Sj 
v 
Od 
bl 
Co
Note: The comma between floor and broken is often omitted.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the Pi-segments:
PI n 
PI to v A G n
PI n are m 
PI to v A G G n of n
PI n Pi 
PI to v A G n of n
PI n to v i n 
PI to v A G G n of A n
PI n v O n 
PI to v A G n of A n
PI O Pv 
PI to v A n
PI ofG n 
PI to v A n ofn
PI ofi G n 
PI to v An of A n
PI ofi n 
PI to v n
PI ofn 
PI to v up
PI only 
PI up
PI PI 
PI up AG n
PI R O n 
PI up A G n are G n
PI right up 
PI up A G n are n
PI to v 
PI up A G n are G n of G n
PI to v A G G n 
PI up A G n are n of n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
113
P1 up A G n are G n of n
PI up A G n are n of G n
PI up A n
PI up A n are G n of G n
PI up A n are G n of n
PI up A n are n of n
PI up A n are n of G n
PI up A n are G n
PI up A n are n
PI up are also EBO of G n
PI up are also EBO of n
PI up are EBO of G n
PI up are EBO of n
PI with G n
PI with n
Cs
Co
etc.
3.2.7 
did-segments
(Did represents the paradigm of do, with the exception of doing.)
The did-segments can be of three types:
a) Independent Interrogative (i), ending with a Question Mark. In this case
did is followed immediately by a Subject.
b) Independent Affirmative, followed by an Exclamation Mark (ii). In this
case, the Subject is missing and did is followed by a Verbal Tense, which
in its turn can be followed by an Object.
c) Cut off from the Subject by an intervening segment (iii). In this case did is
followed by a Verbal Tense, which in turn can be followed by an Object.
(i) 
did d has to v up i G G n ?
Sj 
v 
Od
(ii) 
did not v I !
v 
Od
(iii) 
did v R I
v Oi Od
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the did-segments:
did also v A G n
did also v A n
did also v M
did also v R v A n
v Od
did also v up
did b v
v
did d
did d also v
vOd
vSj
did d also v M
did d b v to be O G n
did d b v to be O n
v Sj v Od
did d G *
did d get PI b
did d get PI
v Sj v
did d v A n
did d v G G n
did d v G n
v Sj v Od
did d v j
v Sj v Pr
did d v M
did d v M n b

114
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
did d v M n
did d v n
did d v n of n
v Sj v Od
did d v Pi
v Sj v
did d v R
did d v to be O G n
did d v to be O n
v Sj v Od
did d v to v
did d v to v up
v Sj v
did d v to v A n of O n Pi
did d v t o v A n o f O n
did d v to v A n
v Sj v Od
did d v up
v Sj v
did I G n v R up?
did I G n v R?
did I n v R?
did I n v R up?
Sj vOd
did I v
did n v?
v Sj v
did not
v
did not A n v A G n
did not A n v A n
v Sj v Od
did not b v
v
did not d
v Sj
did not d b v to be O G n
did not d b v to be O n
v Sj v Od
etc.
3.2.8 
has-segments
The word has represents the paradigm of the Verb have (with the exception
of having). The has-segments are of two types:
a) Interrogative, ending with a Question Mark (i). The Auxiliary Verb has
is part of a Compound Verbal Tense and is followed immediately by a
Subject. This is a complete segment.
b) Incomplete - part of another segment, because the has-segment was cut
off from a previous segment by an intervening segment. In this case the
Verbal Tense is usually followed by an Object (ii), or by a Complement
Subject (iii).
(i) 
has d P2 O n b ?
has d P2 A n ?
has I been P2 ?
has not d been b j ?
Sj
(ii) 
has also been Pi G n
has also P2 A G n of G G n
has also P2 A n of O G n
has also P2 Z
v 
Od

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
115
f iii) 
has also been j to v O G n
has been A n of O G n
has been j
v 
Cs '
Often the Object is followed by an Infinitival Complement:
i'iv) 
has P2 A n to v A n
has P2 A n to v R
v 
Od 
Ic
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the gramma deal structure of the has-scgments:
has also O G n
has A n PI 
has also O n
v Od Co 
has also P2 to v R
has also 
has also P2 A G n of G G n
v 
has also P2 A G n of G n
has also A G n 
has also P2 A G n of n
has also A n 
has also P2 A n of G G G n
v Od 
has also P2 A n of G G n
has also been n 
has also P2 A n of G n
has also been j to v O G n 
has also P2 A n of n
has also been j to v O n 
has also P2 A G n of n
has also been A n 
v Od
has also been A n of O G n 
has also P2 A n d v up
has also been A n of O n 
has also P2 A n d v
has also been j to v R 
v Od Sj v
v Cs 
has also P2 A G n
has also been P2 
has also P2 M G n
v 
has also P2 M n
has also been up j 
has also P2 O G n up
has also been j 
has also P2 O G n
has also been Pi G n 
has also P2 O n up
has also been Pi n 
has also P2 R Pv
v Cs 
has also P2 R up
has also been P2 enough 
has also P2 R up to v X
has also been P2 up 
has also P2 A n of O G n
v 
has also P2 n
has also been P2 up A n 
has also P2 up A n
has also been P2 to v G n 
has also P2 R to v X
has also been P2 to v n 
has also P2 A n of O n
has also been P2 to v A n 
v Od
v Od 
has also P2 up
has also M G n 
has also P2
has also M n 
v

116 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
has also P2 up to v A n 
has d been b j
v Od 
Sj v Cs
has also P2 R almost j 
has d been b P2
v Od 
v Sj v
has also P2 to v A n 
has d been j
has also P2 A n of n 
v Sj v Cs
has also P2 G n 
has d been P2?
has also P2 R 
has d been up
v Od 
has d just been up
has also P2 G n to v n 
v Sj v
has also P2 n to v n 
has d M n
has also P2 R to v A n 
v Sj Od
has also P2 R to v n 
has d P2?
has also P2 A n to v A n 
v Sj v
v Od Ic 
has d P2 A n
has also P2 A n 
has d P2 M n b
has also P2 A n to v n 
has d P2 n
has also P2 A n of n 
has d P2 O n b?
has also P2 A n 
has d P2 O n?
has also P2 R to v 
has d P2 R
has also P2 R j 
v Sj v Od
has also P2 A n to v 
has d TCv of I
has also P2 up G n 
v Sj v
has also P2 G n 
has d v M G G n
v Od 
has d v M G n
has also P2 up n 
has d v M n
has also P2 O n 
v Sj v Od
has also P2 i G n 
has G n
has also P2 Pv G n 
has G n of m n
has also P2 A n to v 
v Od
has also P2 i n 
has I been P2
has also P2 Pi n 
has I not been P2
has also P2 Pv A n 
v Sj v
v Od 
has less b P2 S
has been j to v O G n 
has less P2 S
has been j to v O n 
has less to v up
has been j to v R 
has less to v
has been n 
v
v Cs 
has M G n
has been P2 
has M n
v 
vOd
etc.

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
117
3.2.9 
can-segments
The word can stands for a number of Auxiliary Verbs (see the Index at the
end of the book), expressing ability, condition, possibility, permission, advice,
etc. For more details see Graver (1971). The can-segments are of two types:
a) Interrogative, complete, ending with a Question Mark. The Auxiliary
Verb can (or any other Verb from this set) is part of a Compound Verbal
Tense and is immediately followed by a Subject (i);
b) Incomplete 
part of another segment, cut off as a result of an intervening
segment. In this case the Auxiliary Verb (represented by can) or the
Verbal Tense can be followed by either a Complement Subject (ii) or
Object (iii).
(i) 
can d v A G n ?
can d v A n up ?
can I all be P2 ?
can n v ?
can not d ?
can A G n v ?
v 
Sj
(ii) 
can also be A G n
can also be j
v 
Cs
(iii) 
can also v A G n of n
can also v G G n
can v up G n
v 
Od
(iii a) can v R A n
v 
Oi Od
v 
Od Co
(The last example has two possible Parsings.)
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the can-segments:
can A S G G n v? 
can also be j to v
can A S G n v? 
v Cs
can A S n v? 
can also be P2
v Sj v 
v
can also be 
can also be j to v R
v 
v Cs
can also be UI to v R up 
can also be P2 to v
can also be UI to v R 
v
v Cs 
can also be j to v A n
can also be P2 to v n 
v Cs v Od
v Od 
can also be A G n

118
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
can also be A n
can also be A G
can also be out of A n
can also be out of n
v Cs
can also have P2 I
can also have n of m m b
can also have n of m b
can also have n of m m
vOd
can also v
v
can also v A G n of n
can also v A n" j"
can also v A G G n
can also v A G n
can also v A n of n
can also v A n
can also v A n up
can also v A G n
can also v G n
can also v G G n
can also v i n
vOd
can also v less G
can also v less
v Pr
can also v M of O G n
can also v M of O n
can also v m % n
can also v M n
can also v n
can also v O n
can also v O G n
can also v of G n
can also v of n
can also v R to v
can also v R up
vOd
can also v R A n of n
can also v R A n
can also v R M n of n
can also v R M n
v Oi Od
vOd Co
can d v A G n?
can d v A n
can d v A n up
can d v A n?
can d v A n of A n
v Sj v Od
can d v any further?
can d v G
v Sj v
can d v G n
can d v I
can d v I up
can d v M n up
can d v M n
can d v M other n
can d v n
can d v n of n?
can d v Pv?
can d v R
can d v R up?
can d v R A n of n
can d v R A n
can d v R NAME
can d v R to v up b
can d v R to v up
can d v R to v
can d v R up
can d v UF?
v Sj v Od
can v A G G n
can v A G n of n
can v A G n
can v A n
can v A n of n
can v A n up
vOd
can v A n" j"
vOd Co
can v being P2
v
can v G G n
can v G n
can v i n
vOd
can v less

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
119
can v less G 
can v M of O G n
can v little less 
can v m to m n
v Pr 
can v m to m n of n
can v m % n 
v Od
can v M n 
etc.
can v M of O n
3.2.10 no-segments
(This section also lists the segments starting with not and none — see the
Dictionary of Segments for details.) The word no is a Particle for negation,
having much wider use than its opposite for consent yes. The Particle no can
be an integral part of some Adverbs (i), but it usually stands at the start of an
n-segment and expresses negation (ii). It is used as a Noun when it precedes
one or body (if it is separated from body] (iii). In one single case, when "there
is" is omitted, no starts a shortened phrase for negation (iv).
(i) 
no doubt
no longer
no matter
(ii) 
no n are P2 to v R
no n can be P2
no n of G n are P2
no n shall v A n
no other n v G n
no such n are P2
(iii) 
no body except
no one except d
no one except d are P2
no one shall v A n
(iv) 
no need Pi up
The word none is used as a Noun in 'of phrases (v), as a Numeral (vi), as
a determiner (vii), or as a determiner with a Pronoun (viii), always expressing
negation.
(v) 
none of I are P2
none of I are up
(vi) 
none
none at all (= zero)
(vii) 
none of which
(viii) 
none of R
The Particle for negation not can start a segment when it is cut off from a
preceding segment by a Punctuation Mark or by another segment (ix), or
when used together with an Adverb (x), or when used together with a
Conjunction or Preposition (xi). Often enough it can head a stand-alone,
independent segment (x, xii), if it ends with an Exclamation Mark.

120 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(ix) 
not A n
not all G n
notj
(x) 
not again
not always
not just yet
(xi) 
not because
not even
not even for
not even with
not merely because
not since
not until
(xii) 
Not today!
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the no-segments:
no n are P2 to v R 
no n shall v A n
no n are P2 to v A n 
no n shall v n
no n are P2 to v n 
Sj v Od
Sj v Od 
no n to v
no n are to be P2 
v Od
no n can be P2 
v Sj v
Sjv 
n o n v G G G n
no n of G n are P2 
no n v G G n
no n of n are P2 
no n v G n
no n of i a(n) G n shall be P2 
no n v n
no n of i G n shall be P2 
Sj v Od
no n of i a(n) G n v to be P2 
no need Pv up
no n of i a(n) G n need be P2 
no need Pv
Sj v 
no one — d = R
no n of n 
Sj
no n PI 
Od
Sj 
no one except
Od
no n of Os shall v O n 
no one except R v
Sj v Od 
no one except R
no n Pv up A n 
no one except d v PI
no n Pv A n 
no one except d
Sj Cs 
no one except d are P2
no n shall vOn
Sj v Od 
no one j
no n shall v 
Sj Cs
Sj v 
Od Co
no n shall v R 
no one of R = d = R

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
121
no one P 
no one shall v n
no one Pi 
no one was Pi n
Sj 
no one was Pi R
Od 
no one was Pi A n
no one shall v A n 
Sj v Od
no one shall v R 
etc.
3.2.11 there-segments
In this type of segment, the former Adverb there introduces a Verb that comes
before its Subject (Hausser, 1989: 370), Some grammarians (Hornby, 1958: 60)
call it 'preparatory there', which has no meaning. Other grammarians call it
'introductory there' (Leech and Svartvik, 1975: 236-8), which behaves in
most cases like the Subject of the sentence, or 'anticipatory there' (Curme,
1955: 100), which serves as a provisional Subject.
We would prefer to regard there + Verb (both Auxiliary and Main,
excluding the paradigm of do and most of the Main Verbs), as an Impersonal
Verb, having singular and plural forms when used with the Auxiliary Verbs
have, has, had and is, are, were.
When combined with the paradigm of be (excluding be and being] (i), or with
the paradigm of have (excluding having) (ii), or with the set of Auxiliary Verbs
represented by can, shall (iii), or with a Verb (seem(s), appear(s)) 
(iv), it
assumes the role of a Verb expressing presence, availability, possibility. When it
is used with the Particle no or not, it expresses absence, lack of something. The
there-segment is a self-sufficient and complete Clause or a Sentence.
The Noun (or Noun phrase) following the there Verb is a Subject and a
Predicative to the preceding Verb (v).
(i) 
there are A G n of A n
there are also n
there are also G n Pi M n of n
there are also G G G n
there are b no G n
there are none of A n of P
there are no n of n
there b are A n
v 
Sj (Predicative)
(ii) 
there has also been n
there has b been no G n
there has been R to v R
v 
Sj (Predicative)
(iii) 
there can also be G n
there can be M G n b
there can be no n to v I
there can be G n
v 
Sj (Predicative)

122
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(iv) 
there did v to be A n
there v to be A n of A n
there v to be no n of n
v 
Sj (Predicative)
(v) 
There are people who eat meat.
there are n 
who v n
v 
Sj 
Sj 
v Od
Compare: People eat meat.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the there-segments:
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
there are
vOd
v Sj
A G n of G n
A G n of G G n
A G n of G n j
A G n of n
A G n of n of n
A G n of n of A n
A G n of n of O n
A G n of n b
A G n of n j
A G n to be P2
A G n" Pi"
A m n n b
A n
A n b
A n j
A n n shall v
A n of A G n
A n of A n
A n of A n to v
A n of G n
A n of G n j
A n of n
A n of n of A n
A n of n b
A n of n j
A n o f R
A n of what are called n
A n to be P2
A n to v
A n to v up
A n" Pi"
A N"s n
all A n of what are called n
there
v
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
there
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
are also
A G
A G G n
A G n
A G n of A G n
A G n of A n
A G n of G n
A G n of n
A G n of n b
A G n to be P2
A G n" Pi"
A n
A n b
A n n shall v
A n of A G n
A n of A n
A n of G n
A n of n
A n of n b
A n to be P2
A n" Pi"
enough n
G G G n
G G n
G G n
G n
G n of n
G n" Pi'
G n" Pi'
M n
M n of n
just so many n j
less G n
less n
M Gn
in

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
123
there are also M G n though 
there are
there are also M i n 
there are
there are also M n 
there are
there are also M n of n 
there are
there are also M n though 
there are
there are also n 
there are
there are also n b 
there are
there are also n enough 
there are
there are also n of A n being P2 
there are
there are also n of A n being P2 up 
there are
there are also n of n 
there are
there are also n to v 
there are
there are also n to v up 
there are
there are also n" Pi" M n 
there are
there are also n" Pi" M n of n 
there are
there are also others 
there are
there are also some sort of n 
there are
there are also UF 
there are
there are also UF Pi 
there are
there are an awful lot of n b 
there are
there are b G n 
there are
there are b no G n 
there are
there are b no n 
there are
there are b no n of n 
v Od
there are d 
v Sj
there are d b 
there are
there are EBB 
v Pr
there are EBO of n 
etc.
there are enough n
G
GG G n
G G n
G G n of n
G G n of A n
GGn of An of AGn
G n
G n of A n
G n of n
Gn b
Gnb b
G n o f P
G n of P up
G n" Pi" M n
Gn" Pi" M n o f n
i A n
i G G n
i n
indeed A G n
indeed A n
just A G n
just A n
just so many n j
less
3.3 Prepositional Adverbial Clauses
The Prepositional Adverbial Clause as known traditionally and the
Prepositional Segment, as defined in our study, coincide, because the
Prepositional Adverbial Clause, unlike the Main and the other Subordinate
Clauses of the sentence, cannot be interrupted by a Punctuation Mark or
another Clause. It is always intact.
The Prepositional Adverbial Clauses start with the following Prepositions
(listed in the order used by the text processing algorithm): from, over, of, at,
on, with, without, within, by, into, onto, in, for, to, past, against, through,
under, between, above, before, after, until, while, aboard, about, across,
ahead of, along, among, around, behind, beside, beyond, down, during,
inside, outside, near, prior, round, throughout, towards, upon, via, next,
since, like, once. (NB This is also List No 3, used by some algorithms in Part
2.)

124
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Most Prepositions have a number of syntactical structures (or 'syntactical
words') that are common to all types of Prepositional segments. Below we will
provide a list of sequences of Parts of Speech used after almost all Prepositions
and an example, showing one possible word sequence, for each:
(i) 
A b G n (the extremely large table]
(ii) 
A G G G n (the small green pepper roots]
(iii) 
A G n b (the nice garden outside]
(iv) 
A G n of A G n (a small garden of a big house)
(v) 
A G n of A N"s n (the front door of the priest's house]
(vi) 
A G n of n (a defined class of objects]
(vii) 
A G n of O G n (the white shirt of her small sister)
(viii) 
A G n PI (the rainforest burnt)
(ix) 
A m n (the ten women)
(x) 
A n of A n of A G n (the son of the president of the United States)
(xi) 
A n of G n (the sound of church bells)
(xii) 
A n of G n of n (the accumulation of big grains of sand)
(xiii) 
A n of M n (a mother of two children]
(xiv) 
A n of n of A G n (the seat of power of the great Incas)
(xv) 
A n of O G n (the wheels of his small car)
(xvi) 
A n of O N"s n (the chimney of her brother's house]
(xvii) 
A N"s G n (the car's front lights)
(xviii) 
A S (the first)
(xix) 
A S n (the first horse)
(xx) 
all
(xxi) 
all I (all this)
(xxii) 
both n (both windows)
(xxiii) 
both n of A n (both ends of the street)
(xxiv) 
both of R (both of them)
(xxv) 
G G n (narrow mountain pass)
(xxvi) 
G n of A n (high peaks of the mountain)
(xxvii) 
G n of n (big bags of sand)
(xxviii) 
I (this)
(xxix) 
i G n (this tall man)
(xxx) 
i n of n (this stage of development)
(xxxi) 
m (nine)
(xxxii) 
M G G n (four red wine glasses)
(xxxiii) 
M n of A n (five windows of the house)
(xxxiv) 
M n of A n of n (two springs of the river of gold)
(xxxv) 
M n of n (one bag of nee)
(xxxvi) 
M of A n of n (two of the children of Israel)
(xxxvii) 
M of O G n (several of her riding horses)
(xxxviii) n (people)
(xxxix) 
n of A G n (people of the lower region)
(xxxx) 
n of G n (people of high standing)
(xxxxi) 
n of O G n (friends of her old parents)

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
125
(xxxxiii 
n PI (window broken]
(xxxxiii) n Pi O n (workers trying their luck]
(xxxxiv) O G G n (her red silk curtains]
(xxxxv) 
O n of A n (their side of the river]
(xxxxvi) O n of G n (their system of low taxation]
(xxxxvii) O S n (our first position)
(xxxxviii) P (staying]
(xxxxix) R (him]
(1) 
what
fli) 
which
(lii) 
whom
(liii) 
X 
(himself]
(liv) 
Z (one another)
(M = G; G is optional)
Each structure can have more than one expression in English - we have
shown only one, as an example. We leave it to the students to find out how
many word structures they can fit in, in any one of the above syntactical
structures.
Filling such syntactical structures with words (as we have done)
is a good teaching and learning practice. Students may try to fit in such words
so that the whole structure, in the end, may be used with more than one
Preposition (xxxxiv).
(xxxxiv) with (for, from, against, on] her red silk curtains
Certain word meanings fit into some structures more easily than other
meanings. The Dictionary of Segments provides ample material for an
exercise of this sort.
According to their meaning, the Prepositional Adverbial Clauses can be of
the following types:
a) 
for direction and location (bdl);
b) 
for separation (bs);
c) 
for reason (br);
d) 
for clothing (bt) 
used with the semantic group of words designating
clothes;
e) 
for circumstances (be);
f) 
for purpose (bp);
g) 
for 'stoppage' (bg) 
used with the semantic group of words denoting
stopping or stoppage;
h) 
for linkage or 'togetherness' (be), or joint action (bb);
i) 
for location (bl);
j) for instrument or means (bi);
k) 
for time (bm);
1) 
for activity (ba);
m) for direction (bd);
n) 
for manner (bn'l;

126 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
o) 
for purpose (bo);
p) 
for opposition (bz);
q) 
for condition (bx);
r) 
for persuasion (bw);
s) 
for quantity, volume, measure (bq);
t) 
for comparison (by);
u) 
for concern (bu);
v) 
for appearance (bj);
w) for sequence (bv);
x) 
for result (bf);
y) 
for change (b change);
z) 
for source or 'made of (bk);
aa) starting point (bh).
We have compressed the traditional list of Prepositional Adverbial Clauses
to help the student choose the adequate structure for a specified meaning
more quickly. The compression of the list was made on the basis of
generalization. For example, the meanings of the Preposition through as pass
through and pass by were combined under one meaning, location. We have
dealt similarly with some other meanings.
Table 6.1 lists the meaning of the Prepositional Adverbial Clause and
the Prepositions used to express that meaning. Those Prepositions that have
only one meaning were excluded from the list (for more details see
Appendix 1). In the Dictionary of Segments we have marked almost all
Prepositional Adverbial Clauses in accordance with the above differentia-
tion of meaning.
The Prepositions are border markers within the sentence. Though the
Prepositions are polysemous, they still serve as important guidelines in
outlining the syntactical and the semantic structure of the Sentence.
Every one of the above listed Prepositions starts at least one type of
Adverbial Clause, therefore we will discuss the Prepositions one by one,
giving examples of the Adverbial structures involved.
3.3.1 
front-Clauses
The Preposition from can start Adverbial Clauses of the following type:
(i) 
For reason (br):
(i a) 
from A G n
(i b) 
from A G P
(i c) 
from O n
(i d) 
from A n o f A n t o v A n
(i e) 
from P
pointing to the reason why a certain action was performed or a certain result
was obtained. The same meaning can be expressed by the Conjunction
because of.

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
127
Table 6.1 
Prepositions and types of Prepositional Adverbial Clauses
Meaning of the Prepositional
Adverbial Clause 
Prepositions used to express that meaning
Direction and location 
from, at, in, to, against through, after
Separation 
from, into
Reason 
from, at, on, with, by, in, for, to, upon
Clothes, insertion 
with, into, in
Circumstances 
from, over, at, on, with, into, in, under
Purpose 
from, at, on, with, by, in, for, to, against,
about, toward(s)
Stoppage 
from
Togetherness, joint action 
with, along
Location 
over, at, on, within, by, into, onto, in, to,
past, against, under, between, above, before,
after, about, across, aboard, ahead of, along,
among, behind, around, beside, beyond,
down, inside, near, round, throughout,
toward(s), upon, next
Instrument or means 
with, by, into, through, via, at
Time 
from, over, at, on, by, within, in, for, to, past,
through, between, before, after, prior to,
until, till, while, about, ahead of, behind,
around, during, inside, round, throughout,
next, toward (s), since, once
Direction 
at, to, via
Manner 
at, on, with, by, into, in, like
Opposition 
against, in, by
Source, made from 
from
Starting point 
from
Condition 
at, in, under
Persuasion 
in
Quantity, volume, measure 
over, at, on, with, by, within, onto, in, for, to,
under, above, about
Comparison 
at, on, by, in, between, beside, like
Concern 
over, on, with, in, for, about, around
Appearance 
in, like
Sequence 
over, at, on, in, next, once
Result 
over

128 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Compare: The biggest losses had come, / not /
A G 
n 
had P2 
not
from wilful wrecking j but j
from G 
n 
but
from the custom of the villagers to follow a ship
from A n 
of A n 
to v 
A n
I for many miles.
for M 
n
(ii) 
For direction and location (bdl):
(ii a) 
from A G n PI
(ii b) 
from A n of O n
(ii c) 
from A n of G n
(ii d) 
from another n
(ii e) 
from M G n
(ii f) 
from O G n
(ii g) 
from O G n of n
(ii h) 
from R
(ii j) 
from behind A n
(ii k) 
from beneath A n
(ii 1) 
from n
(ii m) from under A G G n
(ii n) 
from under G n
(ii o) 
from above A n
(ii p) 
from amidst A G n
(ii q) 
from among G G n
(ii r) 
from afar
(ii s) 
from below A n
(ii t) 
from beyond A n
expressing the location and the direction from which certain action ensues.
Compare: I got a letter from him.
d v A n 
from R
(iii) For separation (bs):
(iii a) from A G n PI
(iii b) from A n of G n
(iii c) from I G n
(iii d) from O G n
(iii e) from Z
used with Verbs from the semantic group expressing separation (break off,
break, divorce, distinguish, free oneself from, etc).
Compare: He was separated from his parents.
d am P2 
fromO n
(iv) For time (bm):
(iv a) from hence on
(iv b) from I FB

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
129
(iv c) from long ago
(iv d) from I FB on
(iv e) from FB
(iv f) 
from O childhood
(iv g) from the beginning
(iv h; from the S FB
(iv j; 
from the S half of FB
('iv k; from the very beginning
j i v 1; 
from then on
(iv mi from A FB-BD S half
(iv n) from now on
used with words and phrases denoting time.
Compare: From the first of May.
from A S 
of FB
(vi 
For circumstances (be):
; v a) 
from G n
iv bj 
from A ( i n
(v c) 
from both n of A n
describing the circumstances in which a certain activity is taking place.
Compare:
iv a ) 
The\' drank from big cups.
d 
v 
from G n
?v b) 
7hev were suffering from the same illness.
d 
am Pi 
from A G 
n
(v c) 
They hang suspended from both ends of the rope.
d 
v 
P2 
from both n of A n
!vi) 
For slopping (bg):
ivi a) from P A n
(vi b) from P n
ivi cj 
from Pi PI
ivi d) from G n
used with the verbs from the semantic group for stoppage or cessation or
interruption of a certain activity (prevent, avert, deter, refrain, stop, bar, ban, debar,
suspend, shut, etc.;. Compare:
: vi d i He tried to refrain from casual remarks.
A v 
to v 
fromG 
n
ivii) For purpose (bp;:
•vii a) from P off n
'.vii b) from P R
ivii cj from P n
expressing the purpose for which a certain action is being carried out.
i vii c) He tried to get. money from cleaning cars.
iviii! For source, material and 'made of (bk):

130
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(viii a) from G n
pointing out the material or source used.
(viii a) One can make a soup from dried vegetables.
d 
shall v 
A n 
from G 
n
(viii b) One can build a house from empty beer bottles.
d 
shall v 
A n 
from G 
G 
n
(ix) For initial starting point (bh):
(ix a) from A G n
(ix b) from M %
indicating the point from which a certain action has started. Compare:
(x) 
From a small child, he grew to become a strong man.
from AG 
n 
dv 
tov 
AG 
n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the from-segments:
from A n of A n
from A n of A n of n
from A n of A n b
from A n of A N's n
from A n of G n
from A n of G n 
bdl bs
from A n of having P2
from A n of M n
from A n o f M o f O G G n
from A n o f M o f O G n v R
from A n of n
from A n of n of A G n
from A n of O n of n
from A n of O n 
bdl
from A n of others
from A n UF v j
from A N"s
from A N"s G n
from A N"s n
from A N"s n of n
from A N's n Pi to v
from A S
from A S n
from above
from afar
from all I 
bs
from amidst
from among
from another n bdl
from any n
from b
from behind A n of n
from behind A n 
bl
from behind
from being j enough from being j
from being up b j enough
from being up j enough
from below
from beneath A n 
bl
from beneath
from between
from between O n
from beyond
from both n and n
from close to
from d
etc.
3.3.2 
over - Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with over can be of the following types:
(i) 
For location (bl):

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
131
(i a) 
over A G G n
(i b) 
over A G n of A n
(i c) 
over A N"s ri
( i d ) 
over G n
(i e) 
over here
( i f) 
over I
(i g] 
over i N"s n
(i h! 
over O G G G n
ii il 
over O M n
(i kj 
over R
(i 1} 
over there
(i m) 
over which
indicating the location of a certain thing or being. Compare:
(i a) 
The clouds gathered over the mountain.
A 
n 
v 
over A n
(n) 
For concern (bu):
(ii a) 
over A G n
(ii b) 
over A G n of P
(ii c) 
over A n of A G n (if preceded by to)
(ii d') 
over G n
(ii c) 
over G N"s n to v
(ii f) 
over () G n
expressing concern. In this case over can be replaced by about, concerning.
Compare:
iii d; 
The wrangle was about German participation.
A 
n 
are about G 
ri
i iii) 
For result (bf):
i iii a) over A n (if preceded by victory]
specifying the result obtained after a certain action. Compare:
(iii a) 
The army gained a brilliant victory over the enemy.
A 
n 
v 
A G 
n 
over A n
(iv) 
For time (bnii:
(iv a) over a(n) FB now
;iv b) over a period of m FB
(iv c; over m FB"s n
;iv d) over the last FB
(iv e; over A FB
indicating a period of time, for example:
(iv e) 
There has been no change over the years.
there has been no n 
over A FB
(Note that FB comprises all words denoting time, but not all can assume the
position allotted for them.)

132 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(v) 
For sequence (bv):
(v a) 
over and over again
indicating a sequence or repetition of something.
(vi) For circumstances (be):
(vi a) over I
(vi b) over many a(n) of n
(vi c) over many a(n) n
describing the circumstances in which a certain action takes place.
(vii) For quantity, volume or measure (bq):
(vii a) over m
(vii b) over M G G G n
(vii c) over m JE-D
indicating the amount or distance involved. Compare:
(vii b) It is over fifty miles to London.
it is over M n 
to n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the over-segments:
over A n 
bu, bl 
over I FB 
bm
over A n 
bf if preceded by victory 
over i N"s n 
bl
over A n of n 
bu 
bl 
over m 
bq
over A n v R j 
bl 
over m FB"s n 
bm
over A n are n of G n 
* 
over M G G G n 
bq
over A n arc n of n 
* 
over M G G m 
bq
over A n are n 
* 
over M G n 
bq
over A n of P 
bu 
over m JE-D 
bq
over A n of A n 
bu if preceded by to 
over M n 
bq
over A n of A n 
bl 
over many a(n) n of n 
be
over A n of A G n 
bu if preceded by 
over many a(n) n 
be
to 
over n 
bu 
bl
over A N"s n 
bl 
over n also Pi
over A m n 
over n Pi
over a(n) FB now 
bm 
over A N"s G n
over a period of m FB 
bm 
over A N's n
over and over again 
bm 
over N"s n to v 
bu
over A S 
over NAME 
bl
over A S of M 
over O G G G n d shall v
over A S of A n 
over O G G G n 
bl
over A S of A m n 
over O G G n d shall v
over A S of A G n 
over O G G n 
bl
over G n 
bl 
bu 
over O G n 
bu 
bl
over G N"s n to v 
bu 
over O G n d shall v
over here 
bl 
over O M n 
bl
over I 
be 
bl 
over O n 
bu 
bl

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
133
over R 
bl 
over the years 
bm
over S n PI 
over there 
bl
over the last FB 
bm 
over which
over the weekend 
bm 
etc.
3.3.3 
of-Clauses (segments)
The sequences starting with the Preposition of in some cases (when of is
preceded by a Verb) are equivalent to a Clause (i). In others they are simply
a 'syntactical word' (ii) which is an integral part of another segment and
cannot be separated from it by another segment or a Clause, and are
equivalent to the genitive of the Noun (ii).
I i) 
of A G n of O n
of P A G n
of P A n of G n
of P G n
For example:
He spoke I of his increasing popularity in the country.
d 
v 
of O G 
n 
in A n
where of is equivalent to about, or concerning.
;ii) 
A Ci n of O n
i the genitive always following the governing Noun)
He mentioned the increasing popularity of his team.
d v 
A G 
n 
of O n
Compare: He mentioned his team's popularity.
d v 
O N"s n
As genitive, the of-segment has many other different meanings —
expressing origin, possession, composition, description, gradation, etc. (for
more details see Curme, 1955: 125-9).
In some Clauses of is followed by the Preposition about, to express
approximation (iii a-iii e):
iiii a; of about m
iiii b) of about m G n
(iii c) of about m m n
i. iii d) 
of about m m
(iii el 
of about M n
In other Clauses it is followed by the determiners all or both to express
specified quantity (iii f iii m). or it can express unspecified quantity (iii n).
(iii f) 
of all
;iii g) of all A G n
fiii h) of all I
;iii j I 
of all n

134 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(iii k) 
of all m
(iii 1) 
of both n
(iii m) of both n and G n
(iii n) 
of b M G n
(iii n a) of some G n
and in still other Clauses it is followed by what or which to introduce a
Relative Clause for proportion (iii o-iiii w):
(iii o) of what are also A n of A G n
(iii p) of what are also A G n
(iii q) of what are also n
(iii r) of what has been A G n
(iii s) of what O G n are
(iii t) of which are P2
(iii u) of which are also G n
(iii w) of which are to v
Compare:
The bookshop today received 1000 books, / ten
A
n 
b 
v 
M 
n 
m
percent of which 
were sold /
% 
of which are P2
within the next two hours.
within A G 
M n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the of-segments:
of A n of An 
of A N"s P A n
of A n of A N"s n 
of A NAME
of A n of G n 
of A P of n
o f A n o f G G n 
of A S n
of A n of G n of n 
of about m
of A n of n 
of about m G n
of A n of n PI 
of about m m G n
of A n of n and n 
of about m m n
of A n of n and n PI 
of about m m
of A n of O n 
of about M n
of A n of O G G n 
of all
of A n of O G n 
of all A G n
of A n of P O n 
of all A n
of A ISP's G n 
of all I
of A N"s m G n 
of all I are also to v
of A N"s m n 
of all I are to v
of A N"s n 
of all n
of AN"s nd has P2 
of all m
of A N"s n of n 
of all n v

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
135
of all n v up 
Sj v
of b G n d v 
of being P2
of b G G n 
of both n
of b G n 
of both n and G n
of b M G n 
of both n and n
of b M n 
of course
of course not
of b M n d v 
etc.
3.3.4 
at-Clauses
The Clauses starting with the Preposition at are of the following types:
'i i 
For time (bin):
(i a) 
a t A e n d o f l S F B
'i b; 
at A G FB
(i c) 
at A n FB-BH(A-H)
( i d ) 
at A n of FB
( i e'j 
al A n of P
( i f ) 
at a still further stage
(i gj 
at A time
;i h) 
at a very G FB
(i j) 
at any FB
i i k) 
at I FB
(i 1) 
at b A same FB
i i mi 
at different times
ii n'j 
at EBL past m
ii oj 
at EBL to m
ii pi 
at FB
;i q i 
at first
:i r) 
at I early stage
•;is) 
a t l F B o f A F B
. . . etc. (See the Dictionary of Segments for more details, because very many
at-Clauses designate time.)
(ii) 
For location (bl):
1 ii a) 
at A G G G n
i ii b) 
a t A G G n n
! ii c j 
al A G n of G n
! ii cl i 
at A G n of A n
(ii e: 
at A G n of A n PI up
( i i fi 
al A n of A n of O G G n
. . . etc.. denoting positioning or place of action (for more see the
Dictionary of Segments, because a very large group of at-segments
designate location,.
For example (ii d) can mean: al ike upper edge of the roof.

136 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(iii) For reason (br):
(iii a) at A n of G n
(iii b) at A n of A G n
(iii c) at being G
(iii d) at being j
(iii e) at being P2
elucidating the reason for a certain action. For example (iii b):
He shuddered at the sight of the deep precipice.
d v 
at A n 
of A G n
(iv) For manner (bn):
(iv a) at A n of G n
(iv b) at a(n) n
(iv c) at A G n
(iv d) at bay
(iv e) at chequers
(iv f) 
at ease
(iv g) at will
(iv h) at full length
denoting the manner in which a certain action is performed. For example (iv d):
They must be kept at bay.
d 
shall be P2 at bay
(v) 
For direction (bd):
(v a) 
at A G n Pi up
(v b) 
at O n (if preceded by look and synonyms)
(v c) 
at R
(v d) 
at Z
pointing to the direction of the action. For example (v c):
She looked at him.
d 
v 
at R
(vi) 
For sequence (bv):
(vi a) at A S
(vi b) at A S n
(vi c) at first
denoting that a certain action will be repeated. Compare:
/ thought at first that ...
d v 
at first
(vii) For negation:
(vii a) at all
used for expressing negation. Compare:
'Doyou mma?' 'Not at all.'
(viii) For means (b means):
(viii a) at all events
(viii b) at all costs

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
137
Both express certainty and are equivalent to 'by all means', or 'certainly'. The
means are implicit.
fix) 
For quantity, volume or measure (bq):
fix a) at arm's length
(ix b) at b A same n
(ix c) at better than M n a(n) n
fix d) at G n
(ix e) at least m m
(ix f) 
at m m
(ix g) at m A n
fix h) at m m G n
(ix j) 
at m n square
fix k) at m times n
fix 1) at nearly m each
fix m) at S of A n
(ix n) at the same n
(ix o) at well below m PU a(n) n
(ix p) at well below the n
(where the second m and all G are optional; PU denotes the semantic group
Monetary Unit)
ix) 
For circumstances (be):
(x a) 
at great peril
(x b) 
at I n
(x c) 
at P
outlining the circumstances in which certain action is performed.
(xi) 
For purpose fbp):
(ix a) at P A n
(xi b) at P n of M of O G n
(xi c ) at P n of M of O less G n
(xi d) at P O G n
(xi e) at P R
used to explain the purpose or the motives for a certain action (xi a). For
example:
His entire efforts were aimed at overturning the barrel.
0 G 
n 
are P2 
at P 
A n
(xii) For comparison or evaluation (by):
(xii a) at the most
meaning that all other options being considered, only one is the best. It is
equivalent to most of all. Compare:
This is I what one can 
hope for / at the most.
1 
is 
what d shall v 
up at the most
Overleaf the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the at-segments:

138
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
a t A G n o f A G G n
a t A G n o f A G G n b
at A G n of A G n
a t A G n o f A G n b
at AG n of A G N"s G n
at A G n of A G N"s n
at A G n of A n of n
at A G n of A n 
bl
at A G n of A n are A n
at A G n of A n are O G n
at A G n of A n b
a t A G n o f A n P l 
bl
at A G n of A n PI up
at A G n of A N"s G n
at A G n of A N"s n
at A G n of G n 
br
at A G n of n 
bl 
br
at A G n of O n 
bl
a t A G n o f O N " s n 
bl
at A G n PI
at A G n" Pi" 
bd
at A G n" Pi" up 
bd
at A m % n 
bq
at A n 
bl
at A n are also Pi
at A n are Pi
at A n S
at A n d v
at A n d v up
at A n of A G n of A G n
at A n of A G n of A n
at An of A G N " s G n
at A n of A G N"s n
at A n of A n 
bl
at A n of A n of A G n 
bl
at A n of A n of n 
bl
at A n of A n v A less G n
at A n of A n are A n 
bl
at A n of A n are O G n
at A n of A n are O n 
bl
at A n of A n b
at A n of A n of A G n
bl 
at A n of A n of A n
bl 
at A n of A n of O G G n 
bl
at A n of A n of O G n 
bl
at A n of A n of O n 
bl
bl 
at A n of A n PI
at A n of A n PI up 
bl
at A n of A n to v G n
at A n of A n to v n
at A n of A N"s G n
at A n of A N"s n 
bl
at A n of A Name 
bl
at An of A NAME of A
NAME 
bl
at A n of FB 
bm
at A n of G G n
at A n of G n of n 
bn
at A n of G n 
bl 
br 
bn
a t A n o f G n v A G n
a t A n o f G n v A n
at A n of M n
at A n of M n A n
a t A n o f M n A n v
at A n of m N"s n
at A n of n of A n 
bn
etc.
3.3.5 
on-Clauses
The Preposition on starts Adverbial Clauses of the following type:
(i) 
For location (bl):
(i a) 
on A b G G n
(i b) 
on A b G n of O G n
(i c) 
on AG G n o f A n o f G Gn
(i d) 
on A G N"s n
(i e) 
on A n of O N"s n
(i f) 
on both n of A n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
139
(i g) 
on G n
(i h) 
on I very n
(i j) 
on M of A G n
fi k) 
on O G n b
(i 1) 
on to A n of G n
.. . etc., indicating presence or place of action (the list is quite extensive; for
more details refer to the Dictionary of Segments). For example:
(i g) 
The snow is on high ground.
A 
n 
are on G 
n
(meaning: 'up in the mountain').
(ii) 
For manner (bn):
(ii a) 
on A b less G n
(ii b) 
on A less G n
(ii c) 
on all fours
(ii d) 
on call
(ii e) 
on foot
(ii f) 
on G terms
(ii g) 
on M n
(ii h) 
on O own
(ii j ) 
on sale
(ii k) 
on terms
(ii 1) 
on the sly
(ii m) on O knees
(ii n) 
on purpose
showing the manner in which certain action is performed. For example:
(ii h) 
She climbed up the hill entirely on her own.
d 
v 
up A n 
b 
on O own
(iii) 
For time (bm),
iii a) on A FB of O n
iii b) on A FB
iii c) on end (if preceded by: FB)
iii d) on FB-BE(A-L) m I year
(iii e) on FB-BE(A-L) m
(iii f) 
on FB-BE(A-L) m of I year
(iii g) on FB-BE(A-L) S
(iii h) on FB-BE(A-H) the S
(iii j) 
on I FB
(iii k) on I occasion(-s)
(iii 1) on M occasion(-s)
(iii m) on O death bed
(iii n) on O departure
(iii o) on O honeymoon
(iii p) on O S FB
(iii q) on O way up

140 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(iii r) on O wedding
(iii s) on other occasions
(iii t) on the eve of the n
(iii u) on the eve of O G n
... etc., denoting the time of action (for more details see the Dictionary of
Segments). For example:
(iii r) 
It rained on his wedding.
it v 
on O n
(iv) 
For purpose (bp):
(iv a) on A G n
(iv b) on A N"s n
(iv c) on P A n
expressing the purpose for which certain action is performed or will be
performed. For example:
(iv c) It is 
useless to spend the money on purchasing a house on the island.
it was j 
to v 
A n 
on P 
A n 
on A n
bp 
bl
(v) 
For concern (bu):
(v a) 
on A G n
(v b) 
on A G N"s G n
(v c) 
on A n of G n Pi n
(vd) 
o n A n o f P X
(v e) 
on all m
(v f) 
on G n of A n
(v g) 
on how to v
(v h) 
on n
(v j) 
on n of G n
(v k) 
on O n
(v 1) 
on P
(v m) on P UF
(v n) 
on R
(v o) 
on whether A n shall also v A n
identical with the meaning of about, concerning, related to. For example:
(v h) 
Peter wrote a book on agriculture.
d 
v 
A n 
on n
(vi) 
For reason (br):
(vi a) on behalf of O G n
(vi b) on behalf of A G G n
pointing to the reason for the action. Compare:
(vi b) 
He addressed the meeting on behalf of the entire local community.
d v 
A n 
on behalf of A G 
G 
n
(vii) For circumstances (be):
(vii a) on I n
(vii b) on n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
141
expressing action or describing the circumstances in which the action occurs.
Compare:
(vii b) The forest is 
on fire.
A 
n 
are on n
(viii) For sequence (bv):
(viii a) on M occasion(-s)
(viii b) on M n
equivalent to T (once, twice, etc., times). Compare:
(viii a) She was absent on two occasions.
d 
am j 
on M n
(ix) 
For quantity, volume or measure (bq) (ix a), or comparison (by) (ix b):
fix a) on the average of m a(n) n
(ix b) on the average
Compare:
(ix b) 
They are well off on the average
d 
are also up on the average
(meaning that compared to other people they are rich)
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments,
showing the grammatical structure of the on-segments:
on and off 
on either n of A n are A n
on arrival 
bm 
on either n of A n are A n of G n
on b G n of n 
bl 
on either n of A n are A n of n
on b M G n 
on either side of A n of n
on behalf of A G G n 
on either side of I
on behalf of A G n 
on 
if preceded by FB
on behalf of A n 
on n of A G n 
bl
on behalf of O G n 
br 
on n of A n 
bl, bu
on behalf of O n 
br 
on n of A n of n 
bu
on behalf of R 
on n of G n 
bu
on board 
bl 
on n of i A n
on both n 
bl 
on n of i A n of n
on both n of A n 
on n of j n
on both n of A n 
bl 
on n of n of n 
bl
on business 
bp 
on n of n 
bu
on business of O own 
on n of O n
on call 
bn 
on n of O own
on earth 
bl 
on n of Pi no n
on earth 
on n of R 
bl
on EBB of A n 
bu 
on n PI
on either n of A n 
bl 
on n PI b
on either n of A n are A G n 
etc.

142 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
3.3.6 
with-Clauses
The word with, as a Preposition, starts the following types of Glauses:
(i) 
For togetherness (be) or joint action (bb):
(i a) 
with A d
(i b) 
with A G d Pi R
(i c) 
with A G G G n P i A n
(i d) 
with A G G n
(i e) 
with A G G n of n
(i f) 
with A G n of O G n
(i g) 
with G G n
(i h) 
with G n of O G n
(i j) 
with i n
(i k) 
with O G n of G n
(i 1) 
with other N"s n
(i m) with R
(i n) 
with Z
... etc. (the list is quite extensive), stressing the fact that the action is
performed jointly or is accompanied by a thing or a person. For example:
(i m) 
She came with him.
d 
v 
with R
(ii) 
For manner (bn):
(ii a) 
with n
(ii b) with A G n
(ii c) 
with A G n of n
(ii d) 
with G n
(ii e) 
with greater or less P
(ii f) 
with n of O G n
(ii g) 
with regret
(ii h) 
with sorrow
(ii j) 
with some n
(ii k) 
with the same n
... etc., elucidating the manner in which certain action is performed. For
example:
(ii j) 
He spoke with some 
effort
d v 
with some n
(iii) 
For purpose (bp) (iii a-iii d), or reason (br) (iii c, iii e, iii f):
(iii a) with n
(iii b) with O G n
(iii c) with O n of n
(iii d) with A n
(iii e) with A P
(iii f) with n being P2

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
143
(iii g) with P R
containing, or expressing a purpose. For example:
(iii d) She left the house with the intention to go shopping.
d 
v 
A n 
with A n 
to v Pv
(used with the semantic group of words meaning intention, purpose, aim,
intent, motive, objective)
(iii da) She left the house with the hope that she will be able to find him.
d v 
A n 
with A n 
that d shall be j 
to v 
R
(iv) For instrument or means (bi):
(iv a) with A G d Pi R
(iv b) with A G G n
(iv c) with A G n j
(iv d) with A G n of A G n
(iv e) with A G N"s n
(iv f) 
with A in m
(iv g) with i G G n
(iv h) with M G G n
(iv j) 
with n
(iv k) with n Pi A n
. .. etc., providing evidence for the means or the instrument with which
certain action is performed. Compare:
(iv b) He shaved himself with a new razor blade.
d v 
X 
with A G G 
n
(v) 
For circumstances (be):
(v a) 
with n able to v I N"s G n
(v b) 
with d b j
iv c) 
with O G n Pi A n
(v d) 
with n
describing the circumstances in which an action occurs. For example:
(v d) 
At night the. valley looked beautiful, dotted with fires.
at FB 
A n 
v 
j 
PI 
with n
Compare: The valley looks beautiful when there are fires burning in it at night.
(vi) 
For clothing, or insertion (bt):
(vi a) with A G n
(vi b) with O G n
means to be wrearing or have something on, or to possess something. For
example:
(vi b) She did not part with her white coat.
d shall also v with O G 
n
NB The same applies to all other objects. Compare:
/ don't know what she did with her blue pencil, (meaning: where she has put it).
(vii) For quantity, volume or measure (bq):
(vii a) with A G n of m n
(vii b) with A m m

144 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(vii c) with T A n
(vii d) with T O n
(vii e) with up to m n
(vii f) with the average of m % PI
(viii) For concern or involvement (bu):
(viii a) with A n
(viii b) with G n
(viii c) with P
meaning so far as something is concerned (viii c) or involvement (viii a). For
example:
(viii c) We have finished with hoping.
d 
has P2 
with P
Compare: So far as hoping is concerned, we have no more hope left.
(viii a) 'Some time ago and something to do
M 
FB ago and UF 
to v
with a robbery', was all she could remember.
with A n 
are M d shall v
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the with-segments:
with A G n o f A G G n 
bb 
with A G N"s n 
bb 
bi
with A G n of A G n 
bb 
bi 
with A n of n
with A G n of A G n of A n 
bb 
bi 
w i t h A n o f i G n
with A G n of A G n of n 
bb 
bi 
with A n of Pi A G n
with A G n of A n 
bb 
bi 
bn 
with A n Pi b
with A G n of A n of A n 
bb 
with A n to v O n
with A G n of A n of n 
bb 
with A S n
with A G n of G n PI 
bi 
with A S n of A n
with A G n of little less 
with both n
with A G n of M less 
with M n Pi R
with A G n of m n 
bq 
with M of A N"s n
w i t h A G n o f n 
bb 
bi 
with M of A N"s n Pi
with A G n of n of n 
bi 
bn 
with M of A N"s n Pi up
with A G n of n of A n 
bi 
bn 
w i t h M o f G n 
bb
with A G n of n of A G n 
bi 
bn 
with M of G n PI 
bi
w i t h A G n o f n PI 
bi 
with M of G n PI up 
bi
with A G n of O G n 
with M of i n
with A G n of O n 
with M of n 
bb
with A G n PI 
with M of n PI 
bi
with A G n PI up b 
with M of n PI up 
bi
with A G n Pi A n 
bb 
with M of O G n
with A G n Pi n 
bi 
with M other G n
with A G n Pi up 
with M other n
with A G N"s G n 
bb 
etc.

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
145
3.3.7 
uuithout-Clauses
The Preposition without is, in some cases, more like a Conjunction, because
it can be interpreted as an if-clause (if something or somebody is absent..., if there
is no . . ., if there is no/ a single .. .). Here are some examples:
(i) 
without A G n of A G n
(ii) 
without O n
(iii) without P A n of A n of A n
(iv) 
without P O n
. . . etc. Otherwise, as Preposition, it means absence of something. Compare:
They were left without water for three days.
d 
am P2 without n 
for M FB
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the without-segments:
without O n A n v 
without Pi up
wdthout O n 
without Pi A n
without O n A n v up 
without Pi A G n of R
without P 
without Pi A n v
without P A n 
without Pi n j
without P A n o f A n o f A n 
without Pi n up
without P A n of A n 
without O Pi R
without P O n off A n 
without R Pi R S
without P O n 
without Pi to v
without P O n off R 
without Pi to v A n
without P R any sort of n 
without Pi UF j
without P R 
without Pi up O n
without P R any kind of n 
without Pi O n
without P to v X 
without R
without Pi 
etc.
3.3.8 
•within-Clauxes
The Preposition within means that the action does not exceed certain
defined boundaries of time or space. There are only two major types of
Clauses, for time (i) and for space (ii), as the latter includes such notions as
ability, strength, etc. as well as several individual phrases expressing distance
(iii)."
(i) 
For time (bm):
(i a) 
within A FB
(i b) 
within FB
(i c) 
within FB of O n
( i d ) 
within FB of O Pi
(i e) 
within I FB

146 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(i f) 
within M FB
(i g) 
within M FB of O n
(i h) 
within O n
... etc. For example:
(i a) 
Everything will be decided within a month.
UF 
shall be P2 
within A FB
(ii) 
For location (and strength, ability, etc.) (bl):
(ii a) 
within A G n of G n
(ii b) 
within A n of A n
(ii c) 
within A n of n
(ii d) 
within n of A n
(ii e) 
within G n
... etc. For example:
(ii e) 
The companies are within greater London
A 
n 
are within G 
n
(iii) For distance (bq):
(iii a) within reach
(iii b) within sight of Z
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the within-segments:
within A FB 
bm 
within FB of O n 
bm
within A G n of G n 
within FB of O Pi
within A G n of n 
within FB of O Pi up 
bm
within A n 
within FB of O Pi 
bm
within A n of A n 
within I FB 
bm
within A n of n 
within I n
within A n of A G n 
within j G n
within A n of G n 
within j n
within a(n) FB 
bm 
within M FB 
bm
within b of Z 
within M FB of A n 
bm
within FB 
bm 
within M FB of O n 
bm
within FB of Z 
etc.
within FB of O Pi up 
bm
3.3.9 by-Clauses
The Preposition by starts the following types of Adverbial Clauses:
(i) 
For instrument or means (bi) or (b means):
(i a) 
by A b G n of O G n
(i b) 
by A G G G n
(i c) 
by A G G n Pi
(id) 
b y A G n o f i G n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
147
(i e) 
by A G n of A n of A n
( i f ) 
by A G n of A n
(i g) 
by A G P of A n
(i h) 
by G P
(i j) 
by M n of A G n
(i k) 
by M of A n
(i 1) 
by M of O G n of n
(i m) 
by n
(i n) 
by O n
(i o) 
by P
(i p) 
by P n
(i r) 
by P O n to v G n
(i s) 
by P R
(i t) 
by virtue of I G n
... etc. (G is optional as usual)
(NB We've tried always to select the most characteristic structures to
represent a particular meaning encompassed in them. For more structures see
the Dictionary of Segments.)
The predominant meaning of by is to state what instrument or means were
employed to carry out a certain action. For example:
(i m) 
They arrived by train.
d 
v 
by n
( i f ) 
She fell into a deep sleep, lulled by the pounding gallop of the train.
d 
v into A G 
n 
PI 
by A G 
n 
of A n
(ii) 
For location (bl):
(ii a) 
by A G n
(ii b) 
by A n of A n
(ii c) 
by O n
designating the place of action. For example:
(ii a) 
A minute later he had joined Ann at her post by the window.
A FB 
b 
d has P2 
n 
at O n 
by A n
(iii) 
For manner (bn):
(iii a) by A G G n
(iii b) by chance
(iii c) by coincidence
(iii d) by G P
(iii e) by hand 
(can be also bi)
(iii i) 
by n
(iii g) by P
(iii h) by P A G G G n
(iii j) 
by P O own n of n
(iii k) by X 
(also bi)
specifying the manner in which certain action is performed. For example:

148 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(iii h) 
The breaking away in the course of time
A 
P 
up 
in A n 
of n
of great lumps of rock and loose
of G 
n 
of n 
and G
earth had obliterated any semblance of track, and
n 
has P2 
G 
n 
ofn 
and
it was necessary to progress
it was j 
to v
by bracing the feet on hassocks of grass and
by P 
A n on n 
of n 
and
outcroppings of stone.
n 
ofn
(iv) 
For time (bm):
(iv a) by A n of A FB
(iv b) by early FB-BD
(iv c) by early yesterday EBN
(iv d) by EBP (by EBS, by EBT, by FB)
(iv e) by I FB
(iv f) 
by late yesterday EBN
(iv g) by m o'clock
(iv h) by the close of the FB
(iv j) 
by the end of last FB
(iv k) by the end of FB
(iv 1) by the end of the FB
(iv m) by the end of I FB
(iv n) by the FB
(iv o) by which FB
... etc., determining the time of action.
(v) 
For reason (br):
(v a) 
by A n of O n
(v b) 
by dint ofn
(v c) 
by M of O n
(v d) 
by M of O n of n
(v e) 
by n of A n even to v R
(v f) 
by P up
(v g) 
by the same n
explaining the reason for a certain result. For example:
(v f) 
By playing idly, they lost the game.
by Pi 
up 
d 
v A n
Compare: The reason why they lost the game was because they played idly.
(vi) For quantity, volume or measure (bq):
(vi a) by A m
(vi b) by A n
(vi c) by as much as m n
(vi d) by EBK m n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
149
(vi e) by just m n
(vi f) 
by m 
(used also for time)
(vi g) by m EBL
(vi h) by m G n
(vi j) 
by M m n
(vi k) by n
... etc. For example:
(vi b) 
The rice is 
sold by the pound.
A 
n are P2 by A n
(vii) For opposition (b opposition), or comparison (by):
(vii a) by contrast
(viii) For purpose (bp):
(viii a) by P A n
expressing the purpose or goal of a certain action. For example:
(viii a) By watering the plants, one can increase production.
by P 
A n 
d shall v 
n
(ix) 
For comparison (by):
(ix a) by far the G (G in superlative)
(ix a) Mount Everest is by far the highest in the world.
n 
are by far A G 
in A n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the by-segments:
by A G n of A n 
bi 
by A n of A n Pi up 
b means
by A G n of A n NAME 
bi 
by A n of A n v
by A G n of A n of A n 
by A n of b G n 
bi
by A G n of i G 
by A n of G G n
by A G n of i G n of n 
by A n of G n 
bi
by A G n of i G n 
bi 
by A n of G n b
by A G n of i n of n 
by A n of G n P1
by A G n of i n 
bi 
by A n of i G n
by A G n of n 
bi 
by A n of I G n 
bi
by A G n of n" Pi" A G n 
by A n of i n 
bi
by A G n of n" Pi" An 
b y A n o f M G n
by A G n of O G n 
bi 
by A n of M G n b
by A G n of O G n v R v j 
bi 
by A n of M n
by A G n of O G n v R v n 
bi 
by A n of M n of n 
bi
by A G n of O n v R v j 
bi 
by A n of M n b
by A G n of O n v R v n 
bi 
by A n of M N"s n
by A G n PI 
b y A n o f n 
bi
by A G n Pi 
by A n of n b
b y A G n X 
b y A n o f n PI
by A n of A n of A n 
by A n of n to v 
bi
by A n of A n Pi 
b means 
etc.

150 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
3.3.10 into-Clauses
The Clauses starting with the Preposition into can be of the following
types:
(i) 
For time (bm):
(i a) 
into A G FB (e.g. into the New Tear]
(ii) 
For location (bl):
(ii a) 
into A G n
(ii b) into A N"s G n
(ii c) 
into G n
(ii d) 
into m G n
(ii e) 
into n of A G n of O n
(ii f) 
into P O G n
designating the place of action or the whereabouts of a thing. For example:
(ii a) 
She walked into the bedroom.
d 
v 
into A n
(iii) For clothes (bt), or for a position inside a thing:
(iii a) into A G n
(iii b) into O n
(iv) 
For manner (bn):
(iv a) into A n
(iv b) into A n of G n
(iv c) into A N"s G n
(iv d) into play
expressing the manner in which the action is performed, or the result of the
action. For example:
(iv d) He brought it into play.
d v 
R into play
(v) 
For circumstances (be):
(v a) 
into A n of n
(v b) 
into G n
(v c) 
into M G n
(v d) 
into P
(v e) 
into P n b
providing information about the circumstances in which something or
somebody can be found. For example:
(v e) 
He went into playing football again.
d v 
into P 
n 
b
(vi) 
For separation (bs):
(vi a) into m G n
meaning that something is divided into smaller parts. For example:
(vi a) She divided the melon into ten equal parts.
d 
v 
A n 
into m G 
n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
151
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the into-segments:
into A G n of G n 
into A n of n
into A G n of n 
into A n of G n 
bn
into A G n of A G n 
into A n of A n of G n
into A G n of A n 
into A n of n 
bn
into A G n PI 
into A n of i G n
into A n 
bl 
bn 
into A n v A n P i b G G n
into A n 
bl 
bt 
into A n v A n P i b G n
into all i 
into A n v A n P i b n
into A n of M n 
into A n v A n P i G G n
into A n of A n of n 
into A n v A n P i G n
into A n of i n 
into A n v A n Pi n
into A n of n 
be 
into A n G with n
into A n of A n 
into A n Pi
into A n of n b 
into A n PI
into A n of O n 
into A N"s G n 
bl 
bn
into A n of A n 
into A N"s n
into A n of O G n 
etc.
into A n of A G n
3.3.11 onto-Clauses
The preposition onto is used to designate location (i) or awareness, with an
abstract meaning of location (ii).
(i a) onto A G n
(i b) onto A G n PI
(i c) onto O G n
(i d) onto R
(i e) onto UF else
(ii) 
onto O G n
For example:
(i a) 
He got onto the motorbike.
d v 
onto A n
(ii) 
She is onto your secret games.
d am onto O G 
n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the onto-segments:
onto A G n 
onto O G n
onto A G n PI 
onto O n
onto A n 
onto R
onto A n PI 
etc.
inty
into
into A n of n  bn

152 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
3.3.12 in-Clauses
The preposition in starts the following types of Adverbial Clauses:
(i) 
For time (bm):
(i a) 
in A FB
(i b) 
in A FB of FB-BD
(i c) 
in A FB of M FB
(i d) 
in A FB S
(i e) 
in A G n of FB-BD
(if) 
in A M FB
(i g) 
in A n of FB-BD
(i h) 
in A S EBL of FB-BD
(ij) 
i n A S m F B o f i F B
(i k) 
in A S m to m FB
(i 1) 
in as many FB
(i m) in a while
(i n) 
in about M FB
(i o) 
in about M FB time
(i p) 
in all A FB since then
(i q) 
in FB
(i r) 
in I FB
(is) 
in O life time
(i t) 
in O spare time
... etc., designating the time of action (see Dictionary of Segments).
(ii) 
For manner (bn):
(ii a) 
in A b G G n
(ii b) 
in A G n
(ii c) 
in a line
(ii d) 
in A n of n
(ii e) 
in G n
(ii f) 
in G P
(ii g) 
in kind
(ii h) 
in M G n
(ii j) 
in M ways
(ii k) in O G n
(ii 1) 
in P
(ii m) in silence
... etc., expressing the manner in which the action is performed. For example:
(ii m) 
They stood in silence.
d 
v 
in silence
(iii) 
For location (bl), or direction and location (bdl):
(iii a) in A b G G n
(iii b) in A G G G n
(iii c) i n A G G n o f A G n
(iii d) in A n of G n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
153
(iii e) in A n of i n
(iii f) 
in A n of O G n
(iii g) in all O n
(iii h) in I N"s n of A G n
. . . etc., denoting a place. For example:
(iii g) She has mirrors in all her rooms.
d 
v 
n 
in all O n
(iv) 
For clothes (bt), or insertion, inclusion:
(iv a) in A b G G n
(iv b) in A G G G n
(iv c) in G
(iv d) in G n Pi n
(iv e) 
in n
(iv f) 
in O G G n
. . . etc., meaning dressed in or inserted in. For example:
(iv e) She is all in fur. (meaning she is wearing fur clothes)
d am b in n
(v) 
For circumstances (be):
(v a) 
in A G n
(v b) 
in A n of G n
(v c) 
in A n of P A n
(v d) 
in A NT's n
(v e) 
in all O n
(v f) 
in b G n
(v g) 
in between n 
(also bm or bl)
(v h) 
in M n of G n
(v j) 
in n
(v k) 
in O n
. .. etc., describing the circumstances in which the action is performed. For
example:
(v c) 
They were in the process of buying the car, when they detected a small defect.
d 
am in A n 
of P 
A n when d v 
A G 
n
(vi) 
For purpose (bp or bo):
(vi a) in A G n to v A G n
(vi b) in A n of G n
(vi c) in favour of n
(vi d) in P G G n
(vi e) in P R v G N"s G G n
(vi f) 
in P v n
(vi g) in quest of A n
(vi h) in return for G n
. .. etc., clarifying the purpose behind a certain action. For example:
(vi g) 
They set off in quest of a new land.
d 
v up in n 
of A G n

154
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(vii) For opposition (bz), contrast, or denial:
(vii a) in b G n
(vii b) in spite of A G n
(vii c) in spite of A G n of m n
(vii d) in spite of all O n
(vii e) in spite of n
(vii f) in spite of O G n
where in spite of is equivalent to despite. For example:
(vii b) They came in spite of the heavy rain.
d 
v 
in spite of A G 
n
(viii) For language (b lang.), or means (b means):
(viii a) in n
(viii b) in O N"s G G n
For example:
(viii a) The letter was written in ink.
A 
n 
are P2 
in n
(viii a) The book was in German.
A 
n 
are in n
(ix) 
For sequence (bv):
(ix a) in O n
(ix b) in the S n
denoting sequence of events. For example:
(ix a) She smiled, in her turn.
d 
v 
inO n
(x) 
For quantity, volume, measure (bq):
(x a) 
in n of n
(x b) 
in M n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the in-segments:
in A G N"s n
in A G of n
in a hurry
in a line 
bn
in A M FB 
bm
in A n of A G n
in A n of A n 
bl
in A n of n FB-BH (A-H) v n
in A n of n of Gn
in A n of A n
in A n of A n Pi R
in A n of A n of n
in A n of A n PI b
in A n of A n PI
in A G n of i G n
in A G n of i n
in A G n of m n
in A G n of n 
bl
in A G n of NAME
in A G n of O n
in A G n of P A n 
be
in A G n PI
in A G n Pi off
in A G n Pi
in A G n to v A G n 
bp
in A G n to v A n 
bp
in A G n" Pi" R
in A G N"s n of n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
155
in A n of A N"s n 
in the name of A G n
in A n of A N"s n of n 
in the name of A n
in the least 
in the name of O n
in the long run 
bm 
in the near future 
bm
in the meantime 
bm 
in the offhand way 
bn
in the morning 
bm 
in the offing 
bm
in the name of 
etc.
3.3.13 for-Clauses
The preposition for starts Adverbial Glauses of the following type:
(i) 
For purpose (bp) or for reason (br):
For purpose:
(i a) 
for a bit of P
(i b) 
for a change
(i c) 
for A G G G n only
(i d) 
for A G G G n
(i e) 
for A G n of A n
( i f )  f o r  G  G  N " s  G  G  n
(i g) 
for having P2 O G n
(i h) 
for I
(i j) 
for I G n
(i k) 
for M G n
(i 1) 
for M of O G n
(i m) 
for O n
. . . etc.
For reason:
(i a) 
for a certain n
(i b) 
for A G n of n
(i c) 
for A G n
( i d ) 
f o r A G n o f A n
(i e) 
for d has also P2 G G n
(i i) for G G n of M n
(i g) 
for G n to v O n
(i h) 
for having P2 A n
(i j) 
for I n
. . . etc.
defining the aim to be achieved through the action (bp), or the motives that
have inspired the action (br). For example:
(i m) 
She came for her book, (bp)
d 
v 
for O n
(i j) 
He paid thousands for this horse, (br)
d v 
M 
for I 
n
Compare: The reason why he paid thousands was to have this horse.

156 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(ii) 
For time (bm):
(ii a) 
for A last FB
(ii b) 
for a little while
(ii c) 
for a little more than a FB
(ii d) 
for EBK m FB
(ii e) 
for even a single FB
(ii f) 
for FB
(ii g) 
for FB on end
(ii h) 
for A S FB in FB
(ii j) 
for I FB
... etc., specifying the time of action. For example:
(ii f) 
It was going on for years.
it was Pi 
up for FB
(iii) For quantity, volume or measure (bq):
(iiia) for EBK half of all n
(iii b) for m
(iii c) for M G n
... etc. For example:
(iii b) He bought it for ten.
d 
v 
R for m
Compare: It has cost him ten pounds.
(iv) 
For concern (bu):
(iv a) for A G n
(iv b) for A G n of G n are also j to v
(iv c) for each m n d v
(iv d) for G G n
(iv e) for I are A G G n
(iv f) 
for i n
... etc., meaning concerning (so far as something is concerned}. For example:
(iv f) 
There is no place for this table.
there are no n 
for I 
n
Compare: So far as this table is concerned, there is no place for it in the room.
(v) 
For explanation:
(v a) 
for example
(v b) 
for instance
(vi) Used as Conjunction:
(vi a) for A G n of n has P2 up
(vi b) for A n are also Pi G n to v
(vi c) for d am also n
(vi d) for d has also been j
... etc., starting a Nominal segment, followed by a Verbal Tense and having
the meaning of because. For example:
(vi a) 
The river was very high, for a great deal of snow had melted lately.
A 
n 
are also G 
for A G 
n 
of n 
has P2 
up

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
157
Compare: The water level of the river was high, because much snow had melted
lately.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the for-segments:
for a little less
for a little more than a FB
for a little while 
bm
for a long time 
bm
for A m 
bq
for both A n and A n
for both n
for both n and n
for both of R
for d has P2 A n
for d has P2 G G n 
br
for d has P2 G n 
br
for d has P2 n 
br
for d shall also v O n
for d shall also v O n UI
for d shall also v Pi M
for d shall v O n
for d shall v O n UI
for d shall v Pi M
Sj v Od
for d shall v to v
for d shall v up
Sjv
for each m n d v 
bu
for each one 
refer to last n
for each one of R
for each one PI
for having been j
for having been so j
for having P2 A n
for having P2 A n of n 
br
for having P2 O G n 
bp
bm 
for having P2 O n 
bp
for having P2 R
for I 
bu 
bp
for Pi A n
for Pi G G G n
for Pi n
for Pi R
for Pi R j 
br
for Pi R up
for Pi to v
for Pi to v A n
for Pi X
for R
for R all
for R also to v
for R both
for R to be
for R to v
for R to v O G n 
bp
for R to v R
for R to v up
for R to v up to
for R to v X
for reasons beyond O control
for the rest of O FB 
bm
for the rest of O life
for the rest of O n
for the rest of the FB 
bm
for the time being
etc.
br
3.3.14 to-Clauses
The preposition to can start the following types of Adverbial Clauses:
(i) 
For direction and location (bdl), or for location only (bl) or for
direction only (bd):
(i a) 
t o A b G n o f A G n 
(bdl)
(i b) 
to A G G G n 
(bdl, bd)

158 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(i c) 
to A G n of G G n 
(bdl)
(id) 
to A less G n of n 
(bd)
(i e) 
to A less G n
(if) 
to A less j of G n
(i g) 
to A N"s G n
(i h) 
to i n of G n
(i j) 
to n
(i k) 
to O n 
(bl)
(i 1) 
to O N"s G n 
(bdl)
... etc., expressing either the direction or the location of the action, or both.
For example:
(i b) 
He came to the church.
d v 
to A n
(ii) 
For reason (br):
(ii a) 
to A G n of such a(n) n
(ii b) 
to all n
(ii c) 
to O n
explaining the reason for a certain action. For example:
(ii c) 
We drank to his health.
d 
v 
toO n
(iii) For time (bm):
(iii a) to A G G FB
(iii b) to FB
(iii c) to the FB-BD S half
(iii d) to the last FB
(iii e) to the S of FB
denoting a point of limit in time. For example:
(iii d) 
Tour permit is valid to the first of January.
O 
n 
are j to A S 
of FB
(iv) For addition (b addition):
(iv a) to A G G n
(iv b) to I n
(iv c) to I n of n
used with the verbs add, apply, put, complement, etc. to express addition. For
example:
(iv a) 
The cook added some salt to the soup.
d 
v 
M 
n to A n
(NB The meaning of addition is a subgroup of a more general meaning, that
for direction and location.)
(v) 
For quantity, volume, or measure (bq):
(v a) 
to A G n of m m
(v b) 
to M G n
(v c) 
to just below m %
(v d) 
to less than m %

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
159
(v e) 
to M
(v f) 
to m %
(v g) 
to m % of n
.. . etc., setting a limit to a measurement, amount, volume, quantity, etc. For
example:
(v c) 
The unemployment figures fell to just below 10 %.
A 
G 
n 
v 
to just below m %
('vi) 
For purpose (bp or bo):
(vi a) to A n
(vi b) to n of O n
(vi c) to O P
(vi d) to P A G n
(vi e) to P A n j of n
(vi f) 
to the very n of n
explaining the purpose behind a certain action. For example:
(vi a) 
The helicopter came to the rescue.
A
n 
v 
t o A n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the to-segments:
to A G G n 
b addition 
bd 
to A G n of m m 
bd 
bq
to A G G n of A n 
bdl 
to A G n of m
to A G G n of A n b Pi G n 
to A G n" Pi" n 
bd
to A G G n of A n b Pi n 
to A G n' j' A n
to A G G n of A n Pi G n 
to A G n' Pi'
to A G G n of A n Pi n 
to a great extent 
b
to A G n j of Pi 
to A JE
to A G n j of Pi G n 
to a large degree
to A G n of m of N"s G n 
to a large extent
to A G n of n of N"s G n 
to A less G n of n 
bd
to A G n of n 
bd 
to A less G n
to A G n of A n Pi G n 
to A less j of G n 
bd
to A G n of A n Pi n 
to A less j of n 
bd
t o A G n o f A n b P i G n 
t o A M n
to A G n of A n b Pi n 
to A M of R
to A G n of such a(n) n 
br 
to A n
to A G n of n
to A G n of A n 
to A n A n of A n
to A G n of G G n 
bdl 
to A n A n
to A G n of G n 
bdl 
etc.

160 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
3.3.15 past-Clauses
The preposition past is used to denote:
(i) 
Location (bl):
(i a) 
past A G n
(i b) 
past n of n
... etc., meaning near, near by or beyond something. For example:
(i a) 
They went past the village
d 
v 
past A n
(ii) 
Time (bm):
(ii a) 
past m
(ii b) 
past P n
meaning that a certain limit in time is exceeded. For example:
(ii a) 
It is ten past eleven.
it is m pastm
(ii b) 
He is long past driving age.
d am also past P 
n
3.3.16 next-Clauses
The preposition next is used to start Adverbial Clauses denoting time (i),
sequence (i and ii) and location (only when it is followed by to) (iii). For
example:
(i) 
next FB
(ii a) 
next n
(ii b) 
next n to v
(ii c) 
next v G n
(iii a) 
next to A n
(iii b) 
next to R
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the next-segments:
next FB 
next v A G n of n
next n 
next v A G n of n PI
next n to v 
next v A G n of n PI are m
next time round 
next v G n
next to A n 
bl 
next v n
next to R 
bl 
etc.
next v A G n
3.3.17 against-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition against express
direction and location (bdl or bl) (i), contrast or opposition (ii) and purpose
or reason (iii). For example:

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS
161
(i a) against A G n of A n (bl)
(i b) against A n of I n (bdl)
(i c) against A n (bdl)
(i c) He propped his stick against the wall.
d v 
O n 
against A n
(ii a) against A n
(ii b) against G G n
(ii c) against O G n
(ii a) There was a big demonstration against the regime.
there are A G n 
against A n
(iii a) against n
(iiia) She saved from her salary against retirement.
d 
v 
from O n 
against n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the against-segments:
against A G n of A n
against A G n of G n
against A G n of n
against A G n
bl
bl
against A n shall v G G n
against A n shall v G n
against A n shall v n
v Od
against A n
against A n of A n
against A 11 of I n 
bdl
against A n of G n
against A n of n
against A n 
b opposition
against both of R
against G
against G G n
against G G n of n 
b opposition
against G n 
b opposition
against G n v
against i n
against I
against M n
against n 
b opposition
against n v
against n to v A n PI
against O G n 
b opposition
against O G n of n 
bdl
against O n 
bdl 
b opposition
against O N"s 
bl
against P
against P A n b b
against P A n b
against P A G n b
against P A G n
against P A n
against P A G n b b
against P b
against P n
against P R
against R
against which
etc.

162 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
3.3.18 
through-Clauses
The preposition through starts Adverbial Clauses of the following type:
(i) 
For time (bm):
(i a) 
through A FB
(i b) 
through A G n of A FB-BL
(i c) 
through FB
For example:
(i c) 
We have enough supplies to carry us from 1994 through 1999.
d 
has also 
n 
to v 
R from FB through FB
(ii) 
For direction and location (bdl), which is a very general meaning and
can substitute a number of other meanings, for example (iii, iv).
(ii a) 
through A n
(ii b) through G n
(ii c) 
through G n of A n
For example:
(ii a) 
We passed through the town.
d 
v 
through A n
(iii) For means (bi, b means), or source:
(iii a) through A n
(iii b) through G n
(iii c) through G n of A n
(iii d) through O n
(iii e) through P
. . . etc., elucidating the means used to perform the action. For example:
(iii a) / got it through a friend.
d v R through A n
Compare: A friend helped me to get it.
(iv) To finish or reach the end of something:
(iv a) / went through the book.
d v 
through A n
Compare: I perused the book from one end to the other.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the through-segments:
through A G n of n 
b means 
through A n 
bl 
b means
through A G n of A FB-BL 
bl 
through A n of n Pi n
through A G n of A n 
bl 
through A n Pi n
through A G n of n 
bl 
b means 
through A n of n 
bl 
b means
through A G FB 
bm 
through A n are n of G n 
*
through A G n 
bl 
b means 
through A n of G n PI
through A G n 
bi 
through A n are n of n
through A last M FB 
bm 
through A n of n PI
through A m n PI 
bl 
b means 
through A n of P n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
163
through A n of G n 
through O N"s n
through NAME 
bk 
through P 
b means
through O G 
b means 
through R
through O n 
b means 
etc.
3.3.19 under-Clauses
The prepositions under and beneath, at the start of an Adverbial Clause,
express the following types of meaning:
(i) 
For quantity, volume or measure (bq):
(i a) 
under m
(i b) 
under m %
.. . etc.
For example:
(i b) 
The inflation rate is 
under 10 %.
A 
G 
n are under m %
(ii) 
For location (bl):
(ii a) 
under A b G n
fii b) 
under A G n of A N"s n
(ii cj 
under n
... etc., providing information about the place of action or the whereabouts of
a thing. This is also a very general meaning that can substitute a number of
other meanings (see (i)). For example:
fii d) 
The cat is under the table.
A 
n are under A n
(hi) For circumstances (be) or condition (bx):
(iii a) under n
For example:
iiii a) 
The boiler is under pressure.
A 
n 
are under n
(iii ab) The project is under 
development.
A 
n 
are under n
(iii ac) Tour proposal is under consideration.
O 
n 
are under n
(iv) When under is used in the construction:
(iv a) under i circumstances
it acts as a Conjunction, meaning then, thus, therefore.
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the under-segments:
under A G n of A G n PI 
under A G n of A n" Pi O G n"
under A G n of A G n" Pi O G n" 
under A G n of A G G G n" Pi O n"
under A G n of A n PI 
under A G n of A G G n" Pi O n"

164
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
under A G n of A G n" Pi O n"
under A G n o f A G G n
under A G n of A G n
under A G n o f A G G n 
bl
under A G n
under A G n of A n" Pi O n"
under A G n of A n
under A n NAME
under A n of A G n
under A n of A G n" Pi O n"
under A n of EBO of G n
under A n of EBO of n
under A n of A n" Pi O n"
under A n of A G n 
b means
under A n of FB-BD
under A n of G n PI
under A n of n PI
under A n of A G n PI
under A n of A G n 
bl
under A n of A n PI
under A n of A n 
bl
under A n of others
under A n of others b j to v
under A n of A N"s n 
bl
under A n of A G G n
under A n of A G G G n" Pi O G n'
under A n of A G G n" Pi O G n"
under A n of A G n" Pi O G n"
under An of A n" Pi O G n"
under A n of A G G n
under A n of A G G G n" Pi O n"
under A n of A G G n" Pi O n"
under A n PI
under A N"s n
under A NAME NAME
under A TITLE HEADING
under consideration
under G n 
b means
under G n PI
under i G n of A G G n
under i G n of A G n
under i G n of A n
under i n of A n
under i n of A G G n
under i n of A G n
under m G n NAME
under m n NAME
under n 
bq 
b means
under n m of G n
under n m of G G n
under n m of n
under n n
under n PI
under n subject to n
under O
under O A G n v up
under O A G n v
under O A n v up
under O A n v
Sj v
under O G n
etc.
3.3.20 betzveen-Clauses
At the start of an Adverbial Clause, between is used to indicate location (i),
time (ii) and comparison (iii), both in the abstract and in the concrete sense.
In some cases it is used with the Conjunction and, in others without it.
(i a) between A n and A G n
(i b) between A G G n PI
(i c) between A G n are n of G n
(i d) between O G G n
(i e) between R and A G n
... etc. For example:

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
165
(i a) 
The village is situated between a river and a mountain lake.
A 
n 
are P2 
between An 
and A G 
n
(ii a) between the intervals
(ii b) between m and m o'clock
For example:
(ii b) 
/'// 
be here between four and five o'clock.
d shall be up between m and m o'clock
(iii) between n and n
For example:
(iii a) 
There isn't 
a big difference between pink and red
there are also A G 
n 
between n 
and n
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the between-segments:
between A G n 
between A n and A G n
between A G n and A n 
between A n and A n
between A G n and A G n 
between A n of A G G n
between A G n of A G n 
between A n d shall
between A G 
between A n PI
between A G n PI 
between A n of A m G n
between A G and G n 
between A n of A m n
between A G and G n can be P2 
between A n and O n
between A G G n PI 
between A n of n
between A G n and 
between A n are n of G n
between A G n PI 
between A n of A n
between A G n of A n 
between A n are n of n
between A G n of A G n 
between A n are n
between A G n are n of G n 
between A n and A G G n
between A G n are n of n 
between A n and A G n
between A G n are n 
between A n and A n
between A m n 
between b
between A M n 
between A G n and A G n o f A G G n
between A m of R 
between G and G n
between A m G n 
between G n there v
between A n and 
between G n
between A n and O G n 
between G n PI
between A n 
between i
between A n of A G n 
etc.
between A n and R
3.3.21 
above-Clauses
When used at the beginning of an Adverbial Clause, the preposition above
means positioning or location (i), or sets a limit to quantity, measure and
volume (ii).

166 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(i a) above A n
(i b) above G n
For example:
(i a) 
We were flying above the ocean.
d 
am Pi 
above A n
(ii a) above m
(ii b) above m FB of age
For example:
(ii b) 
All children above five years of age must go to school.
M n 
above m FB of age shall v to n
When used with all it can be a Conjunction, above all (meaning all things
considered, everything taken into consideration, first of all).
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the above-segments:
above A n of O n 
above M n
above A n of A G n 
above n
above A n of A n 
above O G n
above all 
above O n
above board n 
above O n A G G n
above G n 
above O N"s n
above I are G n 
above R
above I are n 
etc.
above m
3.3.22 since-Clauses
Apart from being a Conjunction, since is used as a Preposition at the start of
the Adverbial Clauses denoting time (i).
(i a) since FB
(i b) since i FB
(i c) since P A n
(i d) since O N"s n
(i e) since then
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the since-segments:
since A G n 
since A n of G n
since A G n of n 
since A n v P
since A n of n 
etc.

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
167
3.3.23 
before-Clauses
At the start of an Adverbial Clause, the preposition before is characterized
by two meanings: time (i) and location (ii).
( i a) before A G n
(i b) before FB
(i c) before long
( i d ) before m
(i e) before m o'clock
(i f) before next FB
.. . etc. For example:
(i b) 
The decision must be taken before February.
A 
n 
shall be P2 before FB
(ii a) before A G n
(ii b) before R
. . . etc. For example:
(ii b) 
Two of the guards were walking before him. The other two were behind.
M 
of A d 
are Pi 
before R 
A other m am up
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the before-segments:
before A n 
bl 
bm 
before A n v to v n
before A n did 
Sj v Od
before A n of n 
before A n v
before A n of n Pi PI
before A n of G G n 
before A n v A n of A n
before A n of G n 
before A n v A n
before A n of n of n 
before A n v A n up
before A n v R
before A n shall v R up 
before A n v R up
before A n shall v R 
Sj v Od
before A n shall v A n 
before A n X
before A n shall v A n up 
before all i G n
Sj v Od 
before all i n
before A n to be P2 
before being P2
before A n v up
before d all v O G n
before A n v to v R 
before d all v O n
Sj v Od 
Sj v Od
before A n v 
before d am P2
before d b v
before A n v to v A n 
Sj v
Sj v Od 
before d b v M n o f O n
before A n v to v

168 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
before d b v M n 
before P up b
Sj v Od 
before R 
bl
before P 
before Pi A n
before P A G n 
before Pi O n
before P A n 
before Pi O n for R to v
before P n 
before Pi O n to v
before P O G n 
before Pi X
before P O n 
before R to v
before P O S n 
before too long 
bm
before P R 
etc.
before P up
3.3.24 after-Clauses
In its function as a Preposition heading the Adverbial Clause, after has two
meanings (both implying sequence): for time (i) and for location (ii),
including an expression for direction and location (iii).
(i a) after A FB
(i b) after A FB of P
(i c) after A FB of P A n of n
(i d) after A G G n
(i e) after a while
(i i) after a great interval of time
(i g) after FB
(i h) after FB S
... etc. For example:
(i h) 
She is 
expected to arrive after January 1st.
d am P2 
to v 
after FB 
S
(ii a) after A n
(ii b) after O n
... etc. For example:
(ii a) 
The bank is in this direction, after 
the Post Office.
A 
n 
are in i 
n 
after A n
(iii a) after R
For example:
(iii a) 
The pack of wolves followed after him.
A 
n 
of n 
v 
after R
Below the reader will find an excerpt from the Dictionary of Segments
showing the grammatical structure of the after-segments:
after A FB 
bm 
after A FB"s n
after A FB of P 
bm 
after A FB"s P
after A FB of P A n of n 
after A G G n 
bm
after A FB of P A n 
after A G n

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
169
after A G n of n 
after A n v X
after A G n b 
Sj v Cs
after A G n 
bm 
after A n' Pi A n of A n v'
after A G n of Pi 
after A n' Pi A n of A G n v'
after A n 
bm 
Sj Cs v
after A n of n 
after A P I m m n
after A PI m n
after A n are also P2 
after A P has P2
after A n are P2 
after A P has P2 n
Sj v 
after A S
after A n b 
after A S of O G n
after A n Pi A NT's G n 
after A S of O n
after A n Pi A N"s n 
after a while 
bm
after A n Pi O G n 
after a great interval of time 
bm
after A n Pi O n 
after about m n
after A n v A n 
after about m A n
Sj v Od 
etc.
3.3.25 until, till, while, once, prior to, during-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses and all other Dependent Clauses starting with any of
these Prepositions denote time (bm). Slightly different is once, because it can
also mean repetition or sequence (v d).
(i a) until A n v Pv
(i b) until d has also P2
( i c) until FB
(i d) until M of R v
(ii a) till there are G n (prior to, until and till set a limit in time for the action)
fiii a) while A G G n v up
(in b) while d am P2 up to v A n
( i i i c ) while on A G n v n of n
iiii d) while P O G n
(iv a)during A FB
(iv b) during A n
(iv c) during A n of A n
c i v d ) during P (while and during specify the duration of concurrent action(s))
i v a) once d has P2 to v R
(v b) once d v A n
' v c I once for all
!v d ) once in a while
.. . etc.
3.3.26 like-Clauses
The preposition like starts Adverbial Clauses for comparison, or appearance
i) or for manner (ii). There is no apparent difference between (i) and (ii).

170 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(i a) like A G G n
(i b) like A G n of A G n
(i c) like A n of n
(i d) like G n Pi to be P2
(i e) like n Pi A n out of A n
(i f) like O n
... etc.
For example:
(i f) 
He is like his father.
d am like O n
(ii a) like A G n
(ii b) like A n of n
(ii c) like G n Pi to be P2
(ii d) like I of G n
etc.
For example:
(ii a) 
She was dressed like an old man.
d 
am P2 
like A G n
3.3.27 about-Clauses
The Adverbial Clause starting with the Preposition about can have the
following meanings:
(i) 
For concern (bu):
(i a) 
about A n of A G n
(i b) 
about A n of G n
(i c) 
about A n of O G n
(i d) 
about G n
(i e) 
about I
(i f) 
about O G G n
... etc., meaning concerning, so far as something is concerned.
For example:
(i e) 
We must talk more about this.
d 
shall v 
more about I
(ii) 
For location (bl):
(ii a) 
about A n
(ii b) about m JE-Dn JD of n
... etc.
For example:
(ii a) 
She must be about the house.
d shall be about A n
(iii) For quantity, volume, measure (bq):
(iii a) about m m
(iii b) about M n
... etc., meaning approximately.

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
171
(iv) 
For purpose (bp or bo):
(iv a) about n
... etc., only if immediately preceded by certain Verbs (ask, enquire, come,
etc.).
For example:
(iv a) He asked about money.
d 
v 
about n
(v) 
For time (bm):
(v a) 
about now
(v b) 
about m o'clock
. .. etc.
3.3.28 aboard, across-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Prepositions aboard or across
designate the place of action or location of something (bl).
For example:
(i a) aboard A G G G n
(ii a) across A G n of n
(ii b) across A n
(ii c) across O n
. . . etc.
For example:
(i a) 
The customs inspector came aboard the ship.
d 
v 
aboard A n
(ii b) 
The tree fell across the road.
A 
n v 
across A n
3.3.29 along-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition along can designate
(parallel) location (bl) and togetherness (be). For example:
(i a) along A G G n
(i b) along A G n of A G G n
(i c) along G n
i i d) along i n
. .. etc., also covering the abstract meaning in conformity with.
i ii a) along with A G n
(ii b) along with M G n
(ii c) along with O G one
(ii d) along with O n
(ii e) along with R
... etc.
For example:

172 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(ii d) 
She planned the trip along with her companions.
d 
v 
A n 
along with O n
3.3.30 among-Clauses
The preposition among (or amongst) is used with the Adverbial Clause to
designate location (bl):
(i a) among A G G n of n
(i b) among A G n o f l b G n
(i c) among A n
(i d) among n of G n
(i e) among O G n
... etc. For example:
(i c) 
A word was spread among the people, that ...
A n 
are P2 
among A n
3.3.31 around-Clauses
As part of an Adverbial Clause the Preposition around can designate time (i)
or location (ii). For example:
(i a) around m o'clock
(i b) around the age of m
meaning approximately.
(ii a) around A n
(ii b) around O G n
... etc.
For example:
(ii a) 
They walked all day around the town.
d 
v 
M FB around A n
3.3.32 behind-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition behind designate
location (i) (in the abstract sense, meaning support), and only in a few cases
denote time (ii). For example:
(i a) behind A n of A n
(i b) behind A n of n
(i c) behind A n of n PI
(id) behind A n o f O N " s n
(i e) behind b G G n
etc.
(ii a) behind schedule
(ii b) behind time

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
173
3.3.33 beside-Clauses
The Adverbial Clause starting with beside can mean location (i) and
comparison (by) (ii). For example:
f i a) beside A G G n
(i b) beside n
(i a) 
He likes to sit beside 
the fireplace.
d 
v 
to v beside A n
(ii) 
beside R
... etc.
(ii a) 
There is 
no one beside him, who can sing so well.
there are no n beside R who can v 
b
(in the latter case assuming the meaning of the Conjunction except.}
3.3.34 
beyond-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition beyond designate
location (bl) in the concrete and in the abstract sense, meaning further than a
certain location or limit. For example:
(i a) beyond A G n
(i b) beyond A m G n
(i c) beyond A n of G n
(i d) beyond I
. . . etc.
(i a) 
There are some more villages beyond 
the hill.
there are M more n 
beyond A n
3.3.35 
down-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition down designate location
(bl). For example:
(i a) down A G n
!'i b) down here
. .. etc.
(i a) 
They are swimming down the river.
d 
am Pi 
down A n
3.3.36 inside - Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition inside designate
location (i) and, in one case only, time (ii). For example:
(i a) inside A G G n
ii b) inside A n n

174 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(i c) inside A n of A n
(i d) inside n
(i e) inside O G n
(i f) inside R
etc.
(ii) 
inside A FB (e.g. inside an hour]
3.3.37 near-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition near designate location
(meaning in the close proximity of). For example:
(i a) near A G n
(i b) near A G n of A G n
(i c) near A n Pi n
(i d) near R
... etc.
(i a) 
They have a house near the lake.
d 
v 
A n 
near A n
3.3.38 round and throughout-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Prepositions round or throughout
designate location (i) or time (ii). For example:
(i a) round A G G n
(i b) round A n of n
(i c) round A N"s n
(i d) round here
(i e) round O G n
(i f) throughout I G n
etc.
In this particular meaning round is identical with around (discussed in
3.3.31).
(ii a) round m o'clock
(ii b) round the clock
(ii c) throughout O G n
(ii d) throughout the m hour clock
... etc.
(ii b) 
They work on shifts, round the clock.
d 
v 
on n 
round the clock
3.3.39 
foulards-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition toward(s) express
purpose (i), time (ii) and direction and location (iii). For example:

COMPOSITION OF THE SEGMENTS 
175
(i a) towards n
(i b) towards P A G n
. . . etc.
(i b) 
1 am putting aside money towards buying a new car.
d am Pi 
up n 
towards P 
A G n
(ii) 
towards FB
.. . etc.
(ii a) 
// gets colder towards evening.
it v 
G 
towards FB
(iii a) towards A G G n
(iii b) towards A G n of A G n
(iiic) towards G n
(iii d) towards O G n
.. . etc.
(iii a) 
They were heading towards the sea.
d 
am Pi 
towards A n
3.3.40 upon-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition upon denote reason (i)
and location (ii). For example:
(i a) upon P O n v O S n
(i b) upon P A n
(equivalent to the Conjunction because]
(i b) 
They were rejoicing upon hearing the news that they had won.
d 
am Pi 
upon P 
A n 
that d 
has P2
(ii a) upon A n of A G n
(ii b) upon A n
iii c) upon n
;ii d) upon O G n
.. . etc.
(ii b) 
When he saw the wolf, he climbed upon a tree.
when d v 
A n 
d v 
upon A n
3.3.41 via-Clauses
The Adverbial Clauses starting with the Preposition via designate direction
( i ) o r means ( i i ) . For example:
ii a) via A G G n
;i b) via A G n of n
;i c) via n
. . . etc.
(i c) 
They came via London.
d 
v 
via n
(meaning through)

176 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(ii a) via n
(ii a) 
They came via British Airways.
d 
v 
via G 
n

7 Parsing algorithm
The algorithm presented in this chapter serves to identify a portion of text
(not longer than a sentence) with a segment from the Dictionary of Segments
(DS). Since the segments have a pre-recorded Parsing, the text is parsed
automatically. If there is more than one possible Parsing (there are not more
than two), the user is alerted to this fact and asked for help.
The algorithms presented below have a much deeper significance for the
user 
for example, if a portion of the text cannot be identified with a segment,
this is yet another cause for concern, because it can mean that a) either the
segment corresponding to that portion of text is not registered in the Dictionary
of Segments, or b) that portion of text is syntactically incorrect.
In the former case the user adds (registers) the new segment, in the latter
she (or he) corrects the text. If the user is an English student, our advice is to
try to paraphrase that portion of text in such a way that it matches a segment
from the Dictionary of Segments.
Some of the part of speech disambiguation algorithms and the parsing
method described in this book are already available (Georgiev, 1993a) as a
computer software program called SYNTPARSE. Syntparse is able to parse
any English sentence or text. At the output the program displays the actual
part of speech of every word in the sentence and the parts of the sentence:
subject, object (direct, indirect), complement (subject, object, infinitival),
verb and verbal tense, type of clause, etc. A variant of Syntparse, called
SEMPARSE, displays, in addition, the semantic group to which a particular
word belongs.
(Note that a commercial copy of SYNTPARSE is available for free
download on the Internet 
see Internet Downloads at the end of the book.)
The program saves much time and effort, because there is no need to locate
the segment in the Dictionary of Segments and to look for its Parsing there
this is done by the computer automatically.
1 Identification of the segment
Here we will discuss the identification of a Syntactic Structure (a segment)
within the sentence.

178 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
The segments are arranged in alphabetical order and presented as a
Dictionary of Segments (DS), available on the Internet (see Internet
Downloads at the end of the book). The segments are read by the algorithm
(computer program), one after the other, in the sequence shown in the
Dictionary.
The text to be parsed should be grammatically correct and semantically
meaningful. The text is read from the beginning to the end, running word by
running word, as they flow naturally in the formation of the text. Each
consecutive running word is sent to the Dictionary of Wordforms (DW) to
collect all grammatical (and semantic) information stored for it there. For
example:
Running word 
Grammatical Information
car 
G, n
break 
G, n, v
reading 
G, Pi, n, P, Pv
elected 
G, P1,P2, j, v
they 
d, PPNC (plural)
she 
d, PPNC (feminine singular)
etc.
The running words from the sentence The pianist, sitting down to play, gave her
a brief look will have the following grammatical choice registered in the
Dictionary of Wordforms:
Wordform 
Choice (grammatical information)
the 
A, the
pianist 
d, n, R
sitting 
G, Pi, n, P, Pv
down 
C, up, off
to 
to
play 
G, n, v
gave 
v
her 
R, O
a 
A, a(n)
brief 
G, v, n
look 
n, v
Naturally the computer will have to choose only one alternative where there
are several (as for sitting, play, brief, look}. In order to do this, the computer
runs the grammatical information of the first word of the sentence through
the first members of the Syntactic Structures (the segments), marks those
segments where the grammatical information of the first word matches the
first element of the segment and then starts running the grammatical
information of the second word of the text through the second members of
those segments whose first elements were already identified, etc., till it reaches
the end of the segment as registered in the DS.

The choice of an alternative at each step is made on the condition that the
segment can find a continuation for its next step:
1 links to 2
1 and 2 link to 3
1 and 2 and 3 link to 4
... etc.
(i.e. the 2nd member is sought only if the 1st member of the sequence is
already matched, the 3rd is sought only if the 1st and 2nd members match,
etc., to the end of the segment, then a new segment is started and the same
conditions applied.)
The above sentence will match the following segments from the Dictionary
of Segments:
(i) 
d
Sj (pre-recorded Parsing - Subject)
(ii) 
Pi up to v
v (pre-recorded Parsing 
Verb)
(iii) v R A G n
v Oi Od (pre-recorded Parsing — Verb, Object Indirect, Object Direct)
v Od Co (pre-recorded Parsing - Verb, Object Direct, Complement
Object)
(the computer does not know yet whether R is Oi or Od)
If a shorter segment is identical with the initial part of a longer segment the
shorter segment is disregarded and the longer segment is accepted. For
example:
(1) 
d v R 
/ bought him.
(2) 
d v R A n 
/ bought him a car.
PARSING ALGORITHM 
179
The matching of a portion of the text with a segment from the DS is
performed in the manner described below. Let's consider the same sentence as
above. Horizontally, the numbers show the steps of the sequence of
identification and choice, depending on the continuation of the segment(s).
Vertically, the abbreviations show the choice(s) made at each step.
The
1
A
d
n
pianist
2
d
d
sitting
1
G
Pi
Pi
Pv
down
o
up
up
off
down
to
3
to
to
to
play
4
G
V
n
gave
1
V
V
V
V
her
2
R
R
O
O
a
3
A
A
A
A
brief
4
G
G
n
G
look.
5
n
n
V
n
Chosen alternatives (matching existing segments):
The
1
d
pianist
sitting
\
Pi
down
2
off
to
3
to
play
4
V
gave
1
V
her
2
R
a
3
A
brief
4
G
look.
5
n

180 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
If the sentence from the text reads / bought him a car, then segment (1) is
ignored and segment (2) is identified as the right one to match that particular
portion of the text. Here is another example:
(2) 
d v R A n 
/ bought him a car.
(3) 
d v R A n b 
/ bought him a car yesterday.
If the portion of the text is / bought him a car yesterday, then segment (2) is
discarded and segment (3) is considered to be identical to that particular
portion of the text.
Thus the identification is carried out portion after portion, segment after
segment, till the end of the sentence. In the case of two or more identical
segments (when the initial parts coincide, as in the above examples) only the
longest one to match the portion of text will be accepted. For example, the
identification of the sentence below will be performed in the following order:
They want to believe / that they are going to be discovered / looking their best / behind
closed doors, I just when / they thought / that all was lost, / by a man / who has battled
I across continents.
and the resulting segments will be as follows (the Parsing is shown below, in
bold):
d v to v
Sj v
that d am Pi to be P2
that Sj v
Pi O best
vOd
behind G n 
bl
just when
dTCv
Sj v
that M are j
that Sj v Cs
by A n 
bi
who has P2
Sj v
across n 
bl
When two (or more) segments of equal length happen to be identified with
the same portion of text, then we are met with ambiguity on the syntactic level
which can possibly be resolved on the semantic level. In this case both (or all)
the segments are stored in the memory to await the respective semantic
algorithm to process them, or the user is asked for help. For example:
(4) 
d v R n Pi = I found him home reading. (Compare: He was at home, reading.}
(5) 
d v R G n = I found him home reading. (Compare: I found home reading for
him.}

PARSING ALGORITHM 
181
since home can be G, n, etc., reading can be Pi, P, n, etc.
Or:
(6) 
d v O n n = John gave his baby money. (Compare: John gave money to his
baby.}
(7) 
d v O G n = John gave his baby money. (Compare: money he was given as a
baby.)
since baby can be G, n, etc.
If the identification of (6) or (7) continues, because the portion of the text
has not ended; e.g. in John gave his baby money to buy a doll, then the ambiguity
will remain for the computer so long as there are two identical segments,
(6a) d v O n n t o v A n
(7a) d v O G n to v A n
though for the humans the ambiguity has now ceased to exist. Compare for
contrast:
(8) 
John gave his baby money to Richard the second.
d 
v
O
G
n 
t o n 
A n
In such cases there are two alternatives:
a) the program alerts the user and asks him (her) to intervene and choose the
correct option;
b) the program automatically switches on the respective algorithm for
semantic disambiguation.
The algorithmic procedure for identification of a portion of text with a
segment from the Dictionary of Segments will be as follows below.
/./ Algorithmic notation of Algorithm No 7
Algorithm No 7 uses two dictionaries: the Dictionary of Wordforms and the
Dictionary of Segments.
NB The Dictionary of Wordforms contains both running words and phrases.
The phrases are not placed in a separate dictionary for greater convenience.
Each phrase is registered with its grammatical information. For example:
United States of America 
= n
too well 
= b
for a certain period of time = b
for a change 
= b
take place 
= v
take over 
= v
bring down 
= v
.. . etc.
Most phrases are compound Adverbs and phrasal (separable compound)
Verbs.

182
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
The wordforms of the text are read one by one in the sequence they follow
and are compared with the wordforms (or phrases) in the Dictionary of
Wordforms. The reader can use any English Language (especially Pronoun-
cing) Dictionary, if he (she) complies with the abbreviations for Parts of
Speech adopted in this study (see Chapter 5 and the General Index of
Abbreviations).
The Punctuation Marks to be reckoned with are presented below as List
No 2. These Punctuation Marks interrupt the segment and the algorithm
starts to identify the next segment in sequence (this is also done by the
Auxiliary words, see List No 1 in section 3 of Chapter 6). The Punctuation
Marks ignored by the program are shown below in List No 4, with one
exception - when ' is used to designate the genitive of the Noun. The Inverted
Commas used to emphasize a word, phrase or sentence are ignored.
The identification of the sentence with a segment or segments is carried out
according to the following algorithmic procedure. The block-scheme of the
procedure is shown in Figure 7.1.
Figure 7.1 Block-scheme of the procedure
Here is the flow-chart notation of the same procedure:
1. Read the wordforms of the sentence (from full stop to full stop) one by one;
has the sentence (or the text) ended?
2. Yes. Go to 1 to read the wordforms of the next sentence. If the text has
ended, stop and end operation.
3. No. Take each individual wordform of the sentence (starting with the first)
and compare it with the List presented in the Dictionary of Wordforms
(DW). In those cases where the wordform from the text coincides with the
first word of a phrase (or first words of more than one phrase) in the DW,
take, consecutively, the next word(s) of the sentence and compare them with
the phrase(s) in the DW to see if a phrase can be matched. If a phrase is
List No 2 ; : , . ! ? ( ) -
List No 4 " '
Find the words 
Translate the 
Identify the syntactical
of the sentence 
grammatical 
structure(s) with a
in the Dictionary 
information 
pre-recorded structure
and take their 
of the words 
from the Dictionary of
grammatical 
into syntactical 
Segments,
information. 
structure(s). 
I
1 r
Display the parsing of the
matching structure(s).

PARSING ALGORITHM 
183
matched, take the grammatical information registered for the phrase and
store it. Otherwise, take the grammatical information registered for that
particular individual wordform and store it. If a wordform from the sentence
cannot be matched with a wordform from the DW, display the wordform and
ask the operator to register it in the DW together with its grammatical
information. Then repeat the operation of identification.
The grammatical information of each wordform of the sentence is stored
and presented as shown above (see the example with The pianist, siting down to
play, gave her a brief look.]. The words of the sentence are arranged in a
horizontal sequence (as they follow), and the grammatical information is
arranged vertically under each word (as shown above, p. 179).
NB A segment cannot be interrupted or cut to make it fit. Only a complete
segment can be fitted into the whole sentence or part of it. The segments are
fitted from left to right, one after the other, up to the end of the sentence. The
next segment cannot begin before the previous one has ended. If several
segments fit up to a certain length of the sentence, only the longest of them is
accepted. The last segment should fit exactly into the place left between the
end of the previous segment and the full stop (the end of sentence); if not, the
operator is asked to intervene.
The procedure described above is similar to the identification procedures
used in Text Processing, for example to match a word from the text with a
word in the dictionary. In that case, a particular word from the text can
match the initial parts of many other words in the dictionary, but finally, it
has only one real match 
the word that is absolutely identical to it from the
first letter to the last. Similarly, being a fixed sequence of elements and having
a fixed length, the segment, like the word, can match only an absolutely
identical sequence contained in the sentence. Then the segments follow in
sequence to form a sentence in the same way as the natural language words
follow each other to form a sentence.
When a portion of the text is identified with a segment from the Dictionary
of Segments, the computer checks if there is a long interval left indicating an
instruction concerning that particular segment, and if there is such an
instruction, carries it out. For example:
He is a tall one
d am A G one 
Refer 'one' to the last d as Sj.
Sj v Cs
Then, the program finds the last d used as Subject and refers one to it
(replaces one with it). The parsing of the segment is shown under it. If several
(or more) structures, following in alphabetical sequence, have the same
parsing, the parsing is shown at the end of this sequence. A blank row (or
dots) is left where no parsing is provided. For example:
I m n are also Pi to v R
I m n are also P2 G n
Sj v Od

184 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
all at once
all b Pi
all because
When a segment has more than one parsing it is marked as ambiguous and
is stored to await further instructions to solve this ambiguity on a semantic
level, or the operator is asked to intervene. For example, the two segments
shown below have two possible parsings:
d has also P2 R b A n
d has also P2 R G n
Sj v Oi Od
Sj v Od Co
The segment and the sentence (each constituent element of it) always go
together with their parsing, since the instructions of the algorithms can refer
to either the segment or its parsing when decisions are to be made. For
example:
She bought a nice house near London.
d 
v 
A G n 
near n
Sj v 
Od 
bl
2 Parsing of the segment
There is no Text Processing (verification of the grammatical correctness of
the Sentence, Machine Translation or Information Retrieval) without
parsing.
The reader can find a definition of a Parse in Gazdar and Mellish (1989:
149) or McEnery (1992: 80). In principle, Parsing is synonymous with
identifying the grammatical and syntactical structure of the sentence. In Text
Processing, the outstanding problem is what structure, how it is structured
and with what rate of success. There are different views and approaches
to these questions, therefore the best thing would be to leave this to the critics
and to the users to decide.
When we write, or speak, what we say is called meaning. The way we say it
is called grammar, syntax, style. What we say and how we say it is a universal
dilemma and a cherished subject of many schools of thought. Some (schools)
recognize that what comes first and then they find a way how to express it.
Others think that what and how are inseparable and they should be dealt
with simultaneously.
We have taken the view that syntax, for the purposes of study and
description, can be separated from the lexical and other semantic meaning,
acknowledging the fact that then we deal only with the frame, not with the
substance. In our case, the frame is the segment, understood most generally as
a syntactically correct sequence of Parts of Speech.

PARSING ALGORITHM 
185
However, in the segment we have introduced enough semantic informa-
tion to make the Parsing a reality. This includes the differentiation between
the Noun as a Subject (d) and as an Object (n, R), and the preservation of
the Verbal Tenses, the Infinitive and the Adverb in their actual positions in
the sentence, which has enabled us to determine the Complement and the
Object in the Predicate (in the Verbal Phrase). In other words, the segment
was born with its Parsing. The Parsing was predetermined by the internal
structure of the segment. There was no need for lengthy algorithms to
describe how to recognize the Parts of Speech (as we have done in Part 1)
and, consequently, how to recognize the Parts of the Sentence.
The Parsing of the segment depends on the type and composition of the
segment. The latter was discussed in Chapter 6, Section 3. In this section, in
order to help the reader understand our Parsing method, we will provide
examples to cover all possible varieties of segments and Parsings.
The most important element of the Sentence is the Subject (the doer) and
then comes the Verb (the Predicate denoting action). For example:
(i) 
Teresa came.
d 
v
Sj 
v
The Verb (as Tense) describes what the Subject does, did or will do.
Third in importance is the Object (Od) - the object of the action. Then
the Subject and the Object (of the action) are placed in a relationship,
described by a Verb (Verbal Tense). For example:
(ii) 
Peter asked Mary.
d 
v 
n
Sj 
v 
Od
(iii) 
Mary has bought a book.
d 
" has P2 
A n
Sj 
v 
Od
There are two varieties of Objects 
Direct (Od) and Indirect (Oi). Examples
(ii) and (iii) are for a Direct Object. This means that the connection, or the
relationship between the Subject and the Object is direct. There is nothing to
intervene to stand in between.
The Indirect Object (Oi) intervenes between the Subject and the Object.
For example:
(iv) 
Mary has bought him a book.
d 
has P2 
R 
A n
Sj 
v 
Oi Od
Compare:
(iv a) Mary has bought a book for him.
Sj " v 
Od 
bp
All other elements (or parts) of the Sentence are Complements (or
modifiers) either to the Subject, or the Verb, or the Object Direct. The

186 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Complement explains, clarifies, brings additional information. Below we
discuss the complements one by one.
1. Complement to the Subject (Cs). The Complement Subject can assume
two positions in the segment.
a) It can follow after an Auxiliary Verb from the be paradigm or after a
modal verb (shall, etc.) plus be (shall be) (v, vi, vii), or after a linking
Verb (become, seem, feel, etc.). What is usually meant by a Predicate
Complement (Curme, 1955: 113), or by a Nominative Agreement
(Hausser, 1989: 370) (as in examples v, vi, vii), we would prefer to call
a Complement Subject, accepting that it is a Nominative Agreement
when the Complement Subject contains a Noun. For example:
(v) 
Mary is a housewife.
d 
v A n
Sj 
v Cs
or
(vi) 
He must be the owner.
d shall be A n
Sj v 
Cs
Compare:
(vii) 
The girl on the chair is my sister.
A 
d on A n 
are O n
Sj 
bl 
v 
Cs
(vii a) My sister is on the chair.
(vii b) My sister is the girl on the chair.
(vii c) The girl is my sister.
When the Adjective is used as a Second Argument (Hausser, 1989:
370) it is a Complement Subject. For example:
(viii) 
The man is hungry.
A 
d am j
Sj 
v Cs
Compare:
(viii a) The hungry man (eats a cake).
A 
G 
d 
v An
showing that hungry can be used as an attribute to the Noun, without
substantially changing the meaning of the sentence.
b) It can follow immediately after the Subject, as part of an abridged
Relative Clause. For example:
(ix) 
The man eating the cake is hungry.
A 
d 
Pi 
A n are j
Sj 
Cs 
v Cs

PARSING ALGORITHM 
187
Compare:
(ix a) 
The man who eats the cake is hungry.
A 
d 
who v 
A n are j
Sj 
Sj 
v Od 
Cs
Sj 
Cs
(x) 
The man overboard is a pirate.
A 
d 
b 
are A n
Sj 
Cs 
v 
Cs
2. Complement to the Object (Co). The Complement Object always follows
immediately after the Object Direct. For example:
(xi) 
She called him a liar.
d 
v 
R A n
Sj v 
Od Co
(xii) 
Ton must now say something funny.
d 
shall also v UF 
j
Sj v 
Od 
Co
Some authors (Graver, 1971: 146) point out that the Infinitive can also be
used as an Object to the Verb. Compare:
(xiii) 
/ want to stay.
d v 
to v
However, we would prefer to call the Infinitive in this and in other cases an
Infinitival Complement (Ic), because of its varied use (xiv, xv). For
example:
(xiv) 
She asked him to wait.
d 
v 
R 
to v
Sj v 
Od Ic
Sj v 
Od Co
In (xiv) the Subject of the Infinitive is also the Object of the Main Verb,
the Infinitive playing the role of a Complement Object.
(xiv a) He was the first man to go.
d am A G 
n 
to v
Sj v 
Cs 
Ic
Sj v 
Cs 
Cs
In (xiv a) the Subject of the Infinitive is a Complement Subject, the
Infinitive is also a Complement Subject.
(xiv b) The crowd watched the procession pass.
A 
n 
v 
A n 
v
Sj 
v 
Od 
Ic
Sj 
v 
Od 
Co

188 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Note the ambiguity:
A n 
v 
A G n
Sj 
v 
Od
In (xiv b) the Infinitive is used without the Particle to.
(xiv c) To read is to know.
to v are to v
Sj v
Sj v 
Cs
In (xiv c) the Infinitive to read is used as a Subject.
(xv) 
/ went with them to drink a beer.
d v 
with R 
to v 
A n
Sj v 
be 
v 
Od
Sj v 
be 
Ic
In (xv) the Main Verb and the Infinitive form a single unit. Compare:
(xv a) 
/ went to drink a beer.
Sj 
v Od
According to Curme (1955: 108) the Infinitival Complement in example
(xv) will be an instance of Predicate Appositive used instead of a Clause of
Purpose.
3. Complement to the Verb. The Adverb, the adverbial phrase, the
Prepositional Adverbial Clause and the Infinitival Complement are used
to elucidate the meaning of the Verb. For example:
(xvi) 
We went to the town by car.
d 
v 
to A n 
by n
Sj v 
bdl 
bi
The Adverbial Clauses in (xvi) explain further the meaning of the Verb
(the action denoted by the Verb): towards what location (bdl) and by
what instrument or means (bi).
(xvii) 
Today it rained the whole day.
b 
itv 
A G 
FB
b 
Sj v 
bm
In (xvii) the Adverb (b) and the adverbial phrase (bm) add more
information to the meaning of the Verb, pointing out the time of action.
(xviii) 
It has started to grow.
it has P2 
to v
Sj v 
Ic
In (xviii) the Infinitival Complement explains what has started. In this
case, the Infinitival Complement refers only to the action of the Verb.

PARSING ALGORITHM 
189
However, in (xiv d) below the Infinitival Complement refers indirectly to
the Verb and directly to the Object, if we consider the entire that-clause to
be the Object of the Verb said (xivd b). Compare:
(xiv d) She said that he should have to wait.
d 
v 
that d should have to v
(xiv da) Sj v 
that Sj v 
Ic
(xivdb)Sj v 
Od
The fact that the abridged form of the Infinitival Complement can be used
as a Complement Object (xix) suggests that the Infinitival Complement in
such cases as (xix a) plays the same role.
(xix) 
He deemed him an honest man.
d v 
R A G 
n
Sj v 
Od Co
(xix a) He deemed him to be an honest man.
d v 
R to be A G 
n
Sj v 
Od Ic
It seems that the Parsing of the segments starting with there (there are, there
has, there can, there shall, there v) is somewhat controversial. In some languages
'there + Verb' is recognized as an impersonal Verb. In English, Curme
(1955: 100) calls it 'anticipatory' there and terms it a provisional Subject to the
real Subject (xx).
(xx) 
In this building there lived an interesting woman.
in i 
n 
there v 
A G 
n
Sj 
v 
Sj
So far as the real Subject is concerned, all English language dictionaries and
Hausser (1989: 370) confirm this, saying that the Subject is used as Predicate
of Auxiliaries (xxi).
(xxi) 
There are people . ..
v 
Sj
However, if we take the view point that 'there + Verb' is an impersonal
Verb, then we can also assume that the real Subject is missing (xxi) or
unspecified (xxii) and that what follows after it is either a Complement
Subject (xxi a, xxi b), a Subject (xxi c) or an Object (xxii). Through a
transformation, the Prepositional Adverbial Clause can also become a
Subject (xxii b).
(xxi) 
There are people ...
(xxi a.) 1 am one of them.
(xxi b) Ton are one of them.
... etc. Sj v Cs
(xxi c) There are people, who eat bananas.
Sj 
Sj 
v Od

190 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(xxii) 
There are two apple trees in my garden.
v 
Od 
bl
(xxii a) / have two apple trees in my garden.
Sj v 
Od 
bl
(xxii b) My garden contains two apple trees.
Sj 
v 
Od
Below there is a list of the most common Parsing sequences met in the
English sentence (the Adverb and the Prepositional Adverbial Phrase are
excluded - for details concerning their position in these Parsing sequences see
the Dictionary of Segments):
(xxiii) 
Sj
(xxiv) 
Sj v
(xxv) 
Sj v Gs
(xxvi) 
Sj v Od
(xxvii) 
Sj v Od Co
(xxviii) 
Sj v Oi Od
(xxix) 
Sj v Od Ic
(xxx) 
Sj v Od Co Ic
(xxxi) 
Sj v Ic
(xxxii) 
Sj v Cs Ic
(xxxiii) 
Sj Cs v Cs
For more information see the Dictionary of Segments.
The Parsing terminology used in this study closely follows that used by
Quirk etal. (1972).
2.1 Parsing ambiguities
No parsing system can be perfect for two reasons:
a) many ambiguities inherent in the language cannot be resolved;
b) the Parsing System is not powerful enough to parse what to our human
minds is unambiguous. In other words, the ambiguity does not exist in the
text (in the sentence), it is created by the inability of the Parsing System to
cope efficiently with the text.
We will concentrate our attention on the latter problem, since the former is
well documented in the literature.
The ambiguities that could arise using our Parsing System are of the
following types:
a) ambiguities that may occur within the segment - when a certain portion of
text matches more than one segment;
b) ambiguities that may arise at the juncture of the segments - when the same
sentence can have two (or more) presentations in view of the uncertain
boundaries between the constituent segments (when it is not clear where
the previous segment should end and the next should begin);

PARSING ALGORITHM 
191
c) ambiguities inherent in detached (or incomplete) segments, when a
segment is split by an intervening segment and therefore its pre-recorded
parsing allows for more than one possibility.
Algorithm No 7 matches the segments by using a deterministic approach.
One can improve the algorithm by making it display the different options, so
that the operator can intervene and choose the right option.
2.1.1 
Ambiguities within the segment
This type of ambiguity can be subdivided into three groups:
a) when a portion of a text matches more than one segment and all these
segments have the same pre-recorded Parsing. This type of ambiguity is
due mainly to the fact that some Parts of Speech are regarded as equal in
function and marked so respectively in the Dictionary of Wordforms (m =
G, m = n, S = G, S = n, Pi = n, P = n, etc.). For example:
(i) 
They have money.
(i a) 
d 
has n
(i b) 
d 
v 
n
Sj 
v 
Od
(ii) 
The first man came.
(ii a) 
A 
S 
n 
v
(ii b) 
A 
G 
n 
v
Sj
In this case, the ambiguity is ignored and the analysis of the sentence
continues uninterrupted.
b) when a portion of the text matches one segment, but this segment happens
to have two possible parsings (iii, iv). For example:
(iii) 
She bought him flowers.
d 
v 
R n
Sj v 
Oi Od
Sj v 
Od Co
The above segment has two parsings because it can match such sentences
as iii a and iii b:
(iii a) She thought him rich.
d 
v 
R 
n
Sj 
v 
Od Co
(rich can be a Noun or an Adjective)
(iii b) She gave him money.
d 
v 
R n
Sj 
v 
Oi Od
v

192 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(iv) 
a big house
AG n
Sj
Od
Compare:
(iv a) 
A big house / on the lake leasts much.
Sj
(iv b) 
They bought / a big house / in Paris.
Od
Example (iv) serves to illustrate the problem with the incomplete
(detached) segments (see 2.1.3).
If in example (iii) we use her, instead of him, the ambiguity will be
different:
She bought her flowers.
d 
v 
R n
d 
v 
O n
Sj v 
Oi Od
Sj v 
Od Co
Sj v 
Od
Since the so called 'linking Verbs' (Curme, 1955: 106) are not taken into
separate account, only one Parsing is provided instead of the two possible
(v and v a). For example:
(v) 
She became a mother.
d 
v 
A n
Sj v 
Od
is also equivalent to
(v a) 
She is a mother.
d am A n
Sj v 
Cs
If, however, this phenomenon is seen from a different angle, it may no
longer be considered as a Parsing problem.
In the case where the computer software program is faced with two
options, there are two possibilities: either to switch on a subroutine to select
the right alternative (say by checking whether flowers can be used as an
Adjective and see that it cannot be used as an Adjective because it is in the
plural, or to check what Verbs, after the Subject, can be used with the
Object and what with the Complement Object) or to interrupt the analysis
of the sentence and ask the user for help.
Below we present an efficient algorithm (Algorithm No 21) to facilitate
the choice when we have two alternatives: a segment that can be either a
Subject or an Object (see example (iv) above).

PARSING ALGORITHM 
193
Algorithm No 21 to choose between Subject and Object (for appositional
segments marked as Subject or Object).
1. Is Sj/Od segment preceded by a full stop?
2. Yes. Record: a Sj. Go to the next segment marked Sj or Od. Go to 1.
(For brevity we will use: Go to 1).
3. No. Is Sj/Od immediately preceded by Sj/Od, which in turn is preceded
by a full stop?
4. Yes. Same as 2.
5. No. Is Sj/Od preceded by:
Sj v Oi Od
Sj v Od
Sj am Pi Oi Od
Sj am Pi Od
Sj has P2 Oi Od
Sj has P2 Od 
?
6. Yes. Record: Od. Go to the next Sj/Od. Go to 1.
7. No. Is Sj/Od followed by b-clause(s)?
8. Yes. Same as 2.
9. No. Is Sj/Od followed by a segment that starts with v (Verb) or by a
segment that starts with am (was, were, are)?
10. Yes. Same as 2.
11. No. Is Sj/Od followed by another Sj/Od (or up to 3 other Sj/Od
segments), in turn followed by a v-segment or by an am (was, were,
are)-segment?
12. Yes. Same as 2.
13. No. Is Sj/Od segment followed by and + Sj/Od segment, which in
turn is followed by a b-clause or by a v-segment or by an am-segment?
14. Yes. Same as 2.
15. No. Unrecognized. Ask operator for help. Go to the next Sj/Od. Go
to 1.
c) when a portion of the text matches two segments, both of which have
different Parsing. For example:
(vi) 
They took the Earl prisoner.
(vi a) d 
v 
A n 
n
Sj 
v 
Od 
Go
(vi b) d 
v 
A G 
n
Sj 
v 
Od
(On the condition that in the Dictionary of Wordforms Earl is marked
both as an Adjective and as a Noun.) This type of ambiguity can be seen in
yet another example:
(vii) 
Her worst vice is smoking,
(vii a) O G 
n arc Pi
' Sj
v

194 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(vii b) O G 
n are n
Sj 
v Cs
(of which only vi a and vii b are correct). At this stage, the only solution
would be to ask the user to intervene and to choose the correct alternative.
2.1.2 
Ambiguities arising at the juncture of the segments
One of the main reasons for this kind of ambiguity is that some Verbs can be
used both with and without Prepositions or Adverbial Adjuncts (bring, bring
in; look, look after, etc.) and the computer program would not know if the
Preposition is used with the Verb or belongs to the Adverbial Clause that
follows next. We have tried to nip this ambiguity in the bud by listing those
Prepositional Verbal Phrases that are almost idiomatic as one-word entries in
the Dictionary of Wordforms. Another thing that could be done in this case
would be to check if at the juncture there are two consecutive Prepositions. If
so, this is an indication that the first Preposition is part of the Verb and the
second is part of the Adverbial Clause (i).
(i) 
They went on with their work.
d 
v 
up with O n
Selecting the longest segment is no solution in (iii), although it works in
(ii).
(ii) 
I passed on the messages of sympathy.
d v 
up A n 
of n
Sj v 
Od
(iii) 
/ landed on a heap of stones.
d v 
up A n 
of n
Sj v 
Od
The correct parsing for (iii) is:
(iii a) / landed on a heap of stones.
d v 
on A n 
of n
Sj v 
bl
The two sentences are absolutely identical, but their sequences of Parts of
Speech are not, and hence their Parsing is also different: (ii) is one sentence
that is equal to one segment; (iii) is one sentence that is composed of two
segments, the second of which is an Adverbial Clause. There is no conceivable
way to resolve this problem on purely formal syntactical grounds, though we
can suggest the following amendment to Algorithm No 7: when the
identification of the segment reaches a Preposition, the software program
should offer two alternatives. The first alternative will be to continue, as in
(ii), and to identify the longest segment (available in the Dictionary of
Segments). The second alternative will be to interrupt the previous segment
before the Preposition, assuming that the Preposition starts a Prepositional

PARSING ALGORITHM 
195
Adverbial Clause, and to try to identify it with an existing segment. At the
output, examples (ii) and (iii) will be presented as (ii) and (ii a) and (iii) and
(iii aa), and the user will be asked to intervene to make the correct choice.
(ii a) 
on the, messages of sympathy
(iii aa) on a heap of stones
Yet another example of the same sort is presented in (iii b, iii c, iii d):
(iii b) She clumsily knocked over a chair.
d 
also 
v 
A n
Sj 
v 
Od
(where knock over — v)
(iii c) She clumsily knocked over a chair.
d also 
v 
up A n
Sj 
v 
Od
(where knock over = v up)
(iii d) She clumsily knocked over a chair.
d also 
v 
over A n
Sj 
v 
bdl
where (iii b) and (iii c) match two different segments having the same Parsing
(knocked over is presented in the DW as one word, therefore the resulting
structure in (iii b), but a great number of other Verbs filling this position will
give rise to (iii c) and (iii d)).
Another reason for an ambiguity at the borderline of the segments is the
fact that the Indicative Pronoun that and the Conjunction that coincide.
When a sentence encompasses I or i (signs for an Indicative Pronoun), the
computer software program using this method would not know if that is used
as an Indicative Pronoun and therefore is part of the previous segment, or if it
is used as a Conjunction and is the first element of a new segment (a
Subordinate Clause). Following the rule that the longer segment has
precedence, the program may come up at the output with a wrong Parsing
(iv aj. For example:
(iv) 
We can no longer say that within the current structure this is so.
(iv a) d shall also v I 
within A G n I are b
Sj \- 
Od bl 
Sj v Pr
(iv b) d shall also v that within A G n I are b
Sj v 
that bl 
Sj v Pr
where that in (iv aj is identified as Object, instead of being identified as a
Conjunction as in (iv b). To remedy this problem, we would have to amend
Algorithm No 7 in the same way as we would do for the Prepositions
(examples ( i i ) and (iii)): the computer program will provide two versions
at the output (iv a) and (iv b) and the user will be asked to choose one of
them.

196 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
2.1.3 
Ambiguities inherent in the incomplete segments
Let's consider the following sentences:
(i) 
' You have acted bravely', was his answer.
d 
has P2 
up 
are O n
Sj 
v 
b 
v 
Sj
Compare:
(i a) 
His answer was 'You have acted bravely'.
Sj 
v 
Sj 
v 
Pr
(ii) 
This, without any doubt, was his answer.
I 
without any n 
are O n
Sj 
Prep. Adv. Clause v Cs
where the incomplete segment are O n will have two parsings (i, ii),
depending on the context.
Other factors that may affect the overall performance of the computer
software program developed on this basis are the choice of the programming
language and the ingenuity of the programmer.

8 Links of predicates and incomplete segments
All links, before being syntactic, are logical links as well as semantic links. In
Text Processing, there is a need to establish (also algorithmically) the link of
a) Predicative appositive (as part of a segment, or as interrupted segment)
and b) Interrupted segment, where a segment is interrupted by another
segment (the intervening segments are usually adverbial or appositional) and
its two parts are cut off from one another.
This is a very common practice in English and no computational grammar
can avoid it, because of its significance. Compare, for example:
(i) 
He rose to his feet to greet us.
d v 
to O n 
to v 
R
Sj v 
bn 
v 
Od
Ic
(i a) 
He rose to greet us.
NB The links of the predicates and of the incomplete segments described
below do not have the strength of algorithms. They should be used only as
general guidelines.
1 Links of PI
The Participle 1st (PI) represents the Past Participle forms of the regular (-ed)
and the irregular Verbs. There are two possibilities for the PI.
a) To be an integral part of a segment, positioned before a Noun (as an
attribute to the Noun, marked as G), after the Subject (as Complement
Subject, marked as PI), after the Auxiliary Verb or Verbal Tense used as a
Linking Verb (as Complement Subject, marked as PI), or after the Object
(as Complement Object, marked as PI).
If the segment ends with PI this means that:
1. The PI is a Complement Object if preceded by the Object. If not, it is
a Complement Subject when preceded by a linking verb and should be
linked to the Subject of the same segment, to its left, according to the
formulae:

198 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Sjis PI (1)
Od is PI (2)
2. The PI should also be put at the beginning of the next segment (i da, ii
da below).
These algorithmic operations start immediately after the appearance
of PI at the end of the segment. For example:
(i) 
He remained seated on the sofa.
d v 
PI 
on A n
Sj v 
Cs 
bl
(ii) 
/ found her dressed for the party.
d v 
R PI 
for A n
Sj v 
OdCo 
bp
The above sentences consist of two segments:
(i a) 
He remained seated 
= d v PI
(i b) 
on the sofa. 
= on A n
(ii a) 
I found her dressed 
= d v R PI
(ii b) 
for the party. 
— for A n
Since the first segments end with PI, in accordance with the above
instructions (1) and (2) the computer will make the following
arrangements for further clarification of the links of the PI and of the
meaning of the sentence as a whole:
(i c) 
He is seated.
(i d) 
He remained seated
(i da) 
seated on the sofa.
(ii c) 
She is dressed, (since her = she)
(ii d) 
I found her dressed
(ii da) 
dressed for the party.
Or in another example:
(iii) 
The method employed in measuring the pressure in the renal vessels was one
based upon the general principle employed in human blood pressure estimations.
When processed by Algorithm No 7 this sentence will yield the
following segments:
(iii a) 
The method employed 
= A n PI
(iii b) 
in measuring the pressure 
= in P A n
(iii c) 
in the renal vessels 
= in A G n
(iii d) 
was one based 
~ was one PI
(iii e) 
upon the general principle employed 
= upon A G n PI
(iii f) 
in human blood pressure estimations. — in G G G n
Following the instruction concerning PI, the computer will 'know'
that the following links must be made:

LINKS OF PREDICATES AND INCOMPLETE SEGMENTS 
199
(iii gj 
The method is employed
employed in measuring the pressure
(iii h) 
in renal vessels.
(iii j) 
The method was one based
based upon the general principle employed
(iii k) 
employed in human blood pressure estimations.
Before linking the PI, check first to see if the PI is at the end of an
Adverbial Prepositional Segment. If so, do not link it to the Subject! If
the PI is at the end of an Adverbial Prepositional segment, link it to the
Noun immediately preceding it, using the formula (see iii j, iii k):
n are PI (3)
(iii 1) 
the general principle is employed in ...
b) To start its own segment (Pi-segment). In this case the Pi-segment (being
cut off) is an integral part of another segment within the sentence, and
should be linked to its Subject. All segments beginning with PI are Cs
(Complement Subject). There are some exceptions to this rule.
If the Pl-segmcnt starts the sentence or is not preceded by a Subject (to
the left till full stop) then it should be linked to the first Subject to the
right. For example (in (iv) the Pi-segment surprised is cut off by a
Prepositional Adverbial Segment, the by-segment):
( i v ) 
Surprised by this turn of events she remained hidden behind the door.
PI 
by I 
n 
of n 
d 
v 
PI 
behind A n
Cs 
br 
Sj v 
Cs 
bl
(iv a) 
She is surprised.
(iv b) 
She is hidden.
The above instruction is also applied to all segments starting with 'not
Pl\ The formula then will read:
Sj am not PI (4)
However, when the Pi-segment consists only of PI and does not start
the sentence, then a more elaborate algorithmic procedure is needed to
decide how it should be linked. Then it is more likely to link the Pi-
segment to the d (the Noun designating a human being) of the preceding
Adverbial segment than to the Subject of the sentence.
2 Links of Pi
The Participle '-ing' can be used either as an integral part of a segment or to
start a segment of its own, and depending on this it can have the following
links.
If the segment ends in Pi, this means that Pi should remain at the end of
this segment as it is, but it should also be put at the beginning of the next

200 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
segment. This algorithmic operation starts with the appearance of Pi at the
end of the segment. For example:
(i) 
She saw him practising in the yard.
d 
v 
R Pi 
in A n
Sj v 
OdCo 
bl
(i a) 
She saw him practising
(i b) 
practising in the yard.
When Pi is Complement Object to R (as in (i)), then the logical link to be
used by the computer should be made according to the formula:
1. Find the reference of R (if the reference of R is a PPNC find its reference).
2. Replace R with its reference. Then use the reference of R in the formula
R are Pi (1)
Ris Pi
(R was Pi)
(R were Pi)
Using the above formula the computer will 'know' that:
(i c) 
He is practising.
because the reference of him is he. If the reference of He is John, then we will
have:
(i d) 
John is practising in the yard.
When Pi is a Complement Object to a Noun, no reference of the Noun is
needed. Simply use the formula:
n are Pi (2)
Co
For example:
(i e) 
He watched the water streaming through 
a hole.
d v 
A n 
Pi 
through A n
Sj v 
Od 
Co 
bl
(i ea) 
the water is streaming
When Pi is a Complement Subject, then link it to the Subject using the
formula
Sj are Pi (3)
Sj is Pi
For example:
(i f) 
The girl sitting on the chair is 
my sister.
d 
Pi 
on A n 
are O n
Sj 
Cs 
bl 
v 
Cs

LINKS OF PREDICATES AND INCOMPLETE SEGMENTS 
201
Using formula (3) the computer will know that:
(i fa) 
The girl is sitting on the chair.
When Pi is an integral part of a segment and is used in the Predicative
immediately after the Verbal Tense, then it should be linked to the Subject of
the same segment using formula (3):
(i g) 
She started singing at the age of five.
d 
v 
Pi 
at A n of n
Sj v 
bm
(i ga) 
She is singing.
In the case of a Pi-segment where Pi starts the segment and is followed by
a sequence that includes a Possessive Pronoun (Pi + O + ...), then use the
following formula to link Pi:
(the referent of O) + was + (Pi + O + . ..) (4)
For example, if we have the segment:
(i h) 
Pi O n = taking his coat
and if the referent of his is Leon, then we will have
(i j) 
Leon was taking his coat.
(NB Remember that was stands for is, were and are as well.)
If the Pi-segment is followed by a like-segment, then link the Pi-segment
to the last Noun to the left (no matter whether Subject or Object) - excluding
the Nouns in the Adverbial Clauses 
using the formula:
Noun are Pi (5)
(i k) 
He stayed at home all day singing like mad.
d v 
at n 
M FB Pi 
like n
Sj v 
bl 
bm 
bn
(i ka) He is singing.
In (i k) the Pi-segment (singing) is cut off by intervening Prepositional
Adverbial segments (bl) and (bm).
If the Pi-segment is preceded by a which-segment, link it to the Noun
preceding which (the referent of which) using formula (5).
If Pi is part oi'a not-segment (not Pi), or part of an as if-segment (as if Pi),
then connect the not Pi or as if Pi segment to the last Subject using the
formula:
Sj am Pi (6)
If Pi is part of a without-segment (without Pi) then link the without Pi
segment to the last Subject using the formula:
Sj am not Pi (7)

202 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
The above instructions should follow in the presented order. Having
completed the instructions shown above, then follow the instructions
presented below.
In the case of a Pi-segment, link the Pi-segment to the Subject of the same
sentence (to the last Subject if the Pi-segment is preceded by a Subject (i 1), or
to the next Subject if the Pi-segment starts the sentence (i m)). If, however,
there is no Subject either to the left or to the right within the same sentence,
then the Participle '-ing' (Pi) is a Gerund and, if followed by a Verbal Tense,
is the Subject of the segment (i n) and need not be linked to another segment
(in other cases, when the Verbal Tense is an Auxiliary Verb only from the be
paradigm, it is a Complement Subject (i na)). For example:
(i 1) 
The glomerular membrane plays a passive role performing no work.
A 
G 
n 
v A G 
n P i 
non
Sj 
v 
Od 
v 
Gs
Hence:
(i la) 
The glomerular membrane is performing no work.
(i m) 
Trying to escape from the thorny grasp of the bush, she tore her blouse.
Pi 
to v 
from AG 
n 
of An 
d v O n
bl (bp, bs) 
Sj v 
Od
(i ma) She is trying to escape.
(in) 
Reading came last on his agenda.
P 
v 
up on O n
Sj 
v 
bm
(i na) 
Reading is his favourite pastime.
P 
are O G 
n
Cs 
v 
Sj
or: 
Sj 
v 
Cs
If the first Subject to the left is who, link the Pi-segment to who and after
that link it to the referent of who. For example:
(i o) 
The man, who came to the office asking questions ...
d 
who v 
to A n 
Pi 
n
Sj 
Sj 
v 
bl
(i oa) 
The man was asking questions.
If, however, the Pi-segment extends from full stop to full stop do not touch
it. Leave it as it is.
In the case where a Pi-segment starts with not one should use formula (7).
If the Pi-segment consists only of one word, the Participle '-ing', then link
it to the last Object to the left if it does not start the sentence.
3 Links of the j-segment
If the j-segment extends from full stop to full stop, leave it as it is. Otherwise,
if the j-segment starts the sentence, link it to the first Subject to the right; if
not, link it to the last Subject (to the left). For example:
g

LINKS OF PREDICATES AND INCOMPLETE SEGMENTS 
203
(i) 
Aware of her presence he remained silent.
} 
of O n 
d v 
j
Sj v 
Pr
Sj v 
Cs
(i a) 
He is aware of her presence.
d am j 
of O n
Sj v Cs
(ii) 
She packed her suitcase, in haste, ready to leave.
d 
v 
O n 
in n 
j 
to v
Sj v 
Od 
bn
(ii a) 
She is ready to leave.
d am j 
to v
Sj v 
Cs 
Ic
The linkage was made according to the following formula:
Sj am j-segment 
(1)
If j is alone, between commas, and to the left there is no Subject, then link
it to the first Noun to the right:
(iii) 
.Near her, silent, stood a man I knew.
b 
R 
j 
v 
A n 
d v
bl 
v 
Od 
Sj v
(iii a) A man was silent.
If j is alone in the sentence, between commas, and to the right there is no
Noun to follow till the end of the sentence, then connect it to the last Noun to
the left excluding the Noun in a b-clause, using the formula:
n was j 
i'2}
4 Links of the G-segment
When G is alone in the sentence, between commas, and to the right there is
no Noun to follow till the end of the sentence, then connect it to the last Noun
to the left, but not to a Noun in a b-clause, using the formula:
n was G 
1 1 )
If the G-segment consists of a G and a Noun or of several G (in sequence)
and a Noun and is positioned between commas, then connect the G-segment
to the first Subject to the left, within the same sentence, using the formula:
Sj am G-segment 
(2)
If the Subject is a PPNC find its referent and use it instead.

204 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
5 Links of the v-segment
Verbal segments cannot usually exist on their own without a Subject,
therefore they should always be linked to the first Subject to the left, except
when the v-segment:
a) extends from full stop to full stop;
b) begins with let, let's;
c) ends with an Exclamation Mark;
d) is preceded by:
dTCv
Sj v
e) is preceded by an Adverbial segment.
The other verbal segments - all those beginning with am, are, did, has, can,
should, may, etc. - should also be linked to a Subject, except when they end
with a Question Mark or are preceded by an Adverbial segment. Other
exceptions include may and should after a full stop (at the start of a sentence)
(iv, below), and was, is or are when they are separated from the Interrogative
Pronoun (what, why, how, where, when, which] (vi) or predicate a Subject (on
their right) (vii).
When the v-segment does not start the sentence and there is no Subject to
the left, or when between the Subject and the v-segment there is a
Prepositional Adverbial Clause containing R or a b-segment, then link the
v-segment to the Prepositional Adverbial Segment or Adverbial segment
(b-segment) positioned to the left (i), (ii), (iii):
C R
until A n
(i) 
Near her, silent, stood a man I didn't know.
(i a) 
Near her stood a man.
(ii) 
Until the man on the horse was able to see him ...
(ii a) 
Until the man was able to see him ...
(iii) 
When the bus comes for you, get these men to help you.
(iii a) 
When the bus comes get these men to help you.
(iii b) 
You get these men to help.
For the link in (iii b) we need an additional specification.
Modal Verbs like may, should, etc. at the start of a sentence, need no linking
(iv):
(iv) 
May you live happily for ever.
(v) 
Should you see him, tell him that I am here.
The segments starting with an Auxiliary Verb, in direct and reported
speech, are also a special case (vi, vii):
(vi) 
'And what', Ann said flatly, 'is a solution?'

LINKS OF PREDICATES AND INCOMPLETE SEGMENTS 
205
(vii) 
' 'You have acted bravely', was her answer.
Sj
Compare:
(vi a) 
She said, you have acted bravely.
6 Links of the and-segment
The and-segment should always be linked to the previous segment. When the
and-segment is followed by a v-segment, separate the v-segment and link it
according to the instructions in Section 5.
7 Links of the Infinitive
The Infinitive, when cut off from a segment, should be linked (jumping the
intervening segment) to the preceding segment starting with a Subject (Sj v,
Sj v Cs) within the same sentence (i), with the exception of
d 
TCv
(John said)
Sj 
v
In other cases, the Infinitive should be linked to the Object, to its left (ii).
i i) 
// is dishonourable do you understand, to trade nowadays in weapons of war.
it was j 
did d v 
to v 
b 
in n 
ofn
Sj v Cs 
v Sj v 
Ic 
ba (br)
(i a) 
// is dishonourable to trade nowadays ...
(ii) 
She requested them, at my suggestion, to stay with her.
d 
v 
R 
at O n 
to v 
with R
Sj 
v 
Od 
br 
Ic 
be
(ii a) 
She requested them to stay with her.
d 
v 
R 
to v 
with R
Sj v 
Od Ic 
be
(ii ab) They should stay with her.
(In ii a the Infinitival Complement acts as a Complement Object.)
When the Infinitive starts the sentence and is used as its Subject (hi), then
we need a transformational procedure.
('iii') 
To ride a bicycle on such a wet day is 
awful.
to v 
A n 
on I a(n) G n 
am j
Sj 
bm 
v 
Cs
Compare:
(iii a) // must be awful to ride a bicycle on such a wet day.
it shall be j 
to v 
A n 
on i 
A G n
Sj 
v Cs 
Ic 
bm

206 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
8 Other links and discussion of the links
8.1 Links marked with two or three blank spaces left within a
segment
When the computer matches a portion of the text with a segment from the
Dictionary of Segments, the program will ignore the space left within the
segment (this space is one or sometimes two intervals longer than the
accepted space of one interval between the constituent elements of a
segment). For example:
(i) 
The people in the bus are German
d 
in A n are n
will be marked as
(i a) 
in A n 
are n
(two intervals are left between n and are)
During the identification procedure the interval left before are will be
ignored, but it will serve as an indication that the part that follows after are
should be linked to the previous segment. If three spaces are left, the part that
follows should be linked to the first Subject to the left, before the full stop.
NB The two and three spaces left in a segment, to indicate that what follows is
not part of the same segment, duplicate the situation where the disconnected
part was separated as an incomplete segment (compare the segments starting
with an Auxiliary Verb). In example (i) are German will be a separate segment
and will obey the links specified in Section 5 above. It will not be linked to in
the bus as above (i a).
NB We have preferred to separate the detached part of a segment and to
register it as a separate, incomplete segment, rather than to link it to the
segment it does not belong to and leave blank spaces.
8.2 Discussion of the links
Let's consider the following sentence:
(i) 
The girl sitting on the chair is my sister.
d 
Pi 
on A n 
are O n
Sj 
Cs 
bl 
v 
Cs
The constituent segments of this sentence are:
d Pi
on A n
are O n
hence, according to the rules specified in Links (governing the Nominative

LINKS OF PREDICATES AND INCOMPLETE SEGMENTS 
207
Agreement by using the paradigm of be), the computer software program
will be able to produce the following true statements:
(i a) The girl sitting is my sister.
(i b) The girl is sitting.
( i c ) 
The girl is sitting on the chair.
( i d ) The girl is my sister.
(i e) My sister is the girl sitting.
(i f) 
My sister is the girl sitting on the chair.
(i g) My sister is sitting.
f i h) My sister is sitting on the chair.

9 
Reference
1 Reference within the segment
The references within the segments are marked with the signs " and '.
When the segment is being identified, the signs " (except in N"s) and '
should be ignored. They are used to indicate the word links within a segment.
In the following segments
(i) 
G n shall v n" to v n of A n of O" n
(ii) 
d v up R" n up X"
(iii) 
An" Pi" A n ofO N"s n
the links indicate that in (i) the Possessive Pronoun marked with O" refers to
the Noun marked with n"; in (ii) the Reflexive Pronoun marked with X"
refers to the Personal Pronoun Objective Case, marked with R" (and not to
d!); in (iii) the Pi" refers to the previous Noun.
The references within the segment are dealt with by Algorithm No 8.
/./ Algorithm No 8 for the references within the segment
NB In this algorithm, the word letter means the abbreviation of a Part of
Speech or a natural language word used in the segment.
1. 
Read the segment letter by letter. Is the letter marked with the sign " —
except in N"s - (right top side of the letter)? (letter = Part of Speech
which in turn = a wordform in the text).
2. 
Yes. Remember it temporarily. Go on reading the segment to the end.
Is there another letter marked with the same sign "?
2a. 
Yes. This letter (i.e. wordform) refers to the previous one also marked "
(the one that was remembered temporarily).
2b. 
No. There is a mistake. Ask for help. Go to 1 to read the next segment.
3. 
No. Is the letter marked with the sign ' - except when used with a
natural language word to mark the Genitive of the Noun - (right top
side of the letter)?
4. 
Yes. Remember it temporarily. Go on reading the segment to the end.
Is there another letter marked with the same sign '?

REFERENCE 
209
4a. 
Yes. This letter (i.e. wordform) refers to the previous one marked ' (the
one that was remembered temporarily).
4b. 
No. There is a mistake. Ask the operator for help. Go to 1 to read the
next segment.
5. 
No. Is the letter marked with the sign '" (right top side of the letter)?
6. 
Yes. Remember it temporarily. Go on reading the segment to the end.
Is there another letter marked with the sign " or with the sign '?
6a. 
Yes. Refer this letter (the one marked " or ') to the one marked '" (the
one that was remembered temporarily).
6b. 
No. There is a mistake. Ask the operator for help. Go to 1 to read the
next segment.
7. 
No. Is there a letter marked with the sign " then another letter, after it,
marked with the sign ' or vice versa?
8. 
Yes. Remember them temporarily. Go on reading the segment to the
end. Is there another letter marked with the sign " '?
8a. 
Yes. This letter refers to both previous letters marked respectively " and '.
8b. 
No. There is a mistake. Ask the operator for help. Go to 1 to read the
next segment.
9. 
Go to 1 to read the next segment.
2 Pronominal Reference
The reference of a Pronoun to a particular Noun in the text is called
Pronominal Reference. The Pronoun acts as a substitute for the Noun.
Pronominal Reference is based on meaning. Since meaning cannot
function without syntax, it is possible to establish the Pronominal Reference
using syntactical procedures. The syntactical procedures will be stated
algorithmically (so that, eventually, they can be turned into computer
software programs) for each Pronoun.
The algorithms dealing with Pronominal Reference use, as a database, the
Dictionary of Wordforms, the Dictionary of Segments and the results of
Algorithm No 7.
2.1 Identification of the Pronouns. Algorithm No 9
The segment, after identification with a portion from the text, is read letter by
letter according to the procedure presented in Algorithm No 9 (letter stands
for Part of Speech, which in turn represents a particular word from the text;
letter also stands for a natural language word used in the segment):
1. 
Is this O or Os? (the genitive of the Noun is excluded from O)
2. 
Yes. Go to Algorithm No 10.
3. 
No. Is this R? (names are excluded from R)
4. 
Yes. Go to Algorithm No 11.
5. 
No. Is this X?

210
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
6. 
Yes. Go to Algorithm No 12.
7. 
No. Is this PPNC (Personal Pronoun Nominal Case)?
8. 
Yes. Go to Algorithm No 13.
9. 
No. Is this Z?
10. Yes. Go to Algorithm No 14.
11. 
No. Is this who?
12. 
Yes. Go to Algorithm No 15.
13. 
No. Is this which?
14. 
Yes. Go to Algorithm No 16.
15. 
No. Is this whom?
16. 
Yes. Go to Algorithm No 17.
17. 
No. Is this both?
18. 
Yes. Go to Algorithm No 18.
19. 
No. Start to read the next segment. Go to 1.
At this stage one particular type of word reference is omitted. Here is an
example of such word reference:
The missionary widows tittered still unsure of Jim's sense of humour and pushed their
wooden cart. The iron wheels rang on the stony track shaking the body which the two
women were about to bury.
It will not be difficult to devise a procedure to find the referent of The two
women which, in this case, is the missionary widows.
2.1.1 
Reference of the Possessive Pronoun. Algorithm Mo 10
The Possessive Pronoun is marked as O or Os (the genitive of the Noun,
marked as N"s, is excluded from O). The block-scheme of the algorithm is
shown in Figure 9.1. The full flow-chart notation is available on the Internet
(see Internet Downloads at the end of the book).
Input text with its
matching segments
and their parsing.
Search for Possessive Pronoun(s),
starting from the beginning of the
segment (or the Sentence).
Output result: the
reference of the
Possessive Pronoun
is found.
(Note: The reference
of the Possessive
Pronoun depends on
its location.)
When the Possessive Pronoun is located
see if it is located in the following type of
segment: a) b-segment; v-segment;
and-segment; as if-segment; b) Pi-segment;
c) who-segment; d) other type of segment.
Seek for agreement in Number and Gender
with the Subject or Object (to the left or to
the right).
Figure 9.1 
Block-scheme of Algorithm No 10

REFERENCE 
211
NB This algorithm is not perfect. On every 100 Possessive Pronouns
processed, up to 2 per cent errors can be expected for various reasons. The
main fault is that the computer program does not have sufficient knowledge
yet, since we have given it only some grammatical and syntactical
information and a very limited amount of semantic information, namely
the knowledge of d. We hope that later, with the introduction of semantics,
the computer will become more intelligent. But even then, if grammarians do
not decide to introduce certain norms governing the use of Pronouns, it is
doubtful whether Pronominal Reference can be made 100 per cent accurate.
See the ambiguity in the following sentence(s):
(i) 
Monica (woman No 1), she (she No 2) reflected later, as they (woman No 1
and she .No 2) strolled slowly along the lake shore, knows far more than 1(1 —
she No 2) do; it is right that she (i.e. Mme de Lanneui, mentioned earlier in the
text, she No 3) resembles a sphinx. The morning had passed quite pleasantly in
her (Monica's) company.
(ii) Jim dipped a finger in the hot water but Dr Ransome brusquely waved him
away. Clearly his (Ransome's) conversation with the camp commandant had
upset him 
he was preparing for the winter as if trying to convince himself that
they would all be there when it arrived.
In (i) the reference is very complicated. Mme de Lanneui (she No 3) is far back
in the text, mentioned in a previous conversation between woman No 1 and
she No 2. The Possessive Pronoun her in the last sentence can be erroneously
referred to either she No 2 or she No 3, if the reference is not based on
meaning.
In (ii) the reference is found correctly by the algorithm (Algorithm No 10),
but it may well be Jim who might have talked to the commandant. Let us see,
step by step, how Algorithm No 10 will find the reference of the Possessive
Pronoun his.
Instruction 3 finds out that his is in a b-clause (after the full stop the
segment starts with the Adverb clearly and ends with the appearance of the
Preposition with] and proceeds with the analysis in 18. The main clause of the
same sentence (he was preparing] does not have an Object. The analysis is
passed on to 20, where it is seen that his does agree with the Subject he of the
same sentence (see Table 9.1). We have to use Algorithm No 13 to find the
referent of he. Instruction 17 of Algorithm No 13 requires an agreement with
a d, as Subject, to the left in this paragraph (the first d as Subject to the left is
considered first, excluding the d which is Subject of the Pronoun under
analysis) and finds that Ransome (d, Subject, 3rd person singular - this
information is taken from the Dictionary of Wordforms) agrees in gender and
number with he. The referent of his is found 
it is Ransome. Then the
algorithm starts a search for the next Possessive Pronoun.

212
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Table 9.1 Reference of O (Os)
0 (Os)
I, d (masculine or feminine)
you, d (masculine or feminine n)
he, d (masculine)
she, d (feminine)
it, n (d excluded) singular
we, d (plural)
you, d (plural)
they, d plural, n plural
Agrees with
my, mine
your, yours
his
her, hers
its
our, ours
your, yours
their, theirs
2.1.2 
Reference ofPPOC. Algorithm No 11
Reference of the Personal Pronoun Objective Case marked R. The block-
scheme of the algorithm is shown in Figure 9.2. The full flow-chart notation is
available on the Internet (see Internet Downloads at the end of the book). On
the Internet, Algorithm No 11 uses the information shown in Table 9.2.
Input text with its
matching segments
and their parsing.
Search for Personal Pronoun Objective Case
starting from the beginning of the segment
(or the Sentence).
Output result: the referent of the
Personal Pronoun Objective Case
is found. If the referent is PPNC
or a Possessive Pronoun, the
search for a referent continues.
When the Personal Pronoun
Objective Case is located see
if it agrees in Number and
Gender with the Subject or
with the Object or with any
other Noun denoting a person
(to the left only).
Figure 9.2 Block-scheme of Algorithm No 11
Table 9.2 Reference of PPOC
PPOC is marked as R.
R
I, d (masc. or fern.), N"s (d's)
d (masc. or fern.), N"s (d's)
he, his, d (masculine)
she, her, d (feminine)
it, its, n (singular)
we, our, d and d, d and O d, d (plural)
you, your
they, their, d and d, d and O d, d (plural)
Agrees with
me
your 
you yours
him
her
it
us
you
them

REFERENCE 
213
The reference of R is not 100 per cent accurate. It will be ambiguous in
segments like
d v O m n = / gave her 10 pounds.
d v R m n = / gave her 10 pounds.
where R coincides with O, if that error is not corrected beforehand. The user
should expect up to 2 per cent errors when the above procedure is
implemented.
If we want to improve the reference of PPOC, we will have to introduce
strict grammatical regulations governing their use - the same as those for
spelling.
In order to illustrate the performance of Algorithm No 11, let us consider
again the last sentence.
(i) 
Jim dipped a finger in the hot water but Dr Ransome brusquely waved him
away. Clearly his conversation with the camp commandant had upset him — he
was preparing for the winter as if trying to convince himself that they would all
be there when it arrived.
The analysis of the first him (waved him away] starts with instruction 1 (where it
is seen that him is not equal to me] and proceeds, without result, to instruction
7, where the algorithm finds out that him agrees with Jim in number and
gender (Ransome is excluded from consideration, being the Subject of the same
segment), and instruction 8b decrees to replace him with Jim (i a).
(i a) 
. . . but Dr Ransome brusquely waved Jim away.
The analysis of the second him (the camp commandant had upset him] begins
with instruction 1 and goes further, unsuccessfully, until it reaches instruction
7, where the procedure establishes the fact that him agrees with his as the
Subject of a previous segment in number and gender (note that the with-
segment separates this particular segment into two parts, functioning now as
independent segments). Since the referent is a Possessive Pronoun, Algorithm
No 10 must find the referent of the Possessive Pronoun and then him can be
replaced with it (i b).
(i b) 
Clearly Dr Ransome's conversation with the camp commandant had upset
Dr Ransome . . .
2.1.3 
Reference of the Reflexive Pronoun. Algorithm No 12
The Reflexive Pronoun is marked with X.
1. 
Is X in the plural?
2. 
Yes. Go to 8.
3. 
No. Does X agree with the d in the previous segment (see Table 9.3)?
4. 
Yes. Refer X to that d. Take next X and go to 1.
5. 
No. Does X agree with the last d (to be understood the first to the left)
from the same sentence till a full stop?

214 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
6. 
Yes. Refer X to that d. Take next d and go to 1.
7. 
No. Is X preceded by: d and d, d and O d, d in plural, to the left till a
full stop?
8. 
Yes. Refer X to them. Take next X and go to 1.
9. 
No. The reference of X is not found. Ask for help.
Table 9.3 Reference of the Reflexive Pronoun
As an example, we'll use the same sentence as above:
(i) 
Jim dipped a finger in the hot water but Dr Ransome brusquely waved him
away. Clearly his conversation with the camp commandant had upset him — he
was preparing for the winter as if trying to convince himself that they would all
be there when it arrived.
If the reader takes the Reflexive Pronoun himself and follows carefully the
instructions of the algorithm, a point will be reached, at instruction 5, when
himself will be compared to he (d) - the first d to the left within the same
sentence. Table 9.3 shows that there is an agreement between the two. Then,
Algorithm No 13 will be triggered to find the referent of he.
This algorithm yields 99 per cent correct results when hand checked on
randomly chosen texts.
2.1.4 
Reference of PPNC. Algorithm No 13
The referent of the Personal Pronoun Nominal Case (PPNC is a subclass of d)
can be found using the block-scheme shown in Figure 9.3. The full flow-chart
notation is available on the Internet (see Internet Downloads at the end of
the book). On the Internet, Algorithm No 13 uses the information shown in
Table 9.4.
X
I
you
he, d (masculine)
she, d (feminine)
it, n (singular)
we
you
they, d and d, d and O d, d (plural), n (plural)
Agrees with
myself
yourself
himself
herself
itself
ourselves
yourselves
themselves

REFERENCE
215
Input text with its
matching segments
and their parsing.
Search for Personal Pronoun Nominal Case
starting from the beginning of the segment
(or the Sentence).
Output result: the
referent of the
PPNC is found.
When the Personal Pronoun Nominal Case is
located check the type of the segment. Check
for agreement in Number and Gender between
the PPNC and the Subject, Object, PPOC or
any other Noun, first to the left, then to the
right. Search up to 5 Sentences to the left.
Figure 9.3 
Block-scheme of Algorithm No 13
Table 9.4 
Reference of PPNC
PPNC
d, name
d, name
he, name (masculine), d
she, name (feminine), d
it, n (singular)
we, d and d, d and O d
you, d and d, d and O d
they, d and d, d and O d, d (plural), n (plural)
Agrees with
I
you
he
she
it
we
you
they
To exemplify the performance of the algorithm we will use the following
text:
Aunt Beatrice, Roland's sister, spoke with a slight French accent heavily overlaid with
American. She had a mass of cloudy hair, not dark and long like Monica's, but white
going on pale orange.
The initial procedures of the algorithm check the identity and the typical
surroundings of the Pronoun and when it is seen that no match is found, this
clears the way for the next steps. Finally, instructions 17 and 18 find out that
she agrees in number and gender with the Subject of the previous sentence,
Aunt Beatrice (provided that all feminine and masculine proper names are also
registered in the Dictionary of Wordforms and codemarked respectively), and
this settles satisfactorily the identification and reference problem.
(NB The reference of PPNC is less accurate - up to 4 per cent errors can be
expected using the present procedure. The errors are mainly connected with
the uncertain attribution of I and you).

216 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
2.1.5 
Reference of the Reciprocal Pronoun. Algorithm No 14
The Reciprocal Pronoun is marked as Z. The analysis of the sentence is
performed according to the following procedure:
1. Z in the text (also in the segment) is found. Go left to find the 1st d in the
plural (left up to 5 sentences back, jump to previous paragraphs if necessary).
Have you found it?
2. Yes. Replace Z with it (or remember that Z refers to it). Take the next Z
and go to 1.
3. No. Go left up to 5 sentences back and find the 1st (the 1st to appear): d
and d, d and O d. Have you found it?
4. Yes. Replace Z with it. Take next Z and go to 1.
5. No. The reference of Z is not found. Ask for help.
Let's go through the algorithm with the following sentence and try to find
the reference of the Reciprocal Pronoun:
They looked at each other and smiled.
d 
v 
at Z 
and v
The algorithm locates (instruction 1) the first occurrence of Z (the abbreviation
for a Reciprocal Pronoun in the segment) and goes left in search of a doer in the
plural. The first doer in the plural to be found is the PPNC they. This satisfies the
conditions and if the user (or the program) wants to know who they are, the
reference of they can be found further back in the text (see Algorithm No 13).
The algorithm yields 99 per cent correct results.
2.1.6 
Reference of who. Algorithm No 15
1. Who is located. Is who immediately preceded by a full stop, then
immediately followed by a v and at the same time does the who-segment end
in a question mark?
2. Yes. Who starts an interrogative sentence and does not refer. Take the next
who and go to 1.
3. No. Is who immediately preceded by a b-segment or by a Prepositional
Adverbial segment?
4. Yes. Jump the b-segment or the Prepositional Adverbial segment(s). Refer
who to the d ending the last but one segment (the segment before the b-
segment). Take the next who and go to 1.
5. No. Refer who to the d (Noun) ending the last segment. Take the next
who and go to 1.
The sentence below will serve as an example showing how the algorithm finds
the reference of the Relative and Interrogative Pronoun who.
Three or four times we had known what the other was thinking, in the sort of
telepathic jump that sometimes occurred between people who knew each other well, but
not on a regular basis, and not lately.

REFERENCE 
217
The conditions laid down by the first and the third steps of the algorithm are
not met and the way is paved for a final decision in (5) - to refer who to the
preceding doer (d, n), in this case to people.
The present algorithm yields 99.3 per cent correct results.
2.7.7 
Reference of which. Algorithm No 16
1. Which is located. Is which preceded by a full stop and does the which-
segment end with a question mark?
2. Yes. Which starts an interrogative sentence and therefore does not refer.
Take next which and go to 1.
3. No. Is which immediately preceded by b-segment(s)?
4. Yes. Jump b-segment(s). Refer which to the last n (or n + v) preceding
the b-segment(s), left only till a full stop is reached. Take next which and go
to 1.
5. No. Refer which to the last n in the previous segment.
Below are shown some examples of the reference of the Determiner and
Pronoun which.
(i) 
Pollution is a problem which must concern us all.
n 
are A n 
which shall v 
R all
(ii) 
She behaved with the gaiety sometimes
d 
v 
with A n 
b
induced by risk-taking, which to Peter
and Danielle at least proved infectious.
and n 
at least v 
j
(ii) 
The channel tunnel, which the Queen opened in May, was Britain's first
road link with the Continent.
In (i) the reference of which is found by instruction 5 — which is referred to
the last Noun (problem) of the previous segment. Earlier it was made clear that
which can be referred also to pollution, since problem is a Complement Subject of
pollution and in Nominative agreement with it.
In (ii), instruction 4 ignores the preceding Adverbial segments (starting
with by and with) and refers which to she behaved. Since the Adverbial Clauses
modify the Verb, which, indirectly, refers to the whole predicate. However,
the algorithm fails to refer which directly to gaiety.
In (in), the reference of which is found by instruction 5 - which is referred to
tunnel.
The reference of which is 99.3 per cent accurate.
2.1.8 
Reference of whom. Algorithm No 17
1. The first occurrence of whom is located in the text. Is whom preceded by
a full stop and does the whom-segment end with a question mark?
v  by n   which to n

218 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
2. Yes. Whom starts an interrogative sentence and as such does not refer.
Take next whom and go to 1.
3. No. Refer whom to the last d. Take next whom and go to 1.
As is seen, the reference of whom is quite straightforward. It is always
referred to the last Noun as d.
The reference of the Relative Pronoun whom is similar to that of the other
Relative Pronouns.
2.1.9 
Reference of both. Algorithm No 18
Refer both to the last PPNG (plural), R (plural) or to the next d in the plural
or to the next (immediately following): d and d, d and O d, n and n, n and O
n. For example:
Instantly both John and Raymond were wide awake.
2.1.10 Reference of PPNC with subsequent logical inference. Algorithm No 19
The reference of PPNC is based on the results obtained by Algorithm No 13
and then the analysis of the sentence is carried out according to the following
procedure:
1. Does PPNC refer to the Subject of the previous segment or (if not) of the
previous sentence?
2. Yes. Is the previous segment (or sentence) of the type: Sj v Cs? (where Sj =
d; v = am (is, are, were}; Cs = O n (where O n = O d)).
2a. Yes. Since PPNC refers to the d as Subject it also refers to the d as
Complement Subject (Cs = O d). Therefore replace PPNC with the d in O d
(Cs). Replace also the referent of PPNC with O d. Go right to find the next
PPNC then go with it to 1.
2b. No. Proceed further till you find the next PPNC and when you find it go
with it to 1.
3. No. Proceed further till you find the next PPNC and when you find it go to
1 with it.
Let us consider the following example:
(i) 
The girl sitting on the chair is my sister.
d 
Pi 
on A n 
am O n
Sj 
Cs 
bl 
v 
Cs
She is eating a cake.
d am Pi 
A n
Sj v 
Od
In the text, the referent of my will be determined by Algorithm No 10. Let's
say that the referent is John (therefore John's). The referent of she is the girl -
determined by Algorithm No 13. The word sister is Complement Subject to
the girl and both the Subject and its complement (Cs) are d (doers) and there

REFERENCE 
219
is a Nominative agreement between them. Therefore they can substitute each
other since they denote the same person (or the same thing, in other
examples).
Using the algorithmic procedure of Algorithm No 19 (the algorithmic
notation of Algorithm No 19 is available on the Internet 
see Internet
Downloads at the end of the book) the computer can generate the following
statements (sentences about the sentence) preserving the meaning of the
sentence and, in fact, making a logical inference (i b, i c):
(i a) My sister sitting on the chair is my sister.
(i b) My sister is eating a cake.
(i c) My sister is sitting on the chair.
(\ d) My sister is sitting.
(i e) My sister is my sister (a repetition which can be wiped out).
(i b) and (i c) are examples of'logical inference' based on syntax.

10 Recognition of the Independent and Dependent
Clauses
In this chapter, we present an algorithmic procedure to determine the
structure of the sentence: Independent and Dependent Clauses, including
Adverbial Clauses. This procedure is based on the Dictionary of Segments.
To this end, we remind the reader that:
a) the sentence is viewed as a sequence of segments;
b) the next segment in sequence cannot start before the previous one has
ended;
c) there must be a segment in the Dictionary of Segments for every part of the
sentence, for any sentence;
d) the segments are the building blocks of the sentence - they assume an
intermediate role in the sentence and they can be either a sentence, a
clause, a wordform or a phrase;
e) the segments determine the internal structure of the sentence.
The relationship between the constituent members of the segment (Parts
of Speech, natural language wordforms, semantic groups) and their
position within the segment is fixed (predetermined). The relationship
between the segments in the sentence and their position within the sentence
is not fixed: it has to be established using the algorithmic procedure
described below.
1 Algorithm No 20
(NB Algorithm No 20 is to be run after Algorithm No 7. It uses the results
obtained by Algorithm No 7. Algorithm No 7 establishes the boundaries
between the segments in a sentence. List No 1 is a List of all Auxiliary words
that are used as a first word of a segment - see Dictionary of Segments, or
Section 3 of the Chapter 6. Bearing the meaning expressed by the word from List No
1 refers to the meaning of the Prepositional Adverbial Clause - for details
concerning the meaning of the Prepositional Adverbial Clauses see Section
3.3. in Chapter 6.)

RECOGNITION OF INDEPENDENT AND DEPENDENT CLAUSES 221
The block-scheme of the algorithm is shown in Figure 10.1. The flow
chart, 375 instructions, is available on the Internet (see Internet Downloads
at the end of the book).
Check the first element of the segment
to see if it is an Article, a Noun,
a Preposition, etc. If the segment begins
with a sequence of Auxiliary Words,
determine the sequence.
Output result: Independent or
Dependent Clause (type of
Dependent Clause).
Figure 10.1 
Block-scheme of Algorithm No 20
/./ Examples of the performance of Algorithm No 20
Let's take as an example the following sentence and analyse it with Algorithm
No 20 (the boundaries between the segments are already established by
Algorithm No 7 and here they are marked with /).
(i) 
Alex was an enormous man, / weighing / around three hundred / and fifty pounds
I with a beer belly / on him / that rested / like a balloon / on his knees / when he
sat down.
The algorithm checks and identifies the first word of the first segment (Alex)
and passes, gradually, through the operations until operation 255 is reached.
The first word Alex is identified as a name (d) and the first segment is declared
to be an Independent Clause:
(i a) 
Alex was an enormous man, ( = Independent Clause)
Then the algorithm proceeds with the identification of the first word of the
second segment, weighing, starting again from operation 1 and going through
the operations unsuccessfully, almost to the end of the procedures. Finally,
operation 297 ascertains that weighing is a detached Pi-segment (used as a
Complement Subject) and instructs the computer program to link it to a
Noun from the previous segment, as specified in Links in Chapter 8:
(i b) 
Alex was an enormous man, weighing
(i ba) Alex is weighing
(i bb) Man is weighing
After that, the algorithm starts to identify the first word of the third
segment, around. The same procedure is followed as described above.
Input text as a
sequence of
segments.

222 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Instructions 169-170 identify around and its pre-recorded meaning as a
Prepositional Adverbial Clause for quantity, volume or measure:
(i c) 
around three hundred
Operation 13 identifies the first word of the fourth segment, and, and
examines its surroundings. Then, in 14d, a decision is taken to link and to the
previous segment:
(i d) 
around three hundred and fifty pounds
The first word of the fifth segment is with. The algorithm identifies it in
operation 101 and takes the pre-recorded information for the segment
with A G n 
bn 
bb 
bi
bn bb bi and prints:
(i e) 
with a beer belly (Adverbial Clause for manner, or togetherness, or
instrument and means)
The Preposition on comes next. It is the first word of the sixth segment and
is recognized as such by operation 99. As a result, the computer is instructed
to take the pre-recorded meaning of the segment:
on R 
bl bu
bl bu and to print:
(i f) 
on him (Adverbial Clause for location or concern)
Next, as first word of the seventh segment, comes the Conjunction that.
Operation 19 identifies it and states that it introduces a Dependent Clause to
explain the meaning of the previous Noun. Since belly is the last Noun to be
used:
(i g) 
that rested (Dependent Clause)
(i ga) 
belly rested
The first word of the eighth segment is like. It is spotted by operation 135
and the following statement is issued:
(i h) 
like a balloon (Dependent Clause for comparison)
The first word of the ninth segment comes next. This is again the
Preposition on and it is dealt with by operation 99:
(i j) 
on his knees (Adverbial Clause for location or time)
The tenth (the last) segment starts with when:
when d v up
The word when is identified by operation 37 and since the segment does not
end with a Question Mark, operation 38b issues the following statement:
(i k) 
when he sat down (Dependent Clause for time)

RECOGNITION OF INDEPENDENT AND DEPENDENT CLAUSES 223
2 Role and meaning of Conjunctions
The Conjunctions serve to connect Subordinate (Dependent) Clauses and
most of them have a logical function, expressing comparison (cy), reason (cr),
time (cm), condition (ex), alternative or option (ct), addition (cq), exclusion
(cs), antithesis or adverseness (cz), circumstances (cc) or manner (en), as well
as serving to start Interrogative or Relative Clauses.
Most of the Conjunctions are used together with a Preposition, connecting
the Prepositional Adverbial Clauses.
In order to study the Conjunctions better, we have divided them into
groups, according to their underlying meaning:
f i ) 
Comparison (cy): as, inasmuch as, how, so, according to, somehow,
thus.
(ii) 
Reason (cr): because, as, since, why, hence, that's why, therefore, lest.
(iii) Time (cm): as, then, since, when, as yet, hence, whenever, so far.
(iv) Condition (ex): as, since, though, if, unless, or, even if, so, on condition
that, albeit, depending on, given.
(v) 
Alternative, option (ct): than, rather than, otherwise, else, though, in
spite of, but, yet, notwithstanding that, although, even though, or, then,
since, therefore, nevertheless, even, in order that, albeit, anyway,
besides, either or, instead, in lieu of, nonetheless, otherwise, whether.
(vi) Addition (cq): and, also, besides, moreover, even.
(vii) Exclusion (cs): but, except, yet, lest, apart from, far from, instead,
neither, neither nor, in lieu of, nor, unless.
(viii) Adverseness or counterpoising (cz): but, yet, otherwise, whatever, even,
else, despite, in spite of, either or, far from, however, irrespective of,
neither nor, nevertheless, nonetheless, otherwise, therefore, unless,
whereas, though, notwithstanding that, although, even though, since,
besides, than.
(ix) 
Circumstances (cc): that, so, according to, regarding, thereby, what, as
to, so far as.
(xj 
Manner (en): how.
(xi) 
Pronouns used at the start of Interrogative or Relative Clauses as
determiners and Conjunctions: whom, whose, who, which, whoever,
when, what, where, why, how.
Table 10.1 illustrates the meaning of the Conjunctions. There it can be
seen how many different meanings a particular Conjunction may have and
how this Conjunction relates, in meaning, to the other Conjunctions. The sign
+ is used to indicate the presence of a particular meaning; the sign - indicates
its absence.
NB Compare the meaning of the Conjunctions with the meaning of the
Prepositions (for details see Appendix 1).

224 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Table 10.1 
Meaning of Conjunctions
( + marks the presence of a particular meaning, the dash (-) marks its absence)
meaning
Conjunction 
cy 
cr 
cm 
ex 
cq 
cs 
cz 
cc 
en 
ct
No
according to
albeit
also
although
and
anyway
apart from
as
as yet
because
besides
but
depending on
despite
either
either or
else
even
even if
even though
except
far from
given
hence
how
however
if
in lieu of
in order that
in spite of
inasmuch as
instead
irrespective of
lest
moreover
neither
nevertheless
nonetheless
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
+
+
+
+
+
+
+ 
+ 
+ 
+
+
+
.
+
+
+
+
+
+ 
- 
- 
+
+
+ 
- 
- 
+
+
+
+
+
+ 
+
-
-
-
-
+
+
+
+
.
+
+ 
-
-
-
-
.
_
+
+
+ 
-
-
-
- 
+
+
+
+
+
8 
9 
10
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
+
_
_
+
+
+
_
-
_
+
+
+

RECOGNITION OF INDEPENDENT AND DEPENDENT CLAUSES 225
Conjunction 
cy
nor
notwithstanding that -
on condition that
or
otherwise
rather than
regardless of
regarding
since
so 
+
somehow 
+
than
that
then
thereby
therefore
though
thus 
+
unless
what
whatever
when
whenever
whereas 
+
whether
why
yet' 
+
meaning
cr 
cm 
ex 
cq 
cs 
cz. 
cc 
en 
ct
+ 
+
+ 
. 
. +
+ 
-
-
.
_
-
-
+
+ 
-
- 
+ 
-
- 
+
+
' +
+
+ 
+ 
+ 
-
-
-
-
-
-
+
.
+
+ .
.
. 
+ . .
+ 
.
.
.
.
_
.
+
+
+ 
-
-
-
- 
+ 
-
- 
+
+ 
-
- 
+ 
-
- 
+
+ 
- 
+ 
- 
- 
- 
+
+
+
+ 
_
.
.
. 
+ . .
+ 
.
_
.
. 
+ 
.
_
+
+
+ 
.
.
.
.
_
.
_
_
+ 
+ 
- 
- 
4-
3 The sentence
In Part 2 we have operated with segments, indicating that a segment can be
equal to a simple sentence or be part of it. The sentence, in our view, is any
grammatically correct and meaningful word, or word sequence, that stretches
from full stop to full stop, or from full stop to a Question or Exclamation Mark.
3.1 Simple sentence
The simple sentence, like the segment, is composed of several elements:
1. The Subject (Sj) is the performer of the action.
2. The Predicate or Verb, always expressed as a Verbal Tense (v), is the
action (arrive, sit] or state (is, was, etc.).

226 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
3. The Object Direct (Od) is an object towards which the action is aimed
directly.
4. The Object Indirect (Oi) is an object towards which the action is aimed
indirectly.
The simple sentence can consist of a Subject only, a Verb only, a Subject
and Verb only, a Subject, Verb and Object Direct only, or a Subject, Verb,
Object Indirect and Object Direct only. It cannot consist of Subject, Verb
and Object Indirect only, Object only, or Verb and Object only (except in
Imperative sentences).
Other, less important elements of the sentence are:
5. The Complement (Subject, Object), which modifies the Subject or the
Object.
6. The Infinitive, otherwise called The Infinitival Complement.
7. The Adverbs and the adverbial phrases, as modifiers of the Verb.
8. The Article, the Pronoun, the Numeral and the Adjective as modifiers of
the Noun.
The difference between a segment and a Simple Sentence (in the
traditional sense) is that the segment does not contain a Prepositional
Adverbial Clause, though it contains Adverbs and Adverbial Phrases - their
position in the segment is marked as b, up, also. For example, the Simple
Sentence
(i) 
The book is always on the table.
A 
n are up 
on A n
Sj 
v 
b 
bl
Sj 
v 
Cs
is composed of two segments. The Prepositional Adverbial Clause (bl) acts as
a Complement Subject. In another example, the Prepositional Adverbial
Clause (PAC) acts as Object (ii),
(ii) 
We arrived at the station.
d 
v 
at A n
Sj v 
bl
Sj 
v 
Od
because the Prepositional Adverbial Clause is the Object of the action.
The role of the Prepositional segments must be established algorithmically,
by analysing the context in which they appear.
NB In length, the segment is equal to or shorter than a Simple Sentence or a
Clause.
3.2 Clause
The Clause can be of two types.
On the one hand, it can be equal to a Simple Sentence, or joined to

RECOGNITION OF INDEPENDENT AND DEPENDENT CLAUSES 227
another such Simple Sentence to form a Complex or Compound Sentence by
means of a Conjunction. For example:
(iii) 
We waited, but she did 
not arrive.
d 
v 
but d shall also v
Sj v 
but Sj v
On the other hand, the Clause can be equal to a Simple Sentence, having
appositional role (used as a Complement in the same way as a single word
would be used as a Complement in the Simple Sentence), for example: which
was built] who came to visit us, etc. Compare the sentences:
(iv) 
Our baker, a man who benefits mankind,
O n 
d 
who v 
n
Sj 
Sj 
Sj 
v 
Od
Sj 
Cs
built himself a new house in the neighbourhood.
v 
X 
A G 
n 
in A n
v 
Oi 
Od 
bl
(v) 
We met a woman, a friend of ours.
d 
v A n 
A n 
of Os
Sj v Od 
Co
The examples above illustrate the difference between a segment and a
Clause.
3.3 Complex Sentence
The Complex (or Compound) Sentence consists of Clauses. There are two
main types of Clauses.
3.3.1 
The Principal (or Main) Clause
This is the Independent Clause. All other Clauses in the Complex (or
Compound) Sentence are dependent on it and modify it in one way or
another. The Complex Sentence can have more than one Main Clause. For
example (the segments are separated by /):
(vi) 
/ bought a sweet melon / on Friday / and
d v 
A G 
n 
on FB 
and
/ we ate it today, / though / it had to stay a
d v R up 
though it had to v
few more days to ripen well.
up 
to v 
up
The Main Clauses are underlined. The Main Clause is recognized
algorithmically (Algorithm No 20). Example (vi) illustrates the positioning
of the segments in a Complex Sentence.

228 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
NB On a purely grammatical basis, the main clause is the one that has a
Subject, Verb and Object. However, on a purely semantic basis, it could be
said that the sentence above has only one main clause: / bought a sweet melon.
The other two main clauses provide more detailed information about the
melon, therefore they are subordinate.
3.3.2 
The Subordinate or so-called Dependent Clause
The Subordinate Clause is linked to the Main Clause or to another
Subordinate Clause by means of a Conjunction. The choice of a given
Conjunction depends on the meaning we want to express with the entire
Complex (or Compound) Sentence. The Dependent Clauses, depending on
whether they complement (refer to) the Subject, the Predicate (the Verb) or
the Object of the Main Clause, are respectively called Subject Clause (vii),
Predicate Clause (viii) and Object Clause (ix).
(vii) 
He agreed though he objected at first.
d v 
though d v 
bm
Sj v
(vii a) She is what she must be.
d am what d shall be
Sj v 
Cs
(viii) 
Tour mother meant what she said.
O n 
v 
what d v
Sj 
v 
Sj v
(viii a) She knew what to say.
d 
v 
what to v
Sj v
(ix) 
/ regard him as a very clever man.
d v 
R a s A b G 
n
Sj v 
Od 
Co
Some of these are Prepositional Clauses, because they start with a Preposition
(iv above), others begin straight away with a Conjunction (hi above), still
others start with both a Preposition and a Determiner (x), or a Conjunction
and a Preposition (xi):
(x) 
You should write to all except 
to him.
d 
shall v 
to M except to R
(xi) 
We eat meat every day, except on Sunday.
d 
v n 
each n 
except on n
Those referring to the Predicate are called Prepositional Adverbial Clauses (to
him, to all in (x)).
The reader can find more about the Sentence and the Clauses in the
respective literature.
The above succinct description was meant only as a reminder of what the
sentence really is and how it should be compared to the segment. In the light

RECOGNITION OF INDEPENDENT AND DEPENDENT CLAUSES 229
of this description, it can be seen that the segment can be equated only with
the Simple Sentence (without the Prepositional Adverbial Clause) or with the
Clause (without the Conjunctions).
For more information about what type of segments can follow after a
particular Conjunction, the reader should refer to the Dictionary of
Segments.
Since the segment is deprived of lexical meaning, we cannot provide rules
on how to use the segments to generate Complex (or Compound) Sentences.
We can, however, provide rules on how to make a Simple Sentence
interrogative.
4 Creation of Interrogative Sentences
In English, the Interrogative Pronouns and the Auxiliary Verbs are used to
create Interrogative Sentences. Algorithm No 22 describes how to do that,
how to turn a segment into an Interrogative segment.
When we match a portion of text with a segment, we must have a list of all
Interrogative segments as well. This list is very long, therefore we thought
that it would be better to devise a simple algorithmic procedure to turn the
segments into the Interrogative, instead of listing them.
4.1 Procedure to create Interrogative segments. Algorithm No 22
1. Is this there?
2. Yes. Is it followed by are, is, were?
2a. Yes. Record: are (is, were) + there + the rest of the segment. Read next
segment. Go to 1. (For brevity we will use Go to 1).
2b. No. Go to 1.
3. No. Is this it?
4. Yes. Is it followed by: was, is?
4a. Yes. Record: was (is) + it + the rest of the segment. Go to 1.
4b. No. Is it followed by a v (Verb) ?
4c. Yes. Record: did (do, does) + it + v + ... (the rest of the segment). Go
to 1.
4d. No. Go to 1.
5. No. Is this I?
6. Yes. Is I followed by: are (is, were, was)?
6a. Yes. Record: are (is, was, were) + I + ... (the rest of the segment). Go
to 1.
6b. No. Is I followed by a v (Verb) ?
6c. Yes. Record: did (do, does) + I + v + ... (the rest of the segment). Go
to 1.
6d. No. Go to 1.
7. No. Is this: Sj am Cs?
8. Yes. Record: am + Sj + Cs. Go to 1.

230 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
9. No. Is this: Sj + v + Oi + Od, or Sj + v + O, or Sj + v + Od + Co?
10. Yes. Record: did (do, does) + Sj + v + .. ..(the rest of the segment).
Go to 1.
11. No. Is this: Sj am P2 ... (the rest of the segment)?
12. Yes. Record: am + Sj + P2 + ... (the rest of the segment). Go to 1.
13. No. Is this: Sj + Pi + ... (the rest of the segment)?
14. Yes. Record: am (is, are, was, were) + Sj + Pi + ... (the rest of the
segment). Go to 1.
15. No. Stop. End of operation.
We can also use the modal Verbs and the have paradigm to create
Interrogative segments in the same way as described in Algorithm No 22.

11 Further applications
The ultimate goal of Computational Linguistics is to teach the computer to
understand Natural Language.
A computer's understanding of the meaning of a portion of text, in effect,
amounts to identifying the meaning of that portion with a fixed meaning in its
memory. If the computational linguists can supply the portions of meaning
and establish the procedures to show how a portion of text can be matched
with that fixed portion of meaning in a computer's memory, then
Computational Linguistics will take a step further towards understanding
the meaning of the entire sentence.
By definition, the text is any length of sentences connected by meaning.
The text also contains pragmatic and novel information — something which
cannot readily be seen in the sentence.
Can we imbue the segments with meaning and use them for identification
of the meaning of the sentence?
Let us suppose for a moment that we have filled in the segments with
actual words from the language, using the grammatical rules for concord and
agreement, but ignoring the lexical meaning. Then we'll have a great, but
nevertheless finite, number of grammatically correct statements, most of
which will be utterly meaningless. The next thing we can do is to cross out
from the list all meaningless statements, leaving only the meaningful ones.
What we will have now is a finite number of meaningful statements composed
of natural language words, for instance:
f i ) 
People eat food.
However, the number of these natural language statements will be beyond
compute and at this stage we would not know how similar or distant in
meaning these statements are when compared to one another. For example if
we say:
(ii) 
Stanley wants a pet. and
(in) 
Stanley intends to buy a collie.
the computer would not know, yet, that this amounts to the same thing -
Stanley's desire to have a dog.

232 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Let us now suppose, for a moment, that instead of natural language words,
we use abbreviations for a particular type of meaning, like the abbreviations
we have used in Part 2 of this book to mark words with identical meaning,
and that we have an abbreviation for every conceivable lexical meaning. We
expect that in any natural language there would be just over two thousand
different lexical meanings, excluding the meanings of the subgroups of a
group (see Georgiev, 1994-2001). Then, let us substitute the Parts of Speech
in a segment with the respective meanings (abbreviated). As a result, we will
have a great, but nevertheless finite, number of segments, filled in with the
abbreviations of the semantic groups, which we will call thought patterns. The
estimated number of thought patterns is over one million.
While the segments, as sequences of Parts of Speech, provide the
syntactical frame of expression, the thought patterns presumably are the
rails on which our thoughts run. They are the scope, the limits, of our
understanding of the external reality, piece by piece, segmented, for better
consumption. The thought patterns, in our view, will be the smallest
descriptions of the external reality, also the smallest logical units, the smallest
inferences made in our judgement of the outer world. The smallest because
our aim will be to describe the text with them, to describe the external reality
using pre-recorded statements and sentences, in the same way as the
morphemes of the words or the words of the sentence form strings to express
certain meaning. Being the smallest, they cannot be cut further like we cut the
word into morphemes, or the sentence into words. They can be only joined
together in sequences to form larger units.
Let us take as an example the word head. As a Noun (Georgiev, 1994—
2001), it is met in the word-group RI-A (as part of the body) and also in the
word-group HR (chief, leader}', as a Verb, it is met in the group BFC (guide,
direct, lead, conduct, exercise guidance, head). Let us then take as an example the
following sentences:
(iv) 
The head of the Russian delegation arrived in Geneva.
A d o f A G 
n 
v 
inn
If we substitute the Parts of Speech with semantic groups (AF-EB for Russia
and related words - state, located both in Europe and Asia, etc.; GZ-A for
delegation and related words - deputation, etc.; CLA for arrived and related
words - come, get to, reach, etc.; CU-T for Geneva and related words - city, used
as headquarters of UN, located in Switzerland, etc.) we can present the above
sentence in the following way:
(iva) A H R o f A AF-EB GZ-A CLA in CU-T
This is a much closer approximation to the meaning of that sentence than
that provided by the Parts of Speech.
Let us now consider the next example, where the word head will be used
again, but with a different meaning.
(v) 
John hit his head.
d 
v O n

FURTHER APPLICATIONS 
233
If we use OO to denote hit and the words related to it (beat, pound, buffet, smite,
knock, etc.), then we can substitute (v) with semantic groups:
iv a) 
1 OO O RI-A
where 1 is a subgroup of d (denotes male) and RI-A is head, representing a
subgroup of body.
In other words, this is an abridged presentation of a male hit his head. If we
want to be less specific, we can replace 1 with d (to include male and female,
singular and plural). If we want to be more specific, then we can replace 1
with John.
In another example, head will be coded differently:
ivi) 
He was asked to head the delegation.
d am P2 
to v 
A n
and this sentence can be substituted with the thought pattern
i vi a) 
1 am DG to BFC A GZ-A
(DG represents all synonyms of ask(ed), BFG substitutes all synonyms of lead
and GZ-A marks the word delegation as a member of a class denoting a group of
people, temporally assembled to represent a larger group of people.)
As we have seen, the word head, in all examples, figures only with one
meaning 
the meaning required in that particular context. This is one of the
possible ways to disambiguate the lexical meaning of the word.
The thought patterns will be fixed in the computer's memory as constant
concepts. Being constituents of the Sentence and not of the text as a whole,
the thought patterns will allow for more detailed and precise description of
reality, piece by piece, than the scenes described by Schank and Fano (1992:
175 88). Note that the scenes and the scripts in Schank's theory describe a
whole text (situations in a story) and then are programmed to make logical
inferences on individual sentences or other related texts, while the thought
patterns will describe the meaning of individual sentences only, and can
make logical inferences using the semantic paradigm(s). Compare for
example:
CLA in CU-T
arrived in Geneva
came to Switzerland
Now we shall turn our attention briefly to a more specific problem related
to the idea of thought patterns: what makes us understand those foreigners
who speak the language brokenly? First, when they choose a word from a set
of words sharing the same meaning, they often tend to choose the wrong
word. For example, they might say
f v i i ) 
the leader oj the Russian delegation
instead of the more commonly used word head:

234 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
(viii) 
the head of the Russian delegation
and still they will be understood correctly.
This is an example of what is well known in the literature as norm of usage.
The norm of usage is the established preference of use of a certain word out of
a set of words sharing the same meaning.
The use of thought patterns will have an immense advantage in human-
computer communication, because they can accept both the established
usage, the norm, and those usages which are less established or may even
seem erroneous. For example:
(ix) 
the chief of the Russian deputation
Secondly, a foreigner may wrongly arrange the semantic groups when
forming a thought pattern. For example:
(x) 
People food eat.
d 
n 
v
d 
LQIF
instead of
(x a) 
People eat food.
d 
v n
d 
IFLQ
where LQis an abbreviation marking the class of words denoting food and IF
marks all synonyms of eat. This arrangement (x) is common to some
languages such as Turkish or German, where the Verb often ends the
sentence. In this case, we will need a more sophisticated algorithm to
understand and correct a sentence like (x).
And finally, a foreign speaker may arrange the segments of a sentence in a
manner not quite permissible in English. For example:
(xi) 
Lily went to school by car.
d 
v 
to n 
by n
Sj 
v 
bdl 
bi
may have the following arrangement of its three segments:
(xi a) Lily went to school by car.
(xi b) By car Lily went to school.
(xi c) 
To school Lily went by car.
(xi d) By car to school Lily went.
(xi e) 
To school by car Lily went.
(xi f) 
Lily to school by car went.
(xi g) Lily by car to school went.
(xi h) Lily by car went to school.
etc.
Example (xi f) is characteristic of Turkish, an agglutinative language, in
which the Prepositional Adverbial Clauses, expressed as single words, are

FURTHER APPLICATIONS 
235
allowed to intervene between the Subject and the Verb. Naturally, not all
these sequences of segments are permitted in English. In some languages some
of the sequences are acceptable, in others they are not.
Since there are no rules to govern the arrangement of segments within the
sentence - this is a task for text synthesis, not for text analysis - the computer
software program developed on this basis will not be able to say which one of
the above sentences is correct. The user will be alerted where the sentence is
absolutely correct (xi a), because it is ambiguous, and his attention will also
be drawn where it is needed most (xi f):
(xi a) Lily went to school by car.
(xi aa) d 
v 
to n 
by n
Sj 
v 
bdl 
bi
(xi ab) d 
v 
to v 
by n
Sj 
v 
Ic 
bi
If the longer segment (xi ab) has precedence over the shorter one (xi aa), the
sentence will be parsed incorrectly (to v = Ic). If the computer program is
made so that it regards the Prepositions (in this case the Particle to) used after
a Verb as ambiguous, the above sentence will have two parsings (xi aa, xi ab)
and the user will be asked to intervene. In example (xi f) the user will be
asked for help because to school has two different interpretations.
(xi f) 
Lily I to school / by car / went.
(xi fa) d 
to v 
by n 
v
ixi fb) 
to n
The method described in this book is universal - it can be applied
successfully to any other Natural Language. The author of this book has
already applied it to the French language (Georgiev, 1997-200 Ib) and to the
German language (Georgiev, 1996—2001 b) to produce parsing software
programs. The publication of the written results, in a similar form, is pending.
The segments as described in Part 2 can be used as a basis for construction
of a spell-checking software program based on syntax, provided that
additional grammatical rules are introduced to govern the concord in
number and gender between its constituent words. Such a spell-checking
program for the English language is already available on the software market
under the name SYNTCHEGK (Georgiev, 1993b). SYNTCHECK uses
additional algorithms (which are not included in this book) - describing the
agreement in number and gender between different word pairs within the
sentence 
and is able to spot those words that are spelt correctly from the
orthographical point of view, but incorrectly from the grammatical point of
view. Using the same method, the same author has developed versions for the
German (Georgiev, 1996 200la), French (Georgiev, 1997-2001a) and
Italian (Georgiev, 2000-2001) languages.
On the other hand, the thought patterns, as outlined in this section, can be
used to design a spell-check program based on meaning. The semantic groups
of words will substitute the Parts of Speech in the segments to create thought

236 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
patterns. The sequence of semantic groups in a thought pattern will represent
the combinatorics of meaning permitted in the language (but not, yet, the
norm of usage). Then if someone, instead of (x a), uses the expression (xii)
(xii) 
Houses eat food, (expression in Natural language)
n 
v n 
(segment)
AB-D IF LQ (thought pattern)
(where AB marks the meaning of the class of words denoting building,
construction, erection, and AB-D is a subclass denoting living quarters], the
computer will reject it as meaningless, because this thought pattern will not
be registered in its memory and therefore it will not be regarded as truthful.
However, the computer can acknowledge this particular thought pattern,
and register it in its memory only on the condition that it is accepted as
allegorical.

Appendix 1: List of Prepositions and Conjunctions and
their most characteristic meanings
'* marks the presence of a particular meaning, the dash (-) marks its absence)
Preposition/
Conjunction
List No 1
aboard
about
above
according
across
after
against
ahead of
albeit
along
•i 1 o/--i
clloO
although
altogether
among
'1 TI ri
tillU
anyway
apart from
around
as
as as
as yet
at
r-vfif> o i l cf>
UCLcl Hot
before
behind
beside
besides
Meaning
bs 
br 
be bl bm bn bz
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
*
_
*
*
*
*
_
* 
*
* 
_ 
_ 
_
* 
*
* . . *
* 
*
_
*
*
*
*
*
_
_
_
_
_
*
* 
* . 
_
#
#
_
*
#
#
.
* 
_ 
*
*
*
*
*
*
_
*
* 
*
* 
* 
. 
_
* 
. 
_ 
_
*
_
_
_
.
_
*
bx bq by bp bu bv
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 13
_
* 
* 
* 
*
* 
*
*
_
*
*
_
_
.
_
_
-
*
_
-
-
-
-
-
-
*
.
*
_
_
.
*
; ; ; ; : ;
_
_
_
_
_
_
.
_
*
_
*
_
.
_

238
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Preposition 1
Conjunction
List No 1
between
beyond
both
but
by
coriccrninsf
depending on
despite
down
during
either or
else
even
even if
even though
PYf"*f*T". ."
1^-A.^v^ VJ L
far from
for
from
given
hence
how
however
if
in
inasmuch as
m lipn of
llV^Ll \Ji
in order that
inside
in spite of
in ^fp.^ H
IJLlo L^ctLl
into
in view of
irrespective (of)
lest
like
moreover
near
needless
neither nor
nevertheless
next
Meaning
bs br be bl bm bn bz
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
* 
*
*
* 
*
*
_
*
#
*
*
*
-
_
.
.
_
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
_
_
*
_
_
*
*
_
_
*
_
_
*
*
*
*
*
_
*
_
_
*
_
_
*
*
.
_
#
#
#
#
*
*
*
*
* 
*
*
*
*
_
*
*
_
*
_
*
*
.
_
_
_
*
*
*
*
*
* 
_ 
_ 
_ 
_ 
*
*
_
_
_
_
.
*
*
* 
*
bx bq by bp bu bv
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 13
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
_
* 
* 
*
*
*
_
_
_
_
_
*
*
*
_
_
_
.
-
* . . 
_
*
.
_
_
_
_
-
_
_
_
_
_
_
* 
_ 
* 
* 
_
*
*
_
_
_
.
_
*
_
*
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*
*
*
_
_
_
.
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
.
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
*

APPENDIX 1 
239
Preposition/
Conjunction
List No 1
nonetheless
nor
notwithstanding
of
on
once
on condition
onto
or
otherwise
over
past
per
perhaps
prior (to)
provided (that)
rather than
regarding
round
since
so
somehow
somewhat
somewhere
than
that
then
thereby
therefore
though
through
throughout
thus
to
towards
under
unless
until/till
upon
via
what
whatever
Meaning
bs 
br 
be 
bl bm bn bz bx bq by bp bu bv
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 11 12 13
*
_
_
_
_
_
.
*
_
_
_
_
_
*
_
_
#
_
_
_
*
_
_
_
_
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
*
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
_
*
*
#
#
*
_ 
_
#
*
*
*
*
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
*
.
_
_
_
-
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
* 
*
*
_
_
-
.
-
*
*
-
_
-
-
-
*
*
*
.
_
_
*
_
_
*
*
*
*
.
_
_
_
.
_
_
-
*
*
-
_
-
.
.
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
*
_
_
_
_
_
*
_
_
*
_
_
_
*
_
_
.
_
_
_
_
_
_
.
*
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
_
_
*
_
*
*
_
_
_
-
-
*
.
_
.
.
*
_
*
.
_
.
*
_
_
*
_
_
_
*
_
.
_
* 
_ 
_ 
_
*
_
_
_
*
_
_
_
_
.
*
.
_
_
_
_
.
*
.
_
_
_
_
.
_
_
.
_
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
.
_
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
*
_
*
-
.
_
_
_
_
_
_
-
*
^
*
*
^
- 
— 
— 
- 
—
*
*
_
_
-
-
_
_
_
-
*
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
* . 
_ 
_
*
.
*
*
.
.
.
*
_
*
.
.
*
*
.
.
_
_
_
*
_
_
*
*
_
_
_
*
#
_
_
_
_
*
_
_
_
_
_
*
*
_
_
_
_
_
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
_
*
_
_
_
.
_
_
_
_
_
*
*
_
.
_
_
_
_
_
*
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
-
_
_
*
_
_
_
*
_
_
_
_
_
_

240 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Preposition!
Conjunction
List Mo 1
when
whenever
where
whereas
whether
which
while
with
within
yet
Meaning
bs 
br be bl bm bn bz bx bq by bp bu bv
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 13
*
-
*
-
_
-
_
-
_
.
_
*
-
*
-
_
_
_
.
_
_
_
*
*
-
-
-
.
_
*
_
.
_
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
* 
*
_
_
.
_
_
*
_
_
*
-
_
_
_
_
_
_
_
*
*
*
_
_
*
_
_
*
_
*
*
_
*
*
-
_
_
*
_
.
_
_
*
*
-
-
-
.
_
*
_
_
_
_
_
_
who
whom
whoose
why
without

Appendix 2: Internet downloads
Instructions on how to download and use the additional files. The
Dictionary of Segments, the full text of the algorithms (flow charts) and a
commercial copy of the software program SYNTPARSE can be down-
loaded at http://www.langsoft.ch/eag/eag_app.htm.
SYNTPARSE needs a password to install on Windows. This password is:
sparse2. Please type in the password when prompted to do so. Note that the
password is case sensitive. SYNTPARSE does not need a password to run on
LINUX and UNIX Operating Systems (DOS mode only).
One of the text files contains all algorithms (No 1-No 22). The other text
file contains the Dictionary of Segments. Both files are compressed for
different Operating Systems. For Windows they are in zip format. For
LINUX and UNIX they are in tar.gz format. The text file called Segments
contains approximately 27,000 syntactically correct sequences of Parts of
Speech allowed by English grammar and usage (in certain positions the Parts
of Speech are substituted by words or by abbreviations for semantic groups).
The segments are arranged alphabetically and presented in the order used by
the computer program for identification of a portion of text with a segment:
first come the Nominal Segments, followed by the Verbal Segments and
finally come the segments that start with an Auxiliary word (mainly
Conjunction or Preposition). The reader can find detailed information on
howr to interpret and use the segments in Part 2 of this book. Apart from its
usefulness for the algorithms, the Dictionary of Segments can be used for
reference by anyone who writes in English and wishes to check if the
syntactical expression of his (her) sentence is in accordance with that allowed
by English syntax. Then the user must perform the operations of
identification of a portion of text with a segment from the Dictionary of
Segments, as described in Algorithm No 7: if a segment (or segments) is found
to match the sentence, then that sentence can be considered to be
syntactically correct (but not, yet, semantically).
Since the parsing of the segments (and hence that of sentences) is pre-
recorded, the Dictionary of Segments can be used for reference by anyone
who teaches or studies English Syntax and Parsing.
The text information is provided as ASCII files, to ensure maximum
compatibility for a wide range of PCs, including later Macs.

242 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
The access to the files (Algorithms or Segments) is the same as that to any
other text file: the user must have a Word Processor on the hard disk, or if not
a Word Processor must be installed and opened. The usual commands,
common to all Word Processors, are 'open' or 'open, file name' if the user has
already loaded the file on the hard disk. When the file Segments is opened, the
user should use the commands 'search' ('find', 'locate', etc., available on the
menu, usually under 'edit') and enter the search pattern (the segment or the
initial part of the segment), or 'go to' (page number), or use the keys 'Page
Up' or 'Page Down' in order to find the desired segment. Those readers who
do not have a PC at their disposal ought to find a way to obtain a print-out of
the Dictionary of Segments.

General index of abbreviations
NB Some of the abbreviations such as d', n', 1, k are used only in the
Dictionary of Wordforms (DW).
1 Alphabetical list of one-letter abbreviations
= 
equal to
+ 
plus
the second word marked with " refers to the previous one marked
with the same sign (except in Genitive of the Noun, as in N"s)
the second word marked with ' refers to the previous one marked '
* 
the segment is grammatically incorrect or incomplete
A 
Article (definite and indefinite)
a(n) 
Indefinite Article
b 
Adverb, less, just, only, still
C 
Preposition including all Prepositions having adverbial nature such
as inside, over, above, outside, near, etc.
d 
EBB, Personal Pronoun Nominal Case, Noun denoting a person,
one, others, abbreviation, some, G + d + name, d + name's + G
+ n, d + name's + n, d + of + A + n, name, d + name, G + d,
whoever, d + of + name + of + name, A G d of A G G n, some, G
+ G + G + d, d + of + n + name, d + of + G + n, name + of
+ A + G + G + n, A + d + of + A + G + n, A + d + of + n,
G + N"s + G + d, A+S 
+ d, A + S + d + o f + A + G + n,
name + of + name, M + d, A + N"s + G + G + d, A + G + n
denoting a group of people, G + n denoting a group, A + d, A + G
+ d + of + n, A + d + of + A + G + N"s + G + G + n, A +
G + G + n denoting a group of people, A + d + o f + I + G + n,
A + d + of + N"s + G + n, another + d, etc.
(NB G are optional; N"s = G!) Note that here d stands for both
masculine and feminine gender; d is a subclass of the Noun and
marks the semantic group 'a human being'; d has its own subclasses.
d' 
d plural (used only in DW)
F 
Abbreviation
G 
Adjective (incl. -er,- est) as an Attribute or Predicative, more
h 
A Noun used in singular only (used only in DW)

244 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
I 
Indicative Pronoun, last, next
i 
Indicative Pronoun, such, Article
j 
An Adjective, Numeral Ordinal, Adverb and Participle 1st that can
be used with be and its paradigm as a Predicative or Complement,
e.g. ready, sure, busy, more, steady, sunny, etc.
k 
d female (used only in DW)
k' 
k plural (used only in DW)
1 
d male (used only in DW)
1' 
1 plural (used only in DW)
M 
Numeral Cardinal, UK, figure (number), EBL
m 
Numeral Cardinal, figure (number)
N 
Noun
n 
Noun (singular or plural)
n' 
Noun plural (used only in DW)
"n" 
Noun used as a quotation and put in Inverted Commas
O 
Possessive Pronoun (nominative)
P 
Gerund
p 
Preposition (used only in DW)
q 
A Noun used in the plural only (used only in DW)
R 
Personal Pronoun Objective Case, EBB, other, another, one, name,
others, both, Noun
r 
Geographical name
S 
Numeral Ordinal, last, previous, former (S = G; S — n)
T 
Numeral denoting a repetition: once, twice, etc., many times, half,
M times, score of times, half the time
V 
Verb
v 
Main Verb (including have and do, excluding the Auxiliary Verbs)
v' 
3rd person singular of the Present Tense
W 
Mathematical sign
X 
Reflexive Pronoun
Z 
Reciprocal Pronoun
2 Abbreviations of two or more letters
AA 
Adverb or Adjective
Abbr. 
Abbreviation
Adj 
Adjective
Adv 
Adverb
Aj 
Adjective
almost 
almost, nearly
along 
along, alongside
also 
not, also, Adverb, even, only, still, too
am 
am, are, was, were, is
among 
among, amid, amongst
ANV 
Adjective or Noun or Verb
are 
are, is, was, were
AV 
Adjective or Verb
b change 
Adverbial clause for change
b means 
Adverbial clause for means

GENERAL INDEX OF ABBREVIATIONS
245
b opposition 
Adverbial clause for opposition
ba 
Adverbial clause for activity
bb 
Adverbial clause for togetherness and joint action
be 
Adverbial clause for circumstances
bdl 
Adverbial clause for direction and location
be 
Adverbial clause for togetherness
bf 
Adverbial clause for result
bg 
Adverbial clause for 'stoppage'
bh 
Adverbial clause denoting starting point
bi 
Adverbial clause for instrument, means
bj 
Adverbial clause for appearance
bk 
Adverbial clause for source
bl 
Adverbial clause for location
bm 
Adverbial clause for time
bn 
Adverbial clause for manner
bo 
Adverbial clause for purpose
bp 
Adverbial clause for purpose
bq 
Adverbial clause for quantity
br 
Adverbial clause for reason
bs 
Adverbial clause for separation
bt 
Adverbial clause for 'clothes'
bu 
Adverbial clause for concern
bv 
Adverbial clause for sequence
bw 
Adverbial clause for persuasion
bx 
Adverbial clause for condition
by 
Adverbial clause for comparison
bz 
Adverbial clause for opposition
called 
called, named, denominated, entitled, termed
can 
can, should, will, would, would better, ought to, must, have to
cc 
Conjunction for circumstances
cm 
Conjunction for time
en 
Conjunction for manner
Co 
Complement Object
cq 
Conjunction for addition
cr 
Conjunction for reason
Cs 
Complement Subject
cs 
Conjunction for exclusion
ct 
Conjunction for alternative (option)
ex 
Conjunction for condition
cy 
Conjunction for comparison
cz 
Conjunction for opposition
Dem. Pr 
Demonstrative Pronoun
despite 
despite, notwithstanding
did 
did. do, does
DS 
Dictionary of Segments
DW 
Dictionary of Wordforms
each 
each, every
EAH 
seam, strip, band, ribbon
EAI 
come back, return, go back
EAJ 
endorse, sign, approbate, approve, give one's consent, etc.

246 
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
EAL 
except, with the exception (of), with the exclusion of, without, etc.
EAM 
give rise to, sprout, give birth to, etc.
EAN 
at the back of one's mind, subconsciously
EAO 
forward, ahead
EAP 
somewhere else, not here, elsewhere
EAQ, 
already, at times, sometimes, now and then, often, occasionally,
periodically, intermittently, once, never, some day, always, no
longer, one day, no more, never more, never again, ever (EAQis a
subgroup of HA)
EAR 
next, afterwards, after that, hereafter
EAS 
indeed, of course, yes, no doubt
EAT 
confide in, trust
EAU 
all, everything
EAV 
too, as well, also
EAW 
reportedly, perhaps, possibly, probably, presumably, may be,
undoubtedly, no doubt, indeed, certainly, etc.
EAY 
going on, continuing, in progress
EAZ 
in public, in the open, outdoors, outside
EBA 
notwithstanding, nevertheless, after all
EBB 
anyone, someone, somebody, anybody, any person, everyone,
everybody, no one, no body, whomever, nobody, one, each one of
R, others, other people
EBC 
whatever, anything, everything, something, nothing, the thing, the
things
EBD 
for now, for the time being, at present, currently, presently
EBF 
good night, goodbye, hello, farewell
EBI 
taking into consideration, taking into account, given, considering,
having in mind
EBK 
nearly, almost, approximately
EBL 
half, 1/3, 1/4, etc.
EBM 
goodbye, farewell, goodnight, good afternoon
EBN 
day, morning, dusk, sunrise, sunset, evening, lunch, lunch time,
afternoon, night
EBO 
tens, dozens, hundreds, thousands, millions, score, none
EBP 
20s, 30s, 40s, 50s, 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s, ...
EBQ, 
breakfast, lunch, supper, dinner, sunrise, sunset, dawn
EBR 
a hundred, a thousand, a million, a dozen, etc.
EBS 
Christmas, Easter, New Year, Holy Week, etc.
EBT 
now, yesterday, tomorrow
EBU 
better, best, worst, worse, well
EBW 
uncommunicative, taciturn, speechless, reticent, spellbound
end 
end, start, close, closure, middle, beginning
except 
except, save, apart from, with the exception of, excluding
FB 
words denoting time (period of time)
FB-BD 
1950, 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990, etc.
FB-BE(A-L) 
Months
FB-BH(A-H) 
Days of the week
FB-BL 
50s, 60s, 70s, 80s, 90s, etc.
FB-BM 
seasons
future 
future, present, past

GENERAL INDEX OF ABBREVIATIONS
247
goodnight 
goodnight, goodbye, farewell
greeting 
goodbye, good afternoon, good morning, etc.
HA 
endlessly, permanently, perpetually, eternally, ceaselessly, non-stop,
unendingly, continuously, unceasingly, constantly, uninterruptedly,
incessantly, everyday, indefinitely, daily, steadily, 
endemically,
cronically, persistently, continually, invariably, gradually, by
degrees, bit by bit, step by step, by and by, little by little, in stages,
progressively, successively, for days on end, for months on end, every
day, intermittently, for years on end, unabatedly, for ever, for ever
and ever, all the time, always, day and night, ever, evermore, all the
way through, day by day, day after day, daily
had 
have, had
has 
has. have, had
have 
have
heading(s) 
heading, title (usually in italics)
hence 
hence, therefore, that's why
high 
high, low
Ic 
Infinitival Complement
Indef. Pr 
Indefinite Pronoun
Indie. Pr 
Indicative Pronoun
inside 
inside, outside
Inter. Pr 
Interrogative Pronoun
JD 
Winds (North, South, East, West)
JE 
words denoting measure
JE(A-D) 
words denoting measure (subgroup)
JE-D 
words denoting distance
JE-Dn 
words denoting distance
just 
just, Adverb, do, does, did, also, even
last 
past, recent, last, next, early, late, coming, only, former, previous,
later, latter
late 
late, early
less 
many, less, few, the greater part, best, worse, little, most, much,
more, Adverb, very, even, further, not much, a little, a lot
LQ, 
look and its synonyms
more 
more, less, Adjective
morning 
morning, evening, afternoon
much 
much, more, little
NA 
Noun or Adjective
name 
name (proper)
near 
near, close, far, far away
nearly 
nearly, approximately, almost
neither 
neither, either, nor
NG 
Nominal Word Group
no 
no
not 
not
NP 
Noun Phrase
N"s 
Noun expressing possessiveness: -'s, -s' (Genitive of the Noun)
NV 
Noun or Verb
Od 
Object Direct
other 
other, another

248
off
Oi
one
ones
Os
outset
PA
PAC
PANV
PAY
PC
PI
P2
Pi
Poss. Pr
PPNC
PPOC
Pr
PS
PU
PV
Pv
QJ
Rec. Pr
Refl. Pr
Rel. Pr
RM
round
shall
should
Sj
some
still
TCi
TCn
TCv
TE
that
that'
title
today
too
towards
UF
ENGLISH ALGORITHMIC GRAMMAR
Prepositions and other words used with the Prepositional and
Phrasal or idiomatic Verbs: apart, by, upon, over, forth, up, down,
away, out, in, into, at, with, along, together, through, across, round,
around, aside, adrift, about, home, aback, ahead, for, clear, plain,
part, back, alone, charge, right, loose, fast, secret, astray, place,
behind, abroad, open, busy, alongside, high, aloud, from, past
Object Indirect
one, ones
one, ones
Possessive Pronoun (dative)
outset, beginning
Participle (-ed) or Adjective
Prepositional Adverbial Clause
Participle (-ing) or Adjective or Noun or Verb
Participle (-ing) or Adjective or Verb
Personal computer
Participle 1st
Participle 2nd
Participle '-ing'
Possessive Pronoun
Personal Pronoun Nominal Case
Personal Pronoun Objective Case
Predicative
Part of Speech
monetary unit (pound, dollar, etc.)
Participle (-ed) or Verb
Participle '-ing' (equivalent to 'to + v')
words denoting colour
Reciprocal Pronoun
Reflexive Pronoun
Relative Pronoun
record to memory
round, around
do, does, did, shall, should, can, could, dare, may, might, will,
would, have to, ought to, must, have to
should, will, would, may, might, shall, must
Subject
some, certain, most
still, yet
Participle '-ing' of TCv (communication)
Nouns from the group TCn (communication)
Verb, from the semantic group 'speech and communication'
words denoting group(s) of people
that (does not refer to previous Noun)
that (refers to previous Noun)
Sir, Von, Dr, Mr, Miss, etc.
today, yesterday, tomorrow
Adverb, too, as well, also
towards, toward
something, nothing, everything, all, anything

GENERAL INDEX OF ABBREVIATIONS 
249
UG 
marriage, wedding, death, birth
UG' 
within, inside, outside, abroad, beyond
UI 
UG, UL, anywhere, everywhere, nowhere, somewhere, down, up,
afar, overseas, over here, over there, throughout, elsewhere, around,
EAZ, worldwide, out there
UJ 
beside, near, next, alongside, against, opposite
UK 
all, a few, several, some, many, any, lots of, a lot, a number, a couple
(of), less, much, more, most, far more, none, every, few, so little, all
the, almost all the, a great deal, a great many, a good deal, all of R,
so many, large number(s) (of), certain, much more, each, each one
(of), tens of thousands, EBO of, other, another, a few more, quite a
lot (of), any other, far too much, half the, half a(n), the whole lot,
very few, very many and other words and phrases denoting number
or quantity
UL 
outside, inside, downstairs, upstairs, here, there
under 
under, beneath, below
until 
until, till
up 
The same list as for 'off plus b (all Adverbs) - only in the segment or
at the end of the segment (not at the start of a segment!)
up 
up, off, out, down, over, in (only when at the beginning of a
segment)
VAP 
Verb or Adjective or Participle (-ed)
VG 
Verbal group
VNP 
Verb or Noun or Participle (-ed)
VP 
Verbal phrase
was 
was, is
West 
West, South, East, North
yes 
yes, no
Z's 
Reciprocal Pronoun

References
Brill, E. and Mooney, R. J. (1997), 'An overview of empirical natural language
processing', in AI Magazine, 18 (4): 13-24.
Chomsky, N. (1957), Syntactic Structures. The Hague: Mouton.
Curme, G. O. (1955), English Grammar. New York: Barnes and Noble.
Dowty, D. R., Karttunen, L. and Zwicky, A. M. (eds) (1985), Natural Language
Parsing. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Garside, R. (1986), The CLAWS word-tagging system', in R. Garside, G. Leech and
G. Sampson (eds) The Computational Analysis of English. Harlow: Longman.
Gazdar, G. and Mellish, C. (1989), Natural Language Processing in POP-11. Reading,
UK: Addison-Wesley.
Georgiev, H. (1976), 'Automatic recognition of verbal and nominal word groups in
Bulgarian texts', in t.a. information, Revue International du traitement automatique du
langage, 2, 17-24.
Georgiev, H. (1991), 'English Algorithmic Grammar', in Applied Computer Translation,
Vol. 1, No. 3, 29-48.
Georgiev, H. (1993a), 'Syntparse, software program for parsing of English texts',
demonstration at the Joint Inter-Agency Meeting on Computer-assisted Termi-
nology and Translation, The United Nations, Geneva.
Georgiev, H. (1993b), 'Syntcheck, a computer software program for orthographical
and grammatical spell-checking of English texts', demonstration at the Joint Inter-
Agency Meeting on Computer-assisted Terminology and Translation, The United
Nations, Geneva.
Georgiev, H. (1994—2001), Softhesaurus, English Electronic Lexicon, produced and
marketed by LANGSOFT, Sprachlernmittel, Switzerland; platform: DOS/
Windows.
Georgiev, H. (1996-200la), Syntcheck, a computer software program for orthographical and
grammatical spell-checking of German texts, produced and marketed by LANGSOFT,
Sprachlernmittel, Switzerland; platform: DOS/Windows.
Georgiev, H. (1996-200 Ib), Syntparse, software program for parsing of German texts,
produced and marketed by LANGSOFT, Sprachlernmittel, Switzerland; platform:
DOS/Windows.
Georgiev, H. (1997—200la), Syntcheck, a computer software program for orthographical and
grammatical spell-checking of French texts, produced and marketed by LANGSOFT,
Sprachlernmittel, Switzerland; platform: DOS/Windows.
Georgiev, H. (1997-200Ib), Syntparse, software program for parsing of French texts,
produced and marketed by LANGSOFT, Sprachlernmittel, Switzerland; platform:
DOS/Windows.

REFERENCES 
251
Georgiev, H. (2000 2001), Syntcheck, a computer software program for orthographical and
grammatical spell-checking of Italian texts, produced and marketed by LANGSOFT,
Sprachlernmittel, Switzerland; platform: DOS/Windows.
Giorgi, A. and Longobardi, G. (1991), The Syntax of Noun Phrases: Configuration,
Parameters and Empty Categories. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Graver, B. D. (1971), Advanced English Practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Grisham, R. (1986), Computational Linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Harris, Z. S. (1982), A Grammar of English on Mathematical Principles. New York: Wiley.
Hausser, R. (1989), Computation of Language. Berlin: Springer.
Hornby, A. S. (1958), A Guide to Patterns and Usage in English. London: Oxford
University Press.
Kavi, M. and Nirenburg, S. (1997), 'Knowledge-based systems for natural language',
in A. B. Tucker (ed.) The Computer Science and Engineering Handbook. Boca Raton, FL:
CRC Press, Inc., 637-53.
Koverin, A. A. (1972), 'Grammatical analysis, on a computer, of French scientific and
technical texts' (in Russian), PhD thesis, Leningrad University, Russia.
Leech, S. and Svartvik, J. (1975), A Communicative Grammar of English. London: Longman.
Manning, C. and Schiitze, H. (1999), Foundations of Statistical Natural Language
Processing. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Marcus, M. P. (1980), A Theory of Syntactic Recognition for Natural Language. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press. ' 
"
McEnery, T. (1992), Computational Linguistics. Wilmslow, UK: Sigma Press.
Mihailova, I. V. (1973), 'Automatic recognition of the nominal group in Spanish
texts' (in Russian), in R. G. Piotrovskij (ed.) Injenernaja Linguistika. St Petersburg:
Politechnical Institute, 148-75.
Primov, U. V. and Sorokina,V. A. (1970), 'Algorithm for automatic recognition of the
nominal group in English technical texts' (in Russian), in R. G. Piotrovskij (ed.)
Statistika Teksta, H. Minsk: Politechnical Institute.
Pullum, G. K. (1984), 'On two recent attempts to show that English is not a CFL',
Computational Linguistics, 10 (3-4), 182-6.
Quirk, R. and Greenbaum, S. (1983), A University Grammar of English. London:
Longman.
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G. and Svartvic,J. (1972), Grammar of Contemporary
English. London: Longman.
Reichman, R. (1985), Getting Computers to Talk like You and Me. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Sestier, A. and Dupuis, L. (1962), 'La place de la syntaxe dans la traduction
automatique des langues. Esquisse d'un nouveau systeme de description
grammaticale et de son utilisation pour la reconstruction des structures
grammaticales', Ingenieurs et Techniciens, No. 1555, 43-50.
Schank, R. and Fano, A. (1992) 'Knowledge, memory, learning and teaching. A
survey of our research', in t.a.l., Traitement Automatique des Langues, Vol. 33, No. 1-2.
Shanks, D. (1993), 'Breaking Chomsky's rules', New Scientist, February, 26-30.
Shieber, S. M. (1985), 'Evidence against the non-context-freeness of natural
language', in Linguistics and Philosophy, 8, 333-43.
Stannard, A. (1974), Living English Structure. London: Longman.
Urdang, L. (ed.) (1968), The Random House Dictionary of the English Language (College
Edition). New York: Random House.
Venev, Y. (1990), Elsevier's Dictionary of Mathematical and Computational Linguistics.
Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Index of terms
active voice 
62, 108
adjective 
4, 10, 19, 23, 24, 27, 28, 29,
30, 31, 32, 33, 41, 44, 49, 52, 64, 71,
76, 79, 87, 88, 90, 91, 97, 99, 111,
186, 191, 192, 195, 226
adjunct 
41, 194,
adverb 
4, 8, 10, 12, 19, 21, 22, 25, 27,
28, 29, 31, 41, 47, 48, 49, 53, 54, 55,
56,62,64,66, 79,88,90,94, 111,
119, 121, 181, 185, 188, 190, 211,
226
adverbial 
99, 197
adverbial adjunct 
194
adverbial clause 41, 50, 95, 111, 112,
126, 130, 138, 146, 152, 155, 157,
160, 162, 163, 164, 165, 166, 167,
168, 169, 170, 171, 172, 173, 174,
175, 188, 194, 201, 217, 220, 222
adverbial phrase 
50, 188, 190, 226
adverbial prepositional segment 
199
adverbial segment 
66, 108, 199, 201,
204, 216, 217
adverbial structure 126
agreement 
45, 58, 186, 207, 210, 211,
214-15, 217, 219
algorithmic 
3, 4, 5, 10, 11, 18, 19, 24,
27, 33, 34, 41, 42, 57, 104, 107, 181,
182, 198, 199, 200, 219, 220, 229
algorithmic analysis 4, 11,58
algorithmic notation 
181
algorithmic recognition 
5, 18, 34
ambiguity 
4, 22, 25, 37, 42, 105, 180-1,
184, 187, 190-5, 211
appositional 
43, 192, 197, 227
argument 
52, 58, 186
article 
7-9, 12, 13, 23-6, 30-3, 47, 52,
63-4, 76, 99, 221, 226
artificial intelect 
41
artificial inteligence 
42
artificial language 
12, 42
attribute 4, 10, 19, 27-8, 30, 32, 64, 71,
76, 87-8, 90-1, 186, 197
attribution 
5, 7, 19, 21-2, 34, 215
attributive adjective 
41
automatic recognition 
5, 33
auxiliary clause 56
auxiliary segment 53, 65
auxiliary verb 
4, 7, 10, 23, 33-5, 43, 52-
3, 55, 57-8, 60, 62, 99, 103, 114, 117,
121, 186, 197, 202, 204, 206, 229
auxiliary word 
5, 13, 14, 19, 25, 43, 46,
53, 182, 221
border marker 
126
clause 
16, 20, 41, 43, 45, 93, 97, 99,
103, 121, 123, 133-5, 142, 145, 150,
177, 187, 220, 223, 226-9
aboard, across-clauses 
171
about-clause 
170-1
above-clause 
165-6
after-clause 
168-9
against-clause 
160—1
along-clauses 
171
among-clauses 
172
around-clauses 
172
at-clauses 
135-8
before-clause 
167-8
behind-clauses 
172
beside-clauses 
173
between-clause 
164-5
beyond-clauses 
173
by-clauses 
146—9
down-clauses 
173
for-clauses 
155-7
from-clauses 
126, 128-130
in-clauses 
152-5
inside-clause 
173-4
into-clauses 
150—1
like-clause 
169-170
1
1
1
h
1
1
1

INDEX OF TERMS
253
clause (cont.)
near-clause 
174
next-clause 
160
of-clauses 
133 5
on-clauses 
138-41
onto-clauses 
151
over-clauses 
130 3
past-clause 
160
round, throughout-clauses 174
since-clause 
166
through-clause 
162 -3
to-clauses 
157 9
towards-clause 
174-5
under-clause 
163-4
until, till, while, once, prior to, during-
clauses 
169
upon-clause 
175
via-dause 
175
with-clauses 
142-4
within-clauses 
145-6
without-clauses 
145
comparative modifier 54-5, 70
complement 
4, 58, 70-1, 74, 82, 93, 95,
185-6, 188, 227
complement object 
52, 58, 93, 96-7, 99,
101, 104, 111-12, 177, 179, 187, 189,
192, 197, 200, 205, 226
complement subject 41, 49, 52, 58,
64-6, 71, 74, 91, 93, 95-7, 99, 100-1,
104, 106, 108, 111-12, 114, 117, 177,
186-7, 189, 197, 199, 200, 202,
217-18, 221, 226
complex sentence 
41, 227-9
compound sentence 41, 227-9
compound tense 
10, 19, 34, 112, 114, 117
compound verbal tense 
112, 114, 117
computational 
42, 231
computational grammar 
197
computer 
3, 7, 8, 11, 12, 18-22, 24-5,
34, 41-2, 44, 47, 62, 96, 177-9, 181,
183, 198, 200-1, 206, 211, 219, 222,
231, 234, 236
computer language 
110
computer program 
8, 11, 20, 51, 177-8,
192, 194-6, 207, 209, 211, 221, 235
concord 
45, 231, 235
conditional mood 
35, 37,
conjugation 
57 8
conjunction 
9, 16, 19, 21, 25, 41, 46,
50-1, 53-6, 99-101, 105, 119, 126,
145, 156, 163-4, 166, 173, 175, 195,
222-4, 227-9
constituent element 
42, 47, 76, 184, 206
constituent member 
220
constituent part 
70, 73
constituent phrase 
13
constituent segment 
190, 206
constituent word 
44, 235
context 
4, 5, 12, 18, 21-2, 27, 33, 57,
104, 196, 226, 233
contextual analysis 
18
continuous tense 
60-1, 108
defining relative clause 
94
definite article 
63
demonstrative pronoun 
19, 23
dependent clause 
41, 43, 169, 220-3, 228
dependent segment 105.107
determiner 
52, 56, 79, 91, 95, 99, 119,
133, 217, 223, 228
dictionary of wordforms 
19, 178, 181-2,
191, 193-4, 209, 211, 215
dictionary of segments 44, 49, 51, 57,
63, 67, 72, 74, 77, 80, 83, 87-8, 90-4,
96-7,99-108, 111-19, 120-6, 130-9,
141-8, 150-9, 160-9, 177-8, 181,
190, 206, 209, 220
direct object 
47, 58, 179, 185, 187, 226
disambiguation 
4, 177, 181
disjunct 
41
entropy 
46
enumeration 43, 88
exclamation mark 
107, 113, 119, 204,
225
flow chart 
3, 18, 41, 221
formal feature 4, 16, 57
formal grammar 
3, 12
future continuous 
37
future in the past 
35, 59, 61,
future perfect 
36-7, 60-1
future perfect tense 
35—6,
future perfect in the past
future simple tense 
35
future tense 
36, 59, 61
gender 
45, 210-213, 215, 235
genitive 
26, 47, 52, 63, 71, 89, 90, 97,
133, 182, 208-210
1
1

254
INDEX OF TERMS
geographical name 
19, 20
gerund 
9, 10, 19, 20, 28, 30, 31, 56, 63,
76, 202
grammatical category 47
grammatical framework 49
grammatical information 
21, 23-4, 45
grammatical meaning 
18, 49
grammatical norm 
49
grammatically correct 
43, 45
grammatically incorrect 
43-5, 49
homograph 
19, 37
human being 
19, 45-6, 52, 81, 199
imperative 
52, 104
imperative mood 
107
imperative segment 
103-4
imperative sentence 226
impersonal verb 
121, 189
idiomatic meaning 
44
incomplete segment 
44, 190, 192,
195-7, 199, 206
indefinite article 
8, 33, 99
indefinite determiner 
52, 79
indefinite pronoun 
19, 23
independent clause 41, 43, 220-1, 227
independent segment 
119,213
indicative pronoun 
19, 33, 52, 76-7, 95
indirect object 
58, 66, 179, 185, 226
infinitival complement 
41, 58, 63, 83,
104-5, 107-8, 110-12, 115, 177,
187-9, 205, 226
infinitive 
4, 25, 35-6, 41, 52, 59, 63,
103, 185, 187-8, 205, 226
information retrieval 
42, 184
input language 
3, 17
input text 
23, 210, 212, 215, 221
interjection 
56
internet downloads 
241
interrogative 
52, 93, 99, 223, 229
interrogative determiner 
52
interrogative pronoun 
19, 52, 54, 93,
204, 216, 229
interrogative segment 
93, 97, 103-4,
113-4, 117, 229, 230
interrogative sentence 
95, 97, 108,
216-18, 229
interrupted segment 197
intervening segment 
52, 106, 108, 110,
111-14, 117, 190, 197, 201, 205
irregular verb 
6, 8, 19, 31, 35, 197
lexical meaning 
44, 229, 231-3
linking verb 49, 106, 192, 197
list No 1 9, 14, 15, 24-9, 30-2, 43, 53,
82, 220
list No 2 
15, 26, 182
list No 3 6, 15, 26, 123
list No 4 
6, 15, 26, 182
list No 5 6, 15, 26
list No 6 6, 8, 9, 26
list No 7 6, 8, 15, 26
list No 8 
10, 15, 26
list No 9 6, 10
list No 10 6, 26
logical inference 
42, 218-19, 233
machine language 
18
machine translation 
3, 13, 22, 42, 184
main clause 43, 123, 211, 227-8
marker 
3-5, 12, 18, 57
modal 59, 60-2
modal verb 
53, 186, 204, 230
modifier 
53-5, 70, 91, 185, 226
morpheme 
44, 59, 232
morphology of syntax 59
natural language 
3, 42-7, 51, 105, 178,
183, 208-9, 220, 231-2, 235-6
negation 
53, 62, 119, 136
negative particle 
103
neutral 
52, 86
nominal group 
4, 5
nominal pattern 
64
nominal word group 4, 5
nominative agreement 
58, 186, 206,
217, 219
non-verbal 
4
norm of usage 
234, 236
noun phrase 
12, 42, 121
number 
7, 45, 70, 210-13, 215, 235
numeral 
4, 19, 23-4, 27-8, 30-2, 41, 52,
56, 64, 71, 76, 90-2, 119, 226
numeral cardinal 
6, 70
numeral ordinal 
6, 23, 46, 56
object clause 
228
object direct 47, 58, 179, 185, 187,
226
object indirect 
58, 66, 179, 185, 226
1

INDEX OF TERMS
255
paradigm 
47, 52, 58-9, 60 2, 71, 108,
113-14, 121, 186, 202, 207, 230, 233
parsing ambiguity 
190
parsing algorithm 
177
particle 
4, 19, 25, 41, 52-3, 63, 103,
110, 119, 121, 235
particle for negation 
53, 119
part(s) of speech 
3, 18, 19, 21, 27, 34,
43, 45, 47, 57, 81, 90, 110, 177, 185,
208, 232
part(s) of the sentence 41, 103, 177, 185
participle form 34, 197
passive voice 
36, 6 1 3 , 108
password 
241
past continuous tense 
35-6, 60-1
past participle 
6, 19, 31, 35, 197
past perfect 
60
past perfect tense 
35-6, 61,
past simple tense 36 7, 45-6, 59, 107
past tense 
61, 108
pattern 
59, 64, 232-6
perfect 
35, 60- 1
perfect conditional 
60
perfect tense 
35, 37
personal name 
20, 34
personal pronoun nominal case 
19, 21,
24, 34 5, 45, 52, 86, 178, 200, 203,
210, 212, 214-16, 218
personal pronoun objective case 
19, 21,
66, 208, 212 13, 215
phrasal meaning 
44
phrasal verb 
4, 22, 26, 53, 66, 181
plural 
45, 58-9, 121, 178, 192, 212-16,
218, 233
plural determiner 
79
plural quantifier 52, 70, 79
polysemous 
126
portion(s) of the text 
42-3, 50, 177-8,
180 1, 183, 193, 206
possessive pronoun 
12, 19, 21, 24-6, 30,
33, 48, 52, 63, 89, 90, 201, 208,
210-13
possessive relative pronoun 
97
predicate 
49. 185, 186, 188-9, 197, 217,
225, 228
predicate appositive 
188
predicate clause 228
predicative 
19, 27 9, 30-1, 52, 58, 87,
106, 111, 121 2, 201
predicative adjective 
41
predicative appositive 
197
predicative clause 
43
predictability 
4
prepositional adverbial clause 43, 47,
53, 63, 123, 125, 126, 127, 188, 189,
194, 204, 220, 222, 223, 226, 228,
229, 234
prepositional adverbial phrase 190
prepositional adverbial segment 
199,
201, 204, 216
prepositional clause 
228
prepositional segment 
226
prepositional verb 
26, 66
present continuous tense 
34, 36-7, 60-1
present participle 
10, 20
present perfect 
36, 60
present perfect tense 
35-6, 61
present simple tense 
35, 37, 46, 107
present tense 
36, 45, 59, 61, 108
pronominal form 
52
pronominal reference 41, 86, 209, 211
proper name 
45, 215
provisional subject 
121, 189
punctuation mark 
5, 7, 9, 11, 13, 14,
19, 21, 25, 27, 29, 31, 42-3, 57, 103,
119, 123, 182
quantifier 
53
question mark 
113-14, 117, 204,
216-17, 222
reciprocal pronoun 
216
redundancy 
46
reduced relative clause 
65, 74, 91
reference 
41, 79, 86, 200, 208-9, 210,
211, 213-18,
in the segment 
208
of the personal pronoun nominal
case 
214-15, 218
of the personal pronoun objective
case 
212-13
of the possessive pronoun 
210, 212,
of the reciprocal pronoun 
216
of the reflexive pronoun 
213-14
of the relative pronoun 
218
reflexive pronoun 
6, 19, 56, 208, 213-14
relative clause 
43, 65, 74, 91, 94-5, 99,
134, 186, 223
relative pronoun 
19, 52, 54, 93-4.97,
99, 216, 218

256
INDEX OF TERMS
reported speech 
204
running word 
5, 18-20, 22, 34, 44, 78,
181
second argument 
52, 58, 186
segment(s) 
44-52, 53-219
all-segments 
52, 80-1
am-segments 
52, 108-110
A-segments 
52, 63, 65-67
both-segments 
52, 92-3
can-segments 53, 117-19
did-segments 
52, 113-14
d-segments 52, 81-6
G-segments 
52, 87-9
has-segments 
52, 114—16
I-segments 52, 76-80
it-segments 52, 86-7
j-segments 
111, 112
M-segments 52, 70-4
no-segments 
119-121
n-segments 
52, 74—6
O-segments 
52, 89, 90
other-segments 52, 91-2
PI-segments 
52, 112-13
Pi-segments 
52, 104-6
such-segments 
52, 99, 100
that-segments 
100—3
there-segments 
121-3
to v-segments 
52, 110
v-segments 52, 106-7
which-segments 
52, 95-7
whom-segments 52, 99
who-segments 52, 93-5
whose-segments 
52, 97-8
semantic group 45-7, 50, 56, 125,
128-9, 137, 143, 177, 220, 232-6
semantic paradigm 233
semantical information 
18, 37, 178,
184, 211
semantical meaning 
49, 184
semantical structure 
126
simple sentence 41, 43, 62, 225-7, 229
singular 
6, 10, 45, 58-9, 121, 178, 211,
214-15, 233
software program 
11, 177, 192, 194,
196, 207, 209, 235
source language 
22
statistical 
44
statistically 
49
strings of words 
43
style 
184
style of writing 
44, 49
subject 
41, 47, 52, 76, 80, 82, 88-9,
91-2, 95, 97, 99, 100, 103, 106-7,
110, 113, 115, 117, 121, 177, 179,
183, 185, 187-9, 192, 197, 199,
200-6, 211-13, 215, 218, 225-6, 228
subject clause 
228
subordinate clause 
43, 100, 123, 195,
223, 228
substitute 
209, 219
syntactical construction 
9, 49, 62
syntactical expression 
49
syntactic (al) feature 
3
syntactical framework 49
syntactical information 
3, 17,211
syntactical meaning 
47
syn tactic (al) structure 
12, 41-3, 124-6,
177-8, 184
syntactical word 
49, 59, 64, 124, 133
syntax 
41-2, 44, 59, 184, 209, 219, 235
syntcheck 
235
syntparse 
37, 177, 241
syntparse password 
241
terminological meaning 
44
text analysis 3, 4, 12, 18, 45, 235
text processing 
4, 13, 18, 22, 42, 44, 57,
104, 123, 183-4, 197
text synthesis 3, 12, 45, 235
third person 
45, 59, 60, 86
thought pattern 
232-6
verb 
3-4, 6-9, 10, 12, 18, 19, 20, 22-6,.
33-5, 41, 43-5, 49, 52-3, 55, 57-8,
60, 62-3, 66, 99, 103, 106, 111, 114,
117, 121, 128-9, 177, 179, 185,
188-9, 192, 194, 217, 225-6, 229
verbal group 4
verbal phrase 
4, 12, 42, 185, 194
verbal segment 
52, 103, 204
verbal tense 4, 25, 33-4, 37, 41, 45-6,
48, 57-9, 63-6, 70, 74, 76, 79, 80, 82,
88, 91-2, 94-5, 97, 100, 107, 113-14,
117, 156, 177, 185, 197, 201-2, 225
voice 
36, 61-3, 108
wordform 
3-6, 12, 17, 19, 20-1, 23, 27,
44-6, 178, 182-3, 220
word group 
4, 7, 11, 27

