
EPISTEMOLOGY: AN ANTHOLOGY 
Second Edition 
Edited by Ernest Sosa, Jaegwon Kim, 
Jeremy Fantl, and Matthew McGrath 
~ A Blackwell 
'-II Publishing 

Editorial material and organization © 2000, 2008 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd 
BLACKWELL PUBLISHING 
350 Main Street, Malden, MA 02148-5020, USA 
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford OX4 2DQ, UK 
550 Swanston Street, Carlton, Victoria 3053, Australia 
The right of Ernest Sosa, Jaegwon Kim, Jeremy Fant!, and Matthew McGrath to be identified as the Authors of 
the Editorial Material in this Work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright, Designs, and 
Patents Act 1988. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, 
in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted 
by the UK Copyright, Designs, and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher. 
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand 
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks, or registered trade-
marks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in 
this book. 
This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter 
covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering professional services. If 
professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional should be 
sought. 
First edition published 2000 by Blackwell Publishers Ltd 
This edition published 2008 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd 
2008 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Epistemology: an anthology / edited by Ernest Sosa, Jaegwon Kim, Jeremy Fant!, and Matthew McGrath -
2nd ed. 
p. em. -
(Blackwell philosophy anthologies) 
Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 978-1-4051-6967-7 (hardcover: alk. paper) -
ISBN 978-1-4051-6966-0 (pbk. : alk. paper) 
l. 
Knowledge, Theory of. I. So sa, Ernest. 
BDl6l.E6152008 
121-dc22 
2007042371 
A catalogue record for this title is available from the British Library. 
Set in 9.511l.5pt Minion 
by SPi Publisher Services, Pondicherry, India 
Printed and bound in Singapore 
by Markono Print Media Pte Ltd 
The publisher's policy is to use permanent paper from mills that operate a sustainable forestry policy, and 
which has been manufactured from pulp processed using acid-free and elementary chlorine-free practices. 
Furthermore, the publisher ensures that the text paper and cover board used have met acceptable environmental 
accreditation standards. 
For further information on 
Blackwell Publishing, visit our website: 
www.blackwellpublishing.com 

Preface to the Second Edition 
Acknowledgments 
Part I Skepticism 
Introduction 
The Problem of the External World 
Barry Stroud 
2 
Proof of an External World 
G. E. Moore 
3 
Four Forms of Scepticism 
G. E. Moore 
4 
Certainty 
G. E. Moore 
Contents 
5 
How a Pyrrhonian Skeptic Might Respond to Academic Skepticism 
Peter Klein 
6 
Epistemological Realism 
Michael Williams 
Part II 
The Structure of Knowledge and Justification 
Introduction 
7 
The Myth of the Given 
Roderick M. Chisholm 
8 
Does Empirical Knowledge Have a Foundation? 
Wilfrid Sellars 
9 
Epistemic Principles 
Wilfrid Sellars 
10 
Can Empirical Knowledge Have a Foundation? 
Laurence BonJour 
ix 
xi 
1 
3 
7 
26 
29 
31 
35 
51 
73 
75 
80 
94 
99 
109 

Vi 
CONTENTS 
11 
A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge 
Donald Davidson 
12 
A Foundherentist Theory of Empirical Justification 
Susan Haack 
l3 
The Raft and the Pyramid 
Ernest Sosa 
14 
Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of Reasons 
Peter D. Klein 
Part III 
Defining Knowledge 
Introduction 
15 
Is Justified True Belief Knowledge? 
Edmund Gettier 
16 
Thought, Selections 
Gilbert Harman 
17 
The Inescapability of Gettier Problems 
Linda Zagzebski 
18 
A State of Mind 
Timothy Williamson 
Part IV 
Epistemic Closure 
Introduction 
19 
Epistemic Operators 
Fred Dretske 
20 
Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives, and Deductive Closure 
Gail Stine 
21 
Knowledge and Skepticism 
Robert Nozick 
22 
How to Defeat Opposition to Moore 
Ernest Sosa 
23 
Are There Counterexamples to the Closure Principle? 
Jonathan Vogel 
Part V 
Theories of Epistemic Justification 
Introduction 
24 
Evidentialism 
Richard Feldman and Earl Conee 
25 
Skepticism and Rationality 
Richard Foley 
26 
What Is Justified Belief? 
Alvin I. Goldman 
124 
l34 
145 
165 
187 
189 
192 
194 
207 
213 
231 
233 
237 
247 
255 
280 
290 
303 
305 
310 
322 
333 

27 
Reliabilism Leveled 
Jonathan Vogel 
CONTENTS 
28 
Externalist Theories of Empirical Knowledge 
Laurence BonJour 
29 
Internalism Exposed 
Alvin I. Goldman 
30 
Externalism and Skepticism 
Richard Fumerton 
31 
Internalism Defended 
Richard Feldman and Earl Conee 
Part VI 
Virtue Epistemology and the Value of Knowledge 
Introduction 
Vll 
348 
363 
379 
394 
407 
423 
425 
32 
Warrant: A First Approximation 
429 
Alvin Plantinga 
33 
Virtues of the Mind, Selections 
442 
Linda Zagzebski 
34 
Virtues and Vices of Virtue Epistemology 
454 
John Greco 
35 
Cognitive Responsibility and the Epistemic Virtues 
462 
Duncan Pritchard 
36 
The Place of Truth in Epistemology 
477 
Ernest Sosa 
37 
Why Should Inquiring Minds Want to Know?: Meno Problems and Epistemological Axiology 
492 
Jonathan L. Kvanvig 
38 
True Enough 
507 
Catherine Z. Elgin 
Part VII 
Naturalized Epistemology and the A Priori 
Introduction 
39 
Epistemology Naturalized 
W. V. Quine 
40 
What Is "Naturalized Epistemology"? 
Jaegwon Kim 
41 
Quine as Feminist: The Radical Import of Naturalized Epistemology 
Louise M. Antony 
42 
There is at Least One A Priori Truth 
Hilary Putnam 
43 
Revisability, Reliabilism, and A Priori Knowledge 
Albert Casullo 
44 
A Priori Knowledge and the Scope of Philosophy 
George Bealer 
521 
523 
528 
538 
552 
585 
595 
612 

Vlll 
CONTENTS 
45 
Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions 
Jonathan M. Weinberg, Shaun Nichols, and Stephen Stich 
46 
Investigating Knowledge Itself 
Hilary Kornblith 
Part VIII 
Knowledge and Context 
Introduction 
625 
647 
661 
663 
47 
Solving the Skeptical Problem 
669 
Keith DeRose 
48 
Elusive Knowledge 
691 
David Lewis 
49 
Contextualist Solutions to Epistemological Problems: Scepticism, Gettier, and the Lottery 
706 
Stewart Cohen 
50 
Knowledge and Practical Interest, Selections 
721 
Jason Stanley 
51 
Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification 
742 
Jeremy Fantl and Matthew McGrath 
52 
Sensitive Moderate Invariantism 
760 
John Hawthorne 
53 
The Assessment Sensitivity of Knowledge Attributions 
779 
John MacFarlane 
PartIX Testimony, Memory, and Perception 
801 
Introduction 
803 
54 
Trust and Rationality 
807 
Judith Baker 
55 
Against Gullibility 
815 
Elizabeth Fricker 
56 
Content Preservation 
836 
Tyler Burge 
57 
Testimonial Knowledge and Transmission 
855 
Jennifer Lackey 
58 
The Problem of Memory Knowledge 
868 
Michael Huemer 
59 
Criteria, Defeasibility, and Knowledge 
876 
John McDowell 
60 
Knowing How to Believe With Justification 
892 
Steven L. Reynolds 
Index 
903 

Preface to the Second Edition 
Epistemology is a philosophical inquiry into the 
nature, conditions, and extent of human knowl-
edge. It encompasses some of the most puzzling 
and persistent issues in all of philosophy, ones 
that extensively define its history. The problem of 
skepticism is one example, and the empiricism/ 
rationalism controversy another, along with its 
Kantian and Hegelian aftermath. Such issues, 
although alien to common sense at first sight, in 
fact derive naturally from straightforward reflection 
on the most ordinary knowledge about the world 
around us, knowledge produced or sustained 
through perception, memory, or induction. 
Elementary reflection on such matters produces 
puzzles and paradoxes that have engaged philoso-
phers from ancient times to the present. 
This anthology is meant to supplement 
Blackwell's Companion to Epistemology and Guide 
to Epistemology. We made a conscious effort to 
include both selections that are representative of 
the best current discussion on the most central 
issues in the field, and selections which, though 
relevant to current debates, are somewhat older 
and appropriate for use in upper level undergrad-
uate epistemology courses. Though the former 
selections are inevitably demanding, all readings, 
some of which are only excerpts, should all prove 
accessible in proper order to the attentive reader 
who approaches these issues for the first time. 
The selections are collected in nine sections, 
each of which opens with an introduction that 
discusses the contained readings, and is fol-
lowed by a list of further readings on the subject 
matter of that section. For further expert but 
introductory discussion of the issues, the reader 
is referred to the relevant Blackwell Companion 
and Guide. 
The topics taken up in these nine sections by 
no means exhaust the field of epistemology. Space 
limits have made it impossible to include all topics 
in the field. We have consciously selected central 
issues but we have also drawn from contempo-
rary work some of the most novel and radical 
responses to those issues. The resulting collection 
brings together a variety of approaches and solu-
tions, still under vigorous debate. The current 
edition departs from the first in expanding the 
section on epistemological contextualism to take 
account of recent work on sensitive invariantism 
and relativism. We have also added a section 
devoted to perception, memory, and testimony, 
significantly restructured and reorganized other 
sections, and included some newer work. Space 
limitations have prevented us, once again, from 
including work on more specific issues - other 
minds and induction, for example. On these 
issues excellent work has been published and 
continues to appear. 

x 
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION 
Special thanks go to Sara Bagg and Justin 
McBrayer for their assistance, particularly in their 
contributions to the introductions to the various 
sections, as well as to Michael DiRamio, Brie 
Gertler, Joseph Shieber, and Baron Reed, for their 
work on the first edition. Also helpful were the 
comments and suggestions by anonymous referees. 
Nick Bellorini, our editor, has been exceedingly 
patient and supportive. 
Jeremy Fantl 
Jaegwon Kim 
Matthew McGrath 
Ernest So sa 

Acknowledgments 
The editors and publisher gratefully acknowledge 
the permission granted to reproduce the copy-
right material in this book: 
1. Stroud, Barry, "The Problem of the External 
World;' Chapter 1 III The Significance of 
Philosophical Skepticism (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1984). © 1984 by Barry Stroud. 
Reprinted with permission from Oxford 
University Press. 
2. Moore, G. E., "Proof of an External World;' 
extracted from pp.147-70 in Thomas Baldwin 
(ed.), G. E. Moore: Selected Writings (London 
& New York: Routledge, 1993). © 1993 by 
Thomas Baldwin. Reprinted with permission 
from Taylor & Francis Books (UK). 
3. Moore, G. E., "Four Forms of Scepticism;' pp. 
220-2 in Philosophical Papers (New York: 
Collier Books, 1962). © 1962 by G. E. Moore. 
4. Moore, G. E., "Certainty;' extracted from pp. 
171-96 in Thomas Baldwin (ed.), G. E. Moore: 
Selected Writings, (London & New York: 
Routledge, 1993). © 1993 by Thomas Baldwin. 
Reprinted with permission from Taylor & 
Francis Books (UK). 
5. Klein, Peter, "How a Pyrrhonian Skeptic 
Might Respond to Academic Skepticism;' pp. 
75-94 in Steven Luper (ed.), The Skeptics: 
Contemporary Essays (Aldershot: Ashgate, 
2003). © 2003 by Steven Luper. Reprinted 
with permission from Ashgate Publishing. 
6. Williams, Michael, "Epistemological Realism," 
pp. 83-93,101-19,121-4,129-39 in Unnatural 
Doubts (Oxford, Blackwell Publishers, 1991). 
© 1991 by Michael Williams. Reprinted with 
permission from the author. 
7. Chisholm, Roderick, "The Myth of the 
Given;' pp. 261-86 in R. Chisholm, Philosophy 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1964). 
© 1964 by Roderick M. Chisholm. 
8. Sellars, Wilfred, "Does Empirical Knowledge 
Have a Foundation?" pp. 293-300 in H. Feigel 
and M. Scriven (eds.), The Foundations of 
Science and the Concepts of Psychology and 
Psychoanalysis, Minnesota Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, Vol. 1 (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1956). © 1956. 
Reprinted with permission from University 
of Minnesota Press. 
9. Sellars, Wilfred, "Epistemic Principles;' 
pp. 332-49 in H. Casteneda (ed.), Action, 
Knowledge, and Reality (Indianapolis: Bobbs-
Merrill, 1975). © 1975 by Wilfrid Sellars. 
10. BonJour, Laurence,"Can Empirical Knowledge 
Have a Foundation?" pp. 1-13 in American 
Philosophical Quarterly 15, 1 (1978). © 1978 
by 
American 
Philosophical 
Quarterly. 
Reprinted with permission from American 
Philosophical Quarterly. 
11. Davidson, Donald, "A Coherence Theory of 
Truth and Knowledge;' pp. 307-19 in Ernest 
Lepore (ed.), Truth and Interpretation: 
Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald 
Davidson (New York: Blackwell, 1989). 
© 1989 by Ernest Lepore. Reprinted with 
permission from Blackwell Publishing. 

Xli 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
12. Haack, Susan, "A Foundherentist Theory of 
Empirical Justification," pp. 283-93 in Louis 
Pojman (ed.), The Theory of Knowledge: 
Classical and Contemporary Readings (Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth, 1999). © 1999 by Susan 
Haack. Reprinted by permission of Susan 
Haack, the copyright holder. 
13. So sa, Ernest, "The Raft and the Pyramid;' 
pp. 3-25 in Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 
Vol. 5: Studies in Epistemology (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1980); an 
appendix to this paper is drawn from Ernest 
Sosa, pp. 113-22 "How Do You Know?" 
American Philosophical Quarterly 11 (1974). 
© 1980 by Midwest Studies in Philosophy. 
Reprinted with permission from the author 
and University of Minnesota Press. 
14. Klein, Peter, "Human Knowledge and the 
Infinite Regress of Reasons;' pp. 297-325 
in James Tomberlin (ed.), Philosophical 
Perspedives, 13 Epistemology, 1999. © 1999 
by Philosophical Perspectives. Reprinted 
with permission from Blackwell Publishing. 
15. Gettier, Edmund, "Is Justified True Belief 
Knowledge?" pp. 121-3 in Analysis (1963). 
© 1963 by Edmund Gettier. Reprinted with 
permission from the author. 
16. Harman, Gilbert, Selections from Thought 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1973). 
© 1973 by Princeton University Press, 2001 
renewed PUP. Reprinted with permission 
from Princeton University Press. 
17. Zagzebski, Linda, "The Inescapability of Gettier 
Problems;' pp. 65-73 in The Philosophical 
Quarterly 
44, 
174 
(Oxford: 
Blackwell 
Publishers, 1994). © 1994 by The Editors of 
The Philosophical Quarterly. Reprinted with 
permission from Blackwell Publishing. 
18. Williamson, Timothy, "A State of Mind;' 
pp. 21-48 in T. Williamson, Knowledge and 
Its Limits (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2000). © 2000 by Timothy Williamson. 
Reprinted with permission from Blackwell 
Publishing. 
19. Dretske, 
Fred, 
"Epistemic 
Operators;' 
pp. 1007-23 in The Journal of Philosophy 67, 
24 (Dec. 24,1970). © 1970 by The Journal of 
Philosophy, Inc. Reprinted with permission 
from the author and The Journal of Philosophy. 
20. Stine, Gail, "Skepticism, RelevantAlternatives 
and Deductive Closure," pp. 249-61 in Philo-
sophical Studies 29 (Dordrecht, Netherlands: 
D. Reidel Publishing Co., 1976). © 1976 by 
Philosophical Studies. Reprinted with per-
mission from Springer Science and Business 
Media. 
21. Nozick, Robert, "Knowledge and Skepticism;' 
pp. 
172-85, 
197-217 
in 
Philosophical 
Explanations ( Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1981). © 1981 by Robert 
Nozick. Reprinted with permission from 
Harvard University Press. 
22. Sosa, Ernest, "How to Defeat Opposition to 
Moore;' 
pp. 
141-53 
in 
Philosophical 
Perspectives 13, Epistemology (1999). © 1999 
by Philosophical Perspectives. Reprinted with 
permission from Blackwell Publishing. 
23. Vogel,Jonathan,"AreThereCounterexamples 
to the Closure Principle?;' pp. 13-27 in M. D. 
Roth and G. Ross (eds.), Doubting, (Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 1990). © 1990 Kluwer 
Academic Publishers. Reprinted with per-
mission from the author and Springer 
Science and Business Media. 
24. Feldman, 
Richard 
and 
Earl 
Conee, 
"Evidentialism," pp. 15-34 in Philosophical 
Studies 48 (Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1985). 
© 1985 by Philosophical Studies. Reprinted 
with permission from the authors and 
Springer Science and Business Media. 
25. Foley, Richard, "Skepticism and Rationality;' 
pp. 69-81 in M. D. Roth and G. Ross (eds.), 
Doubting (Dordrecht, Netherlands: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 1990). © 1990 by 
Kluwer Academic Publishers. Reprinted with 
permission from the author and Springer 
Science and Business Media. 
26. Goldman, Alvin, "What is Justified Belief?" 
pp. 1-23 in G. S. Pappas (ed.), Justification 
and Knowledge (Dordrecht, Netherlands: 
D. Reidel, 1976). © 1976 by D. Reidel 
Publishing Company. Reprinted with per-
mission from the author and Springer 
Science and Business Media. 
27. Vogel, 
Jonathan, 
"Reliabilism 
Leveled;' 
pp. 602-23 in The Journal of Philosophy 97, 11 
(Nov. 2000). © 2000 The Journal of Philosophy, 
Inc. Reprinted with permission from the 
author and The Journal of Philosophy. 
28. BonJour, Laurence, "Externalist Theories 
of Empirical Knowledge," pp. 53-73 in 
P. French, T. Uehling, Jr., and H. Wettstein 
(eds.), Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Vol. 5 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Xlll 
1980). © 1980 by Midwest Studies in Philosophy. 
Reprinted with permission from the author 
and University of Minnesota Press. 
29. Goldman, Alvin, "Internalism Exposed;' 
pp. 271-93 in The Journal of Philosophy 96, 
6 (Jun. 1999). © 1999 The Journal of 
Philosophy, Inc. Reprinted with permission 
from the author and The Journal of 
Philosophy. 
30. Fumerton, 
Richard, 
"Externalism 
and 
Skepticism;' pp. 159-81 in Metaepistemology 
and Skepticism (Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 1995). © 1995 by Richard Fumerton. 
Reprinted with permission from Rowman & 
Littlefield Publishing Group. 
31. Feldman, Richard and Earl Conee, "Internalism 
Defended,"pp.1-18inAmericanPhilosophical 
Quarterly 38, 1 (January 2001). © 2001 by 
American Philosophical Quarterly. Reprinted 
with permission from American Philosophical 
Quarterly. 
32. Plantinga, Alvin, "Warrant: A First Approxi-
mation;' pp. 3-20 in Warrant and Proper 
Function (Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1993). © 1993 by Alvin 
Plantinga. Reprinted with permission from 
Oxford University Press. 
33. Zagzebski, Linda, Selections from Virtues of 
the Mind, pp. 134-7, 166-84 in 1. Zagzebski, 
Virtues of the Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1996). © 1996 by Cambridge 
University Press. Reprinted with permission 
from the author and Cambridge University 
Press. 
34. Greco, John, "Virtues and Vices of Virtue 
Epistemology," pp. 413-32 in Canadian 
Journal of Philosophy 23, 3 (1993). © 1993 by 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy. Reprinted by 
permission of University of Calgary Press. 
35. Pritchard, Duncan, "Cognitive Responsibility 
and the Epistemic Virtues;' pp. 181-201 in 
Epistemic Luck (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2005). © 2005 by Duncan Pritchard. 
Reprinted with permission from Oxford 
University Press, Inc. 
36. Sosa, Ernest, "The Place of Truth in 
Epistemology;' pp. 155-79 in M. DePaul and 
1. Zagzebski (eds.), Intellectual Virtue: 
Perspectives From Ethics and Epistemology 
(Oxford and New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2003). © 2003 by Ernest Sosa. 
Reprinted with permission from the author. 
37. Kvanvig, 
Jonathan 
1., 
"Why 
Should 
Enquiring Minds Want to Know?: Meno 
Problems and Epistemological Axiology," pp. 
426-52 in The Monist 81,3 (1998). © 1998, 
THE MONIST, La Salle, Illinois 61301, USA. 
Reprinted with permission from the author 
and publisher. 
38. Elgin, Catherine Z., "True Enough;' pp. 
113-131 in Philosophical Issues 14, Episte-
mology (2004). © 2004 by Philosophical Issues. 
Reprinted with permission from Blackwell 
Publishing. 
39. Quine, W. V., "Epistemology Naturalized;' 
pp. 68-90 in Ontological Relativity and Other 
Essays (Columbia University Press, 1969). © 1969 
by Columbia University Press. Reprinted with 
permission of the publisher. 
40. Kim, 
Jaegwon, "What is 
'Naturalized 
Epistemology'?" m 
J. Tomberlin (ed.), 
Philosophical Perspectives 2. Epistemology 
(Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview Publishing Co., 
1988), pp. 381-405. © 1998 by Philosophical 
Perspectives. Reprinted with permission from 
Blackwell Publishing. 
41. Antony, Louise M., "Quine as Feminist: the 
Radical Import of Naturalized Epistemology;' 
pp. 185-225 in 1. Antony and C. Witt (eds.), 
A Mind of One's Own (Boulder, CO: Westview, 
1993). © 1993 by Westview Press, a member 
of the Perseus Books Group. Reprinted with 
permission from Westview Press, a member 
of the Perseus Books Group. 
42. Putnam, Hilary, "There is a Least One A 
Priori Truth;' pp. 153-170 in Erkenntnis 13 
(Dordrecht,Netherlands: D. Reidel Publishing 
Co., 1978). © 1978 by D. Reidel Publishing 
Company. Reprinted with permission from 
the author and Springer Science and Business 
Media. 
43. Casullo, Albert, "Revisability, Reliabilism, 
and A Priori Knowledge;' pp. 187-213 in 
Philosophy and Phenomenology Research 49, 
2 (Dec. 1988). © 1988 by Philosophy and 
Phenomenology Research. Reprinted with 
permission from Blackwell Publishing. 
44. Bealer, George, "A Priori Knowledge and the 
Scope of Philosophy;' pp. 
121-42 in 
Philosophical Studies 81 (Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1996). © 1996 Kluwer Academic 
Publishers. Reprinted with permission from 
the author and Springer Science and Business 
Media. 

XIV 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
45. Weinberg, Jonathan M., Shaun Nichols, and 
Stephen Stich, "Normativity and Epistemic 
Intuitions:' pp. 429-60 in Philosophical Topics 
29, 1 & 2 (2001). © 2001 by Philosophical 
Topics. Used with permission of the authors 
and University of Arkansas Press, www. 
uapress.com 
46. Kornblith, Hilary, "Investigating Knowledge 
Itself:' pp. 1-27 in H. Kornblith, Knowledge 
and its Place in Nature (Oxford: Clarendon, 
2002). © 2002 by Hilary Kornblith. Reprinted 
with permission from Oxford University 
Press. 
47. DeRose, Keith, "Solving the Skeptical 
Problem:'pp.1-7, 17-52 in The Philosophical 
Review 104, 1 (1995). © 1995 by The 
Philosophical Review. Reprinted with per-
mission from The Philosophical Review. 
48. Lewis, David, "Elusive Knowledge;' pp. 549-67 
in Australasian Journal of Philosophy 74, 4 
(1996). © 1996 by Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy. Reprinted with permission from 
Taylor & Francis (UK). 
49. Cohen, Stewart, "Contextualist Solutions 
to Epistemological Problems: Scepticism, 
Gettier, and the Lottery;' pp. 289-306 in 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 76, 2 
(1998). © 1998 by Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy. Reprinted with permission from 
the author and Taylor & Francis (UK). 
50. Stanley, Jason, "Introduction" and "Knowledge 
Ascriptions and Context -Sensitivity;' pp. 1-15, 
47-73 in Knowledge and Practical Interest 
(New York: Oxford University Press, 2005). 
© 2005 by Jason Stanley. Reprinted with per-
mission from Oxford University Press, Inc. 
51. Fantl, Jeremy and Matthew McGrath, 
"Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification," 
pp. 67-94 in The Philosophical Review Ill, 1 
(Jan. 2002). © 2002 by Cornell University 
Press. All rights reserved. Used by permis-
sion of the publisher. 
52. Hawthorne, 
John, "Sensitive 
Moderate 
Invariantism;' pp. 157-91 in Knowledge and 
Lotteries (Oxford: Clarendon, 2004). © 2004 
by John Hawthorne. Reprinted with permis-
sion from Oxford University Press. 
53. MacFarlane, John, "The Assessment Sensitivity 
of Knowledge Attributions;' pp. 197-233 in 
Tamar Szab6 Gendler and John O'Leary 
Hawthorne (eds.), Oxford Studies in Epistemology, 
Vol. 1 (Oxford: Clarendon, 2005). © 2005 by 
Oxford University Press. Reprinted with per-
mission from Oxford University Press, Inc. 
54. Baker, Judith, "Trust and Rationality," 
pp. 1-13 in Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 
68 (1987). © 1987 Pacific Philosophical 
Quarterly. Reprinted with permission from 
Blackwell Publishing. 
55. Fricker, Elizabeth, ''Against Gullibility:' pp. 
125-61 in B. K. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti 
(eds.) Knowing from Words (Dordrecht, 
Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1994). © 1994 Kluwer Academic Publishers. 
Reprinted with permission from the author 
and Springer Science and Business Media. 
56. Burge, 
Tyler, 
"Content 
Preservation," 
pp. 457-88 in The Philosophical Review, 102, 
4 (Oct. 1993). © 1993 by Cornell University 
Press. All rights reserved. Used by permis-
sion of the publisher. 
57. Lackey, Jennifer, "Testimonial Knowledge and 
Transmission;' pp. 471-90 in The Philosophical 
Quarterly, 49, 197 (Oct. 1999). © The Editors 
of The 
Philosophical 
Quarterly, 
1999. 
Reprinted with permission from Blackwell 
Publishing. 
58. Huemer, Michael, "The Problem of Memory 
Knowledge," pp. 346-57 in The Philosophical 
Quarterly, 80,197 (1999). © 1999 University 
of Southern California and Blackwell 
Publishers Ltd. Reprinted with permission 
from Blackwell Publishing. 
59. McDowell, John, "Criteria, Defeasibility, and 
Knowledge," pp. 455-79 in Proceedings of 
the British Academy 68 (1982). Annual 
Philosophical Lecture. © 1983 by The British 
Academy. Reprinted with permission from 
Proceedings of the British Academy LXVIII; 
1982. 
60. Reynolds, Steven L., "Knowing How to 
Believe with Justification;' pp. 273-92 in 
Philosophical Studies 64, 3 (Dec. 1991).© 1991 
by Philosophical Studies. Reprinted with 
permission from the author and Springer 
Science and Business Media. 
Every effort has been made to trace copyright 
holders and to obtain their permission for the use 
of copyright material. The publisher apologizes 
for any errors or omissions in the above list and 
would be grateful if notified of any corrections 
that should be incorporated in future reprints or 
editions of this book. 

PART I 
Skepticism 


Introduction 
Like Rene Descartes, we have all asked ourselves at one time or another "Couldn't 
everything I seem to see, hear, etc. be illusory? Might I in fact be dreaming all this? If so, 
what do I really know of the outside world?" The skeptic's answers are pessimistic: yes, 
you could be dreaming, and so you know nothing of the outside world. The conclusion 
is outlandish, and yet the reasoning behind it hardly seems strained at all. We feel the 
pressure towards skepticism in the movement from the question about the trust-
worthiness of our senses to the question of our ability to know. Given that the bulk of 
our knowledge of the outside world derives from the senses, how can we know any-
thing about the world unless we first show that our senses can be trusted? The core of 
the skeptical strategy is more general: how can one gain knowledge using a source of 
belief unless one first shows that the source is trustworthy? 
In his selection, Barry Stroud presents the skeptic's argument in its most favorable 
light. The skeptic does not hold us up to an uncommonly high standard of knowledge 
only to make the obvious point that we fail to meet it. The skeptic invokes only 
the standards presupposed in everyday knowledge attributions. To use an example of 
Stroud's, if no goldfinch could possibly be a canary, then if one is to know that the bird 
one sees is a goldfinch, one must be able to rule out its being a canary. More generally, 
to know that p, one must be able to rule out every possibility one knows to be incom-
patible with one's knowing that p. The skeptic then has her wedge: to know that you're 
sitting beside a warm fire, you must be able to rule out any possibility which excludes 
this knowledge, including innumerable "skeptical possibilities:' such as that you're 
dreaming, that you're being deceived by a malicious demon, and that you're a brain in 
a vat stimulated to have the experiences and apparent memories you now have. But it's 
hard to see how you can rule these out. 
In each of the selections from the work of G. E. Moore, the tables are turned on the 
skeptic. Moore provides a counter-argument in "Proof of an External World." A good 
proof, he explains, proceeds from known premises to a distinct conclusion to which 
they can be seen to lead. He then produces an example: raising his hands, one after the 
other, he exclaims "Here is a hand. Here is another hand," and he concludes "There are 

4 
INTRODUCTION 
hands:' If asked to prove his premises, he would reject the demand, for not everything 
that is known can be proved. 
Moore nevertheless takes the skeptic seriously. In "Certainty;' he grants that if he 
doesn't know he is not dreaming, he doesn't know he is standing up giving a lecture. 
Still he asks why there is any more plausibility in using this premise as part of a modus 
ponens argument to conclude that he doesn't know he is standing up than in using it as 
a part of the corresponding modus tollens argument to conclude that he does know 
after all that he is not dreaming. 
In "Four Forms of Scepticism;' Moore fully admits that skeptical scenarios are 
logically possible, but he finds it more certain that something has gone afoul in the 
skeptical argument than that he lacks knowledge that he has hands (or is holding a 
pencil). Moreover, he concludes that since the only way he could know this is through 
some inductive or analogical argument from the character of his experience, such an 
argument must exist. 
The selections from Stroud and Moore concern our knowledge of the external 
world. One might hope that, even if it is hard to answer the skeptical challenge for 
knowledge, at least it could be satisfactorily answered for justification. Peter Klein calls 
the view that we cannot be justified in our beliefs about how things are (as opposed to 
how they seem) "Academic skepticism" and contrasts it with an older form of skepti-
cism: Pyrrhonism. Pyrrhonism, in Klein's view, is a more moderate skepticism than its 
Academic cousin, for Pyrrhonism allows that our beliefs can be conditionally or pro-
visionally justified. But it is still a form of skepticism, because it denies that our beliefs 
can be completely justified. Only if reasoning could settle the matter of whether a 
belief is true could that belief be completely justified. But how can reasoning settle 
anything? If it were legitimate to end reasoning with a proposition for which we could 
not provide a further reason, then it seems reasoning could settle some matter. But this 
is not legitimate. Nor is it legitimate to reason in a circle. Therefore, the only way for 
reasoning to settle matters would be to complete an infinite regress of non-repeating 
reasons (a view Klein refers to as "infinitism," discussed in more detail in his contribu-
tion to Part 11). While this would be a legitimate way to settle some matter, it cannot, 
in fact, be done. 
The lesson for Academic skepticism is that the arguments invoked in favor of 
Academic skepticism are themselves fallacious in that they either rely on arbitrary 
premises or beg the question in favor of their conclusion. Thus, consider the Academic 
skeptic's claim that we cannot know whether we are dreaming or deceived by a mali-
cious demon. This claim is central to the argument for Academic skepticism. If it is 
unsupported, it is arbitrary. To support the claim, the Academic skeptic must first dem-
onstrate that we cannot know, say, that there is a table in front of us. But "I cannot know 
there is a table in front of me" is the ostensible conclusion of the skeptical argument. 
Therefore, Academic skepticism, like the inadequate models of reasoning, must either 
rely on arbitrary premises or beg the question. 
Michael Williams argues that if there is such a thing as knowledge of the external 
world, the kind of knowledge the Cartesian skeptic questions, it seems impossible for us 
to see ourselves as having it. That is, the skeptic would carry the day. But he asks: is there 
such a thing as knowledge of the world? His answer is no. The concept of knowledge of 
the external world is a theoretical concept, and so, unlike practical concepts such as the 
concept of a chair, it lacks application entirely unless there is an appropriate unified 

PART I 
domain of reality whose contours are there for it to match. But there is no such epi-
stemic domain. There could be only if (empirical) beliefs divided into two classes: those 
that could only be known on the basis of beliefs about immediate experience, i.e., 
beliefs about the external world, and those that could be known directly from immedi-
ate experience. Yet an examination of our practices in attributing knowledge and justi-
fication suggests that beliefs do not divide into these epistemic categories nor into any 
objective epistemic categories. 
Williams describes his view as a form of contextualism. But it is a version of context-
ualism quite different from those appearing in Part VIII of this volume. The contextual-
ist theories of DeRose and Cohen, and to a lesser extent Lewis, presuppose the existence 
of a unified range of objective characteristics which, given a speech context, comprise the 
truth-conditions for knowledge attributions in that context. For DeRose, there are the 
objective (context-invariant) notions of sensitivity and strength of epistemic position, 
and for Cohen objective notions of strength of evidence or justification. For Lewis, 
there are the objective factors of one's evidence and which possibilities it rules out. For 
all three of these epistemologists, the function of context is to set the bar on which (or 
what degree) of a relatively unified range of objective factors count. Thus, for them, 
there is an independent place for epistemological inquiry into the nature of these objec-
tive factors as well as into how they feed into the semantics of knowledge attribution. 
According to Williams, by contrast, there is no range of objective factors, with 
the result that there is nothing at all to serve as an object of theoretical investigation for 
the epistemologist. 
Part and parcel of repudiating skepticism, then, is repudiating traditional epistemol-
ogy. Both rely for their livelihood on the assumption that Williams calls "epistemological 
realism:' viz. that there are objective relations of epistemic priority waiting to be 
described. 
Further Reading 
5 
Annas, Julia and Jonathan Barnes, The Modes of 
Scepticism (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1985). 
Landesman, Charles and Roblin Meeks (eds), 
Philosophical Skepticism: From Plato to Rorty 
(Oxford: Blackwell, 2002). 
Burnyeat, M. F. (ed.), The Skeptical Tradition 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1983). 
Clarke, Thompson, "The Legacy of Skepticism;' 
Journal of Philosophy 69 (1972), pp. 754-69. 
DeRose, K. and T. Warfield (eds), Skepticism: A 
Contemporary 
Reader 
(Oxford: 
Oxford 
University Press, 1999). 
Fumerton, R., Metaepistemology and Skepticism 
(Langham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1995). 
Hadot, Pierre, Philosophy as a Way of Life (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1995). 
Hankinson, R. J., The Sceptics (London: Routledge, 
1995). 
Huemer, Michael, Skepticism and the Veil of 
Perception (Langham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 2001). 
Klein, P., Certainty: A Refutation of Scepticism 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1991). 
Nozick, 
Robert, 
Philosophical 
Explanations 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1981). 
Popkin, Richard, Scepticism from Erasmus to 
Spinoza (Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1979). 
Roth, Michael D. and Glenn Ross (eds),Doubting: 
Contemporary 
Perspectives 
on 
Skepticism 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1990). 
Sosa, Ernest, "The Skeptic's Appeal;' in Marjorie 
Clay and Keith Lehrer (eds), Knowledge and 
Skepticism (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 
1989), pp. 51-68. 

6 
INTRODUCTION 
Strawson, P. F., Skepticism and Naturalism: Some 
Varieties (London: Methuen, 1985). 
Stroud, Barry, "Understanding Human Knowledge 
in General;' in Marjorie Clay and Keith Lehrer 
(eds), Knowledge and Skepticism (Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1989), pp. 31-50. 
--, The Significance of Philosophical Scepticism 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1984). 
Unger, Peter, Ignorance: A Case for Scepticism 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975). 
Williams, Michael, Unnatural Doubts (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1996). 

CHAPTER 1 
The Problem of the 
External World 
Barry Stroud 
Since at least the time of Descartes in the seven-
teenth century there has been a philosophical 
problem about our knowledge of the world 
around us. 1 Put most simply, the problem is to 
show how we can have any knowledge of the 
world at all. The conclusion that we cannot, that 
no one knows anything about the world around 
us, is what I call "scepticism about the external 
world", so we could also say that the problem is to 
show how or why scepticism about the external 
world is not correct. My aim is not to solve the 
problem but to understand it. I believe the prob-
lem has no solution; or rather that the only answer 
to the question as it is meant to be understood is 
that we can know nothing about the world around 
us. But how is the question meant to be under-
stood? It can be expressed in a few English words 
familiar to all of us, but I hope to show that an 
understanding of the special philosophical char-
acter of the question, and of the inevitability of 
an unsatisfactory answer to it, cannot be guaran-
teed by our understanding of those words alone. 
To see how the problem is meant to be under-
stood we must therefore examine what is per-
haps best described as its source - how the 
problem arises and how it acquires that special 
character that makes an unsatisfactory negative 
answer inevitable. We must try to understand 
Originally published in B. Stroud, The Significance of 
Philosophical Skepticism (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1984), ch. 1. 
the philosophical problem of our knowledge of 
the external world. 
The problem arose for Descartes in the course 
of reflecting on everything he knows. He reached a 
point in his life at which he tried to sit back and 
reflect on everything he had ever been taught or 
told, everything he had learned or discovered 
or believed since he was old enough to know or 
believe anything.2 We might say that he was reflect-
ing on his knowledge, but putting it that way could 
suggest that what he was directing his attention to 
was indeed knowledge, and whether it was knowl-
edge or not is precisely what he wanted to deter-
mine. "Among all the things I believe or take to be 
true, what amounts to knowledge and what does 
not?"; that is the question Descartes asks himself. 
It is obviously a very general question, since it asks 
about everything he believes or takes to be true, 
but in other respects it sounds just like the sort of 
question we are perfectly familiar with in everyday 
life and often know how to answer. 
For example, I have come to accept over the 
years a great many things about the common 
cold. I have always been told that one can catch 
cold by getting wet feet, or from sitting in a 
draught, or from not drying one's hair before 
going outdoors in cold weather. I have also learned 
that the common cold is the effect of a virus 
transmitted by an already infected person. And 
I also believe that one is more vulnerable to colds 
when over-tired, under stress, or otherwise in less 
than the best of health. Some of these beliefs seem 

8 
BARRY STROUD 
to me on reflection to be inconsistent with some 
others; I see that it is very unlikely that all of them 
could be true. Perhaps they could be, but I 
acknowledge that there is much I do not under-
stand. If I sit back and try to think about all my 
"knowledge" of the common cold, then, I might 
easily come to wonder how much of it really 
amounts to knowledge and how much does not. 
What do I really know about the common cold? If 
I were sufficiently interested in pursuing the 
matter it would be natural to look into the source 
of my beliefs. Has there ever been any good reason 
for thinking that colds are even correlated with 
wet hair in cold weather, for example, or with sit-
ting in a draught? Are the people from whom I 
learned such things likely to have believed them 
for good reasons? Are those beliefs just old wives' 
tales, or are they really true, and perhaps even 
known to be true by some people? These are ques-
tions I might ask myself, and I have at least a 
general idea of how to go about answering them. 
Apart from my impression of the implausibil-
ity of all my beliefs about the common cold being 
true together, I have not mentioned any other 
reason for being interested in investigating the 
state of my knowledge on that subject. But for the 
moment that does not seem to affect the intelligi-
bility or the feasibility of the reflective project. 
There is nothing mysterious about it. It is the sort 
of task we can be led to undertake for a number 
of reasons, and often very good reasons, in so far 
as we have very good reasons for preferring knowl-
edge and firm belief to guesswork or wishful 
thinking or simply taking things for granted. 
Reflection on or investigation of our putative 
knowledge need not always extend to a wide area of 
interest. It might be important to ask whether some 
quite specific and particular thing I believe or have 
been taking for granted is really something I know. 
As a member of a jury I might find that I have been 
ruling out one suspect in my mind because he was a 
thousand miles away, in Cleveland, at the time of the 
crime. But I might then begin to ask myself whether 
that is really something that I know. I would reflect 
on the source of my belief, but reflection in this case 
need not involve a general scrutiny of everything I 
take myself to know about the case. Re-examining 
the man's alibi and the credentials of its supporting 
witnesses might be enough to satisfy me. Indeed 
I might find that its reliability on those counts is 
precisely what I had been going on all along. 
In pointing out that we are perfectly familiar 
with the idea of investigating or reviewing our 
knowledge on some particular matter or in some 
general area I do not mean to suggest that it is 
always easy to settle the question. Depending on 
the nature of the case, it might be very difficult, 
perhaps even impossible at the time, to reach a 
firm conclusion. For example, it would probably 
be very difficult if not impossible for me to trace 
and assess the origins of many of those things I 
believe about the common cold. But it is equally 
true that sometimes it is not impossible or even 
especially difficult to answer the question. We do 
sometimes discover that we do not really know 
what we previously thought we knew. I might 
find that what I had previously believed is not 
even true - that sitting in draughts is not even 
correlated with catching a cold, for example. Or I 
might find that there is not or perhaps never was 
any good reason to believe what I believed - that 
the man's alibi was concocted and then falsely tes-
tified to by his friends. I could reasonably con-
clude in each case that I, and everyone else for 
that matter, never did know what I had previously 
thought I knew. We are all familiar with the ordi-
nary activity of reviewing our knowledge, and 
with the experience of reaching a positive verdict 
in some cases and a negative verdict in others. 
Descartes's own interest in what he knows and 
how he knows it is part of his search for what he 
calls a general method for "rightly conducting 
reason and seeking truth in the sciences".3 He 
wants a method of inquiry that he can be assured 
in advance will lead only to the truth if properly 
followed. I think we do not need to endorse the 
wisdom of that search or the feasibility of that 
programme in order to try to go along with 
Descartes in his general assessment of the posi-
tion he is in with respect to the things he believes. 
He comes to find his putative knowledge wanting 
in certain general respects, and it is in the course 
of that original negative assessment that the prob-
lem I am interested in arises. I call the assessment 
"negative" because by the end of his First 
Meditation Descartes finds that he has no good 
reason to believe anything about the world 
around him and therefore that he can know noth-
ing of the external world. 
How is that assessment conducted, and how 
closely does it parallel the familiar kind of review 
of our knowledge that we all know how to conduct 

THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
9 
in everyday life? The question in one form or 
another will be with us for the rest of this book. It 
is the question of what exactly the problem of our 
knowledge of the external world amounts to, and 
how it arises with its special philosophical charac-
ter. The source of the problem is to be found 
somewhere within or behind the kind of thinking 
Descartes engages in. 
One way Descartes's question about his knowl-
edge differs from the everyday examples I consid-
ered is in being concerned with everything he 
believes or takes to be true. How does one go 
about assessing all of one's knowledge all at once? 
I was able to list a few of the things I believe about 
the common cold and then to ask about each of 
them whether I really know it, and if so how. But 
although I can certainly list a number of the 
things I believe, and I would assent to many more 
of them as soon as they were put to me, there 
obviously is no hope of assessing everything I 
believe in this piecemeal way. For one thing, it 
probably makes no sense, strictly speaking, to talk 
of the number of things one believes. If I am 
asked whether it is one of my beliefs that I went to 
see a film last night I can truly answer "Yes". If I 
were asked whether it is one of my beliefs that 
I went to the movies last night I would give the 
same answer. Have I thereby identified two, or 
only one, of my beliefs? How is that question ever 
to be settled? If we say that I identified only one of 
my beliefs, it would seem that I must also be said 
to hold the further belief that going to see a film 
and going to the movies are one and the same 
thing. So we would have more than one belief 
after all. The prospects of arriving even at a prin-
ciple for counting beliefs, let alone at an actual 
number of them, seem dim. 
Even if it did make sense to count the things 
we believe it is pretty clear that the number would 
be indefinitely large and so an assessment of our 
beliefs one by one could never be completed 
anyway. This is easily seen by considering only 
some of the simplest things one knows, for 
example in arithmetic. One thing I know is that 
one plus one equals two. Another thing I know is 
that one plus two is three, and another, that one 
plus three is four. Obviously there could be no 
end to the task of assessing my knowledge if I had 
to investigate separately the source of each one of 
my beliefs in that series. And even if I succeeded I 
would only have assessed the things I know about 
the addition of the number one to a given number; 
I would still have to do the same for the addition 
of two, and then the addition of three, and so on. 
And even that would exhaust only my beliefs 
about addition; all my other mathematical beliefs, 
not to mention all the rest of my knowledge, 
would remain so far unexamined. Obviously the 
job cannot be done piecemeal, one by one. Some 
method must be found for assessing large classes 
of beliefs all at once. 
One way to do this would be to look for 
common sources or channels or bases of our 
beliefs, and then to examine the reliability of 
those sources or bases, just as I examined the 
source or basis of my belief that the suspect was 
in Cleveland. Descartes describes such a search as 
a search for "principles" of human knowledge, 
"principles" whose general credentials he can 
then investigate (HR, 145). If some "principles" 
are found to be involved in all or even most of our 
knowledge, an assessment of the reliability of 
those "principles" could be an assessment of all or 
most of our knowledge. If I found good reason to 
doubt the reliability of the suspect's alibi, for 
example, and that was all I had to go on in my 
belief that he was in Cleveland, then what I earlier 
took to be my knowledge that he was in Cleveland 
would have been found wanting or called into 
question. Its source or basis would have been 
undermined. Similarly, if one of the "principles" 
or bases on which all my knowledge of the world 
depends were found to be unreliable, my knowl-
edge of the world would to that extent have been 
found wanting or called into question as well. 
Are there any important "principles" of human 
knowledge in Descartes's sense? It takes very little 
reflection on the human organism to convince us 
of the importance of the senses - sight, hearing, 
touch, taste, and smell. Descartes puts the point 
most strongly when he says that "all that up to the 
present time I have accepted as most true and 
certain I have learned either from the senses or 
through the senses" (HR, 145). Exactly what he 
would include under "the senses" here is perhaps 
somewhat indeterminate, but even if it is left 
vague many philosophers would deny what 
Descartes appears to be saying. They would hold 
that, for example, the mathematical knowledge I 
mentioned earlier is not and could not be acquired 
from the senses or through the senses, so not every-
thing I know is known in that way. Whether 

10 
BARRY STROUD 
Descartes is really denying the views of those who 
believe in the non-sensory character of mathe-
matical knowledge, and whether, if he were, he 
would be right, are issues we can set aside for the 
moment. It is clear that the senses are at least very 
important for human knowledge. Even restrict-
ing ourselves to the traditional five senses we can 
begin to appreciate their importance by reflect-
ing on how little someone would ever come to 
know without them. A person blind and deaf 
from birth who also lacked taste buds and a sense 
of smell would know very little about anything, 
no matter how long he lived. To imagine him also 
anaesthetized or without a sense of touch is per-
haps to stretch altogether too far one's conception 
of a human organism, or at least a human organ-
ism from whom we can hope to learn something 
about human knowledge. The importance of the 
senses as a source or channel of knowledge seems 
undeniable. It seems possible, then, to acknowl-
edge their importance and to assess the reliability 
of that source, quite independently of the difficult 
question of whether all our knowledge comes to 
us in that way. We would then be assessing the 
credentials of what is often called our "sensory" or 
"experiential" or "expirical" knowledge, and that, 
as we shall see, is quite enough to be going on with. 
Having found an extremely important "prin-
ciple" or source of our knowledge, how can we 
investigate or assess all the knowledge we get from 
that source? As before, we are faced with the prob-
lem of the inexhaustibility of the things we believe 
on that basis, so no piecemeal, one-by-one proce-
dure will do. But perhaps we can make a sweeping 
negative assessment. It might seem that as soon as 
we have found that the senses are one of the 
sources of our beliefs we are immediately in a 
position to condemn all putative knowledge 
derived from them. Some philosophers appear to 
have reasoned in this way, and many have even 
supposed that Descartes is among them. The idea 
is that if I am assessing the reliability of my beliefs 
and asking whether I really know what I take 
myself to know, and I come across a large class of 
beliefs which have come to me through the senses, 
I can immediately dismiss all those beliefs as 
unreliable or as not amounting to knowledge 
because of the obvious fact that I can sometimes 
be wrong in my beliefs based on the senses. Things 
are not always as they appear, so if on the basis of 
the way they appear to me I believe that they 
really are a certain way, I might still be wrong. 
We have all found at one time or another that we 
have been misled by appearances; we know that 
the senses are not always reliable. Should we not 
conclude, then, that as a general source of know 1-
edge the senses are not to be trusted? As Descartes 
puts it, is it not wiser never "to trust entirely to 
any thing by which we have once been deceived" 
(HR, 145)? Don't we have here a quite general 
way of condemning as not fully reliable all of our 
beliefs acquired by means of the senses? 
I think the answer to that question is "No, we 
do not", and I think Descartes would agree with 
that answer. It is true that he does talk of the 
senses "deceiving" us on particular occasions, and 
he does ask whether that is not enough to con-
demn the senses in general as a source of knowl-
edge, but he immediately reminds us of the 
obvious fact that the circumstances in which the 
senses "deceive" us might be special in certain 
ascertainable ways, and so their occasional fail-
ures would not support a blanket condemnation 
of their reliability. 
Sometimes, to give an ancient example, a 
tower looks round from a distance when it is 
actually square. If we relied only on the appear-
ances of the moment we might say that the dis-
tant tower is round, and we would be wrong. We 
also know that there are many small organisms 
invisible to the naked eye. If the table before me is 
covered with such organisms at the moment but 
I look at it and say there is nothing on the table at 
all, once again I will be wrong. But all that follows 
from these familiar facts, as Descartes points out, 
is that there are things about which we can be 
wrong, or there are situations in which we can get 
false beliefs, if we rely entirely on our senses at 
that moment. So sometimes we should be careful 
about what we believe on the basis of the senses, 
or sometimes perhaps we should withhold our 
assent from any statement about how things are -
when things are too far away to be seen properly, 
for example, or too small to be seen at all. But that 
obviously is not enough to support the policy of 
never trusting one's senses, or never believing 
anything based on them. Nor does it show that I 
can never know anything by means of the senses. 
If my car starts promptly every morning for two 
years in temperate weather at sea level but then 
fails to start one morning in freezing weather at 
the top of a high mountain, that does not support 

THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
11 
the policy of never trusting my car to start again 
once I return to the temperate lower altitude from 
which I so foolishly took it. Nor does it show that 
I can never know whether my car will ever start 
again. It shows only that there are certain circum-
stances in which my otherwise fully reliable car 
might not start. So the fact that we are sometimes 
wrong or "deceived" in our judgements based on 
the senses is not enough in itself to show that the 
senses are never to be trusted and are therefore 
never reliable as a source of knowledge. 
Descartes's negative assessment of all of his 
sensory knowledge does not depend on any such 
reasoning. He starts his investigation, rather, in 
what would seem to be the most favourable con-
ditions for the reliable operation of the senses as a 
source of knowledge. While engaging in the very 
philosophical reflections he is writing about in 
his First Meditation Descartes is sitting in a warm 
room, by the fire, in a dressing gown, with a piece 
of paper in his hand. He finds that although he 
might be able to doubt that a distant tower that 
looks round really is round, it seems impossible 
to doubt that he really is sitting there by the fire in 
his dressing gown with a piece of paper in his 
hand. The fire and the piece of paper are not too 
small or too far away to be seen properly, they are 
right there before his eyes; it seems to be the best 
kind of position someone could be in for getting 
reliable beliefs or knowledge by means of the 
senses about what is going on around him. That 
is just how Descartes regards it. Its being a best-
possible case of that kind is precisely what he 
thinks enables him to investigate or assess at one 
fell swoop all our sensory knowledge of the world 
around us. The verdict he arrives at about his 
putative knowledge that he is sitting by the fire 
with a piece of paper in his hand in that particu-
lar situation serves as the basis for a completely 
general assessment of the senses as a source of 
knowledge about the world around us. 
How can that be so? How can he so easily reach 
a general verdict about all his sensory knowledge 
on the basis of a single example? Obviously not 
simply by generalizing from one particular exam-
ple to all cases of sensory knowledge, as one might 
wildly leap to a conclusion about all red-haired 
men on the basis of one or two individuals. 
Rather, he takes the particular example of his 
conviction that he is sitting by the fire with a piece 
of paper in his hand as representative of the best 
position any of us can ever be in for knowing 
things about the world around us on the basis of 
the senses. What is true of a representative case, if 
it is truly representative and does not depend on 
special peculiarities of its own, can legitimately 
support a general conclusion. A demonstration 
that a particular isosceles triangle has a certain 
property, for example, can be taken as a demon-
stration that all isosceles triangles have that prop-
erty, as long as the original instance was typical or 
representative of the whole class. Whether 
Descartes's investigation of the general reliability 
of the senses really does follow that familiar pat-
tern is a difficult question. Whether, or in pre-
cisely what sense, the example he considers can be 
treated as representative of our relation to the 
world around us is, I believe, the key to under-
standing the problem of our knowledge of the 
external world. But if it turns out that there is 
nothing illegitimate about the way his negative 
conclusion is reached, the problem will be prop-
erlyposed. 
For the moment I think at least this much can 
be said about Descartes's reasoning. He chooses 
the situation in which he finds himself as repre-
sentative of the best position we can be in for 
knowing things about the world in the sense that, 
if it is impossible for him in that position to know 
that he is sitting by the fire with a piece of paper in 
his hand then it is also impossible for him in other 
situations to know anything about the world 
around him on the basis of his senses. A negative 
verdict in the chosen case would support a nega-
tiveverdict everywhere else. The example Descartes 
considers is in that sense meant to be the best kind 
of case there could be of sensory knowledge about 
the world around us. I think we must admit that it 
is very difficult to see how Descartes or anyone 
else could be any better off with respect to know-
ing something about the world around him on the 
basis of the senses than he is in the case he consid-
ers. But if no one could be in any better position 
for knowing, it seems natural to conclude that any 
negative verdict arrived at about this example, any 
discovery that Descartes's beliefs in this case are 
not reliable or do not amount to knowledge, could 
safely be generalized into a negative conclusion 
about all of our sensory "knowledge" of the world. 
If candidates with the best possible credentials 
are found wanting, all those with less impressive 
credentials must fall short as well. 

12 
BARRY STROUD 
It will seem at first sight that in conceding that 
the whole question turns on whether Descartes 
knows in this particular case we are conceding 
very little; it seems obvious that Descartes on that 
occasion does know what he thinks he knows 
about the world around him. But in fact Descartes 
finds that he cannot know in this case that he is 
sitting by the fire with a piece of paper in his 
hand. If the case is truly representative of our sen-
sory knowledge in general, that will show that no 
one can know anything about the world around 
us. But how could he ever arrive at that negative 
verdict in the particular case he considers? How 
could anyone possibly doubt in such a case that 
the fire and the piece of paper are there? The 
paper is in Descartes's hand, the fire is right there 
before his open eyes, and he feels its warmth. 
Wouldn't anyone have to be mad to deny that he 
can know something about what is going on 
around him in those circumstances? Descartes 
first answers "Yes". He says that if he were to 
doubt or deny on that occasion that he is sitting 
by the fire with a piece of paper in his hand he 
would be no less mad than those paupers who 
say they are kings or those madmen who think 
they are pumpkins or are made of glass. But his 
reflections continue: 
At the same time I must remember that I am a 
man, and that consequently I am in the habit of 
sleeping, and in my dreams representing to myself 
the same things or sometimes even less probable 
things, than do those who are insane in their 
waking moments. How often has it happened to 
me that in the night I dreamt that I found myself 
in this particular place, that I was dressed and 
seated near the fire, whilst in reality I was lying 
undressed in bed! At this moment it does indeed 
seem to me that it is with eyes awake that I am 
looking at this paper; that this head which I move 
is not asleep, that it is deliberately and of set pur-
pose that I extend my hand and perceive it; what 
happens in sleep does not appear so clear nor so 
distinct as does all this. But in thinking over this I 
remind myself that on many occasions I have in 
sleep been deceived by similar illusions, and in 
dwelling carefully on this reflection I see so mani-
festly that there are no certain indications by 
which we may clearly distinguish wakefulness 
from sleep that I am lost in astonishment. And my 
astonishment is such that it is almost capable of 
persuading me that I now dream. (HR, 145-6) 
With this thought, if he is right, Descartes has 
lost the whole world. He knows what he is experi-
encing, he knows how things appear to him, but 
he does not know whether he is in fact sitting by 
the fire with a piece of paper in his hand. It is, for 
him, exactly as if he were sitting by the fire with a 
piece of paper in his hand, but he does not know 
whether there really is a fire or a piece of paper 
there or not; he does not know what is really hap-
pening in the world around him. He realizes that 
if everything he can ever learn about what is hap-
pening in the world around him comes to him 
through the senses, but he cannot tell by means of 
the senses whether or not he is dreaming, then all the 
sensory experiences he is having are compatible 
with his merely dreaming of a world around him 
while in fact that world is very different from the 
way he takes it to be. That is why he thinks he 
must find some way to tell that he is not dream-
ing. Far from its being mad to deny that he knows 
in this case, he thinks his recognition of the pos-
sibility that he might be dreaming gives him "very 
powerful and maturely considered" (HR, 148) 
reasons for withholding his judgement about how 
things are in the world around him. He thinks it is 
eminently reasonable to insist that ifhe is to know 
that he is sitting by the fire he must know that he 
is not dreaming that he is sitting by the fire. That 
is seen as a necessary condition of knowing some-
thing about the world around him. And he finds 
that that condition cannot be fulfilled. On careful 
reflection he discovers that "there are no certain 
indications by which we may clearly distinguish 
wakefulness from sleep': He concludes that he 
knows nothing about the world around him 
because he cannot tell that he is not dreaming; he 
cannot fulfil one of the conditions necessary for 
knowing something about the world. 
The Cartesian problem of our knowledge of the 
external world therefore becomes: how can we know 
anything about the world around us on the basis of 
the senses if the senses give us only what Descartes 
says they give us? What we gain through the senses 
is on Descartes's view only information that is com-
patible with our dreaming things about the world 
around us and not knowing anything about the 
world. How then can we know anything about the 
world by means of the senses? The Cartesian argu-
ment presents a challenge to our knowledge, and 
the problem of our knowledge of the external world 
is to show how that challenge can be met. 

THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
13 
When I speak here of the Cartesian argument 
or of Descartes's sceptical conclusion or of his 
negative verdict about his knowledge I refer of 
course only to the position he finds himself in by 
the end of his First Meditation. Having at that 
point discovered and stated the problem of the 
external world, Descartes goes on in the rest of his 
Meditations to try to solve it, and by the end of the 
Sixth Meditation he thinks he has explained how 
he knows almost all those familiar things he began 
by putting in question. So when I ascribe to 
Descartes the view that we can know nothing 
about the world around us I do not mean to sug-
gest that that is his final and considered view; it is 
nothing more than a conclusion he feels almost 
inevitably driven to at the early stages of his 
reflections. But those are the only stages of his 
thinking I am interested in here. That is where the 
philosophical problem of our knowledge of the 
external world gets posed, and before we can con-
sider possible solutions we must be sure we 
understand exactly what the problem is. 
I have described it as that of showing or 
explaining how knowledge of the world around 
us is possible by means of the senses. It is impor-
tant to keep in mind that that demand for an 
explanation arises in the face of a challenge or 
apparent obstacle to our knowledge of the world. 
The possibility that he is dreaming is seen as an 
obstacle to Descartes's knowing that he is sitting 
by the fire, and it must be explained how that 
obstacle can either be avoided or overcome. It 
must be shown or explained how it is possible for 
us to know things about the world, given that the 
sense-experiences we get are compatible with our 
merely dreaming. Explaining how something is 
nevertheless possible, despite what looks like an 
obstacle to it, requires more than showing merely 
that there is no impossibility involved in the 
thing - that it is consistent with the principles of 
logic and the laws of nature and so in that sense 
could exist. The mere possibility of the state of 
affairs is not enough to settle the question of how 
our knowledge of the world is possible; we must 
understand how the apparent obstacle is to be 
got round. 
Descartes's reasoning can be examined and 
criticized at many different points, and has been 
closely scrutinized by many philosophers for cen-
turies. It has also been accepted by many, perhaps 
by more than would admit or even realize that 
they accept it. There seems to me no doubt about 
the force and the fascination - I would say the 
almost overwhelming persuasiveness -
of his 
reflections. That alone is something that needs 
accounting for. I cannot possibly do justice to all 
reasonable reactions to them here. In the rest of 
this chapter I want to concentrate on deepening 
and strengthening the problem and trying to 
locate more precisely the source of its power. 
There are at least three distinct questions that 
could be pressed. Is the possibility that Descartes 
might be dreaming really a threat to his knowl-
edge of the world around him? Is he right in 
thinking that he must know that he is not dream-
ing if he is to know something about the world 
around him? And is he right in his "discovery" 
that he can never know that he is not dreaming? If 
Descartes were wrong on any of these points it 
might be possible to avoid the problem and per-
haps even to explain without difficulty how we 
know things about the world around us. 
On the first question, it certainly seems right 
to say that if Descartes were dreaming that he is 
sitting by the fire with a piece of paper in his hand 
he would not then know that he is sitting by the 
fire with a piece of paper in his hand. When you 
dream that something is going on in the world 
around you you do not thereby know that it is. 
Most often, of course, what we dream is not even 
true; no one is actually chasing us when we are 
lying asleep in bed dreaming, nor are we actually 
climbing stairs. But although usually what we 
dream is not really so, that is not the real reason 
for our lack of knowledge. Even if Descartes were 
in fact sitting by the fire and actually had a piece 
of paper in his hand at the very time he was 
dreaming that he is sitting by the fire with a piece 
of paper in his hand, he would not thereby know 
he was sitting there with that paper. He would be 
like a certain Duke of Devonshire who, according 
to G. E. Moore, once dreamt he was speaking in 
the House of Lords and woke up to find that he 
was speaking in the House of Lords.4 What he 
was dreaming was in fact so. But even if what you 
are dreaming is in fact so you do not thereby 
know that it is. Even if we allow that when you are 
dreaming that something is so you can be said, at 
least for the time being, to think or to believe that 
it is so, there is still no real connection between 
your thinking or believing what you do and its 
being so. At best you have a thought or a belief 

14 
BARRY STROUD 
which just happens to be true, but that is no 
more than coincidence and not knowledge. So 
Descartes's first step relies on what seems to be an 
undeniable fact about dreams: if you are dream-
ing that something is so you do not thereby know 
that it is so. 
This bald claim needs to be qualified and more 
carefully explained, but I do not think that will 
diminish the force of the point for Descartes's 
purposes. Sometimes what is going on in the 
world around us has an effect on what we dream; 
for example, a banging shutter might actually 
cause me to dream, among other things, that a 
shutter is banging. If my environment affects me 
in that way, and if in dreams I can be said to think 
or believe that something is so, would I not in that 
case know that a shutter is banging? It seems to 
me that I would not, but I confess it is difficult to 
say exactly why I think so. That is probably 
because it is difficult to say exactly what is required 
for knowledge. We use the term "know" confi-
dently, we quite easily distinguish cases of knowl-
edge from cases of its absence, but we are not 
always in a position to state what we are going on 
in applying or withholding the term in the ways 
we do. I think that in the case of the banging shut-
ter it would not be knowledge because I would be 
dreaming, I would not even be awake. At least it 
can be said, I think, that even if Descartes's sitting 
by the fire with a piece of paper in his hand (like 
the banging shutter) is what in fact causes him to 
dream that he is sitting by the fire with a piece of 
paper in his hand, that is still no help to him in 
coming to know what is going on in the world 
around him. He realizes that he could be dream-
ing that he is sitting by the fire even if he is in fact 
sitting there, and that is the possibility he finds he 
has to rule out. 
I have said that if you are dreaming that some-
thing is so you do not thereby know that it is so, 
and it might seem as if that is not always true. 
Suppose a man and a child are both sleeping. I say 
of the child that it is so young it does not know 
what seven times nine is, whereas the grown man 
does know that. If the man happens at that very 
moment to be dreaming that seven times nine is 
sixty-three (perhaps he is dreaming that he is 
computing his income tax), then he is a man who 
is dreaming that something is so and also knows 
that it is so. The same kind of thing is possible 
for knowledge about the world around him. He 
might be a physicist who knows a great deal about 
the way things are which the child does not know. 
If the man also dreams that things are that way he 
can once again be said to be dreaming that some-
thing is so and also to know that it is so. There is 
therefore no incompatibility between dreaming 
and knowing. That is true, but I do not think it 
affects Descartes's argument. He is led to consider 
how he knows he is not dreaming at the moment 
by reflecting on how he knows at that moment 
that he is sitting by the fire with a piece of paper 
in his hand. If he knows that at all, he thinks, he 
knows it on the basis of the senses. But he real-
izes that his having the sensory experiences he is 
now having is compatible with his merely dream-
ing that he is sitting by the fire with a piece of 
paper in his hand. So he does not know on the 
basis of the sensory experiences he is having at 
the moment that he is sitting by the fire. Nor, of 
course, did the man in my examples know the 
things he was said to know on the basis of the sen-
sory experiences he was having at that moment. 
He knew certain things to be so, and he was 
dreaming those things to be so, but in dreaming 
them he did not thereby know them to be so. 
But as long as we allow that the sleeping man 
does know certain things about the world around 
him, even if he does not know them on the basis 
of the very dreams he is having at the moment, 
isn't that enough to show that Descartes must 
nevertheless be wrong in his conclusion that no 
one can know anything about the world around 
him? No. It shows at most that we were hasty or 
were ignoring Descartes's conclusion in conced-
ing that someone could know something about 
the world around him. If Descartes's reasoning is 
correct the dreaming physicist, even when he is 
awake, does not really know any of the things we 
were uncritically crediting him with knowing 
about the way things are - or at least he does not 
know them on the basis of the senses. In order to 
know them on the basis of the senses there would 
have to have been at least some time at which he 
knew something about what was going on around 
him at that time. But if Descartes is right he could 
not have known any such thing unless he had 
established that he was not dreaming at that time; 
and according to Descartes he could never estab-
lish that. So the fact about dreams that Descartes 
relies on - that one who dreams that something is 
so does not thereby know that it is so - is enough 

THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
15 
to yield his conclusion if the other steps of his 
reasoning are correct. 
When he first introduces the possibility that 
he might be dreaming Descartes seems to be rely-
ing on some knowledge about how things are or 
were in the world around him. He says "I remind 
myself that on many occasions I have in sleep been 
deceived by similar illusions", so he seems to be 
relying on some knowledge to the effect that he 
has actually dreamt in the past and that he remem-
bers having been "deceived" by those dreams. That 
is more than he actually needs for his reflections 
about knowledge to have the force he thinks they 
have. He does not need to support his judgement 
that he has actually dreamt in the past. The only 
thought he needs is that it is now possible for him 
to be dreaming that he is sitting by the fire, and 
that if that possibility were realized he would not 
know that he is sitting by the fire. Of course it was 
no doubt true that Descartes had dreamt in the 
past and that his knowledge that he had done so 
was partly what he was going on in acknowledg-
ing the possibility of his dreaming on this partic-
ular occasion. But neither the fact of past dreams 
nor knowledge of their actual occurrence would 
seem to be strictly required in order to grant what 
Descartes relies on - the possibility of dreaming, 
and the absence of knowledge if that possibility 
were realized. The thought that he might be 
dreaming that he is sitting by the fire with a piece 
of paper in his hand, and the fact that if he were 
he wouldn't know he was sitting there, is what 
gives Descartes pause. That would worry him in 
the way it does even if he had never actually had 
any dreams exactly like it in the past - if he had 
never dreamt about fires and pieces of paper at 
all. In fact, I think he need never have actually 
dreamt of anything before, and certainly needn't 
know that he ever has, in order to be worried in 
the way he is by the thought that he might be 
dreaming now. 
The fact that the possibility of dreaming is all 
Descartes needs to appeal to brings out another 
truth about dreams that his argument depends 
on - that anything that can be going on or that 
one can experience in one's waking life can also 
be dreamt about. This again is only a statement of 
possibility - no sensible person would suggest 
that we do at some time dream of everything that 
actually happens to us, or that everything we 
dream about does in fact happen sometime. But 
it is very plausible to say that there is nothing we 
could not dream about, nothing that could be the 
case that we could not dream to be the case. I say 
it is very plausible; of course I cannot prove it to 
be true. But even if it is not true with complete 
generality, we must surely grant that it is possible 
to dream that one is sitting by a fire with a piece 
of paper in one's hand, and possible to dream of 
countless other equally obvious and equally mun-
dane states of affairs as well, and those possibili-
ties are what Descartes sees as threatening to his 
knowledge of the world around him. 
There seems little hope, then, of objecting that 
it is simply not possible for Descartes to dream 
that he is sitting by the fire with a piece of paper 
in his hand. Nor is it any more promising to say 
that even if he were dreaming it would not follow 
that he did not know that he was sitting there. 
I think both those steps or assumptions of 
Descartes's reasoning are perfectly correct, and 
further defence of them at this stage is unneces-
sary. If his argument and the problem to which it 
gives rise are to be avoided, it might seem that the 
best hope is therefore to accept his challenge and 
show that it can be met. That would be in effect to 
argue that Descartes's alleged "discovery" is no 
discovery at all: we can sometimes know that we 
are not dreaming. 
This can easily seem to be the most straight-
forward and most promising strategy. It allows 
that Descartes is right in thinking that knowing 
that one is not dreaming is a condition of know-
ing something about the world around us, but 
wrong in thinking that that condition can never 
be met. And that certainly seems plausible. Surely 
it is not impossible for me to know that I am not 
dreaming? Isn't that something I often know, and 
isn't it something I can sometimes find out if the 
question arises? If it is, then the fact that I must 
know that I am not dreaming if I am to know 
anything about the world around me will be no 
threat to my knowledge of the world. 
However obvious and undeniable it might be 
that we often do know that we are not dreaming, 
I think this straightforward response to Descartes's 
challenge is a total failure. In calling it straightfor-
ward I mean that it accepts Descartes's conditions 
for knowledge of the world and tries to show that 
they can be fulfilled. That is what I think cannot 
be done. To put the same point in another way: 
I think Descartes would be perfectly correct in 

16 
BARRY STROUD 
saying "there are no certain indications by which 
we may clearly distinguish wakefulness from 
sleep", and so we could never tell we are not 
dreaming, ifhe were also right that knowing that 
one is not dreaming is a condition of knowing 
something about the world around us. That is 
why I think one cannot accept that condition and 
then go on to establish that one is not dreaming. 
I do not mean to be saying simply that Descartes 
is right - that we can never know that we are not 
dreaming. But I do want to argue that either we 
can never know that we are not dreaming or else 
what Descartes says is a condition of knowing 
things about the world is not really a condition in 
general of knowing things about the world. The 
straightforward strategy denies both alternatives. 
I will try to explain why I think we must accept 
one alternative or the other. 
When Descartes asks himself how he knows 
that he is sitting by the fire with a piece of paper 
in his hand why does he immediately go on to ask 
himself how he knows he is not dreaming that he 
is sitting by the fire with a piece of paper in his 
hand? I have suggested that it is because he recog-
nizes that ifhe were dreaming he would not know 
on the basis of his senses at the moment that he is 
sitting there, and so he thinks he must know that 
that possibility does not obtain if he is to know 
that he is in fact sitting there. But this particular 
example was chosen, not for any peculiarities it 
might be thought to possess, but because it could 
be taken as typical of the best position we can 
ever be in for coming to know things about the 
world around us on the basis of the senses. What 
is true of this case that is relevant to Descartes's 
investigation of knowledge is supposed to be true 
of all cases of knowledge of the world by means 
of the senses; that is why the verdict arrived at 
here can be taken to be true of our sensory 
knowledge generally. But what Descartes thinks 
is true of this particular case of sensory knowl-
edge of the world is that he must know he is not 
dreaming if he is to know that he is sitting by the 
fire with a piece of paper in his hand. That is 
required, not because of any peculiarities of this 
particular case, but presumably because, accord-
ing to Descartes, it is a necessary condition of any 
case - even a best possible case - of knowledge of 
the world by means of the senses. That is why I 
ascribed to Descartes the quite general thesis that 
knowing that one is not dreaming is a condition 
of knowing something about the world around us 
on the basis of the senses. Since he thinks the pos-
sibility of his dreaming must be ruled out in the 
case he considers, and the case he considers is 
regarded as typical and without special character-
istics of its own, he thinks that the possibility that 
he is dreaming must be ruled out in every case of 
knowing something about the world by means of 
the senses. 
If that really is a condition of knowing some-
thing about the world, I think it can be shown 
that Descartes is right in holding that it can 
never be fulfilled. That is what the straightfor-
ward response denies, and that is why I think 
that response must be wrong. We cannot accept 
the terms of Descartes's challenge and then hope 
to meet it. 
Suppose Descartes tries to determine that he is 
not dreaming in order to fulfil what he sees as a 
necessary condition of knowing that he is sitting 
by the fire with a piece of paper in his hand. How 
is he to proceed? He realizes that his seeing his 
hand and seeing and feeling a piece of paper 
before him and feeling the warmth of the fire - in 
fact his getting all the sensory experiences or all 
the sensory information he is then getting - is 
something that could be happening even if he 
were dreaming. To establish that he is not dream-
ing he would therefore need something more 
than just those experiences or that information 
alone. He would also need to know whether those 
experiences and that information are reliable, not 
merely dreamt. If he could find some operation 
or test, or if he could find some circumstance or 
state of affairs, that indicated to him that he was 
not dreaming, perhaps he could then fulfil the 
condition - he could know that he was not dream-
ing. But how could a test or a circumstance or a 
state of affairs indicate to him that he is not dream-
ing if a condition of knowing anything about the 
world is that he know he is not dreaming? It could 
not. He could never fulfil the condition. 
Let us suppose that there is in fact some test 
which a person can perform successfully only if 
he is not dreaming, or some circumstance or state 
of affairs which obtains only if that person is not 
dreaming. Of course for that test or state of affairs 
to be of any use to him Descartes would have to 
know of it. He would have to know that there is 
such a test or that there is a state of affairs that 
shows that he is not dreaming; without such 

THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
17 
information he would be no better off for telling 
that he is not dreaming than he would be if there 
were no such test or state of affairs at all. To have 
acquired that information he would at some 
time have to have known more than just some-
thing about the course of his sensory experience, 
since the connection between the performance of 
a certain test, or between a certain state of affairs, 
and someone's not dreaming is not itself just a 
fact about the course of that person's sensory 
experience; it is a fact about the world beyond his 
sensory experiences. Now strictly speaking if it is 
a condition of knowing anything about the world 
beyond one's sensory experiences that one know 
that one is not dreaming, there is an obvious 
obstacle to Descartes's ever having got the infor-
mation he needs about that test or state of affairs. 
He would have to have known at some time that 
he was not dreaming in order to get the informa-
tion he needs to tell at any time that he is not 
dreaming - and that cannot be done. 
But suppose we forget about this difficulty 
and concede that Descartes does indeed know 
(somehow) that there is a test or circumstance or 
state of affairs that unfailingly indicates that he is 
not dreaming. Still, there is an obstacle to his ever 
using that test or state of affairs to tell that he is 
not dreaming and thereby fulfilling the condition 
for knowledge of the world. The test would have 
to be something he could know he had performed 
successfully, the state of affairs would have to be 
something he could know obtains. If he com-
pletely unwittingly happened to perform the test, 
or if the state of affairs happened to obtain but he 
didn't know that it did, he would be in no better 
position for telling whether he was dreaming than 
he would be if he had done nothing or did not 
even know that there was such a test. But how is 
he to know that the test has been performed suc-
cessfully or that the state of affairs in question 
does in fact obtain? Anything one can experience 
in one's walking life can also be dreamt about; it is 
possible to dream that one has performed a cer-
tain test or dream that one has established that a 
certain state of affairs obtains. And, as we have 
seen, to dream that something about the world 
around you is so is not thereby to know that it is so. 
In order to know that his test has been performed 
or that the state of affairs in question obtains 
Descartes would therefore have to establish that he 
is not merely dreaming that he performed the test 
successfully or that he established that the state of 
affairs obtains. How could that in turn be known? 
Obviously the particular test or state of affairs 
already in question cannot serve as a guarantee of 
its own authenticity, since it might have been 
merely dreamt, so some further test or state of 
affairs would be needed to indicate that the origi-
nal test was actually performed and not merely 
dreamt, or that the state of affairs in question was 
actually ascertained to obtain and not just dreamt 
to obtain. But this further test or state of affairs is 
subject to the same general condition in turn. 
Every piece of knowledge that goes beyond one's 
sensory experiences requires that one know one is 
not dreaming. This second test or state of affairs 
will therefore be of use only if Descartes knows 
that he is not merely dreaming that he is perform-
ing or ascertaining it, since merely to dream that 
he had established the authenticity of the first test 
is not to have established it. And so on. At no 
point can he find a test for not dreaming which he 
can know has been successfully performed or a 
state of affairs correlated with not dreaming 
which he can know obtains. He can therefore 
never fulfil what Descartes says is a necessary 
condition of knowing something about the world 
around him. He can never know that he is not 
dreaming. 
I must emphasize that this conclusion is 
reached only on the assumption that it is a condi-
tion of knowing anything about the world around 
us on the basis of the senses that we know we are 
not dreaming that the thing is so. I think it is his 
acceptance of that condition that leads Descartes 
to "see so manifestly that there are no certain 
indications by which we may clearly distinguish 
wakefulness from sleep". And I think Descartes is 
absolutely right to draw that conclusion, given 
what he thinks is a condition of knowledge of the 
world. But all I have argued on Descartes's behalf 
(he never spells out his reasoning) is that we 
cannot both accept that condition of knowledge 
and hope to fulfil it, as the straightforward 
response hopes to do. And of course if one of the 
necessary conditions of knowledge of the world 
can never be fulfilled, knowledge of the world 
around us will be impossible. 
I think we have now located Descartes's reason 
for his negative verdict about sensory knowledge 
in general. If we agree that he must know that he 
is not dreaming if he is to know in his particular 

18 
BARRY STROUD 
case that he is sitting by the fire with a piece of 
paper in his hand, we must also agree that we can 
know nothing about the world around us. 
Once we recognize that the condition Descartes 
takes as necessary can never be fulfilled if he is 
right in thinking it is indeed necessary, we are 
naturally led to the question whether Descartes is 
right. Is it really a condition of knowing some-
thing about the world that one know one is not 
dreaming? That is the second of the three ques-
tions I distinguished. It is the one that has received 
the least attention. In asking it now I do not mean 
to be going back on something I said earlier was 
undeniably true, viz., that if one is dreaming that 
something about the world is so one does not 
thereby know that it is so. That still seems to me 
undeniable, but it is not the same as Descartes's 
assumption that one must know that one is not 
dreaming if one is to know something about the 
world. The undeniable truth says only that you 
lack knowledge if you are dreaming; Descartes 
says that you lack knowledge if you don't know 
that you are not dreaming. Only with the stronger 
assumption can his sceptical conclusion be 
reached. 
Is that assumption true? In so far as we find 
Descartes's reasoning convincing, or even plausi-
ble, I think it is because we too on reflection find 
that it is true. I said that not much attention had 
been paid to that particular part of Descartes's 
reasoning, and I think that too is because, as he 
presents it, the step seems perfectly convincing 
and so only other parts of the argument appear 
vulnerable. Why is that so? Is it because Descartes's 
assumption is indeed true? Is there anything we 
can do that would help us determine whether it is 
true or not? The question is important because I 
have argued so far that if it is true we can never 
know anything about the world around us on the 
basis of the senses, and philosophical scepticism 
about the external world is correct. We would 
have to find that conclusion as convincing or as 
plausible as we find the assumption from which it 
is derived. 
Given our original favourable response to 
Descartes's reasoning, then, it can scarcely be 
denied that what I have called his assumption or 
condition seems perfectly natural to insist on. 
Perhaps it seems like nothing more than an instance 
of a familiar commonplace about knowledge. We 
are all aware that, even in the most ordinary 
circumstances when nothing very important turns 
on the outcome, we cannot know a particular thing 
unless we have ruled out certain possibilities that 
we recognize are incompatible with our knowing 
that thing. 
Suppose that on looking out the window I 
announce casually that there is a goldfinch in the 
garden. If I am asked how I know it is a goldfinch 
and I reply that it is yellow, we all recognize that 
in the normal case that is not enough for knowl-
edge. "For all you've said so far," it might be 
replied, "the thing could be a canary, so how do 
you know it's a goldfinch?" A certain possibility 
compatible with everything I have said so far has 
been raised, and if what I have said so far is all I 
have got to go on and I don't know that the thing 
in the garden is not a canary, then I do not know 
that there is a goldfinch in the garden. I must be 
able to rule out the possibility that it is a canary if 
I am to know that it is a goldfinch. Anyone who 
speaks about knowledge and understands what 
others say about it will recognize this fact or con-
dition in particular cases. 
In this example what is said to be possible is 
something incompatible with the truth of what I 
claim to know - if that bird were a canary it would 
not be a goldfinch in the garden, but a canary. 
What I believe in believing it is a goldfinch would 
be false. But that is not the only way a possibility 
can work against my knowledge. If I come to sus-
pect that all the witnesses have conspired and 
made up a story about the man's being in 
Cleveland that night, for example, and their testi-
mony is all I have got to go on in believing that he 
was in Cleveland, I might find that I no longer 
know whether he was there or not until I have 
some reason to rule out my suspicion. If their tes-
timony were all invented I would not know that 
the man was in Cleveland. But strictly speaking 
his being in Cleveland is not incompatible with 
their making up a story saying he was. They might 
have invented a story to protect him, whereas in 
fact, unknown to them, he was there all the time. 
Such a complicated plot is not necessary to bring 
out the point; Moore's Duke of Devonshire is 
enough. From the fact that he was dreaming that he 
was speaking in the House ofLords it did not follow 
that he was not speaking in the House of Lords. In 
fact he was. The possibility of dreaming - which 
was actual in that case - did not imply the falsity 
of what was believed. A possible deficiency in the 

THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
19 
basis of my belief can interfere with my knowl-
edge without itself rendering false the very thing I 
believe. A hallucinogenic drug might cause me to 
see my bed covered with a huge pile of leaves, for 
example.s Having taken that drug, I will know the 
actual state of my bed only if I know that what I 
see is not just the effect of the drug; I must be able 
to rule out the possibility that I am hallucinating 
the bed and the leaves. But however improbable it 
might be that my bed is actually covered with 
leaves, its not being covered with leaves does not 
follow from the fact that I am hallucinating that it 
is. What I am hallucinating could nevertheless be 
(unknown to me) true. But a goldfinch simply 
could not be a canary. So although there are two 
different ways in which a certain possibility can 
threaten my knowledge, it remains true that there 
are always certain possibilities which must be 
known not to obtain if I am to know what I claim 
to know. 
I think these are just familiar facts about 
human knowledge, something we all recognize 
and abide by in our thought and talk about know-
ing things. We know what would be a valid chal-
lenge to a claim to know something, and we can 
recognize the relevance and force of objections 
made to our claims to know. The question before 
us is to what extent Descartes's investigation of 
his knowledge that he is sitting by the fire with a 
piece of paper in his hand follows these recog-
nized everyday procedures for assessing claims to 
know. If it does follow them faithfully, and yet 
leads to the conclusion that he cannot know 
where he is or what is happening around him, we 
seem forced to accept his negative conclusion 
about knowledge in general just as we are forced 
to accept the conclusion that I do not know it is a 
goldfinch or do not know the witness was in 
Cleveland because I cannot rule out the possibili-
ties which must be ruled out if! am to know such 
things. Is Descartes's introduction of the possibil-
ity that he might be dreaming just like the intro-
duction of the possibility that it might be a canary 
in the garden or that the alibi might be contrived 
or that it might be a hallucination of my bed cov-
ered with leaves? 
Those possibilities were all such that if they 
obtained I did not know what I claimed to know, 
and they had to be known not to obtain in order 
for the original knowledge-claim to be true. Does 
Descartes's dream-possibility fulfil both of those 
conditions? I have already said that it seems unde-
niable that it fulfils the first. If he were dreaming 
Descartes would not know what he claims to 
know. Someone who is dreaming does not thereby 
know anything about the world around him even 
if the world around him happens to be just the 
way he dreams or believes it to be. So his dream-
ing is incompatible with his knowing. But does it 
fulfil the second condition? Is it a possibility 
which must be known not to obtain if Descartes 
is to know that he is sitting by the fire with a piece 
of paper in his hand? I think it is difficult simply 
to deny that it is. The evident force of Descartes's 
reasoning when we first encounter it is enough to 
show that it certainly strikes us as a relevant pos-
sibility, as something that he should know not to 
obtain if he is to know where he is and what is 
happening around him. 
When that possibility strikes us as obviously 
relevant in Descartes's investigation we might 
come to think that it is because of a simple and 
obvious fact about knowledge. In the case of the 
goldfinch we immediately recognize that I must 
know that it is not a canary if I am to know it is a 
goldfinch. And it is very natural to think that that 
is simply because its being a canary is incompat-
ible with its being a goldfinch. If it were a canary 
it would not be a goldfinch, and I would there-
fore be wrong in saying that it is; so if I am to 
know it is a goldfinch I must rule out the possi-
bility that it is a canary. The idea is that the two 
conditions I distinguished in the previous para-
graph are not really separate after all. As soon as 
we see that a certain possibility is incompatible 
with our knowing such-and-such, it is suggested, 
we immediately recognize that it is a possibility 
that must be known not to obtain if we are to 
know the such-and-such in question. We see that 
the dream-possibility satisfies that first condition 
in Descartes's case (if he were dreaming, he 
wouldn't know), and that is why, according to 
this suggestion, we immediately see that it is rel-
evant and must be ruled out. Something we all 
recognize about knowledge is what is said to 
make that obvious to us. 
But is the "simple and obvious fact about 
knowledge" appealed to in this explanation really 
something that is true of human knowledge even 
in the most ordinary circumstances? What exactly 
is the "fact" in question supposed to be? I have 
described it so far, as applied to the case of the 

20 
BARRY STROUD 
goldfinch, as the fact that if I know something p 
(it's a goldfinch) I must know the falsity of all 
those things incompatible with p (e.g., it's a 
canary). If there were one of those things that I 
did not know to be false, and it were in fact true, I 
would not know that p, since in that case some-
thing incompatible with p would be true and so p 
would not be true. But to say that I must know 
that all those things incompatible with p are false 
is the same as saying that I must know that truth 
of all those things that must be true if p is true. 
And it is extremely implausible to say that that is 
a "simple and obvious fact" we all recognize about 
human knowledge. 
The difficulty is that there are no determinate 
limits to the number of things that follow from 
the things I already know. But it cannot be said 
that I now know all those indeterminately many 
things, although they all must be true if the things 
that I already know are true. Even granting that I 
now know a great deal about a lot of different 
things, my knowledge obviously does not extend 
to everything that follows from what I now know. 
If it did, mathematics, to take only one example, 
would be a great deal easier than it is - or else 
impossibly difficult. In knowing the truth of the 
simple axioms of number theory, for example, I 
would thereby know the truth of everything that 
follows from them; every theorem of number 
theory would already be known. Or, taking the 
pessimistic side, since obviously no one does 
know all the theorems of number theory, it would 
follow that no one even knows that those simple 
axioms are true. 
It is absurd to say that we enjoy or require such 
virtual omniscience, so it is more plausible to 
hold that the "simple and obvious fact" we all rec-
ognize about knowledge is the weaker require-
ment that we must know the falsity of all those 
things that we know to be incompatible with the 
things we know. I know that a bird's being a 
canary is incompatible with its being a goldfinch; 
that is not some farflung, unknown consequence 
of its being a goldfinch, but something that 
anyone would know who knew anything about 
goldfinches at all. And the idea is that that is why 
I must know that it is not a canary if I am to know 
that it is a goldfinch. Perhaps, in order to know 
something, p, I do not need to know the falsity of 
all those things that are incompatible with p, but 
it can seem that at least I must know the falsity of 
all those things that I know to be incompatible 
with p. Since I claim to know that the bird is a 
goldfinch, and I know that its being a goldfinch 
implies that it is not a canary, I must for that 
reason know that it is not a canary if my original 
claim is true. In claiming to know it is a goldfinch 
I was, so to speak, committing myself to knowing 
that it is not a canary, and I must honour my 
commitments. 
This requirement as it stands, even if it does 
explain why I must know that the bird is not a 
canary, does not account for the relevance of the 
other sorts of possibilities I have mentioned. The 
reason in the goldfinch case was said to be that I 
know that its being a canary is incompatible with 
its being a goldfinch. But that will not explain 
why I must rule out the possibility that the wit-
nesses have invented a story about the man's 
being in Cleveland, or the possibility that I am 
hallucinating my bed covered with a pile ofleaves. 
Nor will it explain why Descartes must rule out 
the possibility that he is dreaming. What I claimed 
to know in the first case is that the man was in 
Cleveland that night. But, as we saw earlier, it is 
not a consequence of his being in Cleveland that 
no one will invent a story to the effect that he was 
in Cleveland; they might mistakenly believe he 
was not there and then tell what they think is a lie. 
Nor is it a consequence of my bed's being covered 
with leaves that I am not hallucinating that it is. 
But we recognize that in order to know in those 
cases I nevertheless had to rule out those possi-
bilities. Similarly, as the Duke of Devonshire 
reminds us, it is not a consequence of Descartes's 
sitting by the fire with a piece of paper in his hand 
that he is not dreaming that he is. So if it is obvi-
ous to us that Descartes must know that he is not 
dreaming if he is to know that he is sitting by the 
fire, it cannot be simply because the possibility in 
question is known to be incompatible with what 
he claims to know. It is not. 
If there is some "simple and obvious fact about 
knowledge" that we recognize and rely on in 
responding to Descartes's reasoning it must there-
fore be more complicated than what has been 
suggested so far. Reflecting even on the uncontro-
versial everyday examples alone can easily lead us 
to suppose that it is something like this: if some-
body knows something, p, he must know the fal-
sity of all those things incompatible with his 
knowing that p (or perhaps all those things he 

THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
21 
knows to be incompatible with his knowing that 
pl. I will not speculate further on the qualifica-
tions or emendations needed to make the princi-
ple less implausible. The question now is whether 
it is our adherence to any such principle or 
requirement that is responsible for our recogni-
tion that the possibility that the bird is a canary or 
the possibility that the witnesses made up a story 
must be known not to obtain if I am to know the 
things I said I knew in those cases. What exactly 
are the procedures or standards we follow in the 
most ordinary, humdrum cases of putative 
knowledge? Reflection on the source of Descartes's 
sceptical reasoning has led to difficulties in 
describing and therefore in understanding even 
the most familiar procedures we follow in every-
day life. That is one of the rewards of a study of 
philosophical scepticism. 
The main difficulty in understanding our 
ordinary procedures is that no principle like those 
I have mentioned could possibly describe the way 
we proceed in everyday life. Or, to put it less dog-
matically, if our adherence to some such require-
ment were responsible for our reactions in those 
ordinary cases, Descartes would be perfectly cor-
rect, and philosophical scepticism about the 
external world would be true. Nobody would 
know anything about the world around us. If, in 
order to know something, we must rule out a 
possibility which is known to be incompatible 
with our knowing it, Descartes is perfectly right 
to insist that he must know that he is not dream-
ing if he is to know that he is sitting by the fire 
with a piece of paper in his hand. He knows his 
dreaming is incompatible with his knowing. 
I have already argued that if he is right in insisting 
that that condition must be fulfilled for knowl-
edge of the world around us he is also right in 
concluding that it can never be fulfilled; fulfilling 
it would require knowledge which itself would be 
possible only if the condition were fulfilled. So 
both steps of Descartes's reasoning would be valid 
and his conclusion would be true. 
That conclusion can be avoided, it seems to 
me, only if we can find some way to avoid the 
requirement that we must know we are not 
dreaming if we are to know anything about the 
world around us. But that requirement cannot be 
avoided if it is nothing more than an instance of a 
general procedure we recognize and insist on in 
making and assessing knowledge-claims in every-
day and scientific life. We have no notion of 
knowledge other than what is embodied in those 
procedures and practices. So if that requirement 
is a "fact" of our ordinary conception of knowl-
edge we will have to accept the conclusion that no 
one knows anything about the world around us. 
I now want to say a few more words about the 
position we would all be in if Descartes's conclu-
sion as he understands it were correct. I described 
him earlier as having lost the whole world, as 
knowing at most what he is experiencing or how 
things appear to him, but knowing nothing about 
how things really are in the world around him. To 
show how anyone in that position could come to 
know anything about the world around him is 
what I am calling the problem of our knowledge 
of the external world, and it is worth dwelling for 
a moment on just how difficult a problem that 
turns out to be if it has been properly raised. 
If we are in the predicament Descartes finds 
himself in at the end of his First Meditation we 
cannot tell by means of the senses whether we are 
dreaming or not; all the sensory experiences we 
are having are compatible with our merely dream-
ing of a world around us while that world is in 
fact very different from the way we take it to be. 
Our knowledge is in that way confined to our 
sensory experiences. There seems to be no way of 
going beyond them to know that the world 
around us really is this way rather than that. Of 
course we might have very strongly held beliefs 
about the way things are. We might even be unable 
to get rid of the conviction that we are sitting by 
the fire holding a piece of paper, for example. But 
if we acknowledge that our sensory experiences 
are all we ever have to go on in gaining knowledge 
about the world, and we acknowledge, as we must, 
that given our experiences as they are we could 
nevertheless be simply dreaming of sitting by the 
fire, we must concede that we do not know that 
we are sitting by the fire. Of course, we are in no 
position to claim the opposite either. We cannot 
conclude that we are not sitting by the fire; we 
simply cannot tell which is the case. Our sensory 
experience gives us no basis for believing one 
thing about the world around us rather than its 
opposite, but our sensory experience is all we 
have got to go on. So whatever unshakeable con-
viction we might nevertheless retain, that convic-
tion cannot be knowledge. Even if we are in fact 

22 
BARRY STROUD 
holding a piece of paper by the fire, so that what 
we are convinced of is in fact true, that true con-
viction is still not knowledge. The world around 
us, whatever it might be like, is in that way beyond 
our grasp. We can know nothing of how it is, no 
matter what convictions, beliefs, or opinions we 
continue, perhaps inevitably, to hold about it. 
What can we know in such a predicament? We 
can perhaps know what sensory experiences we 
are having, or how things seem to us to be. At 
least that much of our knowledge will not be 
threatened by the kind of attack Descartes makes 
on our knowledge of the world beyond our expe-
riences. What we can know turns out to be a great 
deal less than we thought we knew before engag-
ing in that assessment of our knowledge. Our 
position is much more restricted, much poorer, 
than we had originally supposed. We are confined 
at best to what Descartes calls "ideas" of things 
around us, representations of things or states of 
affairs which, for all we can know, might or might 
not have something corresponding to them in 
reality. We are in a sense imprisoned within those 
representations, at least with respect to our 
knowledge. Any attempt to go beyond them to try 
and tell whether the world really is as they repre-
sent it to be can yield only more representations, 
more deliverances of sense experience which 
themselves are compatible with reality's being 
very different from the way we take it to be on the 
basis of our sensory experiences. There is a gap, 
then, between the most that we can ever find out 
on the basis of our sensory experience and the 
way things really are. In knowing the one we do 
not thereby know the other. 
This can seem to leave us in the position of 
finding a barrier between ourselves and the world 
around us. There would then be a veil of sensory 
experiences or sensory objects which we could not 
penetrate but which would be no reliable guide to 
the world beyond the veil. If we were in such a 
position, I think it is quite clear that we could not 
know what is going on beyond the veil. There 
would be no possibility of our getting reliable sen-
sory information about the world beyond the veil; 
all such reports would simply be more representa-
tions, further ingredients of the evermore-com-
plicated veil. We would know nothing but the veil 
itself. We would be in the position of someone 
waking up to find himselflocked in a room full of 
television sets and trying to find out what is going 
on in the world outside. For all he can know, what-
ever is producing the patterns he can see on the 
screens in front of him might be something other 
than well-function cameras directed on to the 
passing show outside the room. The victim might 
switch on more of the sets in the room to try to get 
more information, and he might find that some of 
the sets show events exactly similar or coherently 
related to those already visible on the screens he 
can see. But all those pictures will be no help to 
him without some independent information, 
some knowledge which does not come to him 
from the pictures themselves, about how the pic-
tures he does see before him are connected with 
what is going on outside the room. The problem 
of the external world is the problem of finding 
out, or knowing how we could find out, about the 
world around us if we were in that sort of predica-
ment. It is perhaps enough simply to put the 
problem this way to convince us that it can never 
be given a satisfactory solution. 
But putting the problem this way, or only this 
way, has its drawbacks. For one thing, it encour-
ages a facile dismissive response; not a solution to 
the problem as posed, but a rejection of it. I do 
not mean that we should not find a way to reject 
the problem - I think that is our only hope - but 
this particular response, I believe, is wrong, or 
at the very least premature. It is derived almost 
entirely from the perhaps overly dramatic descrip-
tion of the predicament I have just given. 
I have described Descartes's sceptical conclu-
sion as implying that we are permanently sealed 
off from a world we can never reach. We are 
restricted to the passing show on the veil of per-
ception, with no possibility of extending our 
knowledge to the world beyond. We are confined 
to appearances we can never know to match or to 
deviate from the imperceptible reality that is for-
ever denied us. This way of putting it naturally 
encourages us to minimize the seriousness of the 
predicament, to try to settle for what is undenia-
bly available to us, or perhaps even to argue that 
nothing that concerns us or makes human life 
worthwhile has been left out. 
If an imperceptible "reality", as it is called on 
this picture, is forever inaccessible to us, what 
concern can it be of ours? How can something we 
can have no contact with, something from which 
we are permanently sealed off, even make sense to 
us at all? Why should we be distressed by an 

THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
23 
alleged limitation of our knowledge if it is not 
even possible for the "limitation" to be overcome? 
If it makes no sense to aspire to anything beyond 
what is possible for us, it will seem that we should 
give no further thought to this allegedly imper-
ceptible "reality': Our sensory experiences, past, 
present, and future, will then be thought to be all 
we are or should be concerned with, and the idea 
of a "reality" lying beyond them necessarily out of 
our reach will seem like nothing more than a phi-
losopher's invention. What a sceptical philoso-
pher would be denying us would then be nothing 
we could have ordinary commerce with or inter-
est in anyway. Nothing distressing about our 
ordinary position in the familiar world would 
have been revealed by a philosopher who simply 
invents or constructs something he calls "reality" 
or "the external world" and then demonstrates 
that we can have no access to it. That would show 
nothing wrong with the everyday sensory knowl-
edge we seek and think we find in ordinary life 
and in scientific laboratories, nor would it show 
that our relation to the ordinary reality that con-
cerns us is different from what we originally 
thought it to be. 
I think this reaction to the picture of our being 
somehow imprisoned behind the veil of our own 
sensory experiences is very natural and immedi-
ately appealing. It is natural and perhaps always 
advisable for a prisoner to try to make the best of 
the restricted life behind bars. But however much 
more bearable it makes the prospect of life-
imprisonment, it should not lead him to deny the 
greater desirability, let alone the existence, of life 
outside. In so far as the comfort of this response 
to philosophical scepticism depends on such a 
denial it is at the very least premature and is prob-
ably based on misunderstanding. It depends on a 
particular diagnosis or account of how and why 
the philosophical argument succeeds in reaching 
its conclusion. The idea is that the "conclusion" is 
reached only by contrivance. The inaccessible 
"reality" denied to us is said to be simply an arte-
fact of the philosopher's investigation and not 
something that otherwise should concern us. 
That is partly a claim about how the philosophi-
cal investigation of knowledge works; as such, it 
needs to be explained and argued for. We can 
draw no consolation from it until we have some 
reason to think it might be an accurate account of 
what the philosopher does. So far we have no such 
reason. On the contrary; so far we have every 
reason to think that Descartes has revealed the 
impossibility of the very knowledge of the world 
that we are most interested in and which we began 
by thinking we possess or can easily acquire. In 
any case, that would be the only conclusion to 
draw if Descartes's investigation does indeed par-
allel the ordinary kinds of assessments we make 
of our knowledge in everyday life. 
We saw that I can ask what I really know about 
the common cold, or whether I really know that 
the witness was in Cleveland on the night in ques-
tion, and that I can go on to discover that I do not 
really know what I thought I knew. In such ordi-
nary cases there is no suggestion that what I have 
discovered is that I lack some special, esoteric 
thing called "real knowledge", or that I lack knowl-
edge of some exotic, hitherto-unheard-of domain 
called "reality". If I ask what I know about the 
common cold, and I come to realize that I do not 
really know whether it can be caused by sitting in 
a draught or not, the kind of knowledge I discover 
I lack is precisely what I was asking about or 
taking it for granted I had at the outset. I do not 
conclude with a shrug that it no longer matters 
because what I now find I lack is only knowledge 
about a special domain called "reality" that was 
somehow invented only to serve as the inaccessi-
ble realm of something called "real knowledge". 
I simply conclude that I don't really know whether 
colds are caused by sitting in draughts or not. If I 
say in a jury-room on Monday that we can elimi-
nate the suspect because we know he was in 
Cleveland that night, and I then discover by 
reflection on Tuesday that I don't really know he 
was in Cleveland that night, what I am denying I 
have on Tuesday is the very thing I said on Monday 
that I had. 
There is no suggestion in these and countless 
similar everyday cases that somehow in the course 
of our reflections on whether and how we know 
something we are inevitably led to change or ele-
vate our conception of knowledge into something 
else called "real knowledge" which we showed no 
signs of being interested in at the beginning. Nor 
is it plausible to suggest that our ordinary assess-
ments of knowledge somehow lead us to postu-
late a "reality" that is simply an artefact of our 
inquiries about our knowledge. When we ask 
whether we really know something we are simply 
asking whether we know that thing. The "really" 

24 
BARRY STROUD 
signifies that we have had second thoughts on the 
matter, or that we are subjecting it to more careful 
scrutiny, or that knowledge is being contrasted 
with something else, but not that we believe in 
something called "real knowledge" which is dif-
ferent from or more elevated than the ordinary 
knowledge we are interested in. Knowing some-
thing differs from merely believing it or assuming 
it or taking it for granted or simply being under 
the impression that it is true, and so forth, so 
asking whether we really know something is 
asking whether we know it as opposed to, for 
example, merely believing it or assuming it or 
taking it for granted or simply being under the 
impression that it is true. 
If that is true of our ordinary assessments of 
knowledge, and if Descartes's investigation of his 
knowledge that he is sitting by the fire with a piece 
of paper in his hand is just like those ordinary 
cases, his discovery that he doesn't know in the 
case he considers will have the same significance 
as it has in those ordinary cases. And if that exam-
pIe is indeed representative of our knowledge of 
the world around us, the kind of knowledge we 
are shown to lack will be the very kind of knowl-
edge we originally thought we had of things like 
our sitting by the fire holding a piece of paper. 
Without a demonstration that Descartes's philo-
sophical investigation differs from our ordinary 
assessments in some way that prevents its nega-
tive conclusion from having the kind of signifi-
cance similar conclusions are rightly taken to 
have in everyday life, we can derive no consola-
tion from the ungrounded idea that the reality 
from which he shows our knowledge is excluded 
does not or should not concern us anyway. It is 
the investigation of his everyday knowledge, and 
not merely the fanciful picture of a veil of percep-
tion, that generates Descartes's negative verdict. 
But even if we did try to console ourselves 
with the thought that we can settle for what we 
can know on Descartes's account, how much con-
solation could it give us? The position Descartes's 
argument says we are in is much worse than what 
is contemplated in the optimistic response of 
merely shrugging off any concern with an imper-
ceptible "reality". 
For one thing, we would not in fact be left with 
what we have always taken to be the familiar 
objects of our everyday experience - tables and 
chairs, trees and flowers, bread and wine. If 
Descartes is right, we know nothing of such 
things. What we perceive and are in direct sensory 
contact with is never a physical object or state of 
affairs, but only a representation - something that 
could be just the way it is even if there were no 
objects at all of the sort it represents. So if we were 
to settle for the realm of things we could have 
knowledge about even if Descartes's conclusion 
were correct, we would not be settling for the 
comfortable world with which we began. We 
would have lost all of that, at least as something 
we can know anything about, and we would be 
restricted to facts about how things seem to us at 
the moment rather than how they are. 
It might still be felt that after all nothing is cer-
tain in this changing world, so we should not 
aspire to firm truths about how things are. As 
long as we know that all or most of us agree about 
how things seem to us, or have seemed to us up 
till now, we might feel we have enough to give our 
social, cultural, and intellectual life as much sta-
bility as we can reasonably expect or need. But 
again this reaction does not really acknowledge 
the poverty or restrictedness of the position 
Descartes's sceptical conclusion would leave each 
of us in. Strictly speaking, there is no community 
of acting, experiencing and thinking persons I 
can know anything about if Descartes is correct. 
Other people, as I understand them, are not 
simply sensory experiences of mine; they too, if 
they exist, will therefore inhabit the unreachable 
world beyond my sensory experiences, along with 
the tables and chairs and other things about 
which I can know nothing. So at least with respect 
to what I can know I could not console myself 
with thoughts of a like-minded community of 
perceivers all working together and cheerfully 
making do with what a communal veil of percep-
tion provides. I would have no more reason to 
believe that there are any other people than I have 
to believe that I am now sitting in a chair writing. 
The representations or sensory experiences to 
which Descartes's conclusion would restrict my 
knowledge could be no other than my own sen-
sory experiences; there could be no communal 
knowledge even of the veil of perception itself. If 
my own sensory experiences do not make it pos-
sible for me to know things about the world 
around me they do not make it possible for me to 
know even whether there are any other sensory 
experiences or any other perceiving beings at all. 

THE PROBLEM OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
25 
The consequences of accepting Descartes's 
conclusion as it is meant to be understood are 
truly disastrous. There is no easy way of accom-
modating oneself to its profound negative impli-
cations. But perhaps by now we have come far 
enough to feel that the whole idea is simply 
absurd, that ultimately it is not even intelligible, 
Notes 
It has been argued that the problem in the 
completely general form in which I discuss it 
here is new in Descartes, and that nothing 
exactly similar appears in philosophy before 
that time. See M. F. Burnyeat, "Idealism and 
Greek Philosophy: What Descartes Saw and 
Berkely Missed", The Philosophical Review 
(1982). 
2 
See the beginning of the first of his Meditations 
on First Philosophy in The Philosophical 
Works of Descartes, edited and translated by 
and that there can be no question of "accepting" 
Descartes's conclusion at all. I have no wish to 
discourage such a reaction. I would only insist 
that the alleged absurdity or unintelligibility must 
be identified and made out. I think that is the 
only way we can hope to learn whatever there is to 
be learned from Descartes's investigation. 
E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross (2 vols, 
New York, 1955), vol. I, p. 145. (Hereafter cited 
as HR.) 
3 
See his Discourse on the Method of Rightly 
Conducting Reason and Seeking Truth in the 
Sciences in HR, pp. 81 ff. 
4 
See G. E. Moore, "Certainty", this vol., ch. 4. 
5 A memorable example H. H. Price gave in 
a lecture in 1962. It is my impression that 
Price was reporting on an actual hallucination 
of his. 

CHAPTER 2 
Proof of an External World 
G. E. Moore 
It seems to me that, so far from its being true, as 
Kant declares to be his opinion, that there is only 
one possible proof of the existence of things out-
side of us, namely the one which he has given, I 
can now give a large number of different proofs, 
each of which is a perfectly rigorous proof; and 
that at many other times I have been in a position 
to give many others. I can prove now, for instance, 
that two human hands exist. How? By holding up 
my two hands, and saying, as I make a certain ges-
ture with the right hand, "Here is one hand", and 
adding, as I make a certain gesture with the left, 
"and here is another". And if, by doing this, I have 
proved ipso facto the existence of external things, 
you will all see that I can also do it now in num-
bers of other ways: there is no need to multiply 
examples. 
But did I prove just now that two human hands 
were then in existence? I do want to insist that I 
did; that the proof which I gave was a perfectly rig-
orous one; and that it is perhaps impossible to give 
a better or more rigorous proof of anything what-
ever. Of course, it would not have been a proof 
unless three conditions were satisfied; namely (1) 
unless the premiss which I adduced as proof of the 
conclusion was different from the conclusion I 
adduced it to prove; (2) unless the premiss which I 
adduced was something which I knew to be the 
From G. E. Moore, Philosophical Papers (New York: 
Collier Books, 1962), pp. 144-8. 
case, and not merely something which I believed 
but which was by no means certain, or something 
which, though in fact true, I did not know to be so; 
and (3) unless the conclusion did really follow 
from the premiss. But all these three conditions 
were in fact satisfied by my proof. (1) The premiss 
which I adduced in proof was quite certainly dif-
ferent from the conclusion, for the conclusion was 
merely "Two human hands exist at this moment"; 
but the premiss was something far more specific 
than this - something which I expressed by show-
ing you my hands, making certain gestures, and 
saying the words "Here is one hand, and here is 
another". It is quite obvious that the two were dif-
ferent, because it is quite obvious that the conclu-
sion might have been true, even if the premiss had 
been false. In asserting the premiss I was asserting 
much more than I was asserting in asserting the 
conclusion. (2) I certainly did at the moment know 
that which I expressed by the combination of cer-
tain gestures with saying the words "Here is one 
hand and here is another': I knew that there was 
one hand in the place indicated by combining a 
certain gesture with my first utterance of "here" 
and that there was another in the different place 
indicated by combining a certain gesture with my 
second utterance of "here". How absurd it would 
be to suggest that I did not know it, but only 
believed it, and that perhaps it was not the case! 
You might as well suggest that I do not know that I 
am now standing up and talking - that perhaps 
after all I'm not, and that it's not quite certain that 

PROOF OF AN EXTERNAL WORLD 
27 
1 am! And finally (3) it is quite certain that the con-
clusion did follow from the premiss. This is as cer-
tain as it is that if there is one hand here and 
another here now, then it follows that there are two 
hands in existence now. 
My proof, then, of the existence of things 
outside of us did satisfy three of the conditions 
necessary for a rigorous proof. Are there any other 
conditions necessary for a rigorous proof, such 
that perhaps it did not satisfy one of them? Perhaps 
there may be; 1 do not know; but 1 do want to 
emphasise that, so far as 1 can see, we all of us do 
constantly take proofs of this sort as absolutely 
conclusive proofs of certain conclusions -
as 
finally settling certain questions, as to which we 
were previously in doubt. Suppose, for instance, it 
were a question whether there were as many as 
three misprints on a certain page in a certain book. 
A says there are, B is inclined to doubt it. How 
could A prove that he is right? Surely he could 
prove it by taking the book, turning to the page, 
and pointing to three separate places on it, saying 
"There's one misprint here, another here, and 
another here": surely that is a method by which it 
might be proved! Of course, A would not have 
proved, by doing this, that there were at least three 
misprints on the page in question, unless it was 
certain that there was a misprint in each of the 
places to which he pointed. But to say that he 
might prove it in this way, is to say that it might be 
certain that there was. And if such a thing as that 
could ever be certain, then assuredly it was certain 
just now that there was one hand in one of the two 
places 1 indicated and another in the other. 
1 did, then, just now, give a proof that there 
were then external objects; and obviously, if 1 did, 
1 could then have given many other proofs of the 
same sort that there were external objects then, 
and could now give many proofs of the same sort 
that there are external objects now. 
But, if what 1 am asked to do is to prove that 
external objects have existed in the past, then 1 can 
give many different proofs of this also, but proofs 
which are in important respects of a different sort 
from those just given. And 1 want to emphasise 
that, when Kant says it is a scandal not to be able 
to give a proof of the existence of external objects, 
a proof of their existence in the past would cer-
tainly help to remove the scandal of which he is 
speaking. He says that, if it occurs to anyone to 
question their existence, we ought to be able to 
confront him with a satisfactory proof. But by a 
person who questions their existence, he certainly 
means not merely a person who questions 
whether any exist at the moment of speaking, but 
a person who questions whether any have ever 
existed; and a proof that some have existed in the 
past would certainly therefore be relevant to part 
of what such a person is questioning. How then 
can 1 prove that there have been external objects 
in the past? Here is one proof. 1 can say: "I held up 
two hands above this desk not very long ago; 
therefore two hands existed not very long 
ago; therefore at least two external objects have 
existed at some time in the past, QED". This is a 
perfectly good proof, provided 1 know what is 
asserted in the premiss. But 1 do know that 1 held 
up two hands above this desk not very long ago. 
As a matter of fact, in this case you all know it toO. 
There's no doubt whatever that 1 did. Therefore 
1 have given a perfectly conclusive proof that 
external objects have existed in the past; and you 
will all see at once that, if this is a conclusive 
proof, 1 could have given many others of the same 
sort, and could now give many others. But it is 
also quite obvious that this sort of proof differs in 
important respects from the sort of proof 1 gave 
just now that there were two hands existing then. 
1 have, then, given two conclusive proofs of the 
existence of external objects. The first was a proof 
that two human hands existed at the time when 1 
gave the proof; the second was a proof that two 
human hands had existed at a time previous to 
that at which 1 gave the proof. These proofs were 
of a different sort in important respects. And 1 
pointed out that 1 could have given, then, many 
other conclusive proofs of both sorts. It is also 
obvious that 1 could give many others of both 
sorts now. So that, if these are the sort of proof 
that is wanted, nothing is easier than to prove the 
existence of external objects. 
But now 1 am perfectly well aware that, in 
spite of all that 1 have said, many philosophers 
will still feel that 1 have not given any satisfactory 
proof of the point in question. And 1 want briefly, 
in conclusion, to say something as to why this dis-
satisfaction with my proofs should be felt. 
One reason why, is, 1 think, this. Some people 
understand "proof of an external world" as includ-
ing a proof of things which 1 haven't attempted to 
prove and haven't proved. It is not quite easy to 
say what it is that they want proved - what it is 

28 
G. E. MOORE 
that is such that unless they got a proof of it, they 
would not say that they had a proof of the exist-
ence of external things; but I can make an 
approach to explaining what they want by saying 
that if I had proved the propositions which I used 
as premisses in my two proofs, then they would 
perhaps admit that I had proved the existence of 
external things, but, in the absence of such a proof 
(which, of course, I have neither given nor 
attempted to give), they will say that I have not 
given what they mean by a proof of the existence 
of external things. In other words, they want a 
proof of what I assert now when I hold up my 
hands and say "Here's one hand and here's 
another"; and, in the other case, they want a proof 
of what I assert now when I say "I did hold up two 
hands above this desk just now". Of course, what 
they really want is not merely a proof of these two 
propositions, but something like a general state-
ment as to how any propositions of this sort may 
be proved. This, of course, I haven't given; and I 
do not believe it can be given: if this is what is 
meant by proof of the existence of external things, 
I do not believe that any proof of the existence of 
external things is possible. Of course, in some 
cases what might be called a proof of proposi-
tions which seem like these can be got. If one of 
you suspected that one of my hands was artificial 
he might be said to get a proof of my proposition 
"Here's one hand, and here's another': by coming 
up and examining the suspected hand close up, 
perhaps touching and pressing it, and so estab-
lishing that it really was a human hand. But I do 
not believe that any proof is possible in nearly all 
cases. How am I to prove now that "Here's one 
hand, and here's another"? I do not believe I can 
do it. In order to do it, I should need to prove for 
one thing, as Descartes pointed out, that I am not 
now dreaming. But how can I prove that I am 
not? I have, no doubt, conclusive reasons for 
asserting that I am not now dreaming; I have con-
clusive evidence that I am awake: but that is 
a very different thing from being able to prove it. 
I could not tell you what all my evidence is; and I 
should require to do this at least, in order to give 
you a proof. 
But another reason why some people would 
feel dissatisfied with my proofs is, I think, not 
merely that they want a proof of something which 
I haven't proved, but that they think that, if I 
cannot give such extra proofs, then the proofs that 
I have given are not conclusive proofs at all. And 
this, I think, is a definite mistake. They would say: 
"If you cannot prove your premiss that here is one 
hand and here is another, then you do not know it. 
But you yourself have admitted that, if you did not 
know it, then your proof was not conclusive. 
Therefore your proof was not, as you say it was, 
a conclusive proof." This view that, if I cannot 
prove such things as these, I do not know them, is, 
I think, the view that Kant was expressing in the 
sentence which I quoted at the beginning of this 
lecture, when he implies that so long as we have 
no proof of the existence of external things, their 
existence must be accepted merely on faith. He 
means to say, I think, that if I cannot prove that 
there is a hand here, I must accept it merely as a 
matter of faith - I cannot know it. Such a view, 
though it has been very common among philoso-
phers, can, I think, be shown to be wrong - though 
shown only by the use of premisses which are not 
known to be true, unless we do know of the exist-
ence of external things. I can know things, which I 
cannot prove; and among things which I certainly 
did know, even if (as I think) I could not prove 
them, were the premisses of my two proofs. 
I should say, therefore, that those, if any, who are 
dissatisfied with these proofs merely on the 
ground that I did not know their premisses, have 
no good reason for their dissatisfaction. 

CHAPTER 3 
Four Forms of Scepticism 
G. E. Moore 
We pass next to the argument: "Descartes's malicious 
demon is a logical possibility:' This is obviously quite 
different from both the two preceding. Russell does 
not say that any percepts are produced by Descartes's 
malicious demon; nor does he mean that it is practi-
cally or theoretically possible for Descartes's mali-
cious demon to produce in me percepts like this, in 
the sense in which it is (perhaps) practically possible 
that a conjurer should, and theoretically possible 
that a physiologist should by stimulating the optic 
nerve. He only says it is a logical possibility. But what 
exactly does this mean? It is, I think, an argument 
which introduces quite new considerations, of 
which I have said nothing so far, and which lead us 
to the root of the difference between Russell and me. 
I take it that Russell is here asserting that it is logically 
possible that this particular percept of mine, which I 
think I know to be associated with a percept belong-
ing to someone else, was in fact produced in me by a 
malicious demon when there was no such associ-
ated percept: and that, therefore, I cannot know for 
certain what I think I know. It is, of course, being 
assumed that, if it was produced by a malicious 
demon, then it follows that it is not associated with 
a percept belonging to someone else, in the way in 
which I think I know it is: that is how the phrase 
"was produced by a malicious demon" is being used. 
The questions we have to consider are, then, simply 
From G. E. Moore, Philosophical Papers (New York: 
Collier Books, 1962), pp. 220-2. 
these three: What is meant by saying that it is logically 
possible that this percept was produced by a malicious 
demon? Is it true that this is logically possible? And: 
If it is true, does it follow that I don't know for cer-
tain that it was not produced by a malicious 
demon? 
Now there are three different things which 
might be meant by saying that this proposition is 
logically possible. The first is that it is not a self-
contradictory proposition. This I readily grant. 
But from the mere fact that it is not self-contra-
dictory, it certainly does not follow that I don't 
know for certain that it is false. This Russell 
grants. He holds that I do know for certain to be 
false, propositions about my percepts which are 
not self-contradictory. He holds, for instance, that 
I do know for certain that there is a white visual 
percept now; and yet the proposition that there 
isn't is certainly not self-contradictory. 
He must, therefore, in his argument, be using 
"logically possible" in some other sense. And one 
sense in which it might naturally be used is this: 
Not logically incompatible with anything that I 
know. If, however, he were using it in this sense, 
he would be simply begging the question. For the 
very thing I am claiming to know is that this 
percept was not produced by a malicious demon: 
and of course the proposition that it was produced 
by a malicious demon is incompatible with the 
proposition that it was not. 
There remains one sense, which is, I think, the 
sense in which he is actually using it. Namely he is 

30 
G. E. MOORE 
saying: The proposition "This percept was pro-
duced by a malicious demon" is not logically 
incompatible with anything you know immedi-
ately. And if this is what he means, I own that I 
think Russell is right. This is a matter about 
which I suppose many philosophers would disa-
gree with us. There are people who suppose that I 
do know immediately, in certain cases, such things 
as: That person is conscious; at least, they use this 
language, though whether they mean exactly what 
I am here meaning by "know immediately" may 
be doubted. I can, however, not help agreeing 
with Russell that I never do know immediately 
that that person is conscious, nor anything else 
that is logically incompatible with "This percept 
was produced by a malicious demon." Where, 
therefore, I differ from him is in supposing that I 
do know for certain things which I do not know 
immediately and which also do not follow logi-
cally from anything which I do know immediately. 
This seems to me to be the fundamental ques-
tion at issue in considering my classes (3) and (4) 
and what distinguishes them from cases (1) and 
(2). I think I do know immediately things about 
myself and such things as "There was a sound like 
'Russell' a little while ago" - that is, I think that 
memory is immediate knowledge and that much 
of my knowledge about myself is immediate. But 
I cannot help agreeing with Russell that I never 
know immediately such a thing as "That person is 
conscious" or "This is a pencil," and that also the 
truth of such propositions never follows logically 
from anything which I do know immediately, and 
yet I think that I do know such things for certain. 
Has he any argument for his view that if their 
falsehood is logically possible (i.e. if I do not know 
immediately anything logically incompatible with 
their falsehood) then I do not know them for cer-
tain? This is a thing which he certainly constantly 
assumes; but I cannot find that he anywhere gives 
any distinct arguments for it. 
So far as I can gather, his reasons for holding it 
are the two assumptions which he expresses when 
he says: "If (I am to reject the view that my life is 
one long dream) I must do so on the basis of an 
analogical or inductive argument, which cannot 
Note 
Bertrand Russell, An Outline of Philosophy 
(Allen & Unwin: London, 1927), p. 218. 
give complete certainty."] That is to say he 
assumes: (1) My belief or knowledge that this is a 
pencil is, if I do not know it immediately, and if 
also the proposition does not follow logically 
from anything that I know immediately, in some 
sense "based on" an analogical or inductive argu-
ment; and (2) What is "based on" an analogical or 
inductive argument is never certain knowledge, 
but only more or less probable belief. And with 
regard to these assumptions, it seems to me that 
the first must be true in some sense or other, 
though it seems to me terribly difficult to say 
exactly what the sense is. What I am inclined to 
dispute, therefore, is the second: I am inclined 
to think that what is "based on" an analogical or 
inductive argument, in the sense in which my 
knowledge or belief that this is a pencil is so, 
may nevertheless be certain knowledge and not 
merely more or less probable belief. 
What I want, however, finally to emphasize is 
this: Russell's view that I do not know for certain 
that this is a pencil or that you are conscious 
rests, if I am right, on no less than four distinct 
assumptions: (1) That I don't know these things 
immediately; (2) That they don't follow logically 
from any thing or things that I do know immedi-
ately; (3) That, if (1) and (2) are true, my belief in 
or knowledge of them must be "based on an ana-
logical or inductive argument"; and (4) That what is 
so based cannot be certain knowledge. And what 
I can't help asking myself is this: Is it, in fact, as 
certain that all these four assumptions are true, as 
that I do know that this is a pencil and that you are 
conscious? I cannot help answering: It seems to 
me more certain that I do know that this is a pencil 
and that you are conscious, than that any single 
one of these four assumptions is true, let alone all 
four. That is to say, though, as I have said, I agree 
with Russell that (1), (2) and (3) are true; yet of 
no one even of these three do I feel as certain as 
that I do know for certain that this is a pencil. Nay 
more: I do not think it is rational to be as certain 
of anyone of these four propositions, as of the 
proposition that I do know that this is a pencil. 
And how on earth is it to be decided which of the 
two things it is rational to be most certain of? 

CHAPTER 4 
Certainty 
G. E. Moore 
Suppose I say: "I know for certain that I am standing 
up; it is absolutely certain that I am; there is not 
the smallest chance that I am not:' Many philoso-
phers would say: "You are wrong: you do not 
know that you are standing up; it is not absolutely 
certain that you are; there is some chance, though 
perhaps only a very small one, that you are not." 
And one argument which has been used as an 
argument in favour of saying this, is an argument 
in the course of which the philosopher who used 
it would assert: "You do not know for certain that 
you are not dreaming; it is not absolutely certain 
that you are not; there is some chance, though 
perhaps only a very small one, that you are." And 
from this, that I do not know for certain that I am 
not dreaming, it is supposed to follow that I do 
not know for certain that I am standing up. It is 
argued: If it is not certain that you are not dream-
ing, then it is not certain that you are standing up. 
And that if I don't know that I'm not dreaming, 
I also don't know that I'm not sitting down, 
I don't feel at all inclined to dispute. From the 
hypothesis that I am dreaming, it would, I think, 
certainly follow that I don't know that I am stand-
ing up; though I have never seen the matter argued, 
and though it is not at all clear to me how it is to be 
proved that it would follow. But, on the other 
hand, from the hypothesis that I am dreaming, 
From G. E. Moore, Philosophical Papers (New York: 
Collier Books, 1962), pp. 240-6. 
it certainly would not follow that I am not stand-
ing up; for it is certainly logically possible that a 
man should be fast asleep and dreaming, while he 
is standing up and not lying down. It is therefore 
logically possible that I should both be standing 
up and also at the same time dreaming that I am; 
just as the story, about a well-known Duke of 
Devonshire, that he once dreamt that he was 
speaking in the House of Lords and, when he 
woke up, found that he was speaking in the House 
of Lords, is certainly logically possible. And if, as 
is commonly assumed, when I am dreaming that I 
am standing up it may also be correct to say that I am 
thinking that I am standing up, then it follows 
that the hypothesis that I am now dreaming is 
quite consistent with the hypothesis that I am 
both thinking that I am standing up and also 
actually standing up. And hence, if as seems to me 
to be certainly the case and as this argument 
assumes, from the hypothesis that I am now 
dreaming it would follow that I don't know that I 
am standing up, there follows a point which is of 
great importance with regard to our use of the 
word "knowledge" and therefore also of the word 
"certainly" - a point which has been made quite 
conclusively more than once by Russell, namely 
that from the conjunction of the two facts that a 
man thinks that a given proposition p is true, and 
that p is in fact true, it does not follow that the 
man in question knows that p is true: in order that 
I may be justified in saying that I know that I am 
standing up, something more is required than the 

32 
G. E. MOORE 
mere conjunction of the two facts that I both 
think I am and actually am - as Russell has 
expressed it, true belief is not identical with 
knowledge; and I think we may further add that 
even from the conjunction of the two facts that I 
feel certain that I am and that I actually am it 
would not follow that I know that I am, nor there-
fore that it is certain that I am. As regards the 
argument drawn from the fact that a man who 
dreams that he is standing up and happens at the 
moment actually to be standing up will neverthe-
less not know that he is standing up, it should 
indeed be noted that from the fact that a man is 
dreaming that he is standing up, it certainly does 
not follow that he thinks he is standing up; since it 
does sometimes happen in a dream that we think 
that it is a dream, and a man who thought this 
certainly might, although he was dreaming that 
he was standing up, yet think that he was not, 
although he could not know that he was not. It is 
not therefore the case, as might be hastily assumed, 
that, if I dream that I am standing up at a time 
when I am in fact lying down, I am necessarily 
deceived: I should be deceived only if I thought I 
was standing when I wasn't; and I may dream that 
I am, without thinking that I am. It certainly does, 
however, often happen that we do dream that so-
and-so is the case, without at the time thinking 
that we are only dreaming; and in such cases, 
I think we may perhaps be said to think that what 
we dream is the case is the case, and to be deceived 
if it is not the case; and therefore also, in such 
cases, if what we dream to be the case happens 
also to be the case, we may be said to be thinking 
truly that it is the case, although we certainly do 
not know that it is. 
I agree, therefore, with that part of this argu-
ment which asserts that if I don't know now that 
I'm not dreaming, it follows that I don't know that 
I am standing up, even if I both actually am and 
think that I am. But this first part of the argument 
is a consideration which cuts both ways. For, if it 
is true, it follows that it is also true that if I do 
know that I am standing up, then I do know that 
I am not dreaming. I can therefore just as well 
argue: since I do know that I'm standing up, it fol-
lows that I do know that I'm not dreaming; as my 
opponent can argue: since you don't know that 
you're not dreaming, it follows that you don't 
know that you're standing up. The one argument 
is just as good as the other, unless my opponent 
can give better reasons for asserting that I don't 
know that I'm not dreaming, than I can give for 
asserting that I do know that I am standing up. 
What reasons can be given for saying that I 
don't know for certain that I'm not at this moment 
dreaming? 
I do not think that I have ever seen clearly 
stated any argument which is supposed to show 
this. But I am going to try to state, as clearly as I 
can, the premisses and the reasonings from them, 
which I think have led so many philosophers to 
suppose that I really cannot now know for certain 
that I am not dreaming. 
I said, you may remember, in talking of the 
seven assertions with which I opened this lecture, 
that I had "the evidence of my senses" for them, 
though I also said that I didn't think this was the 
only evidence I had for them, nor that this by itself 
was necessarily conclusive evidence. Now if I had 
then "the evidence of my senses" in favour of the 
proposition that I was standing up, I certainly have 
now the evidence of my senses in favour of the 
proposition that I am standing up, even though 
this may not be all the evidence that I have, and 
may not be conclusive. But have I, in fact, the evi-
dence of my senses at all in favour of this proposi-
tion? One thing seems to me to be quite clear 
about our use of this phrase, namely, that, if a man 
at a given time is only dreaming that he is standing 
up, then it follows that he has not at that time the 
evidence of his senses in favour of that proposi-
tion: to say "Jones last night was only dreaming 
that he was standing up, and yet all the time he 
had the evidence of his senses that he was" is to say 
something self-contradictory. But those philoso-
phers who say it is possible that I am now dream-
ing, certainly mean to say also that it is possible 
that I am only dreaming that I am standing up; and 
this view, we now see, entails that it is possible that 
I have not the evidence of my senses that I am. 
If, therefore, they are right, it follows that it is not 
certain even that I have the evidence of my senses 
that I am; it follows that it is not certain that I have 
the evidence of my senses for anything at all. If, 
therefore, I were to say now, that I certainly have 
the evidence of my senses in favour of the propo-
sition that I am standing up, even if it's not certain 
that I am standing up, I should be begging the very 
question now at issue. For if it is not certain that I 
am not dreaming, it is not certain that I even have 
the evidence of my senses that I am standing up. 

CERTAINTY 
33 
But, now, even if it is not certain that I have at 
this moment the evidence of my senses for any-
thing at all, it is quite certain that I either have the 
evidence of my senses that I am standing up or 
have an experience which is very like having the 
evidence of my senses that I am standing up. If I 
am dreaming, this experience consists in having 
dream-images which are at least very like the sen-
sations I should be having if I were awake and had 
the sensations, the having of which would consti-
tute "having the evidence of my senses" that I am 
standing up. Let us use the expression "sensory 
experience;' in such a way that this experience 
which I certainly am having will be a "sensory 
experience," whether or not it merely consists in 
the having of dream-images. If we use the expres-
sion "sensory experience" in this way, we can say, 
I think, that, if it is not certain that I am not 
dreaming now, then it is not certain that all the 
sensory experiences I am now having are not 
mere dream-images. 
What then are the premisses and the reason-
ings which would lead so many philosophers to 
think that all the sensory experiences I am having 
now may be mere dream-images - that I do not 
know for certain that they are not? 
So far as I can see, one premiss which they 
would certainly use would be this: "Some at least 
of the sensory experiences which you are having 
now are similar in important respects to dream-
images which actually have occurred in dreams:' 
This seems a very harmless premiss, and I am 
quite willing to admit that it is true. But I think 
there is a very serious objection to the procedure 
of using it as a premiss in favour of the derived 
conclusion. For a philosopher who does use it as a 
premiss, is, I think, in fact implying, though he 
does not expressly say, that he himself knows it to 
be true. He is implying therefore that he himself 
knows that dreams have occurred. And, of course, 
I think he would be right. All the philosophers I 
have ever met or heard of certainly did know that 
dreams have occurred: we all know that dreams 
have occurred. But can he consistently combine 
this proposition that he knows that dreams have 
occurred, with his conclusion that he does not 
know that he is not dreaming? Can anybody pos-
sibly know that dreams have occurred, if, at the 
time, he does not himself know that he is not 
dreaming? If he is dreaming, it may be that he is 
only dreaming that dreams have occurred; and if 
he does not know that he is not dreaming, can he 
possibly know that he is not only dreaming that 
dreams have occurred? Can he possibly know 
therefore that dreams have occurred? I do not 
think that he can; and therefore I think that 
anyone who uses this premiss and also asserts the 
conclusion that nobody ever knows that he is not 
dreaming, is guilty of an inconsistency. By using 
this premiss he implies that he himself knows that 
dreams have occurred; while, if his conclusion is 
true, it follows that he himself does not know that 
he is not dreaming, and therefore does not know 
that he is not only dreaming that dreams have 
occurred. 
However, I admit that the premiss is true. Let 
us now try to see by what sort of reasoning it 
might be thought that we could get from it to the 
conclusion. 
I do not see how we can get forward in that 
direction at all, unless we first take the following 
huge step, unless we say, namely: since there have 
been dream-images similar in important respects 
to some of the sensory experiences I am now 
having, it is logically possible that there should be 
dream-images exactly like all the sensory experi-
ences I am now having, and logically possible, 
therefore, that all the sensory experiences I am 
now having are mere dream-images. And it might 
be thought that the validity of this step could be 
supported to some extent by appeal to matters of 
fact, though only, of course, at the cost of the same 
sort of inconsistency which I have just pointed 
out. It might be said, for instance, that some 
people have had dream-images which were exactly 
like sensory experiences which they had when 
they were awake, and that therefore it must be 
logically possible to have a dream-image exactly 
like a sensory experience which is not a dream-
image. And then it may be said: If it is logically 
possible for some dream-images to be exactly like 
sensory experiences which are not dream-images, 
surely it must be logically possible for all the 
dream-images occurring in a dream at a given 
time to be exactly like sensory experiences which 
are not dream-images, and logically possible also 
for all the sensory experiences which a man has at 
a given time when he is awake to be exactly like all 
the dream-images which he himself or another 
man had in a dream at another time. 
Now I cannot see my way to deny that it is 
logically possible that all the sensory experiences 

34 
G. E. MOORE 
I am having now should be mere dream-images. 
And if this is logically possible, and if further the 
sensory experiences I am having now were the 
only experiences I am having, I do not see how 
I could possibly know for certain that I am not 
dreaming. 
But the conjunction of my memories of the 
immediate past with these sensory experiences 
may be sufficient to enable me to know that I am 
not dreaming. I say it may be. But what if our 
sceptical philosopher says: It is not sufficient; 
and offers as an argument to prove that it is not, 
this: It is logically possible both that you should 
be having all the sensory experiences you are 
having, and also that you should be remember-
ing what you do remember, and yet should be 
dreaming. If this is logically possible, then I don't 
see how to deny that I cannot possibly know for 
certain that I am not dreaming: I do not see that 
I possibly could. But can any reason be given 
for saying that it is logically possible? So far as 
I know nobody ever has, and I don't know how 
anybody ever could. And so long as this is not 
done my argument, "I know that I am standing 
up, and therefore I know that I am not dream-
ing," remains at least as good as his, "You don't 
know that you are not dreaming, and therefore 
don't know that you are standing up." And I 
don't think I've ever seen an argument expressly 
directed to show that it is not. 
One final point should be made clear. It is 
certainly logically possible that I should have been 
dreaming now; I might have been dreaming now; 
and therefore the proposition that I am dreaming 
now is not self-contradictory. But what I am in 
doubt of is whether it is logically possible that I 
should both be having all the sensory experiences 
and the memories that I have and yet be dream-
ing. The conjunction of the proposition that I 
have these sense experiences and memories with 
the proposition that I am dreaming does seem to 
me to be very likely self-contradictory. 

CHAPTER 5 
How a Pyrrhonian Skeptic 
Might Respond to 
Academic Skepticism 
Peter Klein 
How much do we know? My answer is that we do 
not know what the extent of our knowledge is. 
But since that answer is not immediately evident 
it will require us to employ our reasoning. Thus, 
the question really becomes this: can our reason-
ing ever give a definitive reply to the question 
about the extent of our knowledge? And that is 
just a specific instance of the general question: is 
our reasoning able to settle anything, where some 
claim is settled by reasoning just in case no further 
reasons are required to make the proposition 
completely justified? It is crucial to note that in 
the way in which I will be using "completely justi-
fied"; a proposition could be completely justified 
and false. Hence, I am not asking whether reason-
ing is infallible. In addition, a proposition could 
be completely justified and defeasible. Hence, I 
am not asking whether reasoning can produce 
indefeasible justifications. The question is whether 
reasoning - the process of producing reasons for 
our beliefs - is ever such that further, as yet 
unused, reasons cannot be legitimately required. 
Although I will be arguing that reasoning 
cannot settle anything, there is a rather quick and 
dirty argument to that same conclusion that 
might seem obviously correct which I wish to 
Originally published in Steven Loper (ed.), The 
Skeptics: Contemporary Essays (Aldershot: Ashgate, 
2003), pp. 75-94. 
reject at the outset. It is this: any argument for 
the claim that reasoning can settle matters will, 
of necessity, beg the question because one is 
employing the very capacity that is at issue in the 
argument. 
Now, some might respond to that argument 
by saying that some circular reasoning is permis-
sible - especially if it is logically impossible to 
avoid it. 1 But I believe all circular reasoning to a 
disputed conclusion that has no warrant aside 
from that provided by the argument is fallacious 
(more about this later). Thus, if "reasoning can 
settle matters" were undisputed and had some 
prima facie warrant not dependent upon an argu-
ment (or arguments), then perhaps the fact that it 
cohered with other propositions could raise its 
warrant. But I take it that neither of those condi-
tions obtains. Since the pre-Socratics, the ability 
of reasoning to settle matters has been contested, 
and whatever warrant a favourable assessment 
of reasoning has derives from an argument (or 
arguments). Thus, if the argument(s) for the 
claim that reasoning can settle matters employed 
that very proposition as a premise, that argument 
(or those arguments) could provide no basis for 
thinking that our methods of arriving at beliefs 
can settle matters.2 
But why should one think that all arguments 
to the conclusion that good reasoning is reliable 
must employ that proposition as a premise? Here 
is an argument that does not do that: 

36 
PETER KLEIN 
Good reasoning satisfies conditions C. 
2 Anything satisfying conditions C can settle 
matters. 
3 Therefore, good reasoning can settle matters. 
Is that argument circular? No. No premise 
employs the conclusion. And I can see no reason 
why a sub-argument for either premise (1) or for 
premise (2) must employ (3) in one of its premises 
and so on. I think that there might be such an 
argument with true premises that can provide us 
with some reasons for thinking that reasoning 
can settle matters (but those reasons would not 
settle whether reasoning settles matters). 
So, what would lead anyone to think that such 
arguments must be circular? The answer, I 
believe, is that any prudent person who believes 
(3) will employ what he/she takes to be good 
reasoning in fashioning the argument for (3). 
But doing so does not commit the fallacy of cir-
cular reasoning. Indeed, doing so makes one's 
practices consistent with one's beliefs. As we will 
see, satisfying the belief/practice consistency 
requirement is a problem for the foundationalist 
but not for a type of skeptic - the Pyrrhonian 
type. My point here is that were I not to use what 
I took to be good reasoning in arguing for (3), I 
would legitimately be accused of not practising 
what I preach. 
Nevertheless, I do believe (but am not pre-
pared to say that I know) that our reasoning 
cannot settle anything, including the question 
about the extent of our knowledge. Pessimism, 
however, is not the proper response to that assess-
ment of the power of reasoning. I value reason-
ing, as I think we all do. (The "we" in the previous 
sentence means "adult human beings".) What we 
value is having good enough reasons for our 
(actual) beliefs so that it is (i) more reasonable to 
hold them than to withhold them and (ii) more 
reasonable to hold them than to hold any con-
trary propositions. We might not value having 
such good reasons above all other things - like 
faith, or the pursuit of evil, or the satisfaction of 
our appetites. But even the religious, the wicked 
or the hedonist value reasoning instrumentally 
because they want their beliefs to be efficacious 
and they believe that reasoning will assist them in 
achieving that goal. 
Wanting good enough reasons is one thing, 
but if we begin inquiry with the hope or expectation 
that reasoning can settle matters, pessimism or 
dogmatism will be the likely result. Pessimism, if 
we believe that our goal hasn't yet been satisfied; 
dogmatism, if we believe that our goal has been 
reached because we might then refuse to inquire 
further thinking that only misleading new 
information could be uncovered. 3 But if we set 
what I think is the only realistic goal, namely pro-
visionally justified belief, that is belief in a propo-
sition that, as far as we have reasoned satisfies (i) 
and (ii) above, we can - and at least sometimes 
will - recognize that further inquiry is always 
appropriate. 
Thus, this chapter can be seen as a defence of a 
form ofPyrrhonism (named after Pyrrho, c.300 Be) 
which endorses neither the claim that we have 
knowledge nor the claim that we do not 
have knowledge. This must be carefully distin-
guished from the more common form of skepti-
cism that many, if not most, contemporary 
philosophers find interesting primarily because it 
seems to them to be both highly implausible and 
perniciously difficult to reject once the argument 
for it is investigated. That form of skepticism has 
been called "Academic skepticism" because it was 
endorsed by members of the Late Academy 
founded by Plato, "Cartesian skepticism" because 
of the arguments investigated by Descartes and 
his critics in the mid-seventeenth century, and 
"switched world" skepticism by contemporary 
philosophers because it involves imaging oneself 
to be in some possible world that is both vastly 
different from the actual world and at the same 
time absolutely indistinguishable (at least by us) 
from the actual world. I will most often use 
"Academic skepticism" but in order to avoid wea-
risome repetition, I will occasionally refer to the 
same view with one of the other labels. Its central 
claim is that we do not (in fact, cannot) have 
knowledge or any type of justified belief - even 
provisionally justified belief. I will examine the 
standard argument for Academic skepticism from 
the Pyrrhonian perspective in order to illustrate 
my general claim that reasoning cannot settle 
matters. 
Academic Skepticism 
Here is a way of stating the standard argument for 
Academic skepticism:4 

HOW A PYRRHONIAN SKEPTIC MIGHT RESPOND 
37 
If a person, say S, is justified (to some positive 
degree, d) in believing that there is a table 
before her, then S is justified (to degree d) in 
believing that she is not in one of the skeptical 
scenarios in which there is no table but it 
appears just as though there were one. 
2 S is never justified (to degree d) in believing 
that she is not in one of the skeptical scenarios 
in which there is no table but it appears just as 
though there were one. 
Therefore, S is never justified (to degree d) III 
believing that there is a table before her. 
This is deeply puzzling because it appears that the 
premises are true, that the argument is valid (that 
is, it is not possible for the premises to be true and 
the conclusion false) but, at the same time, the 
conclusion appears false. Further, it seems that 
there are only three possible responses: (1) deny at 
least one premise of the argument; (2) deny that 
the argument is valid; (3) accept the conclusion.5 
None of those options seems initially promising. 
The belief that we have no knowledge seems 
preposterous and the argument certainly seems 
valid. Thus, the strategy of choice for rejecting 
Academic skepticism has been to deny at least one 
of the premises. But the prospects of finding a 
basis for rejecting a premise are dim because, on 
close inspection, the arguments for doing so seem 
to rest on assumptions that are both unmotivated 
and ones which the Academic skeptic should 
reject. There are many types of those arguments, 
but I will consider only one type in order merely 
to illustrate my point (as opposed to demonstrat-
ing it). I chose this argument against Academic 
skepticism because it has struck many as the most 
plausible and also because investigating it will 
prove to be very useful later. 
To unbag the cat now: I do not think that there 
is a good response available within the three alter-
natives just mentioned but I will propose a fourth 
alternative response to Academic skepticism that 
employs the general considerations about the 
limits of reasoning which I will be exploring. But, 
for now, let us focus on what I think is the most 
plausible argument against Cartesian skepticism 
that can be given within the three options listed 
above. 
It is an argument based upon some sup-
posed counter-examples to the general principle 
underlying premise 1. That principle, called the 
closure principle, goes like this: 
Closure principle: if someone, say S, is justified 
(to any positive degree, d) in believing some 
proposition, say p, and if p strictly implies 
another proposition, say q, then S is justified 
in believing (to degree d) that q. 
The issue is: does closure hold for justified belief? 
Closure certainly does hold for some properties, 
for example truth. If p is true and it strictly implies 
q, then q is true. It just as clearly does not hold for 
other properties. If p is a belief of mine, and p 
strictly implies q, it does not follow that q is a belief 
of mine. For I might fail to see the implication or I 
simply might be epistemically perverse or I might 
be "wired" incorrectly (from birth or as the result 
of an injury). I might, for example, believe all of 
the axioms of Euclidean plane geometry, but fail to 
believe (or perhaps even refuse to believe) that the 
exterior angle of a triangle is equivalent to the sum 
of the two opposite interior angles. 
Since closure does not hold for belief, it prob-
ably doesn't hold for justified belief when that 
entails that S actually has the belief. 6 In addition, 
since a necessary truth is entailed by every propo-
sition, if S were justified in believing any proposi-
tion, then S would be justified in believing every 
necessary truth. But these are matters of detail 
and the principle can be repaired to account for 
these minor problems. We could, for example, 
restrict the range of the propositions justifiably 
believed to contingent ones, and we could restrict 
the entailments to known ones, and we could 
stipulate that S could be justified in believing that 
p without actually believing that p. The real issue 
is this: does closure hold for what we are entitled 
to believe (even if we don't, in fact, believe it)? 
It certainly seems that it does. For ifI am enti-
tled to believe p and p strictly implies q, then how 
could I fail to be entitled to believe q? If, for exam-
ple, I am justified in believing that today is 
Wednesday, then I must be justified in believing 
that it is not Thursday. Nevertheless, the principle 
has been challenged. Consider this much dis-
cussed counter-example to the closure principle 
developed by Fred Dretske: 
something's being a zebra implies that it is not a 
mule ... cleverly disguised by the zoo authorities 

38 
PETER KLEIN 
to look like a zebra. Do you know that these ani-
mals are not mules cleverly disguised? If you are 
tempted to say "Yes" to this question, think a 
moment about what reasons you have, what 
evidence you can produce in favor of this claim. 
The evidence you had for thinking them zebras 
has been effectively neutralized, since it does not 
count toward their not being mules cleverly 
disguised to look like zebras. (1970, pp. 1015-16) 
Dretske is speaking of "knowledge" rather than 
beliefs to which one is entitled, but that seems irrel-
evant since the issue concerns the supposed lack of 
sufficient evidence or reasons for the claim that the 
animal is not a cleverly disguised mule.7 In other 
words, Dretske grants that there is an adequate 
source of justification for the claim that the animal 
is a zebra, but he claims that the adequate source of 
evidence that you have for identifying the animals 
as zebras is not an adequate source for determining 
that they are not cleverly disguised mules. 
The crucial thing to note about this proposed 
counter-example is that it works only if the clo-
sure principle entails that the very same evidence 
that justifies S in believing that the animals are 
zebras must justify S in believing that they are not 
cleverly disguised mules because, it is presumed, 
that is the only evidence that we can be sure S has. 
To generalize, the purported counter-example 
depends upon the assumption that the closure of 
justified belief depends upon it being the case 
that the very same evidence, e, that justifies S in 
believing the entailing proposition, p, also justi-
fies S in believing the entailed proposition q. 
Thus, letting "xRy" mean that x is an adequate 
reason for y, the counter-example depends upon 
assuming that if closure holds between p and q, 
then the evidence "path" must look like this: 
Pattern 1 
... Re 
... Rp 
~ 
~ 
... Rq 
Evidence paths specify what propositions serve as 
good enough reasons, ceteris paribus, for believ-
ing other propositions. So, in Pattern 1 type cases, 
if S has good enough reasons for believing the 
proposition e, then S is entitled to "take" the evi-
dence path to proposition p, and S is entitled to 
take the path to proposition q. So if S can get to 
point e on the path, S can get to points p and q. 
This pattern illustrates the constraint on closure 
imposed by Dretske, namely that whenever p 
entails q, the adequate evidence, e, for p is the very 
same evidence that is adequate for q. 
No doubt this constraint sometimes correctly 
portrays the relevant evidential relationships 
when some proposition, p, entails some other 
proposition, q. For example, suppose I have ade-
quate evidence that Anne has two brothers, then 
it would seem that the very same evidence would 
be adequate for believing that Anne has at least 
one brother. But the Academic skeptic would 
(or at least should) point out that closure need 
not require that type of evidence path in all cases 
in which one proposition entails another. 
There are two other possibilities for instantiat-
ing closure that can be depicted as follows: 
Pattern 2 ... ReRp ... Rq 
Pattern 3 ... Re (where e includes q) Rp 
In Pattern 2 cases there is some adequate evidence, e, 
for p; and p, itself, is the adequate evidence for q, 
since p strictly implies q. For example, if I have ade-
quate evidence for believing that 2 is a prime 
number, I can use that proposition as an adequate 
reason for believing that there is at least one even 
prime. In Pattern 3 cases the order of the evidence is 
reversed because q serves as part of the evidence 
for p. For example, I am justified in believing that 
water is present if I am justified in believing 
that there is present a clear, odourless, watery-
tasting and watery-looking fluid at STP. This 
pattern is typical of abductive inferences. 
Thus, showing that there is no Pattern 1 type 
evidence path available to S in the zebra-in-the-
zoo case is not sufficient to show that closure fails. 
Indeed, I would suggest that the animals looking 
like zebras in a pen marked "zebras" are, ceteris 
paribus, adequate evidence to provisionally jus-
tify the claim that they are zebras; and once S is 
entitled to believe that the animals are zebras, 
S can reasonably deduce from that proposition 
that they are not cleverly disguised mules. That is, 
S can employ an evidence path like that depicted 
in Pattern 2.8 Or alternatively, if S had some reason 
to think that the animals were cleverly disguised 
mules, then S would have to eliminate that possi-
bility before she could justifiably believe that they 
are zebras. In other words, in that case S would 

HOW A PYRRHONIAN SKEPTIC MIGHT RESPOND 
39 
have to employ an evidence path like the one 
depicted in Pattern 3. 
I think it is clear that this alleged refutation of 
Academic skepticism based upon the rejection of 
closure rests upon a premise that requires further 
reasons to support it, namely the premise that the 
appropriate evidential relationship between "the 
animals are zebras" and "the animals are not clev-
erly disguised mules" is that depicted in Pattern 1. 
There are other patterns of reasoning that instan-
tiate closure and until some reason is given for 
thinking that the appropriate pattern in this case 
is Pattern I, reasoning would have failed to settle 
whether closure should be rejected. 
Thus, one of the purposes of exploring this 
argument against Academic skepticism has been 
fulfilled, namely to illustrate the general claim I 
will be defending shortly that our reasoning 
cannot settle matters. The other purpose was to 
gesture in the direction of a general claim that the 
prospects are dim for the success of anyone of the 
three alternative responses to the argument for 
Academic skepticism mentioned above. I have 
certainly not demonstrated that there is no way to 
respond to the Academic skeptic within the three 
alternatives. But I have shown that one of the 
better known responses is not compelling. 
So, here is what remains for me to do: 
Argue that reasoning, in general, cannot settle 
matters, but that provisionally justified belief 
is still possible. 
2 Apply that general conclusion to the argu-
ments for academic skepticism in order to 
delineate the fourth alternative response men-
tioned earlier. 
Pyrrhonian Skepticism 
My belief that reasoning cannot settle matters can 
be traced to a famous passage in Sextus Empiricus's 
Outlines of Pyrrhonism in the chapter called "The 
Five Modes" in which he discusses the regress 
problem. Although the chapter title mentions five 
modes, two of them repeat those found else-
where.9 They are the modes of discrepancy and 
relativity and are important here because they 
provide the background for understanding the 
description of the three modes of reasoning. 
Specifically, it is presumed that the relevant object 
of inquiry is subject to actual or potential dispute 
and that reasoning is employed to resolve the dis-
pute. The issue before us then is whether there is 
a mode of reasoning that can settle matters about 
which there is some dispute. Of those modes, 
Sextus writes: 
The Mode based upon regress ad infinitum is 
that whereby we assert that the thing adduced as 
a proof of the matter proposed needs a further 
proof, and this again another, and so on ad infini-
tum, so that the consequence is suspension [of 
assent], as we possess no starting-point for our 
argument ... We have the Mode based upon 
hypothesis when the Dogmatists, being forced to 
recede ad infinitum, take as their starting-point 
something which they do not establish but claim 
to assume as granted simply and without dem-
onstration. The Mode of circular reasoning is the 
form used when the proof itself which ought to 
establish the matter of inquiry requires confir-
mation derived from the matter; in this case, 
being unable to assume either in order to estab-
lish the other, we suspend judgement about both. 
(1993, I, pp. 166-9) 
I will call the first account of the normative con-
ditions required for complete justification "infin-
itism".10 Today we commonly refer to the second 
account as "foundationalism". Finally, I will refer 
to the third possibility as "coherentism" - but 
some important distinctions between forms of 
coherentism will be discussed below. 
The regress problem, then, can be stated briefly 
in this way: there is a trilemma facing all who 
attempt to use reasoning to settle matters. Either 
foundationalism, coherentism or infinitism is the 
appropriate method of responding to the regress 
of reasons. Foundationalism appears to advocate 
a process of reasoning that relies upon arbitrary 
propositions at the base. (What makes a proposi-
tion arbitrary will be discussed later.) Coherentism 
is nothing but a thinly disguised form of circular 
reasoning. Finally, infinitism advocates a process 
of justification that could never be completed. 
Put another way: there are only three norma-
tive constraints that could apply to any instance of 
reasoning. For either the process of producing rea-
sons properly stops at foundational beliefs or it 
doesn't. If it does, then foundationalism is correct. 
If it doesn't, then either reasoning is properly cir-
cular, or it is properly infinite and non-repeating.ll 

40 
PETER KLEIN 
There are no other possibilities. 12 Thus, if none of 
these forms of reasoning can settle matters, no 
form can. 
My view of the matter is that (1) the hinted -at 
arguments of the Pyrrhonians against founda-
tiona/ism and coherentism, when properly fleshed 
out, do render plausible the claim that those forms 
of reasoning are inherently unacceptable models 
of good reasoning because they cannot provide 
the basis for any type of rational practice leading 
to the acceptance of beliefs. But (2) infinitism, 
when properly understood, appears acceptable 
and can lead to provisional justification. 
So, I want now to take up foundationalism 
and coherentism and provide some reasons for 
thinking that they cannot provide a good model 
for reasoning, where reasoning is understood 
simply to be the process of producing reasons for 
our beliefs. Then, we will turn to infinitism. 
Finally, I want to apply the lessons learned in the 
general discussion of reasoning to the problem 
with which we started, namely the standard argu-
ment for Academic skepticism, in order to explain 
the fourth alternative response, mentioned above, 
to that form of skepticism. 
Foundationalism 
Foundationalism comes in many forms. But all 
forms hold that all propositions are either 
basic propositions or non-basic propositions and 
no proposition is both. Basic propositions have 
some autonomous bit of warrant that does not 
depend (at all) upon the warrant of any other 
proposition. 13 Non-basic propositions depend 
(directly or indirectly) upon basic propositions 
for all of their warrant. 
I do not believe that this account of the struc-
ture of reasons can provide a model of reasoning 
that can be rationally practised. My discussion of 
this issue will be reminiscent of Laurence 
BonJour's (1978) rejection of foundationalism 
but unlike his argument, I am not claiming (here) 
that this account of the structure of reasons is 
false. 14 My claim is that a foundationalist cannot 
rationally practise his foundationalism because it 
inevitably leads to arbitrariness, that is asserting a 
proposition for no reason at all. 
To see that foundationalism cannot provide a 
rational model of reasoning consider a discussion 
between two people: the Foundationalist, Fred, 
and the Pyrrhonian Skeptic, Sally. Fred begins 
by saying that he believes that p. He might say 
something quite strong like "I know that p" or "p 
is certainly true" or "I have conclusive reasons 
for p", or he might just say "p is true" or even just 
"p" with the appropriate gusto. The Pyrrhonian 
Skeptic, Sally, asks Fred-the-foundationalist why 
he believes that p is true. Fred gives his reason 
for believing that p, say q. Again, Sally asks Fred 
why he believes that q is true. Fred replies. This 
goes on a while. Finally, Fred (being a founda-
tionalist) replies by citing what he takes to be a 
basic proposition, b. 
Sally then asks Fred, "Why do you think b is 
true?" Fred, being a self-conscious foundational-
ist, replies that b is properly basic and has some 
warrant that does not depend upon any further 
reason for thinking b is true. 15 To use our termi-
nology, Fred is claiming that b has some autono-
mous bit of warrant. Sally replies as follows, "But 
Fred, what I asked you was 'What makes you think 
b is true?' and you replied, in part, by claiming 
that b is a basic proposition. So you must think 
that because a proposition is basic there is some 
positive likelihood, however small, that it is true. 
Right? That is, you must think that propositions 
possessing the autonomous bit of warrant are 
more likely to be true than they would be were 
they not to possess that autonomous bit of war-
rant. Why do you think that possession of auton-
omous warrant is linked in any way with truth?" 
We have come to the crucial point in the dis-
cussion. For Fred faces a dilemma. Either Fred 
will give a reason for thinking that the possession 
of autonomous warrant is at least somewhat 
truth-conducive or he won't. 
Consider the first alternative. If Fred has a 
reason for thinking that propositions possessing 
the autonomous bit of warrant are, in virtue of 
that fact, likely to be true (even to some small 
extent), then the regress has not actually stopped, 
for Fred has a reason for thinking that b is true. 
Fred has given up his foundational ism in order to 
satisfy a perfectly reasonable question, namely 
"Do you think the possession of autonomous 
warrant is linked to truth?" 
Now, consider the second alternative and sup-
pose that Fred does not have a reason for thinking 
that b's possession of the autonomous bit of war-
rant makes it at all likely that b, or any other basic 

HOW A PYRRHONIAN SKEPTIC MIGHT RESPOND 
41 
proposition, is true. Then Fred ought (rationally) 
to give up assenting to all basic and non-basic 
propositions.1 6 After all, Fred has no reason for 
thinking that the basic ones are (somewhat likely 
to be) true by virtue of whatever he thinks makes 
them basic and, being a foundationalist, he 
believes that without the warrant provided by the 
basic propositions, the non-basic ones are not 
warranted. He has been forced to admit that 
accepting basic propositions and everything that 
depends upon them is arbitrary - meaning by 
arbitrary that there are no better reasons for 
thinking that they are true than for thinking that 
they are falseY 
Consider an example: suppose that it is argued, 
along contextualist lines, that some propositions 
just don't need to be justified - what makes a 
proposition properly basic is some fact about the 
context - perhaps that it is accepted by some 
specified group of people. 18 
First, I don't think that is a plausible charac-
terization of the property that could possibly 
make a proposition basic. 19 I grant that on many 
occasions the foundationalist will not be chal-
lenged to provide a reason for the offered basic 
proposition - perhaps because everyone in the 
relevant context believes it and accepts it as a 
reason for further beliefs. But it is crucial to note 
that the unchallenged stopping points could 
include a wide variety of propositions. Suppose the 
issue at hand is whether there is an American foot-
ball game on TV today. The response, "Today is 
New Year's Day" might stop the conversation. 
Similarly, "The newspaper said so" or "My mother 
told me" could all be conversation-stoppers. But are 
they basic in the sense required by the foundation-
alist? I doubt it. They do not have any autonomous 
warrant. For if I didn't believe that I was correctly 
reading the calendar, or that I am correctly remem-
bering the newspaper story, or that I understood 
what my mother said, the conversation-stopping 
propositions would possess no warrant at all. 
Second, and more to the point, even if contex-
tualism correctly identified what makes a propo-
sition basic, the crucial point here is that the 
contextualist response does not serve to stop the 
regress. For the foundational is tic contextualist 
will still be asked this: does the fact that a propo-
sition is a conversation-stopper give anyone any 
reason for thinking that it is true? And Fred's 
dilemma returns. 
Now consider a more traditional brand of 
foundationalism and suppose that Fred offers a 
first-person introspective report as the basic 
proposition, for example "I seem to remember 
that there is a football game on TV today". When 
asked why he thinks that it is true that he seems to 
remember that there is a game, Fred could say 
that he has no reasons for thinking it is true - he 
just does think it is true. Arbitrariness looms. 
What is much more likely is that Fred will come 
up with a story about how he acquires knowledge 
of his memories - a story told to get Sally to 
see why introspection delivers propositions that 
are (at least) likely to be true. It could be a rela-
tively straightforward story about our privileged 
access to certain kinds of our states, for example 
certain kinds of mental states, as contrasted with 
our ability to gain knowledge of other of our 
states. Privileged access, it could be claimed, is 
just that sort of access such that the content of 
what is delivered is very likely to be true. Or the 
story that Fred could tell could be a relatively 
complex one - perhaps even one that Fred thinks 
contains a priori propositions - about the mean-
ing of some "methodologically basic" words and 
the conditions for their application which guar-
antee that they are "true in the main':zo The con-
tent of the story is not crucial here. What is crucial 
is that Fred is giving his reasons for thinking that 
propositions of a certain sort are likely to be true. 
Thus, in order to avoid arbitrariness, Fred has 
offered reasons for thinking that introspection 
reports or propositions about methodologically 
basic items are likely to be true. In other words, 
the regress continues. 
It is crucial to recall that I am not claiming that 
foundational ism is false. Perhaps some proposi-
tions do have autonomous warrant which is 
truth-conducive and all other propositions 
depend for some of their warrant upon those 
basic propositions (although I doubt it). What I 
am claiming is that there is a deep irrationality in 
being a practising self-conscious foundationalist. 
If Fred remains true to his foundationalism, he 
will not provide a reason for thinking that the 
basic proposition, b, is true unless that reason 
ultimately depends upon other basic proposi-
tions. But basic propositions are supposed to have 
some warrant that does not depend upon another 
proposition being warranted. So, the question to 
Fred can be put this way: on the assumption that 

42 
PETER KLEIN 
you cannot appeal to any other proposition, do 
you still think b is true? Fred not only won't have 
any such reason for thinking b is true, given that 
constraint, he cannot have one (if he remains true 
to his foundationalism). Arbitrariness is inevita-
ble. Of course, foundationalists typically realize 
this and, in order to avoid arbitrariness, tell some 
story that, if true, would provide a reason for 
thinking basic propositions are at least somewhat 
likely to be true. But then the regress of reasons 
has continued. Foundationalism, then, cannot 
provide a good model for reasoning since, when 
practised, it endorses arbitrariness. 
Coherentism 
Let us now turn to coherentism. This section can 
be much shorter because we can apply some of 
the lessons learned in the discussion of founda-
tionalism. 
At its base, coherentism holds that there are 
no propositions with autonomous warrant. But 
it is important to note that coherentism comes in 
two forms. What I choose to call the "warrant-
transfer form" responds to the regress problem 
by suggesting that the propositions are arranged 
in a circle and that warrant is transferred within 
the circle - just as basketball players standing in a 
circle pass the ball from one player to another.21 
I could, for example, reason that it rained last 
night by calling forth my belief that there is water 
on the grass and I could reason that there is water 
(as opposed to some other liquid, say glycerin, 
that looks like water) on the grass by calling forth 
my belief that it rained last night. 
At the beginning of the chapter, I claimed that 
all circular reasoning in which the contested con-
clusion was employed as a premise and for which 
no warrant existed beyond what was available to 
be transferred via the argument was fallacious. 
That is the model of reasoning embedded in the 
warrant-transfer form of coherentism.1t seems to 
me that Aristotle explained why it is fallacious. 
As he put it: this is a "simple way of proving any-
thing" (1994: bk I, ch. 3, 73a5). The propositions 
in the circle might be mutually probability 
enhancing, but the point is that we could just as 
well have circular reasoning to the conclusion 
that it did not rain last night because the liquid is 
not water and the liquid is not water because it 
did not rain last night. In this fashion anything 
could be justified - too simply! It is ultimately 
arbitrary which set of mutually probability 
enhancing propositions we believe because there 
is no basis for preferring one over the other. 
The warrant -transfer coherentist could attempt 
to reply to this objection by claiming that there is 
some property in one of the two competing cir-
cles that is not present in the other and the pres-
ence of that property makes one and only one of 
the circles properly circular. For example, in one 
and only one of the circles are there propositions 
that we actually believe, or perhaps believe spon-
taneously (BonJour 1985). More generally, the 
coherentist could claim that all and only circles 
with some property, P, have some initial plausi-
bility. But then it is clear that the warrant-transfer 
coherentist has adopted a form of foundational-
ism because she is now claiming that all and only 
the propositions in circles with P have the auton-
omous bit of warrant. And, all that we have said 
about the dilemma facing the foundationalist 
transfers immediately. Is the possession of P 
truth-conducive or not? If it is ... well, you can 
see how that would go. 
So much for the warrant-transfer version of 
coherentism. The second form of coherentism, 
what we can call the "warrant-emergent form", 
does not imagine the circle as consisting of 
propositions that transfer their warrant from 
one proposition to another. Rather warrant for 
each proposition in the circle depends upon the 
fact that they are mutually probability enhanc-
ing. Coherence itself is the property by virtue of 
which each member of the set of propositions 
has warrant. Warrant emerges all at once, so to 
speak, from the web-like structure of the propo-
sitions. The coherentist can then argue that the 
fact that the propositions cohere provides each 
of them with some prima facie credibility. 
This might initially seem to be a more plausi-
ble view since it avoids the circularity charge. But, 
aside from the fact that there are, again, just too 
many competing circles that are coherent, there is 
one, by now very familiar, problem with this 
alternative. It is crucial to note that the coherentist 
is now explicitly assigning some initial positive 
warrant to all of the individual propositions in a 
set of coherent propositions that does not depend 
upon the warrant of any other proposition in the 
set. In other words, he is assigning to them what 

HOW A PYRRHONIAN SKEPTIC MIGHT RESPOND 
43 
we have called the autonomous bit of warrant. 
Thus, this coherentist has, once again, endorsed a 
form of foundationalism and, once again, the 
dilemma facing the foundationalist returns. 
Let me sum up where we are at this point. 
There seems no way for the foundationalist or the 
coherentist to avoid arbitrariness and at the same 
time stop the regress. It is now time to consider 
what happens if the regress is unavoidable. 
Infinitism 
Infinitism is the view that the answer to the 
regress problem is that the regress never properly 
ends. There is always another reason, one that has 
not already been employed, that can legitimately 
be required for each reason that is given for a 
belief. Only if there is an infinite set of non-
repeating reasons available for a belief is it fully 
justifiable. 
There is an obvious objection to this form of 
reasoning as a method for settling what we should 
believe. Here's a close paraphrase of the objection 
as put by Jonathan Dancy: 
Suppose that all justification is inferential. We 
justify belief A by appeal to belief B, and belief 
B by appeal to C. The result is that A is justified 
only if Band C are. Justification by inference is 
conditional justification only; Ns justification 
is conditional upon the justification ofB and C. 
But if all justification is conditional in this 
sense, then nothing is actually non-conditionally 
justified. (1985, p. 55)22 
My response is that Dancy is absolutely right: 
infinitism does not sanction non-conditional jus-
tification. But that is quite different from the 
objections we discovered to foundationalism and 
coherentism. There we found that those models 
of reasoning were unacceptable because they 
endorsed arbitrariness or circularity. We have just 
seen that infinitism is not able to provide an 
account of a type of reasoning that would settle 
matters because each belief in the set of offered 
reasons is only provisionally justified. But that 
does not lead to the conclusion that infinitism is 
unable to be practised rationally. 
So the question becomes this: can the practis-
ing infinitist be provisionally justified in believing 
one proposition over its competitors and provi-
sionally justified in believing it rather than 
withholding belief? 
First, it is important to note that the infinitist 
can rationally practise what she thinks is the cor-
rect solution to the Pyrrhonian trilemma even 
though the process of justifying a proposition is 
never completed. When needed, the infinitist can 
always seek a further reason. Contrast this with, 
say, the foundationalist who must produce a 
reason for which no further reason can be given -
even when sincerely requestedY 
Second, infinitism provides a good model for 
provisionalism. Here's how it goes. The infinitist 
finds a reason, q, for her belief, p. She would not 
think that it is settled whether p is true because 
she knows that she will never complete the pro-
cess of providing the infinite set of reasons for p 
(if there is such a set). However, if she does locate 
a reason for p and she doesn't have an equally 
good or better reason against it, it would be more 
reasonable to believe p than to deny p or withhold 
p because she does have a reason for believing it. 
Indeed, on many occasions perhaps we can't help 
but believe p - at least to some extent - if we have 
better reasons for it than against it. But we can 
assess the epistemic situation and, as infinitists, 
come to recognize that we ought not to think it is 
settled that p, even though it is more reasonable 
to believe p than to deny p or to withhold p. 
A Clarification and Partial Defence 
of Infinitism 
Nevertheless, it is one thing to claim that infin-
itism can provide an acceptable account of 
rational belief and another to claim that infin-
itism is true. This is not the place for a full-blown 
defence of infinitism.24 But I would like to con-
sider one reason that has been offered for reject-
ing it because doing so will help to clarify 
infinitism. 
The worry is simply this: how could I have an 
infinite number of beliefs? I have a finite mind. 
Here is how John Williams puts this worry: 
The [proposed] regress of justification of S's 
belief that p would certainly require that he holds 
an infinite number of beliefs. This is psychologi-
cally, if not logically, impossible. If a man can 

44 
PETER KLEIN 
believe an infinite number of things, then there 
seems to be no reason why he cannot know an 
infinite number of things. Both possibilities con-
tradict the common intuition that the human 
mind is finite. Only God could entertain an infi-
nite number of beliefs. But surely God is not the 
only justified believer. (1978, pp. 311-12) 
I think this worry (or perhaps set of worries) can 
be resolved by clarifying what infinitism claims. It 
is crucial to remember that infinitism is not a 
form of dogmatism. It acknowledges that we do 
not ever have fully justified beliefs - perhaps that 
epistemic state is available only to a being that 
could consciously and simultaneously entertain an 
infinite number of beliefs. But the issue here is 
not whether we can be fully justified, it is whether 
we can have provisionally justified beliefs. 
Nevertheless, there is a deep worry here that 
does not depend essentially upon how many or 
how few conscious states, that is non-overlapping 
temporal states, humans can occupy during a 
finite time period. The worry is this: there is no 
reason to believe that there is an infinite number 
of propositions available to us that could serve as 
reasons for our beliefs. 
The response to that worry is twofold. First, 
like foundationalism and coherentism, infinitism 
comes in two varieties - an optimistic and pessi-
mistic form. What both varieties of infinitism 
have in common is the belief that the normative 
conditions for full or complete justification 
include the existence of an infinite series of non-
repeating reasons available to us for our beliefs. 
The optimistic form goes on to claim that in the 
required sense there are such reasons available. 
The pessimistic variety says that there are no such 
reasons available. 25 
Consider the parallel with foundationalism. 
A foundationalist holds that the normative con-
ditions of complete justification require that all 
of our non-foundational beliefs rest on some basic 
beliefs with autonomous warrant. An optimistic 
foundationalist - a Cartesian, for example - could 
claim that there are such foundational beliefs. 
A pessimistic foundationalist - a Humean, for 
example - could claim that (at least for many of 
our important beliefs) there is no such set of basic 
beliefs. 
Infinitism is like foundationalism and co her-
entism because all three are theories about the 
normative conditions required for full justifica-
tion. And each could have an optimistic or pes-
simistic form. Thus, it would not be an objection 
to infinitism to claim that there is no such infi-
nite set of available propositions. Pessimistic 
infinitism is an available option. 
Perhaps, though, the worry here is that infin-
itism comes in only the pessimistic form. If that 
were true, it would not constitute an epistemic 
reason for rejecting infinitism. For that which we 
have reason to believe true is sometimes quite 
discouraging. If pessimistic infinitism were the 
only reasonable alternative, we might strongly 
wish it to be otherwise and so, perhaps, it would 
be better, in some sense, were infinitism false. 
But, second, I think the worry that infinitism 
comes in only the pessimistic form misconstrues 
what, in general, is required for a belief to be 
available and what, in particular, infinitism 
requires for beliefs to be available. Generally, 
beliefs are dispositions to sincerely assert some-
thing under the appropriate conditions. We can 
have those dispositions even if we have never con-
sciously entertained the proposition. For example, 
I think that we all believe that pears don't nor-
mally grow on apple trees, that 61 + 346 = 407, 
and that Chicago is east of every city in California, 
but most of us have never before considered those 
propositions. Thus, we might very well have an 
infinite number of beliefs even though we will 
never consciously entertain an infinite number of 
propositions. 
Equally, if not more, important is the fact that 
we have the capacity to develop new reasons for 
our beliefs when we are called upon to do so. For 
example, at a certain point in human history we 
did not believe that diseases were caused by 
microscopic organisms. Nevertheless, we had the 
capacity to form that belief. Of course, we needed 
new experiences, insight and perhaps a certain 
amount of luck in order to form it. But the new 
belief was formed. Thus, beliefs might be availa-
ble to us in the requisite sense even though we do 
not have them. 
Infinitism requires only that there be an infi-
nite set of distinct propositions each member of 
which we have the capacity to legitimately call 
forth as reasons for our beliefs.26 It does not 
require that we have already formed the beliefs 
with those propositions as their contents. 
Optimistic infinitism says that there is such a set. 

HOW A PYRRHONIAN SKEPTIC MIGHT RESPOND 
45 
Pessimistic infinitism says that at some point we 
will run out of such available reasons. It predicts 
that we will hit a permanent brick wall of ulti-
mate arbitrary beliefs or we will have to employ a 
reason that has already appeared in the path of 
reasons. History suggests to me - but of course it 
does not fully justify for me - that when we need 
new reasons for our beliefs we can find them. 
No belief is ever fully justified for any person. 
The process of justifying a proposition is never 
completed. That is a consequence of infinitism. 
But that is not because there is no infinite set of 
propositions available that could serve as good 
reasons for our beliefs. Rather, no belief is fully 
justified because at no point in time will we have 
completed the process of justifying our beliefs. 
All justification is provisional. And as mentioned 
at the very beginning of this paper, that's a good 
thing to recognize since it provides a basis for 
avoiding pessimism and dogmatism. 
Academic Skepticism Reconsidered 
Now, before concluding, I want to return to the 
puzzle with which we began, namely the argu-
ment for Academic skepticism, and test what we 
have learned about reasoning. Does the standard 
argument beg the question or depend upon an 
arbitrary assumption for which there are no better 
reasons for believing than there are for denying? 
Recall where we left off. We saw that the argument 
for Academic skepticism looked pretty good: the 
premises seemed true and the argument seemed 
valid. Nevertheless, the conclusion seemed false. 
We also saw that one argument against premise 1 
ended with an arbitrary assumption, namely that 
the closure of justified beliefs depended upon the 
- claim that all reasoning sanctioned by closure was 
like that depicted in Pattern 1. Thus, we discov-
ered one important instance of the general 
Pyrrhonian claim that arguments that end, end 
either arbitrarily or commit the fallacy of begging 
the question. 
But there is another lesson here related to our 
discovery of the various patterns of reasoning 
that instantiate closure. For a careful examination 
of them reveals the fourth alternative, mentioned 
earlier, for appraising the standard argument for 
Academic skepticism, namely that it, too, either 
begs the question or is based upon an arbitrary 
assumption. If that were true, the argument 
would give us no good reason for accepting that 
form of skepticism. 
Recall the three patterns of reasoning exhibit-
ing closure: 
Pattern 1 
Pattern 2 
Pattern 3 
~ 
... Rp 
. .. Re 
~ 
... Rq 
. .. ReRp ... Rq 
... Re (where e includes q) Rp 
And recall the standard argument for Academic 
skepticism: 
If a person, say S, is justified (to some positive 
degree, d) in believing that there is a table 
before her, then S is justified (to degree d) in 
believing that she is not in one of the skeptical 
scenarios in which there is no table but it 
appears just as though there were one. 
2 S is never justified (to degree d) in believing 
that she is not in one of the skeptical scenarios 
in which there is no table but it appears just as 
though there were one. 
Therefore, S is never justified (to degree d) In 
believing that there is a table before her. 
Now, suppose that the Academic skeptic thinks 
that closure regarding justification holds between 
"there is a table before me" and "I am not in one 
of the skeptical scenarios in which there is no 
table but it appears just as though there were one" 
because the requisite evidential path exemplifies 
Pattern 1. That is, he holds that the very same evi-
dence that is adequate for arriving at the proposi-
tion that there is a table is adequate for denying 
the skeptical hypothesis. Grant that premise 1 is 
true for that reason. But, now, when the Academic 
skeptic argues for premise 2 - as surely he must 
since it is not immediately evident - the sub-
argument for premise 2 must be good enough to 
establish that there is no evidence adequate to 
justify the proposition that there is a table before 
him because the argument must be good enough 
to show that S cannot arrive at point e on the evi-
dence path. For if S were able to do that, S would 
be able to arrive at the denial of the skeptical 

46 
PETER KLEIN 
hypothesis. Hence, the argument for premise 2 
would be sufficient to show that the conclusion is 
true and the argument employing premises 1 and 
2 begs the question since the argument for 
premise 2 alone establishes the conclusion. The 
standard argument does not work. 
The situation vis a vis this version of the argu-
ment for Academic skepticism is similar to this 
one for God's existence: 
The Bible says "God exists". 
2 Whatever the Bible says is true. 
Therefore, God exists. 
As stated, this argument doesn't beg the question. 
Similarly, as stated, the standard argument for 
Cartesian skepticism does not beg the question. 
But if the argument for premise 2 in the argu-
ment for God's existence were that the Bible was 
written by God and whatever God writes is true, 
then the argument would beg the question 
because the sub-premises employed in the argu-
ment for premise 2 imply the conclusion. My 
claim is that if the Cartesian skeptic thinks 
premise 1 in his argument is true because the 
appropriate evidential relationships are depicted 
by Pattern 1, he will be forced to beg the question 
when he gives his argument for premise 2. 
I think this point becomes clearer when we 
look at Pattern 2. If the Cartesian skeptic thinks 
that closure holds in this case because one must 
arrive on the inference path at the proposition 
that there is a table before one arrives at the denial 
of the skeptical hypothesis, then in arguing for the 
second premise the skeptic must show that we 
cannot arrive at the proposition that there is a 
table, because if we did, we could get to the denial 
of the skeptical hypothesis (since that is what this 
instantiation of closure maintains). But if the sub-
argument for premise 2 shows that we can't arrive 
at the proposition that there is a table, then that 
sub-argument already establishes the conclusion. 
Finally, suppose the skeptic thinks that closure 
holds because the evidential relationship is 
depicted by Pattern 3. Here the skeptic is claiming 
that we must first eliminate the skeptical hypoth-
esis in order to arrive at the proposition that there 
is a table before usY That evidential prerequisite 
is not immediately evident and, hence, requires 
some reasons. Would we have to eliminate every 
possible alternative before we arrive at the one 
that is acceptable? Return to the zebra-in-the-zoo 
case. Would we have to eliminate the hypothesis 
that the zebra-like looking things are cleverly dis-
guised aliens or very cleverly disguised members 
of the long lost tribe of Israel before arriving at 
the proposition that they are zebras? I doubt it. 
So, why should we have to eliminate the skeptical 
hypothesis before arriving at the proposition that 
there is a table before us? Is the skeptical hypoth-
esis prima facie plausible? No. Is there some evi-
dence that it is true? No. In fact, the requirement 
that we eliminate every contrary hypothesis to p 
before we are entitled to believe p has the conse-
quence that we must have entailing evidence for 
p - and surely that is too strong a requirement for 
being justified in believing a contingent, empiri-
cal claim such as "there are zebras in the pen".28 
So, this argument for Academic skepticism rests 
upon an arbitrary assumption that we must 
eliminate the skeptical hypothesis before we are 
justified in believing any contingent, empirical 
proposition. 
Thus, on careful inspection, this finite argu-
ment -like all such arguments, if the Pyrrhonian 
is correct - either ends in an arbitrary assump- . 
tion or begs the question. Thus, the fourth alter-
native for rejecting the argument for Academic 
skepticism involves conceding that even if all of 
the premises are true and even if it is valid, the 
argument, at least so far, gives us no good reason 
for accepting the conclusion. 
Conclusion 
We have come a long way and covered a lot of 
ground. To sum up, I have argued for the follow-
ing two main points: 
Reasoning cannot settle matters, but it can 
provide provisional justification. Further 
inquiry is always in order. 
2 
The standard argument for Academic skepti-
cism with the conclusion that reasoning 
cannot produce any type of justified belief, 
including provisionally justified belief, has 
been shown to be an instance of the general 
constraints that Pyrrhonists believe apply to all 
finite arguments. They either rest on arbitrary 
assumptions or they beg the question. 

HOW A PYRRHONIAN SKEPTIC MIGHT RESPOND 
47 
One important caveat: I have argued that no 
belief is unconditionally justified. But even that 
conclusion has to be taken only provisionally -
if I am right. My reasoning here has been finite 
in length. Maybe there aren't good reasons for 
Notes 
I want to thank Anne Ashbaugh, Michael 
Bergmann, Claudio de Almeida, Mylan Engel, 
Michael Huemer, Michael Lynch, Steven Luper, 
Kenton Machina, Stephen Maitzen, Robert 
Martin, Brian McLaughlin, George Pappas, John 
Post, Bruce Russell and Thomas Vinci for their 
help with various aspects of this chapter. Earlier 
versions of some ancestor parts of it were 
presented in March 1999, at the Mississippi 
Philosophical Association and in June 1999, at 
the Bled Conference in Epistemology, and at the 
Rutgers Summer Institute for Minority Students 
in Philosophy, July 2000, at Acadia University, 
September 2000, and at the Illinois Philosophical 
Association, November 2000. The discussions 
that followed helped me in refashioning the argu-
ments in this version. In addition various parts 
of this chapter draw on Klein (1999), (2000b) 
and (2000a). 
1 This is the view developed in Lehrer (1997) 
and (2000, esp. pp. 142-4). 
2 I think that the difficult task in providing 
an account of what makes circular reason-
ing fallacious is to spell out clearly what is 
meant by the conclusion being "employed in" 
a premise. 
3 The only way out of this predicament is to 
withhold belief about whether we have been 
successful in settling an issue by the employ-
ment of reasoning. But note that I am not 
claiming that if we believe that we know 
something, we will, in fact, ignore contrary 
evidence if (or when) it appears. At that 
point we could both lose our belief that we 
know and acknowledge the contrary evi-
dence. Thus, there is no real "Kripke prob-
lem" - the alleged consequence of believing 
that we know, namely that we become per-
manently (and perhaps even rationally) con-
vinced of the truth of what we believe we 
know. I have discussed this elsewhere; see 
Klein (1984). 
some of the, as yet, unsupported suppositions 
in this chapter. And maybe I begged the ques-
tion. Prudence requires that we view the two 
main points of the chapter as only provisionally 
justified. 
4 
I chose to put the argument in terms of degrees 
of justified belief rather than knowledge for 
two reasons: 1) the argument for Academic 
skepticism about knowledge usually depends 
upon assuming that knowledge is at least ade-
quately justified true belief and it is the sup-
posed lack of fulfilment of the justification 
condition that leads to the denial of knowledge, 
and 2) it is the power of reasoning to justify 
beliefs that is the primary concern of this chap-
ter and, consequently, even if knowledge did 
not entail adequately justified beliefs, if there 
were a good argument showing that our beliefs 
were never justified to any positive degree, my 
claim that reasoning can make a belief provi-
sionally justified would have been undercut. 
5 Hume claimed that the only way to deal with 
skepticism was simply not to think about it. 
That might work for some, but not for me -
and it didn't work for Hume either! 
6 Strictly speaking, it could be that beliefs which 
are justified are closed under entailment 
because justified beliefs are a subset of beliefs 
and the subset could be closed while beliefs are 
not. But the same objections to the closure of 
beliefs, simpliciter, seems to apply to justified 
beliefs as well. 
7 Robert Audi gives some other examples in 
which it appears that one can have sufficient 
evidence for the entailing proposition but not 
for the entailed one (1988, esp. pp. 77 ff.). 
I discuss these examples in some detail in Klein 
(1995, pp. 213-36). Briefly, I think these 
counter-examples fail for the same reasons 
that Dretske's proposed counter-examples fail. 
8 I have argued for that in Klein (1984), in Klein 
(1995) and in Klein (2000a). 
9 The modes of relativity and discrepancy reca-
pitulate 
passages 
in 
Sextus's 
chapter 
"Concerning the Ten Modes" in Sextus (1933). 
Sextus attributes this formulation of the 
modes to Aenesidemus. 

48 
PETER KLEIN 
10 
The term "infinitism" is not original to me. 
To the best of my knowledge, the first use of 
a related term is in Moser (1984), in which 
he speaks of"epistemic infinitism': Also, Post 
(1987, p. 91) refers to a position similar to 
the one I am defending as the "infinitist's 
claim". 
11 
The reason for the "non-repeating" condi-
tion is that were the propositions to repeat, 
the result would be a form of coherentism -
infinitely long circles. 
12 
Strictly speaking, there is a fourth possibility, 
namely that there are foundational proposi-
tions and that there are an infinite number 
of propositions between the foundational 
one and the one for which reasons are ini-
tially being sought. Interestingly, such a 
hybrid view might be indistinguishable in 
practice from infinitism and, hence, not sub-
ject to the "foundationalist's dilemma" to be 
discussed later. Thus, I think for our pur-
poses we can treat this as a form of infinitism 
or an acceptable form of foundationalism 
because it is the ability of the three patterns 
of reasoning (foundationalism, coherentism 
and infinitism) to provide a basis for rational 
practice that is the criterion which will deter-
mine whether any of the patterns is accept-
able. As far as I know this possibility has 
never been explored; it might be worthwhile 
to do so. 
l3 
I put it that way in order to make clear that 
foundationalism can embrace some aspects 
of coherentism. Propositions with only min-
imal justification can mount up, so to speak, 
by gaining extra credibility. Thus, the defini-
tion of foundationalism includes both weak 
and strong foundational ism as characterized 
in BonJour (1978, pp. 1-l3). 
14 
In other places I have argued that founda-
tionalism is false; see Klein (1999). 
15 
That is, there is no reason that can be given 
that does not ultimately depend upon other 
basic propositions. There could be reasons 
for believing the basic ones for they could 
cohere with other propositions and coher-
ence could add some degree of warrant. But 
Fred would see that Sally would then just ask 
about the set of basic propositions. In other 
words, she would ask, "What makes you 
think that every member of the set of basic 
propositions is true?" 
16 
There is one move Fred might make here. 
Steven Luper suggests that it is rational to 
accept foundational beliefs even though 
they cannot be supported by reasons. Here 
is a close paraphrase of his argument. The 
epistemic goal is to acquire a complete and 
accurate picture of the world. Granted, at 
base our reasons are arbitrary but "an 
injunction against believing anything ... 
would obviously make it impossible for us 
to achieve the goal of arriving at a complete 
and accurate understanding of what is the 
case ... Indeed, given that our ultimate 
beliefs are arbitrary, it is rational to adopt 
management principles that allow us to 
retain these foundational yet arbitrary views, 
since the alternative is to simply give up on 
the attempt to achieve the epistemic goal" 
(Luper-Foy 1990, p. 45). Briefly, the claim is 
that since the goal of an epistemic agent is to 
acquire a complete and accurate picture of 
the world, accepting a basic, though arbi-
trary, reason is rational since if one did not 
accept it, there would be no possibility of 
attaining the goal. It is "rational to do and 
believe things without reason" (p. 40) 
because if we did not, we could not attain 
our goal. 
But I don't think Fred can employ this 
line of reasoning. For if Fred's basic beliefs 
are arbitrary, that is if there is no available 
reason for thinking that they are even some-
what likely to be true, then Fred, being a 
foundationalist, would have no reason for 
thinking that any of the non-basic proposI-
tions are true either. If, ultimately, it is 
rational to accept some "basic" proposition, 
b, for prudential considerations, then no 
epistemic warrant can be transferred to the 
non-basic ones from the basic ones. Thus, if 
the non-basic propositions have any epis-
temic warrant at all, it must arise completely 
from some source other than the basic 
beliefs. And that view isn't foundationalism. 
Coherence naturally suggests itself. But as we 
will see soon, that solution to the regress 
problem can't provide a model for rational 
practice. 

HOW A PYRRHONIAN SKEPTIC MIGHT RESPOND 
49 
17 
I want to thank Steven Luper for his com-
ments that forced me to be clearer about 
what counts as an arbitrarily adopted propo-
sition. I take it that a proposition is arbitrar-
ily accepted just in case there is no better 
reason for accepting it than denying it, but it 
is accepted anyway. Thus, in the argument 
considered earlier against closure (and hence 
against Academic skepticism) accepting the 
premise that closure entails Pattern 1 type 
evidential structures is arbitrary because 
there are better reasons for denying that than 
there are for accepting it (and hence there 
are no better reasons for accepting than 
denying it). Also, when the infinitist stops 
giving her reasons for beliefs (as she must), 
her last reason given need not be arbitrary 
because she might have better reasons for 
believing it than denying it - although she 
hasn't yet given them. 
18 
See, for example, Cohen (1987, 1988), Lewis 
(1979, 1996), Wittgenstein (1977) and DeRose 
(1995, 1992). There are also hints at such a 
view in Aristotle (Metaphysics, 1006a-1O 11 b). 
19 
I have considered (and rejected) the contex-
tualist response to Academic skepticism in 
Klein (2000a). 
20 
See Donald Davidson (1986) for this type of 
defence of the claim that certain methodo-
logically basic propositions must be "true in 
the main': Davidson, of course, was defend-
ing what he took to be a brand of coherent-
ism. But as we will soon see, some forms of 
coherentism are really nothing but founda-
tionalism in disguise. 
21 
I do not think the expressions "warrant-
transfer coherent ism" or "warrant-emer-
gent coherentism" are original to me. Nor is 
the distinction between the two types of 
coherentism. But I do not recall where I first 
ran across the use of those expressions or 
the discussion of these issues. Ernest Sosa 
does distinguish between various forms of 
coherentism. In addition, he argues that 
what I call the "warrant-emergent" form is 
actually a form of what he calls "formal 
foundational ism". Thus, the claim that some 
forms of coherent ism are actually forms of 
foundationalism is not original to me; see 
Sosa (1980), reprinted in Sosa (1991, pp. 
165-91). In addition, BonJour (1978) dis-
tinguishes between linear and non-linear 
coherentism. That distinction parallels the 
one here between warrant-transfer coher-
entism and warrant-emergent coherentism. 
22 
The original passage is as follows: 
Suppose that all justification is inferential. 
When we justify belief A by appeal to belief B 
and C, we have not yet shown A to be justified. 
We have only shown that it is justified if Band 
C are. Justification by inference is conditional 
justification only; !\s justification is condi-
tional upon the justification of Band C. But if 
all justification is conditional in this sense, then 
nothing can be shown to be actually non-
conditionally justified. 
I modified the passage to avoid what seems to 
me to be an unfortunate level confusion that 
conflates one's being justified with showing 
that one is justified. I also changed the pas-
sage to make clear that the alleged problem is 
with the infinite chain, per se, as opposed to 
the chain diverging because more than one 
proposition is offered as a reason for a belief. 
23 
Once again, I am indebted to Steven Luper 
for this point. 
24 
See Klein (1999) for a fuller defence. 
25 
Of course there is a third option - neutral-
ity, that is being neither optimistic nor pes-
simistic. The reasons presented here for 
thinking that infinitism is not inherently 
pessimistic can be applied to the neutral 
view as well. 
26 
I point to various alternative accounts of 
what would make a proposition one which is 
correctly called forth in Klein (1999). There I 
call such propositions "objectively available" 
as reasons. 
27 
Keith Lehrer makes that claim on behalf of 
the skeptic in Lehrer (1971, pp. 292-4). 
Lehrer no longer accepts this argument 
(I think); see Lehrer (1974, pp. 238-40) and 
Lehrer (2000, pp. 132-7). 
28 
Here is the argument: both (-p & q) and 
(-p & -q) are contraries of p. If the denials of 
both are required to be in the evidence for p, 
then that evidence entails p because 
H -p&q), -( -p&-q)} entails p. 

50 
PETER KLEIN 
References 
Aristotle. 1994. Posterior Analytics, trans. 1. Barnes, 
2nd edn (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Audi, Robert. 1988. Belief, Justification, and 
Knowledge (Belmont: Wadsworth). 
BonJour, Lawrence. 
1978. "Can Empirical 
Knowledge Have a Foundation?;' American 
Philosophical Quarterly 15, pp. 1-13. 
--. 1985. The Structure of Empirical Knowledge 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 
Cohen, Stewart. 1987. "Knowledge, Context, and 
Social Standards:' Synthese 73, pp. 3-26. 
--. 1988. "How to be a Fallibilist." Philosophical 
Perspectives 2, pp. 91-123. 
Dancy, Jonathan. 1985. Introduction to Contem-
porary Epistemology (Oxford: Blackwell). 
Davidson, Donald. 1986. "A Coherence Theory of 
Truth and Knowledge," in Henrich 1983. 
DeRose, 
Keith. 
1992. 
"Contextualism and 
Knowledge Attributions;' Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 52, pp. 913-29. 
--. 1995. "Solving the Skeptical Problem;' 
Philosophical Review 104, pp. 1-52. 
Dretske, Fred. 1970. "Epistemic Operators;' 
Journal of Philosophy 67, pp. 1007-23. 
Klein, Peter. 1995. "Skepticism and Closure: Why 
the Evil Genius Argument Fails;' Philosophical 
Topics 23, pp. 213-36. 
--.1999. "Human Knowledge and the Infinite 
Regress of Reasons;' Philosophical Perspectives 
13, Epistemology, pp. 297-326. 
--. 2000a. "Contextualism and the Real Nature 
of Academic Skepticism," Philosophical Issues 
10, pp. 108-16. 
--. 2000b. "The Failures of Dogmatism and 
a New Pyrrhonism," Acta Analytica 15, 24, 
pp.7-24. 
Lehrer, Keith. 1971. "Why Not Skepticism?;' 
Philosophical Forum, pp. 206-98. 
--. 1974. Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press). 
--. 1997. Self Trust: A Study of Reason, Knowledge, 
and Autonomy (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
--. 2000. Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edn 
(Boulder, CO: Westview Press). 
Lewis, David. 1979. "Scorekeeping in a Language 
Game;' Journal of Philosophical Logic 8, 
pp.339-59. 
--. 1996. "Elusive Knowledge;' Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy 74, pp. 549-67. 
Luper-Foy, Steven. 1990. "Arbitrary Reasons;' in 
M. Roth and G. Ross (eds) Doubting: 
Contemporary 
Perspectives 
on 
Skepticism 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer), pp. 39-55. 
Moser, Paul. 1984. "A Defense of Epistemic 
Intuitionism;' Metaphilosophy 15, 3, pp. 196-204. 
Post, John. 1987. The Faces of Existence (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press). 
Sextus Empiricus. 1933. Outlines of Pyrrhonism, 
trans. R. G. Bury (London: W. Heinemann, 
Loeb Classical Library). 
Sosa, Ernest. 1980. "The Raft and the Pyramid," 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy 5, pp. 3-25. 
--. 1991. Knowledge in Perspective (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press). 
Williams, John. 1978. "Justified Belief and the 
Infinite 
Regress 
Argument;' 
American 
Philosophical Quarterly 15, 4, pp. 311-12. 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig. 
1977. 
On 
Certainty 
(Oxford: Blackwell). 

CHAPTER 6 
Epistemological Realism 
Michael Williams 
Generality and Epistemic Priority 
Although a defender of the naturalness of sceptical 
doubts must hold that foundationalism is a by-
product of scepticism, not a presupposition, so 
far we have seen nothing to suggest that the case 
for scepticism can be understood apart from the 
doctrine of the priority of experiential knowledge 
over knowledge of the world. This result would 
not be decisive if this essential doctrine could 
itself be derived from the truistic elements in the 
sceptic's arguments. But we have seen nothing to 
suggest this either. On the contrary, everything 
points the other way. 
This leaves one option: to see how the truistic 
elements in the sceptic's arguments take on scep-
tical significance, we must look to the distinctive 
character of the traditional epistemological project. 
The sceptic (or traditional epistemologist) must 
argue that, in the context of a distinctively philo-
sophical investigation of our knowledge of the 
world, the crucial ideas about epistemic priority 
are forced on us by our ordinary understanding of 
knowledge or justification. If he can do so, he will 
have rebutted the charge that he simply takes 
them for granted. 
Originally published in M. Williams, Unnatural Doubts 
(Oxford: Blackwell Publishers, 1991), pp. 83-93,101-19, 
121-4,129-39. 
In trying to explain how what might otherwise 
seem to be truisms take on a surprising signifi-
cance, it is natural to look first to the traditional 
epistemologist's aim of assessing the totality of 
our knowledge of the world. Because he wants to 
explain how we are able to know anything at all 
about the external world, his plan is to assess all 
such knowledge, all at once. But surely, the argu-
ment now goes, if we are to understand how it is 
possible for us to know anything at all about 
external reality, we must trace that knowledge to 
knowledge we should still have even if we knew 
nothing about the world. No explanation of how 
we come to have knowledge of the world that 
depended on our already having some would 
show the required generality: it would not be an 
explanation of how we have any such knowledge. 
But this is as good as to say that, once we accept 
the legitimacy of the epistemologist's question -
and we have seen no reason to suppose that it is 
unintelligible - we must also accept the priority 
of experiential knowledge, since experiential 
knowledge is what remains when knowledge of 
the world is set aside. 
This is Stroud's view, which explains why he 
thinks that the diagnosis of scepticism that traces 
it to foundationalism gets things upside down. 
According to Stroud: 
What we seek in the philosophical theory of 
knowledge is an account that is completely gen-
eral in several respects. We want to understand 

52 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
how any knowledge at all is possible - how 
anything we currently accept amounts to knowl-
edge. Or less ambitiously, we want to understand 
with complete generality how we come to know 
anything in a certain specified domain. I 
It is the distinctively philosophical goal of under-
standing certain kinds of knowledge with "com-
plete generality" that leads to attempts to ground 
knowledge of a given kind on some "epistemo-
logically prior" kind of knowledge, and the reason 
is that no other strategy will yield the right kind 
of generality. Unfortunately, the lesson of scepti-
cism seems to be that such attempts are bound to 
fail, so that there is no hope of understanding 
human knowledge in general. 
We can characterize the unusual generality of 
the traditional epistemological undertaking by 
saying that the traditional epistemologist imposes 
a totality condition on a properly philosophical 
understanding of our knowledge of the world. 
Acceptance of this condition, I believe, is what 
lies behind the feeling that arguments concern-
ing conceptual points are unfair to the sceptic. 
Purely conceptual points - the neutrality of expe-
rience or the "non-dreaming" implication of 
ordinary perceptual knowledge - have no intrinsic 
epistemological significance. Moreover, since such 
sceptical significance as they possess depends 
entirely on a tacit commitment to the priority of 
experiential knowledge over knowledge of the 
world, they themselves give no grounds for 
accepting any such general relation of epistemo-
logical priority. But perhaps they do not have 
to. Perhaps the very nature of epistemological 
investigation forces us to recognize that relation; 
and once it is recognized, the sceptic's truistic 
conceptual points are all he needs to reach his 
conclusion. 
> For example, one might argue that the (truis-
tic) claim that my knowing (perceptually) that P 
implies my knowing that I am not dreaming that 
P is not equivalent to the claim the sceptic must 
assimilate it to: that my knowing that P requires 
my being able to rule out the possibility that I am 
dreaming that P independently of my knowledge 
that P (or indeed anything like it). But the sug-
gestion now is that the totality condition, rather 
than the non-dreaming condition alone, is what 
imposes the crucial restriction. So, in the context 
of the traditional attempt to understand our 
knowledge of the world, an otherwise innocuous 
claim gives the sceptic what he needs. 
Acceptance of the totality condition on a 
properly philosophical understanding of our 
knowledge of the world is also the deep source of 
the epistemologist's dilemma, for the dilemma 
springs from a fatal interaction of the totality 
condition with the objectivity requirement. This 
is the requirement that the knowledge we want to 
explain is knowledge of an objective world, a 
world that is the way it is independently of how it 
appears to us to be or what we are inclined to 
believe about it. Now, as we have seen, the totality 
condition requires us to try to trace our knowl-
edge of the world to something more fundamen-
tal, which can only be experiential data. But, as a 
sceptical argument along Ayer's lines reveals, it is 
impossible to explain how such data could ever 
function as evidence. They cannot be linked 
empirically with any facts about the world for, in 
accepting such linkage, we would be crediting 
ourselves with knowledge of the world, in viola-
tion of the totality condition. On the other hand, 
conceptual connections between experiential 
data and worldly fact seem to be ruled out by the 
familiar thought-experiments that the sceptic 
appeals to to establish the neutrality and auton-
omy of experience. And if, in a desperate attempt 
to avoid scepticism, we insist on such connec-
tions, we make the way the world is depend on 
how it appears to us, in violation of the objectiv-
ity requirement. Accordingly, in the context of the 
attempt to assess the totality of our knowledge of 
the world, it seems impossible either to respect or 
violate the objectivity requirement: whatever we 
do looks like succumbing to the sceptic. 
Nevertheless, although the epistemologist's 
dilemma arises from the interaction of the total-
ity condition and the objectivity requirement, 
I take the totality condition to be fundamental. 
Many philosophers would disagree, for they see 
the objectivity requirement, with its commitment 
to a "realistic" view of truth, as the deep source of 
sceptical problems. But it is not clear, to me at 
least, that the objectivity requirement, any more 
than its relative the neutrality of experience, has 
any particular sceptical potential outside the 
context of an assessment of worldy knowledge 
governed by the totality condition. 
I say that the totality condition is fundamen-
tal. More strictly, however, what is fundamental 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
53 
is the attempt to conduct an assessment of our 
knowledge of the world in the light of that condi-
tion. If the priority of experiential knowledge 
over knowledge of the world is implicit in the tra-
ditional epistemological project, this is not solely 
on account of that project's unusual generality. 
Also crucial is the kind of understanding it sug-
gests we seek. As Quine has argued, if all we want 
is some kind of causal or developmental account 
of the emergence of our knowledge of the objec-
tive world, there is nothing viciously circular in 
our appealing to what we now know about the 
world in an explanation of how we came to be in 
our current position. 2 And where there is no 
threat of circularity, there is no pressure to accede 
to a general doctrine of epistemic priority. 
As Quine is of course well aware, traditional 
epistemology is under pressure to accept such a 
doctrine because it seeks a different kind of 
understanding. Its aim is to explain how it is that 
our beliefs about the world amount to knowl-
edge. Thus when Stroud says that what we want 
from a theory of knowledge is an account of how 
our knowledge of the world emerges out of some-
thing that is not our knowledge of the world,3 
he does not mean that we want an explanation 
of how our current way of looking at things 
developed out of some previous way: i.e. out of 
knowledge (or what our ancestors thought of as 
knowledge) that is not ours. This is a task for 
historians and anthropologists. Nor is he think-
ing of an account of how our knowledge emerges 
out of something that is not our knowledge. 
Quine's idea of a naturalized epistemology is a 
gesture in this direction, for it is supposed to issue 
in a causal explanation of how our interactions 
with the environment lead us to form certain 
beliefs; and if there is a worthwhile project here, it 
is presumably one for psychologists and neuro-
physiologists. What is missing from both these 
projects is the idea of an assessment. Each could 
as well, in fact more properly, be offered as an 
account of the emergence of our beliefs. But only 
a legitimating account of the basis or emergence 
of our beliefs will give an account of our knowl-
edge. The sort of theory Stroud has in mind is 
therefore one that traces our knowledge of the 
world to something that is ours, and that is knowl-
edge, but not knowledge of the world. What could 
this be except experiential knowledge? Even 
Quine is forced to something like this position 
when he tries to connect his "naturalized" episte-
mology with traditional sceptical problems. 
It seems, then, that something very like foun-
dationalism falls out of a methodological con-
straint on a properly philosophical examination 
of knowledge of the world. So we have, apparently, 
found what we were looking for: a defence of the 
claim that foundationalism is a by-product of 
scepticism, not a presupposition. When this pos-
sibility was first mooted, I suggested that it would 
have to turn out that scepticism and foundation-
alism have a common root. We have now located 
that common root in the attempt to gain a certain 
kind of understanding of our knowledge of the 
world. In effect, we have glossed Hume's thought 
that we set foot on the road to scepticism as soon 
as we ask distinctively philosophical questions 
about knowledge. True, this will not yield a defence 
of the naturalness of sceptical doubts unless, as 
Hume thought, that form of questioning is itself 
fully natural. However, even on this point, the scep-
tic has strengthened his position. It is hard to see 
how there could be anything unintelligible in what 
seems only to be an attempt to understand knowl-
edge in an unusually general way, so the prospects 
for a convincing therapeutic diagnosis of scepti-
cism seem bleak. But it is not obvious offhand that 
the prospects for a satisfactory theoretical diagno-
sis are any brighter, for how can mere generality 
entail extensive theoretical commitments? 
This is not all. Suppose that we agree that the 
traditional epistemological project leads inevita-
bly to the conclusion either that we have no 
knowledge or that, if we do, we will never under-
stand how we do; and suppose we insist that, since 
this is its outcome, it must involve some distor-
tion of our epistemological position: can we say 
that identifying this distortion will let us see how 
knowledge is possible after all? Stroud suggests 
not. We should not think that: 
if we did come to see how and why the epistemo-
logical enterprise is not fully valid, or perhaps 
not even fully coherent, we would then possess a 
satisfactory explanation of how human knowl-
edge in general is possible. We would have seen, 
at best, that we cannot have any such thing. And 
that too, I believe, would leave us dissatisfied! 
This is a powerful objection to any theoretical 
diagnosis of scepticism. Attempts to answer the 

54 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
sceptic directly run into the epistemologist's 
dilemma. But, if Stroud is right, attempts at 
diagnostic responses meet a similar fate. Suppose 
we find that we cannot hope to ground our 
knowledge of the world in the way that tradi-
tional epistemology has invited us to, because of 
some defect in the ideas about justification 
involved in the notion of even trying: we would 
still not have explained to ourselves how it is that 
we ever come to know anything about the world. 
Unless we show that the sceptic's question is 
actually unintelligible, it will remain dissatisfy-
ingly unanswered. So this is our new dilemma: if 
the traditional epistemological project is coher-
ent, it is doomed to fail; and if it isn't, we are still 
left in a position hard to distinguish from scepti-
cism. It may be scepticism at second order, but it 
is scepticism for all that. We may have knowledge 
of the world, but we will never be able to explain 
to ourselves how we do. We may know things 
about the world, but we will never know that we 
know them. 
Knowledge as an Object of Theory 
In asking whether there is such a thing as knowl-
edge of the world, I am not asking the very same 
question the sceptic asks but one that I think cuts 
deeper. I am asking how we have to think about 
"knowledge of the world" for that phrase to pick 
out a proper object of theory. So if it sounds too 
strange even to hint that there might not be any-
thing for the theory of knowledge to be a theory 
of, my question can be rephrased. What matters is 
whether "our knowledge of the world" picks out 
the kind of thing that might be expected to be 
susceptible of uniform theoretical analysis, so 
that failure to yield to such analysis would reveal 
a serious gap in our understanding. 
To raise these questions is to begin to examine 
a move that gets made before epistemological 
arguments, and particularly sceptical arguments, 
even get started. This is the introduction of the 
objects of epistemological inquiry. We shall be 
trying to isolate views that, for the most part, 
even the most determined anti-sceptics share 
with their adversaries. Philosophers who respond 
to scepticism do not doubt that there is some-
thing to defend against the sceptic's attacks. If 
they are dubious about our prospects for giving a 
direct refutation of scepticism, they call for a 
diagnosis of the sceptic's questions which will 
reveal them, first impressions to the contrary, as 
less than fully coherent. Even Stroud, who thinks 
our most pressing need as epistemologists is to 
understand how traditional epistemological 
inquiry misrepresents our epistemic position, if it 
does, seems not to doubt the existence of its 
objects. For the idea that there is something called 
"our epistemic position" is just another aspect of 
the idea that there is such a thing as "human 
knowledge" or "our view of reality." But is there? 
Or are there fewer things in heaven and earth 
than are dreamt of in our epistemology? 
Now, it is tempting to use "human knowledge" 
and "our knowledge of the external world" as 
though it were obvious that such phrases pick out 
reasonably definite objects of study. But it isn't 
obvious, or shouldn't be. We can talk of "our 
knowledge of the world," but do we have any 
reason to suppose that there is a genuine totality 
here and not just a loose aggregate of more or less 
unrelated cases? My sense is that the totality con-
dition is far more problematic than it first seems. 
Consider, for example, Nagel's characteriza-
tion of the aim of epistemology as "to form a con-
ception of reality which includes ourselves and 
our view of reality among its objects."5 This off-
hand allusion to "our view of reality" takes a lot 
for granted. To suppose that there is such a thing 
as "our view of reality;' which might then be the 
"object" of a single theoretical enterprise, is to 
assume that human knowledge constitutes some 
kind of surveyable whole, an idea that is not, on 
the surface, very promising. There are no clear 
criteria for individuating beliefs and, even if 
there were, it is far from clear that there would be 
any systematic way of enumerating all the things 
we believe. Phrases like "our system of beliefs" 
and "our view of reality" are so vague that we 
cannot be confident they refer to anything. 
Nothing changes if we pull back to narrower 
categories such as knowledge of the external 
world. When it comes to such "specified domains;' 
whether there is anything to understand will 
depend on how the domains are specified. To try 
to understand all knowledge in the standard epis-
temic domains is to suppose that the beliefs in 
those domains hang together in some important 
way. But how? "Knowledge of the external world" 
covers not only all the natural sciences and all <2f 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
55 
history, it covers all everyday, unsystematic factual 
claims belonging to no particular investigative 
discipline. Since, even within a single subject, 
theories, problems and methods tend to prolifer-
ate with the progress of inquiry, so that even the 
most systematic disciplines tend to become less 
rather than more unified, it is doubtful whether 
we can take a synoptic view of physics, never 
mind everything we believe about the external 
world. It is not obvious that it makes sense even 
to try. 
Recall Stroud's claim that in the philosophical 
study of human knowledge we want "to under-
stand how any knowledge at all is possible - how 
anything we currently accept amounts to knowl-
edge." He finds that engaging in this project "feels 
like the pursuit of a perfectly comprehensible 
intellectual goal." Perhaps it does once we have 
grown familiar with theoretical ideas that we shall 
be examining shortly. But we must try to recover 
some naivete here. Then I think we see that, when 
we first encounter the challenge to show how any 
knowledge of the world is possible, we cannot tell 
whether we have been given a perfectly compre-
hensible goal or not. In fact, the obvious diffi-
culty in commanding a synoptic view of our 
worldly beliefs suggests that we haven't. We 
cannot, therefore, just see whether the epistemo-
logical challenge make sense. What we can do, 
however, is to ask how we might make sense of it. 
I think that we can find a somewhat oblique 
recognition of this problem even in Descartes. 
Descartes admits that getting to a general doubt 
by questioning his beliefs one at a time would not 
be easy: perhaps the examination would never be 
completed. Hume too dismisses a piecemeal 
approach as a "tedious lingering method."7 But 
these grudging concessions are misleading: for 
they imply that the main obstacles to going over 
our beliefs seriatim are time and energy, whereas 
the question is certainly not one of convenience. 
If we are to make sense of the project of explain-
ing how anything we believe about the world 
amounts to knowledge, we need a way of reduc-
ing our beliefs to order. We have to bring them 
under principles or show them as resting on 
commitments that we can survey. We must reveal 
some kind of theoretical integrity in the class of 
beliefs we want to assess. H If we can do this, human 
knowledge is a possible object of theoretical 
investigation. But not otherwise. 
The very nature of the traditional project 
demands that the principles in question be all-
pervasive. For example, if we are to assess the 
totality of our beliefs about the world, there must 
be principles that inform all putative knowledge 
of the world as such. But what could they be? 
I take it to be obvious that, in one way, our beliefs 
do not show any kind of theoretical integrity. 
They do not, that is, add up to an ideally unified 
theory of everything. There is no way now, and 
none in prospect, of integrating all the sciences, 
much less all of anyone's everyday factual beliefs, 
into a single coherent system: for example, a 
finitely axiomatized theory with specified rules of 
inference. In this way, Nagel's phrase "our view of 
reality" borders on the absurd. We have not got a 
"view of reality" but indefinitely many. The idea, 
taken for granted by coherence theorists of justi-
fication, that we have a "system" of beliefs ought 
to be suspect. 
"Our beliefs," then, do not amount to a single, 
integrated "view of reality." They are not topi-
cally integrated. But this need not be fatal to the 
project of understanding human knowledge in 
general. For even if our beliefs are not topically 
integrated, they might be epistemologically inte-
grated. This is to say: they might be subject, in so 
far as they are meant to be justified or to amount 
to knowledge, to the same fundamental, episte-
mological constraints. This is what is usually 
suggested, or rather assumed. Thus Descartes 
ties his pre-critical beliefs together, thereby 
constituting their totality as an object of theo-
retical inquiry, by tracing them all to "the senses." 
No matter how topically heterogeneous, and no 
matter how unsystematic, his beliefs have this 
much in common: all owe their place to the 
authority of the senses. If this authority can be 
called in question, each loses its title to the rank 
of knowledge. 
We have seen that this talk of "the senses" is 
poised between a causal truism and a contentious 
epistemological doctrine. Now we see more clearly 
why the epistemological doctrine is and must be 
what is intended. Only by tracing our beliefs about 
the world to a common "source;' which is to say a 
common evidential ground, can we make "beliefs 
about the world" the name of a coherent kind. 
In the absence of topical integration, we must 
look to epistemological considerations for the 
theoretical integrity we require. 

56 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
Hume may have seen, though perhaps dimly, 
that an epistemologically based form of theo-
retical integrity is a precondition for a properly 
general, hence "philosophical;' understanding of 
human knowledge. He compares assessing par-
ticular beliefs and particular sciences one at a 
time to a strategy of "taking now and then a 
castle or village on the frontier"; and he contrasts 
this "tedious" method with marching up to "the 
capital or center of these sciences, to human 
nature itself." In explaining the principles of 
human nature, he tells us, "we in effect propose a 
compleat system of the sciences." But the com-
pleteness envisaged does not involve topical 
integration. It derives rather from the fact that 
all sciences, whatever their subject matter, "lie 
under the cognizance of men, and are judged of 
by their powers and faculties." Their subjection 
to the same underlying epistemological con-
straints, rooted in our "powers and faculties" is 
thus what makes possible a sweeping evaluation 
of "all the sciences."9 
Hume sees the fact that all sciences lie "under 
the cognizance of men" as showing that all are "in 
some measure dependent on the science of MAN:' 
But it seems clear that the science of man is not, 
or ought not to be, dependent on the other 
sciences. (Hume is apologetic about his occa-
sional excursions into natural philosophy.) This 
asymmetry belongs to the logic ofHume's project, 
indeed to the logic of the traditional epistemo-
logical enterprise. Since he is attempting, with a 
view to its reform, a wholesale assessment of our 
knowledge of both the physical and the moral 
world, he cannot take any of that knowledge for 
granted. This means that it must be possible to 
investigate our "powers and faculties," the episte-
mological aspect of the human condition, with-
out relying on any worldly knowledge. Our 
epistemological self-knowledge must be both 
autonomous and fundamental. Thus the project 
of assessing the totality of our knowledge of the 
world does more than presuppose that experien-
tial knowledge is in some very deep way prior to 
knowledge of the world. It also assigns a definite 
privilege to knowledge of such epistemological 
facts. These features of the traditional project 
point to very extensive theoretical commitments. 
The fact that the traditional epistemological 
enterprise is committed to the autonomy of epis-
temology sheds further light on the significance 
of externalism in the theory of knowledge. By 
suggesting that our capacity for knowledge 
depends on our situation in the world, and not 
just on our own "internal" capacities, externalism 
challenges the idea of our "epistemic position" as 
an autonomous object of theory. If our epistemic 
position is not something that can be investigated 
without knowing something about how we are 
placed in the world, there can be no question of 
our assessing the totality of our knowledge of the 
world on the basis of insights into our epistemic 
position. Perhaps we do not even have a fixed 
epistemic position. And if we find that we do not, 
it is doubtful whether we will be able to retain a 
clear conception of "our knowledge of the world" 
as an appropriate object of theory. 
Unlike Hume, Descartes aspires to topical as 
well as epistemological integration: hence his 
metaphor of the tree of knowledge whose roots 
are metaphysics, trunk physics, and branches 
medicine, mechanics, and morals, a figure that 
contrasts interestingly with Hume's citadel of 
reason. But even for Descartes, topical integration 
is something to be achieved rather than assumed. 
His initial survey of his beliefs takes for granted 
only their epistemological integrity. As is familiar, 
he makes the point in terms of the metaph~r of 
foundations: undermine the foundations and the 
whole edifice crumbles. The metaphor is a very 
natural one for, as we have seen, there is a clear 
sense in which epistemology, understood as the 
attempt to comprehend how any knowledge is 
possible, is intrinsically foundational. To see 
human knowledge as an object of theory, we must 
attribute to it some kind of systematic basis. This 
may involve inference from some class of funda-
mental evidence-conferring beliefs, as traditional 
foundationalists maintain; or it may involve gov-
ernance by certain "global" criteria of explanatory 
integration, as coherence theorists think. But 
something must regulate our knowledge of the 
world: something that we can identify and exam-
ine independently of any such knowledge. We 
should therefore not be too eager to oppose the 
account of scepticism that traces it to the general-
ity of the epistemological enterprise to that which 
traces it to foundational ism. (Nor, for that matter, 
should we be too eager to oppose foundationalism 
to the coherence theory.) If we give up the idea of 
pervasive, underlying epistemological constraints; 
if we start to see the plurality of constraints that 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
57 
inform the various special disciplines, never mind 
ordinary, unsystematic factual discourse, as genu-
inely irreducible; if we become suspicious of the 
idea that "our powers and faculties" can be evalu-
ated independently of everything having to do 
with the world and our place in it: then we lose 
our grip on the idea of "human knowledge" as an 
object of theory. The clear contrast between cas-
tles on the frontier and the fortress at the centre 
disSDlves. Perhaps there is no capital, each prov-
ince, as Wittgenstein said of mathematics, having 
to take care of itself. The quest for an understand-
ing of human knowledge as such, no longer feels 
like "the pursuit of a perfectly comprehensible 
intellectual goal." 
The same is true of more modest aims, such as 
understanding how our beliefs about the external 
world amount to knowledge. As a way of classify-
ing beliefs, "beliefs about the external world" is 
only quasi-topical, bringing together beliefs 
belonging to any and every subject, or no well-
defined subject at all. They are united only by 
their supposed common epistemological status. 
The essential contrast to "beliefs about the exter-
nal world" is "experiential beliefs" and the basis 
for the contrast is the general epistemic priority 
of beliefs falling under the latter heading over 
those falling under the former. "External" means 
"without the mind"; and it is taken for granted 
that we have a firmer grasp of what is "in" the 
mind than of what is outside it. 
There is no doubt that this epistemological 
distinction is readily mastered: readily enough for 
arguments based on it to strike us as "immedi-
ately gripping:' But a teachable distinction does 
not guarantee theoretical integrity in the kinds of 
things distinguished. There are various ways of 
failing. I discuss two examples in this section and 
one in the next. 
My first example illustrates a relatively mild 
form of failure. In his natural history of heat, 
Bacon gives a long list of examples of heating. It 
includes examples of heating by radiation, fric-
tion, exothermic reactions, and by "hot" spices 
that "burn" the tongue. to Everything he mentions 
is ordinarily said to involve "heat;' so we cannot 
deny that his list reflects ordinary usage. But what 
we have here is a clear case in which a nominal 
kind, comprising all the things commonly called 
"hot;' has no automatic right to be considered a 
natural kind. It is no objection to the kinetic 
theory that it doesn't cover the tremendous "heat" 
produced in my mouth by a chicken vindaloo, 
never mind the heat often generated by philo-
sophical arguments. We don't complain that, 
since the theory doesn't apply to hot curries or 
heated arguments, it fails to explain heat in a sat-
isfactorily general way. 
Given that we want to know whether there is 
any such thing as, say, "our knowledge of the 
world;' this kind of failure may seem too weak to 
be of interest. Failure to take in hot curries and 
heated arguments does not tempt us to say that 
there is no such thing as heat. But we could say 
that there is no such thing as nominal heat, the 
nominal kind being merely nominal. We can tie 
together some of the examples of heat and, 
having done so, treat them as the only genuine 
examples, discarding the others as resembling the 
genuine examples only superficially, hence as not 
really, but only metaphorically, hot. This is, 
indeed, what Bacon himself goes on to do when 
he argues that heat is a form of motion. Anyway, 
it is clear that there need be no theory of all the 
things commonly called "hot": a hot curry is hot 
even when it has gone cold. Nor need the lack of 
such a theory because for intellectual dissatisfac-
tion. It is just another example of an ordinary 
principle of classification failing to cut nature at 
the joints. By the same token there does not have 
to be a theory of all the things normally called 
"examples of knowledge." And if there isn't, it has 
to be shown that this reveals a lack. It may be that 
there is no such thing as knowledge (or knowl-
edge of the external world, etc.) in just the way 
that there is no such thing as Bacon's nominal 
heat. 
All this notwithstanding, I agree that the 
example of heat doesn't get me very far. All that 
happens in this case is that a nominal kind fails to 
coincide exactly with a theoretically coherent 
kind. So I move to my second example: the sup-
posed division of sentences into analytic, or true 
by virtue of meaning, and synthetic, or true by 
virtue of fact. Quine is famously sceptical about 
this distinction because he is dubious about the 
atomistic conception of meaning that he takes to lie 
behind it.l! Quine's view of meaning is holistic -
the meaning of a given sentence depends on its 
role in a wider theory - and this holistic concep-
tion of meaning suggests that there is no privi-
leged way of distinguishing a theory's "meaning 

58 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
postulates" from its empirical assumptions, any 
more than there is a way of determining which out 
of alternative complete axiom sets is the right one. 
Against Quine, Grice and Strawson argue that 
the analytic/synthetic distinction must be genu-
ine and significant because it is teachable in such 
a way as to enable the student to apply it to new 
cases. 12 The reply, well known by now, is that all 
kinds of dubious distinctions have proved to be 
teachable in this way, for even terms belonging to 
a false theory can admit of consensual application 
on the part of those who accept it. If the fact that, 
at one time, everyone could agree on who was the 
village witch does not mean that there really were 
witches, the fact that appropriately trained stu-
dents can pick out examples of analytic sentences 
does nothing to show that any sentences are gen-
uinely analytic. But the point I want to make does 
not require agreement on this particular example. 
Whether or not we agree with Quine on the ques-
tion of analyticity, the fact remains that distinc-
tions can be teachable and projectible while 
failing to correspond to any theoretically coher-
ent division of objects. When a classification rests 
on an implied background theory, there is no 
immediate inference from the existence of an easily 
mastered kind-term to the theoretical integrity of 
its associated kind. 
The application to our current problem is 
obvious. In accordance with my project of theo-
retical diagnosis, I have been arguing that the 
kinds of knowledge investigated by the tradi-
tional epistemologist are theoretical kinds. So, 
just as the ability of believers in the analytic/syn-
thetic distinction to agree on what to count as 
paradigm instances of analytic sentences does 
n9t mean that there are analytic sentences, the 
fact that we can agree on what to count as exam-
ples of knowledge of the external world does not 
mean that there is knowledge of the external 
world. The underlying principle of classification, 
whatever it is, might be bogus. As a result, we 
cannot simply help ourselves to classifications of 
this kind on the grounds that nothing else prom-
ises the right kind of generality. That such princi-
ples of classification pick out coherent objects of 
theoretical investigation needs to be shown. 
In the case of heat, to sort out the genuine from 
the spurious examples we rely on a physical theory 
which identifies some underlying property, or struc-
ture of more elementary components, common to 
hot things. Explaining theoretically significant 
kinds this way is typical of scientific realism. For 
the scientific realist, deep structural features of the 
elementary components of things determine the 
boundaries of natural, as opposed to merely nom-
inal or conventional, kinds. This suggests an ana-
logy. Since, if human knowledge is to constitute 
a genuine kind of thing - and the same goes for 
knowledge of the external world, knowledge of 
other minds, and so on - there must be underlying 
epistemological structures or principles, the tradi-
tional epistemologist is committed to epistemologi-
cal realism. This is not realism as a position within 
epistemology - the thesis that we have knowledge 
of an objective, mind-independent reality - but 
something quite different: realism about the 
objects of epistemological inquiry. 
The epistemological realist thinks of knowledge 
in very much the way the scientific realist thinks of 
heat: beneath the surface diversity there is struc-
tural unity. Not everything we call knowledge need 
be knowledge properly so called. But there is a way 
of bringing together the genuine cases into a coher-
ent theoretical kind. By so doing - and only by so 
doing - we make such things as "knowledge of the 
external world" the objects of a distinctive form of 
theoretical investigation. We make it possible to 
investigate knowledge, or knowledge of the world, 
as such. 
I expect that at first it seemed bizarre to ques-· 
tion the existence of the objects of epistemologi-
cal inquiry. Who can deny that we evaluate claims 
and beliefs epistemologically, sometimes decid-
ing that they express or amount to knowledge, 
sometimes not? And who. can deny that these 
claims or beliefs concern such things as objects in 
our surroundings, other people's thoughts and 
experiences, events in the past, and so on? No 
one. So it is easy to assume that, if our claims ever 
warrant positive assessment, there must be 
knowledge of the external world, knowledge of 
other minds, knowledge of the past, and so on. 
Even more obviously, there must be knowledge. 
But I hope the examples just considered make 
plausible the thought that there doesn't have to 
be. All we know for sure is that we have various 
practices of assessment, perhaps sharing certain 
formal features. It doesn't follow from this that 
the various items given a positive rating add up 
to anything like a natural kind. So it does not 
follow that they add up to a surveyable whole, to 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
59 
a genuine totality rather than a more or less loose 
aggregate. Accordingly, it does not follow that a 
failure to understand knowledge of the world 
with proper generality points automatically to an 
intellectual lack. To sum up, though I readily 
admit that we have teachable distinctions here, all 
this ensures is that there will be things that we can 
agree on as examples of, say, knowledge of the 
external world. It does not guarantee any theo-
retical integrity of the kind to which the examples 
are assigned. This is the sense in which there need 
be no such thing as knowledge of the world. 
At this point, someone is likely to object that 
there is no immediate inference from the lack of a 
certain type of theoretical integrity in a given 
kind to its spuriousness. Still less is there an infer-
ence to the non-existence of things of that kind. 
Take the sort of loose, functional classification of 
things that is common in everyday life, such as 
the division of dining room furniture into table 
and chairs. We do not expect to be able to formu-
late a physical theory of what makes an object 
a chair. But we are not tempted to conclude that 
chairs do not exist. 13 
This objection assumes that "knowledge of the 
external world" is like "chair" rather than like 
"witch" (or "analytic"). But is it? The distinctive 
feature of terms like "witch" is that they are essen-
tially theoretical. Essentially theoretical distinc-
tions are distinctions that we see no point in 
continuing to make, or even no way of drawing, 
once the theory behind them has been rejected. 
If Quine is right, "analytic/synthetic" is like this, 
for he holds that giving up a certain conception 
of meaning. involves losing all sense of how to 
make a fixed, objective division between a theo-
ry's meaning postulates and its empirical assump-
tions. Essentially theoretical classifications must 
therefore be distinguished from classifications 
that have been theoretically rationalized but 
which retain independent utility. Distinctions 
like this are apt to survive the rejection of theories 
with which they have become associated. Our 
first example, heat, is a case in point. Rejecting the 
caloric theory of heat, or the phlogiston theory of 
combustion, did not tempt us to conclude that 
there are no hot things or that nothing burns. 
Some philosophers would take this view of "ana-
lytic," for they think that there is a robust and 
useful pre-theoretical notion of synonymy that 
survives Quinean scepticism about meanings. If 
they are right, the analytic/synthetic distinction is 
not essentially theoretical. But where a classifica-
tion is essentially theoretical, we are happy to say 
that there are no things of that kind, if we once 
become convinced that the background theory is 
false. Thus there are no witches (or, if Quine is 
right, analytic sentences). 
Though I do not claim that the concept of an 
essentially theoretical classification is knife-edged, 
I do want to say that "knowledge of the external 
world" is quite clearly essentially theoretical. 
There is no commonsense, pre-theoretical prac-
tice that this way of classifying beliefs rationalizes: 
its sole function is to make possible a certain form 
of theoretical inquiry, the assessment of knowl-
edge of the world as such. As we have seen, this 
classification cuts across all familiar subject-
matter divisions and, in addition, presuppos~s 
the autonomy of epistemology. Even the sense of 
"external" is unfamiliar from a commonsense 
standpoint. "External" does not mean "in one's 
surroundings," for even one's own body, with its 
"internal organs:' is an "external" object. It was a 
radical innovation on Descartes's part to exter-
nalize his own body. 14 As I have already remarked, 
"external" in "external world" means "without the 
mind." And since being within the mind depends 
on being given to consciousness, the essential 
contrast to "knowledge of the external world" is 
"experiential knowledge": the classification is 
epistemological through and through. 
But what if the proper analogy for "knowledge 
of the external world" were not "witch" but "heat?" 
I do not believe that it is because I do not see that 
there is any pre-theoretical utility to the concept, or 
any theory-independent way of drawing even 
approximately the right boundaries round it. But 
this is not all. In bringing to centre-stage the issue 
of epistemological realism, I am not questioning 
particular theories of the structure of empirical 
knowledge, as we might question particular theo-
ries of heat, but the very idea that knowledge has 
any fixed, context-independent structure. The 
analogy is therefore not with cases where one struc-
tural theory replaces another but with those where 
we abandon any idea of coming up with a theory of 
that kind. If there are no witches, we may debate 
witch -crazes and witchcraft beliefs, but not whether 
sympathetic magic is superior to contagious. 
Suppose, however, that I am wrong about all 
this. Suppose, that is, that "knowledge of the 

60 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
external world" is like "chair": then what? So far 
as I can see, nothing to the purpose. In connec-
tion with such loose, functional classifications, we 
do not expect theoretical understanding, which is 
why such classifications survive the recognition 
that no such understanding will be forthcoming. 
We do not feel that there is an irremediable intel-
lectuallack because there will never be a science 
of chairs. But that is exactly what we are supposed 
to feel in the absence of a suitably anti-sceptical 
theory of knowledge of the external world. This 
shows that, even by the traditional epistemolo-
gist's own standards, "knowledge of the external 
world" cannot be like "chair." It must pick out 
something in which theoretical integrity is to be 
expected, and this means that the existence of the 
objects of traditional epistemological inquiry is 
far less assured than that of furniture. 
Explanation or Deflation? 
Let me suggest one further case for comparison. 
It has to do with deflationary views of truth. 
Philosophers who take a deflationary approach 
want no more from a theory of truth than a 
description of the logical behaviour of "true" and 
some account of why it is useful to have such a 
device in our language. Quine is a good example 
of such a philosopher. According to Quine, if we 
consider a sentence like" 'Snow is white' is true if 
and only if snow is white" we see that: "To ascribe 
truth to the sentence is to ascribe whiteness to 
snow .... Ascription of truth just cancels the quo-
tation marks. Truth is disquotation:'!5 
Applied to a given sentence, the truth-predicate 
is dispensable. It comes into its own, however, 
with respect to sentences that are not given, as 
when we say that all the consequences of a given 
theory are true. But even here, to say that certain 
sentences are true is just to say that the world is 
as they say it is. As Quine remarks, "one who 
puzzles over the adjective 'true' should puzzle 
rather over the sentences to which he ascribes it. 
'True' is transparent."!6 
Tllough I am very sympathetic to this view, 
my interest here is less in its correctness than its 
character. This view of truth is striking on accouht 
of what it does not say. Compared with traditional 
theories of truth, it says nothing about what 
makes all true sentences true. On the contrary, a 
deflationist will hold that his remarks on the 
behaviour and utility of the truth-predicate say 
just about everything there is to say about truth. 
To approach truth in a deflationary spirit is 
emphatically not to think of "true" as denoting a 
theoretically significant property, explicating which 
will illuminate what is involved in any sentence's 
being true. What is involved in a given sentence's 
being true is exhaustively captured by the sen-
tence itself. On a deflationary view, then, true 
sentences constitute a merely nominal kind. We 
could even say that, for a deflationist, though 
there are endlessly many truths, there is no such 
thing as truth. 
The traditional theorist sees things quite dif-
ferently. In his eyes, "truth" is the name of an 
important property shared by all true sentences, a 
property that can be expected to repay theoretical 
analysis. This property may be correspondence to 
fact, incorporability in some ideally coherent 
system of judgments, or goodness in the way of 
belief, depending on whether he favours a corre-
spondence, coherence, or pragmatic theory. But 
whatever his theoretical preference, he will hold 
that, since true sentences constitute not just a 
nominal but a theoretical kind, no theory of truth 
is satisfactory which does not explain what makes 
true sentences true. We set our sights too low if 
we aim only to capture the use of a word or 
explain the point of a concept:. there is more to 
understanding truth than appreciating the utility 
of the truth-predicate.!? 
We see, then, that traditional and deflationary 
theories are not theories of exactly the same kind. 
As Stephen Leeds puts it, the traditional theories 
are genuinely theories of truth whereas deflation-
ary theories are theories of the concept of truth 
(or, we could say, accounts of the use of "true") Y 
Leeds's illuminating distinction is readily applied 
to epistemological theories. We can distinguish 
theories of knowledge from theories of the con-
cept of knowledge. I think that the debate sparked 
by Gettier's demonstration that the standard 
"justified true belief" analysis fails to state a suf-
ficient condition for knowledge is best seen as 
concerning the concept of knowledge. The kind 
of extra constraint on justification that seems to 
be required - for example that an inference can-
not yield knowledge if it involves a false lemma 
essentially - is rather formal, nothing being said 
about what beliefs can serve as justifying evidence 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
61 
for what. This is why it is ptlssible to discuss issues 
raised by the Gettier problem without ever get-
ting entangled in sceptical problems. Theories 
that say nothing about whether examples of justi-
fied beliefs about objective states of affairs reveal 
any essential similarities, beyond highly formal 
ones of the "no false lemmas" variety, are neutral 
with respect to whether we should think of our 
knowledge of the world as an appropriate object 
of theory. By contrast, traditional foundational 
and coherence theories, which are much more 
closely involved with scepticism, put forward 
general, substantive constraints on justification 
and so make room for a project of assessing our 
knowledge of the world as a whole. They are the-
ories of knowledge and not just theories of the 
concept of knowledge. 19 
Of course, there is no obstacle in principle to 
supplementing one's views about the concept of 
knowledge with views about knowledge itself. 20 
But one could also advance such views in a defla-
tionary spirit. One philosopher who has done so, 
I believe, is Austin. Wittgenstein may be another. 
The availability of deflationary accounts of a 
notion like truth changes the whole problem-
situation. Naively, we might be inclined to sup-
pose that just as in physics we study the nature of 
heat, so in philosophy we study the nature of 
truth. But once plausible deflationary views are 
on the table, the analogy between truth and things 
like heat can no longer be treated as unproblem-
atic, for the question raised by such views is pre-
cisely whether there is any need to think of truth 
as having a "nature." We can conclude, mutatis 
mutandis, that if we have a plausible account of 
the concept of knowledge, it is a further step to 
insist on an account of knowledge as well. A defla-
tionary account of "know" may show how the 
word is embedded in a teachable and useful lin-
guistic practice, without supposing that "being 
known to be true" denotes a property that groups 
propositions into a theoretically significant kind. 
We can have an account of the use and utility of 
"know" without supposing that there is such a 
thing as human knowledge. 
What makes this suggestion particularly 
pointed is that appearances certainly do not 
favour the view that a phrase like "knowledge of 
the world" picks out a theoretically coherent 
kind. For one thing, justification, like explanation, 
seems interest-relative, hence context-sensitive. 
This is in part what Austin is driving at in insist-
ing that demands for justification are raised and 
responded to against a background of specifically 
relevant error possibilities. What is relevant will 
depend on both the content of the claim in ques-
tion and the context in which the claim is entered. 
If all evidence is relevant evidence, then, abstract-
ing from such contextual details, there will be no 
fact of the matter as to what sort of evidence 
could or should be brought to bear on a given 
proposition. 
If context-sensitivity goes all the way down, 
there is no reason to think that the mere fact that 
a proposition is "about the external world" estab-
lishes that it needs, or is even susceptible of, any 
particular kind of evidential support. No propo-
sition, considered in abstraction, will have an 
epistemic status it can call its own. To suppose 
that it must is precisely to fall in with what I call 
"epistemological realism." To treat "our knowl-
edge of the world" as designating a genuine 
totality, thus as a possible object of wholesale 
assessment, is to suppose that there are invariant 
epistemological constraints underlying the shift-
ing standards of everyday justification, which it is 
the function of philosophical reflection to bring 
to light. Exposing this epistemological deep struc-
ture will be what allows us to determine, in some 
general way, whether we are entitled to claim 
knowledge of the world. But if this is so, founda-
tionalist pre-suppositions are buried very deeply 
in the Cartesian project. They do not just fall out 
of the totality condition's exclusion of any appeal 
to knowledge of the world in the course of our 
attempt to gain a reflective understanding of that 
knowledge. They turn out to be involved in the 
very idea of there being something to assess. 
These are my suspicions in outline. Now we 
must look at some details. 
Foundationalism 
My main concern is the relation between scepti-
cism and foundationalism. So having distin-
guished between theories of knowledge and 
theories of the concept of knowledge, I must say 
what kind of a theory I take foundationalism to be. 
One way to understand foundationalism is to 
see it as a doctrine about the formal character of 
justifying inferences. Formal foundationalism, as 

62 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
we may call it, is the view that justification 
depends on the availability of terminating beliefs 
or judgments, beliefs or judgments which amount 
to knowledge, or which are at least in some way 
reasonably held to, without needing support from 
further empirical beliefs. Formal foundational-
ism is sometimes thought to contrast with "coher-
entist" theories of knowledge or justification. 
According to theories of this type, a given belief 
becomes justified through incorporation in some 
suitably "coherent" system of beliefs or "total 
view." Empirical inference is thus a matter of 
moving from one total view to another. The ter-
minating judgments, which the foundationalist 
sees as fixed points constraining the possibilities 
of inferential justification, are unnecessary. Some 
philosophers see the commitment to beliefs that 
function as fixed points as the essential feature of 
foundationalism, hence the complaint, promi-
nent in a recent systematic defence of the coher-
ence theory, that the key error in foundationalism 
is its "linear" conception of inferenceY 
I have my doubts about the contrast between 
foundationalism and the coherence theory, but 
they can wait. The point I want to make here is 
that anyone who traces scepticism about our 
knowledge of the external world to the founda-
tionalist doctrine of epistemic priority must have 
more than formal foundationalism in mind. We 
can call this stronger doctrine "substantive" foun-
dationalism. The distinction between formal and 
substantive foundationalism turns on the account 
given of terminating beliefs or judgments. Sub-
stantive foundationalism involves more than the 
formal doctrine that inference depends on letting 
certain beliefs function as fixed points: it adds a 
distinctive account of the kind of beliefs capable 
of performing that function. Since I think that a 
genuinely foundationalist view of knowledge and 
justification must be substantive, whenever I refer 
to foundationalism simpliciter I shall have sub-
stantive foundational ism in mind.22 
Substantive foundationalism is a theory of 
knowledge, whereas formal foundationalism is 
only (a contribution to) a theory of the concept 
of knowledge. One way to see this is to recall that 
Wittgenstein's view of knowledge, which con-
cedes that all justification takes place against a 
background of judgments affirmed without spe-
cial testing, can be seen as formally foundational-
ist. But this point about our ordinary practices of 
justification, while it might offer a way into the 
fully general problem of the regress of justifica-
tion, gives no basis for supposing that there is a 
particular sceptical problem about our knowl-
edge of objective reality. The transition to that 
problem depends on the tacit assumption that 
the fixed points recognized by commonsense jus-
tifications fall into some fairly obvious kind, so 
that once they have been questioned there must 
be some other, more primitive kind of judgment 
that we are forced to look to for their support. 
The thought that the functional role recognized 
by formal foundationalism corresponds to some 
kind of broad topical division of our beliefs is 
what I take to be the essential characteristic of 
substantive, as opposed to merely formal, foun-
dation ali sm. 
This is the way, then, in which there is more to 
what I am calling (and what has generally been 
called) "foundationalism" than the purely struc-
tural doctrine of formal foundationalism. What 
is missing from formal foundationalism is any 
hint as to the kinds of beliefs that function as 
fixed points or as to what qualifies a belief to play 
that role. But we have not yet got quite to the 
heart of why formal foundationalism is too weak 
a doctrine to capture all that is essential to a foun-
dationalist conception of knowledge and justifi-
cation. The key point is this: that not only does 
formal foundationalism give no account of what 
sorts of beliefs are epistemologically prior to 
what, and why, it does not even imply that any 
such account needs to be given. If foundational-
ism is a purely formal or structural doctrine, we 
have no reason to think that a given belief has any 
particular or permanent epistemological status. 
Perhaps the same belief can be a fixed point at 
one time, or in one particular context of inquiry 
or justification, but a candidate for justification at 
another time or in another context. Nothing in 
formal foundationalism excludes this. 
By contrast, substantive foundationalism pre-
supposes epistemological realism. I first intro-
duced the idea of epistemological realism by way 
of analogy with scientific realism. We can now 
get a clearer sense of the appLOpriateness of the 
analogy. A micro-structural theory of a physical 
phenomenon is not purely structural. It will iden-
tify both certain structures and the types of enti-
ties fitted to occupy appropriate places in them. 
(Think of models of the atom.) Similarly with the 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
63 
foundationalist: he both attributes to justifying 
inferences a certain structural character and iden-
tifies the types of beliefs fitted to play the various 
structurally defined roles: basic, inferential, etc. 
Thus for the (substantive) foundationalist beliefs 
have an intrinsic epistemological status that 
accounts for their ability to play one or other of 
the formal roles the theory allows. Beliefs of one 
kind can be treated as epistemologically prior to 
beliefs of some other kind because they are epis-
temologically prior; some beliefs play the role of 
basic beliefs because they are basic; others receive 
inferential justification because they require it; 
and all because of the kinds of beliefs they are. 
According to foundationalists, our beliefs arrange 
themselves into broad, theoretically coherent 
classes according to certain natural relations of 
epistemological priority. Beliefs to which no 
beliefs are epistemologically prior are epistemo-
logically basic. Their credibility is naturally 
intrinsic, as that of all other beliefs is naturally 
inferential. This is a much more peculiar doctrine 
than is generally recognizedY 
On the foundationalist view, a belief's intrinsic 
epistemological status derives from the content of 
the proposition believed. The foundationalist's 
maxim is "Content determines status." Not, how-
ever, the details of content: what matter are cer-
tain rather abstract features, for example that a 
belief is about "external objects" or "experience." 
Thus it comes naturally to foundationalists to 
talk of basic propositions or basic statements, as 
well as of basic beliefs. Propositions recording the 
data of experience are held to be, by their very 
nature, epistemologically prior to propositions 
about external objects, which is why they are apt 
for the expression of basic beliefs. In light of this, 
we can characterize foundationalism as the view 
that our beliefs, simply in virtue of certain ele-
ments in their contents, stand in natural episte-
mological relations and thus fall into natural 
epistemological kinds. The broad, fundamental 
epistemological classes into which all proposi-
tions, hence derivatively all beliefs, naturally fall 
constitute an epistemic hierarchy which deter-
mines what, in the last analysis, can be called on 
to justify what. This means that, for a foundation-
alist, every belief has an inalienable epistemic 
character which it carries with it wherever it goes 
and which determines where its justification must 
finally be sought. The obvious illustration is the 
thought that any belief whatever about "external 
objects" must in the end derive its credibility from 
the evidence of "the senses;' knowledge of how 
things appear. 
I call the foundationalist's supposed relations 
of epistemological priority "natural" to empha-
size the fact that they are supposed to exist in 
virtue of the nature of certain kinds of beliefs and 
not to depend on the changing and contingent 
contexts in which beliefs become embedded. For 
the foundationalist, in virtue of his epistemologi-
cal realism, there is a level of analysis at which 
epistemic status is not, as Quine once said of one 
important epistemic feature, conventionality, 
"a passing trait." Beliefs are more like the mem-
bers of a highly class-conscious society in which a 
person, no matter what he does, always carries the 
stigma or cachet of his origins. The quest for epis-
temic respectability is thus never entirely une 
carriere ouverte aux talents. A given belief, though 
useful in all sorts of ways, generally and quite 
properly (in appropriate contexts) taken for 
granted, and beyond any specific reproach, can 
never be allowed quite to forget that it presupposes 
the existence of the external world and is therefore, 
by that fact alone, subject to some kind of residual 
doubt, unless it can trace its lineage to more 
respectable data. 
The foundationalist conception of funda-
mental epistemological relations, cutting across 
ordinary subject divisions and operating inde-
pendently of all contextual constraints, receives 
an early articulation in Descartes's notion of "the 
order of reasons." Descartes writes, "I do not 
follow the order of topics but the order of argu-
ments. '" [In] orderly reasoning from easier mat-
ters to more difficult matters I make what 
deductions I can, first on one topic, then on 
another:'24 However, it is far from obvious that 
there is such an order of reasons, operating inde-
pendently of the division of topics. It is not at all 
clear that some matters are intrinsically - that is 
to say independently of all circumstances and all 
collateral knowledge - "easier" than others. The 
way that justification and inquiry proceed in 
common life, or for the matter theoretical science, 
is far from evidently favourable to the foundation-
alist conception of epistemological relations. In 
both science and ordinary life, constraints on jus-
tification are many and various. Not merely that, 
they shift with context in ways that are probably 

64 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
impossible to reduce to rule. In part, they will 
have to do with the specific content of whatever 
claim is at issue. But they will also be decisively 
influenced by the subject of inquiry to which the 
claim in question belongs (history, physics, orni-
thology, etc.). We can call these topical or, where 
some definite subject or distinctive form of 
inquiry is involved, disciplinary constraints. Not 
entertaining radical doubts about the age of the 
Earth or the reliability of documentary evidence 
is a precondition of doing history at all. There are 
many things that, as historians, we might be 
dubious about, but not these. 
Disciplinary constraints fix ranges of admis-
sible questions. But what is and is not appropriate 
in the way of justification may also be strongly 
influenced by what specific objection has been 
entered to a given claim or belief. So to discipli-
nary we must add dialectical constraints: con-
straints reflecting the current state of a particular 
argument or problem-situation. In this respect 
justification is closely akin to explanation, which 
is also context-sensitive because question-relative. 
I shall have more to say about disciplinary con-
straints and about the relation between justifica-
tion and explanation. But for now let me note 
that, in ordinary examples of requiring and pro-
ducing justifications, the epistemological status 
of a given claim can also depend on the particular 
situation in which the claim is entered, so that jus-
tification is also subject to a variety of situational 
constraints. Here I have in mind the wordly and 
not just the dialectical situation. Consider yet again 
Wittgenstein's remark that "My having two hands 
is, in normal circumstances, as certain as anything 
I could produce in evidence for it:'25 Entered in 
the right setting, a claim to have two hands might 
function like a foundationalist's basic statement, 
providing a stopping place for requests for evidence 
or justification: hence the element of formal foun-
dationalism in Wittgenstein's view. But in other 
circumstances the very same claim might be con-
testable and so might stand in need of evidential 
support. The content of what is claimed does not 
guarantee a claim some particular epistemic stand-
ing. Not merely is status often dependent on the 
details of content, it is never determined by content 
alone. As Wittgenstein notes: 
If a blind man were to ask me "Have you got two 
hands?" I should not make sure by looking. If I 
were to have any doubt of it, then I don't know 
why I should trust my eyes. For why shouldn't I 
test my eyes by looking to find out whether I see 
my two hands? What is to be tested by what? 
(Who decides what stands fast?)26 
The point is that, in the absence of a detailed 
specification of a particular context of inquiry, 
the sort of specification that would fix the rele-
vant contextual constraints on justification, the 
question "What is to be tested by what" has no 
answer. Questions about justification are essen-
tially context-bound. This is something a founda-
tionalist will deny. He must of course make 
allowances for the way that what tests what can 
shift with context. But - and this is the crucial 
point, he cannot allow that such contextual deter-
mination goes all the way down. At the funda-
mental level, what is to be tested by what is 
objectively fixed, which is why there is no ques-
tion of anybody's deciding the matter. The answer 
is determined by the epistemological facts them-
selves: by fundamental, objective relations of 
epistemological priority. This is not exactly an 
"intuitive" view. 
Continuing with the example of my knowing 
(in normal circumstances) that I have two hands, 
recall also that there is no obvious way to general-
ize from an example like this. In normal circum-
stances, the proposition that I have two hands is 
as certain as anything we could cite as evidence 
for it. But there is no obvious, non-trivial way of 
saying what other propositions are, in normal cir-
cumstances, as certain as anything we could cite 
as evidence for them. Normally, I am as certain as 
I could be of anything that my name is Michael 
Williams: but beyond this, what does the proposi-
tion that my name is Michael Williams have in 
common with the proposition that I have two 
hands? What feature of their content explains 
their belonging to the same epistemic kind? As far 
as I can see, there isn't one. So even if someone 
said that the claim to have two hands did have a 
kind of intrinsic status - that of being certain in 
normal circumstances - we would still not be able 
to treat the example as paradigmatic of proposi-
tions belonging to a definite epistemic kind, for 
which we could articulate some alternative, non-
trivial criterion of membership.27 Again, the 
foundationalist sees things quite differently. For 
him, highly abstract divisions of propositions 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
65 
according to content (propositions about external 
objects versus experiential propositions, proposi-
tions about the past versus propositions about the 
present, etc.) have to coincide with fixed differ-
ences in epistemological status. But what we 
should learn from the example under discussion 
is that no such coincidence can be simply assumed. 
To cite again another ofWittgenstein's reminders, 
"a proposition saying that here is a physical object 
may have the same logical status as one saying that 
here is a red patch."28 Without natural epistemo-
logical kinds, the foundationalist's permanent 
underlying structure of epistemological relations 
goes by the board. 
We see from this that the antidote to founda-
tionalism, indeed to epistemological realism gen-
erally, is a contextualist view of justification.29 To 
adopt contextualism, however, is not just to hold 
that the epistemic status of a given proposition is 
liable to shift with situational, disciplinary, and 
other contextually variable factors: it is to hold 
that, independently of all such influences, a propo-
sition has no epistemic status whatsoever. There is 
no fact of the matter as to what kind of justification 
it eitl;1er admits of or requires. Thus stated, contex-
tualism implies a kind of externalism, for though 
appropriate contextual constraints will have to be 
met, if a given claim is to express knowledge, they 
will not always have to be known, or even believed, 
to be met.30 But when we realize that the point of 
contextualism is to oppose the sceptic's or tradi-
tional epistemologist's epistemological realism, 
the externalist element in contextualism ought to 
be more palatable. The problem with externalism 
was that it seemed to deprive us of the possibility 
of answering a perfectly intelligible question: how 
do we come to know anything whatsoever about 
the external world? What we now see is that this 
question is not at all intuitive but reflects theoreti-
cal presuppositions that are not easy to defend. 
Contextualism, with its implied externalism, is not 
offered as a question-begging direct answer to an 
undeniably compelling request for understanding, 
but as a challenge to justify the presumption that 
there is something to understand. 
Methodological Necessity 
We have already seen that, to flesh out the idea 
of "human knowledge" as a possible object of 
theoretical investigation, we have to suppose that 
there are pervasive epistemological constraints or 
relations. That is to say, at least some constraints 
on what propositions demand evidential support 
and on what propositions can provide it must be 
context-invariant. If we do not always insist on 
respecting these constraints in a fully rigorous way, 
this need not mean that they do not apply. To admit 
that certain constraints are often waived is different 
from, indeed incompatible with, claiming that they 
are inapplicable. 
This is a very substantial commitment and it 
is not clear why we should accept it. An exami-
nation of ordinary practices of justification 
strongly suggests that constraints, governing 
what sorts of evidence can properly be brought 
to bear on a disputed claim, what needs to be 
defended, and what can safely be taken for 
granted, though subject to other kinds of con-
textual determination as well, are at least topic-
relative, which is to say determined in part by the 
subject under discussion. 
We might criticize Hume's offhand suggestion 
that only carelessness and inattention save us 
from a permanent, debilitating awareness of the 
truth of scepticism, hence from lapsing into a 
state of chronic, paralysing doubt. In particular 
contexts, disciplines etc., exempting certain prop-
ositions from doubt is what determines the direc-
tion of inquiry. As Wittgenstein remarks: "It may 
be ... that all enquiry on our part is set so as to 
exempt certain propositions from doubt, if they 
are ever formulated. They lie apart from the route 
travelled by enquiry."31 
If some of these propositions cease to lie apart 
from the route travelled by inquiry, then inquiry 
travels by a different route. Or perhaps no clear 
route remains for it to travel by. This is obviously 
the case with investigations in particular scientific 
or scholarly disciplines. Disciplinary constraints 
have a great deal to do with the kinds of questions 
that can and cannot legitimately be raised with-
out radically affecting the direction of inquiry. 
Thus, introducing sceptical doubts about whether 
the Earth really existed a hundred years (or five 
minutes) ago does not lead to a more careful way 
of doing history: it changes the subject, from his-
tory to epistemology. So when Wittgenstein asks: 
"am I to say that the experiment which perhaps I 
make to test the truth of a proposition presupposes 
the truth of the proposition that the apparatus 

66 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
I believe I see is really there?"32 he is clearly invit-
ing the answer "No." And the reason for answering 
"No" is that the possibility mentioned, while rele-
vant to certain general, epistemological problems, 
is completely beside the point in the context of a 
specific experiment in chemistry or physics. To 
bring it up is not to introduce greater rigour into 
the investigation in hand but to shift attention 
to another kind of investigation entirely. 
"[Tlhat something stands fast for me;' 
Wittgenstein remarks, "is not grounded in my 
stupidity or credulity."33 We now see that this is 
so, at least in part, because it is grounded in my 
interests. It is not that I think that no proposition 
that stands fast could ever be questioned, though 
in certain cases I should be likely to feel, as 
Wittgenstein says, "intellectually very distant" 
from someone inclined to raise questions. It is 
just that some doubts are logically excluded by 
forms of investigation that I find significant, 
important, or perhaps just interesting. This has 
nothing to do with dogmatism, credulity or care-
lessness. Wittgenstein sums up the key points in 
the following well-known passages: 
The questions that we raise and our doubts 
depend on the fact that some propositions are 
exempt from doubt, are as it were like hinges on 
which those turn. 
That is to say, it belongs to the logic of our 
scientific investigations that certain things are 
indeed not doubted. 
But it isn't that the situation is like this: We just 
can't investigate everything, and for that reason 
we are forced to rest content with assumption. If I 
want the door to turn, the hinges must stay put.34 
Of course, if I do not want the door to turn I can 
nail it shut; or I might want it to open the other 
way, in which case I will move the hinges. But if 
I want the door to turn this way, it is not just 
more convenient, if a little slapdash, to place the 
hinges where they are: there is nowhere else to 
put them. 
By fixing a range of admissible questions, we 
determine a form of inquiry. But this means that 
a form of inquiry is determined by more than 
purely formal constraints. As Wittgenstein puts it: 
'''The question doesn't arise at all.' Its answer 
would characterise a method. But there is no sharp 
boundary between methodological propositions 
and propositions within a method."35 For a sub-
ject like history, there is more to method than 
abstract procedural rules. This is because the 
exclusion of certain questions (about the exist-
ence of the Earth, the complete and total unreli-
ability of documentary evidence, etc.) amounts 
to the acceptance of substantial factual commit-
ments. These commitments, which must be 
accepted, if what we understand by historical 
inquiry is to be conducted at all, have the status, 
relative to that form of inquiry, of methodological 
necessities. 
I have introduced the idea of a proposition's 
being exempted from doubt as a matter of meth-
odological necessity in connection with the disci-
plinary constraints that determine the general 
directions of highly organized forms of inquiry. 
But it is evident that something similar goes on in 
more informal, everyday settings. Asking some 
questions logically precludes asking others: all 
sorts of everyday certainties have to stand fast if 
we are to get on with life. Again, however, I want 
to emphasize that our situation is misread both 
by the Human naturalist and by the sceptic. The 
naturalist sees our everyday inability to entertain 
radical doubts as showing that nature has simply 
determined us to believe certain things, however 
groundless they seem to us in our more reflective 
moments. By contrast, I want to claim that 
exemption from doubt - epistemic privilege - is a 
matter of methodology, not psychology. In a spe-
cific context, certain exemptions will be logically 
required by the direction of inquiry. We are there-
fore determined by Nature to hold certain things 
fast only in so far as we are naturally inclined to 
interest ourselves in matters requiring us to 
exempt them from doubt. 
This is far from the only point that we must 
emphasize. It is also crucial to note that, if epis-
temic status is determined by the direction of 
inquiry, the reason why, in a given inquiry, cer-
tain propositions have to stand fast has to be 
separated from the reason why that inquiry 
results in knowledge, if it does. Here we recur, 
from a slightly different angle, to the externalist 
element in contextualism. In particular contexts 
of inquiry, certain propositions stand fast as a 
matter of methodological necessity. But inquiries 
informed by them will yield knowledge only if 
those propositions are true, which they need not 
always be. 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
67 
The general moral here is that questions about 
a proposition's epistemic status must always be 
separated from questions about its truth. If epis-
temic status is fixed by the direction of inquiry, 
epistemic status is context-sensitive. Truth how-
ever is not. A proposition is either true or not. 
But, according to the contextualist view I favour, 
we cannot say, in a similarly unqualified way, that 
a proposition is either open to doubt or not. 
Sometimes it will be and sometimes it won't. 
Generally speaking, a proposition is neither true 
because it stands fast nor stands fast because it 
is true. 
We can also see why it was so important at the 
outset to distinguish between formal and sub-
stantive foundationalism. If foundationalism is 
equated with a certain view of the formal struc-
ture of justification - i.e. with the view that infer-
ential justification always requires beliefs that 
function as "fixed points - a contextualist view of 
justification can be seen as (formally) founda-
tionalist. But it certainly need not be substantively 
foundationalist. There are no limits as to what 
might or might not, in an appropriate context, 
be fixed. 
In an earlier chapter, I tried to show that argu-
ments for radical scepticism presuppose the pri-
ority of experiential knowledge over knowledge 
of the world. This enabled me to conclude that 
attempts to establish the intrinsic epistemological 
priority of experiential knowledge on the basis 
of the greater intrinsic dubitability of objective 
knowledge are question-begging. The only reason 
for thinking that such knowledge is intrinsically 
more dubitable is provided by the existence of 
sceptical arguments which, when unpacked, turn 
out to take the doctrine of the priority of experi-
ential knowledge for granted. 
This result did not allow us to conclude 
straight away that scepticism rests on a gratuitous 
epistemological assumption. What it did suggest, 
however, is that the source of the doctrine of the 
priority of experiential knowledge is not evidence 
from our ordinary justificational practices but 
rather the distinctively philosophical project of 
trying to understand how it is possible for us to 
know anything whatsoever about the external 
world. The totality condition that the sceptic 
(or the traditional philosopher) imposes on a 
philosophical understanding of our knowledge of 
the world is what forces us to see that knowledge 
as somehow derivative from experience. No other 
way of seeing it permits an assessment, hence a 
legitimating explanation, at the proper level of 
generality. 
We are now in a position to see why this argu-
ment does not prove what it needs to prove. All it 
shows is that the doctrine of the priority of expe-
riential knowledge over knowledge of the world is 
a methodological necessity of the traditional episte-
mological project. But since the sceptic himself is 
irrevocably committed to distinguishing between 
methodological necessity and truth, it does not 
show, nor by his own standards can the sceptic 
take it to show, that that doctrine is true. 
The result is that the inference from the essen-
tial generality of the traditional epistemological 
project fails to establish the kind of relations of 
epistemological priority needed to threaten us 
with scepticism. To yield sceptical results, these 
relations must reflect more than mere methodo-
logical necessities: they must correspond to fully 
objective epistemological asymmetries. It is not 
enough to point out that if we are to attempt an 
assessment of our knowledge of the world as a 
whole we must take experiential knowledge to be 
epistemologically prior to the knowledge we want 
to assess. Success or failure in the enterprise will 
have the significance the sceptic and the tradi-
tional epistemologist mean it to have only if expe-
riential knowledge really is, as a matter of objective 
epistemological fact, more basic than knowledge 
of the world. If it isn't, or more generally if no 
epistemological relations are in the sense I have 
indicated fully objective, no attempt to ground 
knowledge of some allegedly problematic kind on 
some appropriately prior kind of knowledge will 
amount to an attempt at assessment. Should the 
attempt fail, or even inevitably fail, the sceptic 
will be left with a harmless logico-conceptual 
point but with no way of advancing to his pessi-
mistic epistemological conclusion. 
I remarked that the argument from the total-
ity condition to the absolute priority of experi-
ential knowledge over knowledge of the world 
rests on two assumptions: that there is some-
thing to assess, and that charting its relation to 
experience amounts to assessing it. I have con-
centrated on the first, but by so doing have shown 
what to say about the second. As a pure method-
ological proposal, there is nothing wrong with 
setting propositions about the world against 

68 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
experiential propositIOns, for the purposes of 
exploring possible relations between them. Like 
Goodman, we could think of phenomenalism as 
an interesting constructive project. We could ask, 
"To what extent can a phenomenalist reconstruc-
tion of the world be carried through?" without 
thinking that we were even addressing any ques-
tions of epistemic legitimacy.36 Think of the way 
we can model arithmetic in set theory: though 
this is an interesting piece of mathematics, we 
need ancillary epistemological assumptions to 
think of it as relevant to an "assessment" of arith-
metic. But this is not the spirit in which the scep-
tic thinks of the relation between experiential 
knowledge and knowledge of the world. He needs 
a fully objective epistemological asymmetry, and 
this is what no argument from methodological 
necessity will ever yield. 
Some philosophers, Carnap for example, hold 
that the sceptic fails to undermine ordinary knowl-
edge of the world because his statements, as he 
intends them to be taken, mean nothing at all. As 
a statement "internal" to our everyday linguistic 
framework, "There are material objects" is a trivial 
consequence of any statement about the world. 
But as an "external" statement about that frame-
work, an attempted statement, though made in 
the very same words, will lack "cognitive signifi-
cance." However, the sceptic might be equally 
unsuccessful if his statements, as they must be 
understood in the unusual context of philosophi-
cal reflection, mean something different from 
what they ordinarily mean. Thus Thompson 
Clarke suggests that the very general common-
sense propositions with which Moore confronts 
the sceptic can be taken two ways, the "plain" way 
and the "philosophical" way. For example: 
Suppose a physiologist lecturing on mental 
abnormalities observes: Each of us who is normal 
knows that he is now awake, not dreaming or hallu-
cinating, that there is a real public world outside his 
mind which he is now perceiving, that in this world 
there are three-dimensional animate and inanimate 
bodies of many shapes and sizes. ... In contrast, 
individuals suffering from certain mental abnor-
malities each believes that what we know to be the 
real public world is his imaginative creation.37 
The italicized, plain propositions are "verbal 
twins" of propositions typically attacked and 
defended in discussions of philosophical scepti-
cism. But in plain contexts, nobody doubts that 
they are true, even though plain common sense 
recognizes the very phenomena - dreaming, hal-
lucinating, and so on - that the sceptic appeals to 
in his attempt to show that we can never know 
that we are in touch with "a real public world." 
Whether there is a clash between philosophy and 
common sense will depend, therefore, on the rela-
tion between philosophical and plain knowing. 
Here Clarke is more subtle than Carnap, for 
he recognizes that the sceptic has an account of 
the relation between philosophy and common 
sense which both preserves the relevance of phil-
osophical discoveries to ordinary plain knowing 
and makes it hard to think that sceptiCal claims 
are less than fully meaningfuJ.38 Ordinary, plain 
knowing is hemmed by practical considerations. 
By contrasts, to philosophize is "to step outside 
the nonsemantical practice" and, meaning simply 
what one's words mean, ask whether we really 
know what we (plainly) take ourselves to know. 
Compared with our philosophizing, ordinary 
thinking is "restricted." All the sceptic has to do is 
to get us to look beyond the restrictions. This is 
easy enough since there is a standing invitation to 
look "beyond the plain" in our conception of 
knowledge as knowledge of an objective world. 
We want to know what there is: not just relative to 
this and that particular restriction, imposed by 
this or that practical purpose or limitation, but 
absolutely. 
Still, the final distance between Clarke and 
Carnap is not as great as their initial divergence 
might suggest. Clarke too holds that, in the end, 
both "philosophical common sense" and its 
sceptical denial "are a spurious fiction if our 
conceptual-human constitution is not standard." 
Amongst other things, a conceptual-human con-
stitution of the standard type requires that "Each 
concept or the conceptual scheme must be 
divorceable intact from our practices, from what-
ever constitutes the essential character of the plain" 
and that we, as concept users, are "purely ascer-
taining observers who, usually by means of our 
senses, ascertain, when possible, whether items 
fulfill the conditions legislated by concepts."39 But 
the sceptic himself shows that our conceptual-
human constitution cannot be of the standard 
type. Our plain knowledge that we are not dream-
ing right now - the sort of knowledge expressed 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
69 
by the physiologist - cannot be undermined by 
the plain possibility that we might, in fact, be 
asleep. But it would be if our conceptual-human 
constitution were of the standard type. For on 
this point the sceptic is right: there are no marks 
or features that conclusively distinguish waking 
experience from dreaming. So the fact of plain 
knowing, combined with the sceptic's point about 
dreaming or hallucinating, shows that our con-
ceptual-human constitution is not of the stand-
ard type. This insight is part of the legacy of 
scepticism. 
In representing the sceptic as helping bring 
about his own undoing, Clarke prefigures the 
strategy followed by Wright. Wright, we may 
recall, argues that the sceptic does indeed show 
that his target-propositions - for example, that 
there is a real, public world - are beyond justifica-
tion. They are beyond justification because the 
sole evidence we can bring to bear on them only 
functions as evidence if they are already known to 
be true. Thus sensory experience only counts in 
favour of any proposition about the public world 
on assumptions that already commit us to that 
world's existence. But the lesson to learn from this 
is that the propositions the sceptic represents as 
groundless, factual assumptions, are not really 
factual at all. If a proposition's factuality requires 
some account of the cognitive powers that would 
be required for knowing that proposition to be 
true, and if the sceptic shows that, in the case of 
some propositions, no such account can be given, 
scepticism is self-undermining. This argument 
shares with Clarke's more than just structural 
similarities. 
None of these arguments appeals to me. I do 
not want to distinguish between internal and 
external questions or between plain and philo-
sophical meanings of statements. Nor do I wish to 
claim that, for deep philosophical reasons, appar-
ently factual statements are really not factual at 
all. The reason is that I think that all these reac-
tions to scepticism reveal the deep and pervasive 
influence of epistemological realism. I suggested 
earlier that one of the epistemological realist's 
central commitments is to the doctrine that con-
tent determines status. Now I claim that the 
attempt to insulate common sense from sceptical 
undermining by finding a different meaning, or 
no factual meaning at all, in the apparently com-
monsensical propositions the sceptic examines is 
driven by that same doctrine. If a statement is 
certain in one context but not in another, the 
argument assumes, this can only be because a 
change in context induces a change in meaning. 
So if, plainly speaking, we do know that we are 
awake at the moment, whereas, philosophically 
speaking, we don't, our plain and philosophical 
propositions can only be "verbal twins:' But if, as 
I have argued, epistemological status is never 
determined by content alone, there is no such 
easy inference from a difference in status to a dif-
ference in content. We can explain the context-
boundedness of sceptical doubts without getting 
entangled in this baroque apparatus of plain and 
philosophical meanings. As we shall see in a 
moment, this is all to the good. 
Once again, I must emphasize that my argu-
ment on these matters will not be complete until 
I have examined the sceptic's own favoured 
account of the nature of philosophical reflection. 
Even so, however, I think it is fair to conclude that 
we are well on the way to accomplishing the pri-
mary goal of theoretical diagnosis, which is to get 
the sceptic to share the burden of theory. But 
there is a nagging question that is likely to surface 
again at this point. If we are left with one theory 
of knowledge confronting another, and we will 
never be able to determine conclusively which is 
correct, doesn't the sceptic win ties and so tri-
umph at second order? 
If we abandon epistemological realism, there 
is a clear sense in which we no longer see such 
things as "knowledge of the world" as appropriate 
objects of theory. At most, we will have a theory 
of the concept of knowledge. We will not have a 
theory of knowledge as well. A fortiori, we will not 
be left confronting the sceptic's theory with a 
theory of our own. 
Perhaps this will look like a purely verbal 
manoeuvre, for we shall certainly be left with 
epistemological views, whether or not we want to 
think of them as a theory of knowledge. But the 
point isn't just verbal. For what we have seen is 
that the sceptic's theoretical commitments are in 
fact far more extensive than those of his contextu-
alist opponent. Contextualism simply takes seri-
ously and at face-value what seem to be evident 
facts of ordinary epistemic practices: that relevant 
evidence varies with context, that content alone 
never determines epistemological status, and so 
on. The theoretical resources required to explain 

70 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
these appearances away belong entirely to the 
sceptic. So it might be reasonable to object that 
the sceptic wins ties, if the outcome of my theo-
retical diagnosis were a tie. And if I had followed 
philosophers like Carnap, Clarke, or Wright and 
rested my diagnosis on difficult and controversial 
views about meaning, perhaps it would have been. 
But as things stand it isn't. 
This is not all. It seems to me entirely reason-
able to hold that extra theoretical commitments 
demand extra arguments. But where will the 
sceptic find them? Not in evidence from everyday 
practice, which fits in as well or better with con-
textualism. Presumably, then, in some kind of 
general, theoretical considerations. Here, how-
ever, we run into the fallaciousness of the argu-
ment from methodological necessity: by the 
sceptic's own standards, there is no inference 
from the fact that we must take experiential 
knowledge to be generally prior to knowledge of 
the world, if we are to make room for a project of 
assessing our knowledge of the world as a whole, 
to its really being so. But if the argument from 
methodological necessity does not show that the 
sceptic's principles are true, what would? It is 
hard to say: for although the argument from 
methodological necessity is fallacious, it is not as 
if there are other ways of arguing for the priority 
of experiential knowledge. On the contrary, as we 
Notes 
Barry 
Stroud, 
"Understanding 
Human 
Knowledge in General," in Marjorie Clay and 
Keith Lehrer (eds), Knowledge and Skepticism 
(Boulder, CO: Westview, 1989), p. 32. 
2 W. V. Quine, "Epistemology Naturalized;' this 
vol., ch. 39. On Quine's problematic attitude 
towards traditional epistemology, see Barry 
Stroud, The Significance of Philosophical 
Scepticism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1984), ch. VI. 
3 Barry Stroud, "Skepticism and the Possibility 
of Knowledge;' Journal of Philosophy 81, pp. 
545-51. p. 551. 
4 
"Understanding Human Knowledge;' p. 49. 
5 Thomas Nagel, The View from Nowhere 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1986), 
p.68. 
6 
"Understanding Human Knowledge;' p. 32. 
have seen repeatedly, attempts to argue for it 
directly beg the question. So the doctrine has to 
be true but unarguable. 
I think that the sceptic's difficulties are com-
pounded when we turn from this relatively par-
ticular doctrine to epistemological realism in 
general. It is not easy to imagine what a convinc-
ing argument for epistemological realism would 
even look like, or what evidence it could appeal to. 
This is where the clash between scepticism and 
our ordinary attitudes really does work to the 
sceptic's disadvantage. It does so because our 
ordinary practices of justification not only toler-
ate but invite a contexualist construction: and 
contextualism is the antidote to epistemological 
realism. 
True, a contextual view of knowledge and jus-
tification will seem unsatisfactory to a philosopher 
who continues to feel the lack of an understanding 
of human knowledge in general. But if my argu-
ment to this point is correct, he will feel this lack 
only if he is already predisposed to epistemological 
realism. Once more, we are starting to run round a 
very small circle of ideas. The sceptic's foundation-
alism, together with the epistemological realism it 
embodies, is a brute metaphysical commitment. 
The theoretical diagnostician could hardly ask 
for more. 
7 Rene Descartes, "Meditations on First 
Philosophy: 
First Meditation;' in 
The 
Philosophical Works of Descartes, vol. 1, trans. 
Elizabeth Haldane and G. R. T. Ross 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1972), p. 145; David Hume, A Treatise of 
Human Nature, ed. L. A. Selby-Bigge, 2nd 
edn rev. P. H. Nidditch (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1978), p. xx (hereafter, 
THN). 
8 I am grateful to Simon Blackburn for this 
useful phrase. 
9 These quotations and the next, THN, 
pp. xv-xvi. 
10 
Novum Organum, bk II in J. Spedding, 
R. Ellis, and D. Heath (eds), The Works of 
Francis Bacon (London: Longman, 1857-8), 
vol. IV. My example is slightly unfair to 

EPISTEMOLOGICAL REALISM 
71 
Bacon in that he did not intend to give 
instances of everything that would, III 
common parlance, be said to involve "heat-
ing." His aim was to collect instances which 
"agree in the same nature, though in sub-
stance the most unlike": Novum Organum, 
II, aphorism xi. 
11 
W. V. Quine, "Two Dogmas of Empiricism," 
in W. V. Quine (ed.), From a Logical Point of 
View (New York: Harper, 1963). 
12 
H. P. Grice and P. F. Strawson, "In Defence of 
a Dogma," Philosophical Review (1956). 
13 
I must thank Alvin Goldman for pressing me 
on this point. 
14 
Myles 
Burnyeat ("Idealism and Greek 
Philosophy: What Descartes Saw and Berkeley 
Missed;' Philosophical Review 90, pp. 3-40) 
thinks that Descartes's externalization of his 
own body is the key move in his invention of 
the problem of our knowledge of the exter-
nal world. I see it as a consequence of his 
epistemological realism. 
15 
W. V. Quine, Pursuit of Truth (Cambridge 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1990), p. 80. 
16 
Ibid., p. 82. 
17 
However, it seems to me that the more a 
purely disquotational account of "true" can 
be shown to capture whatever we want out 
of the truth-predicate, the less reason there is 
for thinking that there must be some "truth-
making" property that all true sentences 
share: the invitation to apply Occam's Razor 
ought to be, irresistible. 
18 
Stephen Leeds, "Theories of Reference and 
Truth;' Erkenntnis (1978). 
19 
Attempts to discuss the Gettier problem and 
traditional sceptical questions in the same 
breath often seem rather contrived. The 
epistemological analogue of Leed's distinc-
tion explains why. 
20 
Keith Lehrer notes that the "definitional or 
formal" in his theory of knowledge, which 
"constitutes an analysis or explication of the 
concept of knowledge;' "leaves open sub-
stantive issues:' See Lehrer, "Knowledge 
Reconsidered" in Clay and Lehrer (eds), 
Knowledge and Skepticism, quotation p. l32. 
21 
Laurence BonJour, The Structure of Empirical 
Knowledge (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1985), pp. 89ff. Subsequent cita-
tions given by Structure and page numbers. 
22 
The terminology of formal versus substan-
tive foundationalism is also employed by 
Ernest Sosa: see "The Raft and the Pyramid," 
this vol., ch. l3. However, I am uncertain 
whether my usage is the same as Sosa's. 
According to Sosa, "A type of formal founda-
tionalism with respect to a normative or 
evaluative property I/J is the view that the 
conditions (actual and possible) within 
which I/J would apply can be specified in gen-
eral, perhaps recursively. Substantive founda-
tionalism is only a particular way of doing 
so" (p. 278, italics in original). From my point 
of view, everything depends on what is 
allowed to count as a "general" specification. 
23 
Though I have grave doubts about the notion 
of intrinsic credibility, having written about 
all this elsewhere (Groundless Belief (Oxford: 
Blackwell), chs 2, 3, and 5) I will not repeat 
myself. My interest here is in the foundation-
alist's conception of epistemological prior-
ity, which I see as his deepest theoretical 
commitment. 
24 
Letter to Mersenne (24 December, 1640), 
quoted from Anthony Kenny (ed.), Descartes: 
PhilosophicalLetters (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1981), p. 87. 
25 
Ludwig Wittgenstein, On Certainty (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1969), p. 250; hereafter OC. 
26 
Ibid., p. 125. 
27 
Failure to appreciate this point is what viti-
ates Marie McGinn's intuitive reconstruc-
tion of the case for scepticism. 
28 
~C, p. 53. 
29 
For a succinct defence of contextualism, see 
David B. Annis, ''A Contextualist Theory of 
Epistemic Justification;' American Philo-
sophical Quarterly (1978), reprinted III 
Moser, Empirical Knowledge (Totowa, NJ: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 1986). Annis sees 
Pierce, Dewey, and Popper as having been, 
historically, the key contextualists. He may 
be right, though I have doubts about how 
far these philosophers saw into the implica-
tions of contextualism. For example, I doubt 
whether Popper would be as suspicious as 
he is about justification if he were really a 
thoroughgoing contextualist. 
30 
Obviously, this kind of externalism is not the 
same as pure reliabilism, except in so far as 
the apparent theoretical simplicity of some 

72 
MICHAEL WILLIAMS 
forms of reliabilism is a sham. Consider, 
for example, Colin McGinn's suggestion 
(in "The Concept of Knowledge;' in Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy IX (1984)) that know-
ing that p depends on the availability of a 
"way of telling" that p. This analysis does not 
guarantee any theoretical integrity in "ways 
of telling" and is therefore compatible with 
a contextual, hence anti-epistemological-
realist, conception of knowledge. 
31 
OC,p.88. 
32 
Ibid., p. 163. 
33 
Ibid., p. 235. 
34 
Ibid., pp. 341-3. 
35 
Ibid., p. 318, emphasis in original. Cf. the 
metaphor of the river bed at pp. 95-8. 
36 
Nelson Goodman, Ways of Worldmaking 
(Indianapolis: Hackett, 1978), ch. 1. 
37 
Thompson 
Clarke, 
"The 
Legacy 
of 
Skepticism;' Journal of Philosophy 69, pp. 
754-69; p. 756. 
38 
Ibid., pp. 758 ff. 
39 
Ibid., pp. 762, 761. 

PART II 
The Structure of Knowledge 
and Justification 


Introduction 
The Pyrrhonian problematic can be formulated as follows. One can be justified in 
believing that p only if one has a reason to believe that p. But if a proposition that q is 
one's reason to believe that p, it can provide justification only if it is a good reason - that 
is, only if it, too, is something one is justified in believing. This leaves three possibilities 
for any tree of justification: (1) all its branches terminate; (2) at least one of its branches 
contains a loop; (3) at least one of its branches is infinite. Thus, we have the three tra-
ditional theories of justification: foundationalism, coherentism, and the rather less 
popular infinitism. To be complete, there is a fourth option not mentioned, namely 
that skepticism is true, and there are no trees of justification, for no one is ever justified 
in believing anything. 
This description of the Pyrrhonian problematic corresponds closely to the way 
Roderick Chisholm sees the epistemological terrain. Faced with these options, he 
chooses foundationalism. This means admitting that there are some propositions that 
we are justified in believing but for which we lack reasons in the form of further prop-
ositions we are justified in believing. Chisholm fully embraces this consequence. Having 
made the statement "There lies a key:' if one is asked "What is your justification for 
thinking that?," one must provide an answer, but eventually, in the chain of questions, 
a claim about one's present experience will be challenged: "What is your justification 
for thinking you have such-and-such experience?" To this, Chisholm thinks one can do 
no better than to answer: "My justification is that I have such-and-such experience." 
Similarly, faced with a challenge to a claim regarding one's present belief that p, one 
must repeat oneself, saying "My justification for thinking I believe that p is that I believe 
that p." 
Wilfrid Sellars attacks the doctrine of the given precisely on the issue of the episte-
mological status of these foundational beliefs. If there is knowledge that is unsupported 
by further knowledge, as Chisholm would have to acknowledge, then reports of this 
knowledge, like reports of any piece of knowledge, must have authority (Chisholm and 
Sellars seem to assume that the structure of justification is the same as the structure of 

76 
INTRODUCTION 
knowledge). But a report can have authority only if the person making it recognizes its 
authority. Thus, even in the case of my knowledge that what I see before me is green, 
my report "This is green" must have authority that I recognize. Moreover, in this case, 
the authority can only lie in the reliable connection between the production of tokens 
of "This is green" and the presence of green objects. So if I am to know through obser-
vation that what I see is green, I must recognize the truth of this generalization. How, 
then, do I know the truth of the generalization? My present knowledge is based on 
memory knowledge of instances of it. What of my knowledge of these instances? Are 
we headed for a regress? No, answers Sellars, for although I have such memory knowl-
edge, the experiential beliefs from which these memories are derived need not have 
been instances of knowledge. (Presumably, these instances of memory knowledge, too, 
have authority that is also recognized by the subject in the form of a belief that reports 
of "This was green, and I experienced it to be so" co-vary with actual past encounters 
with green objects.) 
Sellars' account rules out Chisholm's given. Formulated in the language of beliefs 
rather than of reports: if all knowledge of particular matters of fact, including observa-
tional knowledge, depends on general knowledge, and if in turn this general knowledge 
itself depends on knowledge of particular matters of fact, then empirical knowledge 
has no foundation. 
Laurence BonJour joins Sellars in arguing that foundationalism fails to solve the 
problem that it was designed to solve, viz. the Pyrrhonian problematic. He bases his 
argument on the very nature of epistemic justification as essentially connected to the 
cognitive goal of truth. What this connection amounts to, he claims, is that a belief is 
justified only if one has good reason to think it is true. Not only this: one must have 
good reason to think, regarding whatever feature that in fact makes the belief justified, 
that beliefs possessing that feature are likely to be true. The problem for foundational-
ists is that there is only one conceivable way foundational beliefs could count as justi-
fied: one would have to know, regarding whatever feature makes foundational beliefs 
foundational, that beliefs with that feature were likely to be true. Yet this is not know-
able a priori, at least about any of the sources of empirical knowledge. Nor can it be 
known a posteriori, for it could only be established using circular reasoning, which is 
eschewed by foundationalists. 
BonJour anticipates objections to his interpretation of the conditions required for 
having good reason to think a belief true. In favor of givenists, he acknowledges that the 
search for the given is a search for something that justifies foundational beliefs. 
Nonetheless, they seek the impossible. There cannot be a state of mind that is able to 
impart justification but needs no justification itself. To impart justification, a state must 
have assertive content, and having assertive content suffices for standing in need of 
justification. 
If Sellars and BonJour are right that foundationalism is inadequate, then the door is 
open for alternatives. Donald Davidson proposes a coherentist theory based on conclu-
sions about meaning and content. Meaning, coherence, and truth, he argues, are inter-
nally connected. The meaning of one's words and one's thoughts depends on one's 
being interpretable as a coherent (indeed a rational) believer, most of whose beliefs are 
true. Since a fully informed or omniscient interpreter would also interpret any believer 
as having mostly true beliefs, it follows that all believers, ourselves included, have mostly 
true beliefs. This would establish a further connection to justification, according to 

PART II 
Davidson, for in seeing that most of our beliefs are true, we gain a presumptive reason 
in favor of retaining any arbitrary one of them. 
Susan Haack sees merit in both the coherentist and foundationalist approaches. Her 
aim is to connect epistemic justification essentially with truth-conduciveness. After 
examining varieties of foundationalist and coherentist theories, she claims that we 
remain in need of an account of how there could be both logical and causal relations 
between experience and beliefs. Only a logical relation can ensure the rational or justi-
ficatory connection between experience and belief. And only a causal connection can 
ensure the linking of empirical justification with truth. For an empirical worldly fact 
can enter our cognitive economy only through experience. 
Haack proposes to provide both the logical and causal connection by employing a 
distinction between belief states (S-beliefs) and the contents of those states (C-beliefs). 
She begins by giving an evidentialist account of justification: agent A is more/less justi-
fied in believing that p depending upon how good 1\s evidence is for p. The distinction 
between S- and C-beliefs is then employed in characterizing 1\s evidence.1\s evidence 
consists of three sorts of items: 1\s S-reasons, 1\s C-reasons, and 1\s experiential C-evi-
dence for believing that p. The S-reasons are themselves S-beliefs sustained ultimately 
by 1\s experiential S-states. The role of experience in sustaining S-beliefs, Haack claims, 
identifies what was right about experientialist foundationalism. 1\s C-reasons for 
believing that p are the C-beliefs that serve as the contents of 1\s S-reasons for believing 
that p. Coherentists were right to emphasize the non-linear character of C-reasons in 
justification. No class of C-beliefs is basic in the nexus of C-reasons. Finally, 1\s experi-
ential C-evidence consists of true propositions to the effect that A is in a certain state, 
viz. the state that constitutes 1\s experiential S-evidence for believing that p. It is the last 
element of 1\s evidence, Haack believes, that supplies the necessary connection between 
justification and truth. One might be tempted to doubt this: surely, a proposition to the 
effect that it seems visually as if there is something green before me provides no guar-
anteed link to truth. It could very well be that my experience is unveridical. How could 
the mere fact that I have an experience as of something green before me be evidence in 
favor of there being something green before me? Haack's answer is that the appropriate 
description of the experience characterizes it in a world-involving way. Thus, a visual 
experience as if there being something green before me is to be described as the kind 
of experience a normal subject would be in, in normal circumstances, when looking at 
a green thing. This would seem to provide the link between justification and truth. 
That I am in the kind of experiential state that is normally or typically caused by a 
green thing does seem to make it objectively more probable that there is a green thing 
before me. 
Thus, we have foundherentism. Foundationalist elements survive in the claim that 
experiential S-reasons form the causal bedrock, coherentist elements in the claim that 
the structure of C-reasons do not have a linear structure. The connection with truth, 
missed by coherentism and by many forms of foundationalism, is secured through the 
claim that part of the C-evidence for a belief includes truths describing experiences in 
terms of their typical external causes. 
Like Haack, Ernest So sa attempts to reconcile coherentism and foundationalism -
the raft and the pyramid. Traditional foundationalism and coherentism alike are com-
mitted to a kind of "formal" foundationalism, which holds that epistemic conditions 
supervene on non-epistemic conditions in a way that can be specified in general, 
77 

78 
INTRODUCTION 
perhaps recursively. Formal foundationalism, according to Sosa, derives its plausibility 
from the claims that epistemic conditions are normative and that all normative condi-
tions are supervenient. If a state of affairs is good, it must be good because it is a state 
of pleasure or because it is a state of desire satisfaction, etc. It cannot be barely good or 
good ultimately owing merely to the goodness of some other state( s). So, too, if a belief 
is justified, some non-epistemic condition must account for its justification. Sosa goes 
on to argue that the thesis of formal foundationalism conflicts with internalist theories 
of justification (perhaps such as Sellars'). If one's justification for believing that p is 
fixed ultimately by non -epistemic facts, then such justification cannot in every case also 
require the possession of further justified beliefs. 
In the final selection of this section, Peter Klein argues in favor of the often dis-
missed position of infinitism. Infinitism provides an account of justification accord-
ing to which the structure of justificatory reasons is infinite and non-repeating. Klein 
argues that infinitism provides an acceptable account of rational beliefs, while other 
epistemic theories, such as foundationalism and coherentism, cannot. This is because 
infinitism is the only epistemic theory that can satisfy two plausible constraints upon 
reasoning - that reasoning neither be arbitrary nor beg the question. Infinitism is 
similar to foundationalism in holding that not every belief counts as a reason but dif-
fers to the extent that the infinitist also holds PAA (the principle of avoiding arbi-
trariness), which states that there are no foundational reasons and so every reason 
stands in need of another reason. Infinitism is similar to coherentism in holding that 
only reasons can justify a belief but differs to the extent that the infinitist also holds 
PAC (the principle of avoiding circularity), which states that justifying reasons cannot 
beg the question. For much of the paper Klein deals with the main objections to infin-
itism, including (1) the finite mind objection, (2) the objection that if some knowledge 
is inferential then some knowledge must not be, (3) a reductio argument against the 
possibility of an infinite regress providing a justification for beliefs, and (4) skeptical 
objections. 
Further Reading 
Alston, William, "Two Types of Foundationalism," 
in Epistemic Justification (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1989), pp. 19-38. 
Audi, Robert, The Structure of Justification (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1993). 
Bender, J. (ed.), The Current State of the Coherence 
Theory (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1989). 
BonJour, Laurence, The Structure of Empirical 
Knowledge 
(Cambridge, 
MA: 
Harvard 
University Press, 1985). 
BonJour, Laurence and Ernest Sosa, Epistemic 
Justification: Internalism vs. Externalism, Foun-
dations vs. Virtues (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003). 
Chisholm, Roderick, The Foundations of Knowing 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1982). 
--, Theory of Knowledge (Englewood Cliffs: 
Prentice-Hall, 1966, 2nd edn 1977, 3rd edn 
1989). 
DePaul, Michael (ed.), Resurrecting Old-Fashioned 
Foundationalism (Langham, MD: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 2000). 
Fant!, Jeremy, "Modest Infinitism," Canadian 
Journal of Philosophy 33 (2003), pp. 537-62. 
Gillett, Carl, "Infinitism Redux? A Response to 
Klein," Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
66 (2003),pp. 709-17. 

PART II 
79 
Haack, Susan, Evidence and Inquiry: Towards Recon-
struction in Epistemology (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1993). 
Lehrer, Keith, Theory of Knowledge (Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1990). 
Lewis, C. I., An Analysis of Knowledge and 
Valuation (LaSalle, IL: Open Court Publishing 
Company, 1946). 
Plantinga, Alvin, Warrant: The Current Debate 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). 
Rescher, Nicholas, Methodological Pragmatism 
(New York: New York University Press, 1977). 
Sellars, Wilfrid, "Empiricism and the Philosophy 
of Mind," reprinted in Sellars, Science, 
Perception and Reality (London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1963). 
--, "Givenness and Explanatory Coherence;' 
Journal of Philosophy 70 (1973), pp. 612-24. 
Sosa, Ernest, Knowledge in Perspective: Selected 
Essays in Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991). 

CHAPTER 7 
The Myth of the Given 
Roderick M. Chisholm 
1. The doctrine of "the given" involved two theses 
about our knowledge. We may introduce them by 
means of a traditional metaphor: 
(A) The knowledge which a person has at any 
time is a structure or edifice, many parts 
and stages of which help to support each 
other, but which as a whole is supported 
by its own foundation. 
The second thesis is a specification of the first: 
(B) The foundation of one's knowledge con-
sists (at least in part) of the apprehension 
of what have been called, variously, "sensa-
tions;, "sense-impressions," "appearances;' 
"sensa," "sense-qualia;' and "phenomena." 
These phenomenal entities, said to be at the base 
of the structure of knowledge, are what was called 
"the given." A third thesis is sometimes associated 
with the doctrine of the given, but the first two 
theses do not imply it. We may formulate it in the 
terms of the same metaphor: 
(C) The only apprehension which is thus basic 
to the structure of knowledge is our 
Originally published in R. Chisholm, Philosophy 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1964), pp. 261-86. 
apprehension of "appearances" (etc.) -
our apprehension of the given. 
Theses (A) and (B) constitute the "doctrine of the 
given"; thesis (C), if a label were necessary, 
might be called "the phenomenalistic version" 
of the doctrine. The first two theses are essential 
to the empirical tradition in Western philosophy. 
The third is problematic for traditional empiri-
cism and depends in part, but only in part, upon 
the way in which the metaphor of the edifice and 
its foundation is spelled out. 
I believe it is accurate to say that, at the time at 
which our study begins, most American episte-
mologists accepted the first two theses and thus 
accepted the doctrine of the given. The expres-
sion "the given" became a term of contemporary 
philosophical vocabulary partly because of its 
use by c.1. Lewis in his Mind and the World-Order 
(Scribner, 1929). Many of the philosophers who 
accepted the doctrine avoided the expression 
because of its association with other more con-
troversial parts of Lewis's book - a book which 
might be taken (though mistakenly, I think) also 
to endorse thesis (C), the "phenomenalistic ver-
sion" of the doctrine. The doctrine itself - theses 
(A) and (B) - became a matter of general contro-
versy during the period of our survey. 
Thesis (A) was criticized as being "absolute" and 
thesis (B) as being overly "subjective." Both criti-
cisms may be found in some of the "instrumental-
istic" writings of John Dewey and philosophers 

THE MYTH OF THE GIVEN 
81 
associated with him. They may also be found in 
the writings of those philosophers of science 
("logical empiricists") writing in the tradition of 
the Vienna Circle. (At an early stage of this tradi-
tion, however, some of these same philosophers 
seem to have accepted all three theses.) Discussion 
became entangled in verbal confusions - espe-
cially in connection with the uses of such terms 
as "doubt;' "certainty," "appearance;' and "imme-
diate experience." Philosophers, influenced by 
the work that Ludwig Wittgenstein had been 
doing in the 1930s, noted such confusions in 
detail, and some of them seem to have taken the 
existence of such confusions to indicate that (A) 
and (B) are false. l Many have rejected both theses 
as being inconsistent with a certain theory of 
thought and reference; among them, in addition 
to some of the critics just referred to, we find phi-
losophers in the tradition of nineteenth-century 
"idealism." 
Philosophers of widely diverging schools now 
believe that "the myth of the given" has finally 
been dispelled.2 I suggest, however, that, although 
thesis (C), "the phenomenalistic version;' is false, 
the two theses, (A) and (B), which constitute the 
doctrine of the given are true. 
The doctrine is not merely the consequence of 
a metaphor. We are led to it when we attempt to 
answer certain questions about justification - our 
justification for supposing, in connection with 
anyone of the things that we know to be true, 
that it is something that we know to be true. 
2. To the question "What justification do I have 
for thinking I know that a is true?" one may reply: 
"I know that b is true, and if I know that b is true 
then I also know that a is true." And to the ques-
tion "What justification do I have for thinking I 
know that b is true?" one may reply: "I know that 
c is true, and if I know that c is true then I also 
know that b is true." Are we thus led, sooner or 
later, to something n of which one may say: "What 
justifies me in thinking I know that n is true is 
simply the fact that n is true." If there is such an n, 
then the belief or statement that n is true may be 
thought of either as a belief or statement which 
"justifies itself" or as a belief or statement which is 
itself "neither justified nor unjustified." The dis-
tinction - unlike that between a Prime Mover 
which moves itself and a Prime Mover which is 
neither in motion nor at rest - is largely a verbal 
one; the essential thing, if there is such an n, is 
that it provides a stopping place in the process, or 
dialectic, of justification. 
We may now re-express, somewhat less meta-
phorically, the two theses which I have called the 
"doctrine of the given:' The first thesis, that our 
knowledge is an edifice or structure having its 
own foundation, becomes (A) "every statement, 
which we are justified in thinking that we know, is 
justified in part by some statement which justifies 
itself." The second thesis, that there are appear-
ances ("the given") at the foundation of our 
knowledge, becomes (B) "there are statements 
about appearances which thus justify themselves." 
(The third thesis - the "phenomenalistic version" 
of the doctrine of the given - becomes (C) "there 
are no self-justifying statements which are not 
statements about appearances:') 
Let us now turn to the first of the two theses 
constituting the doctrine of the given. 
3. "Every justified statement is justified in part by 
some statement which justifies itself." Could it be 
that the question which this thesis is supposed to 
answer is a question which arises only because of 
some mistaken assumption? If not, what are the 
alternative ways of answering it? And did any of 
the philosophers with whom we are concerned 
actually accept any of these alternatives? The first 
two questions are less difficult to answer than the 
third. 
There are the following points of view to be 
considered, each of which seems to have been 
taken by some of the philosophers in the period 
of our survey. 
(1) 
One may believe that the questions about 
justification which give rise to our problem 
are based upon false assumptions and hence 
that they should not be asked at all. 
(2) 
One may believe that no statement or claim 
is justified unless it is justified, at least in 
part, by some other justified statement or 
claim which it does not justify; this belief 
may suggest that one should continue the 
process of justifying ad indefinitum, justify-
ing each claim by reference to some addi-
tional claim. 
(3) 
One may believe that no statement or claim 
a is justified unless it is justified by some 
other justified statement or claim b, and that 

82 
RODERICK M. CHISHOLM 
b is not justified unless it in turn is justified 
by a; this would suggest that the process of 
justifying is, or should be, circular. 
(4) 
One may believe that there are some par-
ticular claims n at which the process of jus-
tifying should stop, and one may then hold 
of any such claim n either: (a) n is justified 
by something - viz., experience or observa-
tion - which is not itself a claim and which 
therefore cannot be said itself either to be 
justified or unjustified; (b) n is itself unjusti-
fied; (c) n justifies itself; or (d) n is neither 
justified nor unjustified. 
These possibilities, I think, exhaust the sig-
nificant points of view; let us now consider them 
in turn. 
4. "The question about justification which give 
rise to the problem are based upon false assump-
tions and therefore should not be asked at all." 
The questions are not based upon false 
assumptions; but most of the philosophers who 
discussed the questions put them in such a mis-
leading way that one is very easily misled into 
supposing that they are based upon false 
assumptions. 
Many philosophers, following 
Descartes, 
Russell, and Husserl, formulated the questions 
about justification by means of such terms as 
"doubt;"'certainty," and "incorrigibility;' and they 
used, or misused, these terms in such a way that, 
when their questions were taken in the way in 
which one would ordinarily take them, they could 
be shown to be based upon false assumptions. 
One may note, for example, that the statement 
"There is a clock on the mantelpiece" is not self-
justifying - for to the question "What is your jus-
tification for thinking you know that there is a 
clock on the mantelpiece?" the proper reply would 
be to make some other statement (e.g., "I saw it 
there this morning and no one would have taken 
it away") - and one may then go on to ask "But 
are there any statements which can be said to jus-
tify themselves?" If we express these facts, as many 
philosophers did, by saying that the statement 
"There is a clock on the mantelpiece" is one which 
is not "certain;' or one which may be "doubted," 
and if we then go on to ask "Does this doubtful 
statement rest upon other statements which are 
certain and incorrigible?" then we are using terms 
in an extraordinarily misleading way. The ques-
tion "Does this doubtful statement rest upon 
statements which are certain and incorrigible?" -
if taken as one would ordinarily take it - does rest 
upon a false assumption, for (we may assume) the 
statement that there is a clock on the mantelpiece 
is one which is not doubtful at all. 
John Dewey, and some of the philosophers 
whose views were very similar to his, tended to 
suppose, mistakenly, that the philosophers who 
asked themselves "What justification do I have 
for thinking I know this?" were asking the quite 
different question "What more can I do to verify 
or confirm that this is so?" and they rejected 
answers to the first question on the ground that 
they were unsatisfactory answers to the second.3 
Philosophers influenced by Wittgenstein tended 
to suppose, also mistakenly, but quite under-
standably, that the question "What justification 
do I have for thinking I know this?" contains an 
implicit challenge and presupposes that one does 
not have the knowledge concerned. They then 
pointed out, correctly, that in most of the cases 
where the question was raised (e.g., "What justi-
fies me in thinking I know that this is a table?") 
there is no ground for challenging the claim to 
knowledge and that questions presupposing that 
the claim is false should not arise. But the question 
"What justifies me in thinking I know that this is 
a table?" does not challenge the claim to know 
that this is a table, much less presuppose that the 
claim is false. 
The "critique of cogency," as Lewis described 
this concern of epistemology, presupposes that we 
are justified in thinking we know most of the things 
that we do think we know, and what it seeks to elicit 
is the nature of this justification. The enterprise is 
like that of ethics, logic, and aesthetics: 
The nature of the good can be learned from 
experience only if the content of experience be 
first classified into good and bad, or grades of 
better and worse. Such classification or grading 
already involves the legislative application of the 
same principle which is sought. In logic, princi-
ples can be elicited by generalization from exam-
ples only if cases of valid reasoning have first 
been segregated by some criterion. In esthetics, 
the laws of the beautiful may be derived from 
experience only if the criteria of beauty have first 
been correctly applied.4 

THE MYTH OF THE GIVEN 
83 
When Aristotle considered an invalid mood of 
the syllogism and asked himself "What is wrong 
with this?" he was not suggesting to himself that 
perhaps nothing was wrong; he presupposed 
that the mood was invalid, just as he presup-
posed that others were not, and he attempted, 
successfully, to formulate criteria which would 
enable us to distinguish the two types of mood. 
When we have answered the question "What 
justification do I have for thinking I know this?" 
what we learn, as Socrates taught, is something 
about ourselves. We learn, of course, what the jus-
tification happens to be for the particular claim 
with which the question is concerned. But we also 
learn, more generally, what the criteria are, if any, 
in terms of which we believe ourselves justified in 
counting one thing as an instance of knowing and 
another thing not. The truth which the philoso-
pher seeks, when he asks about justification, is 
"already implicit in the mind which seeks it, and 
needs only to be elicited and brought to clear 
expression."5 
Let us turn, then, to the other approaches to 
the problem of "the given." 
5. "No statement or claim would be justified 
unless it were justified, at least in part, by some 
other justified claim or statement which it does 
not justify." 
This regressive principle might be suggested 
by the figure of the building and its supports: no 
stage supports another unless it is itself supported 
by some other stage beneath it - a truth which 
holds not only of the upper portions of the build-
ing but also of what we call its foundation. And 
the principle follows if, as some of the philoso-
phers in the tradition of logical empiricism 
seemed to believe, we should combine a frequency 
theory of probability with a probability theory of 
justification. 
In Experience and Prediction (u. of Chicago, 
1938) and in other writings, Hans Reichenbach 
defended a "probability theory of knowledge" 
which seemed to involve the following conten-
tions: 
(1) 
To justify accepting a statement, it is neces-
sary to show that the statement is probable. 
(2) 
To say of a statement that it is probable is to 
say something about statistical frequencies. 
Somewhat more accurately, a statement of 
the form "It is probable that any particular a 
is a b" may be explicated as saying "Most a's 
are b's." Or, still more accurately, to say "The 
probability is n that a particular a is a b" is 
to say "The limit of the relative frequency 
with which the property of being a b occurs 
in the class of things having the property a 
is n." 
(3) 
Hence, by (2), to show that a proposition 
is probable it is necessary to show that a 
certain statistical frequency obtains; and, by 
0), to show that a certain statistical fre-
quency obtains it is necessary to show that it 
is probable that the statistical frequency 
obtains; and therefore, by (2), to show that it 
is probable that a certain statistical frequency 
obtains, it is necessary to show that a certain 
frequency of frequencies obtains ... , 
(4) 
And therefore "there is no Archimedean 
point of absolute certainty left to which to 
attach our knowledge of the world; all we 
have is an elastic net of probability connec-
tions floating in open space" (p. 192). 
This reasoning suggests that an infinite 
number of steps must be taken in order to justify 
acceptance of any statement. For, according to the 
reasoning, we cannot determine the probability 
of one statement until we have determined that of 
a second, and we cannot determine that of the 
second until we have determined that of a third, 
and so on. Reichenbach does not leave the matter 
here, however. He suggests that there is a way of 
"descending" from this "open space" of probabil-
ity connections, but, if I am not mistaken, we can 
make the descent only by letting go of the concept 
of justification. 
He says that, if we are to avoid the regress of 
probabilities of probabilities of probabilities ... 
we must be willing at some point merely to make 
a guess; "there will always be some blind posits on 
which the whole concatenation is based" (p. 367). 
The view that knowledge is to be identified with 
certainty and that probable knowledge must be 
"imbedded in a framework of certainty" is "a 
remnant of rationalism. An empiricist theory of 
probability can be constructed only if we are will-
ing to regard knowledge as a system of posits."6 
But if we begin by assuming, as we do, that 
there is a distinction between knowledge, on the 
one hand, and a lucky guess, on the other, then we 

84 
RODERICK M. CHISHOLM 
must reject at least one of the premises of any 
argument purporting to demonstrate that knowl-
edge is a system of "blind posits." The unaccept-
able conclusion of Reichenbach's argument 
may be so construed as to follow from premises 
(1) and (2); and premise (2) may be accepted as a 
kind of definition (though there are many who 
believe that this definition is not adequate to all 
of the uses of the term "probable" in science and 
everyday life). Premise (1), therefore, is the one 
we should reject, and there are good reasons, 
I think, for rejecting (1), the thesis that "to justify 
accepting a proposition it is necessary to show 
that the proposition is probable." In fairness to 
Reichenbach, it should be added that he never 
explicitly affirms premise (1); but some such 
premise is essential to his argument. 
6. "No statement or claim a would be justified 
unless it were justified by some other justified 
statement or claim b which would not be justified 
unless it were justified in turn by a." 
The "coherence theory of truth;' to which some 
philosophers committed themselves, is sometimes 
taken to imply that justification may thus be cir-
cular; I believe, however, that the theory does not 
have this implication. It does define "truth" as a 
kind of systematic consistency of beliefs or propo-
sitions. The truth of a proposition is said to consist, 
not in the fact that the proposition "corresponds" 
with something which is not itself a proposition, 
but in the fact that it fits consistently into a certain 
more general system of propositions. This view 
may even be suggested by the figure of the build-
ing and its foundations. There is no difference in 
principle between the way in which the upper sto-
ries are supported by the lower, and that in which 
the cellar is supported by the earth just below it, or 
the way in which that stratum of earth is sup-
ported by various substrata farther below; a good 
building appears to be a part of the terrain on 
which it stands and a good system of propositions 
is a part of the wider system which gives it its 
truth. But these metaphors do not solve philo-
sophical problems. 
The coherence theory did in fact appeal to 
something other than logical consistency; its pro-
ponents conceded that a system of false proposi-
tions may be internally consistent and hence that 
logical consistency alone is no guarantee of truth. 
Brand Blanshard, who defended the coherence 
theory in The Nature of Thought, said that a pro-
position is true provided it is a member of an 
internally consistent system of propositions and 
provided further this system is "the system in 
which everything real and possible is coherently 
included."7 In one phase of the development of 
"logical empiricism" its proponents seem to have 
held a similar view: a proposition - or, in this 
case, a statement - is true provided it is a member 
of an internally consistent system of statements 
and provided further this system is "the system 
which is actually adopted by mankind, and espe-
cially by the scientists in our culture circle."8 
A theory of truth is not, as such, a theory of 
justification. To say that a proposition is true is 
not to say that we are justified in accepting it as 
true, and to say that we are justified in accepting 
it as true is not to say that it is true. Whatever 
merits the coherence theory may have as an 
answer to certain questions about truth, it throws 
no light upon our present epistemological ques-
tion. If we accept the coherence theory, we may 
still ask, concerning any proposition a which we 
think we know to be true, "What is my justifica-
tion for thinking I know that a is a member of the 
system of propositions in which everything real 
and possible is coherently included, or that a is a 
member of the system of propositions which is 
actually adopted by mankind and by the scientists 
of our culture circle?" And when we ask such a 
question, we are confronted, once again, with our 
original alternatives. 
7. If our questions about justification do have a 
proper stopping place, then, as I have said, there 
are still four significant possibilities to consider. 
We may stop with some particular claim and say 
of it that either. 
(a) 
it is justified by something - by experience, 
or by observation - which is not itself a 
claim and which, therefore, cannot be said 
either to be justified or to be unjustified; 
(b) 
it is justified by some claim which refers to 
our experience or observation, and the 
claim referring to our experience or obser-
vation has no justification; 
(c) 
it justifies itself; or 
(d) 
it is itself neither justified nor unjustified. 

THE MYTH OF THE GIVEN 
85 
The first of these alternatives leads readily to the 
second, and the second to the third or to the 
fourth. The third and the fourth - which differ 
only verbally, I think - involve the doctrine of 
"the given." 
Carnap wrote, in 1936, that the procedure of 
scientific testing involves two operations: the 
"confrontation of a statement with observation" 
and the "confrontation of a statement with previ-
ously accepted statements." He suggested that 
those logical empiricists who were attracted to the 
coherence theory of truth tended to lose sight of 
the first of these operations - the confrontation of 
a statement with observation. He proposed a way 
of formulating simple "acceptance rules" for such 
confrontation and he seemed to believe that, 
merely by applying such rules, we could avoid the 
epistemological questions with which the adher-
ents of "the given" had become involved. 
Carnap said this about his acceptance rules: "If 
no foreign language or introduction of new terms 
is involved, the rules are trivial. For example: 'If 
one is hungry, the statement "I am hungry" may 
be accepted'; or: 'If one sees a key one may accept 
the statement "there lies a key." "'9 As we shall note 
later, the first of these rules differs in an impor-
tant way from the second. Confining ourselves for 
the moment to rules of the second sort - "If one 
sees a key one may accept the statement 'there lies 
a key'" -let us ask ourselves whether the appeal to 
such rules enables us to solve our problem of the 
stopping place. 
When we have made the statement "There lies 
a key:' we can, of course, raise the question "What 
is my justification for thinking I know, or for 
believing, that there lies a key?" The answer would 
be "I see the key." We cannot ask "What is my jus-
tification for seeing a key?" But we can ask "What 
is my justification for thinking that it is a key that 
I see?" and, if we do see that the thing is a key, the 
question will have an answer. The answer might 
be "I see that it's shaped like a key and that it's in 
the lock, and I remember that a key is usually 
here." The possibility of this question, and its 
answer, indicates that we cannot stop our ques-
tions about justification merely by appealing to 
observation or experience. For, of the statement 
"I observe that that is an A," we can ask, and 
answer, the question "What is my justification for 
thinking that I observe that there is an A?" 
It is relevant to note, moreover, that there 
may be conditions under which seeing a key 
does not justify one in accepting the statement 
"There is a key" or in believing that one sees a 
key. If the key were so disguised or concealed 
that the man who saw it did not recognize it to 
be a key, then he might not be justified in accept-
ing the statement "There is a key." Just as, if 
Mr. Jones unknown to anyone but himself is a 
thief, then the people who see him may be said 
to see a thief - but none of those who thus sees 
a thief is justified in accepting the statement 
"There is a thief."10 
Some of the writings of logical empiricists 
suggest that, although some statements may be 
justified by reference to other statements, those 
statements which involve "confrontation with 
observation" are not justified at all. C. G. Hempel, 
for example, wrote that "the acknowledgement of 
an experiential statements as true is psychologi-
cally motivated by certain experiences; but within 
the system of statements which express scientific 
knowledge or one's beliefs at a given time, they 
function in the manner of postulates for which 
no grounds are offered."!! Hempel conceded, 
however, that this use of the term "postulate" is 
misleading and he added the following note of 
clarification: "When an experiential sentence is 
accepted 'on the basis of direct experiential evi-
dence: it is indeed not asserted arbitrarily; but to 
describe the evidence in question would simply 
mean to repeat the experiential statement itself. 
Hence, in the context of cognitive justification, 
the statement functions in the manner of a prim-
itive sentence:' 12 
When we reach a statement having the pro-
perty just referred to - an experiential statement 
such that to describe its evidence "would simply 
mean to repeat the experiential statement itself" -
we have reached a proper stopping place in the 
process of justification. 
8. We are thus led to the concept of a belief, state-
ment, claim, proposition, or hypothesis, which 
justifies itself. To be clear about the concept, let us 
note the way in which we would justify the state-
ment that we have a certain belief. It is essential, 
of course, that we distinguish justifying the state-
ment that we have a certain belief from justifying 
the belief itself. 

86 
RODERICK M. CHISHOLM 
Suppose, then, a man is led to say "I believe 
that Socrates is mortal" and we ask him "What is 
your justification for thinking that you believe, or 
for thinking that you know that you believe, that 
Socrates is mortal?" To this strange question, the 
only appropriate reply would be "My justification 
for thinking I believe, or for thinking that I know 
that I believe, that Socrates is mortal is simply the 
fact that I do believe that Socrates is mortal." One 
justifies the statement simply by reiterating it; the 
statement's justification is what the statement 
says. Here, then, we have a case which satisfies 
Hempel's remark quoted above; we describe the 
evidence for a statement merely by repeating the 
statement. We could say, as C. J. Ducasse did, that 
"the occurrence of belief is its own evidence:'13 
Normally, as I have suggested, one cannot jus-
tify a statement merely by reiterating it. To the 
question "What justification do you have for 
thinking you know that there can be no life on the 
moon?" it would be inappropriate, and imperti-
nent, to reply by saying simply "There can be no 
life on the moon," thus reiterating the fact at issue. 
An appropriate answer would be one referring to 
certain other facts - for example, the fact that we 
know there is insufficient oxygen on the moon to 
support any kind of life. But to the question 
"What is your justification for thinking you know 
that you believe so and so?" there is nothing to say 
other than "I do believe so and so." 
We may say, then, that there are some state-
ments which are self-justifying, or which justify 
themselves. And we may say, analogously, that 
there are certain beliefs, claims, propositions, or 
hypotheses which are self-justifying, or which 
justify themselves. A statement, belief, claim, 
proposition, or hypothesis may be said to be self-
justifying for a person, if the person's justification 
for thinking he knows it to be true is simply the 
fact that it is true. 
Paradoxically, these things I have described by 
saying that they "justify themselves" may also be 
described by saying they are "neither justified nor 
unjustified." The two modes of description are 
two different ways of saying the same thing. 
If we are sensitive to ordinary usage, we may 
note that the expression "I believe that I believe" 
is ordinarily used, not to refer to a second-order 
belief about the speaker's own beliefs, but to indi-
cate that the speaker has not yet made up his 
mind. "I believe that I believe that Johnson is a 
good president" might properly be taken to indi-
cate that, if the speaker does believe that Johnson 
is a good president, he is not yet firm in that belief. 
Hence there is a temptation to infer that, if we say 
of a man who is firm in his belief that Socrates is 
mortal, that he is "justified in believing that he 
believes that Socrates is mortal," our statement 
"makes no sense." And there is also a temptation 
to go on and say that it "makes no sense" even to 
say of such a man, that his statement "I believe 
that Socrates is mortal" is one which is "justified" 
for him. 14 After all, what would it mean to say of a 
man's statement about his own belief, that he is 
not justified in accepting it?15 
The questions about what does or does not 
"make any sense" need not, however, be argued. 
We may say, if we prefer, that the statements about 
the beliefs in question are "neither justified nor 
unjustified:' Whatever mode of description we 
use, the essential points are two. First, we may 
appeal to such statements in the process of justi-
fying some other statement or belief. If they have 
no justification they may yet be a justification -
for something other than themselves. ("What jus-
tifies me in thinking that he and I are not likely to 
agree? The fact that I believe that Socrates is 
mortal and he does not.") Second, the making of 
such a statement does provide what I have been 
calling a "stopping place" in the dialectic of justi-
fication; but now, instead of signalizing the stop-
ping place by reiterating the questioned statement, 
we do it by saying that the question of its justifi-
cation is one which "should not arise." 
It does not matter, then, whether we speak of 
certain statements which "justify themselves" or 
of certain statements which are "neither justified 
nor unjustified;' for in either case we will be refer-
ring to the same set of statements. I shall continue 
to use the former phrase. 
There are, then, statements about one's own 
beliefs ("I believe that Socrates is mortal") - and 
for statements about many other psychological 
attitudes - which are self-justifying. "What justi-
fies me in believing, or in thinking I know, that I 
hope to come tomorrow? Simply the fact that I do 
hope to come tomorrow." Thinking, desiring, 
wondering, loving, hating, and other such attitudes 
are similar. Some, but by no means all, of the state-
ments we can make about such attitudes, when the 
attitudes are our own, are self-justifying - as are 
statements containing such phrases as "I think 

THE MYTH OF THE GIVEN 
87 
I remember" or "I seem to remember" (as distin-
guished from "I remember"), and "I think that I 
see" and "I think that I perceive" (as distinguished 
from "I see" and "I perceive"). Thus, of the two 
examples which Carnap introduced in connec-
tion with his "acceptance rules" discussed above, 
viz., "I am hungry" and "I see a key," we may say 
that the first is self-justifying and the second not. 
The "doctrine of the given," it will be recalled, 
tells us (A) that every justified statement, about 
what we think we know, is justified in part by 
some statement which justifies itself and (B) that 
there are statements about appearances which 
thus justify themselves. The "phenomenalistic 
version" of the theory adds (C) that statements 
about appearances are the only statements which 
justify themselves. What we have been saying is 
that the first thesis, (A), of the doctrine of the 
given is true and that the "phenomenalistic ver-
sion," (C), is false; let us turn now to thesis (B). 
9. In addition to the self-justifying statements 
about psychological attitudes, are there self-justi-
fying statements about "appearances"? Now we 
encounter difficulties involving the word "appear-
ance" and its cognates. 
Sometimes such words as "appears," "looks;' 
and "seems" are used to convey what one might 
also convey by such terms as "believe." For exam-
ple, if I say "It appears to me that General de 
Gaulle was successful," or "General de Gaulle 
seems to have been successful," I am likely to 
mean only that I believe, or incline to believe, that 
he has been successful; the words "appears" and 
"seems" serve as useful hedges, giving me an out, 
should I find out later that de Gaulle was not suc-
cessful. When "appear" -words are used in this 
way, the statements in which they occur add noth-
ing significant to the class of "self-justifying" 
statements we have just provided. Philosophers 
have traditionally assumed, however, that such 
terms as "appear" may also be used in a quite dif-
ferent way. If this assumption is correct, as I 
believe it is, then this additional use does lead us 
to another type of self-justifying statement. 
The philosophers who exposed the confusions 
to which the substantival expression "appearance" 
gave rise were sometimes inclined to forget, I 
think, that things do appear to us in various 
ways.16 We can alter the appearance of anything 
we like merely by doing something which will 
affect our sense organs or the conditions of obser-
vation. One of the important epistemological 
questions about appearances is "Are there self-
justifying statements about the ways in which 
things appear?" 
Augustine, refuting the skeptics of the late 
Platonic Academy, wrote: 
I do not see how the Academician can refute him 
who says: I know that this appears white to me, I 
know that my hearing is delighted with this, 
I know this has an agreeable odor, I know this 
tastes sweet to me, I know that this feels cold to 
me .... When a person tastes something, he can 
honestly swear that he knows it is sweet to his 
palate or the contrary, and that no trickery of the 
Greeks can dispossess him of that knowledge. l7 
Suppose, now, one were to ask "What justification 
do you have for believing, or thinking you know, 
that this appears white to you, or that tastes bitter 
to you?" Here, too, we can only reiterate the state-
ment: "What justifies me in believing, or in think-
ing I know, that this appears white to me and that 
the tastes bitter to me is the fact that this does 
appear white to me and that does taste bitter." 
An advantage of the misleading substantive 
"appearance;' as distinguished from the verb 
"appears," is that the former may be applied to 
those sensuous experiences which, though capa-
ble of being appearances of things, are actually 
not appearances of anything. Feelings, imagery, 
and the sensuous content of dreams and halluci-
nation are very much like the appearances of 
things and they are such that, under some cir-
cumstances, they could be appearances of things. 
But if we do not wish to say that they are experi-
ences wherein some external physical things 
appears to us, we must use some expression other 
than "appear." For "appear;' in its active voice, 
requires a grammatical subject and thus requires 
a term which refers, not merely to a way of appear-
ing, but also to something which appears. 
But we may avoid both the objective" Something 
appears blue to me," and the substantival "I sense 
a blue appearance." We may use another verb, say 
"sense," in a technical way, as many philosophers 
did, and equate it in meaning with the passive 
voice of "appear;' thus saying simply "I sense blue," 
or the like. Or better still, it seems to me, and at 
the expense only of a little awkwardness, we can 

88 
RODERICK M. CHISHOLM 
use "appear" in its passive voice and say "1 am 
appeared to blue." 
Summing up, in our new vocabulary, we may 
say that the philosophers who talked of the 
"empirically given" were referring, not to "self-
justifying" statements and beliefs generally, but 
only to those pertaining to certain "ways of being 
appeared to." And the philosophers who objected 
to the doctrine of the given, or some of them, 
argued that no statement about "a way of being 
appeared to" can be "self-justifying." 
10. Why would one suppose that "This appears 
white" (or, more exactly, "1 am now appeared 
white to") is not self-justifying? The most con-
vincing argument was this: If I say "This appears 
white;' then, as Reichenbach put it, 1 am making a 
"comparison between a present object and a for-
merly seen object." 18 What I am saying could have 
been expressed by "The present way of appearing 
is the way in which white objects, or objects which 
I believe to be white, ordinarily appear." And this 
new statement, clearly, is not self-justifying; to 
justify it, as Reichenbach intimated, 1 must go on 
and say something further - something about the 
way in which 1 remember white objects to have 
appeared. 
"Appears white" may thus be used to abbrevi-
ate "appears the way in which white things nor-
mally appear." Or "white thing:' on the other 
hand, may be used to abbreviate "thing having the 
color of things which ordinarily appear white." 
The phrase "appear white" as it is used in the 
second quoted expression cannot be spelled out 
in the manner of the first; for the point of the 
second can hardly be put by saying that "white 
thing" may be used to abbreviate "thing having 
the color of things which ordinarily appear the 
way in which white things normally appear." In 
the second expression, the point of "appears 
white" is not to compare a way of appearing with 
something else; the point is to say something 
about the way of appearing itself. It is in terms of 
this second sense of "appears white" - that in 
which one may say significantly and without 
redundancy "Things that are white may normally 
be expected to appear white" - that we are to 
interpret the quotation from Augustine above. 
And, more generally, when it was said that 
"appear" -statements constitute the foundation of 
the edifice of knowledge, it was not intended that 
the "appear" -statements be interpreted as state-
ments asserting a comparison between a present 
object and any other object or set of objects. 
The question now becomes "Can we formu-
late any significant 'appear' -statements without 
thus comparing the way in which some object 
appears with the way in which some other object 
appears, or with the way in which the object in 
question has appeared at some other time? Can 
we interpret 'This appears white' in such a way 
that it may be understood to refer to a present 
way of appearing without relating that way of 
appearing to any other object?" In Experience and 
Prediction, Reichenbach defended his own view 
(and that of a good many others) in this way: 
The objection may be raised that a comparison 
with formerly seen physical objects should be 
avoided, and that a basic statement is to concern 
the present fact only, as it is. But such a reduction 
would make the basic statement empty. Its con-
tent is just that there is a similarity between the 
present object and one formerly seen; it is by 
means of this relation that the present object is 
described. Otherwise the basic statement would 
consist in attaching an individual symbol, say a 
number, to the present object; but the introduc-
tion of such a symbol would help us in no way, 
since we could not make use of it to construct a 
comparison with other things. Only in attaching 
the same symbols to different objects, do we 
arrive at the possibility of constructing relations 
between the objects. (pp. 176-7) 
It is true that, if an "appear" -statement is to be 
used successfully in communication, it must 
assert some comparison of objects. Clearly, if 
I wish you to know the way things are now 
appearing to me, I must relate these ways of 
appearing to something that is familiar to you. 
But our present question is not "Can you under-
stand me if I predicate something of the way in 
which something now appears to me without 
relating that way of appearing to something that 
is familiar to you?" The question is, more simply, 
"Can I predicate anything of the way in which 
something now appears to me without thereby 
comparing that way of appearing with something 
else?" From the fact that the first of these two 
questions must be answered in the negative it 
does not follow that the second must also be 
answered in the negative.'" 

THE MYTH OF THE GIVEN 
89 
The issue is not one about communication, 
nor is it, strictly speaking, an issue about lan-
guage; it concerns, rather, the nature of thought 
itself. Common to both "pragmatism" and "ideal-
ism," as traditions in American philosophy, is the 
view that to think about a thing, or to interpret or 
conceptualize it, and hence to have a belief about 
it, is essentially to relate the thing to other things, 
actual or possible, and therefore to "refer beyond 
it:' It is this view - and not any view about lan-
guage or communication - that we must oppose 
if we are to say of some statements about appear-
ing, or of any other statements, that they "justify 
themselves." 
To think about the way in which something is 
now appearing, according to the view in question, 
is to relate that way of appearing to something 
else, possibly to certain future experiences, possi-
bly to the way in which things of a certain sort 
may be commonly expected to appear. According 
to the "conceptualistic pragmatism" of c.1. Lewis's 
Mind and the World-Order (1929), we grasp the 
present experience, any present way of appearing, 
only to the extent to which we relate it to some 
future experience.2o According to one interpreta-
tion of John Dewey's "instrumentalistic" version 
of pragmatism, the present experience may be 
used to present or disclose something else but it 
does not present or disclose itself. And according 
to the idealistic view defended in Brand 
Blanshard's The Nature of Thought, we grasp our 
present experience only to the extent that we are 
able to include it in the one "intelligible system of 
universals" (vol. I, p. 632). 
This theory of reference, it should be noted, 
applies not only to statements and beliefs about 
"ways of being appeared to" but also to those 
other statements and beliefs which I have called 
"self-justifying." If "This appears white," or "I am 
appeared white to," compares the present experi-
ence with something else, and thus depends for 
its justification upon what we are justified in 
believing about the something else, then so, too, 
does "I believe that Socrates is mortal" and "I 
hope that the peace will continue." This general 
conception of thought, therefore, would seem to 
imply that no belief or statement can be said to 
justify itself. But according to what we have been 
saying, if there is no belief or statement which 
justifies itself, then it is problematic whether any 
belief or statement is justified at all. And there-
fore, as we might expect, this conception of 
thought and reference has been associated with 
skepticism. 
Blanshard conceded that his theory of thought 
"does involve a degree of scepticism regarding 
our present knowledge and probably all future 
knowledge. In all likelihood there will never be a 
proposition of which we can say, 'This that I am 
asserting, with precisely the meaning I now attach 
to it, is absolutely true:"21 On Dewey's theory, or 
on one common interpretation of Dewey's theory, 
it is problematic whether anyone can now be said 
to know that Mr Jones is working in his garden. A. 
O. Lovejoy is reported to have said that, for Dewey, 
"I am about to have known" is as close as we ever 
get to "I know."22 C. I. Lewis, in his An Analysis of 
Knowledge and Valuation (Open Court, 1946) 
conceded in effect that the conception of thought 
suggested by his earlier Mind and the World-Order 
does lead to a kind of skepticism; according to the 
later work there are "apprehensions of the given" 
(cf. An Analysis, pp. 182-3) - and thus beliefs 
which justify themselves. 
What is the plausibility of a theory of thought 
and reference which seems to imply that no one 
knows anything? 
Perhaps it is correct to say that when we think 
about a thing we think about it as having certain 
properties. But why should one go on to say that 
to think about a thing must always involve think-
ing about some other thing as well? Does thinking 
about the other thing then involve thinking about 
some third thing? Or can we think about one 
thing in relation to a second thing without thereby 
thinking of a third thing? And if we can, then why 
can we not think of one thing - of one thing as 
having certain properties - without thereby relat-
ing it to another thing? 
The linguistic analogue of this view of thought 
is similar. Why should one suppose -
as 
Reichenbach supposed in the passage cited above 
and as many others have also supposed - that to 
refer to a thing, in this instance to refer to a way of 
appearing, is necessarily to relate the thing to 
some other thing? 
Some philosophers seem to have been led to 
such a view of reference as a result of such consid-
erations as the following: We have imagined a 
man saying, in agreement with Augustine, "It just 
does appear white - and that is the end of the 
matter." Let us consider now the possible reply 

90 
RODERICK M. CHISHOLM 
"That it is not the end of the matter. You are 
making certain assumptions about the language 
you are using; you are assuming, for example, that 
you are using the word 'white; or the phrase 
'appears white; in the way in which you have for-
merly used it, or in the way in which it is ordinar-
ily used, or in the way in which it would ordinarily 
be understood. And if you state your justification 
for this assumption, you will refer to certain other 
things - to yourself and to other people, to the 
word 'white; or to the phrase 'appears white: and 
to what the word or phrase has referred to or might 
refer to on other occasions. And therefore, when 
you say 'This appears white' you are saying some-
thing, not only about your present experience, but 
also about all of these other things as well." 
The conclusion of this argument - the part 
that follows the "therefore" - does not follow 
from the premises. In supposing that the argu-
ment is valid, one fails to distinguish between (1) 
what it is that a man means to say when he uses 
certain words and (2) his assumptions concern-
ing the adequacy of these words for expressing 
what it is that he means to say; one supposes, mis-
takenly, that what justifies (2) must be included 
in what justifies (1). A Frenchman, not yet sure of 
his English, may utter the words "There are apples 
in the basket," intending thereby to express his 
belief that there are potatoes in the basket. If we 
show him that he has used the word "apples" 
incorrectly, and hence that he is mistaken in his 
assumptions about the ways in which English 
speaking people use and understand the word 
"apples," we have not shown him anything rele-
vant to his belief that there are apples in the 
basket. 
Logicians now take care to distinguish between 
the use and mention oflanguage (e.g., the English 
word "Socrates" is mentioned in the sentence 
'''Socrates' has eight letters" and is used but not 
mentioned, in "Socrates is a Greek.")23 As we shall 
have occasion to note further, the distinction has 
not always been observed in writings on episte-
mology. 
11. If we decide, then, that there is a class of 
beliefs or statements which are "self-justifying," 
and that this class is limited to certain beliefs or 
statements about our own psychological states 
and about the ways in which we are "appeared to," 
we may be tempted to return to the figure of the 
edifice: our knowledge of the world is a structure 
supported entirely by a foundation of such self-
justifying statements or beliefs. We should recall, 
however, that the answers to our original Socratic 
questions had two parts. When asked "What is 
your justification for thinking that you know a?" 
one may reply "I am justified in thinking I know 
a, because (1) I know band (2) ifI know b then 
I know a." We considered our justification for the 
first part of this answer, saying "I am justified in 
thinking I know b, because (1) I know c and (2) if 
I know c then I know b:' And then we considered 
our justification for the first part of the second 
answer, and continued in this fashion until we 
reached the point of self-justification. In thus 
moving toward "the given:' we accumulated, step 
by step, a backlog of claims that we did not 
attempt to justify - those claims constituting the 
second part of each of our answers. Hence our 
original claim - "I know that a is true" - does not 
rest upon "the given" alone; it also rests upon all 
of those other claims that we made en route. And 
it is not justified unless these other claims are 
justified. 
A consideration of these other claims will lead 
us, I think, to at least three additional types of 
"stopping place," which are concerned, respec-
tively, with memory, perception, and what Kant 
called the a priori. Here I shall comment briefly 
on the first two. 
It is difficult to think of any claim to empiri-
cal knowledge, other than the self-justifying 
statements we have just considered, which does 
not to some extent rest upon an appeal to 
memory. But the appeal to memory- "I remem-
ber that A occured" - is not self-justifying. One 
may ask "And what is your justification for 
thinking that you remember that A occured?" 
and the question will have an answer - even if 
the answer is only the self-justifying "I think 
that I remember that A occurred." The statement 
"I remember that A occured" does, of course, 
imply "A occurred"; but "I think that I remem-
ber that A occurred" does not imply "A occurred" 
and hence does not imply "I remember that A 
occured." For we can remember occasions - at 
least we think we can remember them - when 
we learned, concerning some event we had 
thought we remembered, that the event had not 
occurred at all, and consequently that we had 
not really remembered it. When we thus find 

THE MYTH OF THE GIVEN 
91 
that one memory conflicts with another, or, 
more accurately, when we thus find that one 
thing that we think we remember conflicts with 
another thing that we think we remember, we 
may correct one or the other by making further 
inquiry; but the results of any such inquiry will 
always be justified in part by other memories, 
or by other things that we think that we remem-
ber. How then are we to choose between what 
seem to be conflicting memories? Under what 
conditions does "I think that I remember that 
A occurred" serve to justify "I remember that A 
occurred"? 
The problem is one of formulating a rule of 
evidence -
a rule specifying the conditions 
under which statements about what we think 
we remember can justify statements about what 
we do remember. A possible solution, in very 
general terms, is "When we think that we 
remember, then we are justified in believing 
that we do remember, provided that what we 
think we remember does not conflict with any-
thing else that we think we remember; when 
what we think we remember does conflict with 
anything else we think we remember, then, of 
the two conflicting memories (more accurately, 
ostensible memories) the one that is justified is 
the one that fits in better with the other things 
that we think we remember." Ledger Wood 
made the latter point by saying that the justified 
memory is the one which "coheres with the 
system of related memories"; C. I. Lewis used 
"congruence" instead of "coherence."24 But we 
cannot say precisely what is meant by "fitting 
in," "coherence," or "congruence" until certain 
controversial questions of confirmation theory 
and the logic of probability have been answered. 
And it may be that the rule of evidence is 
too liberal; perhaps we should say, for example, 
that when two ostensible memories conflict 
neither one of them is justified. But these are 
questions which have not yet been satisfactorily 
answered. 
If we substitute "perceive" for "remember" in 
the foregoing, we can formulate a similar set of 
problems about perception; these problems, too, 
must await solution.25 
The problems involved in formulating such 
rules of evidence, and in determining the validity 
of these rules, do not differ in any significant way 
from those which arise in connection with the 
formulation, and validity, of the rules of logic. 
Nor do they differ from the problems posed by 
the moral and religious "cognitivists" (the "non-
intuitionistic cognitivists") that I have referred to 
elsewhere. The status of ostensible memories and 
perceptions, with respect to that experience 
which is their "source;' is essentially like that 
which such "cognitivists" claim for judgments 
having an ethical or theological subject matter. 
Unfortunately, it is also like that which other 
"enthusiasts" claim for still other types of subject 
matter. 
12. What, then, is the status of the doctrine of 
"the given" - of the "myth of the given"? In my 
opinion, the doctrine is correct in saying that 
there are some beliefs or statements which are 
"self-justifying" and that among such beliefs and 
statements are some which concern appearances 
or "ways of being appeared to;" but the "phenom-
enalistic version" of the doctrine is mistaken in 
implying that our knowledge may be thought of 
as an edifice which is supported by appearances 
alone.26 The cognitive significance of "the empiri-
cally given" was correctly described - in a vocab-
ulary rather different from that which I have been 
using - by John Dewey: 
The alleged primacy of sensory meanings is 
mythical. They are primary only in logical 
status; they are primary as tests and confirma-
tion of inferences concerning matters of fact, 
not as historic originals. For, while it is not usu-
ally needful to carry the check or test of theo-
retical calculations to the point of irreducible 
sensa, colors, sounds, etc., these sensa form a 
limit approached in careful analytic certifica-
tions, and upon critical occasions it is necessary 
to touch the limit .... Sensa are the class of irre-
ducible meanings which are employed in verify-
ing and correcting other meanings. We actually 
set out with much coarser and more inclusive 
meanings and not till we have met with failure 
from their use do we even set out to discover 
those ultimate and harder meanings which are 
sensory in character.27 
The Socratic questions leading to the concept of 
"the given" also lead to the concept of "rules of 
evidence:' Unfortunately some of the philoso-
phers who stressed the importance of the former 
concept tended to overlook that of the latter. 

92 
RODERICK M. CHISHOLM 
Notes 
Philosophers in other traditions also noted 
these confusions. See, for example, John Wild, 
"The Concept of the Given in Contemporary 
Philosophy:' PhilosophyandPhenomenological 
Research I (1940), pp. 70-82. 
2 The expression "myth of the given" was used 
by Wilfrid Sellars in "Empiricism and the 
Philosophy of Mind," in Herbert Feigl and 
Michael Scriven (eds), Foundations of Science 
and the Concepts of Psychology and Psycho-
analysis, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy 
of Science, vol. I (u. of Minn., 1956), pp. 
253-329. 
3 Dewey also said that, instead of trying to 
provide "Foundations for Knowledge:' the 
philosopher should apply "what is known 
to intelligent conduct of the affairs of 
human life" to "the problems of men." John 
Dewey, Problems of Men (Philosophical, 
1946), pp. 6-7. 
4 C. I. Lewis, Mind and the World-Order 
(Scribner, 1929), p. 29. 
5 Ibid., p. 19. Cf. Hans Reichenbach, Experience 
and Prediction (University of Chicago, 1938), 
p. 6; C. J. Ducasse, "Some Observations 
Concerning the Nature of Probability;' 
Journal of Philosophy XXXVIII (1941), esp. 
pp.400-1. 
6 Hans 
Reichenbach, 
"Are 
Phenomenal 
Reports Absolutely Certain?" Philosophical 
Review LXI (1952), pp. 147-59; the quota-
tion is from p. 150. 
7 Brand Blanshard, The Nature of Thought, 
vol. II (Macmillan, 1940), p. 276. 
8 C. G. Hempel, "On the Logical Positivists' 
Theory of Truth," Analysis II (1935), pp. 
49-59; the quotation is from p. 57. 
9 Rudolf Carnap, "Truth and Confirmation," 
in Herbert Feigl and W. S. Sellars (eds), 
Readings in Philosophical Analysis (Appleton, 
1949), p. 125. The portions of the article 
quoted above first appeared in "Wahrheit und 
Bewahrung," Actes du congres international de 
philosophie scientifique, IV (Paris; 1936), pp. 
18-23. 
10 
Cf. Nelson Goodman, The Structure of 
Appearance (Harvard, 1951), p. 104. If 
Goodman's book, 
incidentally, 
is 
not 
discussed in this collection of essays, the 
fault is with our conventional classification 
of philosophical disciplines. The book, which 
is concerned with an area falling between 
logic and metaphysics, is one of the most 
important philosophical works written by 
an American during the period being sur-
veyed. 
11 
C. G. Hempel, "Some Theses on Empirical 
Certainty," Review of Metaphysics V (1952), 
pp. 621-9; the quotation is from p. 621. 
12 
Ibid., p. 628. Hempel's remarks were made in 
an "Exploration" in which he set forth sev-
eral theses about "empirical certainty" and 
then replied to objections by Paul Weiss, 
Roderick Firth, Wilfrid Sellars, and myself. 
13 
C. J. Ducasse, "Propositions, Truth, and the 
Ultimate Criterion of Truth;' Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research IV (1939), pp. 
317-40; the quotation is from p. 339. 
14 
Cf. Norman Malcolm, "Knowledge of Other 
Minds," Journal of Philosophy LV (1958), pp. 
969-78. Reprinted in Malcolm, Knowledge 
and Certainty: Essays and Lectures (Prentice-
Hall, 1963). 
15 
The principle behind this way of looking at 
the matter is defended in detail by Max Black 
in Language and Philosophy (Cornell, 1949), 
pp. 16 ff. 
16 
One of the best criticisms of the "appear-
ance" (or "sense-datum") terminology was 
O. K. Bouwsma's "Moore's Theory of Sense-
Data;' in The Philosophy of G. E. Moore, ed. 
Schilpp, pp. 201-21. In Perceiving: A 
Philosophical Study (Cornell, 1957), I tried to 
call attention to certain facts about appear-
ing which, I believe, Bouwsma may have 
overlooked. 
17 
Augustine, Contra academicos, xi, 26; trans-
lated by Sister Mary Patricia Garvey as 
Saint Augustine Against the Academicians 
(Marquette, 1942); the quotations are from 
pp.68-9. 
18 
Experience and Prediction, p. 176. 
19 
It may follow, however, that "the vaunted 
incorrigibility of the sense-datum language 
can be achieved only at the cost of its perfect 
utility as a means of communication" (Max 

THE MYTH OF THE GIVEN 
93 
Black, Problems of Analysis (Cornell, 1954), 
p. 66), and doubtless, as Black added, it 
would be "misleading, to say the least" to 
speak of a "language that cannot be commu-
nicated" - cf. Wilfrid Sellars, "Empiricism 
and the Philosophy of Mind" - but these 
points do affect the epistemological question 
at issue. 
20 
This doctrine was modified in Lewis's later 
An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation 
(Open Court, 1946) in a way which enabled 
him to preserve the theory of the given. 
21 
The Nature of Thought, vol. II, pp. 269-70. 
Blanshard added, however, that "for all the 
ordinary purposes of life" we can justify 
some beliefs by showing that they cohere 
"with the system of present knowledge"; and 
therefore, he said, his theory should not be 
described as being "simply sceptical" (vol. II, 
p. 271). Cf. W. H. Werkmeister, The Basis 
and Structure of Knowledge (Harper, 1948), 
part II. 
22 
Quoted by A. E. Murphy in "Dewey's 
Epistemology and Metaphysics:' in P. A. 
Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy of John Dewey, 
(Northwestern, 1939), p. 203. Dewey's theory 
of inquiry, however, was not intended to be 
an epistemology and he did not directly 
address himself to the questions with which 
we are here concerned. 
23 
Cf. W. V. Quine, Mathematical Logic (Norton, 
1940; rev. edn, Harvard, 1951), sec. 4. 
24 
Ledger Wood, The Analysis of Knowledge 
(Princeton, 1941), p. 81; C. I. Lewis, An 
Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation, p. 334. 
25 
Important steps toward solving them were 
taken by Nelson Goodman in "Sense and 
Certainty," Philosophical Review LXI (1952), 
pp. 160-7, and by Israel Scheffler in "On 
Justification and Commitment:' Journal of 
Philosophy, LI (1954), pp. 180-90. The 
former paper is reprinted in Philosophy of 
Knowledge, ed. Roland Houde and J. P. 
Mullally (Lippincott, 1960), pp. 97-103. 
26 
Alternatives to the general metaphor of the 
edifice are proposed by W. V. Quine in the 
introduction to Methods of Logic (Holt, 1950; 
rev. edn, 1959), in From a Logical Point of 
View (Harvard, 1953), and in Word and 
Object (Wiley, 1960). 
27 
John Dewey, Experience and Nature, 2nd edn 
(Norton, 1929), p. 327. 

CHAPTER 8 
Does Empirical Knowledge 
Have a Foundation? 
Wilfrid Sellars 
I have arrived at a stage in my argument which is, 
at least prima facie, out of step with the basic pre-
suppositions of logical atomism. Thus, as long as 
looking green is taken to be the notion to which 
being green is reducible, it could be claimed with 
considerable plausibility that fundamental con-
cepts pertaining to observable fact have that 
logical independence of one another which is 
characteristic of the empiricist tradition. Indeed, 
at first sight the situation is quite disquieting, for 
if the ability to recognize that x looks green pre-
supposes the concept of being green, and if this in 
turn involves knowing in what circumstances to 
view an object to ascertain its color, then, since 
one can scarcely determine what the circum-
stances are without noticing that certain objects 
have certain perceptible characteristics - includ-
ing colors - it would seem that one couldn't form 
the concept of being green, and, by parity of rea-
soning, of the other colors, unless he already had 
them. 
Now, it just won't do to reply that to have the 
concept of green, to know what it is for something 
to be green, it is sufficient to respond, when one is 
in point of fact in standard conditions, to green 
Originally published in H. Feigl and M. Scriven (eds), 
The Foundations of Science and the Concepts of Psychology 
and Psychoanalysis, Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy 
of Science, vol. I (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1956), pp. 293-300. 
objects with the vocable "This is green:' Not only 
must the conditions be of a sort that is appropri-
ate for determining the color of an object by look-
ing, the subject must know that conditions of this 
sort are appropriate. And while this does not imply 
that one must have concepts before one has them, 
it does imply that one can have the concept of 
green only by having a whole battery of concepts 
of which it is one element. It implies that while the 
process of acquiring the concept green may -
indeed does - involve a long history of acquiring 
piecemeal habits of response to various objects in 
various circumstances, there is an important sense 
in which one has no concept pertaining to the 
observable properties of physical objects in Space 
and Time unless one has them all- and, indeed, as 
we shall see, a great deal more besides. 
[ ••• J 
One of the forms taken by the Myth of the Given 
is the idea that there is, indeed must be, a struc-
ture of particular matter of fact such that (a) each 
fact can not only be noninferentially known to be 
the case, but presupposes no other knowledge 
either of particular matter of fact, or of general 
truths; and (b) such that the non inferential 
knowledge of facts belonging to this structure 
constitutes the ultimate court of appeals for all 
factual claims - particular and general - about 
the world. It is important to note that I character-
ized the knowledge of fact belonging to this 
stratum as not only noninferential, but as 

DOES EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION? 
95 
presupposing no knowledge of other matter of 
fact, whether particular or general. It might be 
thought that this is a redundancy, that knowledge 
(not belief or conviction, but knowledge) which 
logically presupposes knowledge of other facts 
must be inferential. This, however, as I hope to 
show, is itself an episode in the Myth. 
Now, the idea of such a privileged stratum of 
fact is a familiar one, though not without its dif-
ficulties. Knowledge pertaining to this level is 
non-inferential, yet it is, after all, knowledge. It is 
ultimate, yet it has authority. The attempt to make 
a consistent picture of these two requirements 
has traditionally taken the following form: 
Statements pertaining to this level, in order to 
"express knowledge" must not only be made, but, 
so to speak, must be worthy of being made, cred-
ible, that is, in the sense of worthy of credence. 
Furthermore, and this is a crucial point, they 
must be made in a way which involves this credi-
bility. For where there is no connection between 
the making of a statement and its authority, the 
assertion may express conviction, but it can 
scarcely be said to express knowledge. 
The authority - the credibility - of statements 
pertaining to this level cannot exhaustively consist 
in the fact that they are supported by other state-
ments, for in that case all knowledge pertaining to 
this level would have to be inferential, which not 
only contradicts the hypothesis, but flies in the 
face of good sense. The conclusion seems inevita-
ble that if some statements pertaining to this level 
are to express noninferential knowledge, they must 
have a credibility which is not a matter of being 
supported by other statements. Now there does 
seem to be a class of statements which fill at least 
part of this bill, namely such statements as would 
be said to report observations, thus, "This is red." 
These statements, candidly made, have authority. 
Yet they are not expressions of inference. How, 
then, is this authority to be understood? 
Clearly, the argument continues, it springs 
from the fact that they are made in just the cir-
cumstances in which they are made, as is indi-
cated by the fact that they characteristically, 
though not necessarily or without exception, 
involve those so-called token-reflexive expres-
sions which, in addition to the tenses of verbs, 
serve to connect the circumstances in which a 
statement is made with its sense. (At this point 
it will be helpful to begin putting the line of 
thought I am developing in terms of the fact-
stating and observation-reporting roles of certain 
sentences). Roughly, two verbal performances 
which are tokens of a non-token-reflexive sen-
tence can occur in widely different circum-
stances and yet make the same statement; 
whereas two tokens of a token-reflexive sentence 
can make the same statement only if they are 
uttered in the same circumstances (according to 
a relevant criterion of sameness). And two 
tokens of a sentence, whether it contains a 
token-reflexive expression - over and above a 
tensed verb - or not, can make the same report 
only if, made in all candor, they express the pres-
ence - in some sense of "presence" - of the state 
of affairs that is being reported; if, that is, they 
stand in that relation to the state of affairs, 
whatever the relation may be, by virtue of which 
they can be said to formulate observations of it. 
lt would appear, then, that there are two ways 
in which a sentence token can have credibility: (1) 
The authority may accrue to it, so to speak, from 
above, that is, as being a token of a sentence type 
all the tokens of which, in a certain use, have cred-
ibility, e.g. "2 + 2 = 4:' In this case, let us say that 
token credibility is inherited from type authority. 
(2) The credibility may accrue to it from the fact 
that it came to exist in a certain way in a certain set 
of circumstances, e.g. "This is red." Here token 
credibility is not derived from type credibility. 
Now, the credibility of some sentence types 
appears to be intrinsic - at least in the limited 
sense that it is not derived from other sentences, 
type or token. This is, or seems to be, the case 
with certain sentences used to make analytic 
statements. The credibility of some sentence 
types accrues to them by virtue of their logical 
relations to other sentence types, thus by virtue 
of the fact that they are logical consequences of 
more basic sentences. It would seem obvious, 
however, that the credibility of empirical sen-
tence types cannot be traced without remainder 
to the credibility of other sentence types. And 
since no empirical sentence type appears to have 
intrinsic credibility, this means that credibility 
must accrue to some empirical sentence types by 
virtue of their logical relations to certain sen-
tence tokens, and, indeed, to sentence tokens the 
authority of which is not derived, in its turn, 
from the authority of sentence types. 
The picture we get is that of there being two 
ultimate modes of credibility: (1) The intrinsic 
credibility of analytic sentences, which accrues to 

96 
WILFRID SELLARS 
tokens as being tokens of such a type; (2) the 
credibility of such tokens as "express observa-
tions;' a credibility which flows from tokens to 
types. 
Let us explore this picture, which is common to 
all traditional empiricisms, a bit further. How is 
the authority of such sentence tokens as "express 
observational knowledge" to be understood? It has 
been tempting to suppose that in spite of the obvi-
ous differences which exist between "observation 
reports" and "analytic statements;' there is an 
essential similarity between the ways in which they 
come by their authority. Thus, it has been claimed, 
not without plausibility, that whereas ordinary 
empirical statements can be correctly made with-
out being true, observation reports resemble ana-
lytic statements in that being correctly made is a 
sufficient as well as necessary condition of their 
truth. And it has been inferred from this - some-
what hastily, I believe - that "correctly making" the 
report "This is green" is a matter of "following the 
rules for the use of 'this; 'is' and 'green:" 
Three comments are immediately necessary: 
(1) First a brief remark about the term 
"report." In ordinary usage a report is a report 
made by someone to someone. To make a report 
is to do something. In the literature of epistemol-
ogy,however, the word "report" or"Konstatierung" 
has acquired a technical use in which a sentence 
token can playa reporting role (a) without being 
an overt verbal performance, and (b) without 
having the character of being "by someone to 
someone" - even oneself. There is, of course, 
such a thing as "talking to oneself" -
in foro 
interno - but, as I shall be emphasizing in the 
closing stages of my argument, it is important 
not to suppose that all "covert" verbal episodes 
are of this kind. 
(2) My second comment is that while we shall 
not assume that because "reports" in the ordinary 
sense are actions, "reports" in the sense of 
Konstatierungen are also actions, the line of 
thought we are considering treats them as such. 
In other words, it interprets the correctness of 
Konstatierungen as analogous to the rightness of 
actions. Let me emphasize, however, that not all 
ought is ought to do, nor all correctness the cor-
rectness of actions. 
(3) My third comment is that if the expression 
"following a rule" is taken seriously, and is not 
weakened beyond all recognition into the bare 
notion of exhibiting a uniformity - in which case 
the lightning, thunder sequence would "follow a 
rule" - then it is the knowledge or belief that the 
circumstances are of a certain kind, and not the 
mere fact that they are of this kind, which con-
tributes to bringing about the action. 
In the light of these remarks it is clear that if 
observation reports are construed as actions, if 
their correctness is interpreted as the correctness 
of an action, and if the authority of an observa-
tion report is construed as the fact that making it 
is "following a rule" in the proper sense of this 
phrase, then we are face to face with giveness in 
its most straightforward form. For these stipula-
tions commit one to the idea that the authority of 
Konstatierungen rests on nonverbal episodes of 
awareness - awareness that something is the case, 
e.g. that this is green - which nonverbal episodes 
have an intrinsic authority (they are, so to speak, 
"self-authenticating") which the verbal perform-
ances (the Konstatierungen) properly performed 
"express:' One is committed to a stratum of 
authoritative nonverbal episodes ("awareness") 
the authority of which accrues to a superstructure 
of verbal actions, provided that the expressions 
occurring in these actions are properly used. 
These self-authenticating episodes would consti-
tute the tortoise on which stands the elephant on 
which rests the edifice of empirical knowledge. 
The essence of the view is the same whether these 
intrinsically authoritative episodes are such items 
as the awareness that a certain sense content is 
green or such items as the awareness that a certain 
physical object looks to someone to be green. 
But what is the alternative? We might begin by 
trying something like the following: An overt or 
covert token of "This is green" in the presence of 
a green item is a Konstatierung and express obser-
vational knowledge if and only if it is a manifesta-
tion of a tendency to produce overt or covert 
tokens of "This is green" - given a certain set - if 
and only if a green object is being looked at in 
standard conditions. Clearly on this interpreta-
tion the occurrence of such tokens of "This is 
green" would be "following a rule" only in the 
sense that they are instances of a uniformity, a 
uniformity differing from the lightning-thunder 
case in that it is an acquired causal characteristic 
of the language user. Clearly the above sugges-
tion, which corresponds to the "thermometer 

DOES EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION? 
97 
view" criticized by Professor Price, and which we 
have already rejected elsewhere, won't do as it 
stands. Let us see, however, if it can't be revised to 
fit the criteria I have been using for "expressing 
observational knowledge." 
The first hurdle to be jumped concerns the 
authority which, as I have emphasized, a sentence 
token must have in order that it may be said to 
express knowledge. Clearly, on this account the 
only thing that can remotely be supposed to con-
stitute such authority is the fact that one can infer 
the presence of a green object from the fact that 
someone makes this report. As we have already 
noticed, the correctness of a report does not have 
to be construed as the rightness of an action. 
A report can be correct as being an instance of a 
general mode of behavior which, in a given lin-
guistic community, it is reasonable to sanction 
and support. 
The second hurdle is, however, the decisive 
one. For we have seen that to be the expression of 
knowledge, a report must not only have authority, 
this authority must in some sense be recognized 
by the person whose report it is. And this is a 
steep hurdle indeed. For if the authority of the 
report "This is green" lies in the fact that the exist-
ence of green items appropriately related to the 
perceiver can be inferred from the occurrence of 
such reports, it follows that only a person who is 
able to draw this inference, and therefore who 
has not only the concept green, but also the con-
cept of uttering "This is green" - indeed, the 
concept of certain conditions of perception, those 
which would correctly be called "standard condi-
tions" - could be in a position to token "This is 
green" in recognition of its authority. In other 
words, for a Konstatierung "This is green" to 
"express observational knowledge;' not only must 
it be a symptom or sign of the presence of a green 
object in standard conditions, but the perceiver 
must know that tokens of "This is green" are symp-
toms of the presence of green objects in conditions 
which are standard for visual perception. 
Now it might be thought that there is some-
thing obviously absurd in the idea that before a 
token uttered by, say, Jones could be the expres-
sion of observational knowledge, Jones would 
have to know that overt verbal episodes of this 
kind are reliable indicators of the existence, suit-
ably related to the speaker, of green objects. I do 
not think that it is. Indeed, I think that something 
very like it is true. The point I wish to make now, 
however, is that if it is true, then it follows, as a 
matter of simple logic, that one couldn't have 
observational knowledge of any fact unless one 
knew many other things as well. And let me 
emphasize that the point is not taken care of by 
distinguishing between knowing how and know-
ing that, and admitting that observational knowl-
edge requires a lot of "know how." For the point is 
specifically that observational knowledge of any 
particular fact, e.g. that this is green, presupposes 
that one knows general facts of the form X is a 
reliable symptom of Y. And to admit this requires 
an abandonment of the traditional empiricist 
idea that observational knowledge "stands on its 
own feet." Indeed, the suggestion would be anath-
ema to traditional empiricists for the obvious 
reason that by making observational knowledge 
presuppose knowledge of general facts of the form 
X is a reliable symptom ofY, it runs counter to the 
idea that we come to know general facts of this 
form only after we have come to know by obser-
vation a number of particular facts which support 
the hypothesis that X is a symptom ofY. 
And it might be thought that there is an obvi-
ous regress in the view we are examining. Does it 
not tell us that observational knowledge at time t 
presupposes knowledge of the form X is a reliable 
symptom of Y, which presupposes prior observa-
tional knowledge, which presupposes other knowl-
edge of the form X is a reliable symptom of Y, 
which presupposes still other, and prior observa-
tional knowledge, and so on? This charge, how-
ever, rests on too simple, indeed a radically 
mistaken, conception of what one is saying of 
Jones when one says that he knows that p. It is not 
just that the objection supposes that knowing is 
an episode; for clearly there are episodes which we 
can correctly characterize as knowings, in partic-
ular, observings. The essential point is that in 
characterizing an episode or a state as that of 
knowing, we are not giving an empirical descrip-
tion of that episode or state; we are placing it in 
the logical space of reasons, of justifying and 
being able to justify what one says. 
Thus, all that the view I am defending requires 
is that no tokening by S now of "This is green" is 
to count as "expressing observational knowl-
edge" unless it is also correct to say of S that he 
now knows the appropriate fact of the form X is 
a reliable symptom ofY, namely that {and again I 

98 
WILFRID SELLARS 
oversimplify) utterances of "This is green" are 
reliable indicators of the presence of green objects 
in standard conditions of perception. And while 
the correctness of this statement about Jones 
requires that Jones could now cite prior particular 
facts as evidence for the idea that these utterances 
are reliable indicators, it requires only that it is 
correct to say that Jones now knows, thus remem-
bers, that these particular facts did obtain. It does 
not require that it be correct to say that at the 
time these facts did obtain he then knew them to 
obtain. And the regress disappears. 
Thus, while Jones' ability to give inductive 
reasons today is built on a long history of acquir-
ing and manifesting verbal habits in perceptual 
situations, and, in particular, the occurrence of 
verbal episodes, e.g. "This is green," which is 
superficially like those which are later properly 
said to express observational knowledge, it does 
not require that any episode in this prior time be 
characterizeable as expressing knowledge. (At 
this point, the reader should reread the opening 
section of this chapter.) 
The idea that observation "strictly and prop-
erly so-called" is constituted by certain self-
authenticating nonverbal episodes, the authority 
of which is transmitted to verbal and quasi-verbal 
performances when these performances are made 
"in conformity with the seman tical rules of the 
language;' is, of course, the heart of the Myth of 
the Given. For the given, in epistemological tradi-
tion, is what is taken by these self-authenticating 
episodes. These "takings" are, so to speak, the 
unmoved movers of empirical knowledge, the 
"knowings in presence" which are presupposed 
by all other knowledge, both the knowledge of 
general truths and the knowledge "in absence" of 
other particular matters of fact. Such is the frame-
work in which traditional empiricism makes its 
characteristic claim that the perceptually given is 
the foundation of empirical knowledge. 
If I reject the framework of traditional empiri-
cism, it is not because I want to say that empirical 
knowledge has no foundation. For to put it this 
way is to suggest that it is really "empirical knowl-
edge so-called;' and to put it in a box with rumors 
and hoaxes. There is clearly some point to the pic-
ture of human knowledge as resting on a level of 
propositions - observation reports - which do 
not rest on other propositions in the same way as 
other propositions rest on them. On the other 
hand, I do wish to insist that the metaphor of 
"foundation" is misleading in that it keeps us 
from seeing that if there is a logical dimension in 
which other empirical propositions rest on obser-
vation reports, there is another logical dimension 
in which the latter rest on the former. 
Above all, the picture is misleading because of 
its static character. One seems forced to choose 
between the picture of an elephant which rests on 
a tortoise (What supports the tortoise?) and the 
picture of a great Hegelian serpent of knowledge 
with its tail in its mouth (Where does it begin?). 
Neither will do. For empirical knowledge, like its 
sophisticated extension, science, is rational, not 
because it has a foundation but because it is a self-
correcting enterprise which can put any claim in 
jeopardy, though not all at once. 

CHAPTER 9 
Epistemic Principles 
Wilfrid Sellars 
I 
The explication of knowledge as "justified true 
belief", though it involves many pitfalls to which 
attention has been called in recent years, remains 
the orthodox or classical account and is, I believe, 
essentially sound. Thus, in the present lecture I 
shall assume that it can be formulated in such a 
way as to be immune from the type of counter-
examples with which it has been bombarded since 
Gettier's pioneering paper in Analysis and turn 
my attention to another problem which has 
dogged its footsteps since the very beginning. 
This problem can be put in the form of two ques-
tions: Ifknowledge is justified true belief, how can 
there be such a thing as self-evident knowledge? 
And if there is no such thing as self-evident 
knowledge, how can any true belief be, in the 
relevant sense, justified? 
But first let us beat about in the neighboring 
fields, perhaps to scare up some game, but, in any 
case, to refamiliarize ourselves with the terrain. 
Thus, are there not occasions on which a person 
can be said to be justified in believing something 
which he would not appropriately be said to 
know? Presumably, to be justified in believing 
something is to have good reasons for believing it, 
Originally published in H. Castaneda (ed.), Action, 
Knowledge, and Reality (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 
1975), pp. 332-49. 
as contrasted with its contradictory. But how 
good? Adequate? Conclusive? If adequate, ade-
quate for what? If conclusive, the conclusion of 
what is at stake? 
We are all familiar with Austin's point con-
cerning the performative character of "I know". 
We are also familiar with the fact that, whereas 
to say "I promise to do A" is, other things being 
equal, to promise to do A, to say "I know that-p" 
is not, other things being equal, to know that-po 
Chisholm's distinction between the strict and 
the extended sense of "performative utterance" 
is helpful in this connection. According to 
Chisholm, 
An utterance beginning with "I want" is not 
performative in [the 1 strict sense, for it cannot be 
said to be an "act" of wanting. But "I want" is 
often used to accomplish what one might accom-
plish by means of the strict performative "I 
request". Let us say, then, that "I want" may be a 
"performative utterance" in an extended sense of 
the latter expression. I 
He asks in which, if either, of these senses an 
utterance of "I know" may be performative. After 
reminding us that "I know" is not performative in 
the strict sense of the term, he allows that "[it] is 
often used to accomplish what one may accomplish 
by the strict performative 'I guarantee' or 'I give you 
my word' " and "hence may be performative in an 
extended sense of the term':2 

100 
WILFRID SELLARS 
He argues, however, that "I know" is not always 
a substitute for "I guarantee", pointing out that: 
Just as an utterance of "I want" may serve both to 
say something about me and to get you to do 
something, an utterance of "I know" may serve 
both to say something about me and to provide 
you with guarantees. To suppose that the per-
formance of the nondescriptive function is incon-
sistent with the simultaneous performance of the 
descriptive function might be called, therefore, 
an example of the performative fallacy. 3 
I think that Chisholm is quite right about this. 
On the other hand, it seems to me that he over-
looks the possibility of a connection between 
"I know" and "I guarantee" other than the one he 
considers. "I know that-p" might be related to 
"I guarantee that-p" not just as an autobiograph-
ical description which on occasion performs the 
same role as the latter but as one which contains 
a reference to guaranteeing in its very meaning. 
Is it not possible to construe "I know that-p" as 
essentially equivalent to "p, and I have reasons 
good enough to support a guarantee" (i.e., to say 
"I guarantee" or "You can rely on my state-
ment")? Such an account would enable us to 
recognize a performative element in the very 
meaning of the verb "to know" without constru-
ing "I know" as a performative in the strict sense. 
It would also preserve the symmetry between 
first person and other person uses of the verb "to 
know" which seems to be a pre-analytic datum. 
Thus, "He knows that-p" would entail "He has 
reasons good enough to support a guarantee 
that-p".4 
Furthermore, this account would enable us to 
appreciate the context dependence of the adequacy 
involved. Reasons which might be adequately 
good to justify a guarantee on one occasion might 
not be adequate to justify a guarantee on another. 
Again, the presence of such a performative ele-
ment in the very meaning of the verb "to know" 
would account for the fact (if it is a fact) that we 
rarely think in terms of "I know" in purely self-
directed thinkings; that we rarely have thoughts 
of the form "I know that-p" unless the question of 
a possible guarantee to someone other than our-
selves has arisen. Of course, we can "tell ourselves" 
that we know something, but, then, so can we be 
said to make promises to ourselves. 
II 
Yet even after justice has been done, perhaps along 
the above lines, to the performative element in 
the meaning of the verb "to know", it seems to 
me that we must recognize a closely related use of 
this expression which, though it may have impli-
cations concerning action, is not in any of the 
above senses performative. For once the ethical 
issue of how good one's reasons for a belief must 
be in order to justify giving a guarantee is solved, 
there remains the problem of how good reasons 
must be to justify believing that-p, where to 
believe that-p is obviously not an action, let alone 
a performatory action in either the strict or the 
extended sense. 
Confronted by this question, we are tempted 
to set apart a class of cases in which the reasons 
are not only good enough to justify believing 
that-p but good enough to make it absurd not to 
believe that-p (or, perhaps, to believe its contra-
dictory). It is perhaps, some such concept as this 
which is (in addition to the truth condition) the 
non-performative core of the meaning of the verb 
"to know': 
I think the above discussion has served its 
primary purpose by highlighting the concept of 
having good reasons for believing that-po For the 
solution of the problem which was posed in my 
opening remarks hinges ultimately on a distinc-
tion between two ways in which there can be, 
and one can have, good reasons for believing 
that-p.5 
Now one pattern for justifying a belief in terms 
of good reasons can be called inferential. Consider 
the schema: 
p; 
So, I have good reasons, all things considered, 
for believing q. 
On reflection, this schema tends to expand into: 
I have good reasons, all things considered, for 
believing p; 
So,p; 
So, I have good reasons, all things considered, 
for believing q. 
Further reflection suggests that arguments 
conforming to this schema have a suppressed 

EPISTEMIC PRINCIPLES 
101 
premise. What might it be? Consider the follow-
ing expanded schema: 
I have, all things considered, good reasons for 
believing p; 
So,p; 
p logically implies q; 
So, I have, all things considered, good reasons 
for believing q. 
The line of thought thus schematically repre-
sented would seem to involve the principle, 
Logical implication transmits reasonableness. 
In cases of this type, we are tempted to say, we 
have derivative good reasons, all things considered, 
for believing q. We say, in other words, that the 
reasonableness of believing q is "inferential': 
Notice that the above line of thought is obvi-
ously an oversimplification, undoubtedly in 
several respects. In particular, it is important to 
note that if I have independent grounds for 
believing not-q, I may decide that I do not have 
good reasons, all things considered, for believing 
that-po After all, if p implies q, not-q equally 
implies not-po Yet in spite of its oversimplifica-
tions, the above train of thought takes us nearer 
to the distinctions necessary to solve our problem. 
I have been considering the case where one 
proposition, p, logically implies another, q, and 
have claimed, with the above qualifications, that 
logical implication transmits reasonableness. 
Perhaps we can also take into account, with trepi-
dation, "probabilistic" implication, which would 
give us the following schema: 
It is reasonable, all things considered, to 
believe p; 
So,p; 
p probabilistically implies q to a high degree; 
So, all things considered, it is reasonable to 
believe q. 
Probabilistic justification of beliefs in accordance 
with this pattern would, presumably, be illus-
trated by inductive arguments and theoretical 
explanations. In each case, we move from a 
premise of the form: 
It is reasonable, all things considered, to 
believe E, 
where "E" formulates the evidence, to a conclu-
sion of the form: 
It is reasonable, all things considered, to 
believe H, 
where "H" formulates in the first case a law-like 
statement and in the second case a body of theo-
retical assumptions. 
III 
As has been pointed out since time immemorial 
it is most implausible to suppose that all epis~ 
temic justification is inferential, at least in the 
sense of conforming to the patterns described 
above. Surely, it has been argued, there must be 
beliefs which we are justified in holding on 
grounds other than that they can be correctly 
inferred, inductively or deductively, from other 
beliefs which we are justified in holding. In tradi-
tional terms, if there is to be inferential knowledge, 
must there not be non-inferential knowledge -
beliefs, that is, the reasonableness of which does 
not rest on the reasonableness of beliefs which 
logically or probabilistically imply them? 
We are clearly in the neighborhood of what has 
been called the "self-evident", the "self-certifying", 
in short, of "intuitive knowledge': It is in this 
neighborhood that we find what has come to be 
called the foundational picture of human knowl-
edge. According to this picture, beliefs which have 
inferential reasonableness ultimately rely for their 
authority on a stratum of beliefs which are, in 
some sense, self-certifying. The reasonableness of 
moves from the level of the self-evident to higher 
levels would involve the principles oflogic (deduc-
tive and inductive) and, perhaps, certain addi-
tional principles which are sui generis. They would 
have in common the character of transmitting 
authoritativeness from lower-level beliefs to 
higher-level beliefs. 
IV 
Let us reflect on the concept of such a founda-
tionallevel of knowledge. It involves the concept 
of beliefs which are reasonable, which have epis-
ternic authority or correctness, but which are not 

102 
WILFRID SELLARS 
reasonable or authoritative by virtue of the fact 
that they are beliefs in propositions which are 
implied by other propositions which it is reason-
able to believe. Let us label them, for the moment, 
"non-inferentially reasonable beliefs': 
How can there be such beliefs? For the con-
cept of a reason seems so clearly tied to that of an 
inference or argument that the concept of non-
inferential reasonableness seems to be a contra-
dictio in adjecto. Surely, we are inclined to say, for 
a belief (or believing) to be reasonable, there must 
be a reason for the belief (or believing). And must 
not this reason be something other than the belief 
or believing for which it is the reason? And surely, 
we are inclined to say, to believe something because 
it is reasonable (to believe it) involves not only that 
there be a reason but that, in a relevant sense, one 
has or is in possession of the reason. Notice that I 
have deliberately formulated these expostulations 
in such a way as to highlight the ambiguities 
involved when one speaks of reasonable beliefs. 
In attempting to cope with these challenges, 
I shall leave aside problems pertaining to inferen-
tial and non-inferential reasonableness in logic 
and mathematics and concentrate on the appar-
ent need for "self evidence" in the sphere of 
empirical matters of fact. 
How might a self-justifying belief be con-
strued? One suggestion, modified from Chisholm's 
Theory of Knowledge,6 is to the effect that the 
justification of such beliefs has the form, 
What justifies me in claiming that my belief 
that a is F is reasonable is simply the fact that 
a isF. 
But this seems to point to the existence of infer-
ences of the form, 
It is a fact that a is F; 
So, it is reasonable to believe that a is F, 
and one might begin to wonder what principle 
authorizes this inference. 
Something, clearly, has gone wrong. In order 
for any such argument to do the job, its premise 
would have to have authority; it would have to be 
something which it is reasonable to believe. But if 
we modify the schema to take this into account, it 
becomes: 
It is reasonable to believe it to be a fact that 
a isF; 
So, it is reasonable to believe that a is F, 
which, in virtue of the equivalence of 
believing a to be F 
with 
believing it to be a fact that a is F, 
is obviously unilluminating. 
v 
Now many philosophers who have endorsed a 
concept of intuitive knowledge are clearly com-
mitted to the position that there is a level of cogni-
tion more basic than believing. This more basic 
level would consist of a sub-conceptual' aware-
ness of certain facts. In terms of the framework 
that I have sketched elsewhere, there would be a 
level of cognition more basic than thinkings or 
tokenings of sentences in Mentalese - more basic, 
in fact, than symbolic activity, literal or analogi-
cal. It would be a level of cognition unmediated 
by concepts; indeed it would be the very source of 
concepts in some such way as described by tradi-
tional theories of abstraction. It would be "direct 
apprehension" of facts; their "direct presence" to 
the mind. 8 
Schematically we would have, 
It is a fact (which I directly apprehend) that a 
is F; 
So, it is reasonable to have the conceptual belief 
that a is F. 
This multiplication of distinctions raises two seri-
ous problems: (1) What sort of entities are facts? 
Do they belong to the real (extra-conceptual) 
order? That "fact" is roughly a synonym for 
"truth", and "true" is appropriately predicated of 
conceptual items (in overt speech or Mentalese) 
should give pause for thought. 
Then there is also the question: (2) How is 
"direct apprehension" to be understood? If 
the apprehending is distinguishable from the 

EPISTEMIC PRINCIPLES 
103 
apprehended, is it not also "separable"? Might not 
apprehending occur without any fact being appre-
hended? If so, an "apprehending that-p" might 
not be an apprehending of the fact that-po Hitting, 
in baseball, implies that something is hit. 
"Swinging" does not. To hit is to swing success-
fully. Of course, "apprehend", like "see", is, in its 
ordinary sense, an achievement word. But does 
this not mean that, as in the case of "see", there is 
a place for "ostensibly apprehending", i.e., seeming 
to apprehend, a concept which does not imply 
achievement? 
Many who use the metaphor "to see" in intel-
lectual contexts overlook the fact that in its literal 
sense "seeing" is a term for a successful conceptual 
activity which contrasts with "seeming to see". No 
piling on of additional metaphors (e.g., "grasp-
ing", which implies an object grasped) can blunt 
this fact. Now the distinction between seeing and 
merely seeming to see implies a criterion. To rely 
on the metaphors of "apprehending" or "presence 
of the object" is to obscure the need of criteria for 
distinguishing between "knowing" and "seeming 
to know", which ultimately define what it means 
to speak of knowledge as a correct or well-founded 
thinking that something is the case. 
If so, to know that we have apprehended a fact, 
we would have to know that the criteria which 
distinguish apprehending from seeming to appre-
hend were satisfied. In short, I suspect that the 
notion of a non-conceptual "direct apprehension" 
of a "fact" provides a merely verbal solution to 
our problem. The regress is stopped by an ad hoc 
regress-stopper. Indeed, the very metaphors 
which promised the sought-for foundation 
contain within themselves a dialectical moment 
which takes us beyond them. 
VI 
What is the alternative? I suggest that the key to 
our problem is provided by the Verbal Behaviorist 
model, developed elsewhere. It is, we have seen, a 
simple, indeed radically over-simplified, model, 
but it will provide us, I believe, with the outline of 
a strategy for getting out of the classical laby-
rinth. 
According to this model, it will be remem-
bered, the primary sense of 
is 
The thought occurred to Jones that snow is 
white 
Jones said "snow is white", 
where the verb "to say" was stripped of some of 
its ordinary implications and roughly equated 
with "to utter words candidly as one who knows 
the language". In particular, it was purged of the 
illocutionary and perlocutionary forces which 
Austin and Grice find so central to their theory of 
meaning. "To say", in this sense, was also equated 
with "thinking-out-loud". 
According to the VB, as I describe him, we 
must also introduce, in order to take account of 
those cases where one thinks silently, a secondary 
sense of 
The thought occurred to Jones that snow IS 
white, 
in which it refers to a short-term proximate propen-
sityto think-out-loud that snow is white. When this 
propensity is "uninhibited'; one thinks-aut-loud, 
i.e., thinks in the primary sense of this term (as con-
strued by VB). There can be many reasons why, on a 
particular occasion, this propensity is inhibited. But, 
for our purposes, the most important is the general 
inhibition acquired in childhood when, after being 
taught to think-out-loud, one is trained not to be a 
"babbler': One might use the model of an on-off 
switch which gets into the wiring diagram when the 
child learns to keep his thoughts to himself. 
I have argued elsewhere that yet another con-
cept of "having the thought occur to one that-p" 
can be introduced which stands to the second as 
the theoretical concept of electronic processes 
stands to the acquisition (and loss) of the power 
to attract iron filings (or a bell clapper) by a 
piece of soft iron in a coil of wire attached to an 
electric circuit. I argued that the classical con-
cept of thought-episodes can be construed as 
part of a theoretical framework designed to 
explain the acquisition and loss of verbal pro-
pensities to think-out-loud. In approaching the 
problem of the status of non-inferential knowl-
edge, however, I shall return to the VB model 
and concentrate, indeed, on the primary sense of 

104 
WILFRID SELLARS 
having the thought occur to one that-p, i.e., 
think-out-loud that-po 
I have argued elsewhere that perceptual 
experience involves a sensory element which is 
in no way a form of thinking, however inti-
mately it may be connected with thinking. This 
element consists of what I have variously called 
"sense impressions", "sensations", or "sensa". 
I argued that these items, properly construed, 
belong in a theoretical framework designed to 
explain: 
(a) 
the difference between merely thinking of 
(believing in the existence of) a perceptible 
state of affairs and seeing (or seeming to see) 
that such a state of affairs exists; 
(b) 
how it can seem to a person that there is a 
pink ice cube in front of him when there 
isn't one - either because there is something 
there which is either not pink or not cubical, 
or because there is nothing there and he is 
having a realistic hallucination. 
I've explored problems pertaining to the 
nature and status of this sensory element on many 
occasions,9 but further exploration of this theme 
would leave no time for the problem at hand. 
What is important for our purposes is that 
perceptual experience also involves a conceptual 
or propositional component - a "thinking" in a 
suitably broad sense of this accordion term. 
In perception, the thought is caused to occur to 
one that, for example, there is a pink ice cube in 
front of one. It is misleading to call such a 
thought a "perceptual judgment" -
for this 
implies question-answering activity of estimat-
ing, for example, the size of an object. (I judge 
that the room is ten feet tall.) Perhaps the best 
term is "taking something to be the case". Thus, 
on the occasion of sensing a certain color con-
figuration, one takes there to be an object or sit-
uation of a certain description in one's physical 
environment. 
Let us consider the case where 
Jones sees there to be a red apple III front 
of him. 
Given that Jones has learned how to use the rele-
vant words in perceptual situations, he is justified 
in reasoning as follows: 
I just thought-out-loud "Lo! Here is a red 
apple" (no countervailing conditions obtain); 
So, there is good reason to believe that there is 
a red apple in front of me. 
Of course, the conclusion of this reasoning is 
not the thinking involved in his original percep-
tual experience. Like all justification arguments, it 
is a higher-order thinking. He did not originally 
infer that there is a red apple in front of him. Now, 
however, he is inferring from the character and 
context of his experience that it is veridical and 
that there is good reason to believe that there is 
indeed a red apple in front of him. 
Notice that although the justification of the 
belief that there is a red apple in front of (Jones) 
is an inferential justification, it has the peculiar 
character that its essential premise asserts the 
occurrence of the very same belief in a specific 
context.!O It is this fact which gives the appearance 
that such beliefs are self-justifying and hence gives 
the justification the appearance of being non-
inferential. 
It is, as I see it, precisely this feature of the 
unique pattern of justification in question which, 
misinterpreted, leads Chisholm to formulate as 
his principle for the "directly evident", 
What justifies me in counting it as evident that 
a is F is simply the fact that a is F.ll 
To be sure, Chisholm's examples of the "directly 
evident" are not taken from the domain of percep-
tual beliefs, but rather, in true Cartesian spirit, 
from one's knowledge about what is going on in 
one's mind at the present moment. Indeed, he 
rejects the idea that particular perceptual beliefs 
of the kind which I illustrated by my example of 
the red apple are ever directly evident. 
On the other hand, though he does think 
that particular perceptual beliefs of this type 
can at best be indirectly evident, he does think 
that they can be reasonable. Should we say 
"directly reasonable"? I, of course, would answer 
in the affirmative. Yet it is not clear to me that 
Chisholm would be happy with this suggestion. 
If (as he should) he has at the back of his mind 
the reasoning; 
There (visually) appears to me to be a red 
apple here; 

EPISTEMIC PRINCIPLES 
105 
So, it is reasonable for me (to believe) that 
there is a red apple here, 
then he should not object to speaking of the rea-
sonableness in question as "direct'; for the premise 
does not contain a predicate of epistemic evalua-
tion. If, on the other hand (as he should not), he has 
at the back of his mind the following reasoning, 
It is evident to me that there (visually) appears 
to me to be a red apple here; 
So, it is reasonable for me (to believe) that 
there is a red apple here, 
we could expect him to object to speaking of his 
reasonableness as "direct". 
This tension sets the stage for a corresponding 
comment on Chisholm's third epistemic princi-
ple, which concerns the case where what we visu-
ally take to be the case is the presence of something 
having a "sensible characteristic F" (where "F' 
ranges over the familiar Aristotelian list of proper 
and common sensibles). The principle reads as 
follows: 
(C) If there is a certain sensible characteristic 
F such that S believes that he perceives 
something to be F, then it is evident to 
S that he is perceiving something to have 
that characteristic F, and also evident that 
there is something that is F. 
I shall not pause to quibble over such matters 
as whether, in the light of Chisholm's definition 
of "evident", it can ever be evident to me that I am 
perceiving something to be pink or that some-
thing in front of me is pink - even if the claim is 
limited to the facing side. A high degree of rea-
sonableness will do. The point which I wish to 
stress is that once again the question arises, does 
Chisholm think of the evidence involved in the 
principles as "direct" or "indirect"? This time it is 
clear that he thinks of it as indirect. As I see it, 
then, he has at the back of his mind the following 
reasoning: 
It is evident to me that there appears to me to 
be a pink object here; 
So, it is evident to me that I perceive a pink 
object to be here and evident to me that there 
is a pink object here. 
The contrasting reasoning would be: 
There appears to me to be a pink object here; 
So, it is evident to me that I perceive a pink 
object to be here and evident to me that there 
is a pink object here. 
Now I suspect that what has misled Chisholm 
is the fact that if I were to argue, 
There appears to me to be a pink cube here; 
So, it is highly reasonable for me (to believe) 
that there is a pink object here, 
a skeptic could be expected to challenge me by 
asking "What right have you to accept your con-
clusion, unless you have a right to accept the 
premise? Are you not implying that you know that 
there appears to you to be a pink object here; and 
must not this claim be a tacit premise in your 
argument?" But, surely, the skeptic would just be 
mistaken - not, indeed, in asserting that in some 
sense I imply that I know that there appears to me 
to be a pink object here, but in asserting that this 
implication must be taken to be a premise in my 
reasoning, if it is to be valid, and, hence, if the 
corresponding epistemic principle is to be true. 
But in that case, the latter principle would be not 
Chisholm's (C), but rather: 
(C') If it is evident to S that there is a certain 
sensible characteristic F ... 
The larger import of the above reply to the 
skeptic will be sketched in my concluding remarks. 
For the moment, let me say that from my point of 
view something very like Chisholm's principle 
(C) is sound but concerns the direct evidence (or, 
better, direct high degree of reasonableness) of 
certain perceptual beliefs. Let me formulate it as 
follows: 
(5) If there is a certain sensible characteristic 
F such that S believes that he perceives 
something to be F, then it is evident to S 
that there is something that is F and, 
hence, that he is perceiving something to 
beF. 
Notice that I have reversed the relative posi-
tion of the two clauses in the consequent as they 

106 
WILFRID SELLARS 
appear in Chisholm's principle. This is because, 
on my interpretation, the core of the principle is 
(S1) If I ostensibly see there to be an F object 
here, then it is highly reasonable for me 
(to believe) that there is an F object here. 
And the move to 
(S2) If I ostensibly see there to be an F object 
here, then it is highly reasonable for me 
(to believe) that I see there to be an F 
object here 
IS justified by the conceptual tie between 
"ostensibly see", "see", and truth. 
VII 
Chisholm's principle (C) and his other epistemic 
principles pertaining to perception and memory 
are themselves justified, as he sees it, by the fact 
that unless they, or something like them, are true, 
then there could be no such thing as perceptual 
knowledge to the effect, to use his example, that 
there is a cat on the roof. We have here a justifica-
tion of the "this or nothing" kind familiar to the 
Kantian tradition. The principles also seem, on 
occasion, to be treated as candidates for the status 
of synthetic a priori (and even, one suspects, self-
evident) truth. 
As I see it, on the other hand, these epistemic 
principles can be placed in a naturalistic setting 
and their authority construed in terms of the 
nature of concept formation and of the acquisi-
tion of relevant linguistic skills. The model which 
I have been using is, indeed, a very simple one, 
and I have largely limited my use of it to the epis-
temic authority of perceptual beliefs. But if the 
strategy which I have suggested is successful, it is 
a relatively simple matter to extend it to memory 
beliefs. I have discussed the case of non-inferen-
tial knowledge of our own mental states in some 
detail, using this same general strategy, on a 
number of occasions. 12 
But, surely, it will be urged, facts about learn-
ing languages and acquiring linguistic skills are 
themselves empirical facts; and to know these 
facts involves perception, memory, indeed, all 
the epistemic activities the justification of which 
is at stake. Must we not conclude that any such 
account as I give of the principle that perceptual 
beliefs occurring in perceptual contexts are likely 
to be true is circular? It must, indeed, be granted 
that principles pertaining to the epistemic 
authority of perceptual and memory beliefs are 
not the sort of thing which could be arrived at by 
inductive reasoning from perceptual belief. But 
the best way to make this point is positive. We 
have to be in this framework to be thinking and 
perceiving beings at all. I suspect that it is this 
plain truth which is the real underpinning of the 
idea that the authority of epistemic principles 
rests on the fact that unless they were true we 
could not see that a cat is on the roof. 
I pointed out a moment ago that we have to 
be in the framework of these (and other) princi-
ples to be thinking, perceiving, and, I now add, 
acting beings at all. But surely this makes it clear 
that the exploration of these principles is but 
part and parcel of the task of explicating the 
concept of a rational animal or, in VB terms, of a 
language-using organism whose language is 
about the world in which it is used. It is only in 
the light of this larger task that the problem of 
the status of epistemic principles reveals its true 
meaning. 
From the perspective of this larger task, the 
metaphor of "foundation and superstructure" is 
seen to be a false extrapolation, to use a Deweyan 
turn of phrase, from specific "problematic situa-
tions" with respect to which it is appropriate. And 
when we concern ourselves, as Philosophy ulti-
mately demands, with how it is with man and his 
world, as contrasted with the catch-as-catch-can 
procedures which generate man's awareness of 
himself and his world, surely we can say, as I wrote 
some fifteen years ago in an earlier essay on this 
topic, 
There is clearly some point to the picture of 
human knowledge as resting on a level of propo-
sitions - observation reports - which do not rest 
on other propositions in the same way as other 
propositions rest on them. On the other hand, 
I do wish to insist that the metaphor of "founda-
tion" is misleading in that it keeps us from seeing 
that if there is a logical dimension in which other 
empirical propositions rest on observation 
reports, there is another logical dimension in 
which the latter rest on the former. 

EPISTEMIC PRINCIPLES 
107 
Above all, the picture is misleading because of 
its static character. One seems forced to choose 
between the picture of an elephant which rests 
on a tortoise (What supports the tortoise?) and 
the picture of a great Hegelian serpent of know 1-
edge with its tail in its mouth (Where did it 
Notes 
R. M. Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966), 
pp.16-17. 
2 Ibid. 
3 Ibid., p. 17. 
4 Notice that the above account of the relation 
of "I know" to a performative is not quite the 
same as Urmson's. According to the latter, as 
represented by Chisholm, to say that Mr Jones 
knew some proposition to be true is to say 
that Mr Jones was "in a position in which he 
was entitled to say 'I know": This account, as 
Chisholm points out, brings us back to the 
original problem of how the first person use 
of the verb is to be construed. 
5 I have called attention elsewhere to the 
importance of distinguishing between ques-
tions concerning the reasonableness of 
believing that-p from questions concerning 
the reasonableness of "acting on the proposi-
tion that-p", including guaranteeing that-po 
The concept of acting on a proposition is 
clear only in simple cases, as when, for exam-
ple, the proposition occurs as a premise in the 
agent's practical reasoning. When the agent 
takes probabilities into account, a far more 
complicated story is necessary to clarify the 
sense in which a person can be said to have 
acted on a given proposition. For a discussion 
of these problems, see my "Induction as 
Vindication", Philosophy of Science 31 (1964), 
pp. 197-232. 
6 Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge, p. 28. 
Chisholm's principle concerns "what justifies 
us in counting it as evident that a is F': But the 
"evident" is defined on p. 22 as a special case 
of the "reasonable". 
7 Where "sub-conceptual" is far from being 
used as a pejorative term. 
8 It is clearly some such position which is envis-
aged by many who explicitly reject the equa-
tion of knowledge with justified true belief. 
begin?). Neither will do. For empirical knowl-
edge, like its sophisticated extension, science, is 
rational, not because it has a foundation but 
because it is a self-correcting enterprise which 
can put any claim in jeopardy, though not all at 
once. 13 
That it is implicit in Chisholm's posltIon 
becomes clear not only when we reflect (as 
above) on what his principle concerning the 
directly evident might mean, but when we 
take into account his use of such phrases as 
"state of affairs" that '''presents itself to him'" 
or that '''is apprehended through itself'" 
(Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge, p. 28) and 
his general commitment to a fact ontology 
(ibid., chap. 7, passim), a "fact", in the rele-
vant sense, being a "state of affairs which 
exists" (ibid., p. 104). "Exists" in this context 
should not be confused with the "existential 
quantifier" but should be considered as a 
synonym for "obtains': It is obviously not 
self-contradictory to say that some states of 
affairs do not obtain. 
9 Most recently in my Science and Metaphysics 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1967), 
ch. 1, and in "Science, Sense Impressions, 
and Sensa: A Reply to Cornman", Review of 
Metaphysics 25 (1971), which is a reply to 
Cornman's "Sellars, Scientific Realism, and 
Sensa", Review of Metaphysics 24 (1970). 
10 
I called attention to this feature of the 
justification involved in "non-inferential" 
knowledge in Science, Perception and Reality 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, and 
New York: Humanities Press, 1963), chap. 3. 
Thus, I wrote" ... one only knows what one 
has a right to think to be the case. Thus, to 
say that one directly knows that-p is to say 
that his right to the conviction that-p essen-
tially involves the fact that the idea that-p 
occurred to the knower in a specific way" 
(ibid., p. 88). I suggested that this "kind of 
credibility" be called "trans-level credibility", 
and the pattern of inference involved in the 
reasoning which mobilizes this credibility, 
"trans-level inference': A similar point was 
less clearly made in Sections 32-9 of my 
"Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind", 

108 
WILFRID SELLARS 
in Herbert Feigl and Michael Scriven (eds), 
Minnesota Studies in the Philosophy of Science 
vol. I (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1956). Reprinted as chapter 5 of my 
Science, Perception and Reality. 
11 
Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge, p. 28. 
12 
Most recently in my Science and Metaphysics, 
esp. pp. 71 ff., 151 ff. 
13 
"Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind': 
sec. 38; quoted from Science, Perception and 
Reality, p. 170. 

CHAPTER 10 
Can Empirical Knowledge 
Have a Foundation? 
Laurence BonJour 
The idea that empirical knowledge has, and must 
have, a foundation· has been a common tenet of 
most major epistemologists, both past and 
present. There have been, as we shall see further 
below, many importantly different variants of 
this idea. But the common denominator among 
them, the central thesis of epistemological foun-
dationism as I shall understand it here, is the 
claim that certain empirical beliefs possess a 
degree of epistemic justification or warrant which 
does not depend, inferentially or otherwise, on 
the justification of other empirical beliefs, but is 
instead somehow immediate or intrinsic. It is 
these non-inferentially justified beliefs, the 
unmoved (or self-moved) movers of the epis-
temic realm as Chisholm has called them, 1 that 
constitute the foundation upon which the rest of 
empirical knowledge is alleged to rest. 
In recent years, the most familiar foundationist 
views have been subjected to severe and continuous 
attack. But this attack has rarely been aimed directly 
at the central foundationist thesis itself, and new 
versions of foundationism have been quick to 
emerge, often propounded by the erstwhile critics 
themselves. Thus foundationism has become a 
philosophical hydra, difficult to come to grips with 
and seemingly impossible to kill. The purposes 
of this paper are, first, to distinguish and clarify 
Originally published in 
American 
Philosophical 
Quarterly 15, 1(1978), pp. 1-13. 
the main dialectical variants of foundationism, by 
viewing them as responses to one fundamental 
problem which is both the main motivation and the 
primary obstacle for foundationism; and second, as 
a result of this discussion to offer schematic reasons 
for doubting whether any version of foundationism 
is finally acceptable. 
The main reason for the impressive durability 
of foundationism is not any overwhelming plau-
sibility attaching to the main foundationist thesis 
in itself, but rather the existence of one appar-
ently decisive argument which seems to rule out 
all non-skeptical alternatives to foundation ism, 
thereby showing that some version of founda-
tionism must be true (on the assumption that 
skepticism is false). In a recent statement by 
Quinton, this argument runs as follows: 
If any beliefs are to be justified at all, ... there 
must be some terminal beliefs that do not owe 
their ... credibility to others. For a belief to be 
justified it is not enough for it to be accepted, let 
alone merely entertained: there must also be 
good reason for accepting it. Furthermore, for an 
inferential belief to be justified the beliefs that 
support it must be justified themselves. There 
must, therefore, be a kind of belief that does not 
owe its justification to the support provided by 
others. Unless this were so no belief would be 
justified at all, for to justify any belief would 
require the antecedent justification of an infinite 
series of beliefs. The terminal ... beliefs that are 
needed to bring the regress of justification to a 

110 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
stop need not be strictly self-evident in the sense 
that they somehow justify themselves. All that 
is required is that they should not owe their 
justification to any other beliefs.2 
I shall call this argument the epistemic regress 
argument, and the problem which generates it, the 
epistemic regress problem. Since it is this argument 
which provides the primary rationale and argu-
mentative support for foundationism, a careful 
examination of it will also constitute an explora-
tion of the foundationist position itself. The main 
dialectical variants of foundation ism can best be 
understood as differing attempts to solve the 
regress problem, and the most basic objection to 
the foundationist approach is that it is doubtful 
that any of these attempts can succeed. (In this 
paper, I shall be concerned with the epistemic 
regress argument and the epistemic regress prob-
lem only as they apply to empirical knowledge. It 
is obvious that an analogous problem arises also 
for a priori knowledge, but there it seems likely 
that the argument would take a different course. 
In particular, a foundationist approach might be 
inescapable in an account of a priori knowledge.) 
I 
The epistemic regress problem arises directly out 
of the traditional conception of knowledge as 
adequately justified true belief3 - whether this be 
taken as a fully adequate definition of knowledge 
or, in light of the apparent counter-examples 
discovered by Gettier,4 as merely a necessary but 
not sufficient condition. (I shall assume through-
out that the elements of the traditional concep-
tion are at least necessary for knowledge.) Now 
the most natural way to justify a belief is by 
producing a justificatory argument: belief A is 
justified by citing some other (perhaps conjunc-
tive) belief B, from which A is inferable in some 
acceptable way and which is thus offered as a 
reason for acceptingA.5 Call this inferential justi-
fication. It is clear, as Quinton points out in the 
passage quoted above, that for A to be genuinely 
justified by virtue of such a justificatory argu-
ment, B must itself be justified in some fashion; 
merely being inferable from an unsupported 
guess or hunch, e.g., would confer no genuine 
justification upon A. 
Two further points about inferential justifica-
tion, as understood here, must be briefly noted. 
First, the belief in question need not have been 
arrived at as the result of an inference in order to 
be inferentially justified. This is obvious, since a 
belief arrived at in some other way (e.g., as a result 
of wishful thinking) may later come to be main-
tained solely because it is now seen to be inferen-
tially justifiable. Second, less obviously, a person 
for whom a belief is inferentially justified need 
not have explicitly rehearsed the justificatory 
argument in question to others or even to him-
self. It is enough that the inference be available to 
him if the belief is called into question by others 
or by himself (where such availability may itself 
be less than fully explicit) and that the availability 
of the inference be, in the final analysis, his reason 
for holding the belief.6 It seems clear that many 
beliefs which are quite sufficiently justified to 
satisfy the justification criterion for knowledge 
depend for their justification on inferences which 
have not been explicitly formulated and indeed 
which could not be explicitly formulated without 
considerable reflective effort (e.g., my current 
belief that this is the same piece of paper upon 
which I was typing yesterday).7 
Suppose then that belief A is (putatively) 
justified via inference, thus raising the question 
of how the justifying premise-belief B is justified. 
Here again the answer may. be in inferential 
terms: B may be (putatively) justified in virtue of 
being inferable from some further belief C. But 
then the same question arises about the justifica-
tion of C, and so on, threatening an infinite and 
apparently vicious regress of epistemic justifica-
tion. Each belief is justified only if an epistemi-
cally prior belief is justified, and that epistemically 
prior belief is justified only if a still prior belief is 
justified, etc., with the apparent result that justi-
fication can never get started - and hence that 
there is no justification and no knowledge. The 
foundationist claim is that only through the 
adoption of some version of foundationism can 
this skeptical consequence be avoided. 
Prima facie, there seem to be only four basic 
possibilities with regard to the eventual outcome 
of this potential regress of epistemic justification: 
(i) the regress might terminate with beliefs for 
which no justification of any kind is available, 
even though they were earlier offered as justifying 
premises; (ii) the regress might proceed infinitely 

CAN EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION? 
111 
backwards with ever more new premise beliefs 
being introduted and then themselves requiring 
justification; (iii) the regress might circle back 
upon itself, so that at some point beliefs which 
appeared earlier in the sequence of justifying 
arguments are appealed to again as premises; 
(iv) the regress might terminate because beliefs 
are reached which are justified - unlike those in 
alternative (i) - but whose justification does not 
depend inferentially on other empirical beliefs 
and thus does not raise any further issue of justi-
fication with respect to such beliefs.s The founda-
tionist opts for the last alternative. His argument 
is that the other three lead inexorably to the skep-
tical result, and that the second and third have 
additional fatal defects as well, so that some ver-
sion of the fourth, foundationist alternative must 
be correct (assuming that skepticism is false). 
With respect to alternative (i), it seems apparent 
that the foundationist is correct. If this alternative 
were correct, empirical knowledge would rest ulti-
mately on beliefs which were, from an epistemic 
standpoint at least, entirely arbitrary and hence 
incapable of conferring any genuine justification. 
What about the other two alternatives? 
The argument that alternative (ii) leads to a 
skeptical outcome has in effect already been 
sketched in the original formulation of the prob-
lem. One who opted for this alternative could 
hope to avoid skepticism only by claiming that 
the regress, though infinite, is not vicious; but 
there seems to be no plausible way to defend such 
a claim. Moreover, a defense of an infinite regress 
view as an account of how empirical knowledge is 
actually justified - as opposed to how it might in 
principle be justified - would have to involve the 
seemingly dubious thesis that an ordinary knower 
holds a literally infinite number of distinct beliefs. 
Thus it is not surprising that no important phi-
losopher, with the rather uncertain exception of 
Peirce,. seems to have advocated such a position. 
Alternative (iii), the view that justification 
ultimately moves in a closed curve, has been 
historically more prominent, albeit often only as 
a dialectical foil for foundationism. At first glance, 
this alternative might seem even less attractive 
than the second. Although the problem of the 
knower having to have an infinite number of 
beliefs is no longer present, the regress itself, still 
infinite, now seems undeniably vicious. For the 
justification of each of the beliefs which figure 
in the circle seems now to presuppose its own 
epistemically prior justification: such a belief 
must, paradoxically, be justified before it can be 
justified. Advocates of views resembling alterna-
tive (iii) have generally tended to respond to this 
sort of objection by adopting a holistic conception 
of justification in which the justification of indi-
vidual beliefs is subordinated to that of the closed 
systems of beliefs which such a view implies; the 
property of such systems usually appealed to as a 
basis for justification is internal coherence. Such 
coherence theories attempt to evade the regress 
problem by abandoning the view of justification as 
essentially involving a linear order of dependence 
(though a non-linear view of justification has 
never been worked out in detail). 10 Moreover, such 
a coherence theory of empirical knowledge is 
subject to a number of other familiar and seem-
ingly decisive objectionsY Thus alternative (iii) 
seems unacceptable, leaving only alternative (iv), 
the foundationist alternative, as apparently viable. 
As thus formulated, the epistemic regress 
argument makes an undeniably persuasive case 
for foundationism. Like any argument by elimi-
nation, however, it cannot be conclusive until the 
surviving alternative has itself been carefully 
examined. The foundationist position may turn 
out to be subject to equally serious objections, thus 
forcing a re-examination of the other alternatives, 
a search for a further non-skeptical alternative, or 
conceivably the reluctant acceptance of the skep-
tical conclusion. '2 In particular, it is not clear on 
the basis of the argument thus far whether and 
how foundationism can itself solve the regress 
problem; and thus the possibility exists that the 
epistemic regress argument will prove to be a 
two-edged sword, as lethal to the foundationist as 
it is to his opponents. 
II 
The most straightforward interpretation of 
alternative (iv) leads directly to a view which I 
will here call strong foundationism. According to 
strong foundation ism, the foundational beliefs 
which terminate the regress of justification pos-
sess sufficient epistemic warrant, independently 
of any appeal to inference from (or coherence 
with) other empirical beliefs, to satisfy the justifi-
cation condition of knowledge and qualify as 

112 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
acceptable justifying premises for further beliefs. 
Since the justification of these basic beliefs, as they 
have come to be called, is thus allegedly not 
dependent on that of any other empirical belief, 
they are uniquely able to provide secure starting-
points for the justification of empirical knowl-
edge and stopping-points for the regress of 
justification. 
The position just outlined is in fact a fairly 
modest version of strong foundation ism. Strong 
foundationists have typically made considerably 
stronger claims on behalf of basic beliefs. Basic 
beliefs have been claimed not only to have suffi-
cient non-inferential justification to qualify as 
knowledge, but also to be certain, infallible, indu-
bitable, or incorrigible (terms which are usually 
not very carefully distinguished)Y And most of 
the major attacks on foundationism have focused 
on these stronger claims. Thus it is important to 
point out that nothing about the basic strong 
foundationist response to the regress problem 
demands that basic beliefs be more than ade-
quately justified. There might of course be other 
reasons for requiring that basic beliefs have some 
more exalted epistemic status or for thinking that 
in fact they do. There might even be some sort of 
indirect argument to show that such a status is a 
consequence of the sorts of epistemic properties 
which are directly required to solve the regress 
problem. But until such an argument is given 
(and it is doubtful that it can be), the question of 
whether basic beliefs are or can be certain, infal-
lible, etc., will remain a relatively unimportant 
side-issue. 
Indeed, many recent foundationists have felt 
that even the relatively modest version of strong 
foundation ism outlined above is still too strong. 
Their alternative, still within the general aegis of 
the foundationist position, is a view which may 
be called weak foundationism. Weak foundation-
ism accepts the central idea of foundationism -
viz. that certain empirical beliefs possess a degree 
of independent epistemic justification or warrant 
which does not derive from inference or coher-
ence relations. But the weak foundationist holds 
that these foundational beliefs have only a quite 
low degree of warrant, much lower than that 
attributed to them by even modest strong foun-
dationism and insufficient by itself to satisfy the 
justification condition for knowledge or to qualify 
them as acceptable justifying premises for other 
beliefs. Thus this independent warrant must 
somehow be argumented if knowledge is to be 
achieved, and the usual appeal here is to coher-
ence with other such minimally warranted beliefs. 
By combining such beliefs into larger and larger 
coherent systems, it is held, their initial, minimal 
degree of warrant can gradually be enhanced 
until knowledge is finally achieved. Thus weak 
foundationism, like the pure coherence theories 
mentioned above, abandons the linear concep-
tion of justification. 14 
Weak foundation ism thus represents a kind of 
hybrid between strong foundationism and the 
coherence views discussed earlier, and it is often 
thought to embody the virtues of both and the 
vices of neither. Whether or not this is so in other 
respects, however, relative to the regress problem 
weak foundation ism is finally open to the very 
same basic objection as strong foundationism, 
with essentially the same options available for 
meeting it. As we shall see, the key problem for 
any version of foundation ism is whether it can 
itself solve the regress problem which motivates 
its very existence, without resorting to essentially 
ad hoc stipulation. The distinction between the 
two main ways of meeting this challenge both 
cuts across and is more basic than that between 
strong and weak foundationism. This being so, it 
will suffice to concentrate here on strong founda-
tionism, leaving the application of the discussion 
to weak foundation ism largely implicit. 
The fundamental concept of strong founda-
tionism is obviously the concept of a basic belief. 
It is by appeal to this concept that the threat of an 
infinite regress is to be avoided and empirical 
knowledge given a secure foundation. But how 
can there be any empirical beliefs which are thus 
basic? In fact, though this has not always been 
noticed, the very idea of an epistemically basic 
empirical belief is extremely paradoxical. For on 
what basis is such a belief to be justified, once 
appeal to further empirical beliefs is ruled out? 
Chisholm's theological analogy, cited earlier, is 
most appropriate: a basic belief is in effect an 
epistemological unmoved (or self-moved) mo~er. 
It is able to confer justification on other beliefs, 
but apparently has no need to have justification 
conferred on it. But is such a status any easier to 
understand in epistemology than it is in theology? 
How can a belief impart epistemic "motion" to 
other beliefs unless it is itself in "motion"? And, 

CAN EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION? 
113 
even more paradoxically, how can a belief 
epistemically"move" itself? 
This intuitive difficulty with the concept of 
a basic empirical belief may be elaborated and 
clarified by reflecting a bit on the concept of 
epistemic justification. The idea of justification is 
a generic one, admitting in principle of many 
specific varieties. Thus the acceptance of an 
empirical belief might be morally justified, i.e. 
justified as morally obligatory by reference to 
moral principles and standards; or pragmatically 
justified, i.e. justified by reference to the desirable 
practical consequences which will result from 
such acceptance; or religiously justified, i.e. justi-
fied by reference to specified religious texts or 
theological dogmas; etc. But none of these other 
varieties of justification can satisfy the justifica-
tion condition for knowledge. Knowledge requires 
epistemic justification, and the distinguishing 
characteristic of this particular species of justifi-
cation is, I submit,. its essential or internal rela-
tionship to the cognitive goal of truth. Cognitive 
doings are epistemically justified, on this concep-
tion, only if and to the extent that they are aimed 
at this goal - which means roughly that one 
accepts all and only beliefs which one has good 
reason to think are true. IS To accept a belief in the 
absence of such a reason, however appealing or 
even mandatory such acceptance might be from 
other standpoints, is to neglect the pursuit of 
truth; such acceptance is, one might say, epistemi-
cally irresponsible. My contention is that the idea 
of being epistemically responsible is the core of 
the concept of epistemic justification. 16 
A corollary of this conception of epistemic jus-
tification is that a satisfactory defense of a particu-
lar standard of epistemic justification must consist 
in showing it to be truth-conductive, i.e. in show-
ing that accepting beliefs in accordance with its 
dictates is likely to lead to truth (and more likely 
than any proposed alternative). Without such a 
meta-justification, a proposed standard of epis-
temic justification lacks any underlying rationale. 
Why after all should an epistemically responsible 
inquirer prefer justified beliefs to unjustified ones, 
if not that the former are more likely to be true? 
To insist that a certain belief is epistemically justi-
fied, while confessing in the same breath that this 
fact about it provides no good reason to think that 
it is true, would be to render nugatory the whole 
concept of epistemic justification. 
These general remarks about epistemic justi-
fication apply in full measure to any strong foun-
dationist position and to its constituent account 
of basic beliefs. If basic beliefs are to provide a 
secure foundation for empirical knowledge, if 
inference from them is to be the sole basis for the 
justification of other empirical beliefs, then that 
feature, whatever it may be, in virtue of which a 
belief qualifies as basic must also constitute a 
good reason for thinking that the belief is true. 
If we let "rp" represent this feature, then for a 
belief B to qualify as basic in an acceptable foun-
dationist account, the premises of the following 
justificatory argument must themselves be at 
least justified: 17 
(i) 
Belief B has feature rp. 
(ii) 
Beliefs having feature rp are highly likely 
to be true. 
Therefore, B is highly likely to be true. 
Notice further that while either premise taken 
separately might turn out to be justifiable on an a 
priori basis (depending on the particular choice 
of rp), it seems clear that they could not both be 
thus justifiable. For B is ex hypothesi an empirical 
belief, and it is hard to see how a particular empir-
ical belief could be justified on a purely a priori 
basis. 18 And if we now assume, reasonably enough, 
that for B to be justified for a particular person (at 
a particular time) it is necessary, not merely that a 
justification for B exist in the abstract, but that 
the person in question be in cognitive possession 
of that justification, we get the result that B is not 
basic after all since its justification depends on 
that of at least one other empirical belief. If this is 
correct, strong foundation ism is untenable as a 
solution to the regress problem (and an analo-
gous argument will show weak foundationism to 
be similarly untenable). 
The foregoing argument is, no doubt, exceed-
ingly obvious. But how is the strong founda-
tionist to answer it? Prima facie, there seem to 
be only two general sorts of answer which are 
even remotely plausible, so long as the strong 
foundationist remains within the confines of 
the traditional conception of knowledge, avoids 
tacitly embracing skepticism, and does not 
attempt the heroic task of arguing that an 
empirical belief could be justified on a purely a 
priori basis. First, he might argue that although it 

114 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
is indeed necessary for a belief to be justified 
and a fortiori for it to be basic that a justifying 
argument of the sort schematized above be in 
principle available in the situation, it is not always 
necessary that the person for whom the belief is 
basic (or anyone else) know or even justifiably 
believe that it is available; instead, in the case of 
basic beliefs at least, it is sufficient that the 
premises for an argument of that general sort (or 
for some favored particular variety of such argu-
ment) merely be true, whether or not that person 
(or anyone else) justifiably believes that they are 
true. Second, he might grant that it is necessary 
both that such justification exist and that the 
person for whom the belief is basic be in cognitive 
possession of it, but insist that his cognitive grasp 
of the premises required for that justification 
does not involve further empirical beliefs which 
would then require justification, but instead 
involves cognitive states of a more rudimentary 
sort which do not themselves require justifica-
tion: intuitions or immediate apprehensions. I will 
consider each of these alternatives in turn. 
III 
The philosopher who has come the closest to an 
explicit advocacy of the view that basic beliefs 
may be justified even though the person for 
whom they are basic is not in any way in cognitive 
possession of the appropriate justifying argument 
is D. M. Armstrong. In his recent book, Belief, 
Truth and Knowledge,19 Armstrong presents a 
version of the epistemic regress problem (though 
one couched in terms of knowledge rather than 
justification) and defends what he calls an 
"Externalist" solution: 
According to "Externalist" accounts of non-
inferential knowledge, what makes a true 
non-inferential belief a case of knowledge is some 
natural relation which holds between the belief-
state ... and the situation which makes the belief 
true. It is a matter of a certain relation holding 
between the believer and the world. (p. 157) 
Armstrong's own candidate for this "natural rela-
tion" is "that there must be a law-like connection 
between the state of affairs Bap [i.e. a's believing 
that p] and the state of affairs that makes 'p' 
true such that, given Bap, it must be the case that p" 
(p. 166). A similar view seems to be implicit in 
Dretske's account of perceptual knowledge in 
Seeing and Knowing, with the variation that Dretske 
requires for knowledge not only that the relation in 
question obtain, but also that the putative knower 
believe that it obtains - though not that this belief 
be justified.20 In addition, it seems likely that vari-
ous views of an ordinary-language stripe which 
appeal to facts about how language is learned either 
to justify basic belief or to support the claim that 
no justification is required would, if pushed, turn 
out to be positions of this general sort. Here I shall 
mainly confine myself to Armstrong, who is the 
only one of these philosophers who is explicitly 
concerned with the regress problem. 
There is, however, some uncertainty as to how 
views of this sort in general and Armstrong's view 
in particular are properly to be interpreted. On 
the one hand, Armstrong might be taken as offer-
ing an account of how basic beliefs (and perhaps 
others as well) satisfy the adequate-justification 
condition for knowledge; while on the other 
hand, he might be taken as simply repudiating the 
traditional conception of knowledge and the 
associated concept of epistemic justification, and 
offering a surrogate conception in its place - one 
which better accords with the "naturalistic" 
world-view which Armstrong prefers. 21 But it is 
only when understood in the former way that 
externalism (to adopt Armstrong's useful term) is 
of any immediate interest here, since it is only on 
that interpretation that it constitutes a version of 
foundation ism and offers a direct response to the 
anti-foundationist argument set out above. Thus 
I shall mainly focus on this interpretation of 
externalism, remarking only briefly at the end of 
the present section on the alternative one. 
Understood in this way, the externalist solu-
tion to the regress problem is quite simple: the 
person who has a basic belief need not be in pos-
session of any justified reason for his belief and 
indeed, except in Dretske's version, need not even 
think that there is such a reason; the status of his 
belief as constituting knowledge (if true) depends 
solely on the external relation and not at all on his 
subjective view of the situation. Thus there are no 
further empirical beliefs in need of justification 
and no regress. 
Now it is clear that such an externalist position 
succeeds in avoiding the regress problem and the 

CAN EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION? 
115 
anti-foundationist argument. What may well be 
doubted, however, is whether this avoidance 
deserves to be considered a solution, rather than 
an essentially ad hoc evasion, of the problem. 
Plainly the sort of "external" relation which 
Armstrong has in mind would, if known, provide 
a basis for a justifying argument along the lines 
sketched earlier, roughly as follows: 
(i) 
Belief B is an instance of kind K. 
(ii) 
Beliefs of kind K are connected in a law-
like way with the sorts of states of affairs 
which would make them true, and there-
fore are highly likely to be true. 
Therefore, B is highly likely to be true. 
But precisely what generates the regress problem 
in the first place is the requirement that for a 
belief B to be epistemically justified for a given 
person P, it is necessary, not just that there be jus-
tifiable or even true premises available in the situ-
ation which could in principle provide a basis for 
a justification of B, but that P himself know or at 
least justifiably believe some such set of premises 
and thus be in a position to employ the corre-
sponding argument. The externalist position 
seems to amount merely to waiving this general 
requirement in cases where the justification takes 
a certain form, and the question is why this should 
be acceptable in these cases when it is not accept-
able generally. (If it were acceptable generally, 
then it would seem that any true belief would be 
justified for any person, and the distinction 
between knowledge and true belief would col-
lapse.) Such a move seems rather analogous to 
solving a regress of causes by simply stipulating 
that although most events must have a cause, 
events of a certain kind need not. 
Whatever plausibility attaches to externalism 
seems to derive from the fact that if the external 
relation in question genuinely obtains, then P 
will not go wrong in accepting the belief, and it is, 
in a sense, not an accident that this is so. But it 
remains unclear how these facts are supposed to 
justify P's acceptance of B. It is clear, of course, 
that an external observer who knew both that P 
accepted B and that there was a law-like connec-
tion between such acceptance and the truth of B 
would be in a position to construct an argument 
to justify his own acceptance of B. P could thus 
serve as a useful epistemic instrument, a kind of 
cognitive thermometer, for such an external 
observer (and in fact the example of a thermo-
meter is exactly the analogy which Armstrong 
employs to illustrate the relationship which is 
supposed to obtain between the person who has 
the belief and the external state of affairs (p. 
166ff.)). But P himself has no reason at all for 
thinking that B is likely to be true. From his per-
spective, it is an accident that the belief is trueY 
And thus his acceptance of B is no more rational 
or responsible from an epistemic standpoint than 
would be the acceptance of a subjectively similar 
belief for which the external relation in question 
failed to obtainY 
Nor does it seem to help matters to move 
from Armstrong's version of externalism, which 
requires only that the requisite relationship 
between the believer and the world obtain, to the 
superficially less radical version apparently held 
by Dretske, which requires that P also believe that 
the external relation obtains, but does not require 
that this latter belief be justified. This view may 
seem slightly less implausible, since it at least 
requires that the person have some idea, albeit 
unjustified, of why B is likely to be true. But this 
change is not enough to save externalism. One 
way to see this is to suppose that the person 
believes the requisite relation to obtain on some 
totally irrational and irrelevant basis, e.g. as a 
result of reading tea leaves or studying astrologi-
cal charts. If B were an ordinary, non-basic belief, 
such a situation would surely preclude its being 
justified, and it is hard to see why the result 
should be any different for an allegedly basic 
belief. 
Thus it finally seems possible to make sense of 
externalism only by construing the externalist as 
simply abandoning the traditional notion of epis-
temic justification and along with it anything 
resembling the traditional conception of know-
ledge. (As already remarked, this may be precisely 
what the proponents of externalism intend to be 
doing, though most of them are not very clear on 
this point.) Thus consider Armstrong's final sum-
mation of his conception of knowledge: 
Knowledge of the truth of particular matters of fact 
is a belief which must be true, where the "must" is 
a matter of law-like necessity. Such knowledge 
is a reliable representation or "mapping" of 
reality. (p. 220) 

116 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
Nothing is said here of reasons or justification or 
evidence or having the right to be sure. Indeed 
the whole idea, central to the western epistemo-
logical tradition, of knowledge as essentially the 
product of reflective, critical, and rational inquiry 
has seemingly vanished without a trace. It is pos-
sible of course that such an altered conception of 
knowledge may be inescapable or even in some 
way desirable, but it constitutes a solution to the 
regress problem or any problem arising out of 
the traditional conception of knowledge only in 
the radical and relatively uninteresting sense that 
to reject that conception is also to reject the prob-
lems arising out of it. In this paper, I shall confine 
myself to less radical solutions. 
IV 
The externalist solution just discussed represents 
a very recent approach to the justification of basic 
beliefs. The second view to be considered is, in 
contrast, so venerable that it deserves to be called 
the standard foundationist solution to the prob-
lem in question. I refer of course to the traditional 
doctrine of cognitive givenness, which has played 
a central role in epistemological discussions at 
least since Descartes. In recent years, however, the 
concept of the given, like foundationism itself, 
has come under serious attack. One upshot of the 
resulting discussion has been a realization that 
there are many different notions of given ness, 
related to each other in complicated ways, which 
almost certainly do not stand or fall together. 
Thus it will be well to begin by formulating the 
precise notion of givenness which is relevant in 
the present context and distinguishing it from 
some related conceptions. 
In the context of the epistemic regress prob-
lem, givenness amounts to the idea that basic 
beliefs are justified by reference, not to further 
beliefs, but rather to states of affairs in the world 
which are "immediately apprehended" or "directly 
presented" or "intuited:' This justification by ref-
erence to non-cognitive states of affairs thus alleg-
edly avoids the need for any further justification 
and thereby stops the regress. In a way, the basic 
gambit of givenism (as I shall call positions of this 
sort) thus resembles that of the externalist posi-
tions considered above. In both cases the justifica-
tory appeal to further beliefs which generates the 
regress problem is avoided for basic beliefs by an 
appeal directly to the non-cognitive world; the 
crucial difference is that for the givenist, unlike 
the externalist, the justifying state of affairs in the 
world is allegedly apprehended in some way by the 
believer. 
The givenist position to be considered here is 
significantly weaker than more familiar versions 
of the doctrine of givenness in at least two differ-
ent respects. In the first place, the present version 
does not claim that the given (or, better, the 
apprehension thereof) is certain or even incorri-
gible. As discussed above, these stronger claims 
are inessential to the strong foundationist solu-
tion to the regress problem. If they have any 
importance at all in this context it is only because, 
as we shall see, they might be thought to be 
entailed by the only very obvious intuitive picture 
of how the view is supposed to work. In the 
second place, givenism as understood here does 
not involve the usual stipulation that only one's 
private mental and sensory states can be given. 
There mayor may not be other reasons for think-
ing that this is in fact the case, but such a restric-
tion is not part of the position itself. Thus both 
positions like that of C. 1. Lewis, for whom the 
given is restricted to private states apprehended 
with certainty, and positions like that of Quinton, 
for whom ordinary physical states of affairs are 
given with no claim of certainty or incorrigibility 
being involved, will count as versions of givenism. 
As already noted, the idea of givenness has 
been roundly criticized in recent philosophical 
discussion and widely dismissed as a piece of 
philosophical mythology. But much at least of 
this criticism has to do with the claim of certainty 
on behalf of the given or with the restriction to 
private, subjective states. And some of it at least 
has been mainly concerned with issues in the phi-
losophy of mind which are only distantly related 
to our present epistemological concerns. Thus 
even if the objections offered are cogent against 
other and stronger versions of givenness, it 
remains unclear whether and how they apply 
to the more modest version at issue here. The 
possibility suggests itself that modest givenness 
may not be a myth, even if more ambitious varie-
ties are, a result which would give the epistemo-
logical foundationist all he really needs, even 
though he has usually, in a spirit of philosophical 
greed, sought considerably more. In what follows, 

CAN EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION? 
117 
however, I shall sketch a line of argument which, 
if correct, will show that even modest givenism is 
an untenable position. 24 
The argument to be developed depends on a 
problem within the givenist position which is 
surprisingly easy to overlook. I shall therefore 
proceed in the following way. I shall first state the 
problem in an initial way, then illustrate it by 
showing how it arises in one recent version of 
givenism, and finally consider whether any plau-
sible solution is possible. (It will be useful for the 
purposes of this discussion to make two simplify-
ing assumptions, without which the argument 
would be more complicated, but not essentially 
altered. First, I shall assume that the basic belief 
which is to be justified by reference to the given or 
immediately apprehended state of affairs is just 
the belief that this same state of affairs obtains. 
Second, I shall assume that the given or immedi-
ately apprehended state of affairs is not itself a 
belief or other cognitive state.) 
Consider then an allegedly basic belief that-p 
which is supposed to be justified by reference to a 
given or immediately apprehended state of affairs 
that-po Clearly what justifies the belief is not the 
state of affairs simpliciter, for to say that would be 
to return to a form of externalism. For the given-
ist, what justifies the belief is the immediate appre-
hension or intuition of the state of affairs. Thus we 
seem to have three items present in the situation: 
the belief, the state of affairs which is the object of 
the belief, and the intuition or immediate appre-
hension of that state of affairs. The problem to be 
raised revolves around the nature of the last of 
these items, the intuition or immediate appre-
hension (hereafter I will use mainly the former 
term). It seems to be a cognitive state, perhaps 
somehow of a more rudimentary sort than a 
belief, which involves the thesis or assertion that-po 
Now if this is correct, it is easy enough to 
understand in a rough sort of way how an intui-
tion can serve to justify a belief with this same 
assertive content. The problem is to understand 
why the intuition, involving as it does the cogni-
tive thesis that-p, does not itself require justifica-
tion. And if the answer is offered that the intuition 
is justified by reference to the state of affairs that-
p, then the question will be why this would not 
require a second intuition or other apprehension 
of the state of affairs to justify the original one. 
For otherwise one and the same cognitive state 
must somehow constitute both an apprehension 
of the state of affairs and a justification of that 
very apprehension, thus pulling itself up by its 
own cognitive bootstraps. One is reminded here 
of Chisholm's claim that certain cognitive states 
justify themselves,2s but that extremely paradoxi-
cal remark hardly constitutes an explanation of 
how this is possible. 
If, on the other hand, an intuition is not a cog-
nitive state and thus involves no cognitive grasp 
of the state of affairs in question, then the need 
for a justification for the intuition is obviated, but 
at the serious cost of making it difficult to see 
how the intuition is supposed to justify the belief. 
If the person in question has no cognitive grasp 
of that state of affairs (or of any other) by virtue 
of having such an intuition, then how does the 
intuition give him a reason for thinking that his 
belief is true or likely to be true? We seem again to 
be back to an externalist position, which it was 
the whole point of the category of intuition or 
givenness to avoid. 
As an illustration of this problem, consider 
Quinton's version of givenism, as outlined in his 
book The Nature of Things. 26 As noted above, 
basic beliefs may, according to Quinton, concern 
ordinary perceptible states of affairs and need not 
be certain or incorrigible. (Quinton uses the 
phrase "intuitive belief" as I have been using 
"basic belief" and calls the linguistic expression 
of an intuitive belief a "basic statements"; he also 
seems to pay very little attention to the difference 
between beliefs and statements, shifting freely 
back and forth between them, and I will generally 
follow him in this.) Thus "this book is red" might, 
in an appropriate context, be a basic statement 
expressing a basic or intuitive belief. But how are 
such basic statements (or the correlative beliefs) 
supposed to be justified? Here Quinton's account, 
beyond the insistence that they are not justified 
by reference to further beliefs, is seriously unclear. 
He says rather vaguely that the person is "aware" 
(p. 129) or "directly aware" (p. 139) of the appro-
priate state of affairs, or that he has "direct knowl-
edge" (p. 126) of it, but he gives no real account of 
the nature or epistemological status of this state 
of "direct awareness" or "direct knowledge;' 
though it seems clear that it is supposed to be a 
cognitive state of some kind. (In particular, it is 
not clear what "direct" means, over and above 
"non -inferential.")27 

118 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
The difficulty with Quinton's account comes 
out most clearly in his discussion of its relation to 
the correspondence theory of truth: 
The theory of basic statements is closely con-
nected with the correspondence theory of truth. 
In its classical form that theory holds that to each 
true statement, whatever its form may be, a fact 
of the same form corresponds. The theory of 
basic statements indicates the point at which 
correspondence is established, at which the 
system of beliefs makes its justifying contact with 
the world. (p. 139) 
And further on he remarks that the truth of basic 
statements "is directly determined by their corre-
spondence with fact" (p. 143). (It is clear that 
"determined" here means "epistemically deter-
mined.") Now it is a familiar but still forceful ide-
alist objection to the correspondence theory of 
truth that if the theory were correct we could 
never know whether any of our beliefs were true, 
since we have no perspective outside our system 
of beliefs from which to see that they do or do not 
correspond. Quinton, however, seems to suppose 
rather blithely that intuition or direct awareness 
provides just such a perspective, from which we 
can in some cases apprehend both beliefs and 
world and judge whether or not they correspond. 
And he further supposes that the issue of justifi-
cation somehow does not arise for apprehensions 
made from this perspective, though without 
giving any account of how or why this is so. 
My suggestion here is that no such account 
can be given. As indicated above, the givenist is 
caught in a fundamental dilemma: if his intui-
tions or immediate apprehensions are construed 
as cognitive, then they will be both capable of 
giving justification and in need of it themselves; if 
they are non-cognitive, then they do not need jus-
tification but are also apparently incapable of 
providing it. This, at bottom, is why epistemo-
logical givenness is a myth.28 
Once the problem is clearly realized, the only 
possible solution seems to be to split the differ-
ence by claiming that an intuition is a semi-cog-
nitive or quasi-cognitive state,29 which resembles 
a belief in its capacity to confer justification, 
while differing from a belief in not requiring jus-
tification itself. In fact, some such conception 
seems to be implicit in most if not all givenist 
positions. But when stated thus baldly, this "solu-
tion" to the problem seems hopelessly contrived 
and ad hoc. If such a move is acceptable, one is 
inclined to expostulate, then once again any sort 
of regress could be solved in similar fashion. 
Simply postulate a final term in the regress which 
is sufficiently similar to the previous terms to sat-
isfy, with respect to the penultimate term, the 
sort of need or impetus which originally gener-
ated the regress; but which is different enough 
from previous terms so as not itself to require 
satisfaction by a further term. Thus we would 
have semi-events, which could cause but need 
not be caused; semi-explanatia, which could 
explain but need not be explained; and semi-
beliefs, which could justify but need not be justi-
fied. The point is not that such a move is always 
incorrect (though I suspect that it is), but simply 
that the nature and possibility of such a conven-
ient regress-stopper needs at the very least to be 
clearly 
and 
convincingly 
established 
and 
explained before it can constitute a satisfactory 
solution to any regress problem. 
The main account which has usually been 
offered by givenists of such semi-cognitive states 
is well suggested by the terms in which immedi-
ate or intuitive apprehensions are described: 
"immediate," "direct," "presentation," etc. The 
underlying idea here is that of confrontation: in 
intuition, mind or consciousness is directly con-
fronted with its object, without the intervention 
of any sort of intermediary. It is in this sense that 
the object is given to the mind. The root meta-
phor underlying this whole picture is vision: 
mind or consciousness is likened to an immate-
rial eye, and the object of intuitive awareness is 
that which is directly before the mental eye and 
open to its gaze. If this metaphor were to be 
taken seriously, it would become relatively simple 
to explain how there can be a cognitive state 
which can justify but does not require justifica-
tion. (If the metaphor is to be taken seriously 
enough to do the foundationist any real good, it 
becomes plausible to hold that the intuitive cog-
nitive states which result would after all have to 
be infallible. For if all need for justification is to 
be precluded, the envisaged relation of confron-
tation seemingly must be conceived as too inti-
mate to allow any possibility of error. To the 

CAN EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION? 
119 
extent that this is so, the various arguments 
which have been offered against the notion of 
infallible cognitive states count also against this 
version of givenism.) 
Unfortunately, however, it seems clear that the 
mental eye metaphor will not stand serious scru-
tiny. The mind, whatever else it may be, is not an 
eye or, so far as we know, anything like an eye. 
Ultimately the metaphor is just far too simple to 
be even minimally adequate to the complexity of 
mental phenomena and to the variety of condi-
tions upon which such phenomena depend. This 
is not to deny that there is considerable intuitive 
appeal to the confrontational model, especially as 
applied to perceptual consciousness, but only to 
insist that this appeal is far too vague in its import 
to adequately support the very specific sorts of 
epistemological results which the strong founda-
tionist needs. In particular, even if empirical 
knowledge at some point involves some sort of 
confrontation or seeming confrontation, this by 
itself provides no clear reason for attributing 
epistemic justification or reliability, let alone cer-
tainty, to the cognitive states, whatever they may 
be called, which result. 
Moreover, quite apart from the vicissitudes of 
the mental eye metaphor, there are powerful 
independent reasons for thinking that the attempt 
to defend givenism by appeal to the idea of a 
semi-cognitive or quasi-cognitive state is funda-
mentally misguided. The basic idea, after all, is to 
distinguish two aspects of a cognitive state, its 
capacity to justify other states and its own need 
for justification, and then try to find a state which 
possesses only the former aspect and not the 
latter. But it seems clear on reflection that these 
two aspects cannot be separated, that it is one and 
the same feature of a cognitive state, viz. its asser-
tive content, which both enables it to confer justi-
fication on other states and also requires that it be 
justified itself. If this is right, then it does no good 
to introduce semi-cognitive states in an attempt 
to justify basic beliefs, since to whatever extent 
such a state is capable of conferring justification, 
it will to that very same extent require justifica-
tion. Thus even if such states do exist, they are of 
no help to the givenist in attempting to answer 
the objection at issue here. 30 
Hence the givenist response to the anti-
foundationist argument seems to fail. There 
seems to be no way to explain how a basic cogni-
tive state, whether called a belief or an intuition, 
can be directly justified by the world without 
lapsing back into externalism - and from there 
into skepticism. I shall conclude with three fur-
ther comments aimed at warding off certain likely 
sorts of misunderstanding. First. It is natural in 
this connection to attempt to justify basic beliefs 
by appealing to experience. But there is a familiar 
ambiguity in the term "experience," which in fact 
glosses over the crucial distinction upon which 
the foregoing argument rests. Thus "experience" 
may mean either an experiencing (i.e., a cognitive 
state) or something experienced (i.e., an object of 
cognition). And once this ambiguity is resolved, 
the concept of experience seems to be of no par-
ticular help to the givenist. Second. I have con-
centrated, for the sake of simplicity, on Quinton's 
version of givenism in which ordinary physical 
states of affairs are among the things which are 
given. But the logic of the argument would be 
essentially the same if it were applied to a more 
traditional version like Lewis's in which it is pri-
vate experiences which are given, and I cannot see 
that the end result would be different - though it 
might be harder to discern, especially in cases 
where the allegedly basic belief is a belief about 
another cognitive state. Third. Notice carefully 
that the problem raised here with respect to 
givenism is a logical problem (in a broad sense of 
"logical"). Thus it would be a mistake to think 
that it can be solved simply by indicating some 
sort of state which seems intuitively to have the 
appropriate sorts of characteristics; the problem 
is to understand how it is possible for any state to 
have those characteristics. (The mistake would be 
analogous to one occasionally made in connec-
tion with the free-will problem: the mistake of 
attempting to solve the logical problem of how an 
action can be not determined but also not merely 
random by indicating a subjective act of effort or 
similar state, which seems intuitively to satisfy 
such a description.) 
Thus foundationism appears to be doomed by 
its own internal momentum. No account seems 
to be available of how an empirical belief can be 
genuinely justified in an epistemic sense, while 
avoiding all reference to further empirical beliefs 
or cognitions which themselves would require 
justification. How then is the epistemic regress 

120 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
problem to be solved? The natural direction to 
look for an answer is to the coherence theory of 
empirical knowledge and the associated non-
linear conception of justification which were 
briefly mentioned above. 3l But arguments by 
Notes 
Roderick M. Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966), 
p.30. 
2 Anthony Quinton, The Nature of Things 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1973), 
p. 119. This is an extremely venerable argu-
ment, which has played a central role in epis-
temological discussion at least since Aristotle's 
statement of it in the Posterior Analytics, Book 
I, ch. 2-3. (Some have found an anticipation 
of the argument in the Theaetetus at 209E-
2 lOB, but Plato's worry in that passage appears 
to be that the proposed definition of knowl-
edge is circular, not that it leads to an infinite 
regress of justification.) 
3 "Adequately justified" because a belief could 
be justified to some degree without being 
sufficiently justified to qualify as knowledge 
(if true). But it is far from clear just how 
much justification is needed for adequacy. 
Virtually all recent epistemologists agree that 
certainty is not required. But the lottery par-
adox shows that adequacy cannot be under-
stood merely in terms of some specified level 
of probability. (For a useful account of the 
lottery paradox, see Robert Ackermann, 
Knowledge and Belief (Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1972), pp. 39-50.) Armstrong, in 
Belief, 
Truth 
and Knowledge 
(London: 
Cambridge University Press, 1973), argues 
that what is required is that one's reasons for 
the belief be "conclusive;' but the precise 
meaning of this is less than clear. Ultimately, 
it may be that the concept of knowledge is 
simply too crude for refined epistemological 
discussion, so that it may be necessary to 
speak instead of degrees of belief and corre-
sponding degrees of justification. I shall 
assume (perhaps controversially) that the 
proper solution to this problem will not 
affect the issues to be discussed here, and 
speak merely of the reasons or justification 
elimination are dangerous at best: there may be 
further alternatives which have not yet been for-
mulated; and the possibility still threatens that 
the epistemic regress problem may in the end be 
of aid and comfort only to the skeptic. 
making the belief highly likely to be true, 
without trying to say exactly what this 
means. 
4 See Edmund Gettier, "Is Justified True Belief 
Knowledge?"thisvol.,ch. 15. Also Ackermann, 
Knowledge and Belief, ch. V, and the corre-
sponding references. 
5 For simplicity, I will speak of inference rela-
tions as obtaining between beliefs rather 
than, more accurately, between the proposi-
tions which are believed. "Inference" is to be 
understood here in a very broad sense; any 
relation between two beliefs which allows 
one, if accepted, to serve as a good reason for 
accepting the other will count as inferential. 
6 It is difficult to give precise criteria for when a 
given reason is the reason for a person's hold-
ing a belief. G. Harman, in Thought (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1973), argues that 
for a person to believe for a given reason is for 
that reason to explain why he holds that belief. 
But this suggestion, though heuristically 
useful, hardly yields a usable criterion. 
7 Thus it is a mistake to conceive the regress as 
a temporal regress, as it would be if each jus-
tifying argument had to be explicitly given 
before the belief in question was justified. 
8 Obviously these views could be combined, 
with different instances of the regress being 
handled in different ways. I will not consider 
such combined views here. In general, they 
would simply inherit all of the objections 
pertaining to the simpler views. 
9 Peirce seems to suggest a virtuous regress 
view in "Questions concerning Certain 
Faculties Claimed for Man;' Collected Papers 
V, pp. 135-55. But the view is presented met-
aphorically and it is hard to be sure exactly 
what it comes to or to what extent it bears on 
the present issue. 
10 
The original statement of the non-linear 
view was by Bernard Bosanquet in Implication 

CAN EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION? 
121 
and Linear Inference (London, 1920). For 
more recent 
discussions, 
see 
Harman, 
Thought; and Nicholas Rescher, "Founda-
tionalism, Coherentism, and the Idea of 
Cognitive Systematization;' The Journal of 
Philosophy 71 (1974), pp. 695-708. 
11 
I have attempted to show how a coherence 
view might be defended against the most 
standard of these objections 
III "The 
Coherence Theory of Empirical Knowledge," 
Philosophical 
Studies 
30 
(1976), 
pp. 
281-312. 
12 
The presumption against a skeptical out-
come is strong, but I think it is a mistake to 
treat it as absolute. If no non-skeptical theory 
can be found which is at least reasonably 
plausible in its own right, skepticism might 
become the only rational alternative. 
13 
For some useful distinctions among these 
terms, see William Alston, "Varieties of 
Privileged Access;' American Philosophical 
Quarterly 8 (1971), pp. 223-4l. 
14 
For discussions of weak foundation ism, see 
Bertrand Russell, Human Knowledge (New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1949), part II, ch. 
II, and part V, chs. 6 and 7; Nelson Goodman, 
"Sense and Certainty," Philosophical Review 
61 (1952), pp. 160-7; Israel Scheffler, Science 
and Subjectivity (New York, 1967), chapter V; 
and Roderick Firth, "Coherence, Certainty, 
and Epistemic Priority;' The Journal of 
Philosophy 61 (1964), pp. 545-57. 
15 
How good a reason must one have? 
Presumably some justification accrues from 
any reason which makes the belief even min-
imally more likely to be true than not, but 
considerably more than this would be 
required to make the justification adequate 
for knowledge. (See note 3, above.) (The 
James-Clifford controversy concerning the 
"will to believe" is also relevant here. I am 
agreeing with Clifford to the extent of saying 
that epistemic justification requires some 
positive reason in favor of the belief and not 
just the absence of any reason against.) 
16 
For a similar use of the notion of epistemic 
irresponsibility, see Ernest Sosa, "How Do 
You Know?" American Philosophical Quarterly 
11(1974), p. 117. 
17 
In fact, the premises would probably have to 
be true as well, in order to avoid Gettier-type 
counterexamples. But I shall ignore this 
refinement here. 
18 
On a Carnap-style a priori theory of proba-
bility it could, of course, be the case that very 
general empirical propositions were more 
likely to be true than not, i.e. that the possi-
ble state-descriptions in which they are true 
outnumber those in which they are false. But 
clearly this would not make them likely to be 
true in a sense which would allow the 
detached assertion of the proposition in 
question (on pain of contradiction), and this 
fact seems to preclude such justification 
from being adequate for knowledge. 
19 
Chs 11-13. Bracketed page references in this 
section are to this book. 
20 
Fred I. Dretske, Seeing and Knowing (London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1969), ch. III, 
especially pp. 126-39. It is difficult to be 
quite sure of Dretske's view, however, since 
he is not concerned in this book to offer a 
general account of knowledge. Views which 
are in some ways similar to those of 
Armstrong and Dretske have been offered by 
Goldman and by Unger. See Alvin Goldman, 
"A Causal Theory of Knowing;' The Journal 
of Philosophy 64 (1967), pp. 357-72; and 
Peter Unger, "An Analysis of Factual 
Knowledge," The Journal of Philosophy 65 
(1968), pp. 157-70. But both Goldman and 
Unger are explicitly concerned with the 
Gettier problem and not at all with the 
regress problem, so it is hard to be sure how 
their views relate to the sort of externalist 
view which is at issue here. 
21 
On the one hand, Armstrong seems to argue 
that it is not a requirement for knowledge 
that the believer have "sufficient evidence" 
for his belief, which sounds like a rejection 
of the adequate-justification condition. On 
the other hand, he seems to want to say that 
the presence of the external relation makes it 
rational for a person to accept a belief, and 
he seems (though this is not clear) to have 
epistemic rationality in mind; and there 
appears to be no substantial difference 
between saying that a belief is epistemically 
rational and saying that it is epistemically 
justified. 
22 
One way to put this point is to say that 
whether a belief is likely to be true or whether 

122 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
in contrast it is an accident that it is true 
depends significantly on how the belief is 
described. Thus it might be true of one and 
the same belief that it is "a belief connected 
in a law-like way with the state of affairs 
which it describes" and also that it is "a belief 
adopted on the basis of no apparent evi-
dence"; and it might be likely to be true on 
the first description and unlikely to be true 
on the second. The claim here is that it is the 
believer's own conception which should be 
considered in deciding whether the belief is 
justified. (Something analogous seems to be 
true in ethics: the moral worth of a person's 
action is correctly to be judged only in terms 
of that person's subjective conception of 
what he is doing and not in light of what 
happens, willy-nilly, to result from it.) 
23 
Notice, however, that if beliefs standing in 
the proper external relation should happen 
to possess some subjectively distinctive fea-
ture (such as being spontaneous and highly 
compelling to the believer), and if the 
believer were to notice empirically, that 
beliefs having this feature were true a high 
proportion of the time, he would then be in 
a position to construct a justification for a 
new belief of that sort along the lines 
sketched at the end of section II. But of 
course a belief justified in that way would no 
longer be basic. 
24 
I suspect that something like the argument 
to be given here is lurking somewhere 
in Sellars' "Empiricism and the Philosophy 
of Mind" (reprinted in Sellars, Science, 
Perception, and Reality (London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1963), pp. 127-96), but it is 
difficult to be sure. A more recent argument 
by Sellars which is considerably closer on the 
surface to the argument offered here is con-
tained in "The Structure of Knowledge:' his 
Machette Foundation Lectures given at the 
University of Texas in 1971, in Hector-Nerl 
Casteneda (ed.), Action, Knowledge, and 
Reality: Critical Studies in Honor of Wilfrid 
Sellars (Indianapolis, 1975), Lecture III, sec-
tions III-IV. A similar line of argument was 
also offered by Neurath and Hempel. See 
Otto Neurath, "Protocol Sentences:' tr. in 
A. J. Ayer (ed.), Logical Positivism (New York, 
1959), pp. 199-208; and Carl G. Hempel, 
"On the Logical Positivists' Theory of Truth:' 
Analysis, 2 (1934-5), pp. 49-59. The Hempel 
paper is in part a reply to a foundationist cri-
tique of Neurath by Schlick in "The 
Foundation of Knowledge," also translated 
in Ayer, Logical Positivism, pp. 209-27. 
Schlick replied to Hempel in "Facts and 
Propositions," and Hempel responded in 
"Some Remarks on 'Facts' and Propositions," 
both in Analysis 2 (1934-5), pp. 65-70 and 
93-6, respectively. Though the Neurath-
Hempel argument conflates issues having to 
do with truth and issues having to do with 
justification in a confused and confusing 
way, it does bring out the basic objection to 
givenism. 
25 
Chisholm, "Theory of Knowledge," in 
Chisholm et aI., Philosophy (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1964), pp. 270 ff. 
26 
Bracketed page references in this section will 
be to this book. 
27 
Quinton does offer one small bit of clarifica-
tion here, by appealing to the notion of 
ostensive definition and claiming in effect 
that the sort of awareness involved in the 
intuitive justification of a basic belief is the 
same as that involved in a situation of osten-
sive definition. But such a comparison is of 
little help, for at least two reasons. First, as 
Wittgenstein, Sellars, and others have argued, 
the notion of ostensive definition is itself 
seriously problematic. Indeed, an objection 
quite analogous to the present one against 
the notion of a basic belief could be raised 
against the notion of an ostensive definition; 
and this objection, if answerable at all, could 
only be answered by construing the aware-
ness involved in ostension in such a way as to 
be of no help to the foundationist in the 
present discussion. Second, more straight-
forwardly, even if the notion of ostensive 
definition were entirely unobjectionable, 
there is no need for the sort of awareness 
involved to be justified. If all that is at issue is 
learning the meaning of a word (or acquir-
ing a concept), then justification is irrelevant. 
Thus the existence of ostensive definitions 
would not show how there could be basic 
beliefs. 
28 
Notice, however, that to reject an epistemo-
logical given does not necessarily rule out 

CAN EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE HAVE A FOUNDATION? 
123 
other varieties of givenness which may have 
importance for other philosophical issues. In 
particular, there may still be viable versions 
of givenness which pose an obstacle to mate-
rialist views in the philosophy of mind. For 
useful distinctions among various versions 
of givenness and a discussion of their rele-
vance to the philosophy of mind, see James 
w. Cornman, "Materialism and Some Myths 
about Some Givens," The Monist 56 (1972), 
pp.215-33. 
29 
Compare the Husserlian notion of a "pre-
predicative awareness:' 
30 It is interesting to note that Quinton seems 
to offer an analogous critique of givenness in 
an earlier paper, "The Problem of Perception," 
reprinted in Robert J. Swartz (ed. ),Perceiving, 
Sensing, and Knowing (Garden City, NY: 
Doubleday, 1965), pp. 497-526; cf. especially 
p.503. 
31 
For a discussion of such a coherence theory, 
see my paper cited i,l note 11, above. 

CHAPTER 11 
A Coherence Theory 
of Truth and Knowledge 
Donald Davidson 
In this paper I defend what may as well be called 
a coherence theory of truth and knowledge. The 
theory I defend is not in competition with a cor-
respondence theory, but depends for its defense 
on an argument that purports to show that coher-
ence yields correspondence. 
The importance of the theme is obvious. If 
coherence is a test of truth, there is a direct con-
nection with epistemology, for we have reason to 
believe many of our beliefs cohere with many 
others, and in that case we have reason to believe 
many of our beliefs are true. When the beliefs are 
true, then the primary conditions for knowledge 
would seem to be satisfied. 
Someone might try to defend a coherence theory 
of truth without defending a coherence theory of 
knowledge, perhaps on the ground that the holder 
of a coherent set of beliefs might lack a reason to 
believe his beliefs coherent. This is not likely, but 
it may be that someone, though he has true 
beliefs, and good reasons for holding them, does 
not appreciate the relevance of reason to belief. 
Such a one may best be viewed as having knowl-
edge he does not know he has: he thinks he is a 
skeptic. In a word, he is a philosopher. 
Setting aside aberrant cases, what brings truth 
and knowledge together is meaning. If meanings 
Originally published in Ernest LePore (ed.), Truth and 
Interpretation: Perspectives on the Philosophy of Donald 
Davidson (New York: Blackwell, 1989), pp. 307-19. 
are given by objective truth conditions there is a 
question how we can know that the conditions 
are satisfied, for this would appear to require a 
confrontation between what we believe and real-
ity; and the idea of such a confrontation is absurd. 
But if coherence is a test of truth, then coherence 
is a test for judging that objective truth condi-
tions are satisfied, and we no longer need to 
explain meaning on the basis of possible confron-
tation. My slogan is: correspondence without 
confrontation. Given a correct. epistemology, we 
can be realists in all departments. We can accept 
objective truth conditions as the key to meaning, 
a realist view of truth, and we can insist that 
knowledge is of an objective world independent 
of our thought or language. 
Since there is not, as far as I know, a theory 
that deserves to be called "the" coherence theory, 
let me characterize the sort of view I want to 
defend. It is obvious that not every consistent set 
of interpreted sentences contains only true sen-
tences, since one such set might contain just the 
consistent sentence 5 and another just the nega-
tion of S. And adding more sentences, while 
maintaining consistency, will not help. We can 
imagine endless state-descriptions -
maximal 
consistent descriptions - which do not describe 
our world. 
My coherence theory concerns beliefs, or sen-
tences held true by someone who understands 
them. I do not want to say, at this point, that every 
possible coherent set of beliefs is true (or contains 

A COHERENCE THEORY OF TRUTH AND KNOWLEDGE 
125 
mostly true beliefs). I shy away from this because it 
is so unclear what is possible. At one extreme, it 
might be held that the range of possible maximal 
sets of beliefs is as wide as the range of possible 
maximal sets of sentences, and then there would 
be no point to insisting that a defensible coherence 
theory concerns beliefs and not propositions or 
sentences. But there are other ways of conceiving 
what it is possible to believe which would justify 
saying not only that all actual coherent belief sys-
tems are largely correct but that all possible ones 
are also. The difference between the two notions 
of what it is possible to believe depends on what 
we suppose about the nature of belief, its interpre-
tation, its causes, its holders, and its patterns. 
Beliefs for me are states of people with intentions, 
desires, sense organs; they are states that are caused 
by, and cause, events inside and outside the bodies 
of their entertainers. But even given all these con-
straints, there are many things people do believe, 
and many more that they could. For all such cases, 
the coherence theory applies. 
Of course some beliefs are false. Much of the 
point of the concept of belief is the potential gap 
it introduces between what is held to be true and 
what is true. So mere coherence, no matter how 
strongly coherence is plausibly defined, can not 
guarantee that what is believed is so. All that a 
coherence theory can maintain is that most of the 
beliefs in a coherent total set of beliefs are true. 
This way of stating the position can at best be 
taken as a hint, since there is probably no useful 
way to count beliefs, and so no clear meaning to 
the idea that most of a person's beliefs are true. 
A somewhat better way to put the point is to say 
there is a presumption in favor of the truth of a 
belief that coheres with a significant mass of 
belie£ Every belief in a coherent total set of beliefs 
is justified in the light of this presumption, much 
as every intentional action taken by a rational 
agent (one whose choices, beliefs and desires 
cohere in the sense of Bayesian decision theory) is 
justified. So to repeat, if knowledge is justified 
true belief, then it would seem that all the true 
beliefs of a consistent believer constitute knowl-
edge. This conclusion, though too vague and 
hasty to be right, contains an important core of 
truth, as I shall argue. Meanwhile I merely note 
the many problems asking for treatment: what 
exactly does coherence demand? How much of 
inductive practice should be included, how much 
of the true theory (if there is one) of evidential 
support must be in there? Since no person has a 
completely consistent body of convictions, coher-
ence with which beliefs creates a presumption of 
truth? Some of these problems will be put in 
better perspective as I go along. 
It should be clear that I do not hope to define 
truth in terms of coherence and belief. Truth is 
beautifully transparent compared to belief and 
coherence, and I take it as primitive. Truth, 
as applied to utterances of sentences, shows the 
disquotational feature enshrined in Tarski's 
Convention T, and that is enough to fix its domain 
of application. Relative to a language or a speaker, 
of course, so there is more to truth than 
Convention T; there is whatever carries over from 
language to language or speaker to speaker. What 
Convention T, and the trite sentences it declares 
true, like" 'Grass is green' spoken by an English 
speaker, is true if and only if grass is green", reveal 
is that the truth of an utterance depends on just 
two things: what the words as spoken mean, and 
how the world is arranged. There is no further 
relativism to a conceptual scheme, a way of view-
ing things, a perspective. Two interpreters, as 
unlike in culture, language and point of view as 
you please, can disagree over whether an utter-
ance is true, but only if they differ on how things 
are in the world they share, or what the utterance 
means. 
I think we can draw two conclusions from 
these simple reflections. First, truth is corre-
spondence with the way things are. (There is no 
straightforward and non-misleading way to state 
this; to get things right, a detour is necessary 
through the concept of satisfaction in terms of 
which truth is characterized. l ) So if a coherence 
theory of truth is acceptable, it must be consistent 
with a correspondence theory. Second, a theory 
of knowledge that allows that we can know the 
truth must be a non-relativized, non-internal 
form of realism. So if a coherence theory of 
knowledge is acceptable, it must be consistent 
with such a form of realism. My form of realism 
seems to be neither Hilary Putnam's internal real-
ism nor his metaphysical realism.2 It is not inter-
nal realism because internal realism makes truth 
relative to a scheme, and this is an idea I do not 
think is intelligible.3 A major reason, in fact, for 
accepting a coherence theory is the unintelligibil-
ity of the dualism of a conceptual scheme and 

126 
DONALD DAVIDSON 
a "world" waiting to be coped with. But my 
realism is certainly not Putnam's metaphysical 
realism, for it is characterized by being "radically 
non-epistemic", which implies that all our best 
researched and established thoughts and theories 
may be false. I think the independence of belief 
and truth requires only that each of our beliefs 
may be false. But of course a coherence theory 
cannot allow that all of them can be wrong. 
But why not? Perhaps it is obvious that the 
coherence of a belief with a substantial body of 
belief enhances its chance of being true, provided 
there is reason to suppose the body of belief is 
true, or largely so. But how can coherence alone 
supply grounds for belief? Mayhap the best we 
can do to justify one belief is to appeal to other 
beliefs. But then the outcome would seem to be 
that we must accept philosophical skepticism, no 
matter how unshaken in practice our beliefs 
remalll. 
This is skepticism in one of its traditional 
garbs. It asks: Why couldn't all my beliefs hang 
together and yet be comprehensively false about 
the actual world? Mere recognition of the fact 
that it is absurd or worse to try to confront our 
beliefs, one by one, or as a whole, with what they 
are about does not answer the question nor show 
the question unintelligible. In short, even a mild 
coherence theory like mine must provide a skep-
tic with a reason for supposing coherent beliefs 
are true. The partisan of a coherence theory can't 
allow assurance to come from outside the system 
of belief, while nothing inside can produce sup-
port except as it can be shown to rest, finally or at 
once, on something independently trustworthy. 
It is natural to distinguish coherence theories 
from others by reference to the question whether 
or not justification can or must come to an end. 
But this does not define the positions, it merely 
suggests a form the argument may take. For there 
are coherence theorists who hold that some beliefs 
can serve as the basis for the rest, while it would 
be possible to maintain that coherence is not 
enough, although giving reasons never comes to 
an end. What distinguishes a coherence theory is 
simply the claim that nothing can count as a 
reason for holding a belief except another belief. 
Its partisan rejects as unintelligible the request for 
a ground or source of justification of another ilk. 
As Rorty has put it, "nothing counts as justifica-
tion unless by reference to what we already accept, 
and there is no way to get outside our beliefs and 
our language so as to find some test other than 
coherence."4 About this I am, as you see, in agree-
ment with Rorty. Where we differ, if we do, is on 
whether there remains a question how, given that 
we cannot "get outside our beliefs and our lan-
guage so as to find some test other than coher-
ence", we nevertheless can have knowledge of, and 
talk about, an objective public world which is not 
of our own making. I think this question does 
remain, while I suspect that Rorty doesn't think 
so. If this is his view, then he must think I am 
making a mistake in trying to answer the ques-
tion. Nevertheless, here goes. 
It will promote matters at this point to review 
very hastily some of the reasons for abandoning 
the search for a basis for knowledge outside the 
scope of our beliefs. By "basis" here I mean 
specifically an epistemological basis, a source of 
justification. 
The attempts worth taking seriously attempt 
to ground belief in one way or another on the tes-
timony of the senses: sensation, perception, the 
given, experience, sense data, the passing show. 
All such theories must explain at least these two 
things: what, exactly, is the relation between sen-
sation and belief that allows the first to justify the 
second? and, why should we believe our sensa-
tions are reliable, that is, why should we trust our 
senses? 
The simplest idea is to identify certain beliefs 
with sensations. Thus Hume seems not to have 
distinguished between perceiving a green spot and 
perceiving that a spot is green. (An ambiguity in 
the word "idea" was a great help here.) Other phi-
losophers noted Hume's confusion, but tried to 
attain the same results by reducing the gap 
between perception and judgement to zero by 
attempting to formulate judgements that do not 
go beyond stating that the perception or sensation 
or presentation exists (whatever that may mean). 
Such theories do not justify beliefs on the basis of 
sensations, but try to justify certain beliefs by 
claiming that they have exactly the same epistemic 
content as a sensation. There are two difficulties 
with such a view: first, if the basic beliefs do not 
exceed in content the corresponding sensation 
they cannot support any inference to an objective 
world; and second, there are no such beliefs. 
A more plausible line is to claim that we cannot 
be wrong about how things appear to us to be. 

A COHERENCE THEORY OF TRUTH AND KNOWLEDGE 
127 
If we believe we have a sensation, we do; this is 
held to be an analytic truth, or a fact about how 
language is used. 
It is difficult to explain this supposed connec-
tion between sensations and some beliefs in a way 
that does not invite skepticism about other minds, 
and in the absence of an adequate explanation, 
there should be a doubt about the implications of 
the connection for justification. But in any case, it 
is unclear how, on this line, sensations justify the 
belief in those sensations. The point is rather that 
such beliefs require no justification, for the exist-
ence of the belief entails the existence of the sen-
sation, and so the existence of the belief entails its 
own truth. Unless something further is added, we 
are back to another form of coherence theory. 
Emphasis on sensation or perception in mat-
ters epistemological springs from the obvious 
thought: sensations are what connect the world 
and our beliefs, and they are candidates for justi-
fiers because we often are aware of them. The 
trouble we have been running into is that the jus-
tification seems to depend on the awareness, 
which is just another belief. 
Let us try a bolder tack. Suppose we say that 
sensations themselves, verbalized or not, justify 
certain beliefs that go beyond what is given in 
sensation. So, under certain conditions, having 
the sensation of seeing a green light flashing may 
justify the belief that a green light is flashing. The 
problem is to see how the sensation justifies the 
belief. Of course if someone has the sensation of 
seeing a green light flashing, it is likely, under cer-
tain circumstances, that a green light is flashing. 
We can say this, since we know of his sensation, 
but he can't say it, since we are supposing he is 
justified without having to depend on believing 
he has the sensation. Suppose he believed he 
didn't have the sensation. Would the sensation 
still justify him in the belief in an objective flash-
ing green light? 
The relation between a sensation and a belief 
cannot be logical, since sensations are not beliefs 
or other propositional attitudes. What then is the 
relation? The answer is, I think, obvious: the rela-
tion is causal. Sensations cause some beliefs and 
in this sense are the basis or ground of those 
beliefs. But a causal explanation of a belief does 
not show how or why the belief is justified. 
The difficulty of transmuting a cause into a 
reason plagues the anticoherentist again ifhe tries 
to answer our second question: What justifies 
the belief that our senses do not systematically 
deceive us? For even if sensations justify belief in 
sensation, we do not yet see how they justify belief 
in external events and objects. 
Quine tells us that science tells us that "our 
only source of information about the external 
world is through the impact of light rays and 
molecules upon our sensory surfaces".5 What 
worries me is how to read the words "source" and 
"information': Certainly it is true that events and 
objects in the external world cause us to believe 
things about the external world, and much, if not 
all, of the causality takes a route through the sense 
organs. The notion of information, however, 
applies in a non-metaphorical way only to the 
engendered beliefs. So "source" has to be read 
simply as "cause" and "information" as "true 
belief" or "knowledge". Justification of beliefs 
caused by our senses is not yet in sight.6 
The approach to the problem of justification 
we have been tracing must be wrong. We have 
been trying to see it this way: a person has all his 
beliefs about the world - that is, all his beliefs. 
How can he tell if they are true, or apt to be true? 
Only, we have been assuming, by connecting his 
beliefs to the world, confronting certain of his 
beliefs with the deliverances of the senses one by 
one, or perhaps confronting the totality of his 
beliefs with the tribunal of experience. No such 
confrontation makes sense, for of course we can't 
get outside our skins to find out what is causing 
the internal happenings of which we are aware. 
Introducing intermediate steps or entities into 
the causal chain, like sensations or observations, 
serves only to make the epistemological problem 
more obvious. For if the intermediaries are merely 
causes, they don't justify the beliefs they cause, 
while if they deliver information, they may be 
lying. The moral is obvious. Since we can't swear 
intermediaries to truthfulness, we should allow 
no intermediaries between our beliefs and their 
objects in the world. Of course there are causal 
intermediaries. What we must guard against are 
epistemic intermediaries. 
There are common views of language that 
encourage bad epistemology. This is no accident, 
of course, since theories of meaning are connected 
with epistemology through attempts to answer 
the question how one determines that a sentence 
is true. If knowing the meaning of a sentence 

128 
DONALD DAVIDSON 
(knowing how to give a correct interpretation of 
it) involves, or is, knowing how it could be recog-
nized to be true, then the theory of meaning raises 
the same question we have been struggling with, 
for giving the meaning of a sentence will demand 
that we specify what would justify asserting it. 
Here the coherentist will hold that there is no use 
looking for a source of justification outside of 
other sentences held true, while the foundational-
ist will seek to anchor at least some words or sen-
tences to non-verbal rocks. This view is held, I 
think, both by Quine and by Michael Dummett. 
Dummett and Quine differ, to be sure. In par-
ticular, they disagree about holism, the claim that 
the truth of our sentences must be tested together 
rather than one by one. And they disagree also, 
and consequently, about whether there is a useful 
distinction between analytic and synthetic sen-
tences, and about whether a satisfactory theory of 
meaning can allow the sort of indeterminacy 
Quine argues for. (On all these points, I am 
Quine's faithful student.) 
But what concerns me here is that Quine and 
Dummett agree on a basic principle, which is that 
whatever there is to meaning must be traced back 
somehow to experience, the given, or patterns of 
sensory stimulation, something intermediate 
between belief and the usual objects our beliefs 
are about. Once we take this step, we open the 
door to skepticism, for we must then allow that a 
very great many - perhaps most - of the sentences 
we hold to be true may in fact be false. It is ironi-
cal. Trying to make meaning accessible has made 
truth inaccessible. When meaning goes epistemo-
logical in this way, truth and meaning are neces-
sarily divorced. One can, of course, arrange a 
shotgun wedding by redefining truth as what we 
are justified in asserting. But this does not marry 
the original mates. 
Take Quine's proposal that whatever there is to 
the meaning (information value) of an observa-
tion sentence is determined by the patterns of 
sensory stimulation that would cause a speaker to 
assent to or dissent from the sentence. This is a 
marvellously ingenious way of capturing what is 
appealing about verificationist theories without 
having to talk of meanings, sense-data, or sensa-
tions; for the first time it made plausible the idea 
that one could, and should, do what I call the 
theory of meaning without need of what Quine 
calls meanings. But Quine's proposal, like other 
forms of verification ism, makes for skepticism. 
For clearly a person's sensory stimulations could 
be just as they are and yet the world outside very 
different. (Remember the brain in the vat.) 
Quine's way of doing without meanings is 
subtle and complicated. He ties the meanings of 
some sentences directly to patterns of stimulation 
(which also constitute the evidence, Quine thinks, 
for assenting to the sentence), but the meanings 
of further sentences are determined by how they 
are conditioned to the original, or observation 
sentences. The facts of such conditioning do not 
permit a sharp division between sentences held 
true by virtue of meaning and sentences held true 
on the basis of observation. Quine made this 
point by showing that if one way of interpreting 
a speaker's utterances was satisfactory, so were 
many others. This doctrine of the indeterminacy 
of translation, as Quine called it, should be 
viewed as neither mysterious nor threatening. It 
is no more mysterious than the fact that tempera-
ture can be measured in Centigrade or Fahrenheit 
(or any linear transformation of those numbers). 
And it is not threatening because the very proce-
dure that demonstrates the degree of indetermi-
nacy at the same time demonstrates that what is 
determinate is all we need. 
In my view, erasing the line between the ana-
lytic and synthetic saved philosophy of language 
as a serious subject by showing how it could be 
pursued without what there cannot be: determi-
nate meanings. I now suggest also giving up the 
distinction between observation sentences and 
the rest. For the distinction between sentences 
belief in whose truth is justified by sensations and 
sentences belief in whose truth is justified only by 
appeal to other sentences held true is as anathema 
to the coherentist as the distinction between 
beliefs justified by sensations and beliefs justified 
only by appeal to further beliefs. Accordingly, I 
suggest we give up the idea that meaning or 
knowledge is grounded on something that counts 
as an ultimate source of evidence. No doubt 
meaning and knowledge depend on experience, 
and experience ultimately on sensation. But this 
is the "depend" of causality, not of evidence or 
justification. 
I have now stated my problem as well as I can. 
The search for an empirical foundation for mean-
ing or knowledge leads to skepticism, while a 
coherence theory seems at a loss to provide any 

A COHERENCE THEORY OF TRUTH AND KNOWLEDGE 
129 
reason for a believer to believe that his beliefs, if 
coherent, are true. We are caught between a false 
answer to the skeptic, and no answer. 
The dilemma is not a true one. What is needed 
to answer the skeptic is to show that someone 
with a (more or less) coherent set of beliefs has a 
reason to suppose his beliefs are not mistaken in 
the main. What we have shown is that it is absurd 
to look for a justifying ground for the totality of 
beliefs, something outside this totality which we 
can use to test or compare with our beliefs. The 
answer to our problem must then be to find a 
reason for supposing most of our beliefs are true 
that is not a form of evidence. 
My argument has two parts. First I urge that a 
correct understanding of the speech, beliefs, 
desires, intentions and other propositional atti-
tudes of a person leads to the conclusion that 
most of a person's beliefs must be true, and so 
there is a legitimate presumption that anyone 
of them, if it coheres with most of the rest, is true. 
Then I go on to claim that anyone with thoughts, 
and so in particular anyone who wonders whether 
he has any reason to suppose he is generally right 
about the nature of his environment, must know 
what a belief is, and how in general beliefs are to 
be detected and interpreted. These being perfectly 
general facts we cannot fail to use when we com-
municate with others, or when we try to commu-
nicate with others, or even when we merely think 
we are communicating with others, there is a 
pretty strong sense in which we can be said to 
know that there is a presumption in favor of the 
overall truthfulness of anyone's beliefs, including 
our own. So it is bootless for someone to ask for 
some further reassurance; that can only add to his 
stock of beliefs. All that is needed is that he recog-
nize that belief is in its nature veridical. 
Belief can be seen to be veridical by considering 
what determines the existence and contents of a 
belief. Belief, like the other so-called propositional 
attitudes, is supervenient on facts of various sorts, 
behavioral, neuro-physiological, biological and 
physical. The reason for pointing this out is not to 
encourage definitional or nomological reduction 
of psychological phenomena to something more 
basic, and certainly not to suggest epistemologi-
cal priorities. The point is rather understanding. 
We gain one kind of insight into the nature of the 
propositional attitudes when we relate them sys-
tematically to one another and to phenomena on 
other levels. Since the propositional attitudes 
are deeply interlocked, we cannot learn the 
nature of one by first winning understanding of 
another. As interpreters, we work our way into 
the whole system, depending much on the pattern 
of interrelationships. 
Take for example the interdependence of 
belief and meaning. What a sentence means 
depends partly on the external circumstances 
that cause it to win some degree of conviction; 
and partly on the relations, grammatical, logical 
or less, that the sentence has to other sentences 
held true with varying degrees of conviction. 
Since these relations are themselves translated 
directly into beliefs, it is easy to see how meaning 
depends on belief. Belief, however, depends 
equally on meaning, for the only access to the 
fine structure and individuation of beliefs is 
through the sentences speakers and interpreters 
of speakers use to express and describe beliefs. If 
we want to illuminate the nature of meaning and 
belief, therefore, we need to start with something 
that assumes neither. Quine's suggestion, which I 
shall essentially follow, is to take prompted assent 
as basic, the causal relation between assenting to a 
sentence and the cause of such assent. This is a 
fair place to start the project of identifying beliefs 
and meanings, since a speaker's assent to a sen-
tence depends both on what he means by the 
sentence and on what he believes about the 
world. Yet it is possible to know that a speaker 
assents to a sentence without knowing either 
what the sentence, as spoken by him, means, or 
what belief is expressed by it. Equally obvious is 
the fact that once an interpretation has been 
given for a sentence assented to, a belief has been 
attributed. If correct theories of interpretation 
are not unique (do not lead to uniquely correct 
interpretations), the same will go for attribu-
tions of belief, of course, as tied to acquiescence 
in particular sentences. 
A speaker who wishes his words to be under-
stood cannot systematically deceive his would-be 
interpreters about when he assents to sentences -
that is, holds them true. As a matter of principle, 
then, meaning, and by its connection with mean-
ing, belief also, are open to public determination. 
I shall take advantage of this fact in what follows 
and adopt the stance of a radical interpreter when 
asking about the nature of belief. What a fully 
informed interpreter could learn about what a 

130 
DONALD DAVIDSON 
speaker means is all there is to learn; the same 
goes for what the speaker believes. 7 
The interpreter's problem is that what he is 
assumed to know - the causes of assents to sen-
tences of a speaker - is, as we have seen, the prod-
uct of two things he is assumed not to know, 
meaning and belief. If he knew the meanings he 
would know the beliefs, and if he knew the beliefs 
expressed by sentences assented to, he would 
know the meanings. But how can he learn both at 
once, since each depends on the other? 
The general lines of the solution, like the prob-
lem itself, are owed to Quine. I will, however, 
introduce some changes into Quine's solution, as 
I have into the statement of the problem. The 
changes are directly relevant to the issue of episte-
mological skepticism. 
I see the aim of radical interpretation (which 
is much, but not entirely, like Quine's radical 
translation) as being to produce a Tarski-style 
characterization of truth for the speaker's lan-
guage, and a theory of his beliefs. (The second 
follows from the first plus the presupposed 
knowledge of sentences held true.) This adds little 
to Quine's program of translation, since transla-
tion of the speaker's language into one's own plus 
a theory of truth for one's own language add up 
to a theory of truth for the speaker. But the shift 
to the semantic notion of truth from the syntactic 
notion of translation puts the formal restrictions 
of a theory of truth in the foreground, and 
emphasizes one aspect of the close relation 
between truth and meaning. 
The principle of charity plays a crucial role 
in Quine's method, and an even more crucial role 
in my variant. In either case, the principle directs 
the interpreter to translate or interpret so as to 
read some of his own standards of truth into the 
pattern of sentences held true by the speaker. The 
point of the principle is to make the speaker 
intelligible, since too great deviations from con-
sistency and correctness leave no common 
ground on which to judge either conformity or 
difference. From a formal point of view, the prin-
ciple of charity helps solve the problem of the 
interaction of meaning and belief by restraining 
the degrees of freedom allowed belief while 
determining how to interpret words. 
We have no choice, Quine has urged, but to 
read our own logic into the thoughts of a speaker; 
Quine says this for the sentential calculus, and I 
would add the same for first-order quantification 
theory. This leads directly to the identification 
of the logical constants, as well as to assigning a 
logical form to all sentences. 
Something like charity operates in the inter-
pretation of those sentences whose causes of 
assent come and go with time and place: when the 
interpreter finds a sentence of the speaker the 
speaker assents to regularly under conditions 
he recognizes, he takes those conditions to be the 
truth conditions of the speaker's sentence. This is 
only roughly right, as we shall see in a moment. 
Sentences and predicates less directly geared to 
easily detected goings-on can, in Quine's canon, 
be interpreted at will, given only the constraints 
of interconnections with sentences conditioned 
directly to the world. Here I would extend the 
principle of charity to favor interpretations that 
as far as possible preserve truth: I think it makes 
for mutual understanding, and hence for better 
interpretation, to interpret what the speaker 
accepts as true when we can. In this matter, r have 
less choice than Quine, because r do not see how 
to draw the line between observation sentences 
and theoretical sentences at the start. There are 
several reasons for this, but the one most relevant 
to the present topic is that this distinction is ulti-
mately based on an epistemological consideration 
of a sort r have renounced: observation sentences 
are directly based on something like sensation -
patterns of sensory stimulation - and this is an 
idea I have been urging leads to skepticism. 
'Nithout the direct tie to sensation or stimulation, 
the distinction between observation sentences 
and others can't be drawn on epistemologically 
significant grounds. The distinction between sen-
tences whose causes to assent come and go with 
observable circumstances and those a speaker 
clings to through change remains however, and 
offers the possibility of interpreting the words 
and sentences beyond the logical. 
The details are not here to the point. What 
should be clear is that if the account I have given 
of how belief and meaning are related and under-
stood by an interpreter, then most of the sen-
tences a speaker holds to be true - especially the 
ones he holds to most stubbornly, the ones most 
central to the system of his beliefs - most of these 
sentences are true, at least in the opinion of the 
interpreter. For the only, and therefore unim-
peachable, method available to the interpreter 

A COHERENCE THEORY OF TRUTH AND KNOWLEDGE 
131 
automatically puts the speaker's beliefs in accord 
with the standards of logic of the interpreter, and 
hence credits the speaker with plain truths of 
logic. Needless to say there are degrees of logical 
and other consistency, and perfect consistency is 
not to be expected. What needs emphasis is only 
the methodological necessity for finding consist-
encyenough. 
Nor, from the interpreter's point of view, is 
there any way he can discover the speaker to be 
largely wrong about the world. For he interprets 
sentences held true (which is not to be distin-
guished from attributing beliefs) according to the 
events and objects in the outside world that cause 
the sentence to be held true. 
What I take to be the important aspect of this 
approach is apt to be missed because the approach 
reverses our natural way of thinking of commu-
nication derived from situations in which under-
standing has already been secured. 
Once 
understanding has been secured we are able, 
often, to learn what a person believes quite inde-
pendently of what caused him to believe it. This 
may lead us to the crucial, indeed fatal, conclu-
sion that we can in general fix what someone 
means independently of what he believes and 
independently of what caused the belief. But if I 
am right, we can't in general first identify beliefs 
and meanings and then ask what caused them. 
The causality plays an indispensable role in deter-
mining the content of what we say and believe. 
This is a t~1Ct we can be led to recognize by taking 
up, as we have, the interpreter's point of view. 
It is an artifact of the interpreter's correct 
interpretation of a person's speech and attitudes 
that there is a large degree of truth and consist-
ency in the thought and speech of an agent. But 
this is truth and consistency by the interpreter's 
standards. Why couldn't it happen that speaker 
and interpreter understand one another on the 
basis of shared but erroneous beliefs? This can, 
and no doubt often does, happen. But it cannot 
be the rule. For imagine for a moment an inter-
preter who is omniscient about the world, and 
about what does and would cause a speaker to 
assent to any sentence in his (potentially unlim-
ited) repertoire. The omniscient interpreter, using 
the same method as the fallible interpreter, finds 
the fallible speaker largely consistent and correct. 
By his own standards, of course, but since these 
are objectively correct, the fallible speaker is seen 
to be largely correct and consistent by objective 
standards. We may also, if we want, let the omnis-
cient interpreter turn his attention to the fallible 
interpreter of the fallible speaker. It turns out that 
the fallible interpreter can be wrong about some 
things, but not in general; and so he cannot share 
universal error with the agent he is interpreting. 
Once we agree to the general method of interpre-
tation I have sketched, it becomes impossible cor-
rectly to hold that anyone could be mostly wrong 
about how things are. 
There is, as I noted above, a key difference 
between the method of radical interpretation I 
am now recommending, and Quine's method of 
radical translation. The difference lies in the 
nature of the choice of causes that govern inter-
pretation. Quine makes interpretation depend on 
patterns of sensory stimulation, while I make it 
depend on the external events and objects the 
sentence is interpreted as being about. Thus 
Quine's notion of meaning is tied to sensory 
criteria, something he thinks that can be treated 
also as evidence. This leads Quine to give epis-
temic significance to the distinction between 
observation sentences and others, since observa-
tion sentences are supposed, by their direct 
conditioning to the senses, to have a kind of extra-
linguistic justification. This is the view against 
which I argued in the first part of my paper, urging 
that sensory stimulations are indeed part of the 
causal chain that leads to belief, but cannot, with-
out confusion, be considered to be evidence, or a 
source of justification, for the stimulated beliefs. 
What stands in the way of global skepticism of 
the senses is, in my view, the fact that we must, in 
the plainest and methodologically most basic 
cases, take the objects of a belief to be the causes 
of that belief. And what we, as interpreters, must 
take them to be is what they in fact are. 
Communication begins where causes converge: 
your utterance means what mine does if belief in 
its truth is systematically caused by the same 
events and objects.s 
The difficulties in the way of this view are 
obvious, but I think they can be overcome. The 
method applies directly, at best, only to occasion 
sentences - the sentences assent to which is caused 
systematically by common changes in the world. 
Further sentences are interpreted by their condi-
tioning to occasion sentences, and the appearance 
in them of words that appear also in occasion 

132 
DONALD DAVIDSON 
sentences. Among occasion sentences, some will 
vary in the credence they command not only in 
the face of environmental change, but also in the 
face of change of credence awarded related sen-
tences. Criteria can be developed on this basis to 
distinguish degrees of observationality on inter-
nal grounds, without appeal to the concept of a 
basis for belief outside the circle of beliefs. 
Related to these problems, and easier still to 
grasp, is the problem of error. For even in the sim-
plest cases it is clear that the same cause (a rabbit 
scampers by) may engender different beliefs in 
speaker and observer, and so encourage assent to 
sentences which cannot bear the same interpreta-
tion. It is no doubt this fact that made Quine turn 
from rabbits to patterns of stimulation as the key 
to interpretation. Just as a matter of statistics, I'm 
not sure how much better one approach is than 
the other. Is the relative frequency with which 
identical patterns of stimulation will touch off 
assent to "Gavagai" and "Rabbit" greater than the 
relative frequency with which a rabbit touches off 
the same two responses in speaker and interpreter? 
Not an easy question to test in a convincing way. 
But let the imagined results speak for Quine's 
method. Then I must say, what I must say in any 
case, the problem of error cannot be met sentence 
by sentence, even at the simplest level. The best 
we can do is cope with error holistically, that is, 
we interpret so as to make an agent as intelligible 
as possible, given his actions, his utterances and 
his place in the world. About some things we will 
find him wrong, as the necessary cost of finding 
him elsewhere right. As a rough approximation, 
finding him right means identifying the causes 
with the objects of his beliefs, giving special weight 
to the simplest cases, and countenancing error 
where it can be best explained. 
Suppose I am right that an interpreter must so 
interpret as to make a speaker or agent largely 
correct about the world. How does this help the 
person himself who wonders what reason he has 
to think his beliefs are mostly true? How can he 
learn about the causal relations between the real 
world and his beliefs that lead the interpreter to 
interpret him as being on the right track? 
The answer is contained in the question. In 
order to doubt or wonder about the provenance 
of his beliefs an agent must know what belief is. 
This brings with it the concept of objective truth, 
for the notion of a belief is the notion of a state 
that mayor may not jibe with reality. But beliefs 
are also identified, directly and indirectly, by their 
causes. What an omniscient interpreter knows a 
fallible interpreter gets right enough if he under-
stands a speaker, and this is just the complicated 
causal truth that makes us the believers we are, 
and fixes the contents of our beliefs. The agent 
has only to reflect on what a belief is to appreciate 
that most of his basic beliefs are true, and among 
his beliefs, those most securely held and that 
cohere with the main body of his beliefs are the 
most apt to be true. The question, how do I know 
my beliefs are generally true? thus answers itself, 
simply because beliefs are by nature generally true. 
Rephrased or expanded, the question becomes, 
how can I tell whether my beliefs, which are by 
their nature generally true, are generally true? 
All beliefs are justified in this sense: they are sup-
ported by numerous other beliefs (otherwise they 
wouldn't be the beliefs they are), and have a pre-
sumption in favor of their truth. The presumption 
increases the larger and more significant the body 
of beliefs with which a belief coheres, and there 
being no such thing as an isolated belief, there is no 
belief without a presumption in its favor. In this 
respect, interpreter and interpreted differ. From the 
interpreter's point of view, methodology enforces a 
general presumption of truth for the body of beliefs 
as a whole, but the interpreter does not need to pre-
sume each particular belief of someone else is true. 
The general presumption applied to others does 
not make them globally right, as I have emphasized, 
but provides the background against which to 
accuse them of error. But from each person's own 
vantage point, there must be a graded presumption 
in favor of each of his own beliefs. 
We cannot, alas, draw the picturesque and pleas-
ant conclusion that all true beliefs constitute knowl-
edge. For though all of a believer's beliefs are to 
some extent justified to him, some may not be justi-
fied enough, or in the right way, to constitute 
knowledge. The general presumption in favor of 
the truth of belief serves to rescue us from a stand-
ard form of skepticism by showing why it is impos-
sible for all our beliefs to be false together. This 
leaves almost untouched the task of specifying the 
conditions of knowledge. I have not been concerned 
with the canons of evidential support (if such there 
be), but to show that all that counts as evidence or 
justification for a belief must come from the same 
totality of belief to which it belongs. 

A COHERENCE THEORY OF TRUTH AND KNOWLEDGE 
133 
Notes 
See my "True to the Facts", The Journal of 
Philosophy (1960), pp. 216-34. 
2 Hilary Putnam, Meaning and the Moral 
Sciences (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
1978), p. 125. 
3 See my "On the Very Idea of a Conceptual 
Scheme", in Proceedings and Addresses of the 
American Philosophical Association (1974), 
pp.5-20. 
4 Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of 
Nature (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1979),p.178. 
5 W. V. Quine, "The Nature of Natural 
Knowledge", in S. Guttenplan (ed.), Mind and 
Language (Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1975), 
p.68. 
6 Many other passages in Quine suggest that 
Quine hopes to assimilate sensory causes to 
evidence. In Word and Object (Massachusetts: 
MIT Press, 1960), p. 22, he writes that "surface 
irritations ... exhaust our clues to an external 
world". In Ontological Relativity (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1969), p. 75, we 
find that "The stimulation of his sensory 
receptors is all the evidence anybody has had 
to go on, ultimately, in arriving at his picture 
of the world." On the same page: "Two cardi-
nal tenets of empiricism remain unassaila-
ble .... One is that whatever evidence there is 
for science is sensory evidence. The other ... is 
that all inculcation of meanings of words, 
must rest ultimately on sensory evidence." In 
The Roots of Reference (Illinois: Open Court 
Publishing Company, 1974), pp. 37-8, Quine 
says "observations" are basic "both in the sup-
port of theory and in the learning of lan-
guage", and then goes on, "What are 
observations? They are visual, auditory, tac-
tual, olfactory. They are sensory, evidently, 
and thus subjective. ... Should we say then 
that the observation is not the sensation ... ? 
No ... " Quine goes on to abandon talk of 
observations for talk of observation sentences. 
But of course observation sentences, unlike 
observations, cannot play the role of evidence 
unless we have reason to believe they are true. 
7 I now think it is essential, in doing radical 
interpretation, to include the desires of the 
speaker from the start, so that the springs of 
action and intention, namely both belief and 
desire, are related to meaning. But in the 
present talk it is not necessary to introduce 
this further factor. 
8 It is clear that the causal theory of meaning 
has little in common with the causal theories 
of reference of Kripke and Putnam. Those 
theories look to causal relations between 
names and objects of which speakers may well 
be ignorant. The chance of systematic error is 
thus increased. My causal theory does the 
reverse by connecting the cause of a belief 
with its object. 

CHAPTER 12 
A Foundherentist Theory of 
Empirical Justification 
Susan Haack 
Let us remember how common the folly is, of going from one faulty extreme into 
the opposite. 1 
Does the evidence presented establish beyond a 
reasonable doubt that the defendant did it? Given 
the evidence recently discovered by space scien-
tists, am I justified in believing there was once 
bacterial life on Mars? Is scientific evidence espe-
cially authoritative, and if so, why? Should we 
take those advertisements claiming that the 
Holocaust never happened seriously, and if not, 
why not? .. Questions about what makes evidence 
better or worse, about what makes inquiry better 
or worse conducted, about disinterestedness and 
partiality, are of real, daily - and sometimes of 
life-and-death - consequence. 
Of late, however, cynicism about the very 
legitimacy of such questions has become the 
familiar philosophical theme of a whole chorus of 
voices, from enthusiasts of the latest develop-
ments in neuroscience, to radical self-styled 
neo-pragmatists, radical feminists and multicul-
turalists, and followers of (by now somewhat 
dated) Paris fashions. 
This cynicism is unwarranted; but dealing 
with it requires something a bit more radical than 
epistemological business-as-usual. Evidence is 
Originally published in Louis Pojman (ed.), The Theory 
of Knowledge: Classical and Contemporary Readings, 
2nd edn (Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1999), pp. 283-93. 
often messy, ambiguous, misleading, inquiry is 
often untidy, inconclusive, biased by the inquir-
ers' interests; but it doesn't follow, as the cynics 
apparently suppose, that standards of good evi-
dence and well-conducted inquiry are local, con-
ventional, or mythical. And an even half-way 
adequate understanding of the complexities of 
real-life evidence and the untidiness of real-life 
inquiry requires a re-examination of some of 
those comfortably familiar dichotomies on which 
recent epistemology has relied - the logical versus 
the causal, internalism versus externalism, apri-
orism versus naturalism, foundationalism versus 
coherentism. 
Though the other dichotomies will also come 
under scrutiny, the main theme here will be that 
foundational ism and coherentism - the tradi-
tionally rival theories of justified belief - do not 
exhaust the options, and that an intermediate 
theory is more plausible than either. I call it 
"foundherentism:' 
I The Case for Foundherentism 
Foundationalist theories of empirical justifica-
tion hold that an empirical belief is justified if 
and only if it is either a basic belief justified by 
the subject's experience,2 or else a derived belief 

FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION 
135 
justified, directly or indirectly, by the support of 
basic beliefs. Coherentist theories of empirical 
justification hold that a belief is justified if and 
only if it belongs to a coherent set of beliefs. In 
short, foundationalism requires a distinction of 
basic versus derived beliefs and an essentially 
one-directional notion of evidential support, 
while coherentism holds that beliefs can be justi-
fied only by mutual support among themselves. 
The merit of foundationalism is that it acknow-
ledges that a person's experience - what he sees, 
hears, etc. - is relevant to how justified he is in his 
beliefs about the world; its drawback is that it 
requires a privileged class of basic beliefs justified 
by experience alone but capable of supporting the 
rest of our justified beliefs, and ignores the perva-
sive interdependence among a person's beliefs. 
The merit of coherentism is that it acknowledges 
that pervasive interdependence, and requires no 
distinction of basic and derived beliefs; its draw-
back is that it allows no role for the subject's expe-
rience. 
Foundationlists, naturally, are keenly aware of 
the problems with coherentism. How could one 
possibly be justified in believing there's a dog in 
the yard, they ask, if what one sees, hears, smells, 
etc., plays no role? And isn't the coherentist's talk 
of mutual support among beliefs just a euphe-
mism for what is really a vicious circle in which 
what supposedly justifies the belief that p is the 
belief that q, and what justifies the belief that q 
the belief that r .. . and what justifies the belief that 
z is the belief that p? 
Coherentists, naturally, are no less keenly aware 
of the problems with foundationalism. What sense 
does it make to suppose that someone could have 
a justified belief that there's a dog in the yard, they 
ask, except in the context of the rest of his beliefs 
about dogs, etc.? Besides, why should we suppose 
that there are any beliefs both justified by experi-
ence alone and capable of supporting the rest of 
our justified beliefs? After all, foundationalists 
can't even agree among themselves whether the 
basic beliefs are about observable physical objects, 
along the lines of "there's a dog;' or are about the 
subject's experience, along the lines of "it now 
seems to me that I see what looks like a dog" or "I 
am appeared to brownly." And anyway, only prop-
ositions, not events, can stand in logical relations 
to other propositions; so how could a subject's 
experience justify those supposedly basic beliefs? 
As the two styles of theory have evolved, with 
each party trying to overcome the difficulties the 
other thinks insuperable, they have come closer 
together. 
Strong foundationalism requires that basic 
beliefs be fully justified by the subject's experi-
ence; pure foundationalism requires that derived 
beliefs be justified exclusively by the support, 
direct or indirect, of basic beliefs. But weak foun-
dationalism requires only that basic beliefs be 
justified to some degree by experience; and 
impure foundationalism, though requiring all 
derived beliefs to get some support from basic 
beliefs, allows mutual support among derived 
beliefs to raise their degree of justification. 
Uncompromisingly 
egalitarian 
forms 
of 
coherentism hold that only overall coherence 
matters, so that every belief in a coherent set is 
equally justified. But moderated, inegalitarian 
forms of coherentism give a subject's beliefs about 
his present experience a distinguished initial 
status, or give a special standing to beliefs which 
are spontaneous rather than inferential in origin. 
In a way, these moderated forms of founda-
tionalism and coherentism lean in the right direc-
tion. But the leaning destabilizes them. 
Weak foundationalism concedes that basic 
beliefs need not be fully justified by experience 
alone; but then what reason remains to deny that 
they could get more (or less) justified by virtue of 
their relations to other beliefs? Impure founda-
tionalism concedes that there can be mutual sup-
port among derived beliefs; but then what reason 
remains to insist that more pervasive mutual sup-
port is unacceptable? And weak, impure founda-
tionalism allows both that basic beliefs are less 
than fully justified by experience, and that derived 
beliefs may be mutually supportive; but now the 
insistence that derived beliefs can give no support 
to basic beliefs looks arbitrary, and the distinction 
of basic and derived beliefs pointless.3 
Moderated, inegalitarian coherentism con-
cedes that some beliefs are distinguished by their 
perceptual content or "spontaneous" origin; but 
isn't this implicitly to concede that justification is 
not after all a relation exclusively among beliefs, 
that input from experience is essential? 
Not surprisingly, these fancier forms of 
foundationalism and compromising kinds of 
coherent ism, though more sophisticated than 
their simpler ancestors, tend to be ambiguous 

136 
SUSAN HAACK 
and unstable. On the foundationalist side, for 
example, under pressure of just the kinds of dif-
ficulty my analysis identifies, C. 1. Lewis moves 
from a pure to an impure foundationalism and 
then, briefly, to a kind of proto-foundherentism.4 
And on the coherentist side, under pressure of 
just the kind of difficulty my analysis identifies, 
BonJour tries to guarantee experiential input by 
adding an "Observation Requirement" - which, 
however, is ambiguous; on one interpretation it is 
genuinely coherentist, but doesn't allow the rele-
vance of experience, and on the other it allows the 
relevance of experience, but isn't genuinely co her-
entist.5 (BonJour now acknowledges that, after 
all, coherentism won't do.)6 
Neither of the traditionally rival theories can 
be made satisfactory without sacrificing its dis-
tinctive character. The obvious conclusion -
though those still wedded to the old dichotomy 
will doubtless continue to resist it - is that we 
need a new approach which allows the relevance 
of experience to empirical justification, but with-
out postulating any privileged class of basic 
beliefs or requiring that relations of support be 
essentially one-directional: in other words, a 
foundherentist theory. 
II 
Explication of Foundherentism 
The details get complicated, but the main ideas 
are simple. 
A foundherentist account will acknowledge 
(like foundationalism) that how justified a person 
is in an empirical belief must depend in part on 
his experience - my version will give a role both 
to sensory experience, and to introspective aware-
ness of one's own mental states. As coherentists 
point out, though experience can stand in causal 
relations to beliefs, it can't stand in logical relations 
to propositions. But what this shows is not that 
experience is irrelevant to empirical justification, 
but that justification is a double-aspect concept, 
partly causal as well as partly logical in character. 
A foundherentist account will acknowledge 
(like coherentism) that there is pervasive mutual 
support among a person's justified beliefs. As 
foundationalists point out, a belief can't be justi-
fied by a vicious circle of reasons. But what this 
shows is not that mutual support is illegitimate, 
but that we need a better understanding of the 
difference between legitimate mutual support 
and vicious circularity - my version will rely on 
an analogy between the structure of evidence and 
a crossword puzzle. 
Of course, the viability of the foundherentist 
approach doesn't depend on my being completely 
successful in articulating it. No doubt there could 
be other versions of foundherentism falling 
within these general contours but differing in 
their details. 
I take as my starting point the following vague, 
but very plausible, formulation: ''A is morelless 
justified, at t, in believing that p, depending on 
how good his evidence is." 
By starting from here I take for granted, first, 
that justification comes in degrees: a person may 
be more or less justified in believing something. 
(I also assume that a person may be more justified 
in believing some things than he is in believing 
others.) 
I also take for granted, second, that the con-
cepts of evidence and justification are internally 
connected: how justified a person is in believing 
something depends on the quality of his evidence 
with respect to that belief. 
I assume, third, that justification is personal: one 
person may be more justified in believing some-
thing than another is in believing the same thing -
because one person's evidence may be better than 
another's. (But though justification is personal, it 
is not subjective. How justified A is in believing that 
p depends on how good his, Xs, evidence is. But 
how justified A is in believing that p doesn't depend 
on how good A thinks his evidence is; and anyone 
who believed the same thing on the same evidence 
would be justified to the same degree.) 
And I assume, fourth, that justification is 
relative to a time: a person may be more justified 
in believing something at one time than at 
another - because his evidence at one time may 
be better than his evidence at another. 
''A is more/less justified, at t, in believing that p, 
depending on how good his evidence is:' The main 
tasks, obviously, are to explain "his evidence" and 
"how good." The double-aspect character of the 
concept of justification is already in play; for "his:' 
in "his evidence:' is a causal notion, while "how 
good" is logical, or quasi-logical, in character. 
The concept of justification is causal as well as 
logical across the board7 - its causal aspect is not 

FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION 
137 
restricted to experiential evidence alone. Quite 
generally, how justified someone is in believing 
something depends not only on what he believes, 
but on why he believes it. For example: if two 
people both believe the accused is innocent, one 
because he has evidence that she was a hundred 
miles from the scene of the crime at the relevant 
time, the other because he thinks she has an 
honest face, the former is more justified than the 
latter. In short, degree of justification depends on 
the quality of the evidence that actually causes the 
belief in question. 
The word "belief" is ambiguous: sometimes it 
refers to a mental state, someone's believing 
something [an S-beliefl;8 sometimes it refers to 
the content of what is believed, a proposition 
[a C-beliefl. "Xs evidence" needs to be tied some-
how to what causes Xs S-belief, but must also be 
capable of standing in logical or quasi-logical 
relations to the C-belief, the proposition believed. 
The idea is to begin by characterizing Xs S-
evidence with respect to p - this will be a set of 
states of A causally related to his S-belief that p; 
and then to use this as the starting point of a 
characterization of Xs C-evidence with respect to 
p - this will be a set of propositions capable of 
standing in logical or quasi-logical relations to 
the C-belief that p. 
If A initially came to believe that the rock-
rabbit is the closest surviving relative of the ele-
phant because a fellow-tourist told him he read 
this somewhere, and later still believes it, but now 
because he has learned all the relevant biological 
details, he is more justified at the later time than at 
the earlier. So, if they are different, "Xs S-evidence 
with respect to p" should relate to the causes of 
Xs S-belief that p at the time in question rather 
than to what prompted it in the first place. 
What goes on in people's heads is very com-
plicated. There will likely be some factors inclin-
ing A towards believing that p, and others pulling 
against it. Perhaps, e.g., A believes that Tom 
Grabit stole the book because his seeing Grabit 
leave the library with a shifty expression and 
a suspicious bulge under his sweater exerts a 
stronger positive pull than his belief that it is 
possible that Tom Grabit has a light-fingered 
identical twin exerts in the opposite direction. 
Both sustaining and inhibiting factors are rele-
vant to degree of justification, so both will be 
included in Xs S-evidence. 
In this vector of forces [the causal nexus of Xs 
S-belief that p], besides Xs present experience 
and present memory traces of his past experience, 
and other S-beliefs of his, such factors as his 
wishes, hopes, and fears will often playa role. But 
Xs desire not to believe ill of his students, say, or 
his being under the influence of alcohol, though 
they may affect whether or with what degree of 
confidence he believes that Grabit stole the book, 
aren't themselves part of his evidence with respect 
to that proposition. 
So "Xs S-evidence with respect to p" will refer 
to those experiential and belief-states of Xs which 
belong, at the time in question, to the causal nexus 
of Xs S-belief that p. The phrase "with respect to" 
signals the inclusion of both positive, sustaining, 
and negative, inhibiting, evidence [respectively, 
Xs S-evidence for p, and Xs S-evidence against pl. 
Xs S-evidence with respect to p will include other 
beliefs of his [Xs S-reasons with respect to p l; and 
his perceptions, his introspective awareness of his 
own mental goings-on, and memory traces of his 
earlier perceptual and introspective states [Xs 
experiential S-evidence with respect to pl. 
The part about memory needs amplifying. Xs 
experiential S-evidence may include present 
memory traces of past experience - such as his 
remembering seeing his car-keys on the dresser. 
This corresponds to the way we talk of Xs 
remembering seeing, hearing, reading, etc. We 
also talk of 1\s remembering that p, meaning that 
he earlier came to believe that p and has not for-
gotten it. How justified A is in such persisting 
beliefs will depend on how good his evidence 
is - his evidence at the time in question, that is. 
A person's evidence for persisting beliefs will 
normally include memory traces of past percep-
tual experience; my belief that my high-school 
English teacher's name was "Miss Wright," for 
instance, is now sustained by my remembering 
hearing and seeing the name used by myself and 
others. 
Testimonial evidence, in a broad sense - what 
a person reads, what others tell him - enters the 
picture byway of his hearing or seeing, or remem-
bering hearing or seeing, what someone else says 
or writes. Of course, Xs hearing B say that p won't 
contribute to his, Xs, believing that p, unless A 
understands B's language. But if A believes that p 
in part because B told him that p, how justified 
A is in believing that p will depend in part on how 

138 
SUSAN HAACK 
justified A is in thinking B honest and reliable. 
But I anticipate. 
J\s S-evidence with respect to p is a set of states of 
A causally related to his S-belief that p. But in the 
part of the theory that explains what makes evi-
dence better or worse, "evidence" will have to 
mean "C-evidence:' and refer to a set of proposi-
tions. The two aspects interlock: J\s C-evidence 
with respect to p will be a set of propositions, and 
how good it is will depend on those propositions' 
logical or quasi-logical relations to p; but which 
propositions J\s C-evidence with respect to p 
consists of depends on which of J\s S-beliefs and 
perceptual, etc., states belong to the causal nexus 
of the S-belief in question. 
A's C-reasons with respect to p, obviously 
enough, should be the C-beliefs, i.e., the proposi-
tions, which are the contents of his S-reasons. For 
example, if one of J\s S-reasons with respect to p 
is his S-belief that female cardinal birds are brown, 
the corresponding C-reason will be the proposi-
tion that female cardinal birds are brown. 
But what about J\s experiential C-evidence? My 
proposal is that "J\s experiential C-evidence with 
respect to p" refers to propositions to the effect that 
A is in the perceptual/introspective/memory states 
which constitute his experiential S-evidence with 
respect to p. Since a perceptual, etc., state can't be 
part of the causal nexus of J\s S-belief that p unless 
A is in that state, these propositions are all true. But 
they need not be propositions that A believes." 
So J\s experiential C-evidence has a distinctive 
status. J\s C-reasons may be true or may be false, 
and A may be more or less justified, or not justi-
fied at all, in believing them. But J\s experiential 
C-evidence consists of propositions all of which 
are, ex hypothesi, true, and with respect to which 
the question of justification doesn't arise. (This is 
the foundherentist way of acknowledging that the 
ultimate evidence for empirical beliefs is experi-
ence - very different from the forced and unnatu-
ral way in which foundationalism tries to 
acknowledge it, by requiring basic beliefs justified 
by experience alone.) 
In line with the way we ordinarily talk about the 
evidence of the senses - "Why do I think there's a 
cardinal in the oak tree? Well, I can see the thing; 
that distinctive profile is clear, though the light's 
not too good, and it's quite far away, so I can't really 
see the color" - I suggest a characterization of J\s 
experiential C-evidence in terms of propositions 
to the effect that A is in the sort of perceptual state 
a normal subject would be in when seeing this or 
that in these or those circumstances. For example, 
if J\s experiential S-evidence with respect to p is 
his perceptual state, its looking to him as it would 
to a normal observer seeing a female cardinal bird 
at a distance of forty feet in poor light, the corre-
sponding experiential C-evidence will be a propo-
sition to the effect that A is in the kind of perceptual 
state a normal observer would be in when looking 
at a female cardinal bird in those circumstances. 
Built into my account of experiential evidence 
is a conception of perception as, in a certain sense, 
direct. This is not to deny that perception involves 
complicated neurophysiological goings-on. Nor 
is it to deny that the judgments causally sustained 
by the subject's experience are interpretative, that 
they depend on his background beliefs as well -
which, on the contrary, is a key foundherentist 
thought. It is only to assert that in normal percep-
tion we interact with physical things and events 
around us, which look a certain way to all normal 
observers under the same circumstances. 
You may be wondering why I include the sub-
ject's sensory and introspective experience as evi-
deIKe, but not, say, his extra-sensory perceptual 
experience. Well, the task here is descriptive - to 
articulate explicitly what is implicit when we say that 
A has excellent reasons for believing that p, that B is 
guilty of wishful thinking, that C has jumped to an 
unjustified conclusion, and so on. As those phrases 
"excellent reasons" and "guilty of wishful thinking" 
indicate, his other belief, should be included as part 
of a subject's evidence, but his wishes should not. 
Actually, I think it most unlikely there is such a thing 
as ESP; but it is excluded because - unlike sensory 
experience, for which we even have the phrase, "the 
evidence of the senses" - it has no role in the implicit 
conception of evidence I am trying to make explicit. 
The concepts of better and worse evidence, of 
more and less justified belief, are evaluative; so, 
after the descriptive task of explication, there will 
be the ratificatory question, whether our stand-
ards of better and worse evidence really are, as we 
hope and believe they are, indicative of truth. But 
that comes later. 
The present task is to explicate "how good" in 
"how good J\s C-evidence is." What factors raise, 
and what lower, degree of justification? 

FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION 
139 
Foundationalists often think of the structure 
of evidence on the model of a mathematical 
proof - a model which, understandably, makes 
them leery of the idea of mutual support. My 
approach will be informed by the analogy of a 
crossword puzzle - where, undeniably, there is 
pervasive mutual support among entries, but, 
equally undeniably, no vicious circle. The clues 
are the analogue of experiential evidence, already-
completed intersecting entries the analogue of 
reasons. As how reasonable a crossword entry is 
depends both on the clues and on other intersect-
ing entries, the idea is, so how justified an empiri-
cal belief is depends on experiential evidence and 
reasons working together. 
Perhaps needless to say, an analogy is only an 
analogy, not an argument. Its role is only to sug-
gest ideas, which then have to stand on their own 
feet. And there are always disanalogies; there will 
be nothing in my theory analogous to the solu-
tion to to day's crossword which appears in tomor-
row's newspaper, for instance, nor any analogue 
of the designer of a crossword. 
But the analogy does suggest a very plausible 
multi-dimensional answer to the question, what 
makes a belief more or less justified? How reason-
able a crossword entry is depends on how well 
it is supported by the clue and any already-
completed intersecting entries; how reasonable 
those other entries are, independent of the entry 
in question; and how much of the crossword has 
been completed. How justified A is in believing 
that p, analogously, depends on how well the 
belief in question is supported by his experiential 
evidence and reasons [supportiveness]; how jus-
tified his reasons are, independent of the belief in 
question [independent security]; and how much 
of the relevant evidence his evidence includes 
[ comprehensiveness]. 
On the first dimension, 1\s C-evidence may be 
conclusive for p, conclusive against p, supportive-
but-not-conclusive of p, undermining-but-not-
conclusive against p, or indifferent with respect to 
pi with respect to not-po 
Foundationalists often take for granted that 
evidence is conclusive just in case it deductively 
implies the proposition in question; but this isn't 
quite right. Inconsistent premisses deductively 
imply any proposition whatever; but inconsistent 
evidence isn't conclusive evidence for anything -
let alone conclusive evidence for everything! 
Think, for example, of a detective whose evidence 
is: the murder was committed by a left-handed 
person; either Smith or Brown did it; Smith is 
right-handed; Brown is right-handed. Though 
this deductively implies that Smith did it, it cer-
tainly isn't conclusive evidence for that belief (let 
alone conclusive evidence for the belief that Smith 
did it and conclusive evidence for the belief that 
Brown did it and conclusive evidence for the 
belief that extra-terrestrials did it!). 
Deductive implication is necessary but not 
sufficient for conclusiveness. Evidence E is conclu-
sive for p just in case the result of adding p to E [the 
p-extrapolation of E] is consistent, and the result 
of adding not-p to E [the not-p-extrapolation 
of E] is inconsistent. E is conclusive against p 
just in case its p-extrapolation is inconsistent and 
its not-p-extrapolation consistent. But if E itself 
is inconsistent, both its p-extrapolation and its 
not-p-extrapolation are also inconsistent, so E is 
indifferent with respect to p. 
Often, though, evidence is not conclusive 
either way, nor yet inconsistent and hence indif-
ferent, but supports the belief in question, or its 
negation, to some degree. Suppose the detective's 
evidence is: the murder was committed by a left-
handed person; either Smith or Brown did it; 
Smith is left-handed; Brown is left-handed; Smith 
recently saw the victim, Mrs Smith, in a romantic 
restaurant holding hands with Brown. Though 
not conclusive, this evidence is supportive to 
some degree of the belief that Smith did it - for, if 
he did, we have some explanation of why. 
The example suggests that supportiveness 
depends on whether and how much adding p to E 
makes a better explanatory story. But a better 
explanatory story than what? Conclusiveness is a 
matter of the superiority of p over its negation 
with respect to consistency. But if p is potentially 
explanatory of E or some component of E, it is 
not to be expected that not-p will be too. So I con-
strue supportiveness as depending on the superi-
ority of p over its rivals with respect to explanatory 
integration; where a rival of p is any proposition 
adding which to E improves its explanatory inte-
gration to some degree, and which, given E, is 
incompatible with p. 
The word "integration" was chosen to indicate 
that E may support p either because p explains E 
or some component of E, or vice versa - that there 
is "mutual reinforcement between an explanation 

140 
SUSAN HAACK 
and what it explains."IO (So the concept of explan-
atory integration is closer kin to the coherentist 
concept of explanatory coherence than to the 
foundationalist concept of inference to the best 
explanation. ) 
Usually, as conclusiveness of evidence is taken 
to be the province of deductive logic, supportive-
ness of evidence is taken to be the province of 
inductive logic. But at least if "logic" is taken in its 
now-usual narrow sense, as depending on form 
alone, this looks to be a mistake. Explanation 
requires generality, kinds, laws - a motive for the 
murder, a mechanism whereby smoking causes 
cancer, and so forth. If so, explanatoriness, and 
hence supportiveness, requires a vocabulary 
which classifies things into real kinds; and hence 
depends on content, not on form alone. (Hempel 
drew the moral, many years ago now, from the 
"grue" paradox. lI ) But there is supportive-but-
not -conclusive evidence, even if there is no formal 
inductive logic. 
Supportiveness alone does not determine 
degree of justification, which also depends on 
independent security and comprehensiveness. 
Suppose our detective's evidence is: the murder 
was committed by a left-handed person; either 
Smith or Brown did it; Smith is right-handed, but 
Brown left-handed. The detective's evidence is 
conclusive that Brown did it; nevertheless, he is 
not well-justified in believing this unless, among 
other things, he is justified in believing that the 
murder was committed by a left-handed person, 
that either Smith or Brown did it, etc. 
The idea of independent security is easiest to 
grasp in the context of the crossword analogy. In 
a crossword, how reasonable an entry is depends 
in part on its fit with intersecting entries, and 
hence on how reasonable those entries are, inde-
pendently of the entry in question. Similarly, how 
justified a person is in believing something 
depends in part on how well it is supported by his 
other beliefs, and hence on how justified he is in 
believing those reasons, independently of the 
belief in question. 
It is that last phrase - in my theory as with a 
crossword puzzle - that averts the danger of a 
vicious circle. The reasonableness of the entry for 3 
down may depend in part on the reasonableness of 
the intersecting entry for 5 across - independent of 
the support given to the entry for 5 across by the 
entry for 3 down. Similarly, how justified A is in 
believing that p may depend in part on how justi-
fied he is in believing that q - independent of the 
support given his belief that q by his belief that p. 
And, though "justified" appears on the right-
hand side of the independent security clause, 
there is no danger of an infinite regress - any 
more than with a crossword puzzle. As in the 
case of a crossword eventually we reach the clues, 
so with empirical justification eventually we 
reach experiential evidence. And experiential 
C-evidence does not consist of other C-beliefs of 
the subject, but of propositions all of which are, 
ex hypothesi, true, and with respect to which the 
question of justification doesn't arise. This is not 
to deny that, as crossword clues may be cryptic, 
experiential evidence may be ambiguous or mis-
leading; on the contrary, my account of experien-
tial C-evidence is intended to recognize that it 
often is. It is only to say that the question of justi-
fication arises with respect to a person's beliefs, 
but not with respect to his experiences. 
As how reasonable a crossword entry is 
depends not only on how well it is supported by 
the clue and other intersecting entries, and on 
how reasonable those other entries are, but also 
on how much of the crossword has been com-
pleted, so degree of justification depends not only 
on supportiveness and independent security, but 
also on comprehensiveness - on how much of the 
relevant evidence the subject's evidence includes. 
Comprehensiveness promises to be even 
tougher to spell out than supportiveness and 
independent security; the crossword analogy isn't 
much help here, and neither is the nearest ana-
logue in the literature, the total evidence require-
ment on inductions, which refers, not to the 
totality of relevant evidence, but to the totality of 
relevant available evidence - and then there is the 
further problem that relevance itself comes in 
degrees. 
I am assuming, however, that (degree of) rel-
evance is an objective matter. Naturally, whether I 
think your handwriting is relevant to your trust-
worthiness depends on whether I believe in 
graphology; but whether it is relevant depends on 
whether graphology is true. 
As this reveals, though relevance, and hence 
comprehensiveness, is objective, judgments of 
relevance, and hence judgments of comprehen-
siveness, are perspectival, i.e., they depend on the 
background beliefs of the person making them. 

FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION 
141 
The same goes for judgments of supportiveness 
and independent security. How supportive you or 
I judge E to be with respect to p, for example, will 
depend on what rivals of p we happen to be able 
to think of; but how supportive E is of p does not. 
Quality of evidence is objective, but judgments of 
quality of evidence are perspectival. 
Because quality of evidence is multi-dimen-
sional, we should not necessarily expect a linear 
ordering of degrees of justification; e.g., Xs evi-
dence with respect to p might be strongly sup-
portive but weak on comprehensiveness, while 
his evidence with respect to q might be strong on 
comprehensiveness but only weakly supportive. 
Nor, a fortiori, does it look realistic to aspire to 
anything as ambitious as a numerical scale of 
degrees of justification. But something can be 
said about what is required for A to be justified to 
any degree in believing that p. 
One necessary condition is that there be such 
a thing as Xs C-evidence with respect to p. If Xs 
S-belief that p is caused simply by a blow to the 
head, or by one of those belief-inducing pills phi-
10sophers are fond of imagining, A isn't justified 
to any degree in believing that p. Since it is the 
justification of empirical beliefs that is at issue, 
another necessary condition is that Xs C-evidence 
should include some experiential C-evidence -
present experiential evidence, or memory traces 
of what he earlier saw, heard, read, etc. This is my 
analogue of BonJour's Observation Requirement, 
obviously much more at home in foundherent-
ism than his requirement was in his coherentist 
theory. (It is not meant to rule out the possibility 
that some of a person's beliefs may not be sus-
tained directly by experiential evidence, not even 
by memory traces, but rely on other beliefs and 
their experiential evidence - as in an unconven-
tional crossword some entries might have no 
clues of their own but rely on other entries and 
their cluesY) A third necessary condition is that 
Xs C-evidence with respect to p should meet 
minimal conditions of supportiveness, independ-
ent security, and comprehensiveness; e.g., it 
should be better than indifferent in terms of sup-
portiveness. Jointly, these necessary conditions 
look to be sufficient. 
What about the upper end of the scale? Our 
ordinary use of phrases like "A is completely justi-
fied in believing that p" is vague and context-
dependent, depending inter alia on whether it is 
Xs particular business to know whether p, and 
how important it is to be right about whether p; 
perhaps it also runs together strictly epistemo-
logical with ethical concerns. This vague concept 
[complete justification] is useful for practical pur-
poses - and for the statement of Gettier-type 
paradoxes. In other philosophical contexts, how-
ever, "A is completely justified in believing that p" 
is used in a context-neutralized, optimizing way, 
requiring conclusiveness, maximal independent 
security, and full comprehensiveness of evidence 
[COMPLETE justification]. 
The account sketched here has been personal, 
i.e., focussed firmly on our friend A. But this is 
not to deny that in even the most ordinary of our 
everyday beliefs we rely extensively on testimonial 
evidence. And where the sciences are concerned, 
reliance on others' evidence - and hence on the 
interpretation of others' words and judgments of 
others' reliability - is absolutely pervasive. (This 
reveals that not only the social sciences but also 
the natural sciences presuppose the possibility of 
interpreting others' utterances: think, e.g., of an 
astronomer's reliance on others' reports of obser-
vations.) 
Anyhow, thinking about evidence in the sci-
ences prompts me to ask whether it is possible to 
extrapolate from my account of "A is more/less 
justified in believing that p" to a concept of justi-
fication applicable to groups of people. It might 
be feasible to do this by starting with the degree 
of justification of a hypothetical subject whose 
evidence includes all the evidence of each member 
of the group, and then discount this by some 
measure of the degree to which each member of 
the group is justified in believing that other mem-
bers are competent and honest. 
III 
The Ratification of Foundherentism 
Thus far the task has been to articulate our stand-
ards of better and worse evidence, of more and 
less justified belief. But what do I mean by "our"? 
And what assurance can I give that a belief's being 
justified, by those standards, is any indication that 
it is true? 
When I speak of "our" standards of better and 
worse evidence, I emphatically do not mean to 
suggest that these standards are local or paro-
chial, accepted in "our;' as opposed to "their," 

142 
SUSAN HAACK 
community. Rather, I see these standards - essen-
tially, how well a belief is anchored in experience 
and how tightly it is woven into an explanatory 
mesh of beliefs - as rooted in human nature, in 
the cognitive capacities and limitations of all 
normal human beings. 
It is sure to be objected that the evidential 
standards of different times, cultures, communi-
ties, or scientific paradigms differ radically. But 
I think this supposed variability is at least an 
exaggeration, and quite possibly altogether an 
illusion, the result of mistaking the perspectival 
character of judgments of evidential quality for 
radical divergence in standards of better and 
worse evidence. 
Because judgments of the quality of evidence 
are perspectival, people with radically different 
background beliefs can be expected to differ sig-
nificantly in their judgments of degree of justifi-
cation. It doesn't follow that there are no shared 
standards of evidence. If we think of the con-
straints of experiential anchoring and explana-
tory integration rather than of specific judgments 
of the relevance, supportiveness, etc., of this or 
that evidence, I believe we will find commonality 
rather than divergence. 
Again, the point is easier to see in the context 
of the crossword analogy. Suppose you and I are 
both doing the same crossword puzzle, and have 
filled in some long central entry differently. You 
think, given your solution to that long central 
entry, that the fact that 14 down ends in a "T" is 
evidence in its favor; I think, given my solution to 
that long central entry, that the fact that it ends in 
a "D" is evidence in its favor. Nevertheless, we are 
both trying to fit the entry to its clue and to other 
already-completed entries. Now suppose you and 
I are both on an appointments committee. You 
think the way this candidate writes his "g"s indi-
cates that he is not to be trusted; I think graphol-
ogy is bunk and scoff at your "evidence:' Because 
of a disagreement in background beliefs, we disa-
gree about what evidence is relevant. Nevertheless, 
we are both trying to assess the supportiveness, 
independent security, and comprehensiveness of 
the evidence with respect to the proposition that 
the candidate is trustworthy. 
But even if I am wrong about this, even if 
there really are radically divergent standards of 
evidential quality, it wouldn't follow that there 
are no objective indications of truth; variability 
of standards does not, in and of itself, imply rela-
tivity of standards. 13 So those epistemic relativists 
who have inferred that, since judgments of justi-
fication vary from community to community, 
there can be no objectively correct standards of 
better and worse evidence, have committed a non 
sequitur as well as relying on a dubious premiss. 
As for those who have succumbed to epistemic 
relativism because they have given up on the con-
cept of truth, I have room here only to say that 
theirs seems to me an entirely factitious despair.14 
In any case, all that will be required of the concept 
of truth in what follows is that a proposition or 
statement is true just in case things are as it says. 
Supposing - as I believe, and so do you - that 
we humans are fallible, limited but inquiring 
creatures who live in a world which is largely 
independent of us and what we believe about it, 
but in which there are kinds, laws, regularities; 
and supposing - as I believe, and so do you - that 
our senses are a source, though by no means an 
infallible source, of information about things 
and events in the world around us, and intro-
spection a source, though by no means an infal-
lible source, of information about our own 
mental goings-on; then, if any indication of how 
things are is possible for us, how well our beliefs 
are anchored in our experience and knit into an 
explanatory mesh is such an indication. (And 
supposing - as I believe, and so, probably, do 
you - we have no other sourc~s of information 
about the world and ourselves, no ESP or clair-
voyance or etc., then this is the only indication 
we can have of how things are.) 
That last paragraph was nothing like an a 
priori ratification of foundherentism; for those 
"supposing" clauses are empirical in character. 
Assumptions about human cognitive capacities 
and limitations are built into our standards of evi-
dential quality; so the truth-indicativeness of 
those standards depends on the truth of those 
empirical assumptions. But neither was that last 
paragraph much like the appeals to psychology or 
cognitive science on which some epistemological 
naturalists of a more extreme stripe than mine 
propose to rely; for the assumptions referred to in 
my "supposing" clauses, though empirical, are of 
such generality as to be rather philosophical than 
scientific in character. 
Those assumptions would surely be presup-
posed by any conceivable scientific experiment. 

FOUNDHERENTIST THEORY OF EMPIRICAL JUSTIFICATION 
143 
But they are well integrated with what the sci-
ences of cognition have to tell us about the mech-
anisms of perception and introspection, and of 
when and why they are more or less reliable, and 
with what the theory of evolution suggests about 
how we came to have the sort of information-
detecting apparatus we do. As one would hope, 
the epistemological part of my crossword - the 
part where the entries are themselves about cross-
words - interlocks snugly with other parts. 
But what am I to say to those readers familiar 
with Descartes' failed attempt to prove "what I 
clearly and distinctly perceive is true," who are 
bound to suspect that I must be arguing in a circle? 
After pointing out that I have not offered a ratifi-
catory argument in which some premiss turns out 
to be identical with the conclusion, nor an argu-
ment relying on a certain mode of inference to 
arrive at the conclusion that this very mode of 
inference is a good one - only that, to borrow 
Peirce's words, by now "the reader will, I trust, be 
too well-grounded in logic to mistake mutual 
support for a vicious circle of reasoning:'ls 
And what am I to say to readers worried 
about the Evil Demon, who are bound to object 
that I have not ruled out the possibility that our 
senses are not a source of information about the 
Notes 
This brief statement of foundherentism is 
based primarily on my Evidence and Inquiry: 
Towards Reconstruction in Epistemology (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1993), especially chapters 1, 4, and 
lO. I have also drawn on material from earlier 
articles of mine, especially "Theories of Know-
ledge: an Analytic Framework," Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society LXXXIII (1982-3), pp. 143-57 
(where foundherentism was first introduced), 
"c. I. Lewis," in American Philosophy, ed. Marcus 
Singer, Royal Institute of Philosophy Lecture 
Series, 19 (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1985), pp. 215-39, and "Rebuilding the Ship 
While Sailing on the Water," in R. Barrett and 
R. Gibson (eds), Perspectives on Quine (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1990), pp. 111-27 (where some of the 
key ideas of foundherentism were developed). 
I have drawn as well on material from the sympo-
sium on Evidence and Inquiry published in 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research LVI. 
external world at all? After pointing out that 
since, ex hypothesi, his machinations would be 
absolutely undetectable, if there were an Evil 
Demon no truth-indication would be possible 
for us - only that my claim is a conditional one: 
that, if any truth-indication is possible for us, the 
foundherentist criteria are truth-indicative. (I 
could discharge the antecedent, and arrive at a 
categorical conclusion, by adopting a definition 
of truth along Peircean lines, as the opinion that 
would survive all possible experiential evidence 
and the fullest logical scrutiny; but I prefer the 
more cautious, and more realist, strategy.) 
Determined skeptics won't be persuaded; but 
determined skeptics never are! And the rest of 
you may notice that foundherentism enables us 
to sidestep another dichotomy which has - if 
you'll pardon the pun - bedeviled recent episte-
mology: either a hopeless obsession with hyper-
bolic skepticism, or a hopeless relativism or 
tribalism preoccupied with "our (local, parochial) 
epistemic practices." Foundherentism, I believe, 
provides a more realistic picture of our epistemic 
condition - a robustly fallibilist picture which, 
without sacrificing objectivity, acknowledges 
something of how complex and confusing evi-
dence can be. 
3 (1996), pp. 611-57, and from the debate with 
BonJour in Synthese 112.1 (July 1997), pp. 7-35. 
Thomas Reid, Essays on the Intellectual Powers 
(l785), in R. E. Beanblossom and K. Lehrer 
(eds), Thomas Reid: Inquiry and Essays, 
(Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1983), vol. VI, p. 4. 
2 
I restrict my attention here to experientialist 
forms of foundationalism, ignoring, e.g., foun-
dationalist theories of a priori knowledge. 
3 My characterization of foundationalism is 
quite standard; cf. for example, Alston's in 
J. Dancy and E. Sosa (eds), Companion to 
Epistemology 
(Oxford: 
Blackwell, 
1992), 
p. 144, or Sosa's in "The Raft and the Pyramid," 
this vol., ch. 13. But matters have been con-
fused because, in "Can Empirical Knowledge 
Have a Foundation?", this vol., ch. lO, and The 
Structure of Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1986), p. 28, 
BonJour uses "weak foundationalism" to refer 

144 
SUSAN HAACK 
a style of theory which is both weak and 
impure, in my sense, and in addition allows 
mutual support among basic beliefs and -
apparently - allows "basic" beliefs to get sup-
port from "derived" beliefs. As my scare quotes 
indicate, once one-directionality has been so 
completely abandoned it is unclear that the 
theory really qualifies as foundationalist at all; 
certainly the basic!derived distinction has 
become purely proforma. See also Haack, 
"Reply to BonJour:' Synthese 112.1 (July 
1997), pp. 25-35. 
4 See Evidence and Inquiry, ch. 2, for details. 
5 See ibid., ch. 3, for details. 
6 Laurence BonJour, "Haack on Justification 
and Experience:' Synthese 112.1 (July 1997), 
pp.13-15. 
7 An idea I first began to work out in 
"Epistemology With a Knowing Subject:' 
Review of Metaphysics XXXIII.2 (1979), pp. 
309-36. 
8 Expressions introduced in square brackets 
are my new, technical terms, or special, tech-
nical uses of familiar terms. 
9 So my theory is not straightforwardly exter-
nalist, since Ns S-evidence must consist of 
states of A - states, furthermore, of which A 
can be aware; but neither is it straightfor-
wardly internalist, since Ns experiential C-
evidence consists of propositions A need not 
believe or even conceive. 
10 
W. V. Quine and J. Ullian, The Web of Belief 
(New York: Random House, 1970), p. 79. 
11 
N. Goodman, "The New Riddle ofInduction" 
(1953), in Fact, 
Fiction 
and Forecast 
(Indianapolis, IN: Bobbs-Merrill, 2nd edn, 
1965), pp. 59-83; C. G. Hempel, "Postscript 
on Confirmation" (1964), in Aspects of 
Scientific Explanation (New York: Free Press, 
1965), pp. 47-52. 
12 
In case a desperate foundationalist is tempted 
to try seizing on this in hopes of salvaging 
the derived/basic distinction, let me point 
out that beliefs without direct experiential 
evidence could contribute to the support of 
beliefs with direct experiential evidence; and 
that this maneuver would identify no plausi-
ble kind of belief as basic! as derived - think, 
e.g., of a scientist whose belief that electrons 
are composed thus and so is sustained by 
what he sees in the bubble chamber. 
13 
See also Susan Haack, "Reflections on 
Relativism: From Momentous Tautology to 
Seductive Contradiction," NoCts Supplement 
(1996), 
pp. 
297-315, 
and 
in 
James 
E. Tomberlin (ed.), Philosophical Perspectives, 
10: Metaphysics (Oxford: Blackwell, 1996), 
pp. 297-315; reprinted in Haack, Manifesto 
of a Passionate Moderate: Unfashionable 
Essays (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1998), pp. 149-66. 
14 
I have more to say in "Confessions of an 
Old-Fashioned Prig," in Manifesto of a 
Passionate Moderate, pp. 7-30. 
15 
C. S. Peirce, Collected Papers, eds C. Hartshorne, 
P. Weiss, and A. Burks (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1931-58),6.315. 

CHAPTER 13 
The Raft and the Pyramid 
Ernest So sa 
Contemporary 
epistemology 
must 
choose 
between the solid security of the ancient founda-
tionalist pyramid and the risky adventure of the 
new coherentist raft. Our main objective will be 
to understand, as deeply as we can, the nature of 
the controversy and the reasons for and against 
each of the two options. But first of all we take 
note of two underlying assumptions. 
1 Two Assumptions 
(Al) 
Not everything believed is known, but 
nothing can be known without being at 
least believed ( or accepted, presumed, 
taken for granted, or the like) in some 
broad sense. What additional requirements 
must a belief fill in order to be knowledge? 
There are surely at least the following two: 
(a) it must be true, and (b) it must be justi-
fied (or warranted, reasonable, correct, or 
the like). 
(A2) 
Let us assume, moreover, with respect to 
the second condition Al(b): first, that it 
involves a normative or evaluative property; 
Originally published in Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 
Vol. 5: Studies in Epistemology (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1980), pp. 3-25; an appendix to 
this paper is drawn from Ernest Sosa, "How Do You 
Know?" American Philosophical Quarterly 11 (1974), 
pp.113-22. 
and, second, that the relevant sort of 
justification is that which pertains to 
knowledge: epistemic (or theoretical) justi-
fication. Someone seriously ill may have 
two sorts of justification for believing he 
will recover: the practical justification that 
derives from the contribution such belief 
will make to his recovery and the theoreti-
cal justification provided by the lab results, 
the doctor's diagnosis and prognosis, and 
so on. Only the latter is relevant to the 
question whether he knows. 
2 
Knowledge and Criteria 
a. There are two key questions of the theory of 
knowledge: 
(i) 
What do we know? 
(ii) 
How do we know? 
The answer to the first would be a list of bits 
of knowledge or at least of types of knowl-
edge: of the self, of the external world, of 
other minds, and so on. An answer to the 
second would give criteria (or canons, meth-
ods, principles, or the like) that would explain 
how we know whatever it is that we do know. 
b. In developing a theory of knowledge, we can 
begin either with a(i) or with a(ii). Particular-
ism would have us begin with an answer to 
a(i) and only then take up a(ii) on the basis of 
that answer. Quite to the contrary, methodism 

146 
ERNEST SOSA 
would reverse that order. The particularist 
thus tends to be antiskeptical on principle. 
But the methodist is as such equally receptive 
to skepticism and to the contrary. Hume, for 
example, was no less a methodist than 
Descartes. Each accepted, in effect, that only 
the obvious and what is proved deductively 
on its basis can possibly be known. 
c. 
What, then, is the obvious? For Descartes it is 
what we know by intuition, what is clear and 
distinct, what is indubitable and credible with 
no fear of error. Thus for Descartes basic knowl-
edge is always an infallible belief in an indubita-
be truth. All other knowledge must stand on 
that basis through deductive proof. Starting 
from such criteria (canons, methods, etc.), 
Descartes concluded that knowledge extended 
about as far as his contemporaries believed. I 
Starting from similar criteria, however, Hume 
concluded that both science and common sense 
made claims far beyond their rightful limits. 
d. Philosophical posterity has rejected Descartes's 
theory for one main reason: that it admits too 
easily as obvious what is nothing of the sort. 
Descartes's reasoning is beautifully simple: 
God exists; no omnipotent perfectly good 
being would descend to deceit; but if our 
common sense beliefs were radically false, that 
would represent deceit on His part. Therefore, 
our common sense beliefs must be true or at 
least cannot be radically false. But in order to 
buttress this line of reasoning and fIll in 
details, Descartes appeals to various principles 
that appear something less than indubitable. 
e. 
For his part, Hume rejects all but a minuscule 
portion of our supposed common sense 
knowledge. He establishes first that there is no 
way to prove such supposed knowledge on the 
basis of what is obvious at any given moment 
through reason or experience. And he con-
cludes, in keeping with this methodism, that in 
point of fact there really is no such knowledge. 
3 
Two Metaphors: The Raft 
and the Pyramid 
Both metaphors concern the body or system of 
knowledge in a given mind. But the mind is of 
course a more complex marvel than is sometimes 
supposed. Here I do not allude to the depths 
plumbed by Freud, nor even to Chomsky's. Nor 
need we recall the labyrinths inhabited by states-
men and diplomats, nor the rich patterns of some 
novels or theories. We need look no further than 
the most common, everyday beliefs. Take, for 
instance, the belief that driving tonight will be dan-
gerous. Brief reflection should reveal that any of us 
with that belief will join to it several other closely 
related beliefs on which the given belief depends 
for its existence or (at least) its justification. Among 
such beliefs we could presumably find some or all 
of the following: that the road will be icy or snowy; 
that driving on ice or snow is dangerous; that it will 
rain or snow tonight; that the temperature will be 
below freezing; appropriate beliefs about the 
forecast and its reliability; and so on. 
How must such beliefs be interrelated in order 
to help justify my belief about the danger of driv-
ing tonight? Here foundationalism and coherent-
ism disagree, each offering its own metaphor. Let 
us have a closer look at this dispute, starting with 
foundationalism. 
Both Descartes and Hume attribute to human 
knowledge an architectonic structure. There is a 
nonsymmetric relation of physical support such 
that any two floors of a building are tied by that rela-
tion: one of the two supports (or at least helps sup-
port) the other. And there is, moreover, a part with a 
special status: the foundation, which is supported by 
none of the floors while supporting them all. 
With respect to a body of knowledge K (in 
someone's possession), foundationalism implies 
that K can be divided into parts K1, K, ... such that 
there is some nonsymmetric relation R (analo-
gous to the relation of physical support) which 
orders those parts in such a way that there is 
one - call it F - that bears R to every other part 
while none of them bears R in turn to F. 
According to foundational ism, each piece of 
knowledge lies on a pyramid such as that shown 
in Figure 13.1. The nodes of such a pyramid (for a 
proposition P relative to a subject S and a time t) 
must obey the following requirements: 
p 
Figure 13.1 

THE RAFT AND THE PYRAMID 
147 
a. 
The set of all nodes that succeed (directly) 
any given node must serve jointly as a base 
that properly supports that node (for S at t). 
b. 
Each node must be a proposition that S is 
justified in believing at t. 
c. 
If a node is not self-evident (for S at t), it 
must have successors (that serve jointly as 
a base that properly supports that node). 
d. 
Each branch of an epistemic pyramid 
must terminate. 
For the foundationalist Descartes, for instance, 
each terminating node must be an indubitable 
proposition that S believes at t with no possibility 
of error. As for the nonterminal nodes, each of 
them represents inferential knowledge, derived 
by deduction from more basic beliefs. 
Such radical foundationalism suffers from a 
fatal weakness that is twofold: (a) there are not so 
many perfectly obvious truths as Descartes 
thought; and (b) once we restrict ourselves to 
what is truly obvious in any given context, very 
little of one's supposed common sense knowledge 
can be proved on that basis. If we adhere to such 
radical foundationalism, therefore, we are just 
wrong in thinking we know so much. 
Note that in citing such a "fatal weakness" of 
radical foundationalism, we favor particularism 
as against the methodism of Descartes and Hume. 
For we reject the methods or criteria of Descartes 
and Hume when we realize that they plunge us in 
a deep skepticism. If such criteria are incompati-
ble with our enjoyment of the rich body of know l-
edge that we commonly take for granted, then as 
good particularists we hold on to the knowledge 
and reject the criteria. 
If we reject radical foundationalism, however, 
what are we to put in its place? Here epistemol-
ogy faces a dilemma that different epistemolo-
gists resolve differently. Some reject radical 
foundational ism but retain some more moderate 
form of foundationalism in favor of a radically 
different coherentism. Coherentism is associated 
with idealism - of both the German and the 
British variety - and has recently acquired new 
vigor and interest. 
The coherentists reject the metaphor of the 
pyramid in favor of one that they owe to the pos-
itivist Neurath, according to whom our body of 
knowledge is a raft that floats free of any anchor 
or tie. Repairs must be made afloat, and though 
no part is untouchable, we must stand on some in 
order to replace or repair others. Not every part 
can go at once. 
According to the new metaphor, what justifies 
a belief is not that it be an infallible belief with an 
indubitable object, nor that it have been proved 
deductively on such a basis, but that it cohere 
with a comprehensive system of beliefs. 
4 A Coherentist Critique of 
Foundationalism 
What reasons do coherentists offer for their total 
rejection of foundationalism? The argument that 
follows below summarizes much of what is alleged 
against foundational ism. But first we must distin-
guish between subjective states that incorporate a 
propositional attitude and those that do not. 
A propositional attitude is a mental state of some-
one with a proposition for its object: beliefs, 
hopes, and fears provide examples. By way of 
contrast, a headache does not incorporate any 
such attitude. One can of course be conscious of a 
headache, but the headache itself does not consti-
tute or incorporate any attitude with a proposi-
tion for its object. With this distinction in the 
background, here is the antifoundationalist argu-
ment, which has two lemmas - a(iv) and b(iii) -
and a principal conclusion. 
a. 
(i) 
If a mental state incorporates a 
propositional attitude, then it does 
not give us direct contact with reality, 
e.g., with pure experience, unfiltered 
by concepts or beliefs. 
(ii) 
If a mental state does not give us 
direct contact with reality, then it 
provides no guarantee against error. 
(iii) 
If a mental state provides no guaran-
tee against error, then it cannot serve 
as a foundation for knowledge. 
(iv) 
Therefore, if a mental state incorpo-
rates a propositional attitude, then it 
cannot serve as a foundation for 
knowledge. 
b. 
(i) 
If a mental state does not incorporate 
a propositional attitude, then it is an 
enigma how such a state can provide 
support for any hypothesis, raising its 
credibility selectively by contrast with 

148 
ERNEST SOSA 
its alternatives. (If the mental state has 
no conceptual or propositional con-
tent, then what logical relation can it 
possibly bear to any hypothesis? Belief 
in a hypothesis would be a proposi-
tional attitude with the hypothesis 
itself as object. How can one depend 
logically for such a belief on an experi-
ence with no propositional content?) 
(ii) 
If a mental state has no proposi-
tional content and cannot provide 
logical support for any hypothesis, 
then it cannot serve as a foundation 
for knowledge. 
(iii) 
Therefore, if a mental state does not 
incorporate a propositional attitude, 
then it cannot serve as a foundation 
for knowledge. 
c. Every mental state either does or does not 
incorporate a propositional attitude. 
d. Therefore, no mental state can serve as a 
foundation for knowledge. (From a(iv), 
b(iii), and c.) 
According to the coherentist critic, foundational-
ism is run through by this dilemma. Let us take a 
closer look. 2 
In the first place, what reason is there to think, 
in accordance with premise b(i), that only proposi-
tional attitudes can give support to their own kind? 
Consider practices - e.g., broad policies or cus-
toms. Could not some person or group be justified 
in a practice because of its consequences: that is, 
could not the consequences of a practice make it a 
good practice? But among the consequences of a 
practice may surely be found, for example, a more 
just distribution of goods and less suffering than 
there would be under its alternatives. And neither 
the more just distribution nor the lower degree of 
suffering is a propositional attitude. This provides 
an example in which propositional attitudes (the 
intentions that sustain the practice) are justified by 
consequences that are not propositional attitudes. 
That being so, is it not conceivable that the justifi-
cation of belief that matters for knowledge be anal-
ogous to the objective justification by consequences 
that we find in ethics? 
Is it not possible, for instance, that a belief that 
there is something red before one be justified in 
part because it has its origins in one's visual experi-
ence of red when one looks at an apple in daylight? 
If we accept such examples, they show us a source 
of justification that serves as such without 
incorporating a propositional attitude. 
As for premise a(iii), it is already under suspi-
cion from our earlier exploration of premise b(i). 
A mental state M can be nonpropositional and 
hence not a candidate for so much as truth, much 
less infallibility, while it serves, in spite of that, as 
a foundation of knowledge. Leaving that aside, let 
us suppose that the relevant mental state is indeed 
propositional. Must it then be infallible in order 
to serve as a foundation of justification and 
knowledge? That is so far from being obvious that 
it seems more likely false when compared with an 
analogue in ethics. With respect to beliefs, we may 
distinguish between their being true and their 
being justified. Analogously, with respect to 
actions, we may distinguish between their being 
optimal (best of all alternatives, all things consid-
ered) and their being (subjectively) justified. In 
practical deliberation on alternatives for action, is 
it inconceivable that the most eligible alternative 
not be objectively the best, all things considered? 
Can there not be another alternative - perhaps a 
llJost repugnant one worth little if any considera-
tion - that in point of fact would have a much 
better total set of consequences and would thus 
be better, all things considered? Take the physi-
cian attending to Frau Hitler at the birth of little 
Adolf. Is it not possible that if he had acted less 
morally, that would have proved better in the full-
ness of time? And if that is so in ethics, may not its 
likeness hold good in epistemology? Might there 
not be justified (reasonable, warranted) beliefs 
that are not even true, much less infallible? That 
seems to me not just a conceivable possibility, but 
indeed a familiar fact of everyday life, where 
observational beliefs too often prove illusory but 
no less reasonable for being false. 
If the foregoing is on the right track, then the 
antifoundationalist is far astray. What has led him 
there? 
As a diagnosis of the antifoundationalist 
argument before us, and more particularly of its 
second lemma, I would suggest that it rests on an 
Intellectualist Model of Justification. 
According to such a model, the justification of 
belief (and psychological states generally) is para-
sitical on certain logical relations among proposi-
tions. For example, my belief (i) that the streets 
are wet, is justified by my pair of beliefs (ii) that it 

THE RAFT AND THE PYRAMID 
149 
is raining, and (iii) that if it is raining, the streets 
are wet. Thus we have a structure such as this: 
B(Q) is justified by the fact that B(Q) IS 
grounded on (B(P), B(P~Q)). 
And according to an Intellectualist Model, this is 
parasitical on the fact that 
P and (P~Q) together logically imply Q. 
Concerning this attack on foundationalism I 
will argue (a) that it is useless to the coherentist, 
since if the antifoundationalist dilemma impales 
the foundationalist, a form of it can be turned 
against the coherentist to the same effect; (b) that 
the dilemma would be lethal not only to founda-
tionalism and coherentism but also to the very 
possibility of substantive epistemology; and (c) 
that a form of it would have the same effect on 
normative ethics. 
a. According to coherentism, what justifies a 
belief is its membership in a coherent and 
comprehensive set of beliefs. But whereas 
being grounded on B(P) and B(PcQ) is 
a property of a belief B(Q) that yields 
immediately the logical implication of Q 
and P and (PcQ) as the logical source of 
that property's justificatory power, the 
property of being a member of a coherent 
set is not one that immediately yields any 
such implication. 
It may be argued, nevertheless, (i) that 
the property of being a member of a 
coherent set would supervene in any 
actual instance on the property of being a 
member of a particular set a that is in fact 
coherent, and (ii) that this would enable 
us to preserve our Intellectualist Model, 
since (iii) the justification of the member 
belief B( Q) by its membership in a would 
then be parasitical on the logical relations 
among the beliefs in a which constitute 
the coherence of that set of beliefs, and 
(iv) the justification of B(Q) by the fact 
that it is part of a coherent set would then 
be indirectly parasitical on logical rela-
tions among propositions after all. 
But if such an indirect form of parasit-
ism is allowed, then the experience of pain 
may perhaps be said to justify belief in its 
existence parasitically on the fact that P 
logically implies P! The Intellectualist 
Model seems either so trivial as to be dull, 
or else sharp enough to cut equally against 
both foundationalism and coherentism. 
b. If (i) only propositional attitudes can jus-
tify such propositional attitudes as belief, 
and if (ii) to do so they must in turn be 
justified by yet other propositional atti-
tudes, it seems clear that (iii) there is no 
hope of constructing a complete episte-
mology, one which would give us, in theory, 
an account of what the justification of any 
justified belief would supervene on. For (i) 
and (ii) would rule out the possibility of a 
finite regress of justification. 
c. If only propositional attitudes can justify 
propositional attitudes, and if to do so 
they must in turn be justified by yet other 
propositional attitudes, it seems clear that 
there is no hope of constructing a com-
plete normative ethics, one which would 
give us, in theory, an account of what the 
justification of any possible justified 
action would supervene upon. For the 
justification of an action presumably 
depends on the intentions it embodies 
and the justification of these, and here we 
are already within the net of propositional 
attitudes from which, for the Intellectualist, 
there is no escape. 
It seems fair to conclude that our coherentist 
takes his antifoundationalist zeal too far. His anti-
foundationalist argument helps expose some val-
uable insights but falls short of its malicious 
intent. The foundationalist emerges showing 
no serious damage. Indeed, he now demands 
equal time for a positive brief in defense of his 
position. 
5 
The Regress Argument 
a. 
The regress argument in epistemology con-
cludes that we must countenance beliefs that 
are justified in the absence of justification by 
other beliefs. But it reaches that conclusion 
only by rejecting the possibility in principle of 
an infinite regress of justification. It thus opts 

150 
ERNEST SOSA 
for foundational beliefs justified in some non-
inferential way by ruling out a chain or pyra-
mid of justification that has justifiers, and 
justifiers of justifiers, and so on without end. 
One may well find this too short a route to 
foundationalism, however, and demand more 
compelling reasons for thus rejecting an infi-
nite regress as vicious. We shall find indeed 
that it is not easy to meet this demand. 
b. We have seen how even the most ordinary 
of everyday beliefs is the tip of an iceberg. 
A closer look below the surface reveals a com-
plex structure that ramifies with no end in 
sight. Take again my belief that driving will be 
dangerous tonight, at the tip of an iceberg, 
(I), as presented in Figure 13.2. The immedi-
ate cause of my belief that driving will be haz-
ardous tonight is the sound of raindrops on 
the windowpane. All but one or two members 
of the underlying iceberg are as far as they can 
be from my thoughts at the time. In what 
sense, then, do they form an iceberg whose tip 
breaks the calm surface of my consciousness? 
Here I will assume that the members of (I) 
are beliefs of the subject, even if unconscious 
or subconscious, that causally buttress and 
thus justify his prediction about the driving 
conditions. 
Can the iceberg extend without end? It 
may appear obvious that it cannot do so, and 
one may jump to the conclusion that any 
piece of knowledge must be ultimately 
founded on beliefs that are not (inferentially) 
justified or warranted by other beliefs. This is 
a doctrine of epistemic foundationalism. 
(I) 
Let us focus not so much on the giving of 
justification as on the having of it. Can there 
be a belief that is justified in part by other 
beliefs, some of which are in turn justified by 
yet other beliefs, and so on without end? Can 
there be an endless regress of justification? 
c. 
There are several familiar objections to such a 
regress: 
(i) 
Objection: "It is incompatible with human 
limitations. No human subject could 
harbor the required infinity of beliefs;' 
Reply: It is mere presumption to fathom 
with such assurance the depths of the 
mind, and especially its unconscious 
and dispositional depths. Besides, our 
object here is the nature of epistemic 
justification in itself and not only that of 
such justification as is accessible to 
humans. Our question is not whether 
humans could harbor an infinite iceberg 
of justification. Our question is rather 
whether any mind, no matter how deep, 
could do so. Or is it ruled out in princi-
ple by the very nature of justification? 
(ii) 
Objection: "An infinite regress is indeed 
ruled out in principle, for if justification 
were thus infinite how could it possibly 
end?" 
Reply: (i) If the end mentioned is tem-
poral, then why must there be such an 
end? In the first place, the subject may 
be eternal. Even if he is not eternal, 
moreover, why must belief acquisition 
and justification occur seriatim? What 
precludes an infinite body of beliefs 
Driving will be dangerous tonight. 
The road will be 
icy or snowy. 
It will rain or 
snow all night. 
/ 
It is raining hard 
already and the sky 
is overcast. 
Figure 13.2 
Driving on snow or 
ice is dangerous. 
The temperature will 
be below freezing. 
---------------
The forecast estimates 
It is near freezing already 
a 100 percent probability 
and the forecast 
of rain or snow all night. 
calls for a sharp drop 
in temperature. 

THE RAFT AND THE PYRAMID 
151 
acquired at a single stroke? Human limi-
tations may rule this out for humans, but 
we have yet to be shown that it is pre-
cluded in principle, by the very nature of 
justification. (ii) If the end mentioned is 
justificatory, on the other hand, then to 
ask how justification could possibly end 
is just to beg the question. 
(iii) 
Objection: "Let us make two assump-
tions: first, that S's belief of q justifies 
his belief of p only if it works together 
with a justified belief on his part that q 
provides good evidence for p; and, 
second, that if S is to be justified in 
believingp on the basis of his belief of q 
and is to be justified in believing q on 
the basis of his belief of r, then S must 
be justified in believing that r provides 
good evidence for p via q. These assump-
tions imply that an actual regress of 
justification requires belief in an infi-
nite proposition. Since no one (or at 
least no human) can believe an infinite 
proposition, no one (no human) can be 
a subject of such an actual regress.") 
Reply: Neither of the two assumptions is 
beyond question, but even granting them 
both, it may still be doubted that the con-
clusion follows. It is true that each finitely 
complex belief of form "r provides good 
evidence for p via q[ ... q,," will omit how 
some members of the full infinite regress 
are epistemically tied to belief of p. But 
that seems irrelevant given the fact that 
for each member r of the regress, such that 
r is tied epistemically to belief of p, there is 
a finite belief of the required sort ("r pro-
vides good evidence for p via q [ .. . qn") that 
ties the two together. Consequently there 
is no apparent reason to suppose - even 
granted the two assumptions - that an 
infinite regress will require a single belief 
in an infinite proposition, and not just an 
infinity of beliefs in increasingly complex 
finite propositions. 
(iv) 
Objection: "But if it is allowed that justifi-
cation extend infinitely, then it is 
too easy to justify any belief at all or 
too many beliefs altogether. Take, for 
instance, the belief that there are perfect 
numbers greater than 100. And suppose 
a mind powerful enough to believe every 
member of the following sequence: 
(01) 
There is at least one perfect 
number> 100 
There are at least two perfect 
numbers> 100 
There are at least three perfect 
numbers> 100 
If such a believer has no other belief 
about perfect numbers save the belief 
that a perfect number is a whole number 
equal to the sum of its whole factors, 
then surely he is not justified in believing 
that there are perfect numbers greater 
than 100. He is quite unjustified in 
believing any of the members of sequence 
(a1), in spite of the fact that a challenge 
to any can be met easily by appeal to its 
successor. Thus it cannot be allowed after 
all that justification extend infinitely, and 
an infinite regress is ruled out:' 
Reply: We must distinguish between 
regresses of justification that are actual 
and those that are merely potential. 
The difference is not simply that an 
actual regress is composed of actual 
beliefs. For even if all members of the 
regress are actual beliefs, the regress 
may still be merely potential in the fol-
lowing sense: while it is true that if any 
member were justified then its prede-
cessors would be, still none is in fact 
justified. Anyone with our series of 
beliefs about perfect numbers in the 
absence of any further relevant infor-
mation on such numbers would pre-
sumably be the subject of such a merely 
potential justificatory regress. 
(v) 
Objection: "But defenders of infinite 
justificatory regresses cannot distin-
guish thus between actual regresses 
and those that are merely potential. 
There is no real distinction to be drawn 
between the two. For if any regress 
ever justifies the belief at its head, then 
every regress must always do so. But 
obviously not every regress does so (as 
we have seen by examples), and hence 
no regress can do SO."4 

152 
ERNEST SO SA 
Reply: One can in fact distinguish between 
actual justificatory regresses and merely 
potential ones, and one can do so both 
abstractly and by examples. 
What an actual regress has that a 
merely potential regress lacks is the prop-
erty of containing only justified beliefs as 
members. What they both share is the 
property of containing no member with-
out successors that would jointly justify it. 
Recall our regress about perfect num-
bers greater than 100; i.e., there is at least 
one; there are at least two; there are at least 
three; and so on. Each member has a suc-
cessor that would justify it, but no member 
is justified (in the absence of further infor-
mation external to the regress). That is 
therefore a merely potential infinite 
regress. As for an actual regress, I see no 
compelling reason why someone (if not a 
human, then some more powerful mind) 
could not hold an infinite series of actually 
justified beliefs as follows: 
(0"2) 
There is at least one even number 
There are at least two even numbers 
There are at least three even 
numbers 
It may be that no one could be the subject 
of such a series of justified beliefs unless he 
had a proof that there is a denumerable 
infinity of even numbers. But even if that 
should be so, it would not take away the 
fact of the infinite regress of potential justi-
fiers, each of which is actually justified, and 
hence it would not take away the fact of the 
actual endless regress of justification. 
The objection under discussion is con-
fused, moreover, on the nature of the issue 
before us. Our question is not whether 
there can be an infinite potential regress, 
each member of which would be justified 
by its successors, such that the belief at its 
head is justified in virtue of its position 
there, at the head of such a regress. The 
existence and even the possibility of a 
single such regress with a belief at its head 
that was not justified in virtue of its posi-
tion there would of course settle that 
question in the negative. Our question is, 
rather, whether there can be an actual infi-
nite regress of justification, and the fact 
that a belief at the head of a potential 
regress might still fail to be justified despite 
its position does not settle this question. 
For even if there can be a merely potential 
regress with an unjustified belief at its 
head, that leaves open the possibility of an 
infinite regress, each member of which is 
justified by its immediate successors work-
ing jointly, where every member of the 
regress is in addition actually justified. 
6 
The Relation of Justification and 
Foundationalist Strategy 
The foregoing discussion is predicated on a simple 
conception of justification such that a set of 
beliefs f3 conditionally justifies (would justify) a 
belief X iff, necessarily, if all members of f3 are jus-
tified then X is also justified (if it exists). The fact 
that on such a conception of justification actual 
endless regresses - such as (0"2) - seem quite pos-
sible blocks a straightforward regress argument in 
favor of foundations. For it shows that an actual 
infinite regress cannot be dismissed out of hand. 
Perhaps the foundationalist could introduce 
some relation of justification - presumably more 
complex and yet to be explicated - with respect to 
which it could be argued more plausibly that an 
actual endless regress is out of the question. 
There is, however, a more straightforward 
strategy open to the foundationalist. For he need 
not object to the possibility of an endless regress 
of justification. His essential creed is the more 
positive belief that every justified belief must be 
at the head of a terminating regress. Fortunately, 
to affirm the universal necessity of a terminating 
regress is not to deny the bare possibility of a 
nonterminating regress. For a single belief can 
trail at once regresses of both sorts: one terminat-
ing and one not. Thus the proof of the denumer-
ably infinite cardinality of the set of evens may 
provide for a powerful enough intellect a termi-
nating regress for each member of the endless 
series of justified beliefs: 
(0"2) 
There is at least one even number 
There are at least two even numbers 
There are at least three even numbers 

THE RAFT AND THE PYRAMID 
153 
At the same time, it is obvious that each member 
of (0"2) lies at the head of an actual endless regress 
of justification, on the assumption that each 
member is conditionally justified by its successor, 
which is in turn actually justified. 
"Thank you so much;' the foundationalist 
may sneer, "but I really do not need that kind of 
help. Nor do I need to be reminded of my essen-
tial creed, which I know as well as anyone. Indeed 
my rejection of endless regresses of justification is 
only a means of supporting my view that every 
justified belief must rest ultimately on founda-
tions, on a terminating regress. You reject that 
strategy much too casually, in my view, but I will 
not object here. So we put that strategy aside. And 
now, my helpful friend, just what do we put in its 
place?" 
Fair enough. How then could one show the 
need for foundations if an endless regress is not 
ruled out? 
7 Two Levels of Foundationalism 
a. We need to distinguish, first, between two 
forms of foundational ism: one formal, the 
other substantive. A type of formal founda-
tionalism with respect to a normative or eval-
uative property ¢J is the view that the 
conditions (actual and possible) within which 
¢J would apply can be specified in general, 
perhaps recursively. Substantive foundational-
ism is only a particular way of doing so, and 
coherentism is another. 
Simpleminded hedonism is the view that: 
(i) 
every instance of pleasure is good, 
(ii) 
everything that causes something good 
is itself good, and 
(iii) 
everything that is good is so in virtue of 
(i) or (ii) above. 
Simpleminded hedonism is a type of formal 
foundationalism with respect to the good. 
Classical foundationalism in epistemology 
is the view that: 
(i) 
every infallible, indubitable belief is 
justified, 
(ii) 
every belief deductively inferred from 
justified beliefs is itself justified, and 
(iii) 
every belief that is justified IS so III 
virtue of (i) or (ii) above. 
Classical foundationalism is a type of formal 
foundationalism with respect to epistemic 
justification. 
Both of the foregoing theories - simple-
minded hedonism in ethics, and classical 
foundationalism in epistemology - are of 
course flawed. But they both remain exam-
ples of formal foundationalist theories. 
b. One way of arguing in favor of formal founda-
tionalism in epistemology is to formulate a 
convincing formal foundationalist theory of 
justification. But classical foundationalism in 
epistemology no longer has for many the 
attraction that it had for Descartes, nor has any 
other form of epistemic foundationalism won 
general acceptance. Indeed epistemic founda-
tionalism has been generally abandoned, and 
its advocates have been put on the defensive by 
the writings of Wittgenstein, Quine, Sellars, 
Rescher, Aune, Harman, Lehrer, and others. It 
is lamentable that in our headlong rush away 
from foundationalism we have lost sight of the 
different types of foundationalism (formal vs. 
substantive) and of the different grades of each 
type. Too many of us now see it as a blur to be 
decried and avoided. Thus our present attempt 
to bring it all into better focus. 
e. 
If we cannot argue from a generally accepted 
foundationalist theory, what reason is there 
to accept formal foundationalism? There is 
no reason to think that the conditions (actual 
and possible) within which an object is spher-
ical are generally specifiable in nongeometric 
terms. Why should we think that the condi-
tions (actual and possible) within which a 
belief is epistemically justified are generally 
specifiable in nonepistemic terms? 
So far as I can see, the main reason for 
accepting formal foundationalism in the 
absence of an actual, convincing formal 
foundationalist theory is the very plausible 
idea that epistemic justification is subject to 
the supervenience that characterizes norma-
tive and evaluative properties generally. 
Thus, if a car is a good car, then any physical 
replica of that car must be just as good. If it 
is a good car in virtue of such properties as 
being economical, little prone to break down, 

154 
ERNEST SOSA 
etc., then surely any exact replica would 
share all such properties and would thus be 
equally good. Similarly, if a belief is epistem-
ically justified, it is presumably so in virtue 
of its character and its basis in perception, 
memory, or inference (if any). Thus any 
belief exactly like it in its character and its 
basis must be equally well justified. Epistemic 
justification is supervenient. The justifica-
tion of a belief supervenes on such proper-
ties of it as its content and its basis (if any) in 
perception, memory, or inference. Such a 
doctrine of supervenience may itself be con-
sidered, with considerable justice, a grade of 
foundationalism. For it entails that every 
instance of justified belief is founded on a 
number of its nonepistemic properties, such 
as its having a certain basis in perception, 
memory, and inference, or the like. 
But there are higher grades of founda-
tionalism as well. There is, for instance, the 
doctrine that the conditions (actual and 
possible) within which a belief would be 
epistemically justified can be specified in 
general, perhaps recursively (and by refer-
ence to such notions as perception, memory, 
and inference). 
A higher grade yet of formal foundation-
alism requires not only that the conditions 
for justified belief be specifiable, in general, 
but that they be specifiable by a simple, com-
prehensive theory. 
d. Simpleminded hedonism is a formal founda-
tionalist theory of the highest grade. If it is 
true, then in every possible world goodness 
supervenes on pleasure and causation in a 
way that is recursively specifiable by means of 
a very simple theory. 
Classical foundationalism in epistemology 
is also a formal foundationalist theory of the 
highest grade. If it is true, then in every pos-
sible world epistemic justification supervenes 
on infallibility cum indubitability and deduc-
tive inference in a way that is recursively 
specifiable by means of a very simple theory. 
Surprisingly enough, coherentism may also 
turn out to be formal foundationalism of the 
highest grade, provided only that the concept of 
coherence is itself both simple enough and free 
of any normative or evaluative admixture. 
Given these provisos, coherentism explains 
how epistemic justification supervenes on the 
nonepistemic in a theory of remarkable sim-
plicity: a belief is justified if it has a place 
within a system of beliefs that is coherent and 
comprehensive. 
It is a goal of ethics to explain how the 
ethical rightness of an action supervenes on 
what is not ethically evaluative or normative. 
Similarly, it is a goal of epistemology to 
explain how the epistemic justification of a 
belief supervenes on what is not epistemically 
evaluative or normative. If coherentism aims 
at this goal, that imposes restrictions on the 
notion of coherence, which must now be con-
ceived innocent of epistemically evaluative or 
normative admixture. Its substance must 
therefore consist of such concepts as explana-
tion, probability, and logical implication -
with these conceived, in turn, innocent of 
normative or evaluative content. 
e. We have found a surprising kinship between 
coherentism and substantive foundational-
ism, both of which turn out to be varieties 
of a deeper foundationalism. This deeper 
foundationalism is applicable to any norma-
tive or evaluative property ¢, and it comes in 
three grades. The first or lowest is simply the 
supervenience of ¢: the idea that whenever 
something has ¢ its having it is founded on 
certain others of its properties which fall 
into certain restricted sorts. The second is 
the explicable supervenience of ¢: the idea 
that there are formulable principles that 
explain in quite general terms the condi-
tions (actual and possible) within which ¢ 
applies. The third and highest is the easily 
explicable supervenience of ¢: the idea that 
there is a simple theory that explains the 
conditions within which ¢ applies. We have 
found the coherentist and the substantive 
foundationalist sharing a primary goal: the 
development of a formal foundationalist 
theory of the highest grade. For they both 
want a simple theory that explains precisely 
how epistemic justification supervenes, in 
general, on the nonepistemic. This insight 
gives us an unusual viewpoint on some 
recent attacks against foundationalism. Let 
us now consider as an example a certain 
simple form of argument distilled from the 
recent antifoundationalist literature.5 

THE RAFT AND THE PYRAMID 
155 
8 Doxastic Ascent Arguments 
Several attacks on foundationalism turn on a sort 
of"doxastic ascent" argument that calls for closer 
scrutiny.6 Here are two examples: 
A. A belief B is foundationally justified for S 
in virtue of having property F only if S is 
justified in believing (1) that most at least 
of his beliefs with property F are true, and 
(2) that B has property F. But this means 
that belief B is not foundational after all, 
and indeed that the very notion of (empir-
ical) foundational belief is incoherent. 
It is sometimes held, for example, that 
perceptual or observational beliefs are 
often justified through their origin in the 
exercise of one or more of our five senses 
in standard conditions of perception. The 
advocate of doxastic ascent would raise a 
vigorous protest, however, for in his view 
the mere fact of such sensory prompting 
is impotent to justify the belief prompted. 
Such prompting must be coupled with the 
further belief that one's senses work well 
in the circumstances, or the like. For we 
are dealing here with knowledge, which 
requires not blind faith but reasoned trust. 
But now surely the further belief about 
the reliability of one's senses itself cannot 
rest on blind faith but requires its own 
backing of reasons, and we are off on the 
regress. 
B. A belief B of proposition P is foundation-
ally justified for S only if S is justified in 
believing that there are no factors present 
that would cause him to make mistakes 
on the matter of the proposition P. But, 
again, this means that belief B is not foun-
dational after all and indeed that the 
notion of (empirical) foundational belief 
is incoherent. 
From the vantage point of formal foundation-
alism, neither of these arguments seems persua-
sive. In the first place, as we have seen, what makes 
a belief foundational (formally) is its having a 
property that is nonepistemic (not evaluative in 
the epistemic or cognitive mode), and does not 
involve inference from other beliefs, but guaran-
tees, via a necessary principle, that the belief in 
question is justified. A belief B is made founda-
tional by having some such nonepistemic prop-
erty that yields its justification. Take my belief 
that I am in pain in a context where it is caused by 
my being in pain. The property that my belief 
then has, of being a self-attribution of pain caused 
by one's own pain is, let us suppose, a nonepis-
temic property that yields the justification of any 
belief that has it. So my belief that I am in pain is 
in that context foundationally justified. Along 
with my belief that I am in pain, however, there 
come other beliefs that are equally well justified, 
such as my belief that someone is in pain. Thus I 
am foundationally justified in believing that I am 
in pain only if I am justified in believing that 
someone is in pain. Those who object to founda-
tionalism as in A or B above are hence mistaken 
in thinking that their premises would refute foun-
dationalism. The fact is that they would not touch 
it. For a belief is no less foundationally justified 
for having its justification yoked to that of another 
closely related belief. 
The advocate of arguments like A and B must 
apparently strengthen his premises. He must appar-
ently claim that the beliefs whose justification is 
entailed by the foundationally justified status of 
belief B must in some sense function as a neces-
sary source of the justification of B. And this would 
of course preclude giving B foundationally justi-
fied status. For if the being justified of those beliefs 
is an essential part of the source of the justification 
of B, then it is ruled out that there be a wholly 
non-epistemic source ofB's justification. 
That brings us to a second point about A and 
B, for it should now be clear that these cannot be 
selectively aimed at foundationalism. In particu-
lar, they seem neither more nor less valid objec-
tions to coherentism than to foundationalism, or 
so I will now argue about each of them in turn. 
A'. A belief X is justified for S in virtue of 
membership in a coherent set only if S is 
justified in believing (1) that most at 
least of his beliefs with the property of 
thus cohering are true, and (2) that X has 
that property. 
Any coherentist who accepts A seems bound to 
accept A'. For what could he possibly appeal to as 
a relevant difference? But A' is a quicksand of end-
less depth. (How is he justified in believing A' (1)? 

156 
ERNEST SO SA 
Partly through justified belief that it coheres? And 
what would justify this? And so on ... ) 
B'. 
A belief X is justified for S only if S is jus-
tified in believing that there are no fac-
tors present that would cause him to 
make mistakes on the subject matter of 
that belief. 
Again, any coherentist who accepts B seems bound 
to accept B'. But this is just another road to the 
quicksand. (For S is justified in believing that 
there are no such factors only if. .. and so on.) 
Why are such regresses vicious? The key is 
again, to my mind, the doctrine of supervenience. 
Such regresses are vicious because they would be 
logically incompatible with the supervenience of 
epistemic justification on such nonepistemic facts 
as the totality of a subject's beliefs, his cognitive 
and experiential history, and as many other non-
epistemic facts as may seem at all relevant. The 
idea is that there is a set of such nonepistemic 
facts surrounding a justified belief such that no 
belief could possibly have been surrounded by 
those very facts without being justified. Advocates 
of A or B run afoul of such supervenience, since 
they are surely committed to the more general 
views derivable from either A or B by deleting 
"foundationally" from its first sentence. In each 
case the more general view would then preclude 
the possibility of supervenience, since it would 
entail that the source of justification always 
includes an epistemic component. 
9 
Coherentism and Substantive 
Foundationalism 
a. The notions of coherentism and substantive 
foundationalism remain unexplicated. We 
have relied so far on our intuitive grasp of 
them. In this section we shall consider rea-
sons for the view that substantive founda-
tionalism is superior to coherentism. To 
assess these reasons, we need some more 
explicit account of the difference between 
the two. 
By coherentism we shall mean any view 
according to which the ultimate sources of 
justification for any belief lie in relations 
among that belief and other beliefs of the 
subject: explanatory relations, perhaps, or 
relations of probability or logic. 
According to substantive foundational ism, 
as it is to be understood here, there are ulti-
mate sources of justification other than rela-
tions among beliefs. Traditionally these 
additional sources have pertained to the spe-
cial content of the belief or its special relations 
to the subjective experience of the believer. 
b. The view that justification is a matter of rela-
tions among beliefs is open to an objection 
from alternative coherent systems or detach-
ment from reality, depending on one's per-
spective. From the latter perspective the body 
of beliefs is held constant and the surround-
ing world is allowed to vary, whereas from the 
former perspective it is the surrounding world 
that is held constant while the body of beliefs 
is allowed to vary. In either case, according to 
the coherentist, there could be no effect on 
the justification for any belief. 
Let us sharpen the question before us as fol-
lows. Is there reason to think that there is at least 
one system B', alternative to our actual system of 
beliefs B, such that B' contains a belief X with the 
following properties: 
(i) 
in our present nonbelief circumstances we 
would not be justified in having belief X even 
if we accepted along with that belief (as our 
total system of beliefs ) the entire belief system 
B' in which it is embedded (no matter how 
acceptance of B' were brought about); and 
(ii) 
that is so despite the fact that belief X coheres 
within B' at least as fully as does some actual 
justified belief of ours within our actual 
belief system B (where the justification of 
that actual justified belief is alleged by the 
coherentist to derive solely from its coher-
ence within our actual body of beliefs B). 
The coherentist is vulnerable to counterexam-
ples of this sort right at the surface of his body of 
beliefs, where we find beliefs with minimal coher-
ence, whose detachment and replacement with 
contrary beliefs would have little effect on the 
coherence of the body. Thus take my belief that I 
have a headache when I do have a splitting head-
ache, and let us suppose that this does cohere 
within my present body of beliefs. (Thus I have 

THE RAFT AND THE PYRAMID 
157 
no reason to doubt my present introspective 
beliefs, and so on. And if my belief does not 
cohere, so much the worse for coherentism, since 
my belief is surely justified.) Here then we have a 
perfectly justified or warranted belief. And yet 
such a belief may well have relevant relations of 
explanation, logic, or probability with at most a 
small set of other beliefs of mine at the time: say, 
that I am not free of headache, that I am in pain, 
that someone is in pain, and the like. If so, then an 
equally coherent alternative is not far to seek. Let 
everything remain constant, including the split-
ting headache, except for the following: replace 
the belief that I have a headache with the belief 
that I do not have a headache, the belief that I am 
in pain with the belief that I am not in pain, the 
belief that someone is in pain with the belief that 
someone is not in pain, and so on. I contend that 
my resulting hypothetical system of beliefs would 
cohere as fully as does my actual system of beliefs, 
and yet my hypothetical belief that I do not have a 
headache would not therefore be justified. What 
makes this difference concerning justification 
between my actual belief that I have a headache 
and the hypothetical belief that I am free of head-
ache, each as coherent as the other within its own 
system, if not the actual splitting headache? But 
the headache is not itself a belief nor a relation 
among beliefs and is thus in no way constitutive 
of the internal coherence of my body of beliefs. 
Some might be tempted to respond by alleging 
that one's belief about whether or not one has a 
headache is always infallible. But since we could 
devise similar examples for the various sensory 
modalities and propositional attitudes, the response 
given for the case of headache would have to be 
generalized. In effect, it would have to cover 
"perip heral" beliefs generally - beliefs at the periph-
ery of one's body of beliefs, minimally coherent 
with the rest. These peripheral beliefs would all be 
said to be infallible. That is, again, a possible 
response, but it leads to a capitulation by the coher-
entist to the radical foundationalist on a crucial 
issue that has traditionally divided them: the infal-
libility of beliefs about one's own subjective states. 
What is more, not all peripheral beliefs are 
about one's own subjective states. The direct real-
ist is probably right that some beliefs about our 
surroundings are uninferred and yet justified. 
Consider my present belief that the table before 
me is oblong. This presumably coheres with such 
other beliefs of mine as that the table has the same 
shape as the piece of paper before me, which is 
oblong, and a different shape than the window 
frame here, which is square, and so on. So far as I 
can see, however, there is no insurmountable 
obstacle to replacing that whole set of coherent 
beliefs with an equally coherent set as follows: 
that the table before me is square, that the table 
has the same shape as the square window frame, 
and a different shape than the piece of paper, 
which is oblong, and so on. The important points 
are (a) that this replacement may be made with-
out changing the rest of one's body of beliefs or 
any aspect of the world beyond, including one's 
present visual experience of something oblong, 
not square, as one looks at the table before one; 
and (b) that it is so, in part, because of the fact (c) 
that the subject need not have any beliefs about 
his present sensory experience. 
Some might be tempted to respond by alleging 
that one's present experience is self-intimating, 
i.e., always necessarily taken note of and reflected 
in one's beliefs. Thus if anyone has visual experi-
ence of something oblong, then he believes that 
he has such experience. But this would involve a 
further important concession by the coherentist 
to the radical foundationalist, who would have 
been granted two of his most cherished doctrines: 
the infallibility of introspective belief and the 
self-intimation of experience. 
10 
The Foundationalist's Dilemma 
The antifoundationalist zeal of recent years has 
left several forms of foundationalism standing. 
These all share the conviction that a belief can be 
justified not only by its coherence within a com-
prehensive system but also by an appropriate 
combination of observational content and origin 
in the use of the senses in standard conditions. 
What follows presents a dilemma for any founda-
tionalism based on any such idea. 
a. We may surely suppose that beings with 
observational 
mechanisms 
radically 
unlike ours might also have knowledge of 
their environment. (That seems possible 
even if the radical difference in observa-
tional mechanisms precludes overlap in 
substantive concepts and beliefs.) 

158 
ERNEST SOSA 
Table 13.1 
Human 
Visual experience 
Experience of 
something red 
Belief that there is 
something red 
before one 
Extraterrestrial being 
¢ experience 
Experience of something F 
Belief that there is 
something F before one 
b. Let us suppose that there is such a being, 
for whom experience of type cfJ (of which 
we have no notion) has a role with respect 
to his beliefs of type cfJ analogous to the 
role that our visual experience has with 
respect to our visual beliefs. Thus we might 
have a schema such as that in Table 13.l. 
c. It is often recognized that our visual expe-
rience intervenes in two ways with respect 
to our visual beliefs: as cause and as justi-
fication. But these are not wholly inde-
pendent. Presumably, the justification of 
the belief that something here is red 
derives at least in part from the fact that 
it originates in a visual experience of 
something red that takes place in normal 
circumstances. 
d. Analogously, the extraterrestrial belief 
that something here has the property of 
being F might be justified partly by the 
fact that it originates in a cfJ experience of 
something F that takes place in normal 
circumstances. 
e. A simple question presents the founda-
tionalist's dilemma: regarding the epis-
temic 
principle 
that 
underlies 
our 
justification for believing that something 
here is red on the basis of our visual expe-
rience of something red, is it proposed as 
a fundamental principle or as a derived 
generalization? Let us compare the famous 
Principle of Utility of value theory, accord-
ing to which it is best for that to happen 
which, of all the possible alternatives in the 
circumstances, would bring with it into 
the world the greatest balance of pleasure 
over pain, joy over sorrow, happiness over 
unhappiness, content over discontent, or 
the like. Upon this fundamental principle 
one may then base various generaliza-
tions, rules of thumb, and maxims of 
public health, nutrition, legislation, eti-
quette, hygiene, and so on. But these are 
all then derived generalizations which rest 
for their validity on the fundamental prin-
ciple. Similarly, one may also ask, with 
respect to the generalizations advanced by 
our foundationalist, whether these are 
proposed as fundamental principles or as 
derived maxims or the like. This sets him 
face to face with a dilemma, each of whose 
alternatives is problematic. If his propos-
als are meant to have the status of second-
ary or derived maxims, for instance, then 
it would be quite unphilosophical to stop 
there. Let us turn, therefore, to the other 
alternative. 
f. 
On reflection it seems rather unlikely that 
epistemic principles for the justification 
of observational beliefs by their origin in 
sensory experience could have a status 
more fundamental than that of derived 
generalizations. For by granting such 
principles fundamental status we would 
open the door to a multitude of equally 
basic principles with no unifying factor. 
There would be some for vision, some for 
hearing, etc., without even mentioning the 
corresponding extraterrestrial principles. 
g. It may appear that there is after all an idea, 
however, that unifies our multitude of 
principles. For they all involve sensory 
experience and sensible characteristics. 
But what is a sensible characteristic? 
Aristotle's answer appeals to examples: 
colors, shapes, sounds, and so on. Such a 
notion might enable us to unify percep-
tual epistemic principles under some 
more fundamental principle such as the 
following. 
If a is a sensible characteristic, then the belief 
that there is something with a before one is 
(prima facie) justified if it is based on a visual 
experience of something with a in condi-
tions that are normal with respect to a. 
h. There are at least two difficulties with such 
a suggestion, however, and neither one 

THE RAFT AND THE PYRAMID 
159 
can be brushed aside easily. First, it is not 
clear that we can have a viable notion of 
sensible characteristics on the basis of 
examples so diverse as colors, shapes, tones, 
odors, and so on. Second, the authority of 
such a principle apparently derives from 
contingent circumstances concerning the 
reliability of beliefs prompted by sensory 
experiences of certain sorts. According to 
the foundationalist, our visual beliefs are 
justified by their origin in our visual expe-
rience or the like. Would such beliefs be 
equally well justified in a world where 
beliefs with such an origin were nearly 
always false? 
I. 
In addition, finally, even if we had a viable 
notion of such characteristics, it is not 
obvious that fundamental knowledge of 
reality would have to derive causally or 
otherwise from sensory experience of 
such characteristics. How could one 
impose reasonable limits on extraterres-
trial mechanisms for noninferential acqui-
sition of beliefs? Is it not possible that 
such mechanisms need not always func-
tion through sensory experience of any 
sort? Would such beings necessarily be 
denied any knowledge of the surround-
ings and indeed of any contingent spatio-
temporal fact? Let us suppose them to 
possess a complex system of true beliefs 
concerning their surroundings, the struc-
tures below the surface of things, exact 
details of history and geography, all 
constituted by concepts none of which 
corresponds to any of our sensible charac-
teristics. What then? Is it not possible that 
their basic beliefs should all concern fields 
of force, waves, mathematical structures, 
and numerical assignments to variables in 
several dimensions? This is no doubt an 
exotic notion, but even so it still seems 
conceivable. And if it is in fact possible, 
what then shall we say of the noninferen-
tial beliefs of such beings? Would we have 
to concede the existence of special epis-
temic principles that can validate their 
noninferential beliefs? Would it not be 
preferable to formulate more abstract 
principles that can cover both human and 
extraterrestrial foundations? If such more 
abstract principles are in fact accessible, 
then the less general principles that define 
the human foundations and those that 
define the extraterrestrial foundations are 
both derived principles whose validity 
depends on that of the more abstract 
principles. In this the human and extra-
terrestrial epistemic principles would 
resemble rules of good nutrition for an 
infant and an adult. The infant's rules 
would of course be quite unlike those 
valid for the adult. But both would still be 
based on a more fundamental principle 
that postulates the ends of well-being and 
good health. What more fundamental 
principles might support both human 
and extraterrestrial knowledge in the way 
that those concerning good health and 
well-being support rules of nutrition for 
both the infant and adult? 
11 
Reliabilism: An Ethics of Moral 
Virtues and an Epistemology of 
Intellectual Virtues 
In what sense is the doctor attending Frau Hitler 
justified in performing an action that brings with it 
far less value than one of its accessible alternatives? 
According to one promising idea, the key is to be 
found in the rules that he embodies through stable 
dispositions. His action is the result of certain stable 
virtues, and there are no equally virtuous alterna-
tive dispositions that, given his cognitive limitations, 
he might have embodied with equal or better total 
consequences, and that would have led him to 
infanticide in the circumstances. The important 
move for our purpose is the stratification of justifi-
cation. Primary justification attaches to virtues and 
other dispositions, to stable dispositions to act, 
through their greater contribution of value when 
compared with alternatives. Secondary justification 
attaches to particular acts in virtue of their source 
in virtues or other such justified dispositions. 
The same strategy may also prove fruitful in 
epistemology. Here primary justification would 
apply to intellectual virtues, to stable dispositions 
for belief acquisition, through their greater con-
tribution toward getting us to the truth. Secondary 

160 
ERNEST SO SA 
justification would then attach to particular 
beliefs in virtue of their source in intellectual 
virtues or other such justified dispositions.? 
That raises parallel questions for ethics and 
epistemology. We need to consider more carefully 
the concept of a virtue and the distinction 
between moral and intellectual virtues. In episte-
mology, there is reason to think that the most 
useful and illuminating notion of intellectual 
virtue will prove broader than our tradition 
would suggest and must give due weight not only 
to the subject and his intrinsic nature but also to 
his environment and to his epistemic community. 
This is a large topic, however, to which I hope 
some of us will turn with more space, and insight, 
than I can now command. 
Summary 
1. Two assumptions: (AI) that for a belief to con-
stitute knowledge it must be (a) true and (b) 
justified; and (A2) that the justification rele-
vant to whether or not one knows is a sort of 
epistemic or theoretical justification to be dis-
tinguished from its practical counterpart. 
2. Knowledge and criteria. Particularism is dis-
tinguished from methodism: the first gives 
priority to particular examples of knowledge 
over general methods or criteria, whereas the 
second reverses that order. The methodism of 
Descartes leads him to an elaborate dogma-
tism whereas that of Hume leads him to a 
very simple skepticism. The particularist is, of 
course, antiskeptical on principle. 
3. Two metaphors: the raft and the pyramid. For 
the foundationalist every piece of knowledge 
stands at the apex of a pyramid that rests on 
stable and secure foundations whose stability 
and security do not derive from the upper 
stories or sections. For the coherentist a body 
of knowledge is a free-floating raft every plank 
of which helps directly or indirectly to keep 
all the others in place, and no plank of which 
would retain its status with no help from the 
others. 
4. A coherentist critique of foundationalism. No 
mental state can provide a foundation for 
empirical knowledge. For if such a state is 
propositional, then it is fallible and hence no 
secure foundation. But if it is not propositional, 
then how can it possibly serve as a founda-
tion for belief? How can one infer or justify 
anything on the basis of a state that, having 
no propositional content, must be logically 
dumb? An analogy with ethics suggests a 
reason to reject this dilemma. Other reasons 
are also advanced and discussed. 
5. 
The regress argument. In defending his 
position, the foundationalist often attempts 
to rule out the very possibility of an infi-
nite regress of justification (which leads 
him to the necessity for a foundation). 
Some of his arguments to that end are 
examined. 
6. 
The relation of justification and foundation-
alist strategy. An alternative foundationalist 
strategy is exposed, one that does not require 
ruling out the possibility of an infinite 
regress of justification. 
7. 
Two levels of foundationalism. Substantive 
foundationalism is distinguished from 
formal foundationalism, three grades of 
which are exposed: first, the superveni-
ence of epistemic justification; second, its 
explicable supervenience; and, third, its 
supervenience explicable by means of a 
simple theory. There turns out to be a sur-
prising kinship between coherentism and 
substantive foundationalism, both of 
which aim at a formal foundationalism of 
the highest grade, at a theory of the great-
est simplicity that explains how epistemic 
justification supervenes on nonepistemic 
factors. 
8. 
Doxastic ascent arguments. The distinction 
between formal and substantive founda-
tionalism provides an unusual viewpoint on 
some recent attacks against foundational-
ism. We consider doxastic ascent arguments 
as an example. 
9. 
Coherentism and substantive foundational-
ism. It is argued that substantive founda-
tionalism is superior, since coherentism is 
unable to account adequately for the epis-
temic status of beliefs at the "periphery" of a 
body of beliefs. 
10. 
The foundationalist's dilemma. All founda-
tionalism based on sense experience is sub-
ject to a fatal dilemma. 
11. 
Reliabilism. An alternative to foundational-
ism of sense experience is sketched. 

THE RAFT AND THE PYRAMID 
161 
Appendix8 
What one is rationally justified in believing obvi-
ously depends on the data in one's possession. 
But what data one has can depend on how much 
and how well one investigates. Consider, there-
fore, the following possibility. What if A is 
rationally justified in believing x given his body 
of data D j whereas B is not rationally justified in 
believing x given his body of data Dz, where Dz 
includes D j but is much more extensive as a 
result of Xs irresponsible negligence and B's com-
mendable thoroughness? The present account 
might unfortunately grant A knowledge while 
denying it to B, for Xs neglect so far has no bearing 
on any epistemic pyramid. 
We have considered a situation where some-
one lacks knowledge owing to his misuse of his 
cognitive equipment, either by letting it idle 
when it should be functioning or by busily 
employing it dysfunctionally. Another situation 
where someone lacks knowledge despite having 
rationally justified correct belief might be called 
the Magoo situation - where S lacks adequate 
equipment to begin with (relative to the ques-
tion in hand: whether p ).9 It is because of this 
type of lack that despite his extensive experi-
ence with cable cars, Mr Magoo does not know 
that his cable car will arrive safely when, 
unknown to him, bombs are raining all around 
it. Of course, even if you have less than 20-20 
vision you can still know that there is an ele-
phant in front of you when you see one there. 
So not just any defect will make your equip-
ment inadequate for a judgment on the ques-
tion whether p. I would venture that it must be 
a defect that prevents you from acquiring infor-
mation that (i) a normal inquirer in the epis-
temic community would acquire in that 
situation and (ii) makes a difference to what 
you can reasonably conclude on the question 
whether p (or at least to how reasonably you 
can draw the conclusion). 
The possibility of inadequate cognitive equip-
ment requires a further and more striking depar-
ture from 
the traditional conception of 
knowledge. Despite having warranted correct 
belief, someone may lack knowledge owing to 
his neglectful data-collection. There lack of 
knowledge could be traced back to epistemic 
irresponsibility, to substandard performance 
blamed on the investigator. In the present exam-
ple, blame is out of place. By hypothesis, Magoo 
conducts impeccable "inquiry" both in arriving 
at his data and on the basis of his data. But he 
still falls short of knowledge, despite his war-
ranted, correct belief. His shortcoming is sub-
standard equipment, for which we may suppose 
him to be blameless. Hence something other 
than epistemic justification or correct belief can 
help determine what one knows or does not 
know. Even if one correctly believes that p with 
full rational justification and free of irrational 
or neglectful unbelief, one may still be in no 
position to know, because of faulty cognitive 
equipment. 
In all of the foregoing cases, someone misses 
or is liable to miss available information which 
may be highly relevant and important and may 
make a difference to what he can conclude on the 
question in hand. In each case, moreover, he 
seems culpable or discredited in some sense: 
he would seem less reliable than otherwise for his 
role in any such case. But there appear to be situ-
ations where again someone misses available 
information with no culpability or discredit. 
Harman gives an example where S reads in a 
newspaper that some famous person has been 
assassinated, but does not read the next edition, 
where all reports of the assassination are denied 
by highly authoritative and trustworthy people. 
If practically the whole country reads the next 
edition and people don't know what to believe, 
does S alone know of the assassination, provided 
the next edition is in fact a pack of lies?!O I sup-
pose we would be inclined to say that he does not 
know (especially if had he read the next edition, 
he would not have known what to believe). But 
what if only two or three people get a chance to 
read the next edition before it is recalled by the 
newspaper? Should we now say that out of mil-
lions who read the first story and mourn the 
loved leader not one knows of his death? I sup-
pose we would be inclined to say that the fake 
edition and the few deceived by it make no differ-
ence concerning what everybody else knows. It 
seems plausible to conclude that knowledge has a 
further "social aspect," that it cannot depend on 
one's missing or blinking what is generally 
known. 
Our departures from the traditional concep-
tion of knowledge put in relief the relativity of 

162 
ERNEST SOSA 
knowledge to an epistemic community. This is 
brought out most prominently by the require-
ment that inquirers have at least normal cognitive 
equipment (e.g., normal perceptual apparatus, 
where that is relevant). But our new require-
ment - that inquirers not lack or blink generally 
known relevant information - also brings out the 
relativity. A vacationer in the woods may know 
that p well enough for an average vacationer, but 
he won't have the kind of knowledge his guide 
has. A guide would scornfully deny that the ten-
derfoot really knows that p. Relative to the epis-
temic community of guides (for that area) the 
tenderfoot lacks relevant generally known infor-
mation, and misses relevant data that the average 
guide would grasp in the circumstances. 
These departures from the traditional account 
may make better sense if we reflect that the hon-
orific term "knowledgeable" is to be applied only 
to those who are reliable sources of information, 
surely an important category for a language-
using, social species. 
We have now taken note of two types of situa-
tion where correct, fully warranted belief falls 
short of knowledge owing to no neglect or faulty 
reasoning or false belief. Despite commendable 
thoroughness 
and 
impeccable 
reasoning 
unspoiled by falsehood, one may still fail to be "in 
a position to know," owing either to faulty cogni-
tive equipment or to missed generally known 
information. I am not suggesting that these are 
the only ways to be out of position to know. I have 
no complete list of epistemic principles describ-
ing ways of arriving at a position to know or of 
being blocked from such a position. My sugges-
tion is only that there are such principles, and 
that in any case we must go beyond the traditional 
emphasis by epistemologists on warrant and rea-
soning as determinants of knowledge. Despite the 
importance of warranted correct belief in deter-
mining what we know, the Gettier examples show 
that it is not alone enough to guarantee knowl-
edge. What is more, warranted correct belief sup-
ported by reasoning unspoiled by falsehood seems 
immune to Gettier examples, but it still falls short 
of knowledge, as we have seen. 
My conclusion is that to understand knowl-
edge we must enrich our traditional repertoire of 
epistemic concepts with the notion of being in a 
position to know (from the point of view of a K, e.g., 
a human being). Thus a proposition is evident 
(from the point of view of a K) to a subject only if 
both he is rationally justified in believing it and he 
is in a position to know (from the K point of 
view) whether it is true. It may be (and not just 
appear) evident to Magoo from his point of view 
that he will reach the other side safely, but it seems 
wrong to say of Magoo as he steps into the cable 
car with bombs raining all around that it is quite 
evident to him that he will arrive safely. It seems 
wrong for whom to say this? For one of us, natu-
rally; that is, for a normal human from his point 
of view. And since a normal human could not 
help seeing and hearing the bombs, from the 
human point of view Magoo is not in a position 
to know that he will arrive safely, inasmuch as he 
is missing relevant information that a normal 
human would gather in the circumstances. Hence 
Magoo does not have human knowledge that he 
will arrive safely, for it is not evident to him from 
the human point of view that he will so arrive. 
Consider this account: 
(A) S knows that p iff 
(a) 
it is true thatp; 
(b) 
S believes that p; and 
(c) 
there is a non-defective epistemic pyra-
mid for S and the proposition that p. 
Every node of such a pyramid must be true and 
evident. And for every node n that has successors, 
the successors must serve as grounds that give the 
subject S rational warrant for believing n. What 
now seems too narrow about this account emerges 
with the explanation of what a pyramid of know 1-
edge is, and of what the evident is. For in this 
explanation what is evident to S is identified with 
what S is rationally justified in believing. But it 
now seems plain that for x to be evident to S, two 
conditions must be satisfied: (i) that S be ration-
ally justified in believing x, and (ii) that S be in a 
position to know whether x is true. And we must 
also take note of the relativity of knowledge to an 
epistemic community. Let us therefore replace 
(A) with the following: 
(B) S knows (from the Kpoint of view) thatp iff 
(a) 
it is true thatp; 
(b) 
S believes that p; and 
(c) 
there is a non-defective epistemic pyra-
mid (from the K point of view) for S 
and the proposition that p. 

THE RAFT AND THE PYRAMID 
163 
Every node of such a pyramid must now be true 
and evident from the K point of view. 
Normally 
when 
epistemologists 
discuss 
knowledge (of the colors and shapes of surround-
ing objects, of one's own or one's neighbor's 
mental states, and so on), they plainly do so from 
the human point of view. But other points of view 
are possible even in ordinary conversation. The 
expert/layman distinction is replicable in many 
different contexts, and with each replication we 
have a new epistemically relevant distinction in 
points of view, with expert knowledge on one side 
and layman knowledge on the other. 
Neither Magoo nor the newspaper reader who 
alone has not seen the new edition is in a position 
to know (from the human point of view) about 
the relevant subject matter. Thus we can under-
stand their ignorance and, by parity of reasoning, 
the ignorance of all those who are out of position 
to know that p because they lack either adequate 
cognitive equipment or relevant information 
that is generally known to those who have taken 
an epistemic stand on the question whether p 
(where to suspend judgment is to take an epis-
temic stand, whereas to be totally oblivious to the 
matter is not). 
What it is for S's belief that p to be fully grounded 
has been explained by means of our epistemic pyra-
mids. That answer points in the right direction, but 
it can be made more precise: e.g., by clarifying the 
grounding relation. Moreover, we have found that a 
fully grounded correct belief is not necessarily 
knowledge, and this for at least two reasons: (i) it 
may rest directly or indirectly on some false ground, 
and (ii) the believer may not be in a position to 
know. 
We have tried to allow for these possibilities by 
broadening epistemic pyramids, by making room 
for our new epistemic notion ofbeing-in-a-posi-
tion-to-know, and by noting that to support 
knowledge epistemic pyramids must be non-
defective, i.e., must contain no false nodes. But 
pyramids are objectionable for other reasons as 
well: (i) they may mislead by suggesting that ter-
minal nodes provide a "foundation" in one or 
another undesirable sense, or by suggesting that 
terminal nodes must come first in time, so that 
one may later build on them; (ii) more seriously, 
there is an unacceptable vagueness in the very 
idea of such a pyramid, which derives mainly 
from the vagueness of the "grounding" relation in 
terms of which pyramids were defined. What fol-
lows is an attempt to solve these problems by 
switching pyramids upside down into trees. 
Let us emphasize, however, that this will not 
commit one to a picture of knowledge according 
to which there is a bedrock of self-evident propo-
sitions. It is perfectly consistent with the present 
theory that part of what makes any proposition 
evident is its coherence with a network of mutu-
ally supporting propositions. Since there is bound 
to be a multitude of such coherent networks, how-
ever, a non-arbitrary narrowing of the field must 
be supported by something other than coherence. 
We turn finally to an account (C) according to 
which S knows that p provided that both (a) S cor-
rectly believes that p,l1 and (b) there is a set of 
propositions that fully and non -defectively renders 
it evident to S that p (where a set "non-defectively 
renders it evident to S that p" if and only if it does 
so without attributing to S any false belief). 12 
Supposing this account correct, every bit of 
knowledge has a tree like that shown in Figure 13.3. 
Note that each node of such a tree is a proposi-
tion. Thus the "root" node is the-proposition-
that-PI' and the first terminal node (from the left) 
the- proposition-that-Pll1. 13 
There is an important difference between these 
trees and our earlier pyramids. Except for terminal 
nodes, every node of a tree is an epistemic proposi-
tion, whereas not a single node of a pyramid need 
be epistemic at all. Pyramids display propositions 
that are evident to A (not propositions that such 
and such other propositions are evident to S), and 
they also show which propositions ground (for S) 
any proposition for which S has grounds. Trees 
display true epistemic propositions concerning S 
and they also show what "makes these proposi-
tions true" via epistemic principles. A tree must do 
this for every epistemic proposition that consti-
tutes one of its nodes. That is to say, trees contain 
no epistemic terminal nodes. It is in this sense that 
trees provide complete epistemic explanations of 
the truth of their root nodes. 
RIII 
P111 
P112 
P121 
RII 
Pll 
RI 
PI 
Figure 13.3 

164 
ERNEST SOSA 
Notes 
But Descartes's methodism was at most par-
tial. James Van Cleve has supplied the mate-
rials for a convincing argument that the way 
out of the Cartesian circle is through a par-
ticularism of basic knowledge. See James 
Van Cleve, "Foundationalism, Epistemic 
Principles, and the Cartesian Circle:' The 
Philosophical Review 88 (1979), pp. 55-91 and 
E. Sosa and J. Kim (eds), Epistemology: An 
Anthology (Malden, MA; Oxford: Blackwell, 
2000), pp. 242-60. But this is, of course, com-
patible with methodism on inferred knowl-
edge. Whether Descartes subscribed to such 
methodism is hard (perhaps impossible) to 
determine, since in the end he makes room 
for all the kinds of knowledge required by 
particularism. But his language when he 
introduces the method of hyperbolic doubt, 
and the order in which he proceeds, suggest 
that he did subscribe to such methodism. 
2 Cf. Laurence BonJour, "The Coherence Theory 
of Empirical Knowledge:' Philosophical Studies 
30, pp. 281-312, and, especially, Michael 
Williams, Groundless Belief (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1977); and Bonjour, "Can Empirical Knowledge 
Have a Foundation?," this vol., ch. lO. 
3 Cf. Richard Foley, "Inferential Justification 
and 
the 
Infinite 
Regress:' 
American 
Philosophical Quarterly 15 (1978), pp. 311-16. 
4 Cf. 
John 
Post, "Infinite 
Regresses 
of 
Justification and of Explanation," Philosophical 
Studies 34 (1980). 
5 The argument of this whole section is devel-
oped in greater detail in my paper "The 
Foundations of Foundationalism:' Nous 14, 
pp. 547--65. 
6 For some examples of the influence of doxas-
tic ascent arguments, see Wilfrid Sellars's 
writing in epistemology: "Empiricism and the 
Philosophy of Mind," in Science, Perception 
and Reality (London: Routledge and Kegan 
Paul, 1963), esp. section VIII, and particularly 
p. 168. Also 1. T. Oakley, "An Argument for 
Skepticism 
Concerning Justified 
Belief' 
American Philosophical Quarterly 13 (1976), 
pp. 221-8; and BonJour, "Can Empirical 
Knowledge Have a Foundation?" 
7 This puts in a more traditional perspective 
the contemporary effort to develop a "causal 
theory of knowing." From our viewpoint, 
this effort is better understood not as an 
attempt to define propositional knowledge, 
but as an attempt to formulate fundamental 
principles of justification. 
Cf. the work ofD. Armstrong, Belief, Truth 
and Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1973), and that of F. Dretske, 
A. Goldman, and M. Swain, whose relevant 
already published work is included in 
G. Pappas and M. Swain (eds), Essays on 
Knowledge and Justification (Ithaca and 
London, 1978). But the theory is still under 
development by Goldman and by Swain, 
who have reached general conclusions about 
it similar to those suggested here, though not 
necessarily - so far as I know - for the same 
reasons or in the same overall context. 
8 From "How Do You Know?" American 
Philosophical 
Quarterly 
11, 
2 
(1974), 
pp.113-22. 
9 The Magoo situation is the situation of that 
unfortunate 
nearsighted 
and 
hearing-
impaired cartoon character who fortunately 
escapes disaster at every turn. 
lO 
Gilbert Harman, "Induction:' in Marshall 
Swain (ed.), Induction, Acceptance and 
Rational Belief (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1970), 
esp. Sect. IV, pp. 95-7. 
11 
Whether knowledge entails belief at all is of 
course a vexed question of long standing, 
but there is no room for it here. A helpful 
and interesting discussion is found in Keith 
Lehrer's 
"Belief 
and 
Knowledge," 
Philosophical Review 77 (1968), pp. 491-9. 
12 
In what follows, the relativity of knowledge 
to an epistemic community is left implicit, as 
it normally is in ordinary thought and 
speech. 
13 
Strictly speaking, what we have here is obvi-
ously a partial tree schema. For convenience, 
however, I speak of trees even when I mean 
partial tree schemata. Also, it should not be 
thought that every tree must have exactly 
three ranks (RI, RII, and RIII). On the con-
trary, a tree may have any number of ranks, 
so long as it has more than one. 

CHAPTER 14 
Human Knowledge 
and the Infinite 
Regress of Reasons 
Peter D. Klein 
Introduction 
The purpose of this paper is to ask you to con-
sider an account of justification that has largely 
been ignored in epistemology. When it has been 
considered, it has usually been dismissed as so 
obviously wrong that arguments against it are not 
necessary. The view that I ask you to consider can 
be called "Infinitism."l Its central thesis is that the 
structure of justificatory reasons is infinite and 
non-repeating. My primary reason for recom-
mending infinitism is that it can provide an 
acceptable account of rational beliefs, i.e., beliefs 
held on the basis of adequate reasons, while 
the two alternative views, foundationalism and 
coherentism, cannot provide such an account. 
Typically, just the opposite viewpoint is 
expressed. Infinitism is usually mentioned as one 
of the logically possible forms that our reasoning 
can take; but it is dismissed without careful con-
sideration because it appears initially to be so 
implausible.2 Foundationalists often begin by 
somewhat cavalierly rejecting infinitism. Then 
they proceed by eliminating coherentism through 
a series of complex and carefully developed argu-
ments. Coherentists often follow a similar general 
strategy by first rejecting infinitism without any 
careful examination of the view and then they 
Originally published in Philosophical Perspectives 13, 
Epistemology (1999), pp. 297-325. 
provide well considered reasons for rejecting 
foundationalism. Of course, if there are no con-
vincing reasons for rejecting infinitism, then 
these typical defenses of foundationalism and of 
coherentism fail. 
I will not rehearse the many arguments 
against foundationalism or coherentism in any 
detail here. But very briefly, foundationalism is 
unacceptable because it advocates accepting an 
arbitrary reason at the base, that is, a reason for 
which there are no further reasons making it 
even slightly better to accept than any of its con-
traries. Traditional coherentism is unacceptable 
because it advocates a not too thinly disguised 
form of begging the question; and seemingly 
more plausible forms of coherentism are just 
foundationalism in disguise. 
Thus, if having rational beliefs is a necessary 
condition of some type of knowledge, both 
foundationalism and coherentism lead directly 
to the consequence that this type of knowledge 
is not possible because each view precludes the 
possibility of having beliefs based upon ade-
quate reasons. On the other hand, infinitism 
makes such knowledge at least possible because 
it advocates a structure of justificatory reasons 
that satisfies the requirements of rational belief 
possession. 
This paper has two main sections. In the first 
section I sketch infinitism in broad outline and 
argue that it is the only account of the structure of 
reasons that can satisfy two intuitively plausible 

166 
PETER KLEIN 
constraints on good reasoning. In the second 
section I defend infinitism against the best 
objections to it. 
I. A Sketch of Infinitism 
Let me begin by pointing out some important 
similarities and dissimilarities between infinitism 
and the two alternative accounts of justification. 
Infinitism is like most forms of traditional coher-
entism in holding that only reasons can justify a 
belief.! Infinitism is unlike traditional coherent-
ism because infinitism does not endorse question 
begging reasoning.4 Indeed, this can be captured 
in what can be called the "Principle of Avoiding 
Circularity" (PAC). 
PAC: For all x, if a person, S, has a justification 
for x, then for all y, if Y is in the eviden-
tial ancestry of x for S, then x is not in 
the evidential ancestry of y for S. 
By "evidential ancestry" I am referring to the links 
in the chains of reasons, sometimes branching, 
that support beliefs.5 For example, if r is a reason 
for p, and q is a reason for r, then r is in the evi-
dential ancestry of p, and q is in the evidential 
ancestry of both p and r.6 I will not defend PAC in 
this paper because it strikes me as an obvious pre-
supposition of good reasoning. It is intended 
merely to make explicit the intuition behind the 
prohibition of circular reasoning. 
Not all so-called "coherentists" would deny 
PAC. These "coherentists" are really closet foun-
dationalists because it is not the propositions 
within a set of coherent propositions that serve as 
reasons for other beliefs in the set; rather the reason 
for every belief in the set is simply that it is a 
member of such a see Thus, these non-traditional 
coherentists avoid question begging reasoning by 
a two stage procedure. First, they define what it 
means for a set of propositions to be coherent 
(perhaps mutual probability enhancements plus 
some other conditions) and, then, they claim that 
the reason for accepting each proposition in the 
set is that it is a member of such a set of beliefs. 
That is consistent with endorsing PAC. But as 
we will see, this type of coherentism, like founda-
tionalism, can offer no hope of blocking the 
regress of reasons. 
Infinitism is like foundationalism in holding 
that there are features of the world, perhaps non-
normative features, that make a belief a reason. 
Not just any old belief is a reason. Infinitism is 
unlike foundationalism because infinitism holds 
that there are no ultimate, foundational reasons. 
Every reason stands in need of another reason. 
This can be stated in a principle - the Principle of 
Avoiding Arbitrariness (PAA). 
PAA: For all x, if a person, S, has a justifica-
tion for x, then there is some reason, rl , 
available to S for x; and there is some 
reason, r2, available to S for r l ; etc. 
Note that there are two features of this principle. 
The first is that it is reasons (as opposed to some-
thing else like appropriate causal conditions 
responsible for a belief) that are required when-
ever there is a justification for a belief. The second 
is that the chain of reasons cannot end with an 
arbitrary reason - one for which there is no fur-
ther reason. I conjoin these features in one princi-
ple because both are needed to capture the 
well-founded intuition that arbitrary beliefs, 
beliefs for which no reason is available, should be 
avoided. I will consider some objections to both 
aspects of PAA shortly. 
Some foundationalists could accept PAA by 
claiming that the available reason, r, could just be 
x, itself. They could assert that some propositions 
are "self-justified." That is not ruled out by PAA; 
but coupled with PAC, that possibility is ruled 
out. Indeed, the combination of PAC and PAA 
entails that the evidential ancestry of a justified 
belief be infinite and non-repeating. Thus, some-
one wishing to avoid infinitism must reject either 
PAC or PAA (or both).8 It is the straight-forward 
intuitive appeal of these principles that is the best 
reason for thinking that if any beliefs are justified, 
the structure of reasons must be infinite and non-
repeating. 
PAA requires that the reason for a belief must 
be available to S. "Availability" is a key notion in 
my account of infinitism for, among other things, 
it has the potential for anchoring justification, as 
understood by the infinitist, in non-normative 
properties.9 So, it would be well for us to dwell a 
bit on that notion. 
There are two conditions that must be satis-
fied in order for a reason to be available to S. 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
167 
It must be both "objectively" and "subjectively" 
available. I will discuss each condition in turn. 
There are many accounts of objective availa-
bility. Each specifies either some normative or 
non-normative property or, perhaps, a mixed 
property that is sufficient to convert a belief into 
a reason. 1O For example, one could say that a 
belief, r, is objectively available to S as a reason 
for p if (1) r has some sufficiently high probability 
and the conditional probability of p given r is 
sufficiently high; or (2) an impartial, informed 
observer would accept r as a reason for p; or (3) r 
would be accepted in the long run by an appro-
priately defined set of people; or (4) r is evident 
for Sand r makes p evident for Sl1; or (5) r accords 
with S's deepest epistemic commitmentsl2; or (6) 
r meets the appropriate conversational presuppo-
sitions13; or (7) an intellectually virtuous person 
would advance r as a reason for p.14 
Infinitism, per se, is compatible with each of 
these depictions of objectively available reasons. 15 
In addition, whether any of these mentioned 
accounts proves ultimately acceptable or whether 
another, unmentioned account is the best one is 
unimportant for the purposes of this paper. What 
is crucial to note at this point is that not just any 
proposition will function as a reason for other 
beliefs. If, for example, I offer as my reason for 
believing that all fish have fins my belief that all 
fish wear army boots and anything wearing army 
boots has fins, my offered-reason entails that all 
fish have fins, but on the accounts mentioned 
above it is not an objectively available reason. It 
has a low probability of being true; an impartial 
observer would not accept it; it would not be 
accepted in the long run by any appropriately 
defined set of people; there is no evident proposi-
tion that makes it evident; accepting it does not 
accord with my deepest epistemic commitments; 
there is no actual context in which appealing to 
that proposition will persuade anyone that all fish 
have fins; and an intellectually virtuous person 
would not offer it. Contrast this case with another. 
My belief that dark clouds are gathering over the 
mountains and it is mid-winter in Montana could 
satisfy the objective availability constraints con-
tained in all of the accounts mentioned above for 
functioning as a reason for the proposition that a 
snowstorm is likely. 
There is second feature of "availability" to S 
that is subjective. There might be a good reason, r, 
that is objectively available for use by any person, 
but unless it is properly hooked up with S's own 
beliefs, r will not be subjectively available to S. In 
an appropriate sense to be discussed later, S must 
be able to call on r. 
It is this subjective sense of "availability" that 
has provoked many of the objections to infin-
itism. For example: How can a "finite" human 
mind have an infinite number ofbeliefs?16 I think 
that rhetorical question involves a deep misun-
derstanding of the infinitist's position that will 
be discussed in some detail when we consider 
the objections to infinitism, but let me now just 
state the obvious: Humans have many beliefs 
that are not occurrent. It is in the non-occurrent 
sense of "belief" that the members of an infinite 
series of reasons might be subjectively available 
to S. Roughly, but I hope good enough for the 
purposes of this paper, let us say that S believes 
p just in case S would affirm that p, or endorse p 
in another fashion - perhaps sotto voce - in 
some appropriately restricted circumstances. For 
example, S may not now be thinking that she is 
in Montana in mid-winter looking at dark clouds 
gathering, but if asked why she believes a snow-
storm is imminent, she will consciously affirm 
that she is in Montana in mid-winter looking at 
dark clouds gathering. The point is that she has 
the belief even before she forms the conscious 
thought. l ? 
Having briefly sketched the two ways in which 
a belief must be available, let me return to the 
central motivation for infinitism - the two intui-
tive principles. As mentioned above, I think the 
only way to avoid infinitism is to reject either PAC 
or PAA. PAC seems completely safe to me. The 
old rejoinder that a large enough circle of reasons 
is acceptable, strikes me as just plain wrong. That 
a circle is larger might make it more difficult to 
detect the flaw in the reasoning, but large circles, 
nevertheless, involve question begging reasoning. 
An error in reasoning is still an error no matter 
how difficult it is to detect. 
What probably is meant by invoking the "large 
circle" is that it has seemed plausible to argue that 
one has a better reason for accepting a proposi-
tion if, ceteris paribus, it is a member of a larger 
set of coherent propositions. There is greater 
"mutual support" in larger sets. This feature of a 
non-traditional coherentist account is offered as 
a way of maintaining a coherentist position while 

168 
PETER KLEIN 
still accepting PAC.18 Indeed, I think PAC, once 
understood, will be accepted in any context of 
discussion that presupposes a distinction between 
good and bad reasoning. Circular reasoning is 
just not acceptable. 
But PAA might not seem so secure. Can't 
something other than reasons make a belief justi-
fied? For example, couldn't a belief be justified 
just in case it arose in some reliable fashion? Or 
couldn't there be a "meta-justification" available 
that (i) shows that some propositions are justified 
but that (ii) is not, itself, directly involved in the 
justification of the proposition? And, finally, 
couldn't it be epistemically rational to accept 
some propositions even when there is no reason 
for believing them? Perhaps arbitrariness isn't 
such a bad thing after all! 
There are, no doubt, other objections to PAA, 
but the three just mentioned seem the most seri-
ous. First, the intuitive appeal of reliabilism needs 
to be reckoned with. Second, the move to a "meta-
justification" seems initially plausible. Finally, 
there is an ingenious argument developed by 
Stephen Luper-Foy to the effect that it is rational 
to accept basic beliefs even though they are not 
rational beliefs - that is, even though there is no 
reason that can be given to believe that they are 
true. Let us consider these objections in order. 
(a) Reliabilism? 
Reliabilism, or at least the relevant form, holds 
either that reasons are not always required to jus-
tify a belief or that knowledge does not require 
justification, if "justification" is used in such a 
way as to entail that only rational beliefs are justi-
fied. A reliabilist could accept the claim that the 
structure of reasons is infinite and simply deny 
that reasons are required either for knowledge or 
for justification. A "moderate" form of reliabilism 
maintains that not all forms of knowledge or jus-
tification require reasoned belief. A "radical" form 
of reliabilism maintains that no form of knowl-
edge requires reasoned belief. What are we to 
make of these claims? Does knowledge or justifi-
cation require having reasons? 
I maintain that being able to produce reasons 
for beliefs is a distinctive characteristic of adult 
human knowledge. Apparently, nothing else 
knows in this way. Of course, many things have 
knowledge that is not rational belief. Dogs scratch 
at doors knowing, in some sense, that they will be 
opened; but dogs do not have reasons. Even adult 
humans know (in that sense) when they do not 
have reasons. As Fred Dretske says, when adult 
humans are in Minnesota in mid-winter, they 
know that it is cold without having reasons. 19 
Nevertheless, even some reliabilists employ 
intuitions involving the having of adequate rea-
sons in order to distinguish cases of justified 
belief from cases of unjustified beliefs. Alvin 
Goldman, one of the architects of reliabilism, 
considers a case in which a subject, S, believes 
"I am in brain-state B" just in case S is in brain-
state B. The belief acquisition method is perfectly 
reliable, but "we can imagine that a brain surgeon 
operating on S artificially induces brain-state B. 
This results, phenomenologically, in S's suddenly 
believing - out of the blue - that he is in brain-
state B, without any relevant antecedent beliefs. 
We would hardly say, in such a case, that S's belief 
that he is in brain -state B is justified."20 
I think the best explanation for Goldman's 
intuition about this case is that some reliabilists 
still feel the bite of the evidentialist requirement 
that in some cases we - adult humans - must have 
reasons for our beliefs in order for them to count 
as knowledge. 
More directly, I am convinced by examples 
like Keith Lehrer's Truetemp Case that there is a 
sense of "know" such that belief, though completely 
reliable, is not knowledge in the relevant sense. 
Recall that Mr. Truetemp has a thermometer-cum-
temperature-belief-generator implanted in his 
head so that within certain ranges of tempera-
tures he has perfectly reliable temperature beliefs. 
As Lehrer puts it: 
He accepts [beliefs about the temperature 1 unre-
flectively ... Thus he thinks and accepts that the 
temperature is 104 degrees. It is. Does he know 
that it is? Surely not.21 
Some reliabilists might maintain that Mr. Truetemp 
does, indeed, know. Now, as I see it, the issue is 
not whether Mr. Truetemp "knows" in some sense 
that the temperature is 104 degrees. He may very 
well have knowledge in some sense - the same 
sense in which a dog can "recognize" her owner's 
voice or in which a thermometer "knows" the 
room temperature. In the other sense of "know" -
the sense that is only predicated of humans who 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
169 
have reached "the age of reason" - Mr. Truetemp 
lacks knowledge because he does not have a sub-
jectively available reason for thinking that it is 
104 degrees. There is nothing he could think of 
which is a reason for believing that it is 104 
degrees. In other words, "knowledge" might not 
refer to a natural kind - there being only one 
fundamental type. Ernest So sa makes this point 
persuasively when he writes: 
The challenge of doxastic assent might well be 
thought a pseudo-challenge, however, since it 
would deny knowledge to infants and animals. 
Admittedly, there is a sense in which even a super-
market door "knows" when someone approaches, 
and in which a heating system "knows" when 
the temperature in a room rises above a certain 
setting. Such is "servo-mechanic" knowledge. 
And there is an immense variety of animal 
knowledge, instinctive or learned, which facili-
tates survival and flourishing in an astonishingly 
rich diversity of modes and environments. 
Human knowledge is on a higher plane of sophis-
tication, however, precisely because of its 
enhanced coherence and comprehensiveness 
and its capacity to satisfy self-reflective curiosity. 
Pure reliabilism is questionable as an adequate 
epistemology for such knowledgeY 
Thus, I believe that radical reliabilism - the view 
that claims that having reasons is never necessary 
for knowledge - fails to capture what is distinctive 
about adult human knowledge. 
On the other hand, the intuitive appeal of 
moderate reliabilism can be adequately recog-
nized without giving up PAA. For one can grant 
that in some senses of "know;' rational beliefs are 
not required for knowledge. Where "knows that p" 
means roughly "possess the information that p" 
we can say of "servo-mechanic" objects that they 
possess knowledge that p. They do not need rea-
sons. Nevertheless, there is another sense of 
"know" such that the mere possession of infor-
mation is not adequate. The information must be 
supported by appropriate reasons. Beliefs that 
come "out of the blue" do not qualify as knowl-
edge in this sense. 
There is one further, relevant move available 
to the infinitist. It could even be granted that no 
form of knowledge requires having rational 
beliefs. That is, radical reliabilism could be 
accepted. But even granting that, the infinitist's 
claim remains significant if only because, if 
correct, it would delineate an important condi-
tion of rational beliefs, even if such beliefs were 
not required for knowledge. Foundationalism 
and coherentism would remain less attractive 
than infinitism as accounts of rational belief. 
(b) Meta-justifications? 
Let us now turn to what Laurence Bonjour calls 
"meta-justifications" - justifications designed to 
show that certain types of beliefs are acceptable 
even in the absence of another belief that serves as 
a reason. Such beliefs are acceptable, it is claimed, 
because they have some property, call it P, and 
beliefs having P are likely to be trueY Both non-
traditional coherentism and foundationalism are 
alike in that they hold that there is some such 
property, P. 
Let us turn directly to foundationalism. Can it 
avoid advocating the acceptance of arbitrary rea-
sons by moving to meta-justifications? Suppose 
it is claimed that a foundational proposition is 
justified because it has a certain causal history 
(e.g., involving the proper use of our senses or 
memory) or that it is justified in virtue of its con-
tent (e.g., it is about a current mental state or it is 
about some necessary truth). Pick your favorite 
accounts of the property, P. I think, as does 
Bonjour, that the old Pyrrhonian question is rea-
sonable: Why is having P truth -conducive?24 Now, 
either there is an answer available to that question 
or there isn't. (Bonjour thinks there is.) If there is 
an answer, then the regress continues - at least 
one more step, and that is all that is needed here, 
because that shows that the offered reason that 
some belief has P or some set of beliefs has P does 
not stop the regress. If there isn't an answer, the 
assertion is arbitrary. 
Now, let me be clear here in order to anticipate 
a possible objection. I am not claiming that in 
order for a belief to be justified or known, either 
we must believe that it is justified or we must be 
justified in believing that it is justified. As many 
have pointed out, that confuses p's being justified 
with a belief about p's justificatory status.25 I am 
not supposing that the foundationalist, or for that 
matter, the non-traditional coherentist thinks 
that what Alston has called "epistemic beliefs" 
(beliefs about the epistemic status of beliefs ) must 
playa role in the justification of all beliefs.26 Quite 

170 
PETER KLEIN 
the contrary. I think the foundationalist typically 
advocates an explicit process of reasoning that 
ends with beliefs which have P rather than with 
epistemic beliefs about P. The meta-justification 
is invoked in order to avoid the appearance of 
arbitrariness for it is designed to show why the 
"final" beliefs are likely to be true. My point is 
merely that moving to the meta-level, that is, 
arguing that such beliefs are likely to be true 
because they possess a certain property, P, will not 
avoid the problem faced by foundationalism. 
Either the meta-justification provides a reason for 
thinking the base proposition is true (and hence, 
the regress does not end) or it does not (hence, 
accepting the base proposition is arbitrary). The 
Pyrrhonians were right. 
The same is true of non-traditional coherent-
ism. Claiming that a belief is justified because it is 
a member of a set of propositions that is coherent 
cannot stop the regress in any but an arbitrary 
way. The non-traditional coherentist must pro-
duce a meta-justification for the belief that prop-
ositions satisfying that requirement are likely to 
be true. As BonJour says: 
... one crucial part of the task of an adequate 
epistemological theory is to show that there is an 
appropriate connection between its proposed 
account of epistemic justification and the cogni-
tive goal of truth. That is, it must somehow be 
shown that justification as conceived by the 
theory is truth-conducive, that one who seeks jus-
tified beliefs is at least likely to find true ones. 27 
So the non-traditional coherentist, like the foun-
dationalist, will move to a meta-level in an attempt 
to show why a belief that coheres with others is 
likely to be true.28 But the same question will 
arise: Why is coherence truth-conducive?29 
To generalize: Foundationalism and non-
traditional coherentism cannot avoid the regress 
by appealing to a meta-claim that a belief having 
some property, P, is likely to be true. That claim 
itself requires an argument that appeals to rea-
sons. Indeed, the appeal to such a meta-claim 
invokes just the kind of dialectical context involv-
ing what is distinctive about adult human knowl-
edge. For surely a reason is required to justify the 
belief that propositions with property, P, are likely 
to be true; and whatever justifies that claim will 
require a reason; and - well, you get the point. 
Thus, the move to a meta-justification cannot 
stop the regress without violating either PAA or 
PAC. 
(c) Harmless arbitrariness? 
One objection to PAA remains to be considered: 
Perhaps it is rational to accept arbitrary, non-
rational, beliefs even though there are no reasons 
for thinking that they are true. If that were the case, 
it would presumably dampen the enthusiasm 
some epistemologists have for foundationalism, 
for they think that the foundational proposi-
tions are not arbitrary (they appeal to meta-
justifications to show that). In addition, it would 
call into question a primary motivation for tradi-
tional coherentism, namely that it is irrational to 
accept a belief without a reason. But it would also 
undermine my argument for infinitism based in 
part on PAA because that principle is designed to 
capture the widely endorsed intuition that it is 
rational to accept a belief only if there is some 
reason for thinking the belief is true. 
Stephen Luper-Foy has argued that it is 
rational to accept foundational beliefs even 
though they cannot be supported by reasons . 
Here is his argument (some of what follows is 
close paraphrase, some is direct quotation as 
indicated): 
The epistemic goal is to acquire a complete and 
accurate picture of the world. Granted at base 
our reasons are arbitrary but "an injunction 
against believing anything ... would obviously 
make it impossible for us to achieve the goal of 
arriving at a complete and accurate understand-
ing of what is the case ... Indeed, given that our 
ultimate beliefs are arbitrary, it is rational to 
adopt management principles that allow us to 
retain these foundational yet arbitrary views, 
since the alternative is to simply give up on the 
attempt to achieve the epistemic goal."30 
His point, I take it, is that since the goal of an 
epistemic agent is to acquire a complete and accu-
rate picture of the world, accepting a basic, though 
arbitrary, reason is rational since if one did not 
accept it, there would be no possibility of attain-
ing the goal. It is "rational to do and believe things 
without reason"31 because if we did not, we could 
not attain our goal. 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
171 
There are two responses. First, if! am right, we 
need not worry about reasons being arbitrary, 
since the regress does not stop. There are no arbi-
trary, ultimate reasons because there are no ulti-
mate reasons. But more to the point at hand, 
if the regress did end with an arbitrary reason 
(as Luper-Foy is assuming at this point in his argu-
ment), I think his argument for making it rational 
to accept arbitrary reasons does not succeed. 
Luper-Foy is using a prudential account of 
rationality such that we are prudentially rational 
just in case our chosen means to a goal are effi-
cient in achieving that goal. But such an instru-
mental conception of rationality is acceptable 
only if the definition of rationality is understood 
to imply that it is rational to adopt a means to a 
given goal only if the means are more likely to 
achieve that goal rather than some incompatible 
and highly undesirable goal. Suppose, as Luper-
Foy claims, that the epistemic goal is to gain a 
complete and accurate picture of the world, then 
believing x would be rational only if believing x 
furthered that goal instead of the incompatible 
and highly undesirable goal, let us say, of obtain-
ing a complete and inaccurate picture of the 
world. But if my basic beliefs are arbitrary, that is, 
if there is no available reason for thinking that 
accepting them is more likely to contribute to 
obtaining an accurate picture than an inaccurate 
picture, then, for all I know, accepting the basic 
beliefs could equally well lead to obtaining a com-
plete and inaccurate picture of the world. So, if at 
the base, reasons are arbitrary, it is not even pru-
dentially rational to accept them since doing so is 
no more likely to satisfy rather than frustrate my 
epistemic goals. 
II. 
Objections to Infinitism 
We have completed the examination of what I 
take to be the best reasons for rejecting PAA and 
found that they are inadequate. As mentioned 
earlier, I take PAC to be the sine qua non of good 
reasoning. Nevertheless, in spite of the fact that 
there appear to be no good grounds for rejecting 
PAA or PAC taken individually, the view that 
results from accepting both of them, namely infin-
itism, has never been advocated by anyone with 
the possible exception of Peirce.32 The remainder 
of this paper will focus on the reasons that have 
been advanced against infinitism. Of course, if 
only for the sake of consistency, I cannot take it 
that this matter is finally settled. But I do think the 
proposed objections to the position fail. 
So, what are the arguments designed to show 
that the structure of reasons could not be infinite 
and non-repeating? They can be divided into four 
types presented in the order in which I think they 
present deep issues for the infinitist - beginning 
with the least troubling and moving to the most 
troubling: 1) Varieties of the Finite Human Mind 
Objection; 2) the Aristotelian Objection that If 
Some Knowledge Is Inferential, Some Is Not 
Inferential; 3) the Reductio Argument Against the 
Possibility of an Infinite Regress Providing a 
Justification for Beliefs (most clearly developed 
by John Post and I. T. Oakley); 4) the Specter of 
Skepticism Objection - namely that nothing is 
known unless reasoning somehow settles the 
matter. 
Objection 1. The finite mind objection 
Very roughly, the intuition behind this objection 
is that the human mind is finite and if such a 
mind is to have reasons for beliefs (a require-
ment for the distinctive adult human kind of 
knowledge), it cannot be the case that such 
beliefs are justified only if there is an infinite 
chain of reasons. Here, for example, is what John 
Williams says: 
The [proposed] regress of justification of S's 
belief that p would certainly require that he holds 
an infinite number of beliefs. This is psychologi-
cally, if not logically, impossible. If a man can 
believe an infinite number of things, then there 
seems to be no reason why he cannot know an 
infinite number of things. Both possibilities con-
tradict the common intuition that the human 
mind is finite. Only God could entertain an infi-
nite number of beliefs. But surely God is not the 
only justified believer.33 
As stated, it is a bit difficult to get a purchase on 
this objection. It cannot mean simply that we are 
finite beings - occupying a finite amount of space 
and lasting a finite duration of time - and conse-
quently, we cannot be in an infinite number of 
states (in particular, belief states). A "finite" thing, 
say a one foot cube existing for only ten minutes, 

172 
PETER KLEIN 
has its center at an infinite number of positions 
during the ten minutes it moves, say, from point 
{O,O,O} in a three dimensional Cartesian coordi-
nate system to, say, point {I,I,!}. So, a finitely 
extended thing can be in an infinite number of 
states in a finite amount of time. 
But Williams does not leave matters at this 
fuzzy, intuitive level. What he means, I think, is 
that there is something about belief states or jus-
tified belief states in particular which is such that 
no finite human can be in an infinite number of 
them. The argument, as best as I can ferret it out, 
is this: It is impossible to consciously believe an 
infinite number of propositions (because to 
believe something takes some time) and it is 
impossible to "unconsciously believe" ("uncon-
scious belief" is his term) an infinite number of 
propositions because the candidate beliefs are 
such that some of them "defeat human under-
standing."34 
Granted, I cannot consciously assent to an 
infinite number of propositions in my lifetime. 
The infinitist is not claiming that in any finite 
period of time - the "threescore and ten" assigned 
to us, for example - we can consciously entertain 
an infinite number of thoughts. It is rather that 
there are an infinite number of propositions such 
that each one of them would be consciously 
thought were the appropriate circumstances to 
anse. 
Williams is, indeed, right that the putative 
examples given thus far in the literature of infi-
nite sets of propositions in which each member is 
subjectively available are not plausible because 
consciously thinking some of them is impossible. 
But, of course, it is a non-sequitur to claim that 
because some examples fail, they all will. 
Richard Foley, for example, suggests that since 
I believe that I am within one hundred miles of 
Boston, I believe that I am within two hundred 
miles of Boston, and I believe that I am within 
300 miles, etc. 35 Williams correctly points out that 
eventually a proposition in such a series will con-
tain a "number so large that no one can consider 
it."36 Robert Audi gives a similar argument against 
the possibility of a mind like ours having an infi-
nite number of beliefs.37 
It is easy to see the general reason why such 
examples fai].38 They all presuppose a finite 
vocabulary for expressing beliefs. Hence, it would 
seem that any method of generating an infinite 
series of beliefs by some manipulation on the 
items in the vocabulary (e.g., conjoining them, 
disjoining them) will eventually produce a 
member in the set that is too "large" or too "long" 
for us to consider. 
But even with a finite vocabulary, we do have 
another way of picking out objects and forming 
beliefs about them. We can use indexicals. We can 
point to an object and say "this." We can also say 
of an object that it has some shape, say a. Now, 
suppose that there were an infinite number of 
discernable objects with the shape a. I claim that 
there would be an infinite number of proposi-
tions each of the form "this is a-shaped" such 
that were we to discern the object referred to by 
"this" in each proposition, we would consciously 
think "this is a-shaped" under the appropriate 
circumstances. So, if there were an infinite number 
of a-shaped discernable objects, then there would 
be an infinite set of propositions such that each 
member would be consciously endorsed under 
the appropriate circumstances - i.e., when we 
discern the object and consider whether it is 
a-shaped. Of course, this is only a hypothetical 
claim. I do not know whether there is an infinite 
number of such discernable objects. But it does 
not matter for my point. My claim is merely that, 
in principle, nothing prevents so-called "finite 
minds" from being such that each proposition in 
an infinite set of propositions is subjectively 
available. There might not be an infinite number 
of such discernable objects, but we certainly have 
the capacity to think about each such object that 
we discern that it is a-shaped. Therefore, we have 
the capacity to believe each member of an infi-
nite set of propositions. No member in the set 
gets too "large" or too "long" or too "complex" for 
us to grasp. 
I mentioned earlier that I thought there was a 
deep misunderstanding of the infinitist's position 
underlying the infinite mind objection. Now is 
the time to consider it. I have already said that the 
infinitist is not claiming that during our lifetime 
we consciously entertain an infinite number of 
beliefs. But what might not be so obvious is that 
the infinitist is also not even claiming that we 
have an infinite number of what Williams calls 
"unconscious beliefs" if such beliefs are taken to 
be already formed dispositions. (We might, but 
that isn't necessary for infinitism.) Consider the 
following question: Do you believe that 366 + 71 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
173 
is 437? I take it that for most of us answering that 
question brings into play some of our capacities 
in a way that answering the question "Do you 
believe that 2 + 2 = 4?" does not. For I simply 
remember that 2 + 2 = 4. I have already formed 
the belief that manifests itself when I consciously 
think that 2 + 2 = 4. By contrast, I had not already 
formed a similar disposition concerning the sum 
of 366 plus 71. We do not simply remember that 
366 + 71 = 437. Rather, we do a bit of adding. We 
are disposed to think that 366 + 71 = 437 after a bit 
of adding given our belief that 6 + 1 = 7, that 7 + 
6 = 13, etc. We have a second order disposition - a 
disposition to form the disposition to think 
something. Thus, there is clearly a sense in which 
we believe that 366 + 71 = 437. The proposition 
that 366 + 71 = 437 is subjectively available to me 
because it is correctly hooked up to already 
formed beliefs. 
We have many second order dispositions that 
are counted as beliefs. For example, you believe 
that apples do not normally grow on pear trees 
even though you had never formed the disposi-
tion to consciously think that (at least up until 
just now!). Infinitism requires that there be an 
infinite set of propositions such that each member 
is subjectively available to us. That requires that 
we have the capacity to form beliefs about each 
member. It does not require that we have already 
formed those beliefs. 
The distinction between already formed first-
order beliefs and dispositions to form a first-order 
belief is important for another reason. Earlier I 
had argued that there was a way, in principle, to 
show that even with a finite vocabulary, we could 
have an infinite number of beliefs by employing 
indexicals. Nevertheless, that response will not 
be useful here since we cannot point to reasons 
(as we can point to objects) with "this" or "that" 
unless the reasons are already formed. The prob-
lem is to show that there can be an infinite number 
of reasons given a finite vocabulary each of which 
can be entertained by a human being. 
The solution to this problem is ready-to-hand. 
Since we can appeal to second order dispositions, 
we can say that when our vocabulary and con-
cepts fall short of being able to provide reasons, 
we can develop new concepts and ways of specify-
ing them. That is, we can discover, develop or 
invent new concepts to provide a reason for our 
beliefs. 
This seems to happen regularly. When we have 
no ready-to-hand explanation of events, we devise 
new concepts that can be employed in under-
standing those events. Consider the following: the 
development of the concept of unconscious 
mechanisms to account for our behavior, the 
development of the concept of quarks to provide 
for some unity in our understanding of sub-
atomic particles and their interactions, and the 
development of evolutionary theory to account 
for the fossil record as well as the diversity and 
commonality among species. In each case there 
was a temporary stopping point reached in our 
ability to provide reasons for our beliefs. But we 
have the capacity to develop new concepts that can 
provide us with further reasons for our beliefs. 
Let me sum up my response to this first reason 
for thinking that a finite mind cannot have an 
infinite number of justified beliefs. We have seen 
that the notion of "belief" is ambiguous. It can 
refer to already formed dispositions and it 
can refer to the disposition to form dispositions. 
It is in the second sense that the infinitist is com-
mitted to the claim that there is an infinite 
number of beliefs both subjectively and objec-
tively available to us whenever (if ever) we have 
distinctively adult human knowledge. 
There is a second argument that is sometimes 
given for supposing that the requirements of 
having an infinite number of justified beliefs 
cannot be satisfied. Both Richard Foley and 
Richard Fumerton suppose that in order for S to 
be justified in believing that p on the basis of e, 
S must (at least paradigmatically for Foley) justi-
fiably believe that e justifies p. Fumerton puts it 
this way: 
To be justified in believing one proposition P on 
the basis of another E one must be 1) justified in 
believing E and 2) justified in believing that E 
makes probable P.'9 
It is easy to see that if this condition of inferential 
justification were coupled with infinitism, the 
consequence would be that any person having a 
justified belief must have a belief that gets "so 
complex" that no human could ever have it. Foley 
argues to the same conclusion by claiming that a 
condition like (2) is a feature of the "best justifi-
cations" and that any theory of justification will 
include a description of the best justifications.40 

174 
PETER KLEIN 
I agree that such a requirement would force 
the rejection of infinitism. But as I mentioned 
earlier, I can see no reason to agree to the premiss 
that in order for S to be justified in believing that 
p on the basis of e, S must be justified in believing 
that e is a good reason for p. I think this simply 
confuses having a justified belief that p with 
having justified beliefs about p's justificatory 
status. This amounts to requiring that S not only 
be an epistemologist, but also that S have a well 
reasoned epistemology in order to be justified in 
believing, for example, that a thunderstorm is 
likely. Epistemology is important, but having a 
justified epistemology is not required in order to 
have justified beliefs! Thus, this argument pro-
vides no grounds for thinking that the chain of 
good reasons, even if infinite, includes beliefs that 
are too complex for us to grasp.41 
Objection 2. The Aristotelian objection that if 
some knowledge is inferential, some is not 
inferential. 
In the Posterior Analytics Aristotle claims that if 
some knowledge is the result of inference, some 
knowledge must not be the result of inference. I 
think that is correct. And I grant that some knowl-
edge is the result of inference. So, some knowledge 
is not the result of inference. But, somewhat sur-
prisingly, it does not follow that the structure of 
justificatory reasons is finite. 
Assume, as I think it is evident that Aristotle 
does, that at some early time in the development 
of a human being, the being is completely igno-
rant. At some later point, the being has knowl-
edge. It would not be possible to account for all of 
the being's knowledge on the basis of previously 
obtained knowledge, for that could not give us an 
account of the original, first, change from igno-
rance to knowledge. So, all knowledge could not 
be produced by inference from previous knowl-
edge - not because the structure of justificatory 
reasons could not be infinite but because all 
knowledge could not arise from previous knowl-
edge if at one time we are ignorant and at a later 
time we are knowledgeable. But nothing in this 
argument prevents the chain of justificatory rea-
sons from being infinite. We could acquire most 
of our beliefs in ways that do not involve reasons 
as causes. My claim is merely that in order to have 
the distinctively adult human type of knowledge, 
there must be reasons of the appropriate sort 
available. Thus, it can be granted that we, humans, 
move from a state of complete ignorance to a 
state of having the distinctively adult human type 
of knowledge during our lifetimes and still main-
tain, as I do, that we make that transition only 
when there are reasons subjectively and objec-
tively available for our beliefs. 
Now, Aristotle may never have intended, at 
least in the Posterior Analytics, that the descrip-
tion of the role of experience in the acquisition of 
knowledge be used to show that there are beliefs 
for which there are no reasonsY Nevertheless, 
there is a passage in the Metaphysics that migh t be 
cited to show that Aristotle endorsed an argu-
ment against infinitism: 
There are, both among those who have these 
convictions [man is the measure of all things 1 
and among those who merely profess these 
views, some who raise a difficulty by asking, 
who is to be the judge of the healthy man, and in 
general who is likely to judge rightly on each 
class of question. But such inquiries are like 
puzzling over the question whether we are now 
asleep or awake. And all such questions have the 
same meaning. These people demand that a 
reason shall be given for everything, for they 
seek a starting point and they seek to get this by 
demonstration, while it is obvious from their 
actions that they have no conviction. But their 
mistake is what we have stated it to be: they seek 
a reason for things for which no reason can be 
given; for the starting point of demonstration is 
not demonstration," 
Now, I grant that there are occasions when it is 
absurd to ask for reasons for a belief. Roughly, 
those are the occasions in which it is clear that 
the conversational presuppositions are not to be 
questioned. For example, when we are distin-
guishing features of waking states from features 
of dream states, it is absurd to ask whether we 
can tell the difference. But it does not follow that 
such questions are always inappropriate. Indeed, 
when the presuppositions of the conversational 
context are revealed, they can be questioned. 
Thus, one can grant what I think Aristotle is sug-
gesting, namely that demonstration can take 
place only within a context of agreed upon pre-
suppositions and that it is absurd to ask for rea-
sons to justify those presuppositions within that 

HUMAN KNOWLEDG;!;. 
175 
kind of a context. He is right. But, of course, the 
contextual situation can change. 
Objection 3. The reductio argument against 
the possibility of an infinite regress providing 
a justification for beliefs 
The gist of the argument is this: If there were an 
infinite regress of reasons, any arbitrarily chosen 
contingent proposition would be justified. That is 
absurd. So there can't be an infinite regress of jus-
tification. 
The argument has two forms. Let me deal with 
them in the order of their ascending plausibility. 
I. T. Oakley's argument is this (what follows is a 
close and, I hope, fair paraphrase): 
Let us suppose that S is justified in believing p in 
the way envisaged by the regress theorist. That is, 
there is a regress from p to r, to s to t, etc. Now, 
conjoin with every member of the series a fur-
ther belief of S's, say q. If the first set of beliefs 
{p, r, s, t, etc.} is justified, so is the new set of con-
junctive beliefs {(p&q), (r&q), (s&q), (t&q), etc.}. 
And if (p&q) is justified, then q is justified:' 
I think this argument rests on an assumed princi-
ple of justification, namely this: If e justifies p, 
then (e & q) justifies (p & q). If that assumed 
principle were true, and if (p & q) justifies p and 
justifies q, then I think this argument does consti-
tute a reductio of infinitism. But the assumed 
principle of justification is false - or better, it is 
clear that it and the principle endorsing justifica-
tion over simplification cannot both be true. For, 
jointly, they lead to the unwelcome consequence 
that any arbitrary proposition, q, is justified given 
any theory of justification. 
To see that, suppose, that there is some propo-
sition, e, and any theory of justification such that 
e is justified and e justifies p. Then, by parallel 
reasoning, since e justifies p, then (e & q) justifies 
(p & q). And, by parallel reasoning, q is justified. 
So, there is a quick and dirty way of showing that 
every proposition would be justified given any 
theory of justification. 
But surely what is wrong here is that the argu-
ment fails to note what is essential to infinitism. It 
is a consequence of the infinitist's constraints on 
constructing a non-question begging chain that 
the ancestors of x in the chain cannot "contain" X.45 
The assumed principle violates that constraint 
and is a clear violation of PAC because the only 
reason offered for (p & q) is (e & q). Indeed, every 
link in the proposed infinite chain is question 
begging, for q is contained in each. Thus, this 
objection fails because the type of infinite chain 
presupposed in this objection does not have the 
appropriate form: 6 
There is another reductio argument that has 
been advanced against infinitism that does not 
violate the proposed constraints on the form of 
the chain of reasons. Here is a close paraphrase of 
the argument as given by John Post: 
Consider an example of an infinite regress that 
does not violate the appropriate constraints. Let p 
be contingent and use modus ponens as follows: 
... , r &(r~(q &(q~p))), q & (q~p), P 
This sort of infinitely iterated application of 
modus ponens guarantees that for any contingent 
proposition, p, one can construct an instance of 
an infinite regress'" 
Post takes that as a reductio of the infinitist's posi-
tion. I agree that if on some view of justification 
every contingent proposition were justified, the 
view would be unacceptable:s But Post has 
assumed that the infinitist takes the mere exist-
ence of such a chain of propositions with the 
appropriate form (non-repeating and infinite) to 
be a sufficient condition for a belief's having a 
justification. However, as I emphasized at the 
outset, the existence of such a chain is necessary, 
but it is not sufficient. The beliefs in the chain 
must also be "available" to S as reasons. Thus, not 
all infinite chains having the required structural 
properties make beliefs justified. 
In considering Post's objection, Ernest Sosa 
distinguishes between what he calls chains that 
provide potential justification and those that 
provide actual justification.49 I think Sosa is 
right. 50 As I see it, there is a potential justification 
for every contingent proposition; that is, there is 
an infinite chain of propositions like the one Post 
describes for every proposition. But only some 
chains contain reasons. Hence, not every propo-
sition will have a justification because a proposi-
tion has a justification only if each member of 
the chain is available as a reason in both the 
objective sense and subjective sense to serve as a 
reason.51 

176 
PETER KLEIN 
Objection 4. The specter of skepticism 
This is the most difficult objection to answer 
because it is the most difficult to fully understand. 
It apparently goes to some deeply held intuitions 
that, perhaps, I do not fully appreciate. The objec-
tion rests upon a Cartesian-like view that the 
whole point of reasoning is to "settle" an issue. 
According to that view, ideally, reasoning should 
produce a priori demonstrations; but where that 
is not possible or feasible (for example with regard 
to empirical propositions), something approxi-
mating a demonstration is required in order for a 
proposition to be justified or known. Reasoning 
should settle what it is we are to believe. If it can't, 
then what's the point of employing it? Reasoning 
is valuable, at least in part, because it can produce 
a final guarantee that a proposition is more rea-
sonable than its contraries. But if the reasoning 
process is infinite, there can be no such guarantee. 
Thus, one of the claimed virtues of infinitism, 
namely, that it makes the distinctively adult 
human type of knowledge possible, is an illusion 
because that type of knowledge obtains only if 
reasoning can settle matters. 
Here is the way that Jonathan Dancy puts the 
objection: 
Suppose that all justification is inferential. When 
we justify belief A by appeal to belief Band C, we 
have not yet shown A to be justified. We have only 
shown that it is justified ifB and C are. Justification 
by inference is conditional justification only; 1\s 
justification is conditional upon the justification 
of Band C. But if all justification is conditional in 
this sense, then nothing can be shown to be actu-
ally non-conditionally justified. 52 
Now, there is an unfortunate conflation in the 
passage that should be avoided - namely, failing 
to distinguish between showing that a belief is 
justified and a belief's being justified. Nevertheless, 
that equivocation could be removed and the 
objection remains: if all justification is provisional, 
no belief becomes unprovisionally justified. 53 
This is an old objection. It is, I think, what the 
Pyrrhonists thought made the infinite regress 
unacceptable as a theory of rational belief. Sextus 
wrote: 
The Mode [of reasoning] based upon the regress 
ad infinitum is that whereby we assert that the 
thing adduced as a proof of the matter proposed 
needs a further proof, and this again another, 
and so on ad infinitum, so that the consequence 
is suspension, as we possess no starting-point for 
our argument.54 
have endorsed the Pyrrhonian objections to 
foundationalism and coherentism. Why not accept 
their argument against the infinite regress? 
The answer is simply that although every 
proposition is only provisionally justified, that is 
good enough if one does not insist that reasoning 
settle matters once and for all. Once that is recog-
nized, surprisingly enough, the Pyrrhonian goal 
of avoiding dogmatism while continuing to 
inquire is obtainable. 
I readily grant that the kind of final guarantee 
that Descartes and others have sought is not avail-
able if infinitism is correct. In general, as we have 
seen, the foundationalist's reliance upon a meta-
justification to locate a property shared by all 
"basic" propositions is not a viable strategy for 
avoiding the regress. In particular, why should 
Descartes' suggestion for a truth-conducive prop-
erty, namely clarity-and-distinctness, be accepted 
without a reason being given? Indeed, Descartes, 
himself, thought that a reason was required for 
believing that clarity-and-distinctness is truth-
conducive. He attempted to provide that reason 
by producing an argument demonstrating the 
existence of an epistemically benevolent god. But 
surely that is only a temporary stopping point in 
the regress of reasons because the premisses in 
that argument need to be supported by further 
reasons in order to avoid arbitrariness. 
But, let me take the objection more seriously. 
Is a proposition justified only when belief in it 
results from a process of justification that has been 
concluded? Richard Fumerton has argued against 
infinitism because "[f]inite minds cannot com-
plete an infinitely long chain of reasoning, so, if 
all justification were inferential we would have 
no justification for believing anything. [emphasis 
added]"55 
This objection to infinitism implicitly appeals 
to a principle that we can call the Completion 
Requirement: In order for a belief to be justified 
for someone, that person must have actually com-
pleted the chain of reasoning that terminates in 
the belief in question. The infinitist cannot accept 
the Completion Requirement because it is clearly 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
177 
incompatible with infinitism. Justifications are 
never finished. More to the point, however, the 
Completion Requirement demands more than 
what is required to have a justified belief even on 
non-infinitist accounts of justified beliefs. 
To see that, apply the Completion Requirement 
to a foundationalist conception of justification 
coupled with the dispositional account of belief 
mentioned above that includes second order dis-
positions. The result would be that most, if not all, 
of our beliefs are not justified. I have thousands 
and thousands of beliefs - if not infinitely many. 
I have not carried out the process of reasoning to 
many (if any) of those beliefs from some founda-
tional beliefs (even if there were foundational 
beliefs). In fact, I couldn't have explicitly enter-
tained any significant number of the propositions 
I believe. There are just too many. 
Nevertheless, Fumerton's claim that S's belief 
is not justified merely because there is a justifica-
tion available to S seems correct. In discussing the 
requirements for a belief's being justified, he 
draws an important distinction between S's 
merely having a justification for P and S's belief 
that P being justified. He claims, correctly I 
believe, the former is necessary but not sufficient 
for the latter: 
The expression "S has a justification for believing 
p" will be used in such a way that it implies noth-
ing about the causal role played by that justifica-
tion in sustaining the belief. The expression "S's 
belief that P is justified" will be taken to imply 
both that S has justification and that S's justifica-
tion is playing the appropriate causal role in sus-
taining the belief. 56 
I think that an infinitist must grant the dis-
tinction between S's merely having a justification 
for the belief P and the belief P being justified 
for S. PAC and PAA specified necessary condi-
tions for S's having a justification; they did not 
specify what else is required in order for S's belief 
to be justified. The question, then, becomes this: 
Can the infinitist draw the distinction between S 
having a justification for P and S's belief P being 
justified? 
Ernest So sa and others have suggested that the 
infinitist will be hard pressed to distinguish 
between S's merely having available a justification 
for a proposition and the proposition's being 
justified for S. Return to the case discussed earlier 
in which S calculates the sum of two numbers by 
employing some "already formed" dispositions. 
Now suppose (Sosa would suggest) that Shad, 
instead, merely guessed that the sum of the two 
numbers is 437, and, also, that when exploring 
whether the guessed sum is actually correct, S 
does a bit of adding and sees that the sum that he 
had guessed was, in fact, the right answer.57 
Presumably we want to say that although S had a 
justification available (if S can add) prior to cal-
culating the sum, the belief that the numbers 
summed to 437 was not even provisionally justi-
fied until S does a bit of adding. So, merely having 
a justification available will not suffice for a 
belief's being provisionally justified. 
Here is the way Sosa states the point:58 
Someone who guesses the answer to a complex 
addition problem does not already know the 
answer just because, given a little time, he could 
do the sum in his head. If he had not done the 
sum, ifhe had just been guessing, then he acquires 
his knowledge, he does not know beforehand ... 
We are not just interested in the weaker position 
of someone who would be able to defend the 
belief, but only because its exposure to reflection 
would lead the subject to new arguments and 
reasonings that had never occurred to him, and 
that in any case had played no role in his acquisi-
tion or retention of the target belief. 59 
Now one might respond by saying that arriving 
at the sum of two numbers is not appropriately 
analogous to coming to believe, for example, that 
I hear my neighbor's dog, Fido, barking. Sum-
ming two large numbers requires (at least for most 
of us) some conscious process; whereas coming 
to believe that it is Fido barking does not require 
having gone through a process of conscious rea-
soning. To repeat, the Completion Requirement 
is just too strong in many cases. I can be justified 
in believing that it is Fido barking even if I have 
not arrived at that belief through some conscious 
process of reasoning. 
Nevertheless, a question still remains even 
about my belief that it is Fido barking: How is the 
infinitist to distinguish between (1) the case of a 
lucky guess that it is Fido barking when a justifi-
cation is available and (2) the case in which the 
belief is actually justified?60 

178 
PETER KLEIN 
The crucial point to recall is that for the infinit-
ist all justification is provisional. S has a provi-
sional justification for a proposition, p, only if 
there is a reason, r1, both subjectively and objec-
tively available to S for p; whereas S's belief p is 
provisionally justified only if S's belief r 1 "is playing 
the appropriate causal role in sustaining" (to use 
Fumerton's expression) S's belief p. But what about 
the belief r I? Doesn't it have to be provisionally jus-
tified in order for the belief p to be provisionally 
justified? No. There does have to be a reason, r2, 
for r1 that is subjectively and objectively available if 
S is to have a justification for p, but the belief r2 
does not have to be provisionally justified in order 
for the belief p to be provisionally justified. It is suf-
ficient that the belief p is causally sustained by the 
belief r1 for the belief p to be provisionally justified. 
Beliefs originating from wild guesses would not be 
provisionally justified. Thus, the infinitist can make 
the requisite distinction between the case of a lucky 
guess when a justification is available and the case 
in which the belief is justified. 
Still, I suspect that there is a deep skeptical 
worry lurking here. Infinitism envisions the pos-
sibility that if we begin to provide the reasons 
available for our beliefs, we might eventually 
arrive at a reason for which there is no further 
reason that is both subjectively and objectively 
available. Perhaps, our capacities to form new dis-
positions and concepts will reach a limit. Perhaps, 
the objective requirements of availability will not 
be met. Those possibilities cannot be ruled out a 
priori. Thus, the possibility of skepticism is a seri-
ous one. It is not, as some have thought, only a phi-
losopher's nightmare.61 Here I side with Richard 
Foley who writes: 
The way to respond to skeptical doubts is not to 
legislate against them metaphysically, and it is 
Notes 
The term "infinitism" is not original with 
me. To the best of my knowledge, the first use 
of a related term is in Paul Moser's paper 
"A 
Defense of Epistemic Intuitionism", 
Metaphilosophy (15.3), 1984, pp. 196-204, in 
which he speaks of "epistemic infinitism." 
Also, John Post in The Faces of Existence 
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1987) refers 
to a position similar to the one I am defending 
not to dismiss them as meaningless, self-
defeating, or even odd ... It is to recognize what 
makes epistemology possible makes skeptical 
worries inevitable - namely, our ability to make 
our methods of inquiry themselves into an object 
of inquiry.62 
Now, of course, I think there might be an infinite 
series of reasons available; and if so, our desire for 
a reason can be answered whenever it arises. Foley 
thinks that the lack of final guarantees implies 
that "the reality of our intellectual lives is that we 
are working without nets."63 And I agree that there 
are no final guarantees. There is no final net of 
that sort. 
Nevertheless, although I think the kind of 
"lifetime" guarantee that would settle things 
once and for all is not available, my view is that 
there are important, "limited" guarantees avail-
able; and there might be a limitless set of lim-
ited guarantees available. The limited guarantees 
are the reasons that we can find for our beliefs. 
We have a limited guarantee that p is true when-
ever we have a reason for p. Is this an airtight 
guarantee? 
No. But, we do have limited guarantees. And, 
for all I know, there might be an infinite number 
of such limited guarantees. Thus, although no 
a priori argument is available whose conclusion is 
that there is an infinite regress of objectively and 
subjectively available reasons, as we have seen 
there is also no such argument for the claim that 
there is no such set of reasons available. 
Thus, I would not characterize our epistemic 
predicament as one in which there are no nets. 
For there might be a net whenever we need one. 
Rather, I would characterize it as one in which it 
is possible, as Lewis Carroll would say, that there 
are nets all the way down. 
as the "infinitist's claim." (p. 91) There is, 
however, an important difference between the 
view that Post correctly criticizes and my view 
that will become clear later when I discuss his 
objection to infinitism. 
2 For example, Robert Audi in The Structure of 
Justification (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1993) uses the "regress problem in a 
way that brings out its role in motivating both 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
179 
foundationalism and coherentism." (p. 10). 
He specifically eschews a "full-scale assess-
ment" of the regress argument (p. 127). In 
addition, William Alston, in his Epistemic 
Justification (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 
1989) employs the regress argument to moti-
vate a type of foundationalism. He, too, does 
not examine the argument in detail but says "I 
do not claim that this argument is conclusive; 
I believe it to be open to objection in ways I 
will not be able to go into here. But I do feel 
that it gives stronger support to foundational-
ism than any other regress argument:' (p. 55) 
Finally, Laurence BonJour in his The Structure 
of Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1985) says that the consid-
erations surrounding the regress argument 
are "perhaps the most crucial in the entire 
theory of knowledge" (p. 18) but dismisses 
the infinite regress by alluding to the "finite 
mental capacity" of human beings. Indeed, he 
says "though it is difficult to state in a really 
airtight fashion, this argument [that humans 
have a finite mental capacity] seems to me an 
adequate reason for rejecting [the view that 
the structure of justificatory reasons is infi-
nite ]." (p. 24) We will, of course, consider the 
"finite mind" objection in due course. My 
point is that such a crucial issue in the theory 
of knowledge deserves careful consideration. 
3 I might note in passing that Davidson's char-
acterization of coherence theories - namely 
that "what distinguishes a coherence theory 
is simply the claim that nothing can count as 
a reason for holding a belief except another 
belief" might distinguish it from founda-
tionalist theories, but it does not distinguish 
it from infinitism. See "Coherence Theory 
of Truth and Knowledge" in Truth and 
Interpretation, Ernest Lepore, ed., (New York: 
Blackwell, 1986), pp. 307-19. Citation from 
p.31O. 
4 I take traditional coherentism to be the view 
that the structure of justification is such that 
some proposition, say x, provides some war-
rant for another proposition, say y, and y also 
provides some warrant for x. It is to be distin-
guished from another view, discussed later, 
which holds that coherence is a property of 
sets of propositions and individual proposi-
tions in the set are warranted because they 
belong to such a set. In this non-traditional 
coherentist view, warrant attaches to beliefs 
because they are members of such a set. Unlike 
traditional coherentism, warrant is not a 
property transferred from one proposition to 
another. 
5 Throughout I will be using single-strand 
chains of reasons. Nothing depends upon 
that. I do so in order to make the contrast 
between foundationalism and coherentism 
more readily evident. 
6 Note that stating PAC this way does not entail 
that "being a reason for" is transitive. This 
avoids a valid criticism of an argument for 
infinitism. See John Post, "Infinite Regress 
Argument" in Companion to Epistemology, 
Jonathan Dancy and Ernest Sosa, eds, 
(New York: Blackwell, 1992), pp. 209-12. His 
criticism of infinitism depends upon my own 
argument against the transitivity of justifica-
tion. See Certainty (Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1981), pp. 30-5. Those 
criticisms do not apply here because "being in 
the evidential ancestry of" is transitive. 
7 Laurence BonJour in 
The Structure of 
Empirical Knowledge and Keith Lehrer in 
Theory of Knowledge (Boulder: Westview 
Press, 1990) develop accounts of what I call 
"non -traditional coherentism." 
8 There are other necessary conditions of justi-
fication, but they are not important for the 
discussion here. For example, there must not 
be another proposition, d, available to S that 
overrides r (unless there is an ultimately non-
overridden overrider of d). See my Certainty, 
pp.44-70. 
9 This is important to note since as I understand 
Ernest Sosa's objection to infinitism it is its 
supposed incompatibility with the superveni-
ence of the normative on the non-normative 
that makes it unacceptable. See his "The Raft 
and the Pyramid", Midwest Studies 
in 
Philosophy, vol 5, (Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1980), pp. 3-25, especially sec-
tion 7. James Van Cleve makes a similar point in 
his "Semantic Supervenience and Referential 
Indeterminacy'~ Journal of Philosophy LXXXIX, 
no. 7, (July 1992), pp. 344-61, especially pp. 
350-1 and 356--7. Note that I am not asserting 
that the normative does, in fact, supervene on 
the non-normative. Indeed, I think the issue 

180 
PETER KLEIN 
might be misconceived. Perhaps there are 
some properties - the so-called "normative" 
properties of knowledge and justification -
that are hybrid properties being neither nor-
mative nor non-normative. My claim is 
merely that as sketched in this paper, infin-
itism is compatible with the supervenience 
of the normative on the non-normative. 
10 
Thus, each one of these accounts of objective 
availability specifies a sufficient condition 
that entails that a belief is a reason. If the suf-
ficient condition appeals only to non-nor-
mative properties, as some of them do, then 
what is unique to infinitism satisfies Van 
Cleve's requirement for epistemic superveni-
ence. He says: 
One of the tasks of epistemology is to 
articulate epistemic principles - principles 
of the form "If--, then subject S is justi-
fied in believing proposition p". Such prin-
ciples divide into two classes. One class 
includes principles that warrant inference 
from already justified propositions to fur-
ther propositions; the antecedents of such 
principles will specify that certain proposi-
tions already have some epistemic status 
for the subject. But not all epistemic princi-
ples can be like this. There must also be a 
class of epistemic principles that specify the 
nonepistemic conditions under which 
some beliefs come to have some epistemic 
status or other in the first place - the condi-
tions, one might say, under which epistemic 
status is generated ... [This 1 requirement is 
really just the requirement of epistemic 
supervenience - that there be some nonepis-
temic features that ultimately underlie the 
instantiation of any epistemic property. (Van 
Cleve, 
"Semantic 
Supervenience 
and 
Referential Indeterminacy;' p. 350) 
If I am right that the sufficient conditions 
for both subjective and objective availability 
can be specified in nonepistemic terms, then 
there is no reason for thinking that infin-
it ism is incompatible with epistemic super-
venience. For the conditions are sufficient 
for making beliefs into the required sort of 
reasons. 
There are other conditions besides those 
specified in PAC and PAA that a belief must 
satisfy in order to be justified (see fn. 8), but 
if those also supervene on the non-norma-
tive facts, then infinitism is compatible with 
epistemic supervenience. Those other fea-
tures are not unique to infinitism. The com-
bination of PAC 
and PAA 
is what 
distinguishes infinitism from coherentism 
and foundationalism. My point is that what 
distinguishes infinitism is compatible with 
epistemic supervenience. 
11 
This is a paraphrase of an account developed 
by Roderick Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc., 
1966). See especially fn. 22, p. 23. 
12 
For a development of the individualistically 
relativistic account of objective availability, 
see Richard Foley, The Theory of Epistemic 
Rationality, (Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1987), especially pp. 68-154. 
13 
See, for example: David Lewis, "Scorekeeping 
in a Language Game," Journal of Philosophical 
Logic VIII (1979), pp. 339-59; L. Wittgenstein, 
On 
Certainty, 
G.E.M. 
Anscombe 
and 
G.H. von Wright, ed., (New York: Harper and 
Row, 1972). There are also hints at such a view 
in Aristotle. (Metaphysics, 1 006a-l 0 11 b.) 
14 
This position is advocated by Linda Zagzebski 
in Virtues of the Mind, 
(Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996). 
15 
One problem for some interpretations of 
objective availability needs to be avoided. 
Troy Cross has pointed out to me that if the 
probability of propositions diminishes as the 
chain of reasons lengthens, our beliefs might 
have such a low probability that they would 
not in any normal sense of "justified;' in fact, 
be justified. There are four ways around that 
worry. The first is that there is an infinite 
number of probability gradations available 
given any required probability level of the 
putatively justified proposition. The second is 
that it is the proposition, itself, that is located 
in the chain rather than a proposition with a 
probability assigned. The third is to simply 
reject the reading of"objective probability" in 
frequency terms and treat "p is probable" as 
roughly synonymous with "p is acceptable 
and can be used to make other propositions 
acceptable:' The fourth is simply to reject 
probability theory as providing an appropri-
ate set of conditions for objective availability. 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
181 
16 
See, for example, the passage cited earlier in 
Bonjour, 
The 
Structure 
of Empirical 
Knowledge. (See fn. 2.) 
17 
There is a deep problem with treating beliefs 
as dispositions to have thoughts under the 
appropriately restricted circumstances. For it 
appears that almost any proposition as well 
as its negation could count as believed under 
some range of "appropriately restricted cir-
cumstances." I do not have a settled view 
regarding the way to restrict the range of cir-
cumstances to avoid that consequence. 
Obviously, this is a general, difficult problem 
for a dispositional account of belief. There 
just seem to be too many beliefs. But, as we 
will see, the problem for the infinitist is just 
the opposite. For infinitism seems to require 
more beliefs than we can or do have. It would 
be nice to have a satisfactory dispositional 
account of belief. A fully developed infinitist 
theory must address this issue. Nevertheless, 
since my purpose here is merely to make 
infinitism a view worth exploring, we can 
proceed without solving this general prob-
lem concerning a dispositional account of 
beliefs. 
18 
Ernest Sosa makes a similar point in "The 
Raft and the Pyramid". It is reprinted in 
his book, Knowledge in Perspective, (New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 
pp. 165-91, see especially p. 178. 
19 
Dretske, "Two Conceptions of Knowledge: 
Rational Belief vs. Reliable Belief," Grazer 
Philosophische Studien 40 (1991), pp. 15-30, 
especially p. 18. 
20 
Alvin Goldman, "What is justified belief?," 
in On Knowing and the Known, Kenneth 
G.Lucy,ed.,(Amherst,NewYork:Prometheus 
Books, 1996), p. 190. 
21 
Keith Lehrer, Theory of Knowledge, p. 164. 
22 
Ernest Sosa, Knowledge in Perspective, p. 95. 
23 
Laurence Bonjour, The Structure of Empirical 
Knowledge, especially pp. 9-14. 
24 
See, for example, Outlines ofPyrrhonism, PH 
1,114-17,122-4. 
25 
See, for example, John Williams, "Justified 
Belief and the Infinite Regress Argument;' 
American Philosophical Quarterly XVIII, no 1, 
(1981), pp. 85-8, especially p. 86. 
26 
William Alston, "Two types of Founda-
tionalism;' Journal of Philosophy LXXIII 
(1976), pp. 165-85. The article also appears 
as Essay 1, m Alston's book, Epistemic 
Justification, pp. 19-38. 
27 
Laurence Bonjour, The Structure of Empirical 
Knowledge, pp. 108-9. 
28 
Donald Davidson also seems concerned to 
establish this sort of connection between 
coherence and truth: 
What is needed to answer the skeptic is to 
show that someone with a (more or less) 
coherent set of beliefs has a reason to sup-
pose that his beliefs are not mistaken in the 
main. What we have shown is that it is 
absurd to look for a justifying ground for 
the totality of beliefs, something outside the 
totality which we can use to test or compare 
with our beliefs. The answer to our problem 
must then be to find a reason for supposing 
most of our beliefs are true that is not a 
form of evidence. (Davidson, "Coherence 
Theory of Truth and Knowledge': p. 314) 
29 
See Peter Klein and Ted Warfield, "What 
Price Coherence?;' Analysis 54.3, (July 1994), 
pp.129-32. 
30 
Steven Luper-Foy, "Arbitrary Reasons," in 
Doubting: Contemporary Perspectives on 
Skepticism, Michael Roth and Glenn Ross, 
eds, (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1990), pp. 39-55. Citation is from p. 45. 
31 
Luper-Foy, "Arbitrary Reasons," p. 40. 
32 
See "Questions Concerning Certain Faculties 
Claimed for Man," in the Collected Papers of 
Charles Sanders Peirce, Charles Hartshorne 
and Paul Weiss, eds, (Cambridge, MA: 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 
1965), Vol V, Bk II, pp. 135-55, especially 
pp. 152-3. There he writes: 
Question 7. Whether there is any cognition 
not determined by a previous cognition. 
259. It would seem that there is or has 
been; for since we are in possession of cogni-
tions, which are all determined by previous 
ones and these by cognitions earlier still, 
there must have been a first in this series or 
else our state of cognition at any time is com-
pletely determined according to logical laws, 
by our state at any previous time. But there 
are many facts against this last supposition, 
and therefore in favor of intuitive cognitions. 

182 
PETER KLEIN 
260. On the other hand, since it is impos-
sible to know intuitively that a given cogni-
tion is not determined by a previous one, the 
only way in which this can be known is by 
hypothetic inference from observed facts. 
But to adduce the cognition by which a given 
cognition has been determined is to explain 
the determinations of that cognition. And it 
is a way of explaining them. For something 
entirely out of consciousness which may be 
supposed to determine it, can, as such, only 
be known and only adduced in the determi-
nate cognition in question. So, that to sup-
pose that a cognition is determined solely by 
something absolutely external, is to suppose 
its determinations incapable of explanation. 
Now, this is a hypothesis which is warranted 
under no circumstances, inasmuch as the 
only possible justification for a hypothesis is 
that it explains that facts, and to say that they 
are explained and at the same time to sup-
pose them inexplicable is self-contradictory. 
Peirce may, indeed, be arguing that only 
beliefs (cognitions) can provide a basis for 
other beliefs - nothing "external" can do so. 
He also might be arguing that the "meta-
argument" referred to earlier can not suc-
ceed because one can always ask of the 
supposed meta-justification what justifies it. 
But I am not certain that either is what he is 
claiming. Further, if he is merely claiming 
that cognitions are infinitely revisable given 
new experiences, then he is not advocating 
infinitism. 
33 
John Williams, "Justified Belief and the 
Infinite Regress Argument," p. 85. 
34 Williams, p. 86. 
35 
Richard Foley, "Inferential Justification and 
the Infinite Regress;' American Philosophical 
Quarterly XV, no.4, (1978), pp. 311-16; quo-
tation from pp. 3ll-12. 
36 Williams, p. 86. 
37 
Robert Audi considers the set of beliefs: 2 is 
twice 1,4 is twice 2, etc. Then, he says, "Surely, 
for a finite mind there will be some point or 
other at which the relevant proposition cannot 
be grasped:' (See Audi's "Contemporary 
Foundationalism;' in The Theory of Knowledge: 
Classic and Contemporary Readings, Louis 
Pojman, ed. (Belmont: Wadsworth, 1993), 
pp. 206-13. The quotation is from p. 209.) 
The example is repeated in Audi's book, The 
Structure 
of Justification, 
(New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1993), p. 127. 
My reply is that there are other examples of 
infinite series of beliefs (understood as dis-
positions) that do not involve increasingly 
difficult to grasp propositions (like the one 
about to be given in the main text). 
38 
I am indebted to Vann McGee for this 
point. 
39 
Richard Fumerton, "Metaepistemology and 
Skepticism;' in Doubting: Contemporary 
Perspectives on Skepticism, pp. 57-68, quota-
tion from p. 60. The same account of justifi-
cation is 
given 
in Fumerton's book, 
Metaepistemology and Skepticism (Lanham, 
Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield Publishers, 
1995), p. 36. 
40 
Richard Foley, "Inferential Justification and 
the Infinite Regress;' esp. pp. 314-15. 
41 
There is a related point which I do think 
might be telling against the relatively thin 
view of justification I am proposing; and it 
might appear that this would jeopardize 
infinitism. Although it is clear that the 
requirement that S have a justification about 
what constitutes good reasoning is too strong 
a requirement of having a justification sim-
pliciter or of paradigmatic forms of having a 
justification simpliciter for the reason just 
given, it is plausible to suggest that S must 
believe, at least dispositionally, that e makes 
p probable (to use Fumerton's terminology) 
whenever S is justified simpliciter in believ-
ing that p and S's available reason for p is e. 
That is a somewhat thicker notion of justi-
fication than the one I am proposing. It is 
plausible because the intuitions that inform 
the Truetemp case can be employed to sup-
port this moderately thick view. Suppose 
Mr. Truetemp believes it is 104 degrees and 
he also believes that he has an accurate 
thermo meter-cum -temp era ture-belief-
generator implanted in his head. On my 
"thin" view, if S believes that he has an 
accurate thermometer-cum -temperature-
belief-generator implanted in his head, then 
S has a justification for the belief that it 
is 104 degrees, if, ceteris paribus, he has 
a good enough, non-question begging 
reason for believing that he has an accurate 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
183 
thermo meter-cum -tem p era ture -belief-
generator implanted in his head, and he has 
a reason for that reason, etc. But on my thin 
view, S might not believe that is his real 
reason. He might believe (dispositionally or 
occurrently) falsely, for example, that his 
reason is that it is Tuesday and that it is 
always 104 degrees on Tuesday. Of course, 
that is not a reason on my account because 
that belief, like the one offered in the Fish/ 
Army Boots Case considered earlier, is not 
objectively available to Mr. Truetemp. I think 
such a case is best seen as one in which 
Mr. Truetemp does not know what his real 
reason is - but that he has a good enough 
reason available in both the objective and 
subjective sense. Thus, I think that, ceteris 
paribus, he has a justification simpliciter 
and that, ceteris paribus, he does know that 
the temperature is 104 degrees, but he does 
not know how he knows that the tempera-
ture is 104 degrees or even that he knows 
that. Nevertheless, I acknowledge the intui-
tive tug in the opposite direction - namely 
that he is not justified simpliciter, and hence 
does not know, because he would offer the 
"wrong" reason for his belief that it is 104 
degrees. 
Let me make the distinction between the 
three views of justification absolutely clear. 
The "thin" view (the one I think is correct) 
holds that 5 has a justification for p on the 
basis of r entails that (a) 5 believes rand (b) r 
is a reason for p. It does not require that, in 
addition, either (1) S believes that r is a 
reason for p or (2) S is justified in believing 
that r is a reason for p. The "moderately thick 
view" (the one I think is plausible) adds (1) 
to the thin view. The "extremely thick" view 
(the one I think cannot be correct) adds (2), 
and presumably (1) as well, to the thin view. 
What is crucial to note is that, without 
jeopardizing infinitism, I can grant that S must 
disposition ally believe that e makes p prob-
able in order for p to be justified by e for S. 
Of course on such a view, S would, at the next 
link in the chain, have to believe that e1 makes 
e probable, and, at the next link believe that 
e2 makes e1 probable, etc. But note that grant-
ing that this thicker view of justification is 
correct would not force the infinitist into 
requiring that S have an implausibly complex 
belief. The beliefs at every step of the regress 
are no more complex than the one at the first 
step. So, the intuitive tug of this moderately 
thick view of justification can be allowed to 
modify the thin view without damaging my 
central claim. I resist the tug because I think 
it is the reasons available to S for p that deter-
mine whether S has a justification for p 
regardless of S's beliefs about those reasons. 
42 
There are some places in the Posterior 
Analytics where Aristotle might be claiming 
that it does follow from the fact that not all 
reasoning is the result of demonstration that 
the structure of reasons cannot be infinite: 
Our own doctrine is that not all knowledge 
is demonstrative: on the contrary, knowl-
edge of the immediate premisses is inde-
pendent of demonstration. (The necessity 
of this is obvious: for since we must know 
the prior premisses from which the demon-
stration is drawn, and since the regress must 
end in immediate truths, those truths must 
be indemonstrable.) [72b18-23] 
[Basic 
Works of Aristotle, Richard McKeon, ed., 
(New York: Random House, 1941)] 
My point is that Aristotle's argument con-
cerning the genesis of knowledge can be 
granted without granting that the structure 
of justification is finite. Demonstration 
cannot be required to bring about all knowl-
edge. But it does not follow that reasons 
could not be given for all beliefs. 
43 
Basic Works of Aristotle, Richard McKeon, 
ed.,1011al-14. 
44 
1. T. Oakley, ''An Argument for Skepticism 
Concerning Justified Beliefs," American 
Philosophical Quarterly XIII, no. 3, (1976), 
pp. 221-8, especially pp. 226-7. 
45 
We said, in PAC, that for all x and for all y, if x 
is contained in the ancestry of y, y cannot be 
contained in the ancestry of x. Let "xCy" stand 
for "x is contained in the ancestry of y': 
1. (x)(y)(xCy~ 
1. Premiss (PAC) 
-(yCx)) 
2. aCa~-(aCa) 
2. UI (twice), 1 
3. aCa 
3. Assume, for reductio 
4. -(aCa) 
4. 2,3 MP 

184 
PETER KLEIN 
46 
5. -(aCa) 
5. CP (discharge), 3--4 
6. (xHxCx) 
6. UG,5 
In order to foreclose a possible objection, it is 
important to note that my claim that if every 
link contains q, the chain would be question 
begging does not have the unacceptable 
consequence that if S is justified in believing 
(p & q), then S is not justified in believing 
that q. My claim is merely that it is not always 
the case that (p & q) is an acceptable (i.e., 
non-question begging) reason for q. What 
typically occurs is that the chain of reasons 
includes p and includes q before including 
(p & q). But, of course, if the chain is of that 
form, then S would be justified in believing p 
and justified in believing q when S is justified 
in believing (p & q) because the justification of 
(p & q) depends upon the prior justification 
of p and the prior justification of q. 
I say "typically" in the preceding para-
graph, because there do seem to be some 
chains of reasoning in which (p & q) precedes 
p and precedes q. Consider this one (where 
"xRy" stands for "x is a reason for y"): 
Sally says "p & q" and whatever Sally says 
is true} R {(p & q)} R {q} 
That chain does not appear to me to be 
question begging. The crucial point here is 
that my denial that (p & q) is always a reason 
for q (the presupposition of Oakley's argu-
ment), does not commit me to denying that 
justification distributes over conjunction. 
47 
I have condensed the argument a bit. In par-
ticular, there are other constraints besides the 
question begging one discussed by Post. But I 
believe that they are not relevant. See John 
Post, "Infinite Regress of Justification and of 
Explanation;' Philosophical Studies XXXVIII, 
(1980), pp. 32-7, especially pp. 34-5. The 
argument, in a slightly revised form appears 
in Post's book, The Faces of Existence, (Ithaca: 
Cornell University Press, 1987), pp. 84-92. 
48 
I might note in passing that if PAA and PAC 
are necessary requirements of justification, 
both foundationalism and coherentism lead 
to the result that no contingent proposition 
is justified, since they advocate reasoning 
that violates those principles. I think any 
49 
50 
theory of justification that automatically 
leads to the view that no proposition is justi-
fied ought to be rejected as readily as a view 
that has the consequence that all contingent 
propositions are justified. 
Ernest Sosa, "The Raft and the Pyramid;' 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Section 5. 
Post claims in The Faces of Existence that his 
new formulation of the reductio argument 
meets the objection by Sosa (see his fn. 21, 
p. 91). As I construe Sosa's objection, namely 
that more is required for a belief to have a 
justification than the mere existence of a 
series of beliefs which under some circum-
stances would provide a justification, Post's 
reformulation does not meet Sosa's objec-
tion. Post says that in such a series "justifica-
tion is supposed to accumulate for [the first 
item in the series] merely as a result of [the 
person's] being able endlessly to meet the 
demand for justification simply by appeal-
ing to the next inferential justification in the 
[series]." (p. 90). My point is that there will 
not be such a series of available reasons for 
some beliefs. 
51 
The infinitist must be careful here not to fall 
into a trap laid by Paul Moser. He points out 
correctly that if the distinction between con-
ditional (or potential) regresses and actual 
ones were that there is some external infor-
mation that makes each step justified, then it 
could appear that the infinitist is committed 
to the view that the reason for believing any 
member of the chain is not the merely the 
antecedent in the chain but the antecedent 
plus the "external" information. That is, the 
external information would become an 
additional reason for holding the belief. See 
Paul Moser, "Whither Infinite Regresses of 
Justification," The Southern Journal of 
Philosophy XXIII, no. 1, (1985), pp. 65-74, 
especially p. 71. 
But the infinitist need not fall into the trap. 
The infinitist holds that there are some facts 
in virtue of which a belief is a reason. These 
facts are not part of the chain of reasoning. 
52 
Jonathan Dancy, Introduction to Contem-
porary Epistemology, (Oxford: Basil Black-
well, 1985) p. 55. 
53 
I use the term "provisional" justification 
rather than "conditional" justification (as used 

HUMAN KNOWLEDGE 
185 
by Dancy) because the term "provisional" 
more clearly underscores the fact that the 
reasons in the chains are replaceable. 
54 
Outlines of Pyrrhonism, PH I, 166. 
55 
Richard Fumerton, Metaepistemology and 
Skepticism, p. 57. Some of what follows 
repeats my comments on Fumerton's book 
in "Foundationalism and the Infinite Regress 
ofReasons,"PhilosophyandPhenomenological 
Research LVIII, No.4 (1989), pp. 219-25. 
56 
Fumerton, p. 92. 
57 
A case similar to this one was discussed in a 
paper that Ernest Sosa presented at the 
Chapel Hill Philosophy Colloquium entitled 
"Two False Dichotomies: Foundationalisml 
Coherentism and Internalism/Externalism" 
on 10/17/97. 
58 
BonJour makes a similar point this way: 
... the fact that a clever person could invent 
an acceptable inferential justification on the 
spot when challenged to justify a hunch or 
arbitrary claim of some sort, so that the jus-
tification was in a sense available to him, 
would not mean that his belief was inferen-
tially justified prior to that time ... (See 
BonJour, 
The 
Structure 
of Empirical 
Knowledge, p. 19) 
59 
Sosa, "Two False Dichotomies: Founda-
tionalism/Coherentism and Internalisml 
Externalism:' manuscript, p. 6. 
60 It is crucial to note that I have been arguing 
that a necessary condition of S's being justi-
fied in believing that p is that S has an appro-
priate justification for p and having such a 
justification requires that there be an infinite 
number of non-repeating reasons available 
to S. I was not suggesting that was a suffi-
cient condition for S's being justified or even 
having a justification (see fn. 8 above). So, 
Sosa's objection, even if valid, cannot be 
directed towards the main claim of this 
paper. Nevertheless, it is an important objec-
tion since the infinitist will at least have to 
show how it is possible for S to have a justi-
fied belief according to the infinitist's account 
of justified belief, if the distinctive type of 
adult human knowledge is to be shown to be 
possible. Nevertheless, let us grant for the 
sake of argument that somehow it could be 
shown - either through philosophic argu-
ment, or perhaps even by cognitive science, 
that our beliefs do not (or can not) have the 
requisite causal history as required by infin-
itism (or foundational ism or coherentism, 
for that matter). What would be the conse-
quences to infinitism (foundationalism or 
coherentism)? I think that is very far from 
clear-cut. The infinitist is claiming that a 
normatively acceptable set of reasons must 
be infinitely long and non-repeating if we 
are to avoid the pitfalls of foundationalism 
(arbitrariness) and coherentism (begging 
the question). If infinitism correctly speci-
fies our current concept about what is 
required for a belief to have the appropriate 
normative pedigree and if it were to turn out 
that beliefs don't (or can't) have the requisite 
causal structure, then we have at least three 
choices: (1) We can revise our concept of the 
normative structure of good reasoning or 
(2) we can adopt a form of Pyrrhonism 
(withholding assent to any proposition 
requiring a justification) or (3) we can accept 
an antinomy. It would not follow that the 
normative 
constraints were 
incorrectly 
described - unless, perhaps, epistemic oughts 
imply epistemic cans. But that seems highly 
dubious. Would it not be possible for it to be 
the case that the rules of inference that are 
most truth conducive are such that we are 
not "wired" to employ them? If so, there is a 
perfectly good sense in which we ought to 
reason in some way that we can't. 
61 
See Michael Williams, Unnatural Doubts 
(Oxford, UK and Cambridge, MA: Black-
well, 1991). 
62 
Richard Foley, "Skepticism and Rationality," 
in Doubting: Contemporary Perspectives on 
Skepticism, cited earlier, pp. 69-81, quota-
tion from p. 75. 
63 
Foley, "Skepticism and Rationality," p. 80. 
For a full development of the "no nets" view, 
see Richard Foley, Working Without a Net: 
A Study of Egocentric Epistemology, (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1993). 


PART III 
Defining Knowledge 


Introduction 
The papers in this section are concerned with questions of analysis. An analysis, at least, 
provides informative, necessary, and sufficient conditions. Can knowledge be analyzed, 
and if so how? 
Edmund Gettier's landmark paper successfully refuted the traditional analysis of 
knowledge as justified true belief. Through a series of examples, Gettier shows that one 
can believe what is true and be justified in so believing and yet fail to know. Justified 
true belief is not sufficient for knowledge. 
What changes must be made to the traditional account, then, to escape the Gettier 
cases? One historically influential position requires that, to know that p, there must be 
no true proposition, q, such that, if q were to be become justified for 5 at t, p would no 
longer be justified for 5 at t. (Peter Klein, for example, has advocated such a position.) 
Gilbert Harman criticizes this sort of account, relying on an example based originally 
on one given by Keith Lehrer and Thomas Paxson, Jr. Suppose I see Tom steal a library 
book, and this is the testimony I give before the University Judicial Council. As it hap-
pens, later that day, after I have left the hearing room, Tom's mother testifies that Tom 
is thousands of miles away, but that his identical twin, Buck, who might well do such 
things, is in town. Suppose, further, that Tom's mother is a pathological liar and that 
this is clear to all in the courtroom. Myself, I know nothing about Tom's mother, brother, 
or any further testimony. Do I know that Tom stole the book? According to the histori-
cally influential position, the answer would be no. But Harman claims, intuitively, that 
it is yes. 
Harman's suggested fourth condition for knowledge that p requires that "One's con-
clusion that p is not based solely on reasoning that essentially involves false intermedi-
ate conclusions." The problem posed by the example of Tom is then addressed as 
follows. First, reasoning is construed so as to involve a claim about the evidence one 
does not possess. Yet the construal is not so strong as to require that there be no evi-
dence whatever that if known would destroy one's justification. Rather, the claim must 
be that there is no undermining evidence one does not possess. Although Harman 
admits he cannot provide criteria for distinguishing true propositions that constitute 

190 
INTRODUCTION 
undermining evidence from those that are such that if known would render the person 
unjustified, he notes that there is an intuitive difference, and that this difference is at 
work in our judgments about Tom. 
Linda Zagzebski doesn't offer a specific suggestion for a fourth condition on knowl-
edge but does argue for a general constraint on responses to the Gettier problem. She 
argues that as long as an analysis of knowledge implies what she calls "warrant fallibi-
lism," Gettier problems will be inescapable. Traditionally, epistemologists have granted 
a close connection between truth and justification (or warrant). For example, perhaps 
a justified belief is one in which the available evidence makes the truth of the belief very 
likely or perhaps a justified belief is one that was produced by faculties that are usually 
very reliable. But epistemologists have not insisted that this connection between justi-
fication and truth is a necessary one. In other words, epistemologists have favored war-
rant fallibilism, the view that it is possible for a belief to be justified (or warranted) but 
false. A Gettier case arises when an accident of bad luck that "disconnects" the justifica-
tion of a belief from its usual close connection with truth is cancelled out by an acci-
dent of good luck that makes the belief true nonetheless. Zagzebski shows that both 
internalist and externalist accounts (including Plantinga's proper functional account) 
of justification are subject to Gettier problems, and she provides a two-step recipe for 
constructing a Gettier counter-example for any analysis of knowledge that implies war-
rant fallibilism. First, construct a case of a belief that includes a degree of justification 
(or warrant) sufficient for knowledge but ensure that some accident renders the belief 
false. Second, add another element of luck that makes the belief true in a way that leaves 
the degree of justification unchanged. Voila: a Gettier counter-example! 
Timothy Williamson proposes a reorientation for epistemology - that we treat 
knowledge as unanalyzable and seek rather to understand epistemological phenomena 
generally (e.g., justified belief, evidence, warranted assertion) in terms of knowledge. 
This approach has come to be called knowledge-first epistemology. But why did we 
think knowledge was definable in the first place? We endorsed the following reasoning. 
Because knowing that p entails both the mental state of believing that p and the (typi-
cally) non-mental state of its being true that p, knowledge must be some sort of com-
posite involving these two components. Williamson argues that this reasoning is 
incorrect. Just because something entails something non-mental as well as something 
mental does not mean that it has these as component parts. And surely our inability to 
complete the full factorization provides evidence that knowledge is not so factorizable. 
This frees us to affirm what seems plausible on its face, that knowledge itself is a mental 
state. Williamson goes on to argue that knowledge can be identified as the broadest fac-
tive mental state. (A mental state with a content pis factive if one can be in it only if p.) 
Further Reading 
Alston, William P., Epistemic Justification (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1989). 
Chisholm, Roderick, 
Theory of Knowledge 
(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1966, 2nd 
edn 1977, 3rd edn 1989). 
Craig, Edward, Knowledge and the State of Nature 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990). 
Fogelin, Robert, 
Pyrrhonian 
Reflections on 
Knowledge and Justification (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1997). 
Goldman, Alvin, "A Causal Theory of Knowing:' 
Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), pp. 357-72. 
--, Epistemology and Cognition (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1986). 

PART III 
191 
Lehrer, Keith, Theory of Knowledge (Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1990). 
Moser, 
Paul 
K., 
Knowledge 
and Evidence 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1989). 
Plantinga, Alvin, Warrant and Proper Function 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). 
Pollock, John, Contemporary Theories of Knowledge 
(Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1986). 
Roth, M. D. and L. Galis (eds), Knowing: Essays in 
the Analysis of Knowledge (New York: Random 
House, 1970). 
Shope, Robert K., The Analysis of Knowing 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1983). 
Sosa, Ernest, Knowledge in Perspective: Selected 
Essays in Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991). 
Williamson, Timothy, Knowledge and Its Limits 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000). 
Zagzebski, Linda Trinkhaus, Virtues of the Mind: 
An Inquiry into the Nature of Virtue and the 
Ethical Foundations of Knowledge (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996). 

CHAPTER 15 
Is Justified True Belief 
Knowledge? 
Edmund Gettier 
Various attempts have been made in recent years 
to state necessary and sufficient conditions for 
someone's knowing a given proposition. The 
attempts have often been such that they can be 
stated in a form similar to the following: l 
(a) 
S knows that P IFF 
(i) 
P is true, 
(ii) 
S believes that 
P,and 
(iii) 
S is justified in 
believing that P. 
For example, Chisholm has held that the follow-
ing gives the necessary and sufficient conditions 
for knowledge:2 
(b) 
S knows that P IFF 
(i) 
S accepts P, 
(ii) 
S has adequate 
evidence for P, 
and 
(iii) 
P is true. 
Ayer has stated the necessary and sufficient 
conditions for knowledge as follows: 3 
(c) 
S knows that P IFF 
(i) 
P is true, 
(ii) 
S is sure that P 
is true, and 
(iii) 
S has the rightto 
be sure that P is 
true. 
Originally published in Analysis (1963), pp. 121-3. 
I shall argue that (a) is false in that the conditions 
stated therein do not constitute a sufficient condi-
tion for the truth of the proposition that S knows 
that P. The same argument will show that (b) and 
(c) fail if "has adequate evidence for" or "has the 
right to be sure that" is substituted for "is justified 
in believing that" throughout. 
I shall begin by noting two points. First, in 
that sense of "justified" in which S's being justi-
fied in believing P is a necessary condition of S's 
knowing that P, it is possible for a person to be 
justified in believing a proposition which is in 
fact false. Second, for any proposition P, if S is 
justified in believing P and P entails Q and S 
deduces Q from P and accepts Q as a result of this 
deduction, then S is justified in believing Q. 
Keeping these two points in mind, I shall now 
present two cases in which the conditions stated 
in (a) are true for some proposition, though it is 
at the same time false that the person in question 
knows that proposition. 
Case I 
Suppose that Smith and Jones have applied for 
a certain job. And suppose that Smith has 
strong evidence for the following conjunctive 
proposition: 
(d) 
Jones is the man who will get the job, 
and Jones has ten coins in his pocket. 

IS JUSTIFIED TRUE BELIEF KNOWLEDGE? 
193 
Smith's evidence for (d) might be that the presi-
dent of the company assured him that Jones 
would in the end be selected, and that he, Smith, 
had counted the coins in Jones's pocket ten min-
utes ago. Proposition (d) entails: 
(e) 
The man who will get the job has ten 
coins in his pocket. 
Let us suppose that Smith sees the entailment 
from (d) to (e) and accepts (e) on the grounds of 
(d), for which he has strong evidence. In this 
case, Smith is clearly justified in believing that 
(e) is true. 
But imagine, further, that unknown to Smith, 
he himself, not Jones, will get the job. And, also, 
unknown to Smith, he himself has ten coins in 
his pocket. Proposition (e) is then true, though 
proposition (d), from which Smith inferred (e), is 
false. In our example, then, all of the following are 
true: (i) (e) is true, (ii) Smith believes that (e) is 
true, and (iii) Smith is justified in believing that 
(e) is true. But it is equally clear that Smith does 
not know that (e) is true; for (e) is true in virtue of 
the number of coins in Smith's pocket, while 
Smith does not know how many coins are in 
Smith's pocket, and bases his belief in (e) on a 
count of the coins in Jones's pocket, whom he 
falsely believes to be the man who will get the job. 
Case II 
Let us suppose that Smith has strong evidence for 
the following proposition: 
(f) 
Jones owns a Ford. 
Smith's evidence might be that Jones has at all 
times in the past within Smith's memory owned a 
Notes 
Plato seems to be considering some such defi-
nition at Theaetetus 201, and perhaps accept-
ing one at Meno 98. 
2 Roderick 
M. 
Chisholm, 
Perceiving: 
A 
Philosophical Study (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1957), p. 16. 
car, and always a Ford, and that Jones has just 
offered Smith a ride while driving a Ford. Let us 
imagine, now, that Smith has another friend, 
Brown, of whose whereabouts he is totally igno-
rant. Smith selects three place names quite at 
random and constructs the following three prop-
ositions: 
(g) 
Either Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is in 
Boston. 
(h) 
Either Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is in 
Barcelona. 
(i) 
Either Jones owns a Ford, or Brown is in 
Brest -Litovsk. 
Each of these propositions is entailed by (f). 
Imagine that Smith realizes the entailment of 
each of these propositions he has constructed by 
(f), and proceeds to accept (g), (h), and (i) on the 
basis of (f). Smith has correctly inferred (g), (h), 
and (i) from a proposition for which he has strong 
evidence. Smith is therefore completely justified 
in believing each of these three propositions. 
Smith, of course, has no idea where Brown is. 
But imagine now that two further conditions 
hold. First, Jones does not own a Ford, but is at 
present driving a rented car. And second, by the 
sheerest coincidence, and entirely unknown to 
Smith, the place mentioned in proposition (h) 
happens really to be the place where Brown is. If 
these two conditions hold, then Smith does not 
know that (h) is true, even though (i) (h) is true, 
(ii) Smith does believe that (h) is true, and 
(iii) Smith is justified in believing that (h) is true. 
These two examples show that definition (a) 
does not state a sufficient condition for someone's 
knowing a given proposition. The same cases, 
with appropriate changes, will suffice to show 
that neither definition (b) nor definition (c) do so 
either. 
3 A. J. Ayer, The Problem of Knowledge (London: 
Pelican, 1976). 

CHAPTER 16 
Thought, Selections 
Gilbert Harman 
Knowledge and Probability 
The lottery paradox 
Some philosophers argue that we never simply 
believe anything that we do not take to be certain. 
Instead we believe it to a greater or lesser degree; 
we assign it a higher or lower "subjective proba-
bility." If knowledge implies belief, on this view 
we never know anything that isn't absolutely cer-
tain. That conflicts with ordinary views about 
knowledge, since our degree of belief in some 
things we think we know is greater than our 
degree of belief in other things we think we 
know. 
We might count as believed anything whose 
"subjective probability" exceeds .99. But that 
would also conflict with ordinary views. We do 
not suppose that a man inconsistently believes of 
every participant in a fair lottery that the partici-
pant will lose, even though we suppose that the 
man assigns a subjective probability greater than 
.99 to each person's losing. If ordinary views are 
to be preserved, belief must be distinguished from 
high degree of belief. 
A rule of inductive inference is sometimes 
called a "rule of acceptance;' since it tells us what 
we can accept (i.e., believe), given other beliefs, 
Originally published in G. Harman, Thought(Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1973). 
degrees of belief, etc. A purely probabilistic rule 
of acceptance says that we may accept something 
if and only if its probability is greater than .99. 
Kyburg points out that such a rule leads to a 
"lottery paradox" since it authorizes the accept-
ance of an inconsistent set of beliefs, each saying 
of a particular participant in a lottery that he 
will lose.! 
It is true that no contradiction arises if conclu-
sions are added to the evidence on whose basis 
probabilities are calculated. Concluding that a 
particular person will lose changes the evidential 
probability that the next person will lose. When 
there are only 100 people left, we cannot infer the 
next person will lose, since the evidential proba-
bility of this no longer exceeds .99. But this does 
not eliminate paradox. The paradox is not just 
that use of a purely probabilistic rule leads to 
inconsistent beliefs. It is not obviously irrational 
to have inconsistent beliefs even when we know 
that they are inconsistent. It has occasionally been 
suggested2 that a rational man believes that he has 
at least some (other) false beliefs. If so, it follows 
logically that at least one thing he believes is false 
(if nothing else, then his belief that he has other 
false beliefs); a rational man will know that. So a 
rational man knows that at least one thing he 
believes is false. Nevertheless it is paradoxical to 
suppose that we could rationally believe of every 
participant in a lottery that he will lose; and it is 
just as paradoxical to suppose that we could 

THOUGHT, SELECTIONS 
195 
rationally believe this of all but 100 participants 
in a large lottery. 
The lottery paradox can be avoided if a purely 
probabilistic rule of acceptance is taken to be rel-
evant not to the acceptance of various individual 
hypotheses but rather to the set of what we accept. 
The idea is that the probability of the whole set 
must exceed .99. We are free to choose among 
various hypotheses saying that one or another 
participant in a lottery loses as long as the prob-
ability of the conjunction of all hypotheses 
accepted remains above .99. (The idea requires a 
distinction between what is simply accepted and 
what is accepted as evidence. If we could add new 
conclusions to the evidence, the lottery paradox 
would be generated as indicated in the previous 
paragraph.) However, although this version of a 
purely probabilistic rule does not yield the lottery 
paradox, it does not fit in with ordinary views, as 
I shall now argue. 
Gettier examples and probabilistic rules 
of acceptance 
In any Gettier example we are presented with 
similar cases in which someone infers h from 
things he knows, h is true, and he is equally justi-
fied in making the inference in either case.3 In the 
one case he comes to know that h and in the other 
case he does not. I have observed that a natural 
explanation of many Gettier examples is that the 
relevant inference involves not only the final 
conclusion h but also at least one intermediate 
conclusion true in the one case but not in the 
other. And I have suggested that any account of 
inductive inference should show why such inter-
mediate conclusions are essentially involved in 
the relevant inferences. Gettier cases are thus to 
be explained by appeal to the principle 
P Reasoning that essentially involves false 
conclusions, intermediate or final, cannot 
give one knowledge. 
It is easy to see that purely probabilistic rules 
of acceptance do not permit an explanation of 
Gettier examples by means of principle P. 
Reasoning in accordance with a purely probabil-
istic rule involves essentially only its final conclu-
sion. Since that conclusion is highly probable, it 
can be inferred without reference to any other 
conclusions; in particular, there will be no 
intermediate conclusion essential to the inference 
that is true in one case and false in the other. 
For example, Mary's friend Mr Nogot con-
vinces her that he has a Ford. He tells her that he 
owns a Ford, he shows her his ownership certifi-
cate, and he reminds her that she saw him drive 
up in a Ford. On the basis of this and similar evi-
dence, Mary concludes that Mr Nogot owns a 
Ford. From that she infers that one of her friends 
owns a Ford. In a normal case, Mary might in this 
way come to know that one of her friends owns a 
Ford. However, as it turns out in this case, Mary is 
wrong about Nogot. His car has just been repos-
sessed and towed away. It is no longer his. On the 
other hand, Mary's friend Mr Havit does own a 
Ford, so she is right in thinking that one of her 
friends owns a Ford. However, she does not real-
ize that Havit owns a Ford. Indeed, she hasn't 
been given the slightest reason to think that he 
owns a Ford. It is false that Mr Nogot owns a 
Ford, but it is true that one of Mary's friends owns 
a Ford. Mary has a justified true belief that one of 
her friends owns a Ford but she does not know 
that one of her friends owns a Ford. She does not 
know this because principle P has been violated. 
Mary's reasoning essentially involves the false 
conclusion that Mr. Nogot owns a Ford.4 
But, if there were probabilistic rules of accept-
ance, there would be no way to exhibit the rele-
vance of Mary's intermediate conclusion. For 
Mary could then have inferred her final conclu-
sion (that one of her friends owns a Ford) directly 
from her original evidence, all of which is true. 
Mr Nogot is her friend, he did say he owns a Ford, 
he did show Mary an ownership certificate, she 
did see him drive up in a Ford, etc. If a purely 
probabilistic rule would permit Mary to infer 
from that evidence that her friend Nogot owns a 
Ford, it would also permit her to infer directly 
that one of her friends owns a Ford, since the 
latter conclusion is at least as probable on the evi-
dence as the former. Given a purely probabilistic 
rule of acceptance, Mary need not first infer an 
intermediate conclusion and then deduce her 
final conclusion, since by means of such a rule she 
could directly infer her final conclusion. The 
intermediate conclusion would not be essential to 
her inference, and her failure to know that one of 
her friends owns a Ford could not be explained by 
appeal to principle P. 

196 
GILBERT HARMAN 
A defender of purely probabilistic rules might 
reply that what has gone wrong in this case is not 
that Mary must infer her conclusion from some-
thing false but rather that, from the evidence that 
supports her conclusion, she could also infer 
something false, namely that Mr Nogot owns a 
Ford. In terms of principle P, this would be to 
count as essential to Mary's inference any conclu-
sion the probabilistic rule would authorize from 
her starting point. But given any evidence, some 
false conclusion will be highly probable on that 
evidence. This follows, e.g., from the existence of 
lotteries. For example, let s be a conclusion saying 
under what conditions the New Jersey State Lottery 
was most recently held. Let q say what ticket won 
the grand prize. Then consider the conclusion, not 
both sand q. Call that conclusion r. The conclu-
sion r is highly probable, given evidence having 
nothing to do with the outcome of the recent lot-
tery, but r is false. If such highly probable false 
conclusions were always considered essential to 
an inference, Mary could never come to know 
anything. 
The problem is that purely probabilistic con-
siderations do not suffice to account for the pecu-
liar relevance of Mary's conclusion about Nogot. 
Various principles might be suggested; but none 
of them work. For example, we might suspect 
that the trouble with r is that it has nothing to do 
with whether any of Mary's friends owns a Ford. 
Even if Mary were to assume that r is false, her 
original conclusion would continue to be highly 
probable on her evidence. So we might suggest 
that an inferable conclusion t is essential to an 
inference only if the assumption that t was false 
would block the inference. That would distin-
guish Mary's relevant intermediate conclusion, 
that Nogot owns a Ford, from the irrelevant con-
clusion r, since if Mary assumed that Nogot does 
not own a Ford she could not conclude that one 
of her friends owns a Ford. 
But again, if there is a purely probabilistic rule 
of acceptance, there will always be an inferable 
false t such that the assumption that it is false 
would block even inferences that give us knowl-
edge. For let h be the conclusion of any inference 
not concerned with the New Jersey Lottery and 
let r be as above. Then we can let t be the conjunc-
tion h & r. This t is highly probable on the same 
evidence e on which h is highly probable; t is false; 
and h is not highly probable relative to the 
evidence e & (not t). Any inference would be 
undermined by such a t, given a purely probabil-
istic rule of acceptance along with the suggested 
criterion of essential conclusions. 
The trouble is that purely probabilistic rules 
are incompatible with the natural account of 
Gettier examples by means of principle P. The 
solution is not to attempt to modify P but rather 
to modify our account of inference. 
Knowledge and Explanation 
A causal theory 
Goldman suggests that we know only if there is 
the proper sort of causal connection between our 
belief and what we know.s For example, we per-
ceive that there has been an automobile accident 
only if the accident is relevantly causally respon-
sible, by way of our sense organs, for our belief 
that there has been an accident. Similarly, we 
remember doing something only if having done it 
is relevantly causally responsible for our current 
memory of having done it. Although in some 
cases the fact that we know thus simply begins a 
causal chain that leads to our belief, in other cases 
the causal connection is more complicated. If 
Mary learns that Mr Havit owns a Ford, Havit's 
past ownership is causally responsible for the evi-
dence she has and also responsible (at least in 
part) for Havit's present ownership. Here the rel-
evant causal connection consists in there being a 
common cause of the belief and of the state of 
affairs believed in. 
Mary fails to know in the original Nogot- Havit 
case because the causal connection is lacking. 
Nogot's past ownership is responsible for her evi-
dence but is not responsible for the fact that one 
of her friends owns a Ford. Havit's past owner-
ship at least partly accounts for why one of her 
friends now owns a Ford, but it is not responsible 
for her evidence. Similarly, the man who is told 
something true by a speaker who does not believe 
what he says fails to know because the truth of 
what is said is not causally responsible for the fact 
that it is said. 
General knowledge does not fit into this simple 
framework. That all emeralds are green neither 
causes nor is caused by the existence of the par-
ticular green emeralds examined when we come 

THOUGHT, SELECTIONS 
197 
to know that all emeralds are green. Goldman 
handles such examples by counting logical con-
nections among the causal connections. The 
belief that all emeralds are green is, in an extended 
sense, relevantly causally connected to the fact 
that all emeralds are green, since the evidence 
causes the belief and is logically entailed by what 
is believed. 
It is obvious that not every causal connection, 
especially in this extended sense, is relevant to 
knowledge. Any two states of affairs are logically 
connected simply because both are entailed by 
their conjunction. If every such connection were 
relevant, the analysis Goldman suggests would 
have us identify knowledge with true belief, since 
there would always be a relevant "causal connec-
tion" between any state of true belief and the state 
of affairs believed in. Goldman avoids this reduc-
tion of his analysis to justified true belief by saying 
that when knowledge is based on inference rele-
vant causal connections must be "reconstructed" 
in the inference. Mary knows that one of her 
friends owns a Ford only if her inference recon-
structs the relevant causal connection between 
evidence and conclusion. 
But what does it mean to say that her inference 
must "reconstruct" the relevant causal connec-
tion? Presumably it means that she must infer or 
be able to infer something about the causal con-
nection between her conclusion and the evidence 
for it. And this suggests that Mary must make at 
least two inferences. First she must infer her orig-
inal conclusion and second she must infer some-
thing about the causal connection between 
the conclusion and her evidence. Her second con-
clusion is her "reconstruction" of the causal 
connection. But how detailed must her recon-
struction be? If she must reconstruct every detail 
of the causal connection between evidence and 
conclusion, she will never gain knowledge by 
way of inference. If she need only reconstruct 
some "causal connection," she will always know, 
since she will always be able to infer that evi-
dence and conclusion are both entailed by their 
conjunction. 
I suggest that it is a mistake to approach the 
problem as a problem about what else Mary 
needs to infer before she has knowledge of her 
original conclusion. Goldman's remark about 
reconstructing the causal connection makes 
more sense as a remark about the kind of inference 
Mary needs to reach her original conclusion in 
the first place. It has something to do with prin-
ciple P and the natural account of the Gettier 
examples. 
Nogot presents Mary with evidence that he owns 
a Ford. She infers that one of her friends owns a 
Ford. She is justified in reaching that conclusion 
and it is true. However, since it is true, not because 
Nogot owns a Ford, but because Havit does, Mary 
fails to come to know that one of her friends owns 
a Ford. The natural explanation is that she must 
infer that Nogot owns a Ford and does not know 
her final conclusion unless her intermediate con-
clusion is true. According to this natural explana-
tion, Mary's inference essentially involves the 
conclusion that Nogot owns a Ford. According to 
Goldman, her inference essentially involves a 
conclusion concerning a causal connection. In 
order to put these ideas together, we must turn 
Goldman's theory of knowledge into a theory of 
inference. 
As a first approximation, let us take his 
remarks about causal connections literally, for-
getting for the moment that they include logical 
connections. Then let us transmute his causal 
theory of knowing into the theory that inductive 
conclusions always take the form X causes Y, 
where further conclusions are reached by addi-
tional steps of inductive or deductive reasoning. 
In particular, we may deduce either X or Y from 
X causes Y. 
This causal theory of inferring provides the 
following account of why knowledge requires 
that we be right about an appropriate causal con-
nection. A person knows by inference only if all 
conclusions essential to that inference are true. 
That is, his inference must satisfy principle P. 
Since he can legitimately infer his conclusion only 
if he can first infer certain causal statements, he 
can know only if he is right about the causal con-
nection expressed by those statements. First, 
Mary infers that her evidence is a causal result of 
Nogot's past ownership of the Ford. From that 
she deduces that Nogot has owned a Ford. Then 
she infers that his past ownership has been caus-
ally responsible for present ownership; and she 
deduces that Nogot owns a Ford. Finally, she 
deduces that one of her friends owns a Ford. 
She fails to know because she is wrong when she 
infers that Nogot's past ownership is responsible 
for Nogot's present ownership. 

198 
GILBERT HARMAN 
Inference to the best explanatory statement 
A better account of inference emerges if we 
replace "cause" with "because." On the revised 
account, we infer not just statements of the form 
X causes Y but, more generally, statements of the 
form Y because X or X explains Y. Inductive infer-
ence is conceived as inference to the best of com-
peting explanatory statements. Inference to a 
causal explanation is a special case. 
The revised account squares better with 
ordinary usage. Nogot's past ownership helps to 
explain Mary's evidence, but it would sound odd 
to say that it caused that evidence. Similarly, the 
detective infers that activities of the butler explain 
these footprints; does he infer that those activities 
caused the footprints? A scientist explains the 
properties of water by means of a hypothesis 
about unobservable particles that make up the 
water, but it does not seem right to say that facts 
about those particles cause the properties of 
water. An observer infers that certain mental 
states best explain someone's behavior; but 
such explanation by reasons might not be causal 
explanation. 
Furthermore, the switch from "cause" to 
"because" avoids Goldman's ad hoc treatment of 
knowledge of generalizations. Although there is 
no causal relation between a generalization and 
those observed instances which provide us with 
evidence for the generalization, there is an obvi-
ous explanatory relationship. That all emeralds 
are green does not cause a particular emerald to 
be green; but it can explain why that emerald is 
green. And, other things being equal, we can infer 
a generalization only if it provides the most plau-
sible way to explain our evidence. 
We often infer generalizations that explain but 
do not logically entail their instances, since they 
are of the form, In circumstances C, X's tend to be 
y's. Such generalizations may be inferred if they 
provide a sufficiently plausible account of 
observed instances all things considered. For 
example, from the fact that doctors have generally 
been right in the past when they have said that 
someone is going to get measles, I infer that doc-
tors can normally tell from certain symptoms 
that someone is going to get measles. More pre-
cisely, I infer that doctors have generally been 
right in the past because they can normally tell 
from certain symptoms that someone is going to 
get measles. This is a very weak explanation, but it 
is a genuine one. Compare it with the pseudo-
explanation, "Doctors are generally right when 
they say someone has measles because they can 
normally tell from certain symptoms that some-
one is going to get measles." 
Similarly, I infer that a substance is soluble in 
water from the fact that it dissolved when I stirred 
it into some water. That is a real explanation, to 
be distinguished from the pseudo-explanation, 
"That substance dissolves in water because it is 
soluble in water." Here too a generalization 
explains an instance without entailing that 
instance, since water-soluble substances do not 
always dissolve in water. 
Although we cannot simply deduce instances 
from this sort of generalization, we can often infer 
that the generalization will explain some new 
instance. The inference is warranted if the explan-
atory claim that X's tend to be y's will explain why 
the next X will be Y is sufficiently more plausible 
than competitors such as interfering factor Q will 
prevent the next X from being a Y. For example, the 
doctor says that you will get measles. Because 
doctors are normally right about that sort of 
thing, I infer that you will. More precisely, I infer 
that doctors' normally being able to tell when 
someone will get measles will explain the doctor's 
being right in this case. The competing explana-
tory statements here are not other explanations of 
the doctor's being right but rather explanations 
of his being wrong - e.g., because he has misper-
ceived the symptoms, or because you have faked 
the symptoms of measles, or because these symp-
toms are the result of some other disease, etc. 
Similarly, I infer that this sugar will dissolve in my 
tea. That is, I infer that the solubility of sugar in 
tea will explain this sugar's dissolving in the 
present case. Competing explanations would 
explain the sugar's not dissolving - e.g., because 
there is already a saturated sugar solution there, 
because the tea is ice-cold, etc. 
Further examples6 
I infer that when I scratch this match it will light. 
My evidence is that this is a Sure-Fire brand 
match, and in the past Sure-Fire matches have 
always lit when scratched. However, unbeknownst 
to me, this particular match is defective. It will 
not light unless its surface temperature can be 

THOUGHT, SELECTIONS 
199 
raised to six hundred degrees, which is more than 
can be attained by scratching. Fortunately, as I 
scratch the match, a burst of Q-radiation (from 
the sun) strikes the tip, raising surface tempera-
ture to six hundred degrees and igniting the 
match. Did I know that the match would light? 
Presumably I did not know. I had justified true 
belief, but not knowledge. On the present account, 
the explanation of my failure to know is this: 
I infer that the match will light in the next instance 
because Sure-Fire matches generally light when 
scratched. I am wrong about that; that is not why 
the match will light this time. Therefore, I do not 
know that it will light. 
It is important that our justification can appeal 
to a simple generalization even when we have 
false views about the explanation of that generali-
zation. Consider the man who thinks that barom-
eters fall before a rainstorm because of an increase 
in the force of gravity. He thinks the gravity pulls 
the mercury down the tube and then, when the 
force is great enough, pulls rain out of the sky. 
Although he is wrong about this explanation, the 
man in question can come to know that it is going 
to rain when he sees the barometer falling in a 
particular case. That a man's belief is based on an 
inference that cannot give him knowledge 
(because it infers a false explanation) does not 
mean that it is not also based on an inference that 
does give him knowledge (because it infers a true 
explanation). The man in question has knowledge 
because he infers not only the stronger explana-
tion involving gravity but also the weaker expla-
nation. He infers that the explanation of the past 
correlation between falling barometer and rain is 
that the falling barometer is normally associated 
with rain. Then he infers that this weak generali-
zation will be what will explain the correlation 
between the falling barometer and rain in the 
next instance. 
Notice that if the man is wrong about that last 
point, because the barometer is broken and is 
leaking mercury, so that it is just a coincidence 
that rain is correlated with the falling barometer 
in the next instance, he does not come to know 
that it is going to rain. 
Another example is the mad-fiend case. Omar 
falls down drunk in the street. An hour later he 
suffers a fatal heart attack not connected with his 
recent drinking. After another hour a mad fiend 
comes down the street, spies Omar lying in the 
gutter, cuts off his head, and runs away. Some 
time later still, you walk down the street, see 
Omar lying there, and observe that his head has 
been cut off. You infer that Omar is dead; and in 
this way you come to know that he is dead. Now 
there is no causal connection between Omar's 
being dead and his head's having been cut off. 
The fact that Omar is dead is not causally respon-
sible for his head's having been cut off, since ifhe 
had not suffered that fatal heart attack he still 
would have been lying there drunk when the mad 
fiend came along. And having his head cut off did 
not cause Omar's death, since he was already 
dead. Nor is there a straightforward logical con-
nection between Omar's being dead and his 
having his head cut off. (Given the right sorts of 
tubes, one might survive decapitation.) So it is 
doubtful that Goldman's causal theory of know-
ing can account for your knowledge that Omar is 
dead. 
If inductive inference is inference to the best 
explanatory statement, your inference might be 
parsed as follows: "Normally, if someone's head is 
cut off, that person is dead. This generalization 
accounts for the fact that Omar's having his head 
cut off is correlated here with Omar's being dead." 
Relevant competing explanatory statements in 
this case would not be competing explanations of 
Omar's being dead. Instead they would seek to 
explain Omar's not being dead despite his head's 
having been cut off. One possibility would be that 
doctors have carefully connected head and body 
with special tubes so that blood and air get from 
body to head and back again. You rule out that 
hypothesis on grounds of explanatory complica-
tions: too many questions left unanswered (why 
can't you see the tubes? why wasn't it done in the 
hospital? etc.). If you cannot rule such possibili-
ties out, then you cannot come to know that 
Omar is dead. And if you do rule them out but 
they turn out to be true, again you do not come to 
know. For example, if it is all an elaborate psycho-
logical philosophical experiment, which however 
fails, then you do not come to know that Omar is 
dead even though he is dead. 
Statistical inference 
Statistical inference, and knowledge obtained 
from it, is also better explicated by way of the 
notion of statistical explanation than by way of 

200 
GILBERT HARMAN 
the notion of cause or logical entailment. 
A person may infer that a particular coin is biased 
because that provides the best statistical explana-
tion of the observed fraction of heads. His con-
clusion explains his evidence but neither causes 
nor entails it. 
The relevant kind of statistical explanation 
does not always make what it explains very prob-
able. For example, suppose that I want to know 
whether I have the fair coin or the weighted coin. 
It is equally likely that I have either; the probabil-
ity of getting heads on a toss of the fair coin is 1/2; 
and the probability of getting heads on a toss of 
the weighted coin is 6/10. I toss the coin 10,000 
times. It comes up heads 4,983 times and tails 
5,017. I correctly conclude that the coin is the fair 
one. You would ordinarily think that I could in 
this way come to know that I have the fair coin. 
On the theory of inference we have adopted, I 
infer the best explanation of the observed distri-
bution of heads and tails. But the explanation, 
that these were random tosses of a fair coin, does 
not make it probable that the coin comes up 
heads exactly 4,983 times and tails exactly 5,017 
times in 10,000 tosses. The probability of this 
happening with a fair coin is very small. If we 
want to accept the idea that inference is inference 
to the best explanatory statement, we must agree 
that statistical explanation can cite an explana-
tion that makes what it explains less probable 
than it makes its denial. In the present case, I do 
not explain why 4,983 heads have come up rather 
than some other number of heads. Instead I 
explain how it happened that 4,983 heads came 
up, what led to this happening. I do not explain 
why this happened rather than something else, 
since the same thing could easily have led to 
something else. 
To return to an example I have used elsewhere, 
you walk into a casino and see the roulette wheel 
stop at red fifty times in a row. The explanation 
may be that the wheel is fixed. It may also be that 
the wheel is fair and this is one of those times 
when fifty reds come up on a fair wheel. Given a 
fair wheel we may expect that to happen some-
times (but not very often). But if the explanation 
is that the wheel is fair and that this is just one of 
those times, it says what the sequence of reds is 
the result of, the "outcome" of. It does not say 
why fifty reds in a row occurred this time rather 
than some other time, nor why that particular 
series occurred rather than any of the 25°_1 other 
possible series. 
This kind of statistical explanation explains 
something as the outcome of a chance set-up. The 
statistical probability of getting the explained 
outcome is irrelevant to whether or not we explain 
that outcome, since this kind of explanation is 
essentially pure nondeterministic explanation. 
All that is relevant is that the outcome to be 
explained is one possible outcome given that 
chance set-up. That is not to say that the statisti-
cal probability of an outcome is irrelevant to the 
explanation of that outcome. It is relevant in this 
sense: the greater the statistical probability an 
observed outcome has in a particular chance set-
up, the better that set-up explains that outcome. 
The point is less a point about statistical expla-
nation than a point about statistical inference. 
I wish to infer the best of competing statistical 
explanations of the observed distribution of 
heads. This observed outcome has different sta-
tistical probabilities in the two hypothetical 
chance set-ups, fair coin or weighted coin. The 
higher this statistical probability, the better, from 
the point of view of inference (other things being 
equal). The statistical probability of an outcome 
in a particular hypothetical chance set-up is rele-
vant to how good an explanation that chance set-
up provides. Here a better explanation is one that 
is more likely to be inferable. For example, I infer 
that I have the fair coin. The statistical probability 
of 4,983 heads on 10,000 tosses of a fair coin is 
much greater than the statistical probability of 
that number of heads on 10,000 tosses of the 
weighted coin. From the point of view of statisti-
cal probability, the hypothesis that the coin is 
fair offers a better explanation of the observed 
distribution than the hypothesis that the coin is 
biased. So statistical probability is relevant to 
statistical explanation. Not that there is no expla-
nation unless statistical probability is greater 
than 1/2. Rather that statistical probability pro-
vides a measure of the inferability of a statistical 
explanation. 
According to probability theory, if initially the 
coin is just as likely to be the fair one or the 
weighted one and the statistical probability of 
the observed outcome is much greater for the fair 
coin than for the weighted coin, the probability 
that the coin is fair, given the observed evidence, 
will be very high. We might conclude that the 

THOUGHT, SELECTIONS 
201 
statistical probability of the observed outcome 
given the fair or weighted coin is only indirectly 
relevant to my inference, relevant only because of 
the theoretical connections between those statis-
tical probabilities and the evidential probabilities 
of the two hypotheses about the coin, given the 
observed evidence. But that would be to get things 
exactly backward. No doubt there is a connection 
between high evidential probability and infer-
ence; but, as we have seen, it is not because there 
is a purely probabilistic rule of acceptance. High 
probability by itself does not warrant inference. 
Only explanatory considerations can do that; and 
the probability relevant to explanation is statisti-
cal probability, the probability that is involved in 
statistical explanation. It is the statistical proba-
bilities of the observed outcome, given the fair 
and weighted coins, that is directly relevant to 
inference. The evidential probabilities of the two 
hypotheses are only indirectly relevant in that 
they in some sense reflect the inferability of the 
hypotheses, where that is determined directly by 
considerations of statistical probability. 
Suppose that at first you do not know which of 
the two coins I have selected. I toss it 10,000 times, 
getting 4,983 heads and 5,017 tails. You infer that 
I have the fair coin, and you are right. But the 
reason for the 4,983 heads is that I am very good 
at tossing coins to come up whichever way I desire 
and I deliberately tossed the coin so as to get 
roughly half heads and half tails. So, even though 
you have justified true belief, you do not know 
that I have the fair coin. 
If statistical inference were merely a matter of 
infering something that has a high probability on 
the evidence, there would be no way to account 
for this sort of Gettier example. And if we are to 
appeal to principle P, it must be a conclusion 
essential to your inference that the observed out-
come is the result of a chance set-up involving the 
fair coin in such a way that the probability of 
heads is 112. Given a purely probabilistic rule, that 
conclusion could not be essential, for reasons 
similar to those that have already been discussed 
concerning the Nogot-Havit case. On the other 
hand, if statistical inference is inference to the 
best explanation and there is such a thing as 
statistical explanation even where the statistical 
probability of what is explained is quite low, 
then your conclusion about the reason for my 
getting 4,983 heads is seen to be essential to your 
inference. Since your explanation of the observed 
outcome is false, principle P accounts for the fact 
that you do not come to know that the coin is the 
fair coin even though you have justified true belief. 
Conclusion 
We are led to construe induction as inference to 
the best explanation, or more precisely as infer-
ence to the best of competing explanatory state-
ments. The conclusion of any single step of such 
inference is always of the form Y because X (or X 
explains y), from which we may deduce either X 
or Y. Inductive reasoning is seen to consist in a 
sequence of such explanatory conclusions. 
We have been led to this conception of induc-
tion in an attempt to account for Gettier exam-
ples that show something wrong with the idea 
that knowledge is justified true belief. We have 
tried to find principles of inference which, 
together with principle P, would explain Gettier's 
deviant cases. Purely probabilistic rules were 
easily seen to be inadequate. Goldman's causal 
theory of knowing, which promised answers to 
some of Gettier's questions, suggested a causal 
theory of induction: inductive inference as infer-
ence to the best of competing causal statements. 
Our present version is simply a modification of 
that, with explanatory replacing causal. Its strength 
lies in the fact that it accounts for a variety of 
inferences, including inferences that involve weak 
generalizations or statistical hypotheses, in a way 
that explains Gettier examples by means of 
principle P. 
Evidence One Does Not Possess 
Three examples 
Example (1) 
While I am watching him, Tom takes a library 
book from the shelf and conceals it beneath his 
coat. Since I am the library detective, I follow him 
as he walks brazenly past the guard at the front 
door. Outside I see him take out the book and 
smile. As I approach he notices me and suddenly 
runs away. But I am sure that it was Tom, for I 
know him well. I saw Tom steal a book from the 
library and that is the testimony I give before the 
University Judicial Council. After testifying, I 
leave the hearing room and return to my post in 

202 
GILBERT HARMAN 
the library. Later that day, Tom's mother testifies 
that Tom has an identical twin, Buck. Tom, she 
says, was thousands of miles away at the time of 
the theft. She hopes that Buck did not do it; but 
she admits that he has a bad character. 
Do I know that Tom stole the book? Let us 
suppose that I am right. It was Tom that took 
the book. His mother was lying when she said 
that Tom was thousands of miles away. I do not 
know that she was lying, of course, since I do 
not know anything about her, even that she 
exists. Nor does anyone at the hearing know that 
she is lying, although some may suspect that she 
is. In these circumstances I do not know that Tom 
stole the book. My knowledge is undermined by 
evidence I do not possess. 7 
Example (2) 
Donald has gone off to Italy. He told you ahead of 
time that he was going; and you saw him off at the 
airport. He said he was to stay for the entire 
summer. That was in June. It is now July. Then 
you might know that he is in Italy. It is the sort of 
thing one often claims to know. However, for rea-
sons of his own Donald wants you to believe that 
he is not in Italy but in California. He writes sev-
eralletters saying that he has gone to San Francisco 
and has decided to stay there for the summer. He 
wants you to think that these letters were written 
by him in San Francisco, so he sends them to 
someone he knows there and has that person mail 
them to you with a San Francisco postmark, one 
at a time. You have been out of town for a couple 
of days and have not read any of the letters. You 
are now standing before the pile of mail that 
arrived while you were away. Two of the phony 
letters are in the pile. You are about to open your 
mail. I ask you, "Do you know where Donald is?" 
"Yes;' you reply, "I know that he is in Italy:' You 
are right about where Donald is and it would 
seem that your justification for believing that 
Donald is in Italy makes no reference to letters 
from San Francisco. But you do not know that 
Donald is in Italy. Your knowledge is undermined 
by evidence you do not as yet possess. 
Example (3) 
A political leader is assassinated. His associates, 
fearing a coup, decide to pretend that the bullet 
hit someone else. On nationwide television they 
announce that an assassination attempt has failed 
to kill the leader but has killed a secret service 
man by mistake. However, before the announce-
ment is made, an enterprising reporter on the 
scene telephones the real story to his newspaper, 
which has included the story in its final edition. Jill 
buys a copy of that paper and reads the story of the 
assassination. What she reads is true and so are her 
assumptions about how the story came to be in the 
paper. The reporter, whose by-line appears, saw 
the assassination and dictated his report, which is 
now printed just as he dictated it. Jill has justified 
true belief and, it would seem, all her intermediate 
conclusions are true. But she does not know that 
the political leader has been assassinated. For eve-
ryone else has heard about the televised announce-
ment. They may also have seen the story in the 
paper and, perhaps, do not know what to believe; 
and it is highly implausible that Jill should know 
simply because she lacks evidence everyone else 
has. Jill does not know. Her knowledge is under-
mined by evidence she does not possess. 
These examples pose a problem for my strategy. 
They are Gettier examples and my strategy is to 
make assumptions about inference that will 
account for Gettier examples by means of princi-
ple P. But these particular examples appear to 
bring in considerations that have nothing to do 
with conclusions essential to the inference on 
which belief is based. 
Some readers may have trouble evaluating 
these examples. Like other Gettier examples, these 
require attention to subtle facts about ordinary 
usage; it is easy to miss subtle differences if, as in 
the present instance, it is very difficult to formu-
late a theory that would account for these differ-
ences. We must compare what it would be natural 
to say about these cases if there were no additional 
evidence one does not possess (no testimony 
from Tom's mother, no letters from San Francisco, 
and no televised announcement) with what it 
would be natural to say about the cases in which 
there is the additional evidence one does not pos-
sess. We must take care not to adopt a very skepti-
cal attitude nor become too lenient about what is 
to count as knowledge. If we become skeptically 
inclined, we will deny there is knowledge in either 
case. If we become too lenient, we will allow that 
there is knowledge in both cases. It is tempting to 
go in one or the other of these directions, toward 
skepticism or leniency, because it proves so 

THOUGHT, SELECTIONS 
203 
difficult to see what general principles are involved 
that would mark the difference. But at least some 
difference between the cases is revealed by the fact 
that we are more inclined to say that there is 
knowledge in the examples where there is no 
undermining evidence a person does not possess 
than in the examples where there is such evidence. 
The problem, then, is to account for this differ-
ence in our inclination to ascribe knowledge to 
someone. 
Evidence against what one knows 
If I had known about Tom's mother's testimony, I 
would not have been justified in thinking that it 
was Tom I saw steal the book. Once you read the 
letters from Donald in which he says he is in San 
Francisco, you are no longer justified in thinking 
that he is in Italy. If Jill knew about the television 
announcement, she would not be justified in 
believing that the political leader has been assas-
sinated. This suggests that we can account for the 
preceding examples by means of the following 
principle. 
One knows only if there is no evidence such that 
if one knew about the evidence one would not be 
justified in believing one's conclusion. 
However, by modifying the three examples it can 
be shown that this principle is too strong. 
Suppose that Tom's mother was known to the 
Judicial Council as a pathological liar. Everyone 
at the hearing realizes that Buck, Tom's supposed 
twin, is a figment of her imagination. When she 
testifies no one believes her. Back at my post in 
the library, I still know nothing of Tom's mother 
or her testimony. In such a case, my knowledge 
would not be undermined by her testimony; but 
if I were told only that she had just testified that 
Tom has a twin brother and was himself thou-
sands of miles away from the scene of the crime 
at the time the book was stolen, I would no 
longer be justified in believing as I now do that 
Tom stole the book. Here I know even though 
there is evidence which, if I knew about it, would 
cause me not to be justified in believing my 
conclusion. 
Suppose that Donald had changed his mind 
and never mailed the letters to San Francisco. 
Then those letters no longer undermine your 
knowledge. But it is very difficult to see what 
principle accounts for this fact. How can letters in 
the pile on the table in front of you undermine 
your knowledge while the same letters in a pile in 
front of Donald do not? If you knew that Donald 
had written letters to you saying that he was in 
San Francisco, you would not be justified in 
believing that he was still in Italy. But that fact by 
itself does not undermine your present knowledge 
that he is in Italy. 
Suppose that as the political leader's associates 
are about to make their announcement, a sabo-
teur cuts the wire leading to the television trans-
mitter. The announcement is therefore heard only 
by those in the studio, all of whom are parties to 
the deception. Jill reads the real story in the news-
paper as before. Now, she does come to know that 
the political leader has been assassinated. But if 
she had known that it had been announced that 
he was not assassinated, she would not have been 
justified in believing that he was, simply on the 
basis of the newspaper story. Here, a cut wire 
makes the difference between evidence that 
undermines knowledge and evidence that does 
not undermine knowledge. 
We can know that h even though there is evi-
dence e that we do not know about such that, if 
we did know about e, we would not be justified in 
believing h. If we know that h, it does not follow 
that we know that there is not any evidence like e. 
This can seem paradoxical, for it can seem obvi-
ous that, if we know that h, we know that any evi-
dence against h can only be misleading. So, later if 
we get that evidence we ought to be able to know 
enough to disregard it. 
A more explicit version of this interesting 
paradox goes like this.8 "If I know that h is true, 
I know that any evidence against h is evidence 
against something that is true; so I know that 
such evidence is misleading. But I should disre-
gard evidence that I know is misleading. So, once 
I know that h is true, I am in a position to disre-
gard any future evidence that seems to tell against 
h." This is paradoxical, because I am never in a 
position simply to disregard any future evidence 
even though I do know a great many different 
things. 
A skeptic might appeal to this paradox in order 
to argue that, since we are never in a position to 
disregard any further evidence, we never know 
anything. Some philosophers would turn the 

204 
GILBERT HARMAN 
argument around to say that, since we often know 
things, we are often in a position to disregard 
further evidence. But both of these responses go 
wrong in accepting the paradoxical argument in 
the first place. 
I can know that Tom stole a book from the 
library without being able automatically to disre-
gard evidence to the contrary. You can know that 
Donald is in Italy without having the right to 
ignore whatever further evidence may turn up. 
Jill may know that the political leader has been 
assassinated even though she would cease to know 
this if told that there was an announcement that 
only a secret service agent had been shot. 
The argument for paradox overlooks the way 
actually having evidence can make a difference. 
Since I now know that Tom stole the book, I now 
know that any evidence that appears to indicate 
something else is misleading. That does not war-
rant me in simply disregarding any further evi-
dence, since getting that further evidence can 
change what I know. In particular, after I get such 
further evidence I may no longer know that it is 
misleading. For having the new evidence can 
make it true that I no longer know that Tom stole 
the book; if I no longer know that, I no longer 
know that the new evidence is misleading. 
Therefore, we cannot account for the prob-
lems posed by evidence one does not possess by 
appeal to the principle, which I now repeat: 
One knows only if there is no evidence such that 
if one knew about the evidence one would not be 
justified in believing one's conclusion. 
For one can know even though such evidence 
exists. 
A result concerning inference 
When does evidence one doesn't have keep one 
from having knowledge? I have described three 
cases, each in two versions, in which there is mis-
leading evidence one does not possess. In the first 
version of each case the misleading evidence 
undermines someone's knowledge. In the second 
version it does not. What makes the difference? 
My strategy is to account for Gettier examples 
by means of principle P. This strategy has led us 
to conceive of induction as inference to the best 
explanation. But that conception of inference 
does not by itself seem able to explain these 
examples. So I want to use the examples in order 
to learn something more about inference, in par-
ticular about what other conclusions are essential 
to the inference that Tom stole the book, that 
Donald is in Italy, or that the political leader has 
been assassinated. 
It is not plausible that the relevant inferences 
should contain essential intermediate conclusions 
that refer explicitly to Tom's mother, to letters 
from San Francisco, or to special television pro-
grams. For it is very likely that there is an infinite 
number of ways a particular inference might be 
undermined by misleading evidence one does not 
possess. If there must be a separate essential con-
clusion ruling out each of these ways, inferences 
would have to be infinitely inclusive - and that is 
implausible. 
Therefore it would seem that the relevant infer-
ences must rule out undermining evidence one 
does not possess by means of a single conclusion, 
essential to the inference, that characterizes all 
such evidence. But how might this be done? It is 
not at all clear what distinguishes evidence that 
undermines knowledge from evidence that does 
not. How is my inference to involve an essential 
conclusion that rules out Tom's mother's testifying 
a certain way before a believing audience but does 
not rule out (simply) her testifying in that way? Or 
that rules out the existence ofletters of a particular 
sort in the mail on your table but not simply the 
existence of those letters? Or that rules out a widely 
heard announcement of a certain sort without 
simply ruling out the announcement? 
Since I am unable to formulate criteria that 
would distinguish among these cases, I will 
simply label cases of the first kind "undermining 
evidence one does not possess." Then we can say 
this: one knows only if there is no undermining 
evidence one does not possess. If there is such evi-
dence, one does not know. However, these remarks 
are completely trivial. 
It is somewhat less trivial to use the same label 
to formulate a principle concerned with inference. 
Q 
One may infer a conclusion only if one 
also infers that there is no undermining 
evidence one does not possess. 
There is of course an obscurity in principle Q; but 
the principle is not as trivial as the remarks of the 

THOUGHT, SELECTIONS 
205 
last paragraph, since the label "undermining 
evidence one does not possess" has been explained 
in terms of knowledge, whereas this is a principle 
concerning inference. 
If we take principle Q, concerning inference, 
to be basic, we can use principle P to account for 
the differences between the two versions of each 
of the three examples described above. In each 
case an inference involves essentially the claim 
that there is no undermining evidence one does 
not possess. Since this claim is false in the first 
version of each case and true in the second, prin-
ciple P implies that there can be knowledge only 
in the second version of each case. 
So there is, according to my strategy, some 
reason to think that there is a principle concern-
ing inference like principle Q. That raises the 
question of whether there is any independent 
reason to accept such a principle; and reflection 
on good scientific practice suggests a positive 
answer. It is a commonplace that a scientist should 
base his conclusions on all the evidence. 
Furthermore, he should not rest content with the 
evidence he happens to have but should try to 
make sure he is not overlooking any relevant evi-
dence. A good scientist will not accept a conclu-
sion unless he has some reason to think that there 
is no as yet undiscovered evidence which would 
undermine his conclusion. Otherwise he would 
not be warranted in making his inference. So 
good scientific practice reflects the acceptance of 
something like principle Q, which is the inde-
pendent confirmation we wanted for the exist-
ence of this principle. 
Notice that the scientist must accept something 
like principle Q, with its reference to "undermin-
ing evidence one does not possess." For example, 
he cannot accept the following principle, 
One may infer a conclusion only if one also 
infers that there is no evidence at all such that if 
he knew that evidence he could not accept his 
conclusion. 
There will always be a true proposition such that 
if he learned that the proposition was true (and 
learned nothing else) he would not be warranted 
in accepting his conclusion. If h is his conclu-
sion, and if k is a true proposition saying what 
ticket will win the grand prize in the next New 
Jersey State Lottery, then either k or not h is such 
a proposition. If he were to learn that it is true 
that either k or not h (and learned nothing else), 
not h would become probable since (given what 
he knows) k is antecedently very improbable. So 
he could no longer reasonably infer that h is 
true. 
There must be a certain kind of evidence such 
that the scientist infers there is no as yet undis-
covered evidence of that kind against h. Principle 
Q says that the relevant kind is what I have been 
labelling "undermining evidence one does not 
possess." Principle Q is confirmed by the fact that 
good scientific practice involves some such prin-
ciple and by the fact that principle Q together 
with principle P accounts for the three Gettier 
examples I have been discussing. 
If this account in terms of principles P and Q 
is accepted, inductive conclusions must involve 
some self-reference. Otherwise there would be a 
regress. Before we could infer that h, we would 
have to infer that there is no undermining evi-
dence to h. That prior inference could not be 
deductive, so it would have to be inference to the 
best explanatory statement. For example, we 
might infer that the fact that there is no sign of 
undermining evidence we do not possess is 
explained by there not being any such evidence. 
But, then, before we could accept that conclusion 
we would first have to infer that there is no 
undermining evidence to it which one does not 
possess. And, since that inference would have to 
be inference to the best explanation, it would 
require a previous inference that there is no 
undermining evidence for its conclusion; and so 
on ad infinitum. 
Clearly, we do not first have to infer that there 
is no undermining evidence to h and only then 
infer h. For that would automatically yield the 
regress. Instead, we must at the same time infer 
both h and that there is no undermining evidence. 
Furthermore, we infer that there is not only no 
undermining evidence to h but also no under-
mining evidence to the whole conclusion. In 
other words, all legitimate inductive conclusions 
take the form of a self-referential conjunction 
whose first conjunct is h and whose second con-
junct (usually left implicit) is the claim that there 
is no undermining evidence to the whole 
conjunction. 

206 
GILBERT HARMAN 
Notes 
Henry Kyburg, Probability and the Logic of 
Rational 
Belief (Middletown: 
Wesleyan 
University Press, 1961). 
2 E.g., by Robert Nozick. 
3 Edmond Gettier, "Is Justified True Belief 
Knowledge?", this vol., ch. 15. 
4 Keith 
Lehrer, "Knowledge, 
Truth, 
and 
Evidence," Analysis 25 (1965), pp. 168-75. 
5 Alvin Goldman, "A Causal Theory of 
Knowing:' Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), 
pp.357-72. 
6 Brian Skyrms, "The Explication of 'X knows 
that p,'" Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), pp. 
373-89. 
7 Keith Lehrer and Thomas Paxson, Jr., 
"Knowledge: Undefeated Justified True Belief;' 
Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969). 
8 Here and in what follows I am indebted to 
Saul Kripke, who is, however, not responsible 
for any faults in my presentation. 

CHAPTER 17 
The Inescapability of Gettier 
Problems 
Linda Zagzebski 
Gettier problems arise in the theory of knowledge 
when it is only by chance that a justified true 
belief is true. Since the belief might easily have 
been false in these cases, it is normally concluded 
that they are not instances of knowledge. 1 The 
moral drawn in the thirty years since Gettier pub-
lished his famous paper is that either justified 
true belief OTB) is not sufficient for knowledge, 
in which case knowledge must have an "extra" 
component in addition to JTB, or else justifica-
tion must be reconceived to make it sufficient for 
knowledge. I shall argue that given the common 
and reasonable assumption that the relation 
between justification and truth is close but not 
inviolable, it is not possible for either move to 
avoid Gettier counter-examples. What is more, it 
makes no difference if the component of knowl-
edge in addition to true belief is identified as 
something other than justification, e.g., warrant 
or well-foundedness. I conclude that Gettier 
problems are inescapable for virtually every ana-
lysis of knowledge which at least maintains that 
knowledge is true belief plus something else. 
Notice first that Gettier problems arise for both 
internalist and externalist notions of justification. 
On internalist theories the grounds for justifica-
tion are accessible to the consciousness of the 
believer, and Gettier problems arise when there is 
Originally published in The Philosophical Quarterly 44, 
No. 174 (1994), pp. 65-73. 
nothing wrong with the internally accessible 
aspects of the cognitive situation, but there is a 
mishap in something inaccessible to the believer. 
Since justification does not guarantee truth, it is 
possible for there to be a break in the connection 
between justification and truth, but for that 
connection to be regained by chance. 
The original "Smith owns a Ford or Brown is 
in Barcelona" case is an example of this sort. Here 
we are to imagine that Smith comes to you brag-
ging about his new Ford, shows you the car and 
the bill of sale, and generally gives you lots of evi-
dence that he owns a Ford. Basing what you think 
on the evidence, you believe the proposition 
"Smith owns a Ford", and from that you infer its 
disjunction with "Brown is in Barcelona", where 
Brown is an acquaintance and you have no reason 
at all to think he is in Barcelona. It turns out that 
Smith is lying and owns no Ford, but Brown is by 
chance in Barcelona. Your belief "Smith owns a 
Ford or Brown is in Barcelona" is true and justi-
fied, but it is hardly the case that you know it. 
In this case the problem arises because in spite 
of the fact that you have done everything to reach 
the truth from your point of view and everything 
that anyone could expect of you, your efforts do 
not lead you to the truth. It is mere bad luck that 
you are the unwitting victim of Smith's lies, and 
only an accident that a procedure that usually 
leads you to the truth leads you to believe the 
falsehood "Smith owns a Ford': The fact that you 
end up with a true belief anyway is due to a second 

208 
LINDA ZAGZEBSKI 
accidental feature of the situation - a feature that 
has nothing to do with your cognitive activity. 
What generates the problem for JTB, then, is that 
an accident of bad luck is cancelled out by an 
accident of good luck. The right goal is reached, 
but only by chance. 
Internalist theories are not the only ones 
afflicted with Gettier problems, contrary to a 
recent claim made by Alvin Plantinga.2 Consider 
how the problem arises for reliabilism. In this 
group of theories believers are justified when 
their beliefs are formed in a reliable, or truth-
conducive, manner. On this account also there is 
no guarantee that justified beliefs are true, and a 
breakdown in the connection between a reliable 
belief-forming process and the truth is possible. 
When that happens, even if you manage to hit on 
the truth anyway, you do not have knowledge. 
The well-known fake barn case can be described 
as an example of this sort. Here we are to imagine 
that you are driving through a region in which, 
unknown to you, the inhabitants have erected 
three barn fa<;:ades for each real barn in an effort 
to make themselves look more prosperous. Your 
eyesight is normal and reliable enough in ordi-
nary circumstances to spot a barn from the road. 
But in this case the fake barns are indistinguisha-
ble from the real barns at such a distance. As you 
look at a real barn you form the belief "That's a 
fine barn': The belief is true and justified, but is 
not knowledge. 
As in the first case, the problem arises because 
of the combination of two accidental features of 
the cognitive situation. It is only an accident that 
visual faculties normally reliable in this sort of 
situation are not reliable in this particular situa-
tion; and it is another accident that you happened 
to be looking at a real barn and hit on the truth 
anyway. Again the problem arises because an acci-
dent of bad luck is cancelled out by an accident of 
good luck. 
Gettier problems cannot be avoided by Alvin 
Plantinga's new theory either. Plantinga calls the 
property that in sufficient quantity converts true 
belief into knowledge "warrant" rather than "jus-
tification': On his proposal warrant is the prop-
erty a belief B has for believer 5 when B is 
produced in 5 by 5's faculties working properly in 
the appropriate environment, according to a 
design plan successfully aimed at truth.3 But 
Plantinga does not maintain that every warranted 
belief is true any more than reliabilists maintain 
that every reliably formed belief is true or inter-
nalists maintain that every internally justified 
belief is true. Let us see if we can form a Gettier 
case for Plantinga's theory parallel to the other 
two cases we have considered. To do so we need to 
look for a situation in which 5's faculties are 
working the way they were designed to in the 
appropriate environment, but 5 unluckily has a 
false belief. We can then add a second accident 
which makes the belief true after all. 
Suppose that Mary has very good eyesight, 
but it is not perfect. It is good enough to allow 
her to identify her husband sitting in his usual 
chair in the living room from a distance of fifteen 
feet in somewhat dim light (the degree of dim-
ness can easily be specified). She has made such 
an identification in these circumstances many 
times. Each time her faculties have been working 
properly and the environment has been appro-
priate for the faculties. There is nothing at all 
unusual about either her faculties or the environ-
ment in these cases. Her faculties may not be 
functioning perfectly, but they are functioning 
well enough, so that if she goes on to form the 
belief "My husband is sitting in the living room", 
that belief has enough warrant to constitute 
knowledge when true and we can assume that it is 
almost always true. 
The belief is almost always true, we say. That is 
because warrant in the degree necessary for 
knowledge does not guarantee truth, according to 
Plantinga. If it did guarantee truth, of course, the 
component of truth in the analysis of knowledge 
would be superfluous. Knowledge would simply 
be warranted belief. So it is possible for Mary to 
make a mistake even though her faculties are 
functioning properly enough for knowledge and 
the environment is normal for the faculties. Let us 
look at one such case. 
Suppose Mary simply misidentifies the chair-
sitter who is, let us suppose, her husband's brother. 
Her faculties may be working as well as they nor-
mally do when the belief is true and when we do 
not hesitate to say it is warranted in a degree suf-
ficient for knowledge. It is not a question of their 
suddenly becoming defective, or at any rate, more 
defective than usual, nor is there a mismatch 
between her faculties and the environment. No 
one is dressing up as her husband to fool her, or 
anything like that, so the environment is not 

THE INESCAPABILITY OF GETTlER PROBLEMS 
209 
abnormal as the fake barn case is abnormal. Her 
degree of warrant is as high as it usually is when 
she correctly identifies her husband since even in 
those cases it is true that she might have misiden-
tified the chair-sitter if it had been her husband's 
brother instead. Of course, she usually has no 
reason to suspect that it is her husband's brother 
and we can imagine that she has no reason to sus-
pect so in this case either. Maybe she knows that 
her husband's brother looks a lot like him, but she 
has no reason to believe that he is in the vicinity, 
and, in fact, has strong reason to believe he has 
gone to Australia. So in the case we are consider-
ing, when Mary forms the false belief, her belief is 
as warranted as her beliefs normally are in these 
circumstances. In spite of well-functioning facul-
ties and a benign environment, she just makes a 
mistake. 
Now, of course, something has gone wrong 
here, and that something is probably in Mary 
rather than in the environment. It may even be 
correct to say that there is a minor defect in her 
faculties; perhaps she is not perfectly attentive or 
she is a little too hasty in forming her belief. But 
she is no less attentive and no more hasty than she 
usually is in such cases and usually it does not 
matter. People do not have to be perfectly atten-
tive and perfectly cautious and have perfect vision 
to have beliefs sufficiently warranted for knowl-
edge on Plantinga's theory. And this is not a mis-
take in Plantinga's theory. It would surely be 
unreasonable of him to expect perfectly function-
ing faculties in a perfectly attuned environment 
as his criteria for the warrant needed for knowl-
edge. So Mary's defect need not be sufficient to 
bring her degree of warrant down below that 
needed for knowledge on Plantinga's account. 
We can now easily emend the case as a Gettier 
example. Mary's husband could be sitting on the 
other side of the room, unseen by her. In that case 
her belief "My husband is sitting in the living 
room" is true and has sufficient warrant for 
knowledge on Plantinga's account, but she does 
not have knowledge. 
In discussing Gettier problems Plantinga con-
cludes: "What is essential to Gettier situations is 
the production of a true belief despite a relatively 
minor failure of the cognitive situation to match 
its design':4 But this comment is problematic on 
his own account. As we have seen, Plantinga con-
siders warrant a property that admits of degree, 
but it is clear that the degree of warrant sufficient 
for knowledge does not require faculties to be 
working perfectly in an environment perfectly 
matched to them. In Gettier-style cases such as 
the case of Mary, either the degree of warrant is 
sufficient for knowledge or it is not. If it is not, 
then a multitude of beliefs we normally think are 
warranted are not, and there is much less knowl-
edge in the world than Plantinga's numerous 
examples suggest. On the other hand, if the 
degree of warrant is sufficient for knowledge, 
then Plantinga's theory faces Gettier problems 
structurally identical to those of the other theo-
ries. Furthermore, even if some aspect of the 
Mary example makes it unpersuasive, there must 
still be cases of warranted false belief on 
Plantinga's theory if the component of truth in 
knowledge is not redundant. With such a case in 
hand a Gettier example can be constructed by 
adding a feature extraneous to the warrant of the 
believer which makes the belief true after all. In 
such a case the degree of warrant is unchanged, 
but it is not knowledge since it might just as well 
have been false. 
It is not enough, then, to say that Gettier prob-
lems arise because of a minor mismatch between 
faculties and environment. What Plantinga 
should have said is that the problem is due to a 
relatively minor failure of the cognitive situation 
to connect to the truth. As long as the property 
that putatively converts true belief into knowl-
edge is analysed in such a way that it is strongly 
linked with the truth, but does not guarantee it, it 
will always be possible to devise cases in which 
the link between such a property and the truth is 
broken but regained by accident. Such is the 
nature of Gettier cases. 
The three examples we have considered sug-
gest a general rule for the generation of Gettier 
cases. It really does not matter how the particular 
element of knowledge in addition to true belief is 
analysed. As long as there is a small degree of 
independence between this other element and the 
truth, we can construct Gettier cases by using the 
following procedure: start with a case of justified 
(or warranted) false belief. Make the element of 
justification (warrant) strong enough for knowl-
edge, but make the belief false. The falsity of the 
belief will not be due to any systematically 
describable element in the situation, for if it were, 
such a feature could be used in the analysis of the 

210 
LINDA ZAGZEBSKI 
components of knowledge other than true belief, 
and then truth would be entailed by the other com-
ponents of knowledge, contrary to the hypothesis. 
The falsity of the belief is therefore due to some 
element of luck. Now emend the case by adding 
another element of luck, only this time an ele-
ment which makes the belief true after all. The 
second element must be independent of the ele-
ment of warrant so that the degree of warrant is 
unchanged. The situation might be described as 
one element of luck counteracting another. We 
now have a case in which the belief is justified 
(warranted) in a sense strong enough for knowl-
edge, the belief is true, but it is not knowledge. 
The conclusion is that as long as the concept of 
knowledge closely connects the justification 
component and the truth component, but per-
mits some degree of independence between them, 
justified true belief will never be sufficient for 
knowledge. 
It is often observed that in typical Gettier cases 
the justified belief depends upon or otherwise 
"goes through" a false belief, so a way to handle 
these cases is to add what are commonly called 
"defeasibility conditions" to the analysis of know 1-
edge. This move was especially popular during 
the sixties and seventies. It adds to the require-
ment that knowledge be justified true belief the 
restriction that the belief in question must also be 
justified in certain counterfactual situations. One 
way to define these conditions is in terms of the 
psychological effect on the subject, as in Steven 
Levy's definition of a de feasibility condition as "a 
requirement to the effect that for S to know that p 
there must be no other evidence against p strong 
enough to undermine S's belief that p, should this 
evidence come to S's attention':s 
The three cases I have just described do have 
the feature that there is a false belief in the neigh-
bourhood of the belief in question which is such 
that, should the subject discover its falsehood, 
that would undermine the belief in the proposi-
tion in question. So your belief that either Smith 
owns a Ford or Brown is in Barcelona is under-
mined if you discover that Smith does not own a 
Ford. Your belief that this is a barn is undermined 
if you discover that most objects that look like 
barns in this vicinity are not real barns. Mary's 
belief that her husband is sitting in the living 
room is undermined if she discovers that that 
man sitting over there in a particular chair in the 
living room is not her husband. In each case were 
S to be advised of the falsity of the underlying 
belief, S would retract the belief under discussion. 
The belief would be defeated by such new infor-
mation. 
This move puts a strain on the independence 
of the justification/ defeasibility condition and the 
truth condition. If S's belief that p is false, there 
will obviously be many other propositions which 
are logically or evidentially connected to p which 
are false also. Should S become aware of any of 
these propositions, that may easily undermine S's 
belief that p, assuming S is rational. This means 
that the falsehood of p is incompatible with a 
strong defeasibility condition, contrary to the 
hypothesis that the justification and defeasibility 
components of knowledge do not entail the truth 
condition. This problem is even more apparent in 
statements of the de feasibility condition in terms 
of evidential support rather than a psychological 
requirement, as in Pappas and Swain's definition: 
"the evidence e must be sufficiently complete that 
no further additions to e would result in a loss of 
justification and hence a loss of knowledge".6 
Obviously, if the belief is false, further additions 
to e will result in a loss of justification, and hence 
a loss of knowledge. 
Strong defeasibility conditions, then, threaten 
the assumption of independence between the jus-
tification (warrant) condition and the truth con-
dition for knowledge. But weaker defeasibility 
conditions are subject to Gettier-style counter-
examples following the pattern described above. 
In each case we find an example of a false belief 
which satisfies the justification and defeasibility 
conditions, and then make the belief true anyway 
due to features of the situation independent of 
the satisfaction of those conditions. 
Suppose Dr Jones, a physician, has very good 
inductive evidence that her patient, Smith, is suf-
fering from virus X. Smith exhibits all of the 
symptoms of this virus, and a blood test has 
shown that his antibody levels against virus X are 
extremely high. In addition, let us suppose that 
the symptoms are not compatible with any other 
known virus, all of the evidence upon which 
Jones bases her diagnosis is true, and there is no 
evidence accessible to her which counts signifi-
cantly against the conclusion. The proposition 
that Smith is suffering from virus X really is 
extremely probable on the evidence. 

THE INESCAPABILITY OF GETTlER PROBLEMS 
211 
In this case there is nothing defective in the 
justification of Dr Jones' belief that Smith has 
virus X and no false belief figures causally or evi-
dentially in her justification, nor is there any false 
belief in the neighbourhood. Furthermore, she 
would have believed that Smith has virus X in a 
wide range of counterfactual situations. None the 
less, let us suppose that the belief is false. Smith's 
symptoms are due to a distinct and unknown 
virus Yand the fact that he exhibits high antibody 
levels to virus X is due to idiosyncratic features of 
his biochemistry which cause him to maintain 
unusually high antibody levels long after a past 
infection. In this case Dr Jones' belief that Smith 
is presently suffering from virus X is false, but it is 
both justified and undefeated. Of course, given 
that the belief is false, there must be some evi-
dence against it accessible to her in some counter-
factual circumstances, so if defeasibilityconditions 
are strong enough, no false empirical belief passes 
the test. But as said above, that is to impose an 
unreasonably strong defeasibility condition, one 
that makes the justification/defeasibility condi-
tion entail truth. The most reasonable conclusion 
to draw in this case, then, is that Jones' belief is 
justified and undefeated, but false. 
Now to construct a Gettier-style example we 
simply add the feature that Smith has very recently 
contracted virus X, but so recently that he does 
not yet exhibit symptoms caused by X, nor has 
there been time for a change in the antibody levels 
due to this recent infection. So while the evidence 
upon which Dr Jones bases her diagnosis does 
make it highly probable that Smith has X, the fact 
that Smith has X has nothing to do with that evi-
dence. In this case, then, Dr Jones' belief that 
Smith has virus X is true, justified and undefeated, 
but it is not knowledge. 
It appears, then, that no account of knowledge 
as true belief plus something else can withstand 
Gettier objections as long as there is a small degree 
of independence between truth and the other 
conditions of knowledge. What are our alterna-
tives? We have already seen that one way to solve 
the problem is to give up the independence 
between the justification condition and the truth 
condition. Justification would be defined in such 
a way that no false belief can satisfy it. Since 
Gettier cases are based on situations in which the 
belief is true, but it might just as well have been 
false, all such cases would be excluded from the 
class of justified (warranted) beliefs. On this 
approach the element of truth in the account of 
knowledge is superfluous and knowledge is 
simply justified (warranted) belief. "5 is justified 
in believing p" entails p. Few philosophers have 
supported this view.? 
So Gettier problems can be avoided if there is 
no degree of independence at all between truth 
and justification. A second way to avoid them is 
to go to the opposite extreme and to make the 
justification condition and the truth condition 
almost completely independent. It could still be 
the case that justification puts the subject in the 
best position available for getting the truth, but if 
the best position is not very good, most justified 
beliefs will be false. Perhaps most justified scien-
tific hypotheses since the world began have been 
false. Perhaps Plato, Spinoza, Kant and Hegel were 
justified in believing their metaphysical theories, 
but most of their theories (at least) were false. Still, 
if one of them is true, some theorists might be 
willing to call it knowledge. On this approach the 
element of luck permitted in the state of knowl-
edge is so great that alleged counter-examples 
based on luck do not count against it. From this 
viewpoint, Gettier cases would simply be accepted 
as cases of knowledge. After all, if knowledge is 
mostly luck anyway, there will be nothing bother-
some about a case in which the truth is acquired 
by luck. 
Perhaps neither of these alternatives will appeal 
to most philosophers, who find the idea that there 
is a small but real degree of independence between 
justification and the acquisition of truth just too 
attractive to give up. A third reaction to the prob-
lem, then, is to accept the fact that no "true belief 
+ x" account of knowledge will be sufficient, but 
that it will always be necessary to add the element 
of luck to the analysis. So knowledge is true belief 
+ x + luck. This approach recognizes the fact that 
the concept we substitute for "x" ought to be one 
that has a strong general connection with the 
acquisition of truth, but that an inviolable con-
nection would be unreasonable. On the other 
hand, it also recognizes the fact that we are much 
less forgiving with the concept of knowledge itself. 
The connection between justification or whatever 
it is we substitute for "x" and truth must exist in 
each and every particular case of knowledge. The 
notion of knowledge requires success, both in 
reaching the goal of truth, and in reaching it via 

212 
LINDA ZAGZEBSKI 
the right cognitive path. The notion of justifica-
tion or warrant is less stringent, requiring only 
that the right path is one that is usually successful 
at getting the truth. It is this difference between 
the notion of knowledge and the notion of justifi-
cation that is responsible for Gettier problems. 
Almost every contemporary theory of justifi-
cation or warrant aims only to give the conditions 
for putting the believer in the best position for 
getting the truth. The best position is assumed to 
be very good, but imperfect, for such is life. 
Notes 
"Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?", Analysis 
23 (1963), pp. 121-3. 
2 Alvin Plantinga, Warrant and Proper Function, 
(Oxford University Press, 1993), p. 48. 
3 The wording I have used can be found in 
Plantinga's book Warrant and Proper Function. 
A very similar wording can be found in 
"Positive 
Epistemic 
Status and 
Proper 
Function",inJ.E. Tomberlin (ed.),Philosophical 
Perspectives 2: Epistemology (Atascadero: 
Ridgeview, 1988), pp. 1-50. In that paper he 
calls "positive epistemic status" what he now 
calls "warrant". 
4 
"Positive 
Epistemic 
Status 
and 
Proper 
Function", p. 43. 
5 Steven 
Levy, "Defeasibility Theories of 
Knowledge", Canadian Journal of Philosophy 7 
(1977), p. 115. 
6 George Pappas and Marshall Swain (eds), 
Essays on Knowledge and Justification (Ithaca 
Properly functioning faculties need not be work-
ing perfectly, but only well enough; reliable belief-
producing mechanisms need not be perfectly 
reliable, only reliable enough; evidence for a belief 
need not support it conclusively, but only well 
enough; and so on. As long as the truth is never 
assured by the conditions which make the state 
justified, there will be situations in which a false 
belief is justified. I have argued that with this 
common, in fact, almost universal assumption, 
Gettier cases will never go away. 
and London: 
Cornell University Press, 
1978), p. 27. 
7 An exception is Robert Almeder, "Truth and 
Evidence", The Philosophical Quarterly, 24 
(1974), pp. 365-8. Almeder's reason for main-
taining that "s is justified in believing p" 
entails p is that the determination of the fact 
that a belief p is justified entails the determi-
nation of the fact that p is true. I find this 
implausible, since (1) there are many ways to 
determine the truth-value of a proposition p 
independently of the justification of a parti-
cular believer in believing p; and (2) even if 
the act of determining that a belief is justified 
included the determination of its truth, it 
does not follow that the fact that a belief is 
justified entails its truth. 

CHAPTER 18 
A State of Mind 
Timothy Williamson 
1 Factive Attitudes 
Knowing is a state of mind. That claim is central 
to the account of knowledge developed in this 
book. But what does it mean? 
A state of a mind is a mental state of a subject. 
Paradigmatic mental states include love, hate, 
pleasure, and pain. Moreover, they include atti-
tudes to propositions: believing that something is 
so, conceiving that it is so, hoping or fearing that 
it is so, wondering whether it is so, intending or 
desiring it to be so. One can also know that some-
thing is so. This book concerns such propositional 
knowledge. If p is a proposition, we will under-
stand knowing p not as merely being acquainted 
with p but as knowing that something is so, some-
thing that is so if and only if p is true. For exam-
ple, if p is the proposition that it is cold, then one 
is acquainted with p in merely wondering whether 
it is cold; to know p is to know that it is cold. 
Knowing in that sense is a factive attitude; one 
knows p only if p is true, although one can be 
acquainted with the proposition p even if it is 
false. Other factive attitudes include perceiving 
that something is so, remembering that it is so, 
and regretting that is so. If attitudes are relations 
of subjects to propositions, then the claim is that 
Originally published in Timothy Williamson, Knowledge 
and Its Limits (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000), 
pp.21-48. 
knowing itself is a mental relation such that, for 
every proposition p, having that relation to p is a 
mental state. Thus for some mental state S, being 
in S is necessary and sufficient for knowing p. We 
abbreviate that claim by saying that knowing is a 
mental state. 
We may assume initially that knowing p entails 
believing p; section 5 considers that assumption 
in more depth. Someone might expect knowing 
to be a state of mind simply on the grounds that 
knowing p involves the paradigmatic mental state 
of believing p. If those grounds were adequate, 
the claim that knowing is a state of mind would 
be banal. However, those grounds imply only that 
there is a mental state being in which is necessary 
for knowing p. By contrast, the claim that know-
ing is a state of mind is to be understood as the 
claim that there is a mental state being in which is 
necessary and sufficient for knowing p. In short, 
knowing is merely a state of mind. This claim may 
be unexpected. On the standard view, believing is 
merely a state of mind but knowing is not, because 
it is factive: truth is a non-mental component of 
knowing. 
Our initial presumption should be that know-
ing is a mental state. Prior to philosophical theory-
building, we learn the concept of the mental by 
examples. Our paradigms should include propo-
sitional attitudes such as believing and desiring, 
if our conception of the mental is not to be radi-
cally impoverished. But factive attitudes have 
so many similarities to the non-factive attitudes 

214 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON 
that we should expect them to constitute mental 
states too; we expect a concept to apply to what-
ever sufficiently resembles its paradigms. It 
would be strange if there were a mental state of 
fearing but no mental state of regretting, or a 
mental state of imagining but no mental state of 
remembering. Indeed, it is not clear that there 
are any pretheoretic grounds for omitting factive 
attitudes from the list of paradigmatic mental 
states. That the mental includes knowing and 
other factive attitudes is built into the natural 
understanding of the procedure by which the 
concept of the mental is acquired. Of course, that 
does not exclude the subsequent discovery of 
theoretical reasons for drawing the line between 
the mental and the non-mental somewhere else. 
But the theory behind those reasons had better be 
a good one. 
This chapter ... eliminates some putative dif-
ferences between knowing and non-factive atti-
tudes that might be thought to disqualify knowing 
as a mental state. The supposed disqualifications 
concern constitutive dependence on the environ-
ment, first-person accessibility, and causal effi-
cacy. In each case, the differences dissolve on 
inspection. Naturally, this form of argument 
cannot provide conclusive proof. We survey the 
current candidates and find them wanting. We 
can still wonder whether our list of potential 
differences is complete. But without good theo-
retical reasons to demote knowing from its 
pretheoretical status as a central case of a mental 
state, demotion is surrender to mere special 
pleading. Indeed, conceptions on which knowing 
is the wrong kind of state to count as mental are 
objectionable on independent grounds. We can 
best understand knowing by classifying it with 
other mental phenomena. 
In this chapter, section 2 orients the claim that 
knowing is a mental state with respect to some 
traditional issues about scepticism and self-
knowledge. Section 3 explains an incompatibility 
between the view of knowing as a factive mental 
state and standard analyses of the concept knows 
as a conjunction of the concepts believes and true 
(predicated of the proposition) and of other con-
cepts; it blames the analyses. Section 4 presents a 
modest positive account of the concept knows, 
distinguishes it from analyses of the traditional 
kind, and indicates the possibility of understand-
ing epistemology in terms of the metaphysics of 
states. Section 5 discusses the relation between 
knowing and believing, and explores some impli-
cations for so-called disjunctive accounts of 
mental states. l 
2 
Mental states, First-Person 
Accessibility, and Scepticism 
The conception of knowing as a mental state can 
look like a confusion between objective and sub-
jective certainty. Someone might even diagnose 
that conception as Descartes' central mistake. Did 
he not seek a mental state sufficient for knowing 
p? Was not clearly and distinctly conceiving phis 
candidate? And does not the failure of his episte-
mological programme manifest the impossibility 
of a mental state of the required kind? 
On the view to be developed here, if Descartes 
sought a mental state sufficient for knowing, his 
mistake lay elsewhere: perhaps in the view (if he 
held it) that one must always be in a position to 
know what mental state one is in. H. A. Prichard, 
who also took knowing to be a mental state, held 
that one is always in a position to know whether 
one knows or merely believes (Prichard 1950, p. 
86). Few would now claim such powers of dis-
crimination. Indeed, one cause of denials that 
knowing is a mental state may be the assumption 
that one must always be in a position to know 
whether one is in a given mental state. 
One is surely not always in a position to know 
whether one knows p (for almost any proposition 
p), however alert and conceptually sophisticated 
one is. The point is most vivid when the subject 
believes p falsely. Consider, for example, the situ-
ation of a generally well-informed citizen N.N. 
who has not yet heard the news from the theatre 
where Lincoln has just been assassinated. Since 
Lincoln is dead, he is no longer President, so N.N. 
no longer knows that Lincoln is President (know-
ing is factive). However, N.N. is in no position to 
know that anything is amiss. He continues rea-
sonably to believe that Lincoln is President; 
moreover, this seems to him to be just another 
item of general knowledge. N.N. continues rea-
sonably to believe that he knows that Lincoln is 
President. Although N.N. does not know that 
Lincoln is President, he is in no position to know 
that he does not know that Lincoln is President 
(see also Hintikka 1962, 106 and section 8.2). 

A STATE OF MIND 
215 
The argument as stated assumes that no a 
priori reasoning demonstrates that it is impossi-
ble to have knowledge about the external world, 
for such reasoning would make it unreasonable 
for N.N. to believe that he knows that Lincoln is 
President. Of course, if all knowledge is impossi-
ble then, for any proposition p whatsoever, one 
does not know p and is not in a position to know 
that one fails to know p; one is never in a position 
to know whether one knows p. A sceptic about 
the external world who is not a sceptic about eve-
rything might attempt to maintain that, for any 
informative proposition p about the external 
world, one is in a position to know that one does 
not know p. Let us assume for the time being that 
such a sceptic is wrong .... 
We can also construct cases in which one 
knows p without being in a position to know that 
one knows p. They involve more delicate issues. It 
is enough for present purposes that one can fail to 
know p without being in a position to know that 
one fails to know p. 
Let transparency be the thesis that for every 
mental state S, whenever one is suitably alert and 
conceptually sophisticated, one is in a position to 
know whether one is in S. Given transparency, 
knowing p is not a mental state, for almost any 
proposition p. 
Transparency is false, however, and demon-
strably so by reference to uncontentiously para-
digmatic mental states. For example, one is 
sometimes in no position to know whether one is 
in the mental state of hoping p. I believe that I do 
not hope for a particular result to a match; I am 
conscious of nothing but indifference; then my 
disappointment at one outcome reveals my hope 
for another. When I had that hope, I was in no 
position to know that I had it. Indeed, it is hard to 
find a non-trivial mental state for which trans-
parency holds. It fails for the state of believing p, 
for the difference between believing p and merely 
fancying p depends in part on one's dispositions 
to practical reasoning and action manifested only 
in counterfactual circumstances, and one is not 
always in a position to know what those disposi-
tions are. Transparency is even doubtful for the 
state of being in pain; with too much self-pity one 
may mistake an itch for a pain, with too little one 
may mistake a pain for an itch .... But even if 
transparency does hold for a few mental states, it 
clearly fails for others; the premise of the argument 
from transparency to the denial that knowing p is 
a mental state is false. Given that knowing p is a 
mental state, we will not expect knowing whether 
one is in it to be always easy. 
It does not follow that there is no asymmetry at 
all between knowledge of one's own mental states 
and knowledge of the mental states of others. 
Perhaps failures of transparency could not be the 
normal case, although that claim would require 
extensive argument. A more plausible claim is that 
we have some non-observational knowledge of our 
own mental states and not of the mental states of 
others. But then the same may be said of knowing: 
we have some non-observational knowledge of our 
own knowledge and ignorance and not of the 
knowledge and ignorance of others. Any genuine 
requirement of privileged access on mental states is 
met by the state of knowing p. Knowing is charac-
teristicallyopen to first-person present-tense access; 
like other mental states, it is not perfectly open. 
Some may object that knowing whether one 
knows p requires evaluating reasons for and 
against p in a way in which knowing whether one 
believes p does not. They distinguish knowing 
whether one currently believes p from deciding 
whether to continue believing p. Suppose for a 
moment that they are correct in taking knowing 
whether one believes p not to require one to eval-
uate reasons for and against p. Still, even on their 
view there is also the mental state of rationally 
believing p, on some appropriate concept of 
rationality. Knowing whether one rationally 
believes p does require one to evaluate reasons for 
and against p. Thus the need for such evaluation 
in order to know whether one knows p does not 
show that knowing p is not a mental state. 
Could it be replied that knowing and ration-
ally believing are not mental states in the way that 
believing is, because "know" and "rational" are 
normative terms? Belief attributions have a nor-
mative element too, for to have any mental attitude 
to a content one must in some sense grasp that 
content, and therefore have some minimal ability 
to deal rationally with it; the reply itself classifies 
"rational" as a normative term. In any sense in 
which "know" and "rational" are normative terms, 
ascriptions of mental states can be normative. 
A different objection is that one's belief 
about whether one knows p is defeasible by new 
information in a way in which one's belief about 
whether one believes p is not. For example, the 

216 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON 
new information might show that p is false. But is 
one's belief about whether one believes p really 
indefeasible by new information? Someone might 
believe that he believes that the world will end 
next year, because he has joined a religious sect in 
which there is strong pressure to believe that the 
world will end next year, but his unwillingness to 
cash in his pension may suggest that he does not 
really believe that the world will end next year. 
When he reflects on his unwillingness to cash in 
his pension, he may come to that conclusion him-
self. But even if we forget such examples and sup-
pose that one's belief about whether one believes 
p is not defeasible by further evidence, we must 
still acknowledge mental states such as being alert 
or thinking clearly about a problem. One's belief 
about whether one is alert or thinking clearly 
about a problem is defeasible by new informa-
tion, for example about what drugs had been 
slipped into one's drink. Thus the defeasibility of 
beliefs about whether one knows p does not show 
that knowing p is not a mental state. 
Once we consider the full variety of acknowl-
edged mental states, it is clear that any general 
requirements of privileged access on mental states 
are very mild. Knowing satisfies those mild 
requirements. 
The failure of transparency helps to clarify the 
relation between the thesis that knowing is a 
mental state and a traditional pattern of sceptical 
argument. The sceptic argues that a subject with a 
true belief could have been in exactly the same 
mental state (that is, in the same total set of 
mental states) even if the belief had been false. He 
concludes that, since the belief fails to constitute 
knowledge in the latter case, it fails equally to do 
so in the former. The sceptical argument assumes 
something like this: if one's mental state is exactly 
the same in two situations, then one's knowledge 
is also the same. On the account to be developed 
here, that assumption is correct, although not 
quite in the way that the sceptic imagines. 
The sceptic supposes that a difference in 
knowledge would require some prior difference 
in mental state, which the subject could detect. 
On the present account, a difference in knowl-
edge would constitute a difference in mental state. 
This difference need not be detectable by the 
subject who lacks knowledge. Thus the sceptic's 
assumption is correct for reasons that undermine 
his argument. He claims to have constructed a 
case in which the belief is false although the 
mental state is exactly the same. But the most that 
he has really shown about the case is that the 
belief is false and one's situation is not discrimi-
nably different. He has not shown that one cannot 
be in different mental states in in discriminable 
situations. Indeed, since we are sometimes in no 
position to know whether we are in a given mental 
state, as argued above, surely one can be in differ-
ent mental states in situations between which one 
cannot discriminate (see McDowell 1982). 
If knowing is a mental state, then the sceptical 
argument is not compelling. Indeed, such a view 
of knowledge need only be defensible for the 
sceptical argument not to be compelling. Thus 
one route into scepticism is blocked. It is not the 
purpose of this chapter to argue that all are .... 
If someone has already taken the route into 
scepticism offered by that fallacious argument, 
before it was blocked, and has become genuinely 
undecided, at least in principle, as to whether she 
is in a sceptical scenario, then the blocking of the 
route now comes too late to rescue her. Nothing 
said here should convince someone who has given 
up ordinary beliefs that they did in fact constitute 
knowledge, for nothing said here should convince 
her that they are true. The trick is never to give 
them up. This is the usual case with philosophical 
treatments of scepticism: they are better at pre-
vention than at cure. If a refutation of scepticism 
is supposed to reason one out of the hole, then 
scepticism is irrefutable. The most to be hoped 
for is something which will prevent the sceptic 
(who may be oneself) from reasoning one into 
the hole in the first place. 
The purpose of these remarks has been to give 
a feel for the view that knowing is a state of mind. 
The content of the view must now be examined 
more explicitly. The notion of a mental state will 
not be formally defined, for that would require a 
formal definition of the mental. Rather, reflection 
on the intuitive notion of a mental state will help 
to clarify its workings. Section 4 will provide a less 
informal account. 
3 Knowledge and Analysis 
To call knowing a mental state is to assimilate it, 
in a certain respect, to paradigmatic mental states 
such as believing, desiring, and being in pain. It is 

A STATE OF MIND 
217 
also to contrast it with various non-examples of 
mental states. Perhaps the most revealing contrast 
is between knowing and believing truly. 
Believing p truly is not a mental state, at least, 
not when p is an ordinary contingent proposition 
about the external environment. Intuitively, for 
example, there is no mental state being in which 
is necessary and sufficient for believing truly that 
it is raining (that is, for believing while it is rain-
ing that it is raining), just as there is no mental 
state being in which is necessary and sufficient for 
believing while Rome burns that it is raining. 
There is a mental state of believing that it is rain-
ing, and there is - on the present account - a 
mental state of knowing that it is raining, but 
there is no intermediate mental state of believing 
truly that it is raining. Let SI be knowing that it is 
raining, S2 be believing truly that it is raining, and 
SJ be believing that it is raining. Then, we may 
assume, necessarily, everything that is in SI is in 
S2; necessarily, everything that is in S2 is in SJ. 
Nevertheless, on the present account, although SI 
and S3 are mental states, S2 is not a mental state. 
That something sandwiched between two 
mental states need not itself be a mental state is 
not as paradoxical as it may sound. Consider an 
analogy: the notion of a geometrical property. 
For these purposes, we can understand geometri-
cal properties to be properties possessed by par-
ticulars in physical space. Let 1t1 be the property 
of being an equilateral triangle, 1t2 the property of 
being a triangle whose sides are indiscriminable 
in length to the naked human eye, and 1tJ the 
property of being a triangle. Necessarily, every-
thing that has 1t1 has 1t2, because lines of the same 
length cannot be discriminated in length; neces-
sarily, everything that has 1t2 has 1t3• Nevertheless, 
although 1t1 and 1tJ are geometrical properties, 1t2 
is not a geometrical property, because it varies 
with variations in human eyesight. Something 
sandwiched between two geometrical properties 
need not itself be a geometrical property. Similarly, 
there is no structural reason why something sand-
wiched between two mental states should itself be 
a mental state. 
The point is general. If S is a mental state and 
C a non-mental condition, there need be no 
mental state S* such that, necessarily, one is in S* 
if and only if one is in Sand C obtains. The non-
existence of such an S* is quite consistent with 
the existence of a mental state S** such that, 
necessarily, one is in S** only if (but not: if) one 
is in Sand C is met. A mental state can guarantee 
that conjunction only by guaranteeing more 
than that conjunction. 
If the denial that believing truly is a mental 
state does not immediately convince, think of it 
this way. Even if believing truly is a mental state in 
some liberal sense of the latter term, there is also 
a more restrictive but still reasonable sense in 
which believing truly is not a mental state but the 
combination of a mental state with a non-mental 
condition. The present claim is that knowing is a 
mental state in every reasonable sense of that 
term: there is no more restrictive but still reason-
able sense of "mental" in which knowing can be 
factored, like believing truly, into a combination 
of mental states with non-mental conditions. 
A sense of "mental" is reasonable if it is suffi-
ciently close to an ordinary sense of the word in 
important respects. Although the present claim is 
therefore vague, it is at least clear enough to be 
disputed. 
Strictly speaking, we must distinguish a con-
ceptual and a metaphysical contrast. The concep-
tual contrast is that the concept knows is a mental 
concept while the concept believes truly is not a 
mental concept. The metaphysical contrast is that 
knowing is a mental state while believing truly is 
not a mental state. 
The concept mental state can at least roughly 
be defined in terms of the concept mental concept 
of a state: a state is mental if and only if there 
could be a mental concept of that state. This defi-
nition does not in principle exclude the possibil-
ity of a non-mental concept of a mental state, for 
different concepts can be of the same state. We 
may reasonably assume that states SI and S2 are 
identical if and only if necessarily everything is in 
SI if and only if it is in S2. In a given context, dis-
tinct concepts may be necessarily coextensive. For 
example, since gold is necessarily the element 
with atomic number 79, the state of having a 
tooth made of gold is the state of having a tooth 
made of the element with atomic number 79, but 
the concept has a tooth made of gold is not the 
concept has a tooth made of the element with 
atomic number 79. Similarly, for any mental state 
S, the concept is in S and such that gold is the ele-
ment with atomic number 79 is necessarily 
coextensive with the concept is in S, so they are 
both concepts of S. 

218 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON 
Of the conceptual and metaphysical contrasts, 
neither immediately entails the other. If the con-
cept knows is mental while the concept believes 
truly is not, then it follows immediately that 
knowing is a mental state, but it does not follow 
immediately that believing truly is not a mental 
state, for perhaps there could also be a mental 
concept of the state of believing truly. Thus the 
conceptual contrast does not immediately entail 
the metaphysical contrast. If knowing is a mental 
state and believing truly is not a mental state, then 
it follows immediately that the concept believes 
truly is not mental, but it does not follow imme-
diately that the concept knows is mental, for per-
haps there could be a different concept of the 
state of knowing which was mental. Thus the 
metaphysical contrast does not immediately 
entail the conceptual contrast. Nevertheless, it is 
hard to see why someone should accept one con-
trast without accepting the other. If the concept 
believes truly is non-mental, its imagined neces-
sary coextensiveness with a mental concept would 
be a bizarre metaphysical coincidence. If the con-
cept knows were a non-mental concept of a mental 
state, its necessary coextensiveness with a mental 
concept would be an equally bizarre metaphysical 
coincidence. In practice, sloppily ignoring the 
distinction between the metaphysical and con-
ceptual contrasts is unlikely to do very much 
harm. Nevertheless, it is safer not to ignore the 
distinction. 
The concept believes truly is not a mental con-
cept of a state. If the concept C is the conjunction 
of the concepts C1, ••• , Cn, then C is mental if and 
only if each Ci is mental. For example, the con-
junctive concept is sad and such that gold is the 
element with atomic number 79 is non-mental, 
simply because it has the non-mental conjunct is 
such that gold is the element with atomic number 79, 
although it is a concept of the state of sadness. 
Even a logically redundant non-mental compo-
nent concept would make C a non-mental con-
cept, although it would then be logically equivalent 
to a mental concept. By contrast, non-mental 
concepts in the content clause of an attitude 
ascription do not make the concept expressed 
non-mental; the concept believes that there are 
numbers can be mental even if the concept number 
is not. At least, all that is so in a reasonable sense of 
"mental", which one might express as "purely 
mental". Now the concept believed truly is the 
conjunction of the concepts believed and true. The 
conjunct true is not mental, for it makes no refer-
ence to a subject. Therefore, the concept believed 
truly is non-mental. Similarly, the concept believes 
truly of subjects rather than propositions is non-
mental. The metaphysical and conceptual con-
trasts turn on whether knowing is a mental state, 
and on whether knows is a mental concept. 
Just as the concept believes truly is non-mental, 
so for a similar reason is the concept has a justi-
fied true belief Indeed, such an argument applies 
to any of the concepts with which the concept 
knows is equated by conjunctive analyses of the 
standard kind. The argument can be generalized 
to analyses formed using logical connectives other 
than conjunction. It would not apply if those 
simpler concepts were all mental, but analyses of 
the concept knows of the standard kind always 
involve irredundant non-mental constituents, in 
particular the concept true. Consequently, the 
analysing concept is non-mental: that is, not 
purely mental. Given that the concept knows is 
mental, every analysis of it of the standard kind is 
therefore incorrect as a claim of concept identity, 
for the analysing concept is distinct from the con-
cept to be analysed. 
If a non -mental concept were necessarily coex-
tensive with the mental concept knows, they 
would be concepts of the same mental state. The 
present account does not strictly entail that no 
analysis of the traditional kind provides correct 
necessary and sufficient conditions for knowing. 
But once we accept that the concept knows is not 
a complex concept of the kind traditionally envis-
aged, what reason have we to expect any such 
complex concept even to provide necessary and 
sufficient conditions for knowing? 
Experience confirms inductively what the 
present account implies, that no analysis of the 
concept knows of the standard kind is correct. 
Indeed, the candidate concepts turn out to be not 
merely distinct from, but not even necessarily 
coextensive with, the target concept. Since Gettier 
refuted the traditional analysis of knows as has a 
justified true beliefin 1963, a succession of increas-
ingly complex analyses have been overturned by 
increasingly complex counterexamples, which is 
just what the present view would have led one to 
expect. 2 
Even if some sufficiently complex analysis 
never succumbed to counterexamples, that would 

A STATE OF MIND 
219 
not entail the identity of the analysing concept 
with the concept knows. Indeed, the equation of 
the concepts might well lead to more puzzlement 
rather than less. For knowing matters; the differ-
ence between knowing and not knowing is very 
important to us. Even unsophisticated curiosity is 
a desire to know. This importance would be hard 
to understand if the concept knows were the more 
or less ad hoc sprawl that analyses have had to 
become; why should we care so much about that?3 
On quite general grounds, one would not 
expect the concept knows to have a non-trivial 
analysis in somehow more basic terms. Not all 
concepts have such analyses, on pain of infinite 
regress; the history of analytic philosophy sug-
gests that those of most philosophical interest do 
not. "Bachelor" is a peculiarity, not a prototype. 
Attempts to analyse the concepts means and 
causes, for example, have been no more successful 
than attempts to analyse the concept knows, suc-
cumbing to the same pattern of counterexamples 
and epicycles. The analysing concept does not 
merely fail to be the same as the concept to be 
analysed; it fails even to provide a necessary and 
sufficient condition for the latter. The pursuit of 
analyses is a degenerating research programme.4 
We can easily describe simple languages in 
which no necessary and sufficient condition for 
knowing can be expressed without circularity. 
Many fragments of English have that property. 
Why should we expect English itself to be differ-
ent? Once "know" and cognate terms have been 
removed, what remains of our lexicon may be too 
impoverished to frame necessary and sufficient 
conditions for knowing. 
The programme of analysis had its origin in 
great philosophical visions. Consider, for example, 
Russell's Principle of Acquaintance: "Every propo-
sition which we can understand must be composed 
wholly of constituents with which we are acquainted" 
(Russell 1910-11, at Salmon and Soames 1988, 
p. 23). Russell calls the principle "the fundamental 
epistemological principle in the analysis of propo-
sitions containing descriptions': There may well 
be a reading on which it is correct. However, when 
the principle is combined with Russell's extremely 
intimate conception of acquaintance, it forces 
analysis to go deeper than the surface constituents 
of the evidently intelligible propositions of sci-
ence and common sense, for our acquaintance 
with those surface constituents is not perfectly 
intimate.s In such a context, the programme of 
analysis has a philosophical point. Now the philo-
sophical visions which gave it a point are no 
longer serious options. Yet philosophers contin-
ued to pursue the programme long after the orig-
inal motivation had gone. Correct deep analyses 
would doubtless still be interesting if they existed; 
what has gone is the reason to believe that they do 
exist. 
While the general point is conceded, it might 
nevertheless be claimed that we have special 
reason to expect an analysis of knows. For we 
already have the necessary condition that what is 
known be true, and perhaps also believed; we 
might expect to reach a necessary and sufficient 
condition by adding whatever knowing has which 
believing truly may lack. But that expectation is 
based on a fallacy. If G is necessary for F, there 
need be no further condition H, specifiable inde-
pendently of F, such that the conjunction of 
G and H is necessary and sufficient for F. Being 
coloured, for example, is necessary for being red, 
but if one seeks a further condition whose con-
junction with being coloured is necessary and 
sufficient for being red, one finds only conditions 
specified in terms of "red": being red; being red if 
coloured. 
There are other examples of the same phe-
nomenon. Although x is a parent of y only if x is 
an ancestor of y, it does not follow that we implic-
itly conceptualize parenthood as the conjunction 
of ancestry with whatever must be added to ances-
try to yield parenthood, or even that ancestry is 
conceptually prior to parenthood. Rather, x is an 
ancestor of y if and only if a chain of parenthood 
runs from x to y (more formally: if and only if x 
belongs to every class containing all parents of y 
and all parents of its members). Thus parents 
of yare automatically ancestors of y. If anything, 
parenthood is conceptually prior to ancestry; we 
use the necessary and sufficient condition for 
ancestry in terms of parenthood to explain why 
ancestry is necessary for parenthood.6 Again, x is 
identical with y only if x weighs no more than y, 
but it does not follow that the concept is identical 
with is the conjunction of weighs no more than 
with whatever must be added to it to yield the 
former concept, or even that weighs no more than is 
prior to is identical with. In this case we explain the 
entailment by Leibniz's Law: if x is identical with y, 
whatever holds of x holds of y too, so since x weighs 

220 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON 
no more than x, x weighs no more than y. We 
grasp Leibniz's Law without considering all its 
instances. In principle one could grasp it before 
having acquired any concept of weight. Necessary 
conditions need not be conjuncts of necessary 
and sufficient conditions in any non-trivial sense. 
More generally, the existence of conceptual 
connections is a bad reason to postulate an analy-
sis of a concept to explain them. For example, the 
axiom of extensionality says that sets with the 
same members are identical; it has as good a claim 
to conceptual truth as the proposition thatknowl-
edge entails belief. Nevertheless, the axiom is not 
explained by an analysis of the concept set, if an 
analysis provides a non-circular statement of nec-
essary and sufficient conditions. 
The working hypothesis should be that the 
concept knows cannot be analysed into more 
basic concepts. 7 But to say that is not to say that 
no reflective understanding of it is possible. 
4 
Knowing as the Most General Factive 
Mental State 
Knowing does not factorize as standard analyses 
require. Nevertheless, a modest positive account 
of the concept can be given, one that is not an 
analysis of it in the traditional sense. The one 
sketched below will appear thin by comparison 
with standard analyses. That may not be a vice. 
Indeed, its thinness will clarify the importance of 
the concept as more complex accounts do not. 
The main idea is simple. A propositional atti-
tude is factive if and only if, necessarily, one has it 
only to truths. Examples include the attitudes of 
seeing, knowing, and remembering. Not all fac-
tive attitudes constitute states; forgetting is a 
process. Call those attitudes which do constitute 
states stative. The proposal is that knowing is the 
most general factive stative attitude, that which 
one has to a proposition if one has any factive sta-
tive attitude to it at all. Apparent counterexam-
ples to this conjecture are discussed below. The 
point of the conjecture is to illuminate the central 
role of the concept of knowing in our thought. It 
matters to us because factive stative attitudes 
matter to us. 
To picture the proposal, compare the state of 
knowing with the property of being coloured, the 
colour property which something has if it has any 
colour property at all. If something is coloured, 
then it has a more specific colour property; it is 
red or green or .... Although that specific colour 
may happen to lack a name in our language, we 
could always introduce such a name, perhaps 
pointing to the thing as a paradigm. We may say 
that being coloured is being red or green or ... if 
the list is understood as open-ended, and the con-
cept is coloured is not identified with the disjunc-
tive concept. One can grasp the concept is coloured 
without grasping the concept is green, therefore 
without grasping 
the 
disjunctive 
concept. 
Similarly, if one knows that A, then there is a spe-
cific way in which one knows; one can see or 
remember or ... that A. Although that specific 
way may happen to lack a name in our language, 
we could always introduce such a name, perhaps 
pointing to the case as a paradigm. We may say 
that knowing that A is seeing or remembering or 
... that A, if the list is understood as open-ended, 
and the concept knows is not identified with the 
disjunctive concept. One can grasp the concept 
knows without grasping the concept sees, there-
fore without grasping the disjunctive concept. 
We can give substance to the category of fac-
tive stative attitudes by describing its realization 
in a natural language. The characteristic expres-
sion of a factive stative attitude in language is a 
factive mental state operator (FMSO). Syntactically, 
an FMSO <I> has the combinatorial properties of a 
verb. Semantically, <I> is an unanalysable expres-
sion; that is, <I> is not synonymous with any com-
plex expression whose meaning is composed of 
the meanings of its parts. A fortiori, <I> is not itself 
such an expression. <I> also meets three further 
conditions. For simplicity, they are stated here as 
conditions on an FMSO in English, although the 
general category is realized in other languages 
too. First, <I> typically takes as subject a term for 
something animate and as object a term consist-
ing of "that" followed by a sentence. Second, <I> is 
factive, in the sense that the form of inference 
from "s <l>s that k.' to "N' is deductively valid (the 
scrupulous will read quotation marks as corner 
quotes where appropriate). Third, "s <l>s that k.' 
attributes a propositional attitude to S. On the 
present view, "know" and "remember" are typical 
FMSOs. Even with the following glosses, these 
remarks do not constitute a rigorous definition of 
"FMSO", but they should make its extension 
moderately clear. 

A STATE OF MIND 
221 
First, "s Il>s that k' is required to have "If' as a 
deductive consequence, not as a mere cancella-
ble presupposition. There is a use of the verb 
"guess" on which "s guessed that If' in some 
sense presupposes "k'. However, this presupposi-
tion is cancellable by context, as the logical and 
linguistic propriety of the following sentences 
shows: 
(1) 
I guessed incorrectly that he was guilty. 
(2) 
I guessed that he was guilty and you guessed 
that he was innocent. 
In contrast, the substitution of "knew" for 
"guessed" in (1) or (2) yields a contradiction. 
Incidentally, therefore, the implication from "s 
does not know that k' to "k' is not like that from 
"S knows thatif' to "X', for only the former is can-
cellable. The following sentences are logically and 
linguistically proper: 
(3) 
I did not know that he was guilty, for he was 
innocent. 
(4) 
I did not know that he was guilty and you 
did not know that he was innocent. 
In contrast, the substitution of "knew" for "did 
not know" in (3) or (4) yields a contradiction. If 
Il> is an FMSO, the implication from "S Il>s that If' 
to "X' is not cancellable (see Grice 1989, pp. 44-6 
and 279-80 for cancellability and the presupposi-
tions of "know" respectively). 
Second, FMSOs are stative: they are used to 
denote states, not processes. This distinction is 
linguistically marked by the impropriety of 
progressive tenses. Consider: 
(5) 
She is proving that there are infinitely 
many primes. 
(6) 
The shoes are hurting her. 
*(7) 
She is knowing that there are infinitely 
many primes. 
*(8) 
She is believing that there are infinitely 
many primes. 
*(9) 
The shoes are fitting her. 
Sentences (7)-(9) are deviant because "know", 
"believe", and "fit" (on the relevant reading), 
unlike "prove" and "hurt'; are stative. Of course, a 
verb may have both stative and non-stative 
readings, as in (10): 
?(10) 
She is remembering that there are 
infinitely many primes. 
On the salient reading of "remember", (10) is 
deviant, but it might correctly be used to say 
that she is in the process of recalling that there 
are infinitely many primes (see Vendler 1967, 
p. 104 for more on the linguistic marks of 
statives). 
Third, an FMSO ascribes an attitude to a 
proposition to the subject. Thus "S Il>s that If' 
entails "s grasps the proposition that If: To know 
that there are infinitely many primes, one must 
grasp the proposition that there are infinitely 
many primes, so "know" passes the test. A verb 
with a sense like "is responsible for its being the 
case that" would fail it. Thus, given that "see" and 
"remember" are FMSOs, one can see that Olga is 
playing chess or remember that she was playing 
chess only if one has a concept of chess. This is 
not to deny that one's perceptions and memories 
may have a content which one lacks the concepts 
to express; the point is just that the English con-
structions "see that X' and "remember that X' do 
not ascribe such content. Other constructions 
with those verbs behave differently; one does not 
need a concept of chess to see or remember Olga 
playing chess. 
Fourth, an FMSO is semantically unanalys-
able. An artificial verb stipulated to mean the 
same as "believe truly" would not be an FMSO. 
A semantically analysable expression has a more 
complex semantic role than that of simply 
denoting an attitude; its proper treatment 
would require an account of the meanings from 
which its meaning is composed. Thus it is best 
at this stage to concentrate on semantically 
unanalysable expressions. Verbs such as "know" 
and "remember" will be assumed to be semanti-
cally unanalysable. However, an FMSO is not 
required to be syntactically unanalysable. In 
English and some other languages, for example, 
the addition of the auxiliary "can" often forms 
an FMSO (Vendler 1967, pp. 104-6). Consider 
the following pair: 
(11) 
She felt that the bone was broken. 
( 12) 
She could feel that the bone was broken. 
The "could" in (12) is not the "could" of ability; 
(12) does not mean anything like: 

222 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON 
(13) 
She had the ability to feel that the bone 
was broken. 
A rough paraphrase of the salient reading of (11) 
would be: "She intuitively believed that the bone 
was broken:' A rough paraphrase of the salient 
reading of (12) would be: "She knew by the sense 
of touch that the bone was broken': Sentence (12), 
unlike (11), entails "The bone was broken." Thus 
"could feel" differs from "felt" in two ways: it is 
factive, and it is perceptual. Neither of these dif-
ferences would occur if "could feel" were semanti-
cally analysable into "could" and "feel", for that 
would assimilate "could feel" to "had the ability to 
feel", which is neither factive nor perceptual. 
"Could feel" is semantically fused. It is an FMSO; 
"feel" is not. 
"Hear" is like "feel" in this respect. Consider: 
(14) 
She heard that the volcano was erupting. 
(15) 
She could hear that the volcano was 
erupting. 
A rough paraphrase of the salient reading of (14) 
would be: "She heard a report that the volcano 
was erupting." A rough paraphrase of the salient 
reading of (15) would be: "She knew by the sense 
of hearing that the volcano was erupting:' 
Sentence (15), unlike (14), entails "The volcano 
was erupting': Thus "could hear" differs from 
"heard" in two ways: it is factive, and it is more 
directly perceptual. Neither of these differences 
would occur if "could hear" were semantically a 
compound of "could" and "hear': "Could hear" is 
an FMSO; "hear" is not. 
"Could see" differs from "see" in only one of 
the two ways. Consider: 
(16) 
She saw that the stock market had 
crashed. 
(17) 
She could see that the stock market had 
crashed. 
Both (16) and (17) entail "The stock market had 
crashed"; there is no difference in factiveness. 
However, they are naturally read in such a way 
that (16) would be true and (17) false if she simply 
saw a newspaper report of the crash; (17) might 
be true if she saw investors lining the window 
ledges. In such cases, one could insert "the news" 
before "that" in (16) but not in (17) - not even 
when she has inferred the crash from newspaper 
reports of other events. In this way, "could see" is 
more directly perceptual than "saw". This does 
not prevent both from being FMSOs. 
The notion of an FMSO should by now be 
clear enough to be workable; it can be projected 
onto new cases. Moreover, it has been explained 
without essential reference to the notion of know-
ing, although "know" is an example of an FMSO. 
It will now be proposed that "know" has a special 
place in the class of FMSOs. 
The proposal is that if <l> is any FMSO, then "s 
<l>s that X' entails "s knows that K If you see that 
it is raining, then you know that it is raining. 
If you remember that it was raining, then you 
know that it was raining. Such entailments are 
plausible but not uncontroversial (see Unger 1972 
and 1975, pp. 158-83 for useful discussion). 
It is sometimes alleged that one can perceive 
or remember that A without knowing that A, 
because one fails to believe or to be justified in 
believing that A. Other evidence may give one 
reason to think that one is only hallucinating 
what one is in fact perceiving, or only imagining 
what one is in fact remembering. One abandons 
the belief, or retains it without justification; 
either way, it is alleged, one fails to know (Steup 
1992 is a recent example of such a view). 
However, such cases put more pressure on the 
link between knowing and believing or having 
justification than they do on the link between 
perceiving or remembering and knowing. If you 
really do see that it is raining, which is not 
simply to see the rain, then you know that it is 
raining; seeing that A is a way of knowing that 
A. You may not know that you see that it is rain-
ing, and consequently may not know that you 
know that it is raining, but neither condition is 
necessary for knowing that it is raining. 
Similarly, if you really do remember that it was 
raining, which is not simply to remember the 
rain, then you know that it was raining; remem-
bering that A is a way of knowing that A. You 
may not know that you remember that it was 
raining, and consequently may not know that 
you know that it was raining, but neither condi-
tion is necessary for knowing that it is raining. 
But it is far from obvious that you do see or 
remember that it is or was raining in the cases 
at issue, and an account will now be suggested 
on which you do not. 

A STATE OF MIND 
223 
There is a distinction between seeing that A 
and seeing a situation in which A. One difference 
is that only the former requires the perceiver to 
grasp the proposition that A. A normal observer 
in normal conditions who has no concept of chess 
can see a situation in which Olga is playing chess, 
by looking in the right direction, but cannot see 
that Olga is playing chess, because he does not 
know what he sees to be a situation in which Olga 
is playing chess. The present cases suggest another 
difference between the two notions of seeing. By 
looking in the right direction, you can see a situa-
tion in which it is raining. In the imagined case, 
moreover, you have enough concepts to grasp the 
proposition that it is raining. Nevertheless, you 
cannot see that it is raining, precisely because you 
do not know what you see to be a situation in 
which it is raining (given the unfavourable 
evidence). On this account, the case is a 
counterexample to neither the claim that seeing 
implies knowing nor the claim that knowing 
implies believing. 
Similarly, there is a distinction between 
remembering that A and remembering a situa-
tion in which A. One difference is that only the 
former requires the rememberer to grasp the 
proposition that A. Someone whose memory is 
functioning normally but who has no concept of 
chess can remember a situation in which Olga 
was playing chess, but cannot remember that 
Olga was playing chess, because he does not know 
what he remembers to be a situation in which 
Olga was playing chess. The present cases suggest 
another difference between the two notions of 
remembering. You can remember a situation in 
which it was raining. In the imagined case, more-
over, you have enough concepts to grasp the 
proposition that it was raining. Nevertheless, you 
cannot remember that it was raining, precisely 
because you do not know what you remember to 
be a situation in which it was raining (given the 
unfavourable evidence). On this account, the case 
is a counterexample to neither the claim that 
remembering implies knowing nor the claim that 
knowing implies believing. 
The discussion of FMSOs may be summarized 
in three principles: 
(18) 
If <I> is an FMSO, from "S <l>s that X' one 
may infer "X: 
(19) 
"Know" is an FMSO. 
(20) 
If <I> is an FMSO, from "S <l>s that X' one 
may infer "s knows that x: 
The latter two principles characterize the concept 
of knowing uniquely, up to logical equivalence, in 
terms of the concept of an FMSO. For let "schnow" 
be any term governed by (19') and (20'), the 
results of substituting "schnow" for "know" in 
(19) and (20) respectively. By (19) and (20'), from 
"s knows that X' one may infer "s schnows that 
X'. Similarly, by (19') and (20), from "s schnows 
that X' one may infer "S knows that X: Thus 
"schnow" is logically equivalent to "know': Note 
that this argument would fail if (20) held only for 
most FMSOs. In simple terms, "know" is the most 
general FMSO, the one that applies if any FMSO 
at all applies. 
In the material mode, the claim is that know-
ing is the most general stative propositional atti-
tude such that, for all propositions p, necessarily 
if one has it to p then p is true. This is not quite to 
claim that, for all propositions p, knowingp is the 
most general mental state such that necessarily if 
one is in it then p is true. The latter claim fails for 
necessarily true propositions: every mental state 
is such that necessarily if one is in it then 5 + 7 = 
12, but it does not follow that every mental state 
is sufficient for knowing that 5 + 7 = 12. 
It is vital to this account of "know" that 
"believe truly" does not count as an FMSO. If it 
did, (20) would permit the invalid inference from 
"s believes truly that X' to "s knows that X'. The 
mental state is believing that A, not believing 
truly that A. To entail knowing, the mental state 
itself must be sufficient for truth. The condition 
of semantic unanalysability ensures that "believe 
truly" does not count as an FMSO. 
On this account, the importance of knowing 
to us becomes as intelligible as the importance of 
truth. Factive mental states are important to us as 
states whose essence includes a matching between 
mind and world, and knowing is important to us 
as the most general factive stative attitude. Of 
course, something needs to be said about the 
nature and significance of this matching, but that 
is a further problem. Someone who denied that 
the concept characterized by (18)-(20) is our 
concept knows might even think that it was more 
useful than the latter. 
The states in question are general: different 
people can be in them at different times. No claim 

224 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON 
is made about the essences of their tokens; indeed, 
the idea of a token state is of doubtful coherence 
(Steward 1997, pp. 105-34). With respect to gen-
eral states, the claims of necessity are de re, not 
just de dicta. Given that "knowing p" rigidly des-
ignates a mental state, the de dicta claim that the 
truth of p is necessary for knowing p implies the 
de re claim that for some mental state S the truth 
of p is necessary for S. 
The account is explicitly not a decomposition 
of the concept knows; if"know" were semantically 
analysable, it would not be an FMSO. It would 
certainly be quite implausible to claim that every-
one who thinks that John knows that it is raining 
thereby thinks that John has the most general sta-
tive propositional attitude such that, for all prop-
ositions p, necessarily if one has it to p then p is 
true, to the proposition that it is raining. What, 
then, is the status of the account? 
Consider an analogy. Identity is uniquely 
characterized, up to logical equivalence, by the 
principles of reflexivity and Leibniz's Law, just as 
knowing is uniquely characterized, up to logical 
equivalence, by ( 19) and (20). However, it would be 
quite implausible to claim that everyone who thinks 
that Istanbul is Constantinople thereby thinks that 
Istanbul bears to Constantinople the reflexive 
relation that obeys Leibniz's Law. The metalogi-
cal concepts used in formulating Leibniz's Law 
are far more sophisticated than the concepts we 
use in thinking that Istanbul is Constantinople. 
In order to have the concept is (of identity), one 
must somehow be disposed to reason according 
to Leibniz's Law, but that does not require one to 
have the metalogical concepts used in formulat-
ing Leibniz's Law. If it did, there would be an 
obvious danger of an infinite regress. Similarly, 
in order to have the concept knows, one must 
somehow be disposed to reason according to 
(18)-(20), but that does not require one to have 
the metalinguistic concepts used in formulating 
(18)-(20). 
It is no straightforward matter to say what it is 
for a subject to be disposed to reason according to 
rules which the subject cannot formulate. Such a 
subject may even consciously reject the rules; phi-
losophers who mistakenly deny Leibniz's Law do 
not thereby cease to understand the "is" of iden-
tity. Nevertheless, some such notion does seem to 
be needed, independently of the account of know-
ing; the latter account can avail itself of that 
notion, whatever exactly it proves to be. The 
present account of knowing is consistent with 
the main features of a theory of concepts such as 
that of Peacocke 1992, on which an account of a 
concept gives necessary and sufficient condi-
tions for possession of the concept without any 
need to decompose the concept itself. However, 
the account is not committed to any general 
programme of Peacocke's kind in the theory of 
concepts. 
The present account of knowing makes no use 
of such concepts as justified, caused, and reliable. 
Yet knowing seems to be highly sensitive to such 
factors over wide ranges of cases. Any adequate 
account of knowing should enable one to under-
stand these connections. This challenge is not lim-
ited to the present account: standard accounts of 
knowing in terms of justification must enable one 
to understand its sensitivity to causal factors, and 
standard accounts of knowing in terms of causal 
factors must enable one to understand its sensitiv-
ity to justification; none of these tasks is trivial. 
One way for the present account to meet the 
challenge is by exploiting the metaphysics of 
states. For example, a form of the essentiality of 
origins may apply to states; a necessary condition 
of being in some states may be having entered 
them in specific ways. States of perceiving and 
remembering have this feature, requiring entry 
along a specific kind of causal path. Thus the 
importance of causal factors in many cases of 
knowing is quite consistent with this account. 
More obviously, having an inferential justifica-
tion of a specific kind may be essential to being in 
some mental states; having a proof is clearly a fac-
tive mental state. Thus the importance of justifi-
cation in many cases of knowing is equally 
consistent with this account. Of course, these 
remarks merely adumbrate a strategy, without 
carrying it out. ... We can see epistemology as a 
branch of the philosophy of mind. If we try to 
leave epistemology out of the philosophy of mind, 
we arrive at a radically impoverished conception 
of the nature of mind. 
5 
Knowing and Believing 
The account of knowing above makes no essen-
tial mention of believing. Formally, it is consistent 
with many different accounts of the relation 

A STATE OF MIND 
225 
between the two concepts. Historically, however, 
the view of knowing as a mental state has been 
associated with the view that knowing entails not 
believing. Prichard is a case in point (1950, pp. 
86-8). On standard analyses of knowing, in con-
trast, knowing entails believing. On some inter-
mediate views, knowing is consistent both with 
believing and with not believing. It is therefore 
natural to ask how far the present account of 
knowing constrains the relation between know-
ing and believing. 
We have two schemas to consider: 
(21) 
If S knows that A then S believes that A. 
(22) 
If S knows that A then S does not believe 
thatA. 
If (21) is invalid, then the programme of analys-
ing the concept knows as a conjunction of believes 
with true and other concepts is stillborn. Once 
the programme has been abandoned, (21) can be 
examined without prior need for its vindication. 
The schema (22) is quite implausible. Whether 
I know that A on being told that A depends con-
stitutively on whether my informant knew that A 
(amongst other factors). Whether I believe that A 
on being told that A does not depend constitu-
tively on whether my informant knew that A; it 
would have to if knowing excluded believing. Of 
course, when one can describe someone as know-
ing that A, it is conversationally misleading simply 
to describe her as believing that A, but that is not 
to say that it is false. Not all believing is mere 
believing. We should reject (22). 
The schema (21) does not sound trivially valid, 
as the schema "If S knows that A then 1\' does. 
When the un confident examinee, taking herself to 
be guessing, reliably gives correct dates as a result 
of forgotten history lessons, it is not an obvious 
misuse of English to classify her as knowing that 
the battle ofAgincourt was in 1415 without believ-
ing that it was. But intuitions differ over such 
cases; it is not very clear whether she knows and 
not very clear whether she believes. In a case in 
which she was taught incorrect dates and repeats 
them with equal un confidence, she is in an at least 
somewhat belief-like state, which she is also in 
when she was taught the correct dates. We have no 
clear counterexamples to (21) (see Radford 1966, 
Armstrong 1973, pp. 138-49, and Shope 1983, 
pp. 178-87 for further discussion of such cases). 
There is a wide grammatical divergence 
between the verbs "know" and "believe" not sug-
gestive of closely connected terms. For example, 
in a context in which I have predicted that it will 
rain, "You know what I predicted" has a reading 
on which it is true if and only if you know that I 
predicted that it will rain, whereas "You believe 
what I predicted" has no reading on which it is 
true if and only if you believe that I predicted 
that it will rain. There are many further gram-
matical differences between "know" and "believe" 
(see Austin 1946, Vendler 1972, pp. 89-119, and 
Shope 1983, pp. 171-8, 191-2). One explanation 
of such facts, proposed by Vendler, is that "know" 
and "believe" take different objects: what one 
knows is a fact, what one believes a proposition, 
where a fact is not a true proposition. A contin-
gently true proposition, unlike a contingent fact, 
could have been false and still have existed. If so, 
then knowing is not a propositional attitude, and 
much of the terminology of this book might 
need revision, although the substance of the 
account would remain. Vendler's explanation 
makes it hard to see why (21) should be valid. 
However, it is not strictly inconsistent with the 
validity of (21), since "that 1\' may refer to a fact 
in the antecedent and to a proposition in the 
consequent. 
If "that 1\' refers to a fact in the context "S 
knows that 1\', then we might expect "that 1\' to 
suffer reference failure when "1\' is false. 
Consequently, we might expect "s knows that 1\' 
and "s does not know that 1\' not to express prop-
ositions. But if "1\' is false, "S knows that 1\' 
expresses a false proposition and "S does not 
know that 1\' a true one. Perhaps we could treat 
"that 1\' as elliptical for "the fact that 1\' and ana-
lyse it by a Russellian theory of definite descrip-
tions. The reference of "fact that 1\' in the definite 
description is presumably determined by the 
proposition p expressed by "1\'; it is therefore 
some function f of p. Thus to know that A is to 
know the f(p), and hence to stand in a complex 
relation expressed by "know", "the", and "/' to the 
proposition expressed by "1\'. But then with only a 
slight change of meaning we could use the word 
"know" for that complex relation to a proposi-
tion. Thus, even on a view like Vendler's, knowing 
would still involve a propositional attitude. 
However, it is very doubtful that there are any 
such things as facts other than true propositions 

226 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON 
(see Williamson 1999 for an argument). Moreover, 
the propriety of remarks like "I always believed 
that you were a good friend; now I know it" and 
"Long before I knew those things about you I 
believed them" suggest that "believe" and "know" 
do take the same kind of object. Vendler's account 
is not accepted here. 
The present account of knowing might be 
thought inconsistent with the validity of (21), on 
the grounds that it provides no basis for a con-
ceptual connection between believing and know-
ing. That would be too quick. Section 3 already 
noted that not every conceptually necessary con-
dition is a conjunct of a conjunctive analysis. It is 
a mistake to assume that (21) is valid only if that 
connection is explicable by an analysis of knows 
in terms of believes. Consider an analogy: it may 
be a priori that being crimson is sufficient for 
being red, but that implication need not be 
explained by an analysis of one colour concept 
in terms of the other. One can grasp either con-
cept without grasping the other, by being shown 
examples of its application and non-application. 
Neither concept relies on the other in demarcat-
ing conceptual space. Nevertheless, the area 
demarcated by one concept might be so safely 
within the area demarcated by the other that 
one could know by a priori reflection that the 
former is sufficient for the latter. Similarly, the 
area demarcated by the concept knows might be 
so safely within the area demarcated by the con-
cept believes that one could know (21) by a 
priori reflection. That is quite consistent with, 
although not entailed by, the account of knowing 
in section 4. 
An alternative proposal is to reverse the direc-
tion of analysis, and validate (21) by an analysis 
of believes in terms of knows. The simplest sug-
gestion is that the concept believes is analysable 
as a disjunction of knows with other concepts. 
The word "opine" will be used here as a term of 
art for the rest of the disjunction. On this analy-
sis, one believes p if and only if one either knows 
p or opines p. Given that opining p is incompat-
ible with knowing p, it follows that one opines p 
if and only if one believes p without knowing p. 
A similar view has been proposed by John 
McDowell (1982), building on the disjunctive 
account of perceptual experience developed by 
J. M. Hinton (1967 and 1973) and Paul Snowdon 
(1980-1 and 1990; see also Child 1994, pp. 143-64, 
Dancy 1995, and Martin 1997). In McDowell's 
terminology, believing is not the highest common 
factor of knowing and opining. There is no such 
common factor. Rather, knowing and opining are 
radically different, mutually exclusive states, 
although instances of the latter are easily mis-
taken for instances of the former. Given a distinc-
tion between facts and true propositions, one 
could contrast knowing and opining somewhat 
as Vendler contrasts knowing and believing: to 
know is to be acquainted with a fact; to opine is 
to be acquainted with no more than a proposi-
tion. But the disjunctive conception does not 
require such an ontology of facts. 
Not all those who advocate a disjunctive con-
ception would claim that it provides a conceptual 
analysis. That claim faces difficulties additional to 
the generally dim prospects for conceptual analy-
sis evoked in section 3. If the concept believes is 
the disjunction of knows and opines, then it must 
be possible to grasp the concept opines without 
previously grasping the concept believes. For 
otherwise, since grasping a disjunction involves 
grasping its disjuncts, it would be impossible to 
grasp the concept opines for the first time. Now 
"opine" was introduced as a term of art; how is it 
to be explained? The natural explanation is that 
to opine a proposition p is to have a mere belief p, 
which is presumably to believe p without know-
ing p, but that explanation uses the concept 
believes. It does not permit one to grasp opines 
without already grasping believes. The explana-
tion that to opine p is to be of the opinion p does 
no better, for "be of the opinion" as ordinarily 
understood is just a rough synonym of "believe". 
In particular, once it is conceded - as it is by the 
disjunctive conception - that "know" implies 
"believe", little reason remains to deny that 
"know" implies "be of the opinion': too. 
Can we explain "opine" in terms of "know"? 
A first attempt is this: one opines the proposition 
p if and only if one is in a state which one cannot 
discriminate from knowing p, in other words, a 
state which is, for all one knows, knowing p. That 
cannot be quite right, for if one cannot grasp the 
proposition p then one cannot discriminate one's 
state from knowing p; but one does not believe p, 
and therefore does not opine it. To avoid that 
problem, we can revise the definition thus: one 
opines p if and only if one has an attitude to the 
proposition p which one cannot discriminate 

A STATE OF MIND 
227 
from knowing, in other words, an attitude to p 
which is, for all one knows, knowing. However, 
that definition does not help a disjunctive analysis 
of believing. For if one knows p, then trivially one 
has an attitude to p which one cannot discrimi-
nate from knowing; one cannot discriminate 
something from itself. Thus the first disjunct, 
"One knows p", entails the second disjunct, "One 
opines p': The whole disjunction would therefore 
be equivalent to its second disjunct, and the dis-
junctive form of the definiens would be a mere 
artefact of conceptual redundancy. To tack the 
qualification "but does not know p" onto the end 
of the definition of "opine" would make no sig-
nificant difference, for since "One either knows p 
or has an attitude to p which one cannot discrim-
inate from knowing but does not know p" is still 
equivalent to "One has an attitude to p which one 
cannot discriminate from knowing p", the dis-
junctive form would remain a mere artefact. 
Alternatively, "opine" might be explained as 
the disjunction of several more specific disjuncts, 
such as "be under the illusion", "be irrationally 
certain" and so on. However, it is very doubtful 
that, without using the concept believes, one could 
extend such a list to include all the different ways 
in which someone can believe without knowing. 
Those ways seem to be indefinitely various. How 
could one even specify, without using the concept 
believes, all the states in which someone can 
believe p falsely? If the list of disjuncts is open-
ended, one could not grasp how to go on without 
realizing that one must list the ways in which 
someone can believe without knowing. Thus the 
explanation of "opine" illicitly relies on a prior 
grasp of the concept believes. 
The phenomenon just noted also threatens 
more metaphysical disjunctive accounts which do 
not attempt conceptual analysis, instead making 
their claims only about the underlying facts in 
virtue of which the concepts apply. Such an 
account of believing might deny that believing is 
itself a unified state, insisting that it is necessary 
but not a priori that one believes p if and only if 
one is in either the state of knowing p or the state 
of opining p. Since conceptual analysis is no 
longer in question, the replacement of "opining" 
by "merely believing" is not objectionable on 
grounds of circularity. The trouble is rather that 
there is no more reason to regard merely believing 
p as a unified mental state than to regard believ-
ing p as such. What unifies Gettier cases with 
cases of unjustified false belief is simply that in 
both, the subject believes without knowing; a 
good taxonomy of believing would not classify 
them together on the basis of some positive fea-
ture that excludes knowing. Moreover, it is hard 
to see how such a taxonomy could describe every 
species of believing without using the concept 
believes. But if a good taxonomy of believing does 
use the concept believes, that undermines the 
denial that believing is a unified state. Similar 
objections apply to disjunctive accounts of per-
ception, appearance, and experience. For exam-
ple, there is no reason to postulate a unified 
mental state equivalent to its appearing to one 
that A while one does not perceive that A. 
A strictly disjunctive account of belief is not 
correct at either the conceptual or the metaphysi-
cal level. However, the disjunctive account was 
brought into playas a simple means to reconcile 
the account of knowing in section 4 with the sup-
posed validity of (21) (knowing entails believing). 
There are other means to that end. A non-dis-
junctive analysis of believes might also validate 
(21). For example, (21) is a corollary of an analy-
sis of believes itself on the lines of the definition of 
opines above: one believes p if and only if one has 
an attitude to the proposition p which one cannot 
discriminate from knowing, in other words, an 
attitude to p which is, for all one knows, knowing. 
That definition suggestively makes knowing 
central to the account of believing. One attraction 
of such an account is that it opens the prospect 
of explaining the difficulty, remarked by Hume, of 
believing p at will in terms of the difficulty of 
knowing p at will. The analysis is also consistent 
with the account of knowing in section 4. 
Although that analysis provides a reasonable 
approximation to our concept believes, it does not 
fully capture the concept. It incorrectly classifies 
as believing that food is present a primitive crea-
ture which lacks any concept of knowing and 
merely desires that food is present; for all the 
creature knows, its attitude to the proposition 
that food is present is knowing. Equally incor-
rectly, the account classifies as not believing that 
there is a god someone who consciously takes a 
leap of faith, knowing that she does not know that 
there is a god. Both examples, however, are com-
patible with the variant idea that to believe p is 
to treat p as if one knew p - that is, to treat p in 

228 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON 
ways similar to the ways in which subjects treat 
propositions which they know. In particular, a 
factive propositional attitude to a proposition is 
characteristically associated with reliance on it as 
a premise in practical reasoning, for good func-
tional reasons; such reliance is crucial to belief. 
A creature which lacks a concept of knowing can 
still treat a proposition in ways in which it treats 
propositions which it knows. The primitive crea-
ture does not treat the proposition that food is 
present like that when merely desiring that food 
is present; it does not use the proposition as a 
premise in practical reasoning. By contrast, the 
person who genuinely believes that there is a god 
by a leap of faith does rely on that premise in such 
reasoning. The un confident examinee who tenta-
tively gives p as an answer is little disposed to rely 
on p as a premise, and for that reason does not 
clearly believe p, but for the same reason does 
not clearly know p. Although a full-blown exact 
conceptual analysis of believes in terms of knows 
is too much to expect, we can still postulate a 
looser connection along these lines. 
If believing p is, roughly, treating p as if one 
knew p, then knowing is in that sense central to 
believing. Knowledge sets the standard of appropri-
ateness for belief. That does not imply that all cases 
of knowing are paradigmatic cases of believing, for 
one might know p while in a sense treating p as if 
one did not know p - that is, while treating p in 
ways untypical of those in which subjects treat 
what they know. Nevertheless, as a crude generali-
zation, the further one is from knowing p, the less 
appropriate it is to believe p. Knowing is in that 
sense the best kind of believing. Mere believing is 
a kind of botched knowing.8 In short, belief aims 
at knowledge (not just truth) .... 
Notes 
McDowell 1995 and Gibbons 1998 defend 
closely related conceptions of knowing as a 
mental state. See also Guttenplan 1994 and 
Peacocke 1999, pp. 52-5. 
2 See Shope 1983 for the history of a decade of 
research into the analysis of knowing after 
Gettier 1963; an equally complex book could 
be written on post-1983 developments. Not 
all this work aims to provide an analysis in the 
traditional sense; see Shope 1983, pp. 34-44. 
Although the letter of disjunctive accounts 
has been rejected, the spirit may have been 
retained. For on the account in section 4, believ-
ing is not the highest common factor of knowing 
and mere believing, simply because it is not a 
factor of knowing at all (whether or not it is a 
necessary condition). Since that point is consist-
ent with the claim that believing is common to 
knowing and mere believing, the claim is harm-
less. It no more makes the difference between 
knowing and mere believing extrinsic to a state 
than the point that continuity is common to 
straight and curved lines makes the difference 
between straight and curved extrinsic to a line. 
To know is not merely to believe while various 
other conditions are met; it is to be in a new kind 
of state, a factive one. What matters is not accept-
ance of a disjunctive account of believing but 
rejection of a conjunctive account of knowing.9 
Furthermore, the claim that belief is what aims at 
knowledge is consonant with the suggestion in 
disjunctive accounts that illusion is somehow 
parasitic on veridical perception. Properly devel-
oped, the insight behind disjunctive theories 
leads to a non-conjunctive account of knowledge 
and a non-disjunctive account of belief. 
While belief aims at knowledge, various mental 
processes aim at more specific factive mental 
states. Perception aims at perceiving that some-
thing is so; memory aims at remembering that 
something is so. Since knowing is the most gen-
eral factive state, all such processes aim at kinds of 
knowledge. If a creature could not engage in such 
processes without some capacity for success, we 
may conjecture that nothing could have a mind 
without having a capacity for knowledge. 
3 Craig 1990 makes an interesting attempt to 
explain the point of the concept of knowledge 
in the light of the failure of analyses of the 
standard kind. However, on the present view 
it remains too close to the traditional pro-
gramme, for it takes as its starting point our 
need for true beliefs about our environment 
(1990: 11), as though this were somehow 
more basic than our need for knowledge of 
our environment. It is no reply that believing 

A STATE OF MIND 
229 
truly is as useful as knowing, for it is agreed 
that the starting point should be more spe-
cific than "useful mental state"; why should it 
be specific in the manner of "believing truly" 
rather than in that of "knowing"? ... 
4 For sophisticated but un compelling defence 
of conceptual analysis see Jackson 1998 and 
Smith 1994, pp. 29-56, 161-4. However, the 
kind of analysis they defend constitutes little 
threat to the claim that knowing is a mental 
state in every reasonable sense of the latter 
term. They provide no reason to suppose that 
the concept knows can be non-trivially ana-
lysed in any sense in which paradigmatic 
mental concepts cannot be, or that it is some-
how posterior in the order of analysis to the 
concept believes. See also Fodor 1998 for a dis-
cussion of the demise of definition. 
5 We must also assume Russell's conception of 
propositions as at the level of reference rather 
than sense. In effect, Evans 1982 combines the 
Principle of Acquaintance with a conception 
of acquaintance much less extreme than 
Russell's. Of course, Russell's extremism here 
is no mere extraneous dogma; it is an attempt 
to solve puzzles about the identity and non-
existence of denotation in intentional contexts. 
References 
Armstrong, D. M. 1973. Belief, Truth and 
Knowledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press). 
Austin, J. L. 1946. "Other minds:' Proceedings of 
the Aristotelian Society, supp. 20, pp. 148-87. 
Child, T. W. 1994. Causality, Interpretation and 
the Mind (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Craig, E. J. 1990. Knowledge and the State of 
Nature: An Essay in Conceptual Synthesis 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Dancy, J. 1995. "Arguments from illusion:' 
Philosophical Quarterly 45, pp. 421-38. 
Evans, M. G. J. 1982. The Varieties of Reference, ed. 
J. H. McDowell (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Fodor, J. A. 1998. Concepts: Where Cognitive Science 
Went Wrong (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Gettier, E. 1963. "Is justified true belief knowl-
edge?" Analysis, 23, pp. 121-3. 
Gibbons, J. 1998. "Truth in action." Unpublished 
typescript. 
Unfortunately, the cure is worse than the 
disease. 
6 As noted in the Introduction, we cannot define 
"x is a parent of y" by "x is an ancestor of y and 
x is not an ancestor of an ancestor of y". 
7 A further ground for suspicion of analyses of 
the concept knows in terms of the concept 
believes is that they seem to imply that the 
latter concept is acquired before the former. 
Data on child development suggest, if any-
thing, the reverse order (see Perner 1993, pp. 
145-203 for discussion of relevant work). 
Crudely: children understand ignorance 
before they understand error. Naturally, the 
data can be interpreted in various ways, and 
their bearing on the order of analysis depends 
on subtle issues in the theory of concepts. 
8 See also Peacocke 1999, p. 34. 
9 Martin 1997, pp. 88-90 questions whether a 
parallel account of perception and appear-
ance will serve the purposes of naive realism, 
on the grounds that it does not entail the 
naive realist's distinctive claims about the 
phenomenology of perception. But a parallel 
account in terms of a factive mental state of 
conscious perceptual awareness may capture 
such claims. 
Grice, H. P. 1989. Studies in the Way of Words 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 
Guttenplan, S. 1994. "Belief, knowledge and 
the origins of content." Dialectica 48, pp. 
287-305. 
Hintikka, K. J. J. 1962. Knowledge and Belief 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press). 
Hinton, J. M. 1967. "Visual experiences." Mind 76, 
pp.217-27. 
Howson, C. 
1996. "Epistemic probability:' 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, supp. 70, 
pp.63-77. 
Jackson, F. 1998. From Metaphysics to Ethics: 
A Defence of Conceptual Analysis ( Oxford: 
Oxford University Press). 
McDowell, J. H. 1982. "Criteria, defeasibility, and 
knowledge." Proceedings of the British Academy 
68, pp. 455-79. Partly reprinted with revisions 
in Dancy (ed.) 1988. Perceptual Knowledge 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 

230 
TIMOTHY WILLIAMSON 
--
1995. "Knowledge and the internal:' 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 55, 
pp.877-93. 
Martin, M. G. F. 1997. "The reality of appear-
ances." In R. M. Sainsbury (ed.) Thought and 
Ontology (Milan: FrancoAngeli). 
Peacocke, C. A. B. 1992. A Study of Concepts 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press). 
-- 1999. Being Known (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press). 
Perner,1. 1993. "Fitch and intuitionistic knowa-
bility:' Analysis 50, pp. 182-7. 
Prichard, H. A. 1950. Knowledge and Perception 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Radford, C. 1966. "Knowledge - by examples." 
Analysis 27, pp. 1-11. 
Russell, 1. B. A. W. 1910-11. "Knowledge by 
acquaintance and knowledge by description:' 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 11, pp. 
108-28. Page reference to reprinting in Salmon 
and So ames 1988. 
Salmon, N. U. and So ames, S. (eds) 1988. 
Propositions and Attitudes (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press). 
Shope, R. K. 1983. The Analysis of Knowing: 
A Decade of Research (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press). 
Smith, M. 1994. The Moral Problem (Oxford: 
Blackwell). 
Snowdon, P. 1980-1. "Perception, vision and cau-
sation." Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 
81, pp. 175-92. 
-- 1990. "The objects of perceptual experi-
ence." Proceedings of Aristotelian Society, supp. 
64, pp. 121-50. 
Steward, H. 1997. The Ontology of Mind: Events, 
Processes and States (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press). 
Unger, 
P. 
1972. "Propositional verbs and 
knowledge:' Journal of Philosophy 69, pp. 
301-12. 
-- 1975. Ignorance: A Case for Scepticism 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Vendler, Z. 1967. Linguistics in Philosophy (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press). 
-- 1972. Res Cogitans (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press). 
Williamson, T. 1999. "Truthmakers and the 
Converse Barcan Formula." Dialectica 53, 
pp.253-70. 

PART IV 
Epistemic Closure 


Introduction 
It is a commonplace observation that deduction, or at least competent deduction, can 
extend our knowledge. We can expand our knowledge by figuring out what follows 
from it. This seems to be evidence for a kind of epistemic "closure" principle - a prin-
ciple positing some strong connection between knowing something and knowing its 
implications. Moreover, it seems that skeptical reasoning quite often presupposes some 
such principle. For example, a skeptic might argue that because you don't know you're 
not a handless brain in a vat, you don't know you have hands. Getting clear on how our 
knowledge might be extended to the implications of what we know seems important, 
then, for evaluating skeptical reasoning. 
It is plainly too strong to say that knowledge is closed under implication - that we 
know all that is implied by what we know - since one need have no idea that there is an 
implication. I might know that 2 + 2 is 4 but not know some very complicated mathe-
matical proposition implied by it. A good first start for an epistemic closure takes 
knowledge to be closed under known implication: 
If 5 knows that p, and if 5 knows that p implies q, then 5 knows that q. 
There is a lot to say in favor of this principle. For one thing, it seems clearly absurd 
to say, "I know that I'm awake, and I realize that my being awake implies my not dream-
ing, but I don't know I'm not dreaming." To use a term from Keith DeRose, such con-
junctions seem abominable. The principle also seems to explain how deduction is a 
secure source of the transmission of knowledge. Nonetheless, the principle has difficul-
ties. The selections in this section are all devoted either to making palatable the view that 
closure fails or to defending closure against the objections presented by its opponents. 
Fred Dretske, for example, argues that it follows from the right conception of the 
semantics of "knows" that closure is violated. Suppose I have a reason to buy a car at 
Jones's used car lot - that it's the kind of car I'm looking for, and it's being sold cheaper 
at Jones's lot than anywhere else. This is a reason to buy my car at Jones's. But notice a 
logical consequence of my buying a car at Jones's. If I buy my car at Jones's, I don't steal 
my car at Jones's. My reason for buying my car at Jones's surely is not a reason not to 

234 
INTRODUCTION 
steal a car at Jones's. My reasons for that lie elsewhere. According to Dretske, certain 
epistemic operators, like "R is a reason for ... " and "E is an explanation for ... ;' while 
truly applied to certain propositions, do not "penetrate" to all logical consequences of 
those propositions. And, according to Dretske, knowledge is a lot like "explains" and "is 
a reason for" in that the operator "5 knows that" when applied to "p" does not penetrate 
to all logical consequences of p, even all those logical consequences which 5 knows 
about. This is just to say that closure fails in such cases. The reason is that to know 
something is to know it against a background of certain relevant alternatives, just as to 
have a reason for doing something is to have a reason for doing it, rather than some 
other specific alternative. In the case of certain standard skeptical arguments, Dretske 
proposes that we can fail to know that the skeptical alternatives don't obtain (e.g., we 
do not know that animals in the zebra pen at the zoo are not cleverly disguised mules) 
even while knowing what we originally said we knew (e.g., we do know that the animals 
in the zebra pen are zebras). Knowing, on Dretske's so-called relevant alternatives 
theory, requires ruling out all relevant alternatives, not all alternatives. 
Gail Stine is also sympathetic to the relevant alternatives theory but, unlike Dretske, 
does not think that this approach requires the denial of closure. On her understanding 
of the theory, which alternatives are relevant can vary depending on the context of 
speech. If we are in a court of law or are discussing skepticism, alternatives can become 
relevant which aren't relevant in ordinary contexts. If we hold the speech context fixed, 
she claims, any relevant alternative to the conclusion of a (single-premised) valid argu-
ment will be a relevant alternative to its premise. Of course, by actually moving from 
asserting knowledge of the premises to asserting knowledge of the conclusion, we can 
alter the speech context, making new alternatives relevant, and so closure can appear to 
be violated. But this is mere appearance. For, in changing the speech context, one is in 
effect equivocating on 'knows.' We test a closure principle for truth by holding fixed the 
content of all terms involved, including 'knows; and then seeing whether the anteced-
ent can be true and the consequent false. But holding fixed the content of 'knows' 
requires holding fixed the class of relevant alternatives. 
Like Dretske, Robert Nozick argues that a denial of closure falls out of the correct 
analysis of knowledge. Nozick, however, is not a relevant alternatives theorist. According 
to Nozick, the key to knowledge is tracking the truth. One knows through perception that 
there is a bird on the ledge because one wouldn't believe this if it weren't so. Moreover, one 
must be such that if things were slightly different and there was a bird on the ledge, one 
would still believe that this were so. Thus, we obtain the following preliminary account: 
5 knows that p iff 
1 P is true. 
2 5 believes that p. 
3 If P were not true, 5 would not believe that p. 
4 
If P were true, 5 would believe that p. 
One of the great advantages of the account is that, if correct, it would defuse argu-
ments for skepticism. For if Nozick is right about knowledge, it is not closed under 
known logical implication. There are cases in which one tracks the truth of p, tracks the 
truth of <p entails q> but fails to track the truth of q. The standard skeptical cases are 
prime examples: I track the truth of both <I have hands> and «I have hands> entails 

PART IV 
<I am not a brain in a vat deceived into thinking 1 have hands», but 1 don't track the 
truth of <I am not a brain in a vat deceived into thinking 1 have hands>. For had 1 been 
a brain in a vat so deceived, 1 would still believe 1 have hands, for my evidence would be 
just what it is. Thus, 1 know that 1 have hands, even though 1 don't know that 1 am not 
a brain in a vat deceived into thinking 1 have hands. The defeat of skepticism, as with 
Dretske, is provided by a denial of closure. 
Ernest So sa argues that we can defend Moorean common sense - and likewise, the 
closure principle - against Dretske and Nozick, based on an appeal to sensitivity (i.e., 
truth-tracking). Sosa understands Moore as arguing as follows: 1 know ordinary prop-
osition 0, and if 1 know 0 then 1 know the falsity of skeptical proposition H, and so 1 
know -H. Against this, it has been claimed that one can't know -H because one is not 
sensitive to its truth. One can't know one isn't a brain in a vat, for example, because if 
one were a brain in a vat, one would still believe one was not a brain in a vat. Thus, to 
avoid the skeptical conclusion that one doesn't know ordinary propositions such as I 
have hands, the sensitivity theorist must either deny epistemic closure or appeal to 
some sort of contextual shift. Overlooked here is the distinction between sensitivity 
and a close relative of it, which Sosa calls safety. To say S's belief is safe is to say that if S 
were to believe p then p would be true. This is the contrapositive of sensitivity (and the 
converse of Nozick's condition 4). Some conditionals contrapose, but Sosa shows that 
contraposition fails for subjunctive conditionals. In fact, Sosa claims, the way in which 
it fails makes safety the better candidate for being a requirement of knowledge. (For 
example, I can know many propositions of the form I do not falsely believe that p, and 
in each case my belief is safe but not sensitive.) Replacing the sensitivity requirement 
with a safety requirement enables us to defend Moore. We do safely believe that we're 
not in a skeptical scenario H because were we to believe -H we would be right. Finally, 
the close apparent connection between safety and sensitivity can help explain why we 
find the claim that we don't know - H so tempting: we confuse safety with sensitivity. 
Jonathan Vogel offers further defense of the closure principle generally and, in par-
ticular, those instances of the closure principle that figure in the skeptical arguments. 
Vogel argues that the intuitions which drive apparent counter-examples can be 
explained away in light of certain psychological tendencies to overestimate chances of 
error. Further, Vogel argues that even if the closure principle does fail in the face of 
certain lottery-like cases, this failure does not carryover to the contexts where the skep-
tic might appeal to the principle. Skeptical propositions - that you are a brain in a vat, 
etc. - do not have the characteristic features of lottery propositions. 
Further Reading 
235 
Audi, Robert, "Deductive Closure, Defeasibility, 
and Scepticism: A Reply to 
Feldman;' 
Philosophical Quarterly 45 (1995), pp. 494-9. 
Brueckner, Anthony L., "Skepticism and Epistemic 
Closure," Philosophical Topics 13 (1985), pp. 
89-117. 
Dretske, Fred, "The Case Against Closure;' in 
Matthias Steup and Ernest Sosa (eds), 
Contemporary 
Debates 
In 
Epistemology 
(Oxford: Blackwell, 2005), pp. 13-25. 
Cohen, Stewart, "Two 
Kinds of Skeptical 
Argument;' Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 58 (1998), pp. 143-59. 
Feldman, Richard, "In Defence of Closure;' 
Philosophical Quarterly 45 (1995), pp. 487-94. 
Harman, Gilbert, Change in View: Principles of 
Reasoning, (Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press, 1988). 

236 
INTRODUCTION 
Hawthorne, John, Knowledge and Lotteries 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2004). 
--, "The Case for Closure," in Matthias Steup 
and Ernest Sosa (eds), Contemporary Debates 
in Epistemology (Oxford: Blackwell, 2005), pp. 
26-42. 
Heller, Mark, "Relevant Alternatives and Closure;' 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 77 (1999), 
pp.196-208. 
Klein, Peter, "Closure Matters:Academic Skepticism 
and Easy Knowledge," Nous - supplement: 
Philosophical Issues 14 (2004), pp. 165-84. 
Kvanvig, Jonathan, "Epistemic Closure," Philosophy 
Compass 1 (2006). 
Nozick, Robert,PhilosophicalExplanations (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1981). 
Warfield, Ted A., "Deductive Closure and Relevant 
Alternatives;' Southwest Philosophical Studies 
(1991), pp. 104-16. 

CHAPTER 19 
Epistemic Operators 
Fred Dretske 
Suppose Q is a necessary consequence of P. Given 
only this much, it is, of course, quite trivial that if 
it is true that P, then it must also be true that Q. If 
it is a fact that P, then it must also be a fact that Q. 
If it is necessary that P, then it is necessary that Q; 
and if it is possible that P, then it must also be 
possible that Q. 
I have just mentioned four prefixes: "it is true 
that", "it is a fact that", "it is necessary that", and "it 
is possible that': In this paper I shall refer to such 
affIxes as sentential operators or simply operators; 
when affIxed to a sentence or statement, they 
operate on it to generate another sentence or 
statement. The distinctive thing about the four 
operators I have just mentioned is that, if Q is a 
necessary consequence of P, then the statement 
we get by operating on Q with one of these four 
operators is a necessary consequence of the state-
ment we get by operating on P with the same 
operator. This may be put more succinctly if we 
let "0" stand for the operator in question and 
"O(P)" for the statement we get by affixing the 
operator "0" to the statement "P': We can now say 
that the above four operators share the following 
property: if P entails Q, then O(P) entails O( Q). I 
shall call any operator having this property a pen-
etrating operator (or, when emphasis is required, a 
fully penetrating operator). In operating on P these 
Originally published in The Journal of Philosophy 
LXVII, 24 (December 24,1970), pp. 1007-23. 
operators penetrate to every necessary conse-
quence of P. 
We are now in a position to ask ourselves a pre-
liminary question. The answer to this question is 
easy enough, but it will set the stage for more diffI-
cult questions. Are all sentential operators fully 
penetrating operators? Are all operators such that if 
P entails Q, then O(P) entails O( Q)? If all operators 
are penetrating operators, then each of the follow-
ing statements must be true (when P entails Q): 
(1) 
You cannot have a reason to believe that P 
unless you have a reason to believe that Q. 
(2) 
You cannot know that P unless you know 
that Q. 
(3) 
You cannot explain why P is the case unless 
you can explain why Q is the case. 
(4) 
If you assert that P, then you assert that Q. 
(5) 
If you hope that P, then you hope that Q. 
(6) 
If it is strange (or accidental) that P, then it 
must be strange (or accidental) that Q. 
(7) 
If it was a mistake that P, then it was a mistake 
that Q. 
This list begins with two epistemic operators, 
"reason to believe that" and "know that". Since I 
shall be concerned with these later in the paper, 
let me skip over them now and look at those 
appearing near the end of the list. They will suf-
fice to answer our opening question, and their 
status is much less problematic than that of some 
of the other operators. 

238 
FRED DRETSKE 
"She lost" entails "Someone lost': Yet, it may be 
strange that she lost, not at all strange that some-
one lost. "Bill and Susan married each other" 
entails that Susan got married; yet, it may be quite 
odd that (strange that, incredible that) Bill and 
Susan married each other but quite unremarka-
ble, not at all odd that, Susan got married. It may 
have been a mistake that they married each other, 
not a mistake that Susan got married. Or finally, 
"I hit the bull's-eye" entails that I either hit the 
bull's-eye or the side of the barn; and though I 
admit that it was lucky that (accidental that) I hit 
the bull's-eye, I will deny that it was lucky, an acci-
dent, that I hit either the bull's-eye or the side of 
the barn. 
Such examples show that not all operators are 
fully penetrating. Indeed, such operators as "it is 
strange that", "it is accidental that" and "it is a 
mistake that" fail to penetrate to some of the most 
elementary logical consequences of a proposition. 
Consider the entailment between "p . Q" and "Q': 
Clearly, it may be strange that P and Q, not at all 
strange that P, and not at all strange that Q. A 
concatenation of factors, no one of which is 
strange or accidental, may itself be strange or 
accidental. Taken by itself, there is nothing odd or 
suspicious about Frank's holding a winning ticket 
in the first race. The same could be said about any 
of the other races: there is nothing odd or suspi-
cious about Frank's holding a winning ticket in 
the nth race. Nonetheless, there is something very 
odd, very suspicious, in Frank's having a winning 
ticket in n races. 
Therefore, not only are these operators not 
fully penetrating, they lie, as it were, on the other 
end of the spectrum. They fail to penetrate to 
some of the most elementary consequences of a 
proposition. I shall refer to this class of operators 
as nonpenetrating operators. I do not wish to sug-
gest by this label that such operators are totally 
impotent in this respect (or that they are all uni-
form in their degree of penetration). I mean it, 
rather, in a rough, comparative, sense: their degree 
of penetration is less than that of any of the other 
operators I shall have occasion to discuss. 
We have, then, two ends of the spectrum with 
examples from both ends. Anything that falls 
between these two extremes I shall call a semi-
penetrating operator. And with this definition I 
am, finally, in a position to express my main 
point, the point I wish to defend in the rest of this 
paper. It is, simply, that all epistemic operators are 
semi-penetrating operators. There is both a trivial 
and a significant side to this claim. Let me first 
deal briefly with the trivial aspect. 
The epistemic operators I mean to be speaking 
about when I say that all epistemic operators are 
semi-penetrating include the following: 
(a) 
S knows that ... 
(b) 
S sees (or can see) that ... 
(c) 
S has reason (or a reason) to believe that ... 
(d) 
There is evidence to suggest that ... 
(e) 
S can prove that ... 
(f) 
S learned (discovered, found out) that ... 
(g) 
In relation to our evidence it is probable 
that ... 
Part of what needs to be established in showing 
that these are all semi-penetrating operators is 
that they all possess a degree of penetration 
greater than that of the nonpenetrating opera-
tors. This is the trivial side of my thesis. I say it is 
trivial because it seems to me fairly obvious that if 
someone knows that P and Q, has a reason to 
believe that P and Q, or can prove that P and Q, 
he thereby knows that Q, has a reason to believe 
that Q, or can prove (in the appropriate epistemic 
sense of this term) that Q. Similarly, if S knows 
that Bill and Susan married each other, he (must) 
know that Susan got married (married someone). 
If he knows that P is the case, he knows that P or 
Q is the case (where the "or" is understood in a 
sense which makes "p or Q" a necessary conse-
quence of "P"). This is not a claim about what it 
would be appropriate to say, what the person 
himself thinks he knows or would say he knows. 
It is a question, simply, of what he knows. It may 
not be appropriate to say to Jim's wife that you 
know it was either her husband, Jim, or Harold 
who sent the neighbor lady an expensive gift when 
you know it was Harold. For, although you do 
know this, it is misleading to say you know it -
especially to Jim's wife. 
Let me accept, therefore, without further argu-
ment that the epistemic operators are not, unlike 
"lucky that", "strange that", "a mistake that", and 
"accidental 
that'~ nonpenetrating operators. I 
would like to turn, then, to the more significant 
side of my thesis. Before I do, however, I must 
make one point clear lest it convert my entire 
thesis into something as trivial as the first half of 

EPISTEMIC OPERATORS 
239 
it. When we are dealing with the epistemic opera-
tors, it becomes crucial to specify whether the 
agent in question knows that P entails Q. That is 
to say, P may entail Q, and S may know that P, but 
he may not know that Q because, and perhaps 
only because, he fails to appreciate the fact that P 
entails Q. When Q is a simple logical consequence 
of P we do not expect this to happen, but when 
the propositions become very complex, or the 
relationship between them very complex, this 
might easily occur. Let P be a set of axioms, Q a 
theorem. S's knowing P does not entail S's know-
ing Q just because P entails Q; for, of course, S 
may not know that P entails Q, may not know 
that Q is a theorem. Hence, our epistemic opera-
tors will turn out not to be penetrating because, 
and perhaps only because, the agents in question 
are not fully cognizant of all the implications of 
what they know to be the case, can see to be the 
case, have a reason to believe is the case, and so 
on. Were we all ideally astute logicians, were we all 
fully apprised of all the necessary consequences 
(supposing this to be a well defined class) of every 
proposition, perhaps then the epistemic opera-
tors would turn into fully penetrating operators. 
That is, assuming that if P entails Q, we know that 
P entails Q, then every epistemic operator is a 
penetrating operator: the epistemic operators 
penetrate to all the known consequences of a 
proposition. 
It is this latter, slightly modified, claim that I 
mean to reject. Therefore, I shall assume through-
out the discussion that when Q is a necessary 
consequence of P, every relevant agent knows 
that it is. I shall be dealing with only the known 
consequences (in most cases because they are 
immediate and obvious consequences). What I 
wish to show is that, even under this special 
restriction, the epistemic operators are only semi-
penetrating. 
I think many philosophers would disagree 
with this contention. rh~_conviction is that the 
epistel1!ic _worth of apropositLop i~_J:1~!"..e~itary 
unde~- entailment, thatvvhat~ver the~i~~-;:nTc 
worth _~f JLC11 lea:sult~_si!m~yalue_must be 
accorded the known conseQlleI1ces of P. This con-
viction . finds expressi~-n in a variety of ways. 
Epistemic logic: if S knows that P, and knows that 
P entails Q, then S knows that Q. Probability 
theory: if A is probable, and B is a logical conse-
quence of A, then B is probable (relative to the 
same evidence, of course). Confirmation theory: 
if evidence e tends to confirm hypothesis h, then e 
indirectly confirms all the logical consequences 
of h. But perhaps the best evidence in favor of 
supposing that most philosophers have taken the 
epistemic operators to be fully penetrating is the 
way they have argued and the obvious assump-
tions that structure their arguments. Anyone who 
has argued in the following way seems to me to be 
assuming the thesis of penetrability (as I shall call 
it): if you do not know whether Q is true or not, 
and P cannot be true unless Q is true, then you 
(obviously) do not know whether P is true or not. 
A slightly more elaborate form of the same argu-
ment goes like this: If S does not know whether or 
not Q is true, then for all he knows it might be 
false. If Q is false, however, then P must also be 
false. Hence, for all S knows, P may be false. 
Therefore, S does not know that P is true. This 
pattern of argument is sprinkled throughout the 
epistemological literature. Almost all skeptical 
objections trade on it. S claims to know that this 
is a tomato. A necessary consequence of its being 
a tomato is that it is not a clever imitation which 
only looks and feels (and, if you will, tastes) like a 
tomato. But S does not know that it is not a clever 
imitation that only looks and feels (and tastes) 
like a tomato. (I assume here that no one is pre-
pared to argue that anything that looks, feels, and 
tastes like a tomato to S must be a tomato.) 
Therefore, S does not know that this is a tomato. 
We can, of course, reply with G. E. Moore that we 
certainly do know it is a tomato (after such an 
examination) and since tomatoes are not imita-
tions we know that this is not an imitation. It is 
interesting to note that this reply presupposes the 
same principle as does the skeptical objection: 
they both assume that if S knows that this is a P, 
and knows that every P is a Q, then S knows that 
this is a Q. The only difference is that the skeptic 
performs a modus tollens, Moore a modus 
ponens. Neither questions the principle itself. 
Whether it be a question of dreams or demons, 
illusions or fakes, the same pattern of argument 
emerges. If you know this is a chair, you must 
know that you are not dreaming (or being 
deceived by a cunning demon), since its being a 
(real) chair entails that it is not simply a figment 
of your own imagination. Such arguments assume 
that the epistemic operators, and in particular the 
operator "to know", penetrate to all the known 

240 
FRED DRETSKE 
consequences of a proposition. If these operators 
were not penetrating, many of these objections 
might be irrelevant. Consider the following 
exchange: 
S: 
How strange! There are tomatoes growing 
in my apple tree. 
K: 
That isn't strange at all. Tomatoes, after 
all, are physical objects and what is so 
strange about physical objects growing in 
your apple tree? 
What makes K's reply so silly is that he is treating 
the operator "strange that" as a fully penetrating 
operator: it cannot be strange that there are 
tomatoes growing in the apple tree unless the 
consequences of this (e.g., there are objects 
growing in your apple tree) are also strange. 
Similarly, it may not be at all relevant to object to 
someone who claims to know that there are 
tomatoes in the apple tree that he does not know, 
cannot be absolutely sure, that there are really 
any material objects. Whether or not this is a rel-
evant objection will depend on whether or not 
this particular consequence of there being toma-
toes in the apple tree is one of the consequences 
to which the epistemic operators penetrate. 
What I wish to argue in the remainder of this 
paper is that the traditional skeptical arguments 
exploit precisely those consequences of a propo-
sition to which the epistemic operators do not 
penetrate, precisely those consequences which 
distinguish the epistemic operators from the 
fully penetrating operators. 
In support of this claim let me begin with 
some examples which are, I think, fairly intuitive 
and then turn to some more problematic cases. I 
shall begin with the operator "reason to believe 
that" although what I have to say could be said as 
well with any of them. This particular operator 
has the added advantage that if it can be shown to 
be only semi-penetrating, then many accounts of 
knowledge, those which interpret it as a form of 
justified true belief, would also be committed to 
treating "knowing that" as a semi-penetrating 
operator. For, presumably, "knowing that" would 
not penetrate any deeper than one's "reasons for 
believing that". 
Suppose you have a reason to believe that the 
church is empty. Must you have a reason to believe 
that it is a church? I am not asking whether you 
generally have such a reason. I am asking whether 
one can have a reason to believe the church empty 
without having a reason to believe that it is a 
church which is empty. Certainly your reason for 
believing that the church is empty is not itself a 
reason to believe it is a church; or it need not be. 
Your reason for believing the church to be empty 
may be that you just made a thorough inspection 
of it without finding anyone. That is a good 
reason to believe the church empty. Just as clearly, 
however, it is not a reason, much less a good 
reason, to believe that what is empty is a church. 
The fact is, or so it seems to me, I do not have to 
have any reason to believe it is a church. Of course, 
I would never say the church was empty, or that I 
had a reason to believe that the church was empty, 
unless I believed, and presumably had a reason 
for so believing, that it was a church which was 
empty, but this is a presumed condition of my 
saying something, not of my having a reason to 
believe something. Suppose I had simply assumed 
(correctly as it turns out) that the building was a 
church. Would this show that I had no reason to 
believe that the church was empty? 
Suppose I am describing to you the "adven-
tures" of my brother Harold. Harold is visiting 
New York for the first time, and he decides to take 
a bus tour. He boards a crowded bus and immedi-
ately takes the last remaining seat. The little old 
lady he shouldered aside in reaching his seat 
stands over him glowering. Minutes pass. Finally, 
realizing that my brother is not going to move, 
she sighs and moves resignedly to the back of the 
bus. Not much of an adventure, but enough, I 
hope, to make my point. I said that the little old 
lady realized that my brother would not move. 
Does this imply that she realized that, or knew 
that, it was my brother who refused to move? 
Clearly not. We can say that S knows that X is Y 
without implying that S knows that it is X which 
is Y. We do not have to describe our little old lady 
as knowing that the man or the person would not 
move. We can say that she realized that, or knew 
that, my brother would not move (minus, of 
course, this pattern of emphasis), and we can say 
this because saying this does not entail that the 
little old lady knew that, or realized that, it was my 
brother who refused to move. She knew that 
my brother would not move, and she knew this 
despite the fact that she did not know something 
that was necessarily implied by what she did 

EPISTEMIC OPERATORS 
241 
know - viz., that the person who refused to move 
was my brother. 
I have argued elsewhere that to see that A is B, 
that the roses are wilted for example, is not to see, 
not even to be able to see, that they are roses 
which are wilted. I To see that the widow is limp-
ing is not to see that it is a widow who is limping. 
I am now arguing that this same feature holds for 
all epistemic operators. I can know that the roses 
are wilting without knowing that they are roses, 
know that the water is boiling without knowing 
that it is water, and prove that the square root of 2 
is smaller than the square root of 3 and, yet, be 
unable to prove what is entailed by this - viz., that 
the number 2 has a square root. 
The general point may be put this way: there 
are certain presuppositions associated with a 
statement. These presuppositions, although their 
truth is entailed by the truth of the statement, are 
not part of what is operated on when we operate 
on the statement with one of our epistemic oper-
ators. The epistemic operators do not penetrate to 
these presuppositions. For example, in saying that 
the coffee is boiling I assert that the coffee is boil-
ing, but in asserting this I do not assert that it is 
coffee which is boiling. Rather, this is taken for 
granted, assumed, presupposed, or what have 
you. Hence, when I say that I have a reason to 
believe that the coffee is boiling, I am not saying 
that this reason applies to the fact that it is coffee 
which is boiling. This is still presupposed. I may 
have such a reason, of course, and chances are 
good that I do have such a reason or I would not 
have referred to what I believe to be boiling as 
coffee, but to have a reason to believe the coffee is 
boiling is not, thereby, to have a reason to believe 
it is coffee which is boiling. 
One would expect that if this is true of the 
semi-penetrating operators, then it should also be 
true of the nonpenetrating operators. They also 
should fail to reach the presuppositions. This is 
exactly what we find. It may be accidental that the 
two trucks collided, but not at all accidental that 
it was two trucks that collided. Trucks were the 
only vehicles allowed on the road that day, and so 
it was not at all accidental or a matter of chance 
that the accident took place between two trucks. 
Still, it was an accident that the two trucks col-
lided. Or suppose Mrs. Murphy mistakenly gives 
her cat some dog food. It need not be a mistake 
that she gave the food to her cat, or some food to a 
cat. This was intentional. What was a mistake was 
that it was dog food that she gave to her cat. 
Hence, the first class of consequences that dif-
ferentiate the epistemic operators from the fully 
penetrating operators is the class of consequences 
associated with the presuppositions of a proposi-
tion. The fact that the epistemic operators do not 
penetrate to these presuppositions is what helps 
to make them semi-penetrating. And this is an 
extremely important fact. For it would appear 
that if this is true, then to know that the flowers 
are wilted I do not have to know that they are 
flowers (which are wilted) and, therefore, do not 
have to know all those consequences which follow 
from the fact that they are flowers, real flowers, 
which I know to be wilted. 
Rather than pursue this line, however, I would 
like to turn to what I consider to be a more sig-
nificant set of consequences - "more significant" 
because they are the consequences that are directly 
involved in most skeptical arguments. Suppose we 
assert that x is A. Consider some predicate, "B", 
which is incompatible with A, such that nothing 
can be both A and B. It then follows from the fact 
that x is A that x is not B. Furthermore, if we con-
join B with any other predicate, Q, it follows from 
the fact that x is A that x is not-(B and Q). I shall 
call this type of consequence a contrast conse-
quence, and I am interested in a particular subset 
of these; for I believe the most telling skeptical 
objections to our ordinary knowledge claims 
exploit a particular set of these contrast conse-
quences. The exploitation proceeds as follows: 
someone purports to know that x is A, that the 
wall is red, say. The skeptic now finds a predicate 
"B" that is incompatible with "A': In this particu-
lar example we may let "B" stand for the predicate 
"is white". Since "x is red" entails "x is not white" it 
also entails that x is not-(white and Q) where "Q" 
is any predicate we care to select. Therefore, the 
skeptic selects a "Q" that gives expression to a con-
dition or circumstance under which a white wall 
would appear exactly the same as a red wall. For 
simplicity we may let "Q" stand for: "cleverly illu-
minated to look red". We now have this chain of 
implications: "x is red" entails "x is not white" 
entails "x is not white cleverly illuminated to look 
red': If "knowing that" is a penetrating operator, 
then if anyone knows that the wall is red he must 
know that it is not white cleverly illuminated to 
look red. (I assume here that the relevant parties 

242 
FRED DRETSKE 
know that if x is red, it cannot be white made to 
look red.) He must know that this particular con-
trast consequence is true. The question is: do we, 
generally speaking, know anything of the sort? 
Normally we never take the trouble to check the 
lighting. We seldom acquire any special reasons 
for believing the lighting normal although we can 
talk vaguely about there being no reason to think 
it unusual. The fact is that we habitually take such 
matters for granted, and although we normally 
have good reasons for making such routine 
assumptions, I do not think these reasons are suf-
ficiently good, not without special precautionary 
checks in the particular case, to say of the particu-
lar situation we are in that we know conditions are 
normal. To illustrate, let me give you another 
example - a silly one, but no more silly than a 
great number of skeptical arguments with which 
we are all familiar. You take your son to the zoo, 
see several zebras, and, when questioned by your 
son, tell him they are zebras. Do you know they 
are zebras? Well, most of us would have little hesi-
tation in saying that we did know this. We know 
what zebras look like, and, besides, this is the city 
zoo and the animals are in a pen clearly marked 
"Zebras." Yet, something's being a zebra implies 
that it is not a mule and, in particular, not a mule 
cleverly disguised by the zoo authorities to look 
like a zebra. Do you know that these animals are 
not mules cleverly disguised by the zoo authorities 
to look like zebras? If you are tempted to say "Yes" 
to this question, think a moment about what rea-
sons you have, what evidence you can produce in 
favor of this claim. The evidence you had for 
thinking them zebras has been effectively neutral-
ized, since it does not count toward their not being 
mules cleverly disguised to look like zebras. Have 
you checked with the zoo authorities? Did you 
examine the animals closely enough to detect such 
a fraud? You might do this, of course, but in most 
cases you do nothing of the kind. You have some 
general uniformities on which you rely, regulari-
ties to which you give expression by such remarks 
as, "That isn't very likely" or "Why should the zoo 
authorities do that?" Granted, the hypothesis (if 
we may call it that) is not very plausible, given 
what we know about people and zoos. But the 
question here is not whether this alternative is 
plausible, not whether it is more or less plausible 
than that there are real zebras in the pen, but 
whether you know that this alternative hypothesis 
is false. I don't think you do. In this I agree with 
the skeptic. I part company with the skeptic only 
when he concludes from this that, therefore, you 
do not know that the animals in the pen are zebras. 
I part with him because I reject the principle he 
uses in reaching this conclusion - the principle 
that if you do not know that Q is true, when it is 
known that P entails Q, then you do not know 
that P is true. 
What I am suggesting is that we simply admit 
that we do not know that some of these contrast-
ing "skeptical alternatives" are not the case, but 
refuse to admit that we do not know what we 
originally said we knew. My knowing that the wall 
is red certainly entails that the wall is red; it also 
entails that the wall is not white and, in particular, 
it entails that the wall is not white cleverly illumi-
nated to look red. But it does not follow from the 
fact that I know that the wall is red that I know 
that it is not white cleverly illuminated to look 
red. Nor does it follow from the fact that I know 
that those animals are zebras that I know that 
they are not mules cleverly disguised to look like 
zebras. These are some of the contrast conse-
quences to which the epistemic operators do not 
penetrate. 
Aside from asserting this, what arguments can 
be produced to support it? I could proceed by 
multiplying examples, but I do not think that 
examples alone will support the full weight of this 
view. The thesis itself is sufficiently counterintui-
tive to render controversial most of the crucial 
examples. Anyone who is already convinced that 
skepticism is wrong and who is yet troubled by 
the sorts of skeptical arguments I have mentioned 
will, no doubt, take this itself as an argument in 
favor of my claim that the epistemic operators are 
only semi-penetrating. This, however, hardly 
constitutes an argument against skepticism. For 
this we need independent grounds for thinking 
that the epistemic operators do not penetrate to 
the contrast consequences. So I shall proceed in a 
more systematic manner. I shall offer an analogy 
with three other operators and conclude by 
making some general remarks about what I think 
can be learned from this analogy. The first opera-
tor is "explains why" or, more suggestively (for the 
purposes of this analogy): 
(A) 
R is the reason (explanatory reason) that 
(or why) ... 

EPISTEMIC OPERATORS 
243 
For example, the reason why 5 quit smoking was 
that he was afraid of getting cancer. The second 
operator has to do with reasons again, but in this 
case it is a reason which tends to justify one in 
doing something: 
(B) 
R is a reason for ... (5 to do Y).' 
For example, the fact that they are selling the very 
same (type of) car here much more cheaply than 
elsewhere is a reason to buy it here rather than 
elsewhere. The status of this as a reason will, of 
course, depend on a variety of circumstances, but 
situations can easily be imagined in which this 
would be a reason for someone to buy the car 
here. Finally, there is a particular modal relation-
ship which may be construed as a sentential 
operator: 
(C) 
R would not be the case unless ... 
For example, he would not have bid seven no-
trump unless he had all four aces. I shall abbrevi-
ate this operator as "R ~ ... "; hence, our example 
could be written "he bid seven no-trump ~ he 
had all four aces". 
Each of these operators has features similar to 
those of our epistemic operators. If one retraces 
the ground we have already covered, one will find, 
I think, that these operators all penetrate deeper 
than the typical non penetrating operator. If R 
explains why (or is the reason that) P and Q are 
the case, then it explains why (is the reason that) 
Q is the case.3 If I can explain why Bill and Harold 
are always invited to every party, I can explain 
why Harold is always invited to every party. From 
the fact that it was a mistake for me to quit my job 
it does not follow that it was a mistake for me to 
do something, but if I had a reason to quit my job, 
it does follow that I had a reason to do something. 
And if the grass would not be green unless it had 
plenty of sunshine and water, it follows that it 
would not be green unless it had water. 
Furthermore, the similarities persist when one 
considers the presuppositional consequences. I 
argued that the epistemic operators fail to pene-
trate to the presuppositions; the above three 
operators display the same feature. In explaining 
why he takes his lunch to work, I do not (or need 
not) explain why he goes to work or why he works 
at all. The explanation may be obvious in some 
cases, of course, but the fact is I need not be able 
to explain why he works (he is so wealthy) to 
explain why he takes his lunch to work (the cafe-
teria food is so bad). The reason why the elms on 
Main Street are dying is not the reason there are 
elms on Main Street. I have a reason to feed my 
cat, no reason (not, at least, the same reason) to 
have a cat. And although it is quite true that he 
would not have known about our plans if the sec-
retary had not told him, it does not follow that he 
would not have known about our plans if some-
one other than the secretary had told him. That is, 
(He knew about our plans) ~ (The secretary told 
him) even though it is not true that (He knew 
about our plans) ~ (It was the secretary who told 
him). Yet, the fact that it was the secretary who 
told him is (I take it) a presuppositional conse-
quence of the fact that the secretary told him. 
Similarly, if George is out to set fire to the first 
empty building he finds, it may be true to say that 
George would not have set fire to the church 
unless it (the church) was empty, yet false to say 
that George would not have set fire to the church 
unless it was a church. 
I now wish to argue that these three operators 
do not penetrate to a certain set of contrast con-
sequences. To the extent that the epistemic oper-
ators are similar to these operators, we may then 
infer, by analogy, that they also fail to penetrate 
to certain contrast consequences. This is, admit-
tedly, a weak form of argument, depending as it 
does on the grounds there are for thinking that 
the above three operators and the epistemic 
operators share the same logic in this respect. 
Nonetheless, the analogy is revealing. Some may 
even find it persuasive. 4 
(A) The pink walls in my living room clash 
with myoId green couch. Recognizing this, I pro-
ceed to paint the walls a compatible shade of 
green. This is the reason I have, and give, for 
painting the walls green. Now, in having this 
explanation for why I painted the walls green, I 
do not think I have an explanation for two other 
things, both of which are entailed by what I do 
have an explanation for. I have not explained why 
I did not, instead of painting the walls green, buy 
a new couch or cover the old one with a suitable 
slip cover. Nor have I explained why, instead of 
painting the walls green, I did not paint them 
white and illuminate them with green light. The 
same effect would have been achieved, the same 

244 
FRED DRETSKE 
purpose would have been served, albeit at much 
greater expense. 
I expect someone to object as follows: although 
the explanation given for painting the walls green 
does not, by itself, explain why the couch was not 
changed instead, it nonetheless succeeds as an 
explanation for why the walls were painted green 
only in so far as there is an explanation for why the 
couch was not changed instead. If there is no 
explanation for why I did not change the couch 
instead, there has been no real, no complete, exam-
ination for why the walls were painted green. 
I think this objection wrong. I may, of course, 
have an explanation for why I did not buy a new 
couch: I love the old one or it has sentimental value. 
But then again I may not. It just never occurred to 
me to change the couch; or (if someone thinks that 
its not occurring to me is an explanation of why I 
did not change the couch) I may have thought of it 
but decided, for what reasons (if any) I cannot 
remember, to keep the couch and paint the walls. 
That is to say, I cannot explain why I did not change 
the couch. I thought of it but I did not do it. I do 
not know why. Still, I can tell you why I painted the 
walls green. They clashed with the couch. 
(B) The fact that they are selling XS so much 
more cheaply here than elsewhere may be a reason 
to buy your XS here, but it certainly need not be a 
reason to do what is a necessary consequence of 
buying your XS here - viz., not stealing your XS 
here. 
(C) Let us suppose that 5 is operating in per-
fectly normal circumstances, a set of circumstances 
in which it is true to say that the wall he sees would 
not (now) look green to him unless it was green (if 
it were any other color it would look different to 
him). Although we can easily imagine situations in 
which this is true, it does not follow that the wall 
would not (now) look green to 5 if it were white 
cleverly illuminated to look green. That is, 
(i) 
The wall looks green (to 5) ~ the wall is 
green. 
(ii) 
The wall is green entails the wall is not white 
cleverly illuminated to look green (to 5). 
are both true; yet, it is not true that 
(iii) 
The wall looks green (to 5) ~ the wall is 
not white cleverly illuminated to look green 
(to 5). 
There are dozens of examples that illustrate the 
relative impenetrability of this operator. We can 
truly say that A and B would not have collided if 
B had not swerved at the last moment and yet 
concede that they would have collided without 
any swerve on the part of B if the direction in 
which A was moving had been suitably altered in 
the beginning.s 
The structure of these cases is virtually identi-
cal with that which appeared in the case of the 
epistemic operators, and I think by looking just a 
little more closely at this structure we can learn 
something very fundamental about our class of 
epistemic operators and, in particular, about 
what it means to know something. If I may put it 
this way, within the context of these operators no 
fact is an island. If we are simply rehearsing the 
facts, then we can say that it is a fact that Brenda 
did not take any dessert (though it was included 
in the meal). We can say this without a thought 
about what sort of person Brenda is or what she 
might have done had she ordered dessert. 
However, if we put this fact into, say, an explana-
tory context, if we try to explain this fact, it sud-
denly appears within a network of related facts, a 
network of possible alternatives which serve to 
define what it is that is being explained. What is 
being explained is a function of two things - not 
only the fact (Brenda did not order any dessert), 
but also the range of relevant alternatives. A rel-
evant alternative is an alternative that might have 
been realized in the existing circumstances if the 
actual state of affairs had not materialized. 6 When 
I explain why Brenda did not order any dessert 
by saying that she was full (was on a diet, did not 
like anything on the dessert menu), I explain why 
she did not order any dessert rather than, as 
opposed to, or instead of ordering some dessert 
and eating it. It is this competing possibility 
which helps to define what it is that I am explain-
ing when I explain why Brenda did not order any 
dessert. Change this contrast, introduce a differ-
ent set of relevant alternatives, and you change 
what it is that is being explained and, therefore, 
what counts as an explanation, even though (as it 
were) the same fact is being explained. Consider 
the following contrasts: ordering some dessert 
and throwing it at the waiter; ordering some des-
sert and taking it home to a sick friend. With 
these contrasts none of the above explanations 
are any longer explanations of why Brenda did 

EPISTEMIC OPERATORS 
245 
not order dessert. Anyone who really wants to 
know why Brenda did not order dessert and 
throw it at the waiter will not be helped by being 
told that she was full or on a diet. This is only to 
say that, within the context of explanation and 
within the context of our other operators, the 
proposition on which we operate must be under-
stood as embedded within a matrix of relevant 
alternatives. We explain why P, but we do so 
within a framework of competing alternatives A, 
B, and C. Moreover, if the possibility D is not 
within this contrasting set, not within this net-
work of relevant alternatives, then even though 
not-D follows necessarily from the fact, P, which 
we do explain, we do not explain why not-D. 
Though the fact that Brenda did not order des-
sert and throw it at the waiter follows necessarily 
from the fact that she did not order dessert 
(the fact that is explained), this necessary conse-
quence is not explained by the explanation given. 
The only contrast consequences to which this 
operator penetrates are those which figured in 
the original explanation as relevant alternatives. 
So it is with our epistemic operators. To know 
that x is A is to know that x is A within a frame-
work of relevant alternatives, B, C, and D. This set 
of contrasts, together with the fact that x is A, 
serve to define what it is that is known when one 
knows that x is A. One cannot change this set of 
contrasts without changing what a person is said 
to know when he is said to know that x is A. We 
have subtle ways of shifting these contrasts and, 
hence, changing what a person is said to know 
without changing the sentence that we use to express 
what he knows. Take the fact that Lefty killed Otto. 
By changing the emphasis pattern we can invoke 
a different set of contrasts and, hence, alter what 
it is that S is said to know when he is said to know 
that Lefty killed Otto. We can say, for instance, 
that S knows that Lefty killed Otto. In this case 
(and I think this is the way we usually hear the 
sentence when there is no special emphasis) 
we are being told that S knows the identity of 
Otto's killer, that it was Lefty who killed Otto. 
Hence, we expect S's reasons for believing that 
Lefty killed Otto to consist in facts that single out 
Lefty as the assailant rather than George, Mike, or 
someone else. On the other hand, we can say that 
S knows that Lefty killed Otto. In this case we are 
being told that S knows what Lefty did to Otto; he 
killed him rather than merely injuring him, killed 
him rather than merely threatening him, etc. A 
good reason for believing that Lefty killed Otto 
(rather than merely injuring him) is that Otto is 
dead, but this is not much of a reason, if it is a 
reason at all, for believing that Lefty killed Otto. 
Changing the set of contrasts (from "Lefty rather 
than George or Mike" to "killed rather than 
injured or threatened") by shifting the emphasis 
pattern changes what it is that one is alleged to 
know when one is said to know that Lefty killed 
OttO.7 The same point can be made here as we 
made in the case of explanation: the operator will 
penetrate only to those contrast consequences 
which form part of the network of relevant alter-
natives structuring the original context in which a 
knowledge claim was advanced. Just as we have 
not explained why Brenda did not order some 
dessert and throw it at the waiter when we 
explained why she did not order some dessert 
(although what we have explained -
her not 
ordering any dessert - entails this), so also in 
knowing that Lefty killed Otto (knowing that what 
Lefty did to Otto was kill him) we do not necessar-
ily (although we may) know that Lefty killed Otto 
(know that it was Lefty who killed Otto). Recall 
the example of the little old lady who knew that 
my brother would not move without knowing 
that it was my brother who would not move. 
The conclusions to be drawn are the same as 
those in the case of explanation. Just as we can say 
that within the original setting, within the origi-
nal framework of alternatives that defined what 
we were trying to explain, we did explain why 
Brenda did not order any dessert, so also within 
the original setting, within the set of contrasts 
that defined what it was we were claiming to 
know, we did know that the wall was red and did 
know that it was a zebra in the pen. 
To introduce a novel and enlarged set of alter-
natives, as the skeptic is inclined to do with our 
epistemic claims, is to exhibit consequences of 
what we know, or have reason to believe, which 
we may not know, may not have a reason to 
believe; but it does not show that we did not 
know, did not have a reason to believe, whatever it 
is that has these consequences. To argue in this 
way is, I submit, as much a mistake as arguing 
that we have not explained why Brenda did not 
order dessert (within the original, normal, set-
ting) because we did not explain why she did not 
order some and throw it at the waiter. 

246 
FRED DRETSKE 
Notes 
Seeing and Knowing (Chicago: University 
Press, 1969), pp. 93-112, and also "Reasons 
and Consequences," Analysis (April 1968). 
2 Unlike our other operators, this one does not 
have a propositional operand. Despite the 
rather obvious differences between this case 
and the others, I still think it useful to call 
attention to its analogous features. 
3 One must be careful not to confuse sentential 
conjunction with similar-sounding expres-
sions involving a relationship between two 
things. For example, to say Bill and Susan got 
married (if it is intended to mean that they 
married each other), although it entails that 
Susan got married, does not do so by simplifi-
cation. "Reason why" penetrates through logi-
cal simplification, not through the type of 
entailment represented by these two proposi-
tions. That is, the reason they got married is 
that they loved each oher; that they loved each 
other is not the reason Susan got married. 
4 
I think that those who are inclined to give a 
causal account of knowledge should be par-
ticularly interested in the operator "R~ ... " 
since, presumably, it will be involved in many 
instances of knowledge ("many" not "all," 
since one might wish to except some form of 
immediate knowledge - knowledge of one's 
own psychological state - from the causal 
account). If this operator is only semi-
penetrating, then any account of knowledge 
that relies on the relationship expressed by this 
operator (as I believe causal accounts must) 
will be very close to giving a "semi-penetrating" 
account of "knowing that". 
5 The explanation for why the modal relation-
ship between Rand P (R~P) fails to carry 
over (penetrate) to the logical consequences 
of P (i.e., R~Q where Q is a logical conse-
quence of P) is to be found in the set of cir-
cumstances that are taken as given, or held 
fIXed, in subjunctive conditionals. There are cer-
tain logical consequences of Pwhich, by bring-
ing in a reference to circumstances tacitly 
held fixed in the original subjunctive (R~P), 
introduce a possible variation in these cir-
cumstances and, hence, lead to a different 
framework of fixed conditions under which to 
assess the truth of R~Q. For instance, in the 
last example in the text, when it is said that A 
and B would not have collided if B had not 
swerved at the last moment, the truth of this 
conditional clearly takes it as given that A and 
B possessed the prior trajectories they in fact 
had on the occasion in question. Given cer-
tain facts, including the fact that they were 
traveling in the direction they were, they 
would not have collided if B had not swerved. 
Some of the logical consequences of the state-
ment that B swerved do not, however, leave 
these conditions unaltered - e.g., B did not 
move in a perfectly straight line in a direction 
2° counterclockwise to the direction it actu-
ally moved. This consequence "tinkers" with 
the circumstances originally taken as given 
(held fixed), and a failure of penetration will 
usually arise when this occurs. It need not be 
true that A and B would not have collided if B 
had moved in a perfectly straight line in a 
direction 2° counterclockwise to the direction 
it actually moved. 
6 I am aware that this characterization of "a rel-
evant alternative" is not, as it stands, very illu-
minating. I am not sure I can make it more 
precise. What I am after can be expressed this 
way: if Brenda had ordered dessert, she would 
not have thrown it at the waiter, stuffed it in 
her shoes, or taken it home to a sick friend 
(she has no sick friend). These are not alter-
natives that might have been realized in the 
existing circumstances if the actual state of 
affairs had not materialized. Hence, they are 
not relevant alternatives. In other words, the 
"might have been" in my characterization of a 
relevant alternative will have to be unpacked 
in terms of counterfactuals. 
7 The same example works nicely with the 
operator "R~ ... ". It may be true to say that 
Otto would not be dead unless Lefty killed 
him (unless what Lefty did to him was kill 
him) without its being true that Otto would 
not be dead unless Lefty killed him (unless it 
was Lefty who killed him). 

CHAPTER 20 
Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives, 
and Deductive Closure 
Gail Stine 
Discussions of skepticism, defined with varying 
degrees of precision, are of course perennial in 
philosophy. Some recent discussions of the issue l 
give prominence to the notion of "relevant alter-
natives", according to which a claim to know that 
p is properly made in the context of a limited 
number of competing alternatives to p; to be jus-
tified in claiming to know p (or simply to know p) 
it is sufficient to be able to rule out alternatives 
relevant to that context. This seems to me to be a 
correct and heartening development. Recent epis-
temological discussions have also brought up a 
relatively new subject, which is the validity of the 
general form of argument: 
(A) 
a knows that p 
a knows that p entails q 
:. a knows that q 
I shall call this the principle of epistemic deduc-
tive closure, or simply, in this paper, deductive 
closure.2 What is interesting about recent com-
ments on this principle is that it is perceived to 
have something to do with skepticism - in fact 
to lead to it - and hence is currently of very 
bad repute. And "relevant alternatives" views of 
knowledge vis-a-vis skepticism are supposed to 
show us the falsity of the principle. 
Originally published in Philosophical Studies 29 (1976), 
pp.249-61. 
In this paper I propose to do three things. 
First, to give a qualified argument for deductive 
closure. Second, to give a qualified argument 
against skepticism which will make use of the rel-
evant alternatives idea. It will be similar to others 
in leaving rather indeterminate the way in which 
the context determines what is taken to be a rele-
vant alternative, although I shall distinguish dif-
ferent sources of this indeterminateness and draw 
some further conclusions. Third, I shall give an 
unqualified argument to the effect that the ques-
tions of the validity of the principle of epistemic 
deductive closure and skepticism are completely 
irrelevant to one another, and that in fact proper 
attention to the idea of relevant alternatives tends 
to confirm the principle. This, of course, puts me 
in direct conflict with the recent trend I have 
mentioned. 
1. 
Epistemic Deductive Closure 
I am in principle suspicious of all principles of 
epistemic logic on the general grounds that while 
the logic of a knower who is in some way simpli-
fied and idealized may be useful for limited pur-
poses, what we are ultimately interested in are 
actual knowers who can be pretty obtuse and 
idiosyncratic, yet still lay claim to knowledge. 
For this, among other reasons, I have elsewhere 
been concerned with epistemic logic which 
eschews possible worlds semantics imposing 

248 
GAIL STINE 
strong constraints on knowers.' Certainly, I would 
reject the pattern which goes: 
(B) 
a knows that p 
p entails q 
:. a knows that q 
However, the pattern which I have labeled epis-
temic deductive closure does seem to represent a 
certain bare minimum. One looks naturally for 
counter-instances involving failure of belief where 
p and q are very complicated, but any such case I 
can imagine turns out to be apparent only because 
it invariably raises doubts about the truth of the 
second premise which are as strong as the doubts 
about the truth of the conclusion. The principle 
seems to be on a par with epistemic conjunction, 
to wit: 
(C) 
a knowsp 
a knows q 
:. a knows p and q 
There have, of course, been problems in reconcil-
ing this principle with commitments to rational 
belief in terms of degrees of confirmation and 
knowledge in terms of rational belief,4 but one 
feels strongly inclined to the view that the adjust-
ment must be made in the area of these commit-
ments and not in the principle of conjunction. 
In addition to failure of belief, one may look 
for counter-examples to the principle of epis-
temic deductive closure in the area of failure of 
evidence or warrant. One's initial reaction to this 
idea is that if one's evidence is not sufficient for 
knowing q, it is not sufficient for knowing p, 
either, where p is known to entail q. I shall be 
returning to this subject later, for some philoso-
phers to whom I have referred deny this point 
which seems, initially, fairly obvious and I shall 
argue that their reasons are mistaken. 
Actually, if instead of (A) we adopt the stronger 
epistemic deductive closure principle: 
(D) 
aknowsp 
a knows q 
a knows (p . q entails r) 
:. a knows r 
(A) and (C) may be seen as instances of a common 
principle, provided we allow "a knows (p . q 
entails p . q)" as an uncontroversial instance of 
the third premise.s (D) is, ultimately, what we 
need, anyway to capture the idea of knowing the 
known logical consequences of what one knows, 
for (A) covers only the known consequences of 
the things one knows taken individually, not the 
known consequences of one's whole body of 
knowledge. And although (D) is stronger than 
(A), the arguments for (A) work just as strongly 
for (D), and, so far as I can see, there are no argu-
ments that anyone might seriously offer against 
(D) which do not also apply to (A). However, for 
the sake of simplicity and conformity to other 
discussions in the literature, I shall continue to 
discuss deductive closure in the form of (A). 
In summary, I am not absolutely convinced of 
the validity of the principle of epistemic deduc-
tive closure, as I am not absolutely convinced 
of the validity of the principle of epistemic con-
junction, but in neither case can I think of an 
objection, and in both cases, apparent problems 
they lead to (skepticism, inconsistency) are either 
apparent only or are better handled by giving up 
other less obvious principles. 
2. 
Skepticism 
In Belief, Truth and Knowledge, D. M. Armstrong 
argues: 
It is not a conclusive objection to a thermometer 
that it is only reliable in a certain sort of environ-
ment. In the same way, reliability of belief, but 
only within a certain sort of environment, would 
seem to be sufficient for the believer to earn the 
accolade of knowledge if that sort of environ-
ment is part of his boundary-conditions.6 
For example, I know that the striped animal I see 
in the zoo is a zebra.7 I know this despite the fact 
that I have no particular evidence that it is not a 
mule painted to look like a zebra (I have not 
looked for a paint can, tried paint remover on the 
animal, etc.). In this context - under normal cir-
cumstances, in zoos of integrity, etc. - that an 
animal on display has been deliberately disguised 
to fool trusting zoo-goers is just not a relevant 
hypothesis, one that I need trouble myself about 
rejecting. If the skeptic tries to persuade me to 
his position by stressing my lack of evidence 

RELEVANT ALTERNATIVES AND DEDUCTIVE CLOSURE 
249 
against such an hypothesis, my proper response 
is to turn a deaf ear. He has ensnared me by 
improper means and is more than halfway to 
(illegitimately) winning his point ifhe gets me to 
agree that I must argue with him, go look for 
further evidence, etc. 
This view, which I call the relevant alternative 
view, seems to me fundamentally correct. It does 
leave a lot of things unsaid. What are normal cir-
cumstances? What makes an alternative relevant 
in one context and not in another? However, in 
ordinary life, we do exhibit rather strong agree-
ment about what is relevant and what is not. But 
there are grey areas. Alvin Goldman makes this 
point nicely with the following example which he 
attributes to Carl Ginet: if on the basis of visual 
appearances obtained under optimum conditions 
while driving through the countryside Henry 
identifies an object as a barn, normally we say 
that Henry knows that it is a barn. Let us suppose, 
however, that unknown to Henry, the region is 
full of expertly made papier-mache facsimiles of 
barns. In this case, we would not say Henry knows 
that the object is a barn, unless he has evidence 
against it being a papier-mache facsimile, which 
is now a relevant alternative. So much is clear, but 
what if no such facsimiles exist in Henry's sur-
roundings, although they do in Sweden? What if 
they do not now exist in Sweden, but they once 
did? Are either of these circumstances sufficient 
to make the hypothesis relevant? Probably not, 
but the situation is not so clear. 
Another area of obscurity resides not in the 
nature of the case but in the formulation of the 
view in question. Goldman seems to hold what I 
regard as the correct version of it, which is that: 
(1) 
an alternative is relevant only if there is 
some reason to think that it is true. 
But there is also the view that: 
(2) 
an alternative is relevant only if there is 
some reason to think it could be true. 
Clearly, the force of the "could" cannot be mere 
logical possibility, or the relevant alternative view 
would lose its distinguishing feature. However, if 
the "could" is read in some stronger way, we could 
still have a version of the relevant alternative view. 
Dretske's "Conclusive Reasons"8 paper, espousing 
a view according to which if one knows, then given 
one's evidence, one could not be wrong (he reads 
"could" as "physically possible") suggests that we 
should consider an hypothesis a live one unless it 
could not be true, given one's evidence. Hence any 
alternative would be relevant, in the sense of block-
ing knowledge, if one has not the evidence to rule 
it out, so long as it is physically possible, given 
one's evidence. Also, the passage in "Epistemic 
Operators" where Dretske says: "A relevant alter-
native is an alternative that might have been real-
ized in the existing circumstances if the actual state 
of affairs had not materialized",9 is more akin to 
(2) than (1), although so taking it depends on the 
force of his "might': This, I think, is the wrong way 
to take the relevant alternative view. First of all, 
however unclear it may be as to when there is some 
reason to think an alternative is true, it is much 
more unclear as to when there is reason to think it 
could be true. Certainly, if there is a difference 
between (1) and (2), (2) is weaker, allows more to 
count as a relative alternative. So possibly Descartes 
thought there was some reason to think that there 
could, in some sense stronger than logical possibil-
ity, be an evil genius. But it seems safe to say he was 
wrong if he thought that there was some reason to 
think that there was an evil genius. That is, the evil 
genius hypothesis is not a relevant alternative 
according to (1) but may be according to (2) 
(although I shall qualify this). But the whole thrust 
of the relevant alternative position, as I conceive it, 
is that such an hypothesis is not relevant. To allow 
it as relevant seems to me to preclude the kind of 
answer to the skeptic which I sketched in the 
opening paragraph of this section. 
In truth, Dretske does combine a relevant 
alternative view with an answer to skepticism. But 
his account is tied in with a view of knowledge, 
which, although it does defeat skepticism, does so 
in a way which gives small confort. On his account, 
we do know many things, i.e., there are many 
things about which given our evidence, we could 
not be wrong. However, he does not merely reject 
the view that knowing entails knowing that one 
knows. to He also seems committed to the view 
that one rarely, if ever, knows that one knows, for 
it is well high impossible on his account to defend 
the claim that one knows, given one's evidence, 
that one could not be wrong, in his sense of "could". 
Perhaps this is preferable to skepticism, but at best 
it is going from the fire into the frying pan. 

250 
GAIL STINE 
Here some qualifications of this position that 
the relevant alternative view provides an answer 
to the skeptic are in order. In truth, in some sense 
skepticism is unanswerable. This rather supports 
the relevant alternative view, for the uncertainty 
which infects (1) as to when there is some reason 
to think an alternative true explains why this is so. 
The relevant alternative view does provide a kind 
of answer to the skeptic - the only kind of answer 
which can be given. But the skeptic has an enter-
ing wedge, and rightly so. It is an essential charac-
teristic of our concept of knowledge that tighter 
criteria are appropriate in different contexts. II It 
is one thing in a street encounter, another in a 
classroom, another in a law court - and who is to 
say it cannot be another in a philosophical discus-
sion? And this is directly mirrored by the fact we 
have different standards for judging that there is 
some reason to think an alternative is true, i.e., 
relevant. We can point out that some philoso-
phers are very perverse in their standards (by 
some extreme standard, there is some reason to 
think there is an evil genius, after all) - but we 
cannot legitimately go so far as to say that their 
perversity has stretched the concept of knowledge 
out of all recognition - in fact they have played on 
an essential feature of the concept. On the other 
hand, a skeptical philosopher is wrong if he holds 
that others are wrong in any way - i.e., are sloppy, 
speaking only loosely, or whatever - when they 
say we know a great deal. And the relevant alter-
native view gives the correct account of why a 
skeptic is wrong if he makes such accusations. 
3. 
Deductive Closure and Skepticism 
Proponents of the relevant alternative view have 
tended to think that it provides grounds for 
rejecting deductive closure. Although many phi-
losophers have recently taken this position, 
Dretske has provided the fullest published argu-
ment to this effect. He writes: 
To know that X is A is to know that X is A within 
a framework of relevant alternatives, B, C, and D. 
This set of contrasts together with the fact X is A, 
serve to define what it is that is known when one 
knows that X is A. One cannot change this set of 
contrasts without changing what a person is said 
to know when he is said to know that X is A. We 
have subtle ways of shifting these contrasts and, 
hence, changing what a person is said to know 
without changing the sentence that we use to 
express what he knows. 12 
Consider the following instance of (A): 
\ 
(E) 
John knows that the animal is a zebra 
John knows that [the animal is a zebra 
entails the animal is not a mule painted 
to look like a zebra 1 
:. John knows that the animal is not a 
mule painted to look like a zebra 
In Dretske's zoo example, the animal's being a 
mule painted to look like a zebra is not a relevant 
alternative. So what one means when one says 
that John knows the animal is a zebra, is that he 
knows it is a zebra, as opposed to a gazelle, an 
antelope, or other animals one would normally 
expect to find in a zoo. If, however, being a mule 
painted to look like a zebra became a relevant 
alternative, then one would literally mean some-
thing different in saying that John knows that the 
animal is a zebra from what one meant originally 
and that something else may well be false. Now, 
normally, in saying that one knows that p, one 
presupposes (in some sense) that not-p is a rele-
vant alternative; hence one does not know p 
unless one has evidence to rule out not-po This is 
in fact Dretske's view, for he holds that one does 
not know that the animal is not a mule painted to 
look like a zebra because one has no evidence to 
rule out the possibility that it is. However, accord-
ing to Dretske, so long as the animal's being a 
mule painted to look like a zebra is not a relevant 
alternative, the fact that John does not know that 
it is not does not count against John's knowing 
that it is a zebra. Hence, deductive closure fails 
(we are assuming that John's knowing an animal's 
being a zebra entails his knowing that it is not a 
mule); i.e., (E) and hence (A), are invalid. 
I submit that there is another account of this 
example on the relevant alternative view which 
does not entail giving up deductive closure. On 
this account, to say that John knows that p does 
normally presuppose that not-p is a relevant 
alternative. This is, however, a pragmatic, not a 
semantic presupposition. 13 That is, it is the speaker, 
not the sentence (or proposition) itself, who 
does the presupposing. Thus, the presupposition 

RELEVANT ALTERNATIVES AND DEDUCTIVE CLOSURE 
251 
falls in the category of those which Grice labels 
"cancellable': 14 It is possible for "John knows that 
p" to be true even though a pragmatic presuppo-
sition, that not-p is a relevant alternative, is false. 
I would say that we may create some sort of 
special circumstance which cancels the normal 
presupposition when we utter the sentence in the 
course of making a deductive closure argument. 
After all, the utterance has got to be an odd case 
where we are given that not-p is not a relevant 
alternative to begin with - we can expect some-
thing unusual to happen, other than being forced 
to admit that it is a relevant alternative, after all. 
For even if we would not normally affirm "John 
knows that p" in such a situation, we would not 
normally say that John does not know that p, 
either. Or it may happen that stating a deductive 
closure argument affects normal presuppositions 
in another way. If we hesitate to say "John knows 
that the animal is not a mule painted to look like 
a zebra", we may well hesitate to affirm "John 
knows the animal is a zebra". If this is so, not being 
a mule painted to look like a zebra will have 
become a relevant alternative - we will have 
decided there is some reason to think it true -
with respect to the latter sentence as well. Perhaps 
the mere utterance of the former sentence is 
enough to make us loosen up our notion of what 
counts as a relevant alternative. 
Either way, my account holds the set of rele-
vant alternatives constant from beginning to end 
of the deductive closure argument. This is as it 
should be; to do otherwise would be to commit 
some logical sin akin to equivocation. If the rele-
vant alternatives, which have after all to do with 
the truth or falsity of the premises and conclu-
sion, cannot be held fixed, it is hard so see on 
what basis one can decide whether the argument 
form is valid or not. And if the set of relevant 
alternatives is one thing for the first premise and 
another for the conclusion, how do we determine 
what it is for the second premise, and how does 
this affect the truth of the second premise? There 
is no reason for my account of the matter to make 
skeptics of us all. The skeptical argument goes: If 
you know it is a zebra, and you know its being a 
zebra entails its not being a painted mule, then 
you know it is not a mule painted to look like a 
zebra. But you do not know the last, so you do not 
know the first - i.e., you do not know it is a zebra. 
With our account in hand, let us see how the 
skeptic is to be treated. There are two possibilities. 
First, the skeptic may be up to something legiti-
mate. He is beginning by suggesting that being a 
mule painted to look like a zebra is a relevant 
alternative - i.e., that there is some reason to think 
it is true. We point out to the skeptic that under 
normal circumstances, given what we know of 
people and zoos, etc., this is not the case. The 
skeptic may, however, persevere, playing on the 
looseness of "some reason to think true". At this 
point, while we cannot argue the skeptic out of 
his position, we are perfectly within our rights in 
refusing to adopt the skeptic's standards and can 
comfort ourselves by feeling that the skeptic, if 
not flatly wrong, is at least very peculiar. On the 
other hand, the skeptic may be up to something 
illegitimate. He may be trying to get us to doubt 
that we know it is a zebra without going through 
the hard work of convincing us that being a mule 
painted to look like a zebra is a relevant alterna-
tive. The skeptic seeks to persuade us of his con-
clusion by getting us to admit that we do not 
know it is not a mule painted to look like a zebra 
because we do not have evidence to rule out the 
possibility that it is. This is what Dretske believes 
and this is why he believes we must give up deduc-
tive closure to defeat the skeptic. I think this a 
wrong move. We do know it is not a mule painted 
to look like a zebra. Let us grant temporarily for 
the sake of this argument we do not have evi-
dence. But Dretske is deluded by the fact that 
many knowledge claims require evidence on the 
part of the knower into thinking that all knowl-
edge claims require evidence. Normally, as I have 
admitted, saying "a knows that p" presupposes 
that not-p is a relevant alternative. And it does 
sound odd to say that we know it is not a mule 
painted to look like a zebra when its being one is 
not a relevant alternative. But the fact that it 
sounds odd - is indeed perhaps misleading or 
even improper to say - does not mean as we have 
seen that the presupposition is not cancellable, 
and that the proposition in question is not true. 
We often get results which sound odd to say when 
we draw valid conclusions from true premises the 
utterance of which does not sound odd. "John 
knows that it is raining" may be true and quite in 
order to say to convey its literal meaning. But on 
the assumption of minimal logical competence 
on John's part and deductive closure, it entails 
"John knows that it is either raining or not 

252 
GAIL STINE 
raining". But this sentence, if uttered at all, is 
most likely to be used to suggest the negation of 
the first sentence. We might, in fact, say that the 
speaker presupposes it. Given knowledge of the 
first sentence, the latter is too obviously true to 
bother uttering at all, except for purposes of sar-
casm, ironic effect, or some purpose other than 
conveying the information expressed by the lit-
eral meaning of the words. Yet, for all that, it is 
literally true. Or take a case with perhaps more 
analogies to our example. This is an example from 
GriceY "My wife is in the kitchen" implies "My 
wife is in the kitchen or in the bedroom': Yet, the 
utterance of the latter, in normal circumstances, 
presupposes the speaker's ignorance of the former 
and is thus an improper or at best misleading 
thing for him to say if he knows the former. But 
for all that, the latter is true if the former is, and 
the presupposition is cancellable. 
The logical consequences of knowledge claims 
which the skeptic draws by deductive closure of 
the sort Dretske discusses, are the sorts of proposi-
tions which, in normal circumstances, are such 
that their negations are not relevant alternatives. 
Thus they sound odd to say and often have the 
effect of suggesting that the circumstances are 
abnormal. It is indeed improper to utter them in 
normal circumstances unless one explicitly cancels 
the relevant alternative presupposition which they 
carry, because one misleads. Nevertheless, they are 
literally true in normal circumstances. I endorse 
here a view which I believe to be Austin's.!6 This 
view is adumbrated in the following passage: 
If, for instance, someone remarks in casual con-
versation, ''As a matter of fact I live in Oxford': 
the other party to the conversation may, if he 
finds it worth doing, verify this assertion; but the 
speaker, of course, has no need to do this - he 
knows it to be true (or, if he is lying, false) .... 
Nor need it be true that he is in this position by 
virtue of having verified his assertion at some 
previous stage; for of how many people really, 
who know quite well where they live, could it be 
said that they have at any time verified that they 
live there? When could they be supposed to have 
done this? In what way? And why? What we have 
here, in fact, is an erroneous doctrine ... about 
evidence.!7 
The point is that one does know what one takes 
for granted in normal circumstances. I do know 
that it is not a mule painted to look like a zebra. 
I do not need evidence for such a proposition. 
The evidence picture of knowledge has been car-
ried too far. I would say that I do not have evi-
dence that it is a zebra, either. I simply see that it is 
one. But that is perhaps another matter. The point 
I want to make here is simply that if the negation 
of a proposition is not a relevant alternative, then 
I know it - obviously, without needing to provide 
evidence - and so obviously that it is odd, mis-
leading even, to give utterance to my knowledge. 
And it is a virtue of the relevant alternative view 
that it helps explain why it is odd. 
There is another way in which (E) could be 
defended. This line could be to claim that John 
does, after all, in his general knowledge of the 
ways of zoos and people, etc., have evidence that 
the animal is not a mule painted to look like a 
zebra. The same would hold for other conse-
quences of knowledge claims which the skeptic 
draws by deductive closure. This would involve a 
notion of evidence according to which having 
evidence is not just limited to cases in which one 
has a specific datum to which to point. Malcolm 
expresses this point of view when he says: 
... The reason is obvious for saying that my copy 
of James's book does not have the characteristic 
that its print undergoes spontaneous changes. 
I have read millions of printed words on many 
thousands of printed pages. I have not encoun-
tered a single instance of a printed word vanish-
ing from a page or being replaced by another 
printed word, suddenly and without external 
cause. Nor have I heard of any other person who 
had such an encounter. There is overwhelming 
evidence that printed words do not behave in that 
way. It is just as conclusive as the evidence that 
houses do not turn into flowers. That is to say, 
absolutely conclusive evidencel8 (italics mine). 
It is true that in the last sentence of this passage 
Malcolm talks about evidence for a universal 
proposition to the effect that printed words do 
not behave in a certain way, but the thrust of his 
argument is such that he commits himself to the 
view that he also (thereby) has evidence that the 
printed words on his particular copy of James's 
book will not behave that way. I am not inclined 
towards such a view of what it is to have adequate 
evidence for the proposition that the print of my 
own particular copy of James's book did not 

RELEVANT ALTERNATIVES AND DEDUCTIVE CLOSURE 
253 
undergo a spontaneous change. I am inclined to 
reject Malcolm's view, and others akin, in favor of 
the Austinian sort of one previously discussed -
that is, that in such a case, evidence is not required 
to support a knowledge claim. I mention the view 
only as a possible alternative view of defending 
epistemic deductive closure in a way consonant 
with the relevant alternative view. 
4. 
Summary 
My view is that the relevant alternative position 
should be conceived of as in two parts: 
(1) 
With respect to many propositions, to 
establish a knowledge claim is to be able to 
Notes 
I am partial to J. L. Austin's approach in 
"Other Minds" (Philosophical Papers, Oxford, 
1961) and Chapter X of Sense and Sensibilia 
(Oxford, 1962). Other more recent and more 
explicitly developed accounts include those of 
Fred Dretske, most importantly in "Epistemic 
Operators",fournal of Philosophy LXVII (1970), 
pp. 1007-23, but also in "Contrastive State-
ments': Philosophical Review LXXXI (1972), pp. 
411-30; D. M. Armstrong, Belief, Truth and 
Knowledge (Cambridge, 1973); Alvin Goldman, 
"Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge': 
presented at the Annual Philosophy Collo-
quium, University of Cincinnati, 1973; James 
Cargile, "Knowledge and Deracination", pre-
sented at the Annual Philosophy Colloquium, 
University of Cincinnati, 
1973; Norman 
Malcolm in "The Verification Argument" in 
Knowledge and Certainty (Prentice-Hall, 1963) 
is more concerned with certainty than knowl-
edge but his discussion of when a proposition is 
"possible" is very much in accord with consid-
erations which go towards making a proposi-
tion a "relevant alternative': 
2 Dretske, "Epistemic Operators",; Cargile, 
"Knowledge and Deracination"; Goldman, 
"Discrimination and Perceptual Knowledge': 
3 Cf. 
"Quantified 
Logic 
for 
Knowledge 
Statements", Journal of Philosophy LXXI 
(1974), and "Essentialism, Possible Worlds, 
support it as opposed to a limited number 
of alternatives - i.e., only those which are 
relevant in the context. 
(2) 
With respect to many propositions - in par-
ticular those which are such that their nega-
tions are not relevant alternatives in the 
context in question - we simply know them 
to be true and do not need evidence, in the 
normal sense, that they, rather than their 
negations, are true. 
So conceived, the relevant alternative view 
neither supports the abandonment of deductive 
closure, nor is such abandonment in any way 
needed to provide the relevant alternative view 
with an answer to the skeptic, insofar as he can be 
answered. 
and Propositional Attitudes", Philosophical 
Review LXXXII (1973), pp. 471-82. 
4 
Cf. discussions of the place of a principle of 
conjunction in an account of rational belief 
in, for example, Isaac Levi, Gambling With 
Truth, Knopf (1967); and in Induction, 
Acceptance, and Rational Belief, ed. by Swain, 
Reidel (1970) the following papers: Marshall 
Swain, "The Consistency of Rational Belief", 
Henry Kyburg, "Conjunctivitis", and Keith 
Lehrer, "Justification, Explanation, and 
Induction': This case for conjunction hold-
ing for rational belief is, of course, more 
problematic than the case for knowledge. 
5 lowe this point to David Kaplan. 
6 
Armstrong, Belief, Truth and Knowledge, p. 174. 
7 
The example is Dretske's in "Epistemic 
Operators': 
8 In Australasian Journal of Philosophy 49 
(1971), pp. 1-22. 
9 "Epistemic Operators", p. 1021. 
10 
This view has been criticized, for example, by 
Ronald DeSousa in "Knowledge, Consistent 
Belief, and Self-Consciousness", Journal of 
Philosophy (1970), against defenders of it 
such as Jaakko Hintikka in Knowledge and 
Belief (Cornell, 1962) and Keith Lehrer in 
"Belief and Knowledge", Philosophical Review 
( 1968). The view is also rejected by Armstrong, 
Belief, Truth and Knowledge (p. 146), and at 

254 
GAIL STINE 
least implicitly rejected on such accounts of 
knowledge as, for example, those of Alvin 
Goldman, "A Causal Theory of Knowing", 
Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), pp. 357-72; 
Brian Skyrms, "The Explication of 'X Knows 
that P"', Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), pp. 
373-89; and Peter Unger, "An Analysis of 
Factual Knowledge", Journal of Philosophy 65 
(1968), pp. 157-70. 
11 
Here I take a view directly opposed to that of 
Peter Unger, "A Defense of Skepticism", 
Philosophical Review (1971), according to 
which knowledge is an "absolute" concept, 
like the flatness of geometers. 
12 
"Epistemic Operators", p. 1022. 
13 
Here I distinguish pragmatic from semantic 
presuppositions in the manner of Robert 
Stalnaker, "Pragmatics", in Semantics of 
Natural Language, ed. by Davidson and 
Harman 
(Reidel, 
1972), 
pp. 
380-97. 
Attributing the notion of a semantic presup-
position to Bas van Fraassen ("Singular 
Terms, Truth Value Gaps, and Free Logic", 
Journal of Philosophy 63 (1966), pp. 481-95, 
and "Presupposition, Implication, and Self 
Reference", Journal of Philosophy 65 (1968), 
pp. 136-51), Stalnaker says (p. 387): 
According to the semantic concept, a proposi-
tion P presupposes a proposition Q if and only 
if Q is necessitated both by P and by not-P. That 
is, in every model in which P is either true or 
false, Q is true. According to the pragmatic con-
ception, presupposition is a propositional atti-
tude, not a semantic relation. People, rather 
than sentences or propositions are said to have, 
or make, presuppositions in this sense. 
. .. In general, any semantic presupposition 
of a proposition expressed in a given context 
will be a pragmatic presupposition of the 
people in that context, but the converse clearly 
does not hold. 
To presuppose a proposition in the prag-
matic sense is to take its truth for granted, and 
to assume that others involved in the context do 
the same. 
14 
H. P. 
Grice, "The Causal Theory of 
Perception", Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society, Supp!. Vo!' XXXV (1961). 
15 
Ibid. 
16 
In "Other Minds", Loc. cit., and Chapter X of 
Sense and Sensibilia, Oxford (1962). 
17 
Sense and Sensibilia, pp. 117-18. 
18 
"The Verification Argument", p. 38. 

CHAPTER 21 
Knowledge and Skepticism 
Robert Nozick 
Knowledge 
Conditions for knowledge 
Our task is to formulate further conditions to go 
alongside 
(l) P is true. 
(2) 
S believes that p. 
We would like each condition to be necessary for 
knowledge, so any case that fails to satisfy it will 
not be an instance of knowledge. Furthermore, 
we would like the conditions to be jointly suffi-
cient for knowledge, so any case that satisfies all 
of them will be an instance of knowledge. We first 
shall formulate conditions that seem to handle 
ordinary cases correctly, classifying as knowledge 
cases which are knowledge, and as nonknowledge 
cases which are not; then we shall check to see 
how these conditions handle some difficult cases 
discussed in the literature. 1 
The causal condition on knowledge, previ-
ously mentioned, provides an inhospitable envi-
ronment for mathematical and ethical knowledge; 
also there are well-known difficulties in specify-
ing the type of causal connection. If someone 
floating in a tank oblivious to everything around 
Originally published in R. Nozick, Philosophical Expla-
nations (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 
1981),pp. 172-85, 197-217. 
him is given (by direct electrical and chemical 
stimulation of the brain) the belief that he is 
floating in a tank with his brain being stimulated, 
then even though that fact is part of the cause of 
his belief, still he does not know that it is true. 
Let us consider a different third condition: 
(3) 
If P weren't true, S wouldn't believe that p. 
Throughout this work, let us write the subjunc-
tive "if-then" by an arrow, and the negation of a 
sentence by prefacing "not-" to it. The above con-
dition thus is rewritten as: 
(3) 
not-p --7 not-(S believes thatp). 
This subjunctive condition is not unrelated to the 
causal condition. Often when the fact that p, (par-
tially) causes someone to believe that p, the fact 
also will be causally necessary for his having the 
belief - without the cause, the effect would not 
occur. In that case, the subjunctive condition 3 also 
will be satisfied. Yet this condition is not equivalent 
to the causal condition. For the causal condition 
will be satisfied in cases of causal overdetermina-
tion, where either two sufficient causes of the effect 
actually operate, or a back-up cause (of the same 
effect) would operate if the first one didn't; whereas 
the subjunctive condition need not hold for these 
cases.2 When the two conditions do agree, causal-
ity indicates knowledge because it acts in a manner 
that makes the subjunctive 3 true. 

256 
ROBERT NOZICK 
The subjunctive condition 3 serves to exclude 
cases of the sort first described by Edward Gettier, 
such as the following. Two other people are in my 
office and I am justified on the basis of much 
evidence in believing the first owns a Ford car; 
though he (now) does not, the second person (a 
stranger to me) owns one. I believe truly and jus-
tifiably that someone (or other) in my office owns 
a Ford car, but I do not know someone does. 
Concluded Gettier, knowledge is not simply justi-
fied true belief. 
The following subjunctive, which specifies 
condition 3 for this Gettier case, is not satisfied: if 
no one in my office owned a Ford car, I wouldn't 
believe that someone did. The situation that 
would obtain if no one in my office owned a Ford 
is one where the stranger does not (or where he is 
not in the office); and in that situation I still 
would believe, as before, that someone in my 
office does own a Ford, namely, the first person. 
So the subjunctive condition 3 excludes this 
Gettier case as a case of knowledge. 
The subjunctive condition is powerful and intu-
itive, not so easy to satisfy, yet not so powerful as to 
rule out everything as an instance of knowledge. 
A subjunctive conditional "if p were true, q would 
be true;' p ~ q, does not say that p entails q or that 
it is logically impossible that p yet not-q. It says that 
in the situation that would obtain if p were true, 
q also would be true. This point is brought out 
especially clearly in recent "possible-worlds" 
accounts of subjunctives: the subjunctive is true 
when (roughly) in all those worlds in which p holds 
true that are closest to the actual world, q also is 
true. (Examine those worlds in which p holds true 
closest to the actual world, and see if q holds true in 
all these.) Whether or not q is true in p worlds that 
are still farther away from the actual world is irrel-
evant to the truth of the subjunctive. I do not mean 
to endorse any particular possible-worlds account 
of subjunctives, nor am I committed to this type of 
account.3 I sometimes shall use it, though, when it 
illustrates points in an especially clear way. 4 
The subjunctive condition 3 also handles 
nicely cases that cause difficulties for the view 
that you know that p when you can rule out the 
relevant alternatives to p in the context. For, as 
Gail Stine writes, 
what makes an alternative relevant in one con-
text and not another? ... if on the basis of visual 
appearances obtained under optimum conditions 
while driving through the countryside Henry 
identifies an object as a barn, normally we say that 
Henry knows that it is a barn. Let us suppose, 
however, that unknown to Henry, the region is full 
of expertly made papier-mache facsimiles of barns. 
In that case, we would not say that Henry knows 
that the object is a barn, unless he has evidence 
against it being a papier-mache facsimile, which is 
now a relevant alternative. So much is clear, but 
what if no such facsimiles exist in Henry's sur-
roundings, although they once did? Are either 
of these circumstances sufficient to make the 
hypothesis (that it's a papier-mache object) 
relevant? Probably not, but the situation is not so 
clear.5 
Let p be the statement that the object in the field 
is a (real) barn, and q the one that the object in 
the field is a papier-mache barn. When papier-
mache barns are scattered through the area, if p 
were false, q would be true or might be. Since in 
this case (we are supposing) the person still would 
believe p, the subjunctive 
(3) 
not-p ~ not-(S believes thatp) 
is not satisfied, and so he doesn't know that p. 
However, when papier-mache barns are or were 
scattered around another country, even if p were 
false q wouldn't be true, and so (for all we have 
been told) the person may well know that p. 
A hypothesis q contrary to p clearly is relevant 
when if p weren't true, q would be true; when 
not-p ~q. It clearly is irrelevant when if p weren't 
true, q also would not be true; when not p ~ not-
q. The remaining possibility is that neither of 
these opposed subjunctives holds; q might (or 
might not) be true if p weren't true. In this case, q 
also will be relevant, according to an account of 
knowledge incorporating condition 3 and treat-
ing subjunctives along the lines sketched above. 
Thus, condition 3 handles cases that befuddle 
the "relevant alternatives" account; though that 
account can adopt the above subjunctive crite-
rion for when an alternative is relevant, it then 
becomes merely an alternate and longer way of 
stating condition 3.6 
Despite the power and intuitive force of the 
condition that if p weren't true the person would 
not believe it, this condition does not (in con-
junction with the first two conditions) rule out 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
257 
every problem case. There remains, for example, 
the case of the person in the tank who is brought 
to believe, by direct electrical and chemical stim-
ulation of his brain, that he is in the tank and is 
being brought to believe things in this way; he 
does not know this is true. However, the subjunc-
tive condition is satisfied: if he weren't floating in 
the tank, he wouldn't believe he was. 
The person in the tank does not know he is 
there, because his belief is not sensitive to the 
truth. Although it is caused by the fact that is its 
content, it is not sensitive to that fact. The opera-
tors of the tank could have produced any belief, 
including the false belief that he wasn't in the 
tank; if they had, he would have believed that. 
Perfect sensitivity would involve beliefs and facts 
varying together. We already have one portion of 
that variation, subjunctively at least: if p were 
false he wouldn't believe it. This sensitivity as 
specified by a subjunctive does not have the belief 
vary with the truth or falsity of p in all possible 
situations, merely in the ones that would or might 
obtain if p were false. 
The subjunctive condition 
(3) 
not-p ~ not-(S believes thatp) 
tells us only half the story about how his belief is 
sensitive to the truth-value of p. It tells us how his 
belief state is sensitive to p's falsity, but not how it 
is sensitive to p's truth; it tells us what his belief 
state would be if p were false, but not what it 
would be if p were true. 
To be sure, conditions 1 and 2 tell us that p is 
true and he does believe it, but it does not follow 
that his believing p is sensitive to p's being true. 
This additional sensitivity is given to us by a further 
subjunctive: if p were true, he would believe it. 
(4) P ~ S believes thatp. 
Not only is p true and S believes it, but if it were 
true he would believe it. Compare: not only was 
the photon emitted and did it go to the left, but (it 
was then true that): if it were emitted it would go 
to the left. The truth of antecedent and conse-
quent is not alone sufficient for the truth of a sub-
junctive; 4 says more than 1 and 2.7 Thus, we 
presuppose some (or another) suitable account 
of subjunctives. According to the suggestion ten-
tatively made above, 4 holds true if not only does 
he actually truly believe p, but in the "close" 
worlds where p is true, he also believes it. He 
believes that p for some distance out in the p 
neighborhood of the actual world; similarly, 
condition 3 speaks not of the whole not-p neigh-
borhood of the actual world, but only of the first 
portion of it. (If, as is likely, these explanations do 
not help, please use your own intuitive under-
standing of the subjunctives 3 and 4.) 
The person in the tank does not satisfy the sub-
junctive condition 4. Imagine as actual a world in 
which he is in the tank and is stimulated to believe 
he is, and consider what subjunctives are true in 
that world. It is not true of him there that if he were 
in the tank he would believe it; for in the close world 
(or situation) to his own where he is in the tank but 
they don't give him the belief that he is (much less 
instill the belief that he isn't) he doesn't believe he is 
in the tank. Of the person actually in the tank and 
believing it, it is not true to make the further state-
ment that if he were in the tank he would believe it -
so he does not know he is in the tank. 8 
The subjunctive condition 4 also handles a 
case presented by Gilbert Harman. 9 The dictator 
of a country is killed; in their first edition, news-
papers print the story, but later all the country's 
newspapers and other media deny the story, 
falsely. Everyone who encounters the denial 
believes it (or does not know what to believe and 
so suspends judgment). Only one person in the 
country fails to hear any denial and he continues 
to believe the truth. He satisfies conditions 1 
through 3 (and the causal condition about belief) 
yet we are reluctant to say he knows the truth. The 
reason is that if he had heard the denials, he too 
would have believed them, just like everyone else. 
His belief is not sensitively tuned to the truth, he 
doesn't satisfy the condition that if it were true he 
would believe it. Condition 4 is not satisfied. IO 
There is a pleasing symmetry about how this 
account of knowledge relates conditions 3 and 4, 
and connects them to the first two conditions. 
The account has the following form. 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
not-l ~ not-2 
(4) 
1 ~ 2 
I am not inclined, however, to make too much 
of this symmetry, for I found also that with 

258 
ROBERT NOZICK 
other conditions experimented with as a possible 
fourth condition there was some way to construe 
the resulting third and fourth conditions as 
symmetrical answers to some symmetrical look-
ing questions, so that they appeared to arise in 
parallel fashion from similar questions about the 
components of true belief. 
Symmetry, it seems, is a feature of a mode 
of presentation, not of the contents presented. 
A uniform transformation of symmetrical state-
ments can leave the results nonsymmetrical. But 
if symmetry attaches to mode of presentation, 
how can it possibly be a deep feature of, for 
instance, laws of nature that they exhibit sym-
metry? (One of my favorite examples of symme-
try is due to Groucho Marx. On his radio 
program he spoofed a commercial, and ended, 
"And if you are not completely satisfied, return 
the unused portion of our product and we will 
return the unused portion of your money.") 
Still, to present our subject symmetrically 
makes the connection of knowledge to true 
belief especially perspicuous. It seems to me 
that a symmetrical formulation is a sign of our 
understanding, rather than a mark of truth. If 
we cannot understand an asymmetry as arising 
from an underlying symmetry through the 
operation of a particular factor, we will not 
understand why that asymmetry exists in that 
direction. (But do we also need to understand 
why the underlying asymmetrical factor holds 
instead of its opposite?) 
A person knows that p when he not only does 
truly believe it, but also would truly believe it and 
wouldn't falsely believe it. He not only actually 
has a true belief, he subjunctively has one. It is 
true that p and he believes it; if it weren't true he 
wouldn't believe it; if it weren't true he wouldn't 
believe it, and if it were true he would believe it. 
To know that p is to be someone who would 
believe it if it were true, and who wouldn't believe 
it if it were false. 
It will be useful to have a term for this situa-
tion when a person's belief is thus subjunctively 
connected to the fact. Let us say of a person who 
believes that p, which is true, that when 3 and 4 
hold, his belief tracks the truth that p. To know is 
to have a belief that tracks the truth. Knowledge is 
a particular way of being connected to the world, 
having a specific real factual connection to the 
world: tracking it. 
One refinement is needed in condition 4. It 
may be possible for someone to have contradic-
tory beliefs, to believe p and also believe not-po 
We do not mean such a person to easily satisfy 4, 
and in any case we want his belief-state, sensitive 
to the truth of p, to focus upon p. So let us rewrite 
our fourth condition as: 
(4) P ~ S believes that p and not-(S believes 
that not _p).1l 
As you might have expected, this account of 
knowledge as tracking requires some refinements 
and epicycles. Readers who find themselves (or 
me) bogged down in these refinements should 
move on directly to this essay's second part, on 
skepticism, where the pace picks up. 
Ways and methods 
The fourth condition says that if p were true the 
person would believe it. Suppose the person only 
happened to see a certain event or simply chanced 
on a book describing it. He knows it occurred. Yet 
ifhe did not happen to glance that way or encoun-
ter the book, he would not believe it, even though 
it occurred. As written, the fourth condition 
would exclude this case as one where he actually 
knows the event occurred. It also would exclude 
the following case. Suppose some person who 
truly believes that p would or might arrive at a 
belief about it in some other close situation where 
it holds true, in a way or by a method different 
from the one he (actually) used in arriving at his 
belief that p, and so thereby come to believe that 
not-po In that (close) situation, he would believe 
not-p even though p still holds true. Yet, all this 
does not show he actually doesn't know that p, for 
actually he has not used this alternative method 
in arriving at his belief. Surely he can know that p, 
even though condition 4, as written, is not 
satisfied. 
Similarly, suppose he believes that p by one 
method or way of arriving at belief, yet if p were 
false he wouldn't use this method but would use 
another one instead, whose application would 
lead him mistakenly to believe p (even though it 
is false). This person does not satisfy condition 3 
as written; it is not true of him that if p were false 
he wouldn't believe it. Still, the fact that he would 
use another method of arriving at belief if p were 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
259 
false does not show he didn't know that p when 
he used this method. A grandmother sees her 
grandson is well when he comes to visit; but if he 
were sick or dead, others would tell her he was 
well to spare her upset. Yet this does not mean she 
doesn't know he is well (or at least ambulatory) 
when she sees him. Clearly, we must restate our 
conditions to take explicit account of the ways 
and methods of arriving at belief. 
Let us define a technical locution, S knows, via 
method (or way of believing) M, that p: 
(l) P is true. 
(2) 
S believes, via method or way of coming to 
believe M, that p. 
(3) 
If P weren't true and S were to use M to 
arrive at a belief whether (or not) p, then S 
wouldn't believe, via M, that p. 
( 4) 
If P were true and S were to use M to arrive 
at a belief whether (or not) p, then S would 
believe, via M, that p. 
We need to relate this technical locution to our 
ordinary notion of knowledge. If only one method 
M is actually or subjunctively relevant to S's belief 
that p, then, simply, S knows that p (according to 
our ordinary notion) if and only if that method 
M is such that S knows that p via M. 
Some situations involve multiple methods, 
however. 
First Situation: S's belief that p is overdeter-
mined; it was introduced (or reinforced) by two 
methods, each of which in isolation would have 
been sufficient to produce in S the belief that p. 
S's belief that p via one of these methods satisfies 
conditions 1-4. However, S's belief that p via the 
second method does not satisfy conditions 1-4, 
and in particular violates condition 3. 
A case of this sort is discussed by Armstrong. 12 
A father believes his son innocent of committing 
a particular crime, both because of faith in his 
son and (now) because he has seen presented in 
the courtroom a conclusive demonstration of his 
son's innocence. His belief via the method of 
courtroom demonstration satisfies 1-4, let us 
suppose, but his faith-based belief does not. If his 
son were guilty, he would still believe him inno-
cent, on the basis of faith in his son. Thus, his 
belief that p (that his son is innocent) via faith in 
his son violates condition 3. Looking at his belief 
alone, without mention of method, his belief that 
p violates the third condition (namely, if p were 
false S wouldn't believe that p), which made no 
mention of method. 
Second Situation: S's belief that p via one method 
satisfies conditions 1-4. However, if p were false, 
S would not use that method in arriving at a 
belief about the truth value of p. Instead, he 
would use another method, thereby deciding, 
despite p's falsity, that p was true. S's actual belief 
that p is in no way based on the use of this second 
method, but if p were false he would believe p via 
the second method. (However, if p were false 
and S were to decide about its truth value by 
using the first method, then S would not believe 
that p. To be sure, if p were false S wouldn't 
decide about it by using that first method.) The 
truth value of p affects which method S uses to 
decide whether p. 
Our earlier example of the grandmother is of this 
sort. Consider one further example, suggested to 
me by Avishai Margalit. S believes a certain build-
ing is a theater and concert hall. He has attended 
plays and concerts there (first method). However, 
if the building were not a theater, it would have 
housed a nuclear reactor that would so have 
altered the air around it (let us suppose) that eve-
ryone upon approaching the theater would have 
become lethargic and nauseous, and given up the 
attempt to buy a ticket. The government cover 
story would have been that the building was a 
theater, a cover story they knew would be safe 
since no unmedicated person could approach 
through the nausea field to discover any differ-
ently. Everyone, let us suppose, would have 
believed the cover story; they would have believed 
that the building they saw (but only from some 
distance) was a theater. 
S believes the building is a theater because he has 
attended plays and concerts inside. He does not 
believe it is a theater via the second method of read-
ing the government's cover story plus planted spu-
rious theater and concert reviews. There are no such 
things. However, if it weren't a theater, it would be a 
nuclear reactor, there would be such cover stories, 
and S would believe still (this time falsely and via 
the second method) that the building was a theater. 
Nonetheless, S, who actually has attended perform-
ances there, knows that it is a theater. 

260 
ROBERT NOZICK 
To hold that a person knows that p if there 
exists at least one method M, satisfying condi-
tions 1--4, via which he believes that p, would clas-
sify the father as knowing his son is innocent, a 
consequence too charitable to the father. Whereas 
it seems too stringent to require that all methods 
satisfy conditions 1-4, including those methods 
that were not actually used but would be under 
some other circumstances; the grandmother 
knows her grandson is well, and the person who 
has attended the concerts and plays knows the 
building is a theater. It is more reasonable to hold 
he knows that p if all the methods via which he 
actually believes that p satisfy conditions 1-4. Yet 
suppose our theatergoer also believes it is a theater 
partly because government officials, before they 
decided on which use they would put the build-
ing to, announced they were building a theater. 
Still, the theatergoer knows the building is a 
theater. Not all methods actually used need satisfy 
conditions 1--4, but we already have seen how the 
weak position that merely one such method is 
enough mishandles the case of the father. 
We are helped to thread our way through these 
difficulties when we notice this father does not 
merely believe his son is innocent via the route of 
faith in his son; this defective route, not satisfying 
1--4, also outweighs for him the method of court-
room demonstration. Even if courtroom demon-
stration (had it operated alone) would lead to the 
belief that his son is guilty, that not-p, still he would 
believe his son innocent, via faith in his son. 
Although it is the method of courtroom demon-
stration that gives him knowledge that p if anything 
does, for the father this method is outweighed by 
faith. 13 As a first try at delineating outweighing, we 
might say that method M is outweighed by others 
if when M would have the person believe p, the 
person believes not-p if the other methods would 
lead to the belief that not -p, or when M would have 
the person believe not-p, the person believes p if 
the other methods would lead to the belief that p. 
Table 21.1 
This leads us to put forth the following posi-
tion: S knows that p if there is some method via 
which S believes that p which satisfies conditions 
1--4, and that method is not outweighed by any 
other method(s), via which S actually believes 
that p, that fail to satisfy conditions 3 and 4. 
According to this position, in some cases a person 
has knowledge even when he also actually believes 
via a method MI that does not satisfy 1--4, pro-
vided it is outweighed by one that does; namely, 
in the over-determination case, and in the case 
when MI alone would suffice to fix belief but only 
in the absence of a verdict from the M he also uses 
which does satisfy 1-4. 
S knows that p if and only if there is a method 
M such that (a) he knows that p via M, his belief 
via Mthat p satisfies conditions 1-4, and (b) all 
other methods MI via which he believes that p 
that do not satisfy conditions 1-4 are outweighed 
byM. 14 
We have stated our outweighing requirement 
only roughly; now we must turn to refinements. 
According to our rough statement, in the over-
determination case, method MI, which satisfies 3 
and 4 and which is what gives knowledge if any-
thing does, wins out over the other method M2 in 
all cases. The actual situation (Case I) is where MI 
recommends believing p as does M 2, and the 
person believes p. In this case we have made our 
answer to the question whether he knows that p 
depend on what happens or would happen in the 
two other cases where the methods recommend 
different beliefs (see Table 21.1). The first rough 
statement held that the person knows in Case I 
only if he would believe p in Case II and not -pin 
Case III. While this is sufficient for knowledge in 
Case I, it seems too stringent to be necessary for 
such knowledge. 
An alternative and more adequate view would 
hold constant what the other method recom-
mends, and ask whether the belief varies with the 
recommendation of MI. Since M2 actually 
M1 recommends 
M2 recommends 
Does the person believe 
p or believe not-p? 
Case I 
Case II 
Case III 
believe p 
believep 
believe not-p 
believep 
believe not-p 
believep 
believes p 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
261 
recommends p (Case I), we need look only at 
Case III and ask: when M2 continues to recom-
mend p and MI recommends not-p, would the 
person believe not-p? Despite his faith, would the 
father believe his son guilty if the courtroom pro-
cedure proved guilt? That is the relevant question 
- not what he would believe if the courtroom 
showed innocence while (somehow) his method 
of faith led to a conclusion of guilty. 
Consider how this works out in another simple 
case. I see a friend today; he is now alive. However, 
if he were not alive, I wouldn't have seen him 
today or (let us suppose) heard of his death, and 
so still would believe he was alive. Yet condition 3 
is satisfied; it includes reference to a method, and 
the method MI of seeing him satisfies 3 with 
respect to p equals he is alive at the time. But there 
also is another method M2 via which I believe he 
is alive, namely having known he was alive yester-
day and continuing to believe it. Case III asks 
what I would believe if I saw the friend dead 
(though I knew yesterday he was alive); our posi-
tion holds I must believe him dead in this case if I 
am to know by seeing him that he is alive in Case 
I. However, we need not go so far as to consider 
what I would believe if I had "learned" yesterday 
that he was dead yet "saw" him alive today. Perhaps 
in that case I would wonder whether it really was 
he I was seeing. Even so, given the result in Case 
III, I know (in Case I) he is alive. Thus, we hold 
fixed the recommendation of the other method, 
and only ask whether then the belief varies with 
the recommendation of method MI. j5 
Our test oflooking at Case III cannot apply if Mj 
is a one-sided method, incapable of recommending 
belief in not-p; it either recommends belief in p or 
yields no recommendation. (Perhaps Mj detects 
one of a number of sufficient conditions for p; not 
detecting this, Mj remains silent as to the truth of p.) 
What are we to say about his knowing if a person's 
belief is overdetermined or jointly determined by a 
one-sided method MI plus another method M2 
which fails to satisfy condition 3? Should we now 
look at Case II, where MI recommends belief in p 
and M2 recommends belief in not-p, and say that 
believing p in this case is sufficient to show that Mj 
outweighs M} That does not seem unreasonable, 
but we had better be careful to stipulate that this 
Case II situation is a sufficient condition for Mj's 
outweighing M2 only when the Case III situation is 
impossible, for otherwise we face the possibility of 
divergent results. (For example, he believes p in 
Case II and in Case III, yet believes not -p when both 
methods recommend not-p; here the result in Case 
II indicates Mj outweighs M2 while the result in 
Case III indicates M2 outweighs Mj.) It is Case III 
that should predominate. 
One final remark about method. Suppose a 
method is good for some types of statements but 
not others; it satisfies 3 and 4 for the first type but 
not for the second. However, S believes the method 
is good for all types of statements and applies it 
indiscriminately. When he applies it to a state-
ment of the first type which he thereby comes to 
believe, does he know that it is true? He does, ifhe 
satisfies conditions 3 and 4. Hesitation to grant 
him knowledge stems, I think, from the fact that if p 
were false and were of the second type, he might 
well still believe it. Whether or not this undercuts 
condition 3 for knowledge depends upon the 
disparity of the two types; the greater the gulf 
between the types, the more willing we are to say 
he knows a statement of the type where M works. 
In explaining the nature of knowledge by ref-
erence to a method or way of believing, we leave 
large questions open about how to individuate 
methods, count them, identify which method is 
at work, and so on. I do not want to underesti-
mate these difficulties, but neither do I want to 
pursue them here. 16 Still, some clarifying remarks 
are needed. 
A person can use a method (in my sense) 
without proceeding methodically, and without 
knowledge or awareness of what method he is 
using. Usually, a method will have a final upshot 
in experience on which the belief is based, such as 
visual experience, and then (a) no method with-
out this upshot is the same method, and (b) any 
method experientially the same, the same "from 
the inside;' will count as the same method. Basing 
our beliefs on experiences, you and I and the 
person floating in the tank are using, for these 
purposes, the same method. 
Some methods are supervenient on others, for 
example, "believing what seems to be true to you" 
or "believing what seems true given the weighting 
of all other methods." The account of outweigh-
ing is not to apply to such supervenient methods, 
otherwise there always will be such a one that 
outweighs all the others. There are various gerry-
mandered (Goodmanesque) methods that would 
yield the same resulting belief in the actual 

262 
ROBERT NOZICK 
situation; which method a person actually is using 
will depend on which general disposition to 
acquire beliefs (extending to other situations) he 
actually is exercising.!? 
Although sometimes it will be necessary to be 
explicit about the methods via which someone 
believes something, often it will cause no 
confusion to leave out all mention of method. 
Furthermore, some statements playa central role 
in our continuing activities, or in our picture of 
the world or framework wherein we check other 
statements, for example, "I have two hands;' "the 
world has existed for many years already"; it is 
misleading to think of our coming to believe 
them via some delimited method or methods.!8 
So nested are these statements in our other beliefs 
and activities, and so do they nest them, that our 
belief or acceptance of them is (for almost all 
purposes) best represented apart from any par-
ticular methods. In considering our knowledge 
of them we may revert to the earlier simpler sub-
junctives 
(3) 
not-p ~ not-(S believes thatp) 
(4) 
p ~ S believes thatp. 
The very centrality of the specific p means that 4 
will be satisfied without reference to a specific 
method or way of believing. In contrast, I know 
there is a pair of scissors on my desk (in front of 
me) now; but it is not accurate simply to say that 
if there were a pair of scissors there, I would 
believe there was. For what if I weren't looking, 
or hadn't looked, or were elsewhere now? 
Reference to the method via which I believe there 
are scissors on the desk is needed to exclude 
these possibilities. With the most central state-
ments, however, there is no similar "what if"; 
their centrality ensures they will not escape 
notice. 
Skepticism 
The skeptic about knowledge argues that we 
know very little or nothing of what we think we 
know, or at any rate that this position is no less 
reasonable than the belief in knowledge. The 
history of philosophy exhibits a number of dif-
ferent attempts to refute the skeptic: to prove 
him wrong or show that in arguing against 
knowledge he presupposes there is some and so 
refutes himself. Others attempt to show that 
accepting skepticism is unreasonable, since it is 
more likely that the skeptic's extreme conclu-
sion is false than that all of his premisses are 
true, or simply because reasonableness of belief 
just means proceeding in an anti-skeptical way. 
Even when these counterarguments satisfy their 
inventors, they fail to satisfy others, as is shown 
by the persistent attempts against skepticism.!9 
The continuing felt need to refute skepticism, 
and the difficulty in doing so, attests to the 
power of the skeptic's position, the depth of his 
worries. 
An account of knowledge should illuminate 
skeptical arguments and show wherein lies their 
force. If the account leads us to reject these 
arguments, this had better not happen too easily 
or too glibly. To think the skeptic overlooks 
something obvious, to attribute to him a simple 
mistake or confusion or fallacy, is to refuse to 
acknowledge the power of his position and the 
grip it can have upon us. We thereby cheat our-
selves of the opportunity to reap his insights and 
to gain self-knowledge in understanding why his 
arguments lure us so. Moreover, in fact, we cannot 
lay the specter of skepticism to rest without first 
hearing what it shall unfold. 
Our goal is not, however, to refute skepticism, 
to prove it is wrong or even to argue that it is 
wrong. Our task here is to explain how knowl-
edge is possible, given what the skeptic says that 
we do accept (for example, that it is logically pos-
sible that we are dreaming or are floating in the 
tank). In doing this, we need not convince the 
skeptic, and we may introduce explanatory 
hypotheses that he would reject. What is impor-
tant for our task of explanation and understand-
ing is that we find those hypotheses acceptable or 
plausible, and that they show us how the exist-
ence of knowledge fits together with the logical 
possibilities the skeptic points to, so that these are 
reconciled within our own belief system. These 
hypotheses are to explain to ourselves how knowl-
edge is possible, not to prove to someone else that 
knowledge is possible. 20 
Skeptical possibilities 
The skeptic often refers to possibilities in which a 
person would believe something even though it 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
263 
was false: really, the person is cleverly deceived by 
others, perhaps by an evil demon, or the person is 
dreaming or he is floating in a tank near Alpha 
Centauri with his brain being stimulated. In each 
case, the p he believes is false, and he believes it 
even though it is false. 
How do these possibilities adduced by the 
skeptic show that someone does not know that p? 
Suppose that someone is you; how do these pos-
sibilities count against your knowing that p? One 
way might be the following. (I shall consider 
other ways later.) If there is a possible situation 
where p is false yet you believe that p, then in that 
situation you believe that p even though it is false. 
So it appears you do not satisfy condition 3 for 
knowledge. 
(3) 
If P were false, S wouldn't believe that p. 
For a situation has been described in which you 
do believe that p even though p is false. How then 
can it also be true that if p were false, you wouldn't 
believe it? If the skeptic's possible situation shows 
that 3 is false, and if 3 is a necessary condition for 
knowledge, then the skeptic's possible situation 
shows that there isn't knowledge. 
So construed, the skeptic's argument plays on 
condition 3; it aims to show that condition 3 is 
not satisfied. The skeptic may seem to be putting 
forth 
R: 
Even if p were false, S still would believe 
p.21 
This conditional, with the same antecedent as 3 
and the contradictory consequent, is incompat-
ible with the truth of 3. If 3 is true, then R is 
not. However, R is stronger than the skeptic 
needs in order to show 3 is false. For 3 is false 
when if p were false, S might believe that p. This 
last conditional is weaker than R, and is merely 
3's denial: 
T: 
not-[not-p ~ not-(S believes thatp)]. 
Whereas R does not simply deny 3, it asserts an 
opposing subjunctive of its own. Perhaps the pos-
sibility the skeptic adduces is not enough to show 
that R is true, but it appears at least to establish 
the weaker T; since this T denies 3, the skeptic's 
possibility appears to show that 3 is false.22 
However, the truth of 3 is not incompatible 
with the existence of a possible situation where 
the person believes p though it is false. The 
subjunctive 
(3) 
not-p ~ not-(S believes p) 
does not talk of all possible situations in which p 
is false (in which not-p is true). It does not say 
that in all possible situations where not-p holds, S 
doesn't believe p. To say there is no possible situa-
tion in which not-p yet S believes p, would be to 
say that not-p entails not-(S believes p), or logi-
cally implies it. But subjunctive conditionals 
differ from entailments; the subjunctive 3 is not a 
statement of entailment. So the existence of a 
possible situation in which p is false yet S believes 
p does not show that 3 is false;23 3 can be true even 
though there is a possible situation where not-p 
and S believes that p. 
What the subjunctive 3 speaks of is the situ-
ation that would hold if p were false. Not every 
possible situation in which p is false is the situ-
ation that would hold if p were false. To fall 
into possible worlds talk, the subjunctive 3 
speaks of the not-p world that is closest to the 
actual world, or of those not-p worlds that are 
closest to the actual world, or more strongly 
(according to my suggestion) of the not-p 
neighborhood of the actual world. And it is of 
this or these not-p worlds that it says (in them) 
S does not believe that p. What happens in yet 
other more distant not-p worlds is no concern 
of the subjunctive 3. 
The skeptic's possibilities (let us refer to them 
as SK), of the person's being deceived by a demon 
or dreaming or floating in a tank, count against 
the subjunctive 
(3) 
if P were false then S wouldn't believe 
thatp 
only if (one of) these possibilities would or might 
obtain if p were false; only if one of these possi-
bilities is in the not-p neighborhood of the actual 
world. Condition 3 says: if p were false, S still 
would not believe p. And this can hold even 
though there is some situation SK described by 
the skeptic in which p is false and S believes p. If P 
were false S still would not believe p, even though 
there is a situation SK in which p is false and S 

264 
ROBERT NOZICK 
does believe p, provided that this situation SK 
wouldn't obtain if p were false. If the skeptic 
describes a situation SK which would not hold 
even if p were false then this situation SK doesn't 
show that 3 is false and so does not (in this way at 
least) undercut knowledge. Condition C acts to 
rule out skeptical hypotheses. 
C: 
not-p -7 SK does not obtain. 
Any skeptical situation SK which satisfies condi-
tion C is ruled out. For a skeptical situation SK to 
show that we don't know that p, it must fail to 
satisfy C which excludes it; instead it must be a 
situation that might obtain if p did not, and so 
satisfy C's denial: 
not-(not-p -7 SK doesn't obtain). 
Although the skeptic's imagined situations appear 
to show that 3 is false, they do not; they satisfy 
condition C and so are excluded. 
The skeptic might go on to ask whether we 
know that his imagined situations SK are excluded 
by condition C, whether we know that if p were 
false SK would not obtain. However, typically he 
asks something stronger; do we know that his 
imagined situation SK does not actually obtain? 
Do we know that we are not being deceived by a 
demon, dreaming, or floating in a tank? And if we 
do not know this, how can we know that p? Thus 
we are led to the second way his imagined situa-
tions might show that we do not know that p. 
Skeptical results 
According to our account of knowledge, S knows 
that the skeptic's situation SK doesn't hold if and 
only if 
(1) 
SK doesn't hold 
(2) 
S believes that SK doesn't hold 
(3) 
If SK were to hold, S would not believe that 
SK doesn't hold 
(4) 
If SK were not to hold, S would believe it 
does not. 
Let us focus on the third of these conditions. The 
skeptic has carefully chosen his situations SK so 
that if they held we (still) would believe they did 
not. We would believe we weren't dreaming, 
weren't being deceived, and so on, even if we were. 
He has chosen situations SK such that if SK were to 
hold, S would (still) believe that SK doesn't hold-
and this is incompatible with the truth of 3.24 
Since condition 3 is a necessary condition for 
knowledge, it follows that we do not know that 
SK doesn't hold. If it were true that an evil demon 
was deceiving us, if we were having a particular 
dream, if we were floating in a tank with our 
brains stimulated in a specified way, we would 
still believe we were not. So, we do not know we're 
not being deceived by an evil demon, we do not 
know we're not in that tank, and we do not know 
we're not having that dream. So says the skeptic, 
and so says our account. And also so we say - don't 
we? For how could we know we are not being 
deceived that way, dreaming that dream? If those 
things were happening to us, everything would 
seem the same to us. There is no way we can know 
it is not happening for there is no way we could 
tell if it were happening; and if it were happening 
we would believe exactly what we do now - in 
particular, we still would believe that it was not. 
For this reason, we feel, and correctly, that we 
don't know - how could we? - that it is not hap-
pening to us. It is a virtue of our account that it 
yields, and explains, this result. 
The skeptic asserts we do not know his possi-
bilities don't obtain, and he is right. Attempts to 
avoid skepticism by claiming we do know these 
things are bound to fail. The skeptic's possibilities 
make us uneasy because, as we deeply realize, we 
do not know they don't obtain; it is not surprising 
that attempts to show we do know these things 
leave us suspicious, strike us even as bad faith.25 
Nor has the skeptic merely pointed out something 
obvious and trivial. It comes as a surprise to real-
ize that we do not know his possibilities don't 
obtain. It is startling, shocking. For we would 
have thought, before the skeptic got us to focus 
on it, that we did know those things, that we did 
know we were not being deceived by a demon, or 
dreaming that dream, or stimulated that way in 
that tank. The skeptic has pointed out that we do 
not know things we would have confidently said 
we knew. And if we don't know these things, what 
can we know? So much for the supposed obvious-
ness of what the skeptic tells us. 
Let us say that a situation (or world) is doxi-
cally identical for S to the actual situation when if 
S were in that situation, he would have exactly the 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
265 
beliefs (doxa) he actually does have. More gener-
ally, two situations are doxically identical for S if 
and only if he would have exactly the same beliefs 
in them. It might be merely a curiosity to be told 
there are nonactual situations doxically identical 
to the actual one. The skeptic, however, describes 
worlds doxically identical to the actual world in 
which almost everything believed is false. 26 
Such worlds are possible because we know 
mediately, not directly. This leaves room for a 
divergence between our beliefs and the truth. It is 
as though we possessed only two-dimensional 
plane projections of three-dimensional objects. 
Different three-dimensional objects, oriented 
appropriately, have the same two-dimensional 
plane projection. Similarly, different situations or 
worlds will lead to our having the very same 
beliefs. What is surprising is how very different 
the doxically identical world can be - different 
enough for almost everything believed in it to be 
false. Whether or not the mere fact that knowl-
edge is mediated always makes room for such a 
very different doxically identical world, it does so 
in our case, as the skeptic's possibilities show. To 
be shown this is nontrivial, especially when we 
recall that we do not know the skeptic's possibility 
doesn't obtain: we do not know that we are not 
living in a doxically identical world wherein 
almost everything we believe is false. 27 
What more could the skeptic ask for or hope 
to show? Even readers who sympathized with my 
desire not to dismiss the skeptic too quickly may 
feel this has gone too far, that we have not merely 
acknowledged the force of the skeptic's position 
but have succumbed to it. 
The skeptic maintains that we know almost 
none of what we think we know. He has shown, 
much to our initial surprise, that we do not know 
his (nontrivial) possibility SK doesn't obtain. 
Thus, he has shown of one thing we thought we 
knew, that we didn't and don't. To the conclusion 
that we know almost nothing, it appears but a 
short step. For if we do not know we are not 
dreaming or being deceived by a demon or float-
ing in a tank, then how can I know, for example, 
that I am sitting before a page writing with a pen, 
and how can you know that you are reading a 
page of a book? 
However, although our account of knowledge 
agrees with the skeptic in saying that we do not 
know that not -SK, it places no formidable barriers 
before my knowing that I am writing on a page 
with a pen. It is true that I am, I believe I am, ifI 
weren't I wouldn't believe I was, and if I were, I 
would believe it. (I leave out the reference to 
method.) Also, it is true that you are reading a 
page (please, don't stop now!), you believe you 
are, if you weren't reading a page you wouldn't 
believe you were, and if you were reading a page 
you would believe you were. So according to the 
account, I do know that I am writing on a page 
with a pen, and you do know that you are reading 
a page. The account does not lead to any general 
skepticism. 
Yet we must grant that it appears that if the 
skeptic is right that we don't know we are not 
dreaming or being deceived or floating in the 
tank, then it cannot be that I know I am writing 
with a pen or that you know you are reading a 
page. So we must scrutinize with special care the 
skeptic's "short step" to the conclusion that we 
don't know these things, for either this step 
cannot be taken or our account of knowledge is 
incoherent. 
Nonclosure 
r In taking the "short step;' the skeptic assumes that 
I , if S knows that p and he knows that p entails q 
, then he also knows that q. In the terminology of 
the logicians, the skeptic assumes that knowledge 
is closed under known logical implication; that 
the operation of moving from something known 
to something else known to be entailed by it does 
not take us outside of the (closed) area of knowl-
edge. He intends, of course, to work things back-
wards, arguing that since the person does not 
know that q, assuming (at least for the purposes 
of argument) that he does know that p entails q, it 
follows that he does not know that p. For if he did 
know that p, he would also know that q, which he 
doesn't. 
The details of different skeptical arguments 
vary in their structure, but each one will assume 
some variant of the principle that knowledge is 
closed under known logical implication. If we 
abbreviate "knowledge that p" by "Kp" and abbre-
viate "entails" by the fish-hook sign -<;' we can 
write this principle of closure as the subjunctive 
principle 
P: K(p -< q) & Kp ~ Kq. 

266 
ROBERT NOZICK 
If a person were to know that p entails q and he 
were to know that p then he would know that q. 
The statement that q follows by modus ponens 
from the other two stated as known in the ante-
cedent of the subjunctive principle P; this prin-
ciple counts on the person to draw the inference 
to q. 
You know that your being in a tank on Alpha 
Centauri entails your not being in place X where 
you are. (I assume here a limited readership.) And 
you know also the contrapositive, that your being 
at place X entails that you are not then in a tank 
on Alpha Centauri. If you knew you were at X you 
would know you're not in a tank (of a specified 
sort) at Alpha Centauri. But you do not know this 
last fact (the skeptic has argued and we have 
agreed) and so (he argues) you don't know the 
first. Another intuitive way of putting the skep-
tic's argument is as follows. If you know that two 
statements are incompatible and you know the 
first is true then you know the denial of the 
second. You know that your being at X and your 
being in a tank on Alpha Centauri are incompat-
ible; so if you knew you were at X you would 
know you were not in the (specified) tank on 
Alpha Centauri. Since you do not know the 
second, you don't know the first.28 
No doubt, it is possible to argue over the details 
of principle P, to point out it is incorrect as it 
stands. Perhaps, though Kp, the person does not 
know that he knows that p (that is, not -KKp) and 
so does not draw the inference to q. Or perhaps 
he doesn't draw the inference because not-KK 
(p -< q). Other similar principles face their own 
difficulties: for example, the principle that K(p ~ 
q) ~ (Kp ~ Kq) fails if Kp stops P ~ q from 
being true, that is, ifKp ~ not-(p ~ q); the prin-
ciple that K(p -< q) ~ K(Kp ~ Kq) faces difficul-
ties if Kp makes the person forget that (p -< q) and 
so he fails to draw the inference to q. We seem 
forced to pile K upon K until we reach something 
like KK(p -< q) & KKp ~ Kq; this involves strength-
ening considerably the antecedent of P and so is 
not useful for the skeptic's argument that p is 
not known. (From a principle altered thus, it 
would follow at best that it is not known that p 
is known.) 
We would be ill-advised, however, to quibble 
over the details of P. Although these details are 
difficult to get straight, it will continue to appear 
that something like P is correct. If S knows that "p 
entails q" and he knows that p and knows that 
"(p and p entails q) entails q" and he does draw 
the inference to q from all this and believes q via 
the process of drawing this inference, then will he 
not know that q? And what is wrong with simpli-
fying this mass of detail by writing merely princi-
ple P, provided we apply it only to cases where the 
mass of detail holds, as it surely does in the skep-
tical cases under consideration? For example, I do 
realize that my being in the Van Leer Foundation 
Building in Jerusalem entails that I am not in a 
tank on Alpha Centauri; I am capable of drawing 
inferences now; I do believe I am not in a tank on 
Alpha Centauri (though not solely via this infer-
ence, surely); and so forth. Won't this satisfy the 
correctly detailed principle, and shouldn't it 
follow that I know I am not (in that tank) on 
Alpha Centauri? The skeptic agrees it should 
follow; so he concludes from the fact that I don't 
know I am not floating in the tank on Alpha 
Centauri that I don't know I am in Jerusalem. 
Uncovering difficulties in the details of particular 
formulations of P will not weaken the principle's 
intuitive appeal; such quibbling will seem at best 
like a wasp attacking a steamroller, at worst like 
an effort in bad faith to avoid being pulled along 
by the skeptic's argument. 
Principle P is wrong, however, and not merely in 
detail. Knowledge is not closed under known logi-
cal implication.29 S knows that p when S has a true 
belief that p, and S wouldn't have a false belief that 
p (condition 3) and S would have a true belief that 
p (condition 4). Neither of these latter two condi-
tions is closed under known logical implication. 
Let us begin with condition 
(3) 
if P were false, S wouldn't believe that p. 
When S knows that p, his belief that p is contin-
gent on the truth of p, contingent in the way the 
subjunctive condition 3 describes. Now it might 
be that p entails q (and S knows this), that S's 
belief that p is subjunctively contingent on the 
truth of p, that S believes q, yet his belief that q is 
not subjunctively dependent on the truth of q, in 
that it (or he) does not satisfy: 
(3') 
if q were false, S wouldn't believe that q. 
For 3' talks of what S would believe if q were false, 
and this may be a very different situation than the 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
267 
one that would hold if p were false, even though p 
entails q. That you were born in a certain city 
entails that you were born on earth.30 Yet contem-
plating what (actually) would be the situation if 
you were not born in that city is very different 
from contemplating what situation would hold if 
you weren't born on earth. Just as those 
possibilities are very different, so what is believed 
in them may be very different. When p entails q 
(and not the other way around) p will be a 
stronger statement than q, and so not-q (which is 
the antecedent of 3') will be a stronger statement 
than not-p (which is the antecedent of 3). There is 
no reason to assume you will have the same beliefs 
in these two cases, under these suppositions of 
differing strengths. 
There is no reason to assume the (closest) not-
p world and the (closest) not-q world are doxi-
cally identical for you, and no reason to assume, 
even though p entails q, that your beliefs in one of 
these worlds would be a (proper) subset of your 
beliefs in the other. 
Consider now the two statements: 
p = I am awake and sitting on a chair in 
Jerusalem; 
q = I am not floating in a tank on Alpha 
Centauri being stimulated by electro-
chemical means to believe that p. 
The first one entails the second: p entails q. Also, I 
know that p entails q; and I know that p. If P were 
false, I would be standing or lying down in the 
same city, or perhaps sleeping there, or perhaps in 
a neighboring city or town. If q were false, I would 
be floating in a tank on Alpha Centauri. Clearly 
these are very different situations, leading to great 
differences in what I then would believe. If p were 
false, if I weren't awake and sitting on a chair in 
Jerusalem, I would not believe that p. Yet if q were 
false, if I was floating in a tank on Alpha Centauri, 
I would believe that q, that I was not in the tank, 
and indeed, in that case, I would still believe that 
p. According to our account of knowledge, I know 
that p yet I do not know that q, even though (I 
know) p entails q. 
This failure of knowledge to be closed under 
known logical implication stems from the fact 
that condition 3 is not closed under known 
logical implication; condition 3 can hold of one 
statement believed while not of another known 
to be entailed by the first. 31 It is clear that any 
account that includes as a necessary condition for 
knowledge the subjunctive condition 3, not-p -7 
not-(S believes that p), will have the consequence 
that knowledge is not closed under known logical 
implication.32 
When p entails q and you believe each of them, 
if you do not have a false belief that p (since pis 
true) then you do not have a false belief that q. 
However, if you are to know something not only 
don't you have a false belief about it, but also you 
wouldn't have a false belief about it. Yet, we have 
seen how it may be that p entails q and you believe 
each and you wouldn't have a false belief that p 
yet you might have a false belief that q (that is, it 
is not the case that you wouldn't have one). 
Knowledge is not closed under the known logical 
implication because "wouldn't have a false 
belief that" is not closed under known logical 
implication. 
If knowledge were the same as (simply) true 
belief then it would be closed under known logi-
cal implication (provided the implied statements 
were believed). Knowledge is not simply true 
belief, however; additional conditions are needed. 
These further conditions will make knowledge 
open under known logical implication, even 
when the entailed statement is believed, when at 
least one of the further conditions itself is open. 
Knowledge stays closed (only) if all of the addi-
tional conditions are closed. I lack a general non-
trivial characterization of those conditions that 
are closed under known logical implication; pos-
sessing such an illuminating characterization, one 
might attempt to prove that no additional condi-
tions of that sort could provide an adequate anal-
ysis of knowledge. 
Still, we can say the following. A belief that p is 
knowledge that p only if it somehow varies with 
the truth of p. The causal condition for knowl-
edge specified that the belief was "produced by" 
the fact, but that condition did not provide the 
right sort of varying with the fact. The subjunc-
tive conditions 3 and 4 are our attempt to specify 
that varying. But however an account spells this 
out, it will hold that whether a belief that p is 
knowledge partly depends on what goes on with 
the belief in some situations when p is false. An 
account that says nothing about what is believed 
in any situation when p is false cannot give us any 
mode of varying with the fact. 

268 
ROBERT NOZICK 
Because what is preserved under logical 
implication is truth, any condition that is pre-
served under known logical implication is most 
likely to speak only of what happens when p, and 
q, are true, without speaking at all of what hap-
pens when either one is false. Such a condition is 
incapable of providing "varies with"; so adding 
only such conditions to true belief cannot yield 
an adequate account of knowledge.33 
A belief's somehow varying with the truth of 
what is believed is not closed under known logical 
implication. Since knowledge that p involves such 
variation, knowledge also is not closed under 
known logical implication. The skeptic cannot 
easily deny that knowledge involves such variation, 
for his argument that we don't know that we're not 
floating in that tank, for example, uses the fact that 
knowledge does involve variation. ("If you were 
floating in the tank you would still think you 
weren't, so you don't know that you're not.") Yet, 
though one part of his argument uses that fact that 
knowledge involves such variation, another part of 
his argument presupposes that knowledge does not 
involve any such variation. This latter is the part 
that depends upon knowledge being closed under 
known logical implication, as when the skeptic 
argues that since you don't know that not-SK, you 
don't know you are not floating in the tank, then 
you also don't know, for example, that you are now 
reading a book. That closure can hold only if the 
variation does not. The skeptic cannot be right both 
times. According to our view he is right when he 
holds that knowledge involves such variation and 
so concludes that we don't know, for example, that 
we are not floating in that tank; but he is wrong 
when he assumes knowledge is closed under known 
logical implication and concludes that we know 
hardly anything.34 
Knowledge is a real factual relation, subjunc-
tively specifiable, whose structure admits our 
standing in this relation, tracking, to p without 
standing in it to some q which we know p to 
entail. Any relation embodying some variation 
of belief with the fact, with the truth (value), 
will exhibit this structural feature. The skeptic 
is right that we don't track some particular 
truths - the ones stating that his skeptical pos-
sibilities SK don't hold - but wrong that we 
don't stand in the real knowledge-relation of 
tracking to many other truths, including ones 
that entail these first mentioned truths we 
believe but don't know. 
The literature on skepticism contains writers 
who endorse these skeptical arguments (or simi-
lar narrower ones), but confess their inability to 
maintain their skeptical beliefs at times when 
they are not focusing explicitly on the reasoning 
that led them to skeptical conclusions. The most 
notable example of this is Hume: 
I am ready to reject all belief and reasoning, and 
can look upon no opinion even as more probable 
or likely than another ... Most fortunately it hap-
pens that since reason is incapable of dispelling 
these clouds, nature herself suffices to that pur-
pose, and cures me of this philosophical melan-
choly and delirium, either by relaxing this bent 
of mind, or by some avocation, and lively impres-
sion of my senses, which obliterate all these chi-
meras. I dine, I play a game of backgammon, 
I converse, and am merry with my friends; and 
when after three or four hours' amusement, 
I would return to these speculations, they appear 
so cold, and strained, and ridiculous, that 
I cannot find in my heart to enter into them any 
farther. (A Treatise of Human Nature, Book I, 
Part IV, section VII) 
The great subverter of Pyrrhonism or the 
excessive principles of skepticism is action, and 
employment, and the occupations of common 
life. These principles may flourish and triumph 
in the schools; where it is, indeed, difficult, if not 
impossible, to refute them. But as soon as they 
leave the shade, and by the presence of the real 
objects, which actuate our passions and senti-
ments, are put in opposition to the more power-
ful principles of our nature, they vanish like 
smoke, and leave the most determined skeptic in 
the same condition as other mortals... And 
though a Pyrrhonian may throw himself or others 
into a momentary amazement and confusion by 
his profound reasonings; the first and most trivial 
event in life will put to flight all his doubts and 
scruples, and leave him the same, in every point 
of action and speculation, with the philosophers 
of every other sect, or with those who never 
concerned themselver in any philosophical 
researches. When he awakes from his dream, he 
will be the first to join in the laugh against him-
self, and to confess that all his objections are mere 
amusement. (An Enquiry Concerning Human 
Understanding, Section XII, Part II) 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
269 
The theory of knowledge we have presented 
explains why skeptics of various sorts have had 
such difficulties in sticking to their far-reaching 
skeptical conclusions "outside the study," or even 
inside it when they are not thinking specifically 
about skeptical arguments and possibilities SK. 
The skeptic's arguments do show (but show 
only) that we don't know the skeptic's possibili-
ties SK do not hold; and he is right that we don't 
track the fact that SK does not hold. (If it were to 
hold, we would still think it didn't.) However, the 
skeptic's arguments don't show we do not know 
other facts (including facts that entail not-SK) for 
we do track these other facts (and knowledge is 
not closed under known logical entailment.) 
Since we do track these other facts - you, for 
example, the fact that you are reading a book; 
I, the fact that I am writing on a page - and the 
skeptic tracks such facts too, it is not surprising 
that when he focuses on them, on his relationship 
to such facts, the skeptic finds it hard to remem-
ber or maintain his view that he does not know 
those facts. Only by shifting his attention back to 
his relationship to the (different) fact that not-SK, 
which relationship is not tracking, can he revive 
his skeptical belief and make it salient. However, 
this skeptical triumph is evanescent, it vanishes 
when his attention turns to other facts. Only by fix-
ating on the skeptical possibilities SK can he main-
tain his skeptical virtue; otherwise, unsurprisingly, 
he is forced to confess to sins of credulity. 
Skepticism and the conditions for knowledge 
We have considered how the skeptic's argument 
from the skeptical possibilities SK plays off condi-
tion 3: if p weren't true S wouldn't believe that p. 
His argument gains its power by utilizing this con-
dition ("but even if SK held, you still would believe 
it didn't, so you do not know it doesn't"); the deep 
intuitive force of the argument indicates that con-
dition 3 (or something very much like it) is a nec-
essary condition for knowledge. Similarly, are there 
any skeptical arguments or moves that playoff 
condition 4: if p were true then S would believe 
that p (and wouldn't believe that not-p)? If condi-
tion 3 specifies how belief somehow should vary 
with the truth of what is believed, condition 4 
specifies how belief shouldn't vary when the truth 
of what is believed does not vary. Condition 3 is a 
variation condition, condition 4 is an adherence 
condition. Both conditions together capture the 
notion that S (who actually truly believes p) would 
have a true belief that p. He wouldn't have a false 
belief that p if P weren't true (condition 3), and he 
would have a true belief that p if P were true (con-
dition 4). Just as the skeptic argued earlier that the 
belief wouldn't vary when it should, he also can 
argue that it would vary when it shouldn't, con-
cluding both times that we don't have knowledge. 
We would expect skeptical arguments playing 
off condition 4 to be less powerful and compel-
ling than ones playing off 3. Condition 3 requires 
that we wouldn't falsely believe p, and we can be 
led to worry not only whether we might but 
whether we do. While condition 4 requires that 
we would truly believe p (and wouldn't falsely 
believe not-p), and though we might worry 
whether we might violate this, we need have no 
fear that we are - for we know we are believing p 
and are not believing not-po Skeptical arguments 
playing off condition 4, unlike those with 3, 
cannot make us wonder also whether we violate 
the condition's indicative version. 
Condition 4 is an adherence condition, so the 
relevant doubts concern how securely you are 
tied to the truth. For many (most?) of the things p 
you believe, if a group of people came and deceit-
fully told you not-p, you would believe them and 
stop believingp. (Relevant experiments frequently 
have been done by social psychologists.) So do 
you really know p? If physicists told you that 
Newton's theory turns out to have been correct 
after all, wouldn't (or mightn't) you believe them? 
So do you really know Newtonian theory is false? 
But, as before, the mere possibility of its being 
true while you do not believe it is not sufficient to 
show you don't actually know it. That possibility 
must be one that might arise. Call this possibility 
of p's being true while you don't believe it: 
sk. (Lowercase "sk" is p's being true and your not 
believing it, while capital SK is p's being false and 
your believingp.) Possibility sk need not concern 
us when: if p were true, sk wouldn't hold; 
p ~ not-sk; sk is false throughout the first part of 
the p neighborhood of the actual world. It is for-
tunate for my knowing that p that there wouldn't 
be people who trick me, just as it is fortunate for 
my knowing I am in Emerson Hall that whatever 
would occur if I weren't there does not include 

270 
ROBERT NOZICK 
people tricking or hypnotizing me into believing 
I am there. 
Suppose I present a certain argument to some-
one who believes (truly) that p, and he is convinced 
by it and comes to believe not-po Look how easily 
he can be moved from believing p to believing 
not-po Suppose it happens that I do not present 
the argument to him, so he does not start to 
believe not-p, and he continues to believe p. Does 
he know that p? Is it merely the case that his 
knowledge is insecure, or does such instability 
show it is not knowledge after all? 
A skeptic might argue that for almost each p 
we (think we) know, there is an argument or hap-
pening that would get us to believe not-p even 
though p was true. We reply to this skeptic as 
before - the fact that some possible argument or 
happening would get us to believe not-p when p 
doesn't show that it is false that 4: if p were true 
then S would believe p and S wouldn't believe 
not-po To show the falsity of 4, the skeptic would 
have to refer to something that might occur if p 
were true; if it wouldn't hold if p were true, what 
he refers to is irrelevant. 
Among the arguments that get people to stop 
believing things are the skeptic's arguments 
themselves. These arguments often puzzle 
people, sometimes they get people to stop believ-
ing they know that p. They do not know that they 
know. Should we describe this as a case of people 
who first know that they know but who, after 
hearing the skeptic's arguments, no longer know 
that they know because they no longer believe that 
they know (and knowledge entails belief)? Our 
present view is that such people did not know 
that they knew that p, even before hearing the 
skeptic. For their previous belief that they knew 
that p would vary when it shouldn't, so it violates 
condition 4. Similarly, some people who never 
have heard the skeptic's arguments would (if they 
heard them) become convinced that they don't 
know that p. It is pleasant to grant the skeptic a 
partial victory after all, one gained by the plausi-
bility of his arguments, not their cogency. Because 
of the skeptical arguments, some people would 
falsely believe they don't know that p, and these 
people do not know they know it. The existence 
of skeptical arguments makes one type of skepti-
cal conclusion (that we don't know we know 
things) true of some people - those the shoe fits 
have been wearing it. 
Meno claimed he could speak eloquently 
about virtue until Socrates, torpedolike, began 
to question him. He did not know what virtue 
was, for Socrates' questions uncovered Meno's 
previously existing confusions. Even if it had been 
a sophist's questions that bewildered Meno, get-
ting him to believe the opposite, what he previ-
ously had would not have been knowledge. 
Knowledge should be made of sterner stuff.35 
Thus, some skeptical arguments playoff con-
dition 3, others off condition 4. In addition to 
these conditions, our (full) account of knowledge 
formulates a condition about outweighing to 
cover the situation when multiple methods, not 
all satisfying 3 and 4, give rise to the belief. Do any 
skeptical arguments playoff this outweighing 
condition? Here, presumably, would fit various 
attempts at unmasking the dominant sources of 
our belief as methods that do not track: faith, 
prejudice, self-interest, class-interest, deep psy-
chological motives. The outweighing view involves 
subjunctives, but does anything here correspond 
to the skeptic's focusing upon a possibility that is 
so far out that it wouldn't occur, even if p were 
false? Perhaps the following is comparable. Recall 
that it was not necessary for the tracking method 
to win out against the combined opposed weight 
of all other methods; the person's belief merely 
had to vary with the verdict of the tracking method 
when the recommendations of every other way 
used to arrive at belief were held fixed. (It was only 
Case III in the chart that needed to be examined.) 
Any actual split in the verdict of nontracking 
methods will be welcome support. The skeptic 
should not load the other methods against what 
tracking recommends, any more than they actu-
ally are; to suppose more counts as too far out. 
Some skeptical arguments playoff condition 
3, some off condition 4, some (perhaps) off the 
outweighing condition when multiple methods 
are involved. Still other skeptical arguments play 
off the methods themselves, off the fact that 
knowledge is gained via methods or ways of 
believing. In the situations when we are aware of 
what methods we are using, do we know we are 
using those methods? To decide whether we know 
this, according to condition 3 we must consider 
what we would believe if we weren't using the 
methods. Would we then still believe we were? 
If so, condition 3 is violated, and so we did not 
actually know we were using the methods. 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
271 
Along this pathway lies trouble. For if we 
weren't using that method, the very method we 
use to track various facts - a situation we have to 
contemplate in applying condition 3 - who knows 
what we would believe about what methods we 
are using? That method M we are using to track 
various facts may be the very method via which 
we believe that we are using method M. This is 
likely if (and only if) M is described widely and 
deeply enough, for example, as the sum total of 
our (rational or effective) methods. But then, how 
are we to treat the question of what we would 
believe if we weren't using that method M, a ques-
tion condition 3 pushes at us in order to decide if 
we know we are using M? "If I weren't using M, 
would I still believe I was?" What methods of 
believing am I left by this question? After all, con-
dition 3 when fully formulated says: not-p and S, 
via M, comes to a belief about the truth of 
p ~ not -(S believes that p). And the method M of 
condition 3 is the very one said to be actually uti-
lized, in condition 2: S believes, via M, that p. 
Yet now we face the situation where S believes 
of himself that he is applying method M, via an 
application of method M itself;36 moreover, in 
this situation the statement p, which we are trying 
to decide whether S knows, is: S is using method 
M. The result of substituting this p in the full con-
dition 3 is: If S weren't using method M, and S, via 
using M, were to decide about the truth of "s 
is using method M' then S would not believe "s is 
using method M." But the antecedent of this sub-
junctive is supposing both that S is not using 
method M (this supposition is the not-p of the 
antecedent of condition 3) and that S is using 
method M (he uses this method in 3 to decide 
whether or not p, since that is the method via 
whic,h, in condition 2, he actually believes p). We 
have no coherent way to understand this.3' 
Yet if we cannot simply include the use of 
method M in determining what S would believe if 
he were not using M, neither can we simply sup-
pose (for the purposes of condition 3) that S is 
using some other method to arrive at a belief 
about this matter. We saw earlier, in considering a 
range of examples, the great importance of hold-
ing the method fixed in deciding questions about 
knowledge. Recall the grandmother who sees her 
grandson visit her and so believes he is healthy 
and ambulatory; yet if he weren't ambulatory, 
other relatives would tell her he was fine to spare 
her anxiety and upset. She sees her grandson 
walking; does she know he is ambulatory? 
According to condition 3 we must ask what she 
would believe if he weren't ambulatory. If the 
method via which she believes is not held fixed, 
the answer will be wrong. True, if he weren't 
ambulatory, she would then believe he was (via 
hearing about him from other relatives). But the 
relevant question is: what would she believe if he 
weren't ambulatory and (as before) she saw him 
and spoke to him. Thus, to reach the correct 
answer about her knowledge, the method must 
be held fixed - that is one of the reasons why we 
introduced explicit reference to the method or 
way of believing. 
How then are we to treat the question of 
whether the person knows he is using method M, 
when he believes he is via that very method M? If 
he knows he is, then his belief that he is tracks the 
fact that he is, and varies with that fact. To deter-
mine whether it so varies, we must look to the 
question of what he would believe if p were false, 
that is, ifhe weren't using method M. How are we 
to understand this question? It seems we must 
hold fixed the method M via which he believes, in 
order to reach the correct answer about knowl-
edge (as is shown by the case of the grandmother), 
and that we cannot hold the method M fixed, for 
then we have the (apparently) incoherent suppo-
sition that he is applying the method to the situa-
tion where he is not using it, in order to determine 
whether or not he is - and this supposes that he 
both is and isn't using the method. 
This problem does not arise when we know via 
another method that we are using some particular 
method; it arises only for our knowledge of our 
use of our deepest methods, though not for shal-
lower specifications of these methods in specific 
instances. Still, what should we say about our 
knowledge of these deepest methods or of the con-
ditions in which we apply them. Do you know you 
are rational, do you know you are sane? If you were 
irrational or insane, mightn't you think you were 
rational and sane? Yes, but not by applying meth-
ods under (fixed) conditions of rationality and 
sanity. We cannot conclude simply that condi-
tion 3 is not satisfied so you don't know you are 
rational or sane; for that condition is not satisfied 
only when the method is allowed to vary. It would 
be best to be able coherently to discover whether 
or not that method is being used. I can use M to 

272 
ROBERT NOZICK 
discover whether you are using M (if you weren't, 
I wouldn't believe, via M, that you were), or 
whether I was using M in the past (if I hadn't 
been, I wouldn't now believe, via M, that I had 
been). The difficulty is to make sense of saying 
that M, if currently used, would detect that it was 
not being used (if it weren't). And while I do not 
think this simply is incoherent, neither is it pel-
lucidly clear.38 
Questions about knowing one is rational or 
sane need not depend on varying the method 
used. If what we have to go on as we apply meth-
ods is the appearance of rationality and sanity, 
then mightn't we appear sane and rational to our-
selves even if we are not? So how do we know we 
are? We do have more to go on than how we 
appear to ourselves; there also is the agreement 
with others. Let us leave aside the possibility that 
all those others also might be insane and irra-
tional, or be engaged in a plot to convince me 
(falsely) that I was rational and sane. Neither of 
these is what (actually) would or might occur if 
I weren't rational or sane. Might an insane and 
irrational person also be mistaken about whether 
Notes 
Despite some demurrals in the literature, 
there is general agreement that conditions 1 
and 2 are necessary for knowledge. (For some 
recent discussions, see D. M. Armstrong, 
Belief, Truth and Knowledge (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1973), ch. 10; 
Keith Lehrer, Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1974), chs. 2, 3.) I shall take 
for granted that this is so, without wishing to 
place very much weight on its being belief 
that is the precise cognitive attitude (as 
opposed to thinking it so, accepting the state-
ment, and so on) or on the need to introduce 
truth as opposed to formulating the first con-
dition simply as: p. 
I should note that our procedure here does 
not stem from thinking that every illuminat-
ing discussion of an important philosophical 
notion must present (individually) necessary 
and (jointly) sufficient conditions. 
2 
Below, we discuss further the case where 
though the fact that p causes the person's 
belief that p, he would believe it anyway, even 
others are agreeing with him, though, interpret-
ing their disagreement as concord? If a person 
were insane or irrational in this way then others 
would appear (to him) to agree with him, and so 
he would appear sane and rational to himself. 
Things would appear qualitatively indistinguish-
able to him from the situation where he rationally 
and sanely judges the world. There appears to be 
no shift in method here, at least insofar as how 
using the method is experienced internally by the 
user. Do you know, then, that you are not in that 
particular skeptical situation SK? Perhaps not, 
but (as before) from our not knowing that par-
ticular not-SK it does not follow that we don't 
know other things, including that we are being 
sane and rational in particular situations in par-
ticular ways. For if we weren't, we wouldn't believe 
we were; if we weren't then sane and rational in 
those particular ways, what would or might 
obtain is not this skeptic's possibility SK. These 
points emerge even more clearly if we consider 
positions skeptical not about (almost) all knowl-
edge in general, but about particular kinds of 
knowledge. 
if it were not true. I should note here that I 
assume bivalence throughout this chapter, 
and consider only statements that are true if 
and only if their negations are false. 
3 
See Robert Stalnaker, "A Theory of Condi-
tionals," in N. Rescher (ed.), Studies in Logical 
Theory (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1968); David 
Lewis, Counterfactuals (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1973); and Jonathan Bennett's 
critical review of Lewis, "Counterfactuals and 
Possible 
Worlds;' 
Canadian 
Journal 
of 
Philosophy IV, 2 (Dec. 1974), pp. 381-402. 
Our purposes require, for the most part, 
no more than an intuitive understanding of 
subjunctives. However, it is most convenient 
to examine here some further issues, which 
will be used once or twice later. Lewis's 
account has the consequence that p ~ q 
whenever p and q are both true; for the pos-
sible world where p is true that is closest to the 
actual world is the actual world itself, and in 
that world q is true. We might try to remedy 
this by saying that when p is true, p ~ q is true 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
273 
if and only if q is true in all p worlds closer (by 
the metric) to the actual world than is any 
not-p world. When p is false, the usual 
accounts hold that p ~ q is true when q holds 
merely in the closest p worlds to the actual 
world. This is too weak, but how far out must 
one go among the p worlds? A suggestion par-
allel to the previous one is: out until one 
reaches another not-p world (still further 
out). So if q holds in the closest p world Wj but 
not in the p world w2' even though no not-p 
world lies between Wj and w2' then (under the 
suggestion we are considering) the subjunc-
tive is false. A unified account can be offered 
for subjunctives, whatever the truth value of 
their antecedents. The p neighborhood of the 
actual world A is the closest p band to it; that 
is, w is in the p neighborhood of the actual 
world if and only if p is true in wand there are 
no worlds wP and wP such that not-p is true in 
wP and p is true in wP, and wP is closer to A 
than w is to A, and wP is at least as close to A as 
wP is to A. A subjunctive p ~ q is true if and 
only if q is true throughout the p neighbor-
hood of the actual world. 
If it is truly a random matter which slit a 
photon goes through, then its going through 
(say) the right slit does not establish the sub-
junctive: if a photon were fired at that time 
from that source it would go through the 
right-hand slit. For when p equals A photon is 
fired at that time from that source, and q 
equals the photon goes through the right-
hand slit, q is not true everywhere in the p 
neighborhood of the actual world. 
This view of subjunctives within a possible-
worlds framework is inadequate if there is no 
discrete p band of the actual world, as when for 
each positive distance from the actual world A, 
there are both p worlds and not-p worlds so 
distant. Even if this last is not generally so, 
many p worlds that interest us may have their 
distances from A matched by not-p worlds. 
Therefore, let us redefine the relevant p band 
as the closest spread of p worlds such that there 
is no not-p world intermediate in distance 
from A to two p worlds in the spread unless 
there is also another p world in the spread the 
very same distance from A. By definition, it is 
only p worlds in the p band, but some not-p 
worlds may be equidistant from A. 
Though this emendation allows us to 
speak of the closest spread of p worlds, it no 
longer is so clear which worlds in this p band 
subjunctives (are to) encompass. We have 
said it is not sufficient for the truth of p ~ q 
that q hold in that one world in the p band 
closest to the actual world. Is it necessary, as 
our first suggestion has it, that q hold in all 
the p worlds in the closest p band to the actual 
world? Going up until the first "pure" stretch 
of not-p worlds is no longer as natural a line 
to draw as when we imagined "pure" p neigh-
borhoods. Since there already are some not-p 
worlds the same distance from A as some 
members of the p band, what is the special 
significance of the first unsullied not-p 
stretch? There seems to be no natural line, 
though, coming before this stretch yet past 
the first p world. Perhaps nothing stronger 
can be said than this: p ~ q when q holds for 
some distance out in the closest p band to the 
actual world, that is, when all the worlds in 
this first part of that closest p band are q. The 
distance need not be fixed as the same for all 
subjunctives, although various general for-
mulas might be imagined, for example, that 
the distance is a fixed percentage of the width 
of the p band. 
I put forth this semantics for subjunc-
tives in a possible-worlds framework with 
some diffidence, having little inclination to 
pursue the details. Let me emphasize, 
though, that this semantics does not presup-
pose any realist view that all possible worlds 
obtain. I would hope that into this chapter's 
subjunctively formulated theoretical struc-
ture can be plugged (without too many 
modifications) whatever theory of sub-
junctives turns out to be adequate, so that 
the theory of knowledge we formulate is not 
sensitive to variations in the analysis of 
subjunctives. In addition to Lewis and 
Stalnaker cited above, see Ernest W. Adams, 
The Logic of Conditionals (Dordrecht: Reidel, 
1975); John Pollock, Subjunctive Reasoning 
(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1976); J. H. Sobel, 
"Probability, Chance and Choice" (unpub-
lished book manuscript); and a forthcoming 
book by Yigal Kvart. 
4 If the possible-worlds formalism is used to 
represent counterfactuals and subjunctives, 

274 
ROBERT NOZICK 
the relevant worlds are not those p worlds 
that are closest or most similar to the actual 
world, unless the measure of closeness or 
similarity is: what would obtain if p were 
true. Clearly, this cannot be used to explain 
when subjunctives hold true, but it can be 
used to represent them. Compare utility 
theory which represents preferences but does 
not explain them. Still, it is not a trivial fact 
that preferences are so structured that they 
can be represented by a real-valued function, 
unique up to a positive linear transformation, 
even though the representation (by itself) 
does not explain these preferences. Similarly, 
it would be of interest to know what proper-
ties hold of distance metrics which serve to 
represent subjunctives, and to know how 
subjunctives must be structured and interre-
lated so that they can be given a possible 
worlds representation. (With the same one 
space serving for all subjunctives?) 
One further word on this point. Imagine a 
library where a cataloguer assigns call num-
bers based on facts of sort F. Someone, per-
haps the cataloguer, then places each book on 
the shelf by looking at its call number, and 
inserting it between the two books whose call 
numbers are most nearly adjacent to its own. 
The call number is derivative from facts of 
type F, yet it plays some explanatory role, not 
merely a representational one. "Why is this 
book located precisely there? Because of its 
number." Imagine next another library where 
the person who places books on the shelves 
directly considers facts of type F, using them 
to order the books and to interweave new 
ones. Someone else might notice that this 
ordering can be represented by an assign-
ment of numbers, numbers, from which 
other information can be derived as well, for 
example, the first letter of the last name of the 
principal author. But such an assigned 
number is no explanation of why a book in 
this library is located between two others (or 
why its author's last name begins with a cer-
tain letter). I have assumed that utility num-
bers stand to preferences, and closeness or 
similarity measures stand to subjunctives, as 
the call numbers do to the books, and to the 
facts of type F they exhibit, in the second 
library. 
5 G. C. Stine, "Skepticism, RelevantAlternatives 
and Deductive Closure," Philosophical Studies 
29 (1976), p. 252, who attributes the exam-
ple to Carl Ginet. 
6 This last remark is a bit too brisk, for that 
account might use a subjunctive criterion for 
when an alternative q to p is relevant (namely, 
when if p were not to hold, q would or might), 
and utilize some further notion of what it is to 
rule out relevant alternatives (for example, have 
evidence against them), so that it did not turn 
out to be equivalent to the account we offer. 
7 More accurately, since the truth of anteced-
ent and consequent is not necessary for the 
truth of the subjunctive either, 4 says some-
thing different from 1 and 2. 
8 I experimented with some other conditions 
which adequately handled this as well as 
some other problem cases, but they suc-
cumbed to further difficulties. Though much 
can be learned from applying those condi-
tions, presenting all the details would engage 
only the most masochistic readers. So I 
simply will list them, each at one time a can-
didate to stand alone in place of condition 4. 
(a) 
S believes that not-p ~ not-po 
(b) 
S believes that not-p ~ not-p or it is 
through some other method that S 
believes not-po (Methods are discussed 
in the next section.) 
(c) 
(S believes p or S believes not-p) ~ 
not-(S believes p, and not-p holds) and 
not -(S believes not -p, and p holds). 
(d) 
not-(S believes that p) ~ not-(p and S 
believes that not-pl. 
(e) 
not-(p and S believes that p) ~ not-
(not-p and S believes thatp or p and S 
believes that not-p). 
9 Gilbert 
Harman, 
Thought 
(Princeton: 
Princeton, University Press, 1973), ch. 9, pp. 
142-54. 
10 
What if the situation or world where he too 
hears the later false denials is not so close, so 
easily occurring? Should we say that every-
thing that prevents his hearing the denial 
easily could have not happened, and does 
not in some close world? 
11 
This reformulation introduces an apparent 
asymmetry between the consequents of con-
ditions 3 and 4. Since we have rewritten 4 as 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
275 
P -7 S believes that p and not-(S believes 
that not-p), 
why is 3 not similarly rewritten as 
not-p -7 not-(S believes that p) and S 
believes that not-p? 
It is knowledge that p we are analyzing, 
rather than knowledge that not -po Knowledge 
that p involves a stronger relation to p than 
to not-po Thus, we did not first write the third 
condition for knowledge of pas: not-p -7 S 
believes that not-pi also the following is not 
true: S knows that p -7 (not-p -7 S knows 
that not-pl. 
Imagine that someone S knows whether 
or not p, but it is not yet clear to us which he 
knows, whether he knows that p or knows 
that not-po Still, merely given that S knows 
that---, we can say: 
not-p -7 not-(S believes that p) 
p -7 not-(S believes that not-p). 
Now when the blank is filled in, either 
with p or with not-p, we have to add S's 
believing it to the consequent of the subjunc-
tive that begins with it. That indicates which 
one he knows. Thus, when it is p that he 
knows, we have to add to the consequent of 
the second subjunctive (the subjunctive that 
begins with p): S believes that p. We thereby 
transform the second subjunctive into: 
P -7 not-(S believes that not-p) and S 
believes that p. 
Except for a rearrangement of which is 
written first in the consequent, this is con-
dition 4. Knowledge that p especially tracks 
p, and this special focus on p (rather than 
not-p) gets expressed in the subjunctive, not 
merely in the second condition. 
There is another apparent asymmetry in 
the antecedents of the two subjunctives 3 and 
4, not due to the reformulation. When actu-
ally p is true and S believes that p, condition 
4 looks some distance out in the p neighbor-
hood of the actual world, while condition 3 
looks some distance out in the not-p neigh-
borhood, which itself is farther away from 
the actual world than the p neighborhood. 
Why not have both conditions look equally 
far, revising condition 3 to require merely 
that the closest world in which p is false yet S 
believes that p be some distance from the 
actual world. It then would parallel condi-
tion 4, which says that the closest world in 
which p yet p is not believed is some distance 
away from the actual world. Why should 
condition 3 look farther from the actual 
world than condition 4 does? 
However, despite appearances, both con-
ditions look at distance symmetrically. The 
asymmetry is caused by the fact that the 
actual world, being a p world, is not sym-
metrical between p and not-po Condition 3 
says that in the closest not-p world, not-(S 
believes that p), and that this "not-(S believes 
that p)" goes out through the first part of the 
not-p neighborhood of the actual world. 
Condition 4 says that in the closest p world, 
S believes that p, and that this "s believes that 
p" goes out through the first part of the p 
neighborhood of the actual world. Thus the 
two conditions are symmetrical; the differ-
ent distances to which they extend stems not 
from an asymmetry in the conditions but 
from one in the actual world - it being 
(asymmetrically) p. 
12 
D. M. Armstrong, Belief, Truth and Knowledge 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1973), p. 209; he attributes the case to 
Gregory Q'Hair. 
13 
Some may hold the father is made more sure 
in his belief by courtroom proof; and hold 
that the father knows because his degree of 
assurance (though not his belief) varies sub-
junctively with the truth. 
14 
If there is no other such method M] via 
which S believes that p, the second clause is 
vacuously true. 
Should we say that no other method used 
outweighs M, or that M outweighs all 
others? Delicate questions arise about situa-
tions where the methods tie, so that no sub-
junctive holds about one always winning 
over the other. It might seem that we should 
require that M outweigh (and not merely 
tie) the other methods; but certain ways of 
resolving the ties, such as not randomly 
deciding but keeping judgment suspended, 
might admit knowledge when a true belief is 

276 
ROBERT NOZICK 
arrived at via a tracking method M which is 
not outweighed yet also doesn't (always) 
outweigh the others present. There is no spe-
cial need to pursue the details here; the out-
weighing condition should be read here and 
below as a vague one, residing somewhere in 
the (closed) interval between "outweighs" 
and "not outweighed", but not yet precisely 
located. This vagueness stands independ-
ently of the refinements pursued in the text 
immediately below. 
15 
When a belief is overdetermined or jointly 
produced by three methods, where only the 
first satisfies conditions 3 and 4, the question 
becomes: what does the person believe when 
M j recommends believing not-p while the 
two others each recommend believing p? 
Notice also that in speaking of what would 
happen in Case III we are imposing a sub-
junctive condition; if there is no "would" 
about it, if in each instance of a Case III situ-
ation it is determined at random which 
method outweighs which, then that will not 
be sufficient for knowledge, even though 
sometimes M j wins out. 
It is worrisome that in weakening our ini-
tial description of outweighing by looking to 
Case III but not to Case II, we seem to give 
more weight to condition 3 for tracking than 
to condition 4. So we should be ready to 
reconsider this weakening. 
16 
For example, in the case of the father who 
believes on faith that his son is innocent and 
sees the courtroom demonstration of inno-
cence, does the father use two methods, faith 
and courtroom demonstration, the second 
of which does satisfy conditions 3-4 while 
the first (which outweighs it) does not sat-
isfy 3-4; or does the father use only one 
method which doesn't satisfy 3-4, namely: 
believe about one's son whatever the method 
of faith tells one, and only if it yields no 
answer, believe the result of courtroom dem-
onstration? With either mode of individua-
tion, knowledge requires the negative 
existentially quantified statement (that there 
is no method ... ) somewhere, whether in 
specifying the method itself or in specifying 
that it is not outweighed. 
17 
One suspects there will be some gimmick 
whereby whenever p is truly believed a trivial 
method M can be specified which satisfies 
conditions 3 and 4. If so, then further condi-
tions will have to be imposed upon M, in 
addition to the dispositional condition. 
Compare the difficulties encountered in the 
literature on specifying the relevant reference 
class in probabilistic inference and explana-
tion; see Henry Kyburg, Probability and 
the Logic of Rational Belief (Middletown: 
Wesleyan University Press, 1961), ch. 9; 
c. G. Hempel, Aspects of Scientific Expla-
nation (New York: Free Press, 1965), pp. 
394-405; also his "Maximal Specificity and 
Lawlikeness in Probabilistic Explanation," 
Philosophy of Science 35 (1968), pp. 116-33. 
18 
See Ludwig Wittgenstein, On Certainty 
(Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1969),83,94, 102-10, 
140-4,151-2,162-3,166,411,419,472-5. 
19 
There is an immense amount of literature 
concerning skepticism. See, for example, 
Sextus Empiricus, Writings (4 vols, Loeb 
Classical 
Library, 
Cambridge: 
Harvard 
University Press); Richard Popkin, History 
of Skepticism from Erasmus to Descartes 
(rev. edn, New York: Humanities Press, 
1964); Arne Naess, Skepticism (New York: 
Humanities Press, 1968); Rene Descartes, 
Meditations on First Philosophy (New York: 
Liberal Arts Press, 1960); G. E. Moore, "Proof 
of an External World," "Four Forms of 
Scepticism:' and "Certainty," this vol., chs 2, 
3 and 4, and "A Defense of Common Sense:' 
in his Philosophical Papers (Allen and Unwin, 
London, 1959); J. L. Austin, "Other Minds" 
in his Philosophical Papers (Oxford University 
Press, 1961); Wittgenstein, On Certainty; 
Keith Lehrer, "Why Not Skepticism?" (in 
Swain and Pappas (eds), Essays on Knowledge 
and Justification, pp. 346-63); Peter Unger, 
Ignorance (Oxford University Press, 1975), 
pp. 7-24; Michael Slote, Reason and Skepti-
cIsm (London: Allen and Unwin, 1970); 
Roderick Firth, "The Anatomy of Certainty:' 
Philosophical Review 76 (1967), pp. 3-27; 
Thompson 
Clarke, 
"The 
Legacy 
of 
Skepticism:' Journal of Philosophy 69 (1972), 
pp. 754-69; Stanley Cavell, The Claim of 
Reason (Oxford University Press, 1979). 
20 
From the perspective of explanation rather 
than proof, the extensive philosophical dis-
cussion, deriving from Charles S. Peirce, of 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
277 
whether the skeptic's doubts are real is beside 
the point. The problem of explaining how 
knowledge is possible would remain the 
same, even if no one ever claimed to doubt 
that there was knowledge. 
21 
Subjunctives with actually false antecedents 
and actually true consequents have been 
termed by Goodman semi-factuals. R is the 
semi-factual: not-p -t S believes p. 
22 
Should one weaken condition 3, so that the 
account of knowledge merely denies the 
opposed subjunctive R? That would give us: 
not-(not-p -t S believes p). This holds when 
3 does not, in situations where if p were false, 
S might believe p, and also might not believe 
it. The extra strength of 3 is needed to 
exclude these as situations of knowledge. 
23 
Though it does show the falsity of the cor-
responding entailment, "not-p entails not-(S 
believes that p):' 
24 
If a person is to know that SK doesn't hold, 
then condition 3 for knowledge must be sat-
isfied (with "SK doesn't hold" substituted for 
p). Thus, we get 
(3) 
not-(SK doesn't hold) -t not-(S 
believes that SK doesn't hold). 
Simplifying the antecedent, we have 
(3) 
SK holds -t not-(S believes that SK 
doesn't hold). 
The skeptic has chosen a situation SK such 
that the following is true of it: 
SK holds -t S believes that SK doesn't hold. 
Having the same antecedent as 3 and a 
contradictory consequent, this is incom-
patible with 3. Thus, condition 3 is not sat-
isfied by the person's belief that SK does 
not hold. 
25 
Descartes presumably would refute the tank 
hypothesis as he did the demon hypothesis, 
through a proof of the existence of a good 
God who would not allow anyone, demon or 
psychologist, permanently to deceive us. The 
philosophical literature has concentrated on 
the question of whether Descartes can prove 
this (without begging the question against 
the demon hypothesis). The literature has 
not discussed whether even a successful 
proof of the existence of a good God can 
help Descartes to conclude he is not almost 
always mistaken. Might not a good God have 
his own reasons for deceiving us; might he 
not deceive us temporarily - a period which 
includes all of our life thus far (but not an 
afterlife)? To the question of why God did 
not create us so that we never would make 
any errors, Descartes answers that the 
motives of God are inscrutable to us. Do we 
know that such an inscrutable God could 
not be motivated to allow another powerful 
"demon" to deceive and dominate us? 
Alternatively, could not such a good God 
be motivated to deceive itself temporarily, 
even if not another? (Compare the various 
Indian doctrines designed to explain our 
ignorance of our own true nature, that is, 
Atman-Brahman's or, on another theory, 
the purusha's nature.) Whether from play-
fulness or whatever motive, such a good 
God would temporarily deceive itself, per-
haps even into thinking it is a human being 
living in a material realm. Can we know, via 
Descartes' argument, that this is not our 
situation? And so forth. 
These possibilities, and others similar, are 
so obvious that some other explanation, I 
mean the single-minded desire to refute 
skepticism, must be given for why they are 
not noticed and discussed. 
Similarly, one could rescrutinize the 
cogito argument. Can "I think" only be pro-
duced by something that exists? Suppose 
Shakespeare had written for Hamlet the line, 
"I think, therefore I am," or a fiction is writ-
ten in which a character named Descartes 
says this, or suppose a character in a dream 
of mine says this; does it follow that they 
exist? Can someone use the cogito argument 
to prove he himself is not a fictional or 
dream character? Descartes asked how he 
could know he wasn't dreaming; he also 
should have asked how he could know he 
wasn't dreamed. See further my fable 
"Fiction;' Ploughshares 6, 3 (Oct. 1980). 
26 
I say almost everything, because there still 
could be some true beliefs such as "I exist." 
More limited skeptical possibilities present 

278 
ROBERT NOZICK 
worlds doxically identical to the actual world 
in which almost every belief of a certain sort 
is false, for example, about the past, or about 
other people's mental states. 
27 
Let WI ••• , wn be worlds doxically identical to 
the actual world for S. He doesn't know he is 
not in WI' he doesn't know he is not in w2 ••• ; 
does it follow that he doesn't know he is in 
the actual world wA or in one very much like 
it (in its truths)? Not if the situation he would 
be in if the actual world w A did not obtain 
wasn't one of the doxically identical worlds; 
if the world that then would obtain would 
show its difference from the actual one w A' he 
then would not believe he was in wA. 
However, probably there are some worlds 
not very different from the actual world (in 
that they have mostly the same truths) and 
even doxically identical to it, which might 
obtain if w A did not. In that case, S would not 
know he was in w A specified in all its glory. 
But if we take the disjunction of these harm-
less worlds (insofar as drastic skeptical con-
clusions go) doxically identical with wAthen 
S will know that the disjunction holds. For if 
it didn't, he would notice that. 
28 
This argument proceeds from the fact that 
floating in the tank is incompatible with 
being at X. Another form of the skeptic's 
argument, one we shall consider later, pro-
ceeds from the fact that floating in the tank 
is incompatible with knowing you are at X 
(or almost anything else). 
29 
Note that I am not denying that Kp & 
K(p -< q) ~ Believes q. 
30 
Here again I assume a limited readership, 
and ignore possibilities such as those 
described in James Blish, Cities in Flight. 
31 
Thus, the following is not a deductively valid 
form of inference. 
p -< q (and S knows this) 
not-p ~ not-(S believes that p) 
Therefore, not-q ~ not-(S believes that q). 
Furthermore, the example in the text shows 
that even the following is not a deductively 
valid form of inference. 
p -< q (and S knows this) 
not-p ~ not-(S believes that p) 
Therefore, not-q ~ not-(S believes that p). 
Nor is this one deductively valid: 
p-<q 
not-q ~ r 
Therefore, not-p ~ r. 
32 
Does this same consequence of nonclosure 
under known logical implication follow as 
well from condition 4: p ~ S believes that p? 
When p is not actually true, condition 4 can 
hold of p yet not of a q known to be entailed 
by p. For example, let p be the (false) state-
ment that I am in Antarctica, and let q be the 
disjunction of p with some other appropriate 
statement; for example, let q be the statement 
that I am in Antarctica or I lost some object 
yesterday though I have not yet realized it. 
If P were true I would know it, p entails q, yet 
if q were true I wouldn't know it, for the way 
it would be true would be by my losing some 
object without yet realizing it, and if that 
happened I would not know it. 
This example to show that condition 4 is 
not closed under known logical implica-
tion depends on the (actual) falsity of p. I 
do not think there is any suitable example 
to show this in the case where p is true, 
leaving aside the trivial situation when the 
person simply does not infer the entailed 
statement q. 
33 
Suppose some component of the condition, 
call it C', also speaks of some cases when p is 
false, and when q is false; might it then pro-
vide "varies with;' even though C' is preserved 
under known logical implication, and is trans-
mitted from p to q when p entails q and is 
known to entail q? If this condition C' speaks 
of some cases where not-p and of some cases 
where not-q, then C' will be preserved under 
known logical implication if, when those cases 
of not-p satisfy it, and p entails q, then also 
those cases of not-q satisfy it. Thus, C' seems 
to speak of something as preserved from some 
cases of not-p to some cases of not-p, which is 
preservation in the reverse direction to the 
entailment involving these, from not-q to 
not-po Thus, a condition that is preserved 
under known logical implication and that also 
provides some measure of "varies with" must 
contain a component condition saying that 
something interesting (other than falsity) is 
preserved in the direction opposite to the 

KNOWLEDGE AND SKEPTICISM 
279 
logical implication (for some cases); and 
moreover, that component itself must be pre-
served in the direction of the logical implica-
tion because the condition including it is. It 
would be interesting to see such a condition 
set out. 
34 
Reading an earlier draft of this chapter, friends 
pointed out to me that Fred Dretske already 
had defended the view that knowledge (as 
one among many epistemic concepts) is not 
closed under known logical implication. (See 
his 
"Epistemic 
Operators;' Journal 
of 
Philosophy 67 (1970), pp. 1007-23, ch. 19 in 
this vol.) Furthermore, Dretske presented a 
subjunctive condition for knowledge (in his 
"Conclusive Reason;' Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy 49, (1971), pp. 1-22), holding that 
S knows that p on the basis of reasons R only 
if: R would not be the case unless p were the 
case. Here Dretske ties the evidence subjunc-
tively to the fact, and the belief based on the 
evidence subjunctively to the fact through the 
evidence. (Our account of knowledge has 
not yet introduced or discussed evidence or 
reasons at all. While this condition corre-
sponds to our condition 3, he has nothing 
corresponding to 4.) So Dretske has hold of 
both pieces of our account, subjunctive and 
nonclosure, and he even connects them in a 
passing footnote (Journal of Philosophy 67, 
p. 1019, n. 4), noticing that any account of 
knowledge that relies on a subjunctive condi-
tional will not be closed under known logical 
implication. Dretske also has the notion of a 
relevant alternative as "one that might have 
been realized in the existing circumstances if 
the actual state of affairs had not material-
ized" (p. 1021), and he briefly applies all this 
to the topic of skepticism (pp. 1015-16), 
holding that the skeptic is right about some 
things but not about others. 
It grieves me somewhat to discover that 
Dretske also had all this, and was there first. 
It raises the question, also, of why these views 
have not yet had the proper impact. Dretske 
makes his points in the midst of much other 
material, some of it less insightful. The inde-
pendent statement and delineation of the 
position here, without the background noise, 
1 hope will make clear its many merits. 
After Goldman's paper on a causal theory 
of knowledge (in Journal of Philosophy 64 
(1967)), an idea then already "in the air;' it 
required no great leap to consider subjunctive 
conditions. Some two months after the first 
version of this chapter was written, Goldman 
himself published a paper on knowledge uti-
lizing counterfactuals ("Discrimination and 
Perceptual Knowledge;' Journal of philosophy 
78 (1976), pp. 771-91), also talking of rele-
vant possibilities (without using the coun-
terfactuals to identify which possibilities are 
relevant); and Shope's survey article has 
called my attention to a paper of L. S. Carrier 
("An Analysis of Empirical Knowledge;' 
Southern Journal of Philosophy 9 (1971), 
pp. 3-11) that also used subjunctive condi-
tions including our condition 3. Armstrong's 
reliability view of knowledge (Belief, Truth 
and Knowledge, pp. 166, 169) involved a law-
like connection between the belief that p and 
the state of affairs that makes it true. Clearly, 
the idea is one whose time has come. 
35 
Is it a consequence of our view that of two 
people who know p, each believing he knows 
p and satisfying condition 3 for knowing he 
knows p, one may know he knows and the 
other not, because (although identical in all 
other respects) the second might encounter 
skeptical arguments while the first some-
how lives hermetically sealed from the merest 
brush with them? 
36 
Our task now is not to wonder whether it is 
legitimate to use M to reach a belief that M is 
being used. What, after all, is the alternative? 
Presumably, an infinite regress of methods, 
or a circle, or reaching a method which is 
used but either is not believed to be used, or 
is believed to be though not via any method 
or way of believing. 
37 
Similar questions arise about our knowledge 
of other statements such that if they were false, 
we would not be using the methods via which 
we know they are true, for example, "there are 
eyes;' "I am alive;' "I am sentient;' perhaps "I 
sometimes am tracking something:' 
38 
Should we say for these cases discussed in 
the text that condition 3 does not apply, so 
that, as in the previous case of necessary 
truths, the whole weight of tracking devolves 
upon condition 4? The issue then simply 
turns on whether in similar situations where 
the person uses method M, he also would 
believe he does. 

CHAPTER 22 
How to Defeat Opposition 
to Moore 
Ernest Sosa 
What modal relation must a fact bear to a belief 
in order for this belief to constitute knowledge of 
that fact? Externalists have proposed various 
answers, including some that combine external-
ism with contextualism. We shall find that vari-
ous forms of externalism share a modal conception 
of "sensitivity" open to serious objections. 
Fortunately, the undeniable intuitive attractive-
ness of this conception can be explained through 
an easily confused but far preferable notion of 
"safety." The denouement of our reflections, 
finally, will be to show how replacing sensitivity 
with safety makes it possible to defend plain 
Moorean common sense against the spurious 
advantages over it claimed by skeptical, tracking, 
relevant-alternative, and contextualist accounts. 
A 
A belief by S that p is "sensitive" iff were it not so 
that p, S would not believe that p. This concept is 
important in a line of thought developed by 
Dretske, Nozick, and DeRose, among others, each 
in his own way. It enables the following 
requirement. 
Sensitivity In order to constitute knowledge a 
belief must be sensitive. 
Originally published in Philosophical Perspectives 13, 
Epistemology (1999), pp. 141-53. 
(That the subject's belief be sensitive is sometimes 
required rather for correct attribution to that 
subject of corresponding "knowledge:' Although 
we shall take little further notice of this formula-
tion, much of what follows could be recast in its 
terms.) 
An "alternative" to a proposition is any incom-
patible possibility. (Among the truths only the 
contingent have alternatives, since no "possibil-
ity" can be incompatible with a necessary truth.) 
To "rule out" such an alternative is to know that it 
is not the case. The following principle of exclu-
sion now seems plausible: 
PE 
In order to know a fact P one must rule 
out (i.e., know to be false) everyalterna-
tive that one knows to be incompatible 
with it. 
That creates a problem for the sensitivity require-
ment. My belief that 
(0) 
hereisahand 
might constitute knowledge even though my 
belief that 
(-h) 
I am not now fooled by a demon into 
believing incorrectly that here is a hand 
is not sensitive, despite my knowing that <0> 
entails <-h>. But if my belief of <-h> is not 

HOW TO DEFEAT OPPOSITION TO MOORE 
281 
sensitive, then the sensitivity requirement pre-
cludes my knowing <-h>, and precludes thereby 
my ruling out <h>, which, in combination with 
PE, precludes in turn my knowing <0>. Advocates 
of the "relevant alternatives" approach, relevan-
tists, take this in stride by rejecting principle PE in 
its full generality. Instead they propose this: 
PE-rel In order to know a fact P one must rule 
out every relevant alternative that one knows 
to be incompatible with it. 
Thus one might know that (0) here is a hand, 
despite being unable to rule out the hypothetical 
possibility that (h) one is being fooled by a demon, 
etc.; or so say relevantists. Replacing PE with PE-
rei enables them to reject the demand to exclude 
alternative <h>, if they can marginalize that alter-
native as irrelevant. What then is the difference 
between relevant and irrelevant alternatives? 
What makes an alternative irrelevant? No answer 
is generally accepted, even among relevantists, 
and the notion of relevance remains obscure, no 
published account having yet much relieved this 
darkness. (I do not expect relevance theorists to 
disagree radically with this estimate; one thinker's 
debilitating drawback is another's challenging 
open problem, to be resolved in due course.) 
Here is an alternative approach. 
Call a belief by S that p "safe" iff: S would 
believe that p only if it were so that p. 
(Alternatively, a belief by S that p is "safe" iff: S 
would not believe that p without it being the 
case that p; or, better, iff: as a matter of fact, 
though perhaps not as a matter of strict neces-
sity, not easily would S believe that p without 
it being the case that p.) 
Safety 
In order to (be said correctly to) con-
stitute knowledge a belief must be safe (rather 
than sensitive). 
While akin to Sensitivity, Safety has important 
advantages.! 
Principle PE, for example, does not give Safety 
the problem we saw it give Sensitivity. Suppose 
the belief <0> above to be a safe belief, and con-
sider the paired skeptical proposition <-h> that 
one knows to be entailed by <0>. Although one's 
belief of < -h> is clearly not sensitive, it does seem 
quite safe. In other words, unlike sensitivity, safety 
is preserved under this known entailment. No 
belief constitutes knowledge unless safe, we may 
now say, while leaving ourselves free to exclude 
such skeptical scenarios that we know to be 
incompatible with something we know. If you 
know that p, and you know that some such sce-
nario <h> is necessarily incompatible with <0>, 
you are not precluded by the safety requirement 
from knowledgeably excluding that scenario. 
Replacing the sensitivity requirement with 
the safety requirement may thus enable a unary 
conditionals-theoretic account of knowledge in 
need of no distinction between relevant and irrel-
evant alternatives. (This counters some at least of 
the rationale for the relevant alternatives tack.) 
B. 
The Skeptic Answered: Moore, Nozick, 
and DeRose 
What follows will explore sensitivity-based oppo-
sition to plain Moorean common sense. We shall 
find that several of the most striking attacks on 
plainness rest essentially, in one way or other, on 
some 
assumed 
requirement of sensitivity. 
Replacing sensitivity with safety would in one 
stroke undercut all such attacks. 
First some abbreviations: 
h 
I am a handless brain in a vat being fed 
experiences as if I were normally embod-
ied and situated. 
o 
I now have hands. 
Here now is the skeptic's "argument from igno-
rance" AI: 
1. 
I do not know that not-h. 
2. 
If 1, then c (below). 
c. 
I do not know that o. 
That lays out the skeptic's stance. G. E. Moore for 
his part grants the skeptic premise 2, but rejects C 
and therefore 1. Nozick's stance is different. Like 
Moore, he rejects C. Like the skeptic, he affirms 1. 
So he must reject 2, which he does aided by his 
independently supported account of knowledge 
as tracking. Tracking is in fact not preserved by 
entailment, nor even by known entailment. One 
can perfectly well track a fact P and yet fail to 
track a fact Q that one knows to be entailed by P. 

282 
ERNEST SO SA 
We already have an example: I know that 0 
(above) entails not-H; but I track the former 
without tracking the latter.2 It is not only Nozick 
who rejects closure under known entailment; so 
does the relevantist, for whom in order to know 
some fact X you need not know, and often cannot 
know, the negation of an alternative known to be 
incompatible with X, so long as it is not a "rele-
vant" alternative. 
Nozick's account implies a conjunction found 
"abominable" (one that would of course be no 
less "abominable" when derived from the relevant 
alternatives approach): namely, that I know 0 
without knowing not-H.3 Despite rejecting the 
account for that reason, DeRose draws from it a 
key concept for his own contextualist response to 
the skeptic, that of sensitivity. Again, one's belief 
of <p> is sensitive if, and only if, were it not so 
that p, one would not believe it. My belief that 
here before me now is a hand is a sensitive belief, 
since: did I not now have a hand before me, I 
would not believe that I did.4 
To that the contextualist response now joins a 
second key concept, that of the "strength of one's 
epistemic position." One's epistemic position 
with respect to P is stronger the more remote are 
the least remote possibilities wherein one's belief 
as to whether p does not match the fact of that 
matter.S 
These two concepts enable a distinctive 
response to argument AI. It is not enough, we are 
told, just to select some consistent stance on the 
three propositions involved: thus the Moorean 
stance, or the skeptic's, or Nozick's or that of rel-
evant alternatives. Whatever stance one selects, a 
proper treatment of the paradox will require one 
to explain also why the argument is as plausible 
as it is.6 In particular, one will need to explain 
why it is that the skeptic's premise 1 is so plausi-
ble. This requirement the Mooreans have not 
met. Nor has Nozick properly explained the 
appeal of his rejected premise, premise 2, which 
one can reject only at the cost of denying the 
closure of knowledge under known entailment 
(and deduction). 
DeRose meets that explanatory requirement 
through his new contextualism, according to 
which S is correctly attributed knowledge that 0 
only if S's belief of 0 is strong enough by the 
operative standards. And how strong is "strong 
enough"? What sets the threshold in any given 
context? One crucial consideration is a certain 
salience in that context of some proposition H 
which one must knowledgeably rule out in order 
to know O. In a context with H thus salient, Scan 
be said correctly to "know" 0 only if S would 
avoid belief/fact mismatch re 0 up to and includ-
ing the least remote possibilities where H (and 
not just not-O) is the case. But in the skeptic's 
scenario H, S would go wrong both in believing 
not-H and in believing 0. 7 
Compatibly, it may still be true to say in ordi-
nary contexts that one "knows" 0: there one is at 
least free of any skeptical challenge. In such con-
texts more relaxed standards allow one an epis-
temic position strong enough to render true the 
claim to "know" O. For it is now required only 
that one avoid belief/fact mismatch strongly 
enough to make one's belief sensitive: i.e., one 
that would be right in any possibility up to and 
including the least remote possibilities in which 
o was false. 
Recall the skeptic's "argument from ignorance" 
AI: 
1. I do not know that not-h. 
2. If 1, then c (below). 
c. I do not know that o. 
Three main positions have been adopted 
here: 
Skeptic: 
1,2, c 
Nozick, et al.: 
1, -c,-2 
Moore: 
2, -c, -1 
(Where Nozick represents those who deny clo-
sure under known entailment, which, again, 
includes those who opt for "relevant alterna-
tives:') DeRose has something interestingly fresh 
to say about this dialectic by in effect distinguish-
ing whether an argument is sound in itself, as an 
abstract argument, from whether it would be 
sound to endorse it." An argument might be 
endorsed in any of at least three ways: (a) by public 
affirmation, (b) by conscious and occurrent 
thought, and (c) by implicit belief. DeRose's con-
textualism implies that Moore's argument could 
not correctly be endorsed at least in ways a and b, 
and perhaps not in way c either. However, this 
does not affect the soundness of the argument 
when unendorsed. 

HOW TO DEFEAT OPPOSITION TO MOORE 
283 
The unutterable soundness of Moore's argu-
ment is subtly interesting and quite similar to the 
unutterable truth of "I am silent." It may enable a 
fascinatingly attractive position on the skeptical 
paradox. According to DeRose's contextualism, the 
Moorean combination (2, -c, -1) may be the 
abstractly sound argument, as compared with its 
rival arguments favored respectively by Nozick and 
the skeptic; but it can remain so only at the cost of 
being unuttered and unthought.9 Moore's position 
may hence be correct but unendorsable. If one 
must take a position on the paradox, one of the 
three laid out as the skeptic's, Nozick's, and Moore's, 
then the right option is rather the skeptic's. For 
DeRose it is only the skeptic's position that is ever 
endorsable, in whatever context, inasmuch as the 
very endorsing of that position so changes the con-
text as to make its endorsement correct. 10 
C. 
There's A Better Way 
1. 
Sensitivity not necessary for knowledge 
The "sensitivity" of a belief that p - that were it 
not so that p one would not believe it - was 
rejected earlier as a necessary condition for the 
truth of the assertion that one "knows" P. What 
follows will support that rejection by showing 
how the sensitivity requirement runs against 
simple and striking counterexamples. 
Suppose first we have two propositions as fol-
lows: (a) that p, and (b) that I do not believe 
incorrectly (falsely) that p. Surely no-one mini-
mally rational and attentive who believes both of 
these will normally know either without knowing 
the other. Yet even in cases where one's belief of 
(a) is sensitive, one's belief of (b) could never be 
sensitive. After all, even if (b) were false, one 
would still believe it anyhow. Still it is quite 
implausible that the assertion that I know (b) 
could never be true, not even in the many situa-
tions where the assertion that I know (a) would be 
trueY 
Second counterexample. On my way to the 
elevator I release a trash bag down the chute from 
my high rise condo. Presumably I know my bag 
will soon be in the basement. But what if, having 
been released, it still (incredibly) were not to 
arrive there? That presumably would be because 
it had been snagged somehow in the chute on the 
way down (an incredibly rare occurrence), or 
some such happenstance. But none such could 
affect my predictive belief as I release it, so I would 
still predict that the bag would soon arrive in the 
basement. My belief seems not to be sensitive, 
therefore, but constitutes knowledge anyhow, and 
can correctly be said to do SO.12 
Thirdly, sensitivity is doubtful as a condition 
for our being correctly said to have knowledge of 
any apodictically necessary truth A, given how 
hard it would be to make sense of the supposition 
that not-A. This problem leads Nozick himself to 
abandon the requirement of sensitivity for such 
truths. 
2. 
Better safe than sensitive 
These problems for sensitivity do not affect our 
"safety:' A belief is sensitive iff had it been false, S 
would not have held it, whereas a belief is safe iff 
S would not have held it without it being true. For 
short: S's belief B(p) is sensitive iff -p ~ -B(p), 
whereas S's belief is safe iff B(p) ~ p. These are 
not equivalent, since subjunctive conditionals do 
not contrapose.13 
DeRose gives a persuasive defense of the sen-
sitivity idea common to the various forms of 
sensitivity-based opposition to Moore: namely, 
the skeptical, tracking, relevant-alternative, and 
contextualist approaches that share some form of 
commitment to that requirement. This idea sup-
ports the skeptic's correctness in affirming the 
first premise of AI. Ordinary claims to know can 
apparently be sustained only by distinguishing 
ordinary contexts in which such claims are made 
from contexts where the skeptic asserts his dis-
tinctive premise in the course of giving argument 
AI. With this difference in context comes a differ-
ence in standards, and because of this difference, 
it is incorrect to say in a skeptic's context that one 
knows 0, correct though it may remain to say it in 
an ordinary context. 
That response to the skeptic faces a problem. 
Nozick and DeRose argue that sensitivity is nec-
essary for correct attributions of knowledge. The 
requirement that a belief must be sensitive if it is 
to be (correctly characterizable as) "knowledge" is 
found to be broadly prima facie plausible: in many 
cases it is found intuitively that the failure of a 
belief to be (correctly characterizable as) "knowl-
edge" may be explained through the fact that the 

284 
ERNEST SO SA 
belief would remain in place even if false (in cir-
cumstances determined by the context of attribu-
tion). The problem for this way of arguing is that 
an alternative explanation is equally adequate for 
undisputed cases (undisputed, for example, 
between the Moorean who rejects the skeptic's 
distinctive premise 1 and the contextualist who is 
willing to affirm it). According to this alternative 
explanation, it is safety that (correct attribution 
of) "knowledge" requires, a requirement violated 
in the ordinary cases cited, wherein the subject 
fails to know. One fails to know in those cases, it 
is now said, because one's belief is not safe. 
Suppose this generalizes to all uncontentious 
cases adduced by the contextualist to favor his 
sensitivity requirement. Suppose in all such cases 
the condition required could just as well be safety 
as sensitivity. And suppose, moreover, that the 
problems for sensitivity briefly noted do not affect 
safety, as I have claimed. If so, then one cannot 
differentially support sensitivity as the right 
requirement, in support of the skeptic's main 
premise. 
Here is the striking result: if we opt for safety 
as the right requirement then a Moorean stance 
is defensible, and we avoid skepticism. 14 That is 
to say, one does satisfy the requirement that one's 
belief of not-H be safe: after all, not easily would 
one believe that not-H (that one was not so radi-
cally deceived) without it being true (which is 
not to say that not possibly could one believe that 
not -H without it being true). In the actual world, 
and for quite a distance away from the actual 
world, up to quite remote possible worlds, our 
belief that we are not radically deceived matches 
the fact as to whether we are or are not radically 
deceived. 15 
D. A Moorean Stance Defended 
One last job will complete our defense of the 
Moorean stance. Recall the compelling require-
ment that a fully adequate treatment of the para-
dox explain to us why the component of the 
paradox rejected by that treatment seems so plau-
sible. We might try to meet this requirement by 
explaining how the skeptic is guaranteed to be 
right in affirming his distinctive premise (while 
we are pleasantly surprised that we can still 
ordinarily "know" that we have hands, etc.). This 
is the approach of the contextualism just 
reviewed. 
In his special context, with the raised stand-
ards, the skeptic's main premise turns out to be 
true. However, one need not explain plausibility in 
terms of truth. Many false things are plausible 
and we can explain why they are plausible with-
out having to consider them true. We are said to 
face illusions at every turn, from the humble per-
ceptual and cognitive illusions of interest to psy-
chologists to the more momentous illusions 
alleged by Freud and Marx. In all such cases illu-
sion may be said to explain plausibility. (One 
might however prefer to view illusion as misbe-
gotten plausibility, so that the plausibility is con-
stitutive of the illusion, which therefore cannot 
explain it really; still, in all such cases of illusion it 
may be explained why something strikes us as 
plausible despite being false.) 
Consider, moreover, the need to explain how 
the skeptic's premise - that one does not know 
oneself not to be radically misled, etc. - is as 
plausible as it is. That requirement must be bal-
anced by an equally relevant and stringent 
requirement: namely, that one explains how that 
premise is as implausible as it is. 16 To many of us 
it just does not seem so uniformly plausible that 
one cannot be said correctly to know that one is 
not at this very moment being fed experiences 
while envatted. So the explanatory requirement 
is in fact rather more complex than might seem 
at first. And given the distribution of intuitions 
here, the contextualist and the Nozickian, et aI., 
still owe us an explanation. 
Interestingly, our distinction between sensi-
tivity and safety may help us meet the more 
complex explanatory demand, compatibly with 
the Moorean stance, which I adopt as my own. 
My preferred explanation may be sketched as 
follows. 
a. It is safety that is required for knowledge (and 
for its correct attribution), not sensitivity. It is 
required that B(p) ~ p, and not that -p ~ 
-B(p)Y 
b. Take our belief that we are not radically 
deceived as in a skeptical scenario such as 
H. Since that belief is safe, the skeptic 
cannot argue for his distinctive premise by 
alleging that here we violate the safety 
requirement. 

HOW TO DEFEAT OPPOSITION TO MOORE 
285 
c. Safety and sensitivity, being mutual contra-
positives, are easily confused, so it is easy to 
confuse the correct requirement of safety (for 
knowledge and its correct attribution) with a 
requirement of sensitivity. It is easy to over-
look that subjunctive conditionals do not 
contrapose. 
d. Those who find the skeptic's distinctive 
premise plausible on the basis of sensitivity 
considerations may thus be confusing sensitiv-
ity with safety, and may on that basis assess as 
correct affirmations of that premise. After all, 
the requirement of safety is well supported by 
the sorts of considerations adduced generally 
by the sensitivity-based opposition to Moore. 
Sensitivity being so similar to safety, so easy to 
confuse, it is no surprise that one would find 
sensitivity so plausible, enough to mislead 
one into assessing as correct affirmations of 
that premise. 
e. The plausibility of the skeptic's premise is thus 
explained compatibly with its falsity, which fits 
the stance of the Moorean. Once that premise 
(premise 1 of AI) is thus rejected, finally, two 
other things are then avoidable: first, one can 
avoid "abominable" conjunctions and still pre-
serve our ordinary knowledge; second, in 
doing so one can avoid both the semantic 
ascent and the contextualist turn favored by 
many recent treatments of the paradox. IS 
Thus maya Moorean epistemology defend itself 
against "sensitivity-based" objections, whether 
wielded by the skeptic, by the Nozickian et aI., or 
by the contextualist. These three alternatives to a 
plain Moorean stance all require that in order to 
constitute knowledge a belief must first be "sensi-
tive." We reject that requirement, and thereby 
support our preferred Moorean alternative. 
Of course all we really need in order to explain 
the plausibility of the skeptic's premise is that it 
clearly enough follow from something plausible 
enough. And the sensitivity requirement may 
perhaps fulfill that role well enough independ-
ently of whether it is confused with a safety 
requirement. But that would still leave the ques-
tion of why sensitivity is so plausible if it is just 
false. And here there might still be a role for safety 
if it can function as a plausible enough 
requirement, one both true and defensible 
through reflection, and one that appeals to us 
simply through our ability to discern the true 
from the false in such a priori matters. Compatibly 
with that, some of us may be misled into accept-
ing the requirement of sensitivity because it is so 
easily confused with the correct requirement, that 
of safety, thus succumbing to cognitive illusion. 19 
E. 
Objections and Replies 
Objection 1 
We have before us an explanation for why it is 
that people find it as plausible as they do that we 
do not know ourselves to be free of such skeptical 
scenarios as that of the evil demon and that of the 
envatted brain. But how would we explain the 
extent to which people find it plausible to think 
that we do not know ordinary things such as that 
one has hands, once exposed to the skeptic's rea-
soning? Does the contextualist have an advantage 
in that regard? 
Reply 
If people are persuaded that a belief can amount to 
knowledge only if sensitive, and they are also per-
suaded that whatever follows obviously from the 
known must itself be known, then it is not surpris-
ing that they may puzzle over how they can possi-
bly know that they have hands if they do not know 
that they are not handlessly envatted, etc. Moreover, 
I do not see why our new contextualist should 
enjoy any advantage here, since he does accept that 
what follows obviously from the known must itself 
be known. So the new contextualist in fact grants 
us what we need for our explanation. 
Objection 2 
Doesn't the requirement of safety share with the 
requirement of sensitivity the drawback that it 
makes knowledge not closed under deduction? 
Could one not then know that p, deduce that q 
from one's premise that p, and yet not know 
thereby that q? 
Reply 
Yes, in fact this is one reason why our account of 
safety is only at best a first approximation. Here 
now is a closer approximation (or an initial 

286 
ERNEST SOSA 
sketch of one). What is required for a belief to 
be safe is not just that it would be held only if 
true, but rather that it be based on a reliable indi-
cation. What counts as such an indication? 
Indications are deliverances, as when you osten-
sibly perceive, or remember, or deduce some-
thing or other. A deliverance in the product sense 
is a proposition, i.e., what is delivered; in the 
process sense it is the delivering. A proposition is 
thus delivered to you when something inclines 
you to believe it, as in the ostensible perception, 
memory, or sound conclusion. Such a deliver-
Notes 
Subjunctive conditionals do not contra pose, 
which makes safety inequivalent to sensitivity, 
as may be seen through counterexamples like 
the following. 
First Argument. 
Let 
f = Water flows from 
Then we have: 
the faucet 
o = The main valve is open 
(a) f ~ -(f&-o) 
(b) -[(f&-o) ~ -f] 
Both (a) and (b) seem intuitively right and 
hence constitute a prima facie counterexample 
to the general claim that the subjunctive con-
ditional contraposes. If the subjunctive condi-
tional contraposes, then we have to say that if 
(a) above is true then the following must also 
be true: 
(c) (f&-o) ~-f 
But (c) seems intuitively unacceptable (while 
(a) seems still intuitively acceptable). 
Second Argument. 
Let 
p = I am not wrong in 
thinking that I have a hand 
before me. 
And let's imagine a normal situation, like 
Moore's, where, while awake, alert, etc., one 
holds one's hand before one. Then we have: 
(a) B(p) ~ P 
(b) -[-p ~ -B(p)] 
ance is an indication if and only if it would occur 
only if the delivered proposition were true. Again, 
a belief is safe if and only if it is based on a relia-
ble indication. And it is this more complex safety 
that is required for knowledge, not the simpler 
one that I offered for comparison with the 
Nozick/DeRose sensitivity. Of course, that sensi-
tivity requirement is itself also a first approxima-
tion, and Nozick has recourse to his "methods" in 
his fuller account. So there is no disadvantage in 
respect of complexity for safety as compared with 
sensitivity.20 
Re (a): If I were to believe that I'm not wrong 
in thinking I have a hand before me, then I 
would not be wrong in so thinking surely, 
given the normal situation, the good light, the 
open eyes, etc. In such a situation one would 
believe that one was not wrong in thinking 
one had a hand before one, only if either 
(i) one did not have a hand before one and did 
not think one did, or (ii) one did have a hand 
before one and thought one did - therefore, 
only if one was not wrong in thinking that 
one had a hand before one. So we do get that 
B(p) ~ p. Re (b): If I were to be wrong in 
thinking that I have a hand before me, would 
I then believe that I was wrong in so thinking? 
No, I would never believe that I was wrong in 
thinking that such and such, no matter what 
the "such and such" might be. Indeed, what I 
would believe is that I was not wrong in think-
ing that I had a hand before me. So in any case 
it would be false that [-p ~ -B(p)], and true 
rather that -[-p ~ -B(p)]. This shows once 
again that the subjunctive conditional fails to 
contrapose. 
2 
Expressions of the form "<p>" will be short 
for corresponding expressions of the form 
"the proposition that p': Capitalization will 
also be used as an alternative device equiva-
lent to such enclosing in angle brackets. 
3 Keith DeRose, "Solving the Skeptical Problem:' 
The Philosophical Review 104 (1995), pp. 
1-52; p. 28. 
4 
DeRose often works with a stronger "insen-
sitivity" idea than the Nozickian one (or the 
one I am using). His stronger understanding 
is this: that if it were not so that p, one would 
believe that p anyhow. The weaker one is 

HOW TO DEFEAT OPPOSITION TO MOORE 
287 
this: that it is false that if it were not so that 
p, one would not believe that p. (It seems to 
me that the stronger entails the weaker, but 
not conversely. However, DeRose does not 
distinguish these steadily, and tells me that 
he is inclined to think them equivalent.) I 
don't think this affects the dialectic to follow 
in any fundamental way. 
S "An important component of being in a 
strong epistemic position with respect to P 
is to have one's belief as to whether P is true 
match the fact of the matter as to whether P 
is true, not only in the actual world, but also 
at the worlds sufficiently close to the actual 
world. That is, one's belief should not only 
be true, but should be non-accidentally true, 
where this requires one's belief as to whether 
P is true to match the fact of the matter at 
nearby worlds. The further away one can get 
from the actual world, while still having it 
be the case that one's belief matches the fact 
at worlds that far away and closer, the 
stronger a position one is in with respect to 
P." Ibid., p. 34. 
6 
Here and in his general framing of the skep-
tic's puzzle, DeRose acknowledges Stewart 
Cohen; see, e.g., Cohen's "How to be a 
Fallibilist," Philosophical Perspectives 2 (1988), 
pp.91-123. 
7 According to the "Rule of Sensitivity," 
restricted so as to make it most directly rele-
vant to the skeptical paradox: "When it is 
asserted that some subject S knows (or does 
not know) some proposition P, the standards 
for knowledge (the standards for how good 
an epistemic position one must be in to count 
as knowing) tend to be raised, if need be, to 
such a level as to require S's belief in that par-
ticular P to be sensitive for it to count as 
knowledge:' And this will also affect the 
standards for the evaluation of suitably related 
more ordinary propositions: "Where the P 
involved is to the effect that a skeptical 
hypothesis does not obtain, then this rule dic-
tates that the standards will be raised to a 
quite high level, for, as we've seen, one must 
be in a stronger epistemic position with 
respect to a proposition stating that a skepti-
cal hypothesis is false - relative to other, more 
ordinary, propositions - before a belief in 
such as proposition can be sensitive." (DeRose, 
"Solving the skeptical Problem;' p. 36.) 
8 His approach is fresh in appealing to thresh-
old-setting within a dimension of strength, 
which distinguishes him from Stewart 
Cohen, who uses rather degree of justifica-
tion as his dimension of relevant epistemic 
interest. 
9 DeRose speaks of the components of AI as 
"propositions," presumably indexical propo-
sitions, which can be truth-evaluated relative 
to various standards. It is in some such way 
that one would understand the abstract 
soundness of an argument such as Moore's: 
-C, 2; therefore, -1. 
10 
Although it remains a bit unclear whether, 
for the contextualism under review, Moore's 
argument is un endorsable even through 
implicit belief, the general lines of the posi-
tion staked out are at least vaguely discerni-
ble. There is one other issue on which the 
position is not quite clear and distinct, how-
ever, namely whether we are definitely to 
affirm that the Moorean combination is a 
sound argument. I do not find an unambig-
uous verdict on this. Is the sort of indirect 
endorsement that would be involved in such 
an affirmation to be countenanced by this 
new contextualism? In saying that Moore's 
combination (2, -c, and -1) constitutes a 
sound argument, we are at least indirectly 
highlighting proposition 1. And having done 
that, it seems no more correct to say that the 
Moorean argument is sound than it would 
be to give the argument itself affirmatively in 
speech or in thought. 
That may make the skeptic's paradox 
even more deeply paradoxical than might at 
first appear, from the perspective of our new 
contextualism. We dimly see that an argu-
ment might be sound even though it could 
never be identified directly so as to attribute 
its soundness to it. Its soundness could per-
haps be attributed to it were it identified 
only quite indirectly, perhaps as the argu-
ment laid out on such and such a page of 
Moore's Philosophical Papers, or in some 
such way. As soon as the argument is identi-
fied more directly in terms of its actual con-
tent, however, soundness may no longer be 
attributed correctly to it. (How "directly" 
may the argument be specified compatibly 
with thinking or calling it sound? That is an 
interesting issue that threatens to enmesh us 

288 
ERNEST SOSA 
in controversies of content externalism in 
philosophy of language and mind.) 
11 
See my "Postscript to 'Proper Functionalism 
and Virtue Epistemology';' in Warrant in 
Contemporary Epistemology, ed. Jonathan 
Kvanvig (Rowman & Littlefield, 1996), pp. 
271-81. Can anyone find that consequence 
acceptable? In fact, DeRose is well aware of 
this problem, and waves it aside for future 
consideration, proposing in the meantime 
an ad hoc stopgap. This problem is also in 
Jonathan Vogel's "Tracking, Closure, and 
Inductive Knowledge;' in S. Luper-Foy, ed., 
The Possibility of Knowledge (Rowman & 
Littlefield, 1987). Compare moreover: (c) p, 
and (d) if I'm not mistaken, p. Even when 
one tracks and thereby can know that p, one 
could never track the likes of (d), for the 
reason, precisely, that belief of (d) could not 
be sensitive. This sort of counterexample, 
unlike the one to follow, strikes me as con-
clusive. 
12 
This sort of problem is also presented by 
Vogel, "Tracking, Closure and Inductive 
Knowledge," and is endorsed by Stewart 
Cohen in his "Contextualist Solutions to 
Epistemological 
Problems: 
Skepticism, 
Gettier, and the Lottery;' forthcoming in the 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy. 
13 
If water now flowed from your kitchen 
faucet, it would not then be the case that 
water so flowed while your main valve was 
closed. But the contrapositive of this true 
conditional is clearly false. 
14 
I mean that we in our reflection and in our 
discussions in journal and seminar, avoid 
skepticism; we can say right here and now 
that we do know various things, and not just 
that we say "I know" correctly in various 
contexts not now our own. 
15 
This sort of externalist move has been widely 
regarded as unacceptably circular, mistak-
enly, as I argue in "Philosophical Scepticism 
and Epistemic Circularity," Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society, supp. vol. 68 (1994), pp. 
268-90, and in "Reflective Knowledge in the 
Best Circles;' Journal of Philosophy 94 (1997), 
pp.41O-30. 
16 
Informal polling of my classes has revealed 
(of course defeasibly) that those who find it 
false outnumber those who find it true, and 
quite a few prefer to suspend judgment. At 
every stage people spread out in some such 
patters of three-way agreement-failure. 
17 
This is actually a first approximation that 
will need to be qualified. A closer approxi-
mation that preserves the spirit of safety and 
the opposition to sensitivity may be found in 
my "How Must Knowledge Be Modally 
Related to What is Known?" in the festschrift 
for Sydney Shoemaker forthcoming m 
Philosophical Issues. (I should emphasize that 
I use the arrow merely as an abbreviatory 
device. So "p ~ q" abbreviates the likes of 
"As a matter of fact, though perhaps not as a 
matter of strict necessity, it would not be so 
that p, without it being so that q"; etc.; or, 
perhaps better: "As a matter of fact, though 
perhaps not as a matter of strict necessity, 
not easily would it have been so that p with-
out it being so that q.") 
18 
A 
turn 
found 
problematic 
m 
my 
"Contextualism and Skepticism," forthcom-
ing in Philosophical Issues. 
19 
I need hardly say how much this work owes to 
writings of Fred Dretske, Robert Nozick, and 
Keith DeRose. Portions of it were read at the 
Conference on Methods meeting of May 1998, 
where Richard Feldman and Jonathan Vogel 
commented, and at the SOFIA meeting of 
June 1998, where Hilary Kornblith, Keith 
Lehrer, and James Tomberlin did so. (And the 
present paper overlaps in part my contribu-
tion to the proceedings of that conference.) 
David Sosa was helpful both editorially and 
philosophically, as was discussion in both my 
seminar and my dissertation group at Brown, 
and in the Gibbons/Unger seminar at NYU. 
Thank you all! 
20 
Actually, this second approximation is close 
but itself needs further improvement. This 
and related issues are taken up further in my 
"How Must Knowledge Be Modally Related 
to What is Known': For example, I favor 
requiring for one's belief to be knowledge 
that it be based on an indication, where an 
indication is in the way specified a reliable or 
itself "safe" delivering. (But in addition the 
delivering must be fundamentally through 
the exercise of an intellectual virtue. Thus 
the source that yields the deliverance must 
be virtuous, i.e., in a reliable or trustworthy 

HOW TO DEFEAT OPPOSITION TO MOORE 
289 
way a source of truth; and moreover, if it is 
a source that is based on a more fundamen-
tal source, then the most fundamental 
source involved must be thus virtuous. 
Thus if I normally infer from something's 
being a sea-creature that it is a mammal, 
and it is this that underlies my inference 
form something's being a whale to its being 
a mammal, then the latter source, despite 
being virtuous, is not a source of knowledge 
or apt belief.) 

CHAPTER 23 
Are There Counterexamples 
to the Closure Principle? 
Jonathan Vogel 
Very often, a person can't know a proposition 
without knowing various logical consequences 
of that proposition. So, for instance, if you know 
that your friend is wearing a yellow tie, you can't 
fail to know that your friend is wearing a tie, 
period. In this case, the relation of logical conse-
quence is obvious. When the relation isn't obvi-
ous, a proposition you know may have a logical 
consequence you don't know - for example, a 
suitably obscure mathematical theorem. In light 
of these considerations, it seems plausible to 
hold that if a person knows a given proposition, 
that person must also know any logical conse-
quence of that proposition which he or she recog-
nizes as such. Putting it differently, we might say 
that knowledge is closed under known logical 
implication.! 
The problem of skepticism about the external 
world gives this epistemic principle (hereafter, the 
"Closure Principle") a special interest. When the 
skeptic argues that we have no knowledge of 
the world because we don't know that we aren't 
massively deceived in some way, he or she appears 
to assume that knowledge has the closure prop-
erty. But if it is possible to find clear examples 
demonstrating that closure sometimes fails, a 
crucial piece of support for skepticism will be 
Originally published in M. D. Roth and G. Ross (eds), 
Doubting (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1990), pp. 13-27. 
removed. The purpose of this paper is to show 
that even the strongest apparent counterexamples 
to closure don't hold up under scrutiny. To that 
extent, the problem of skepticism is still with us. 
I Dretske's Zebra Case 
In a widely read paper, Fred Dretske offered an 
intriguing example which is meant to show that 
the Closure Principle is invalid. It is worthwhile 
to quote Dretske's discussion at length: 
You take your son to the zoo, see several zebras, 
and when questioned by your son, tell him they 
are zebras. Do you know they are zebras? Well, 
most of us would have little hesitation in saying 
that we did know this. We know what zebras look 
like, and, besides, this is the city zoo and the ani-
mals are in a pen clearly marked "Zebras." Yet, 
something's being a zebra implies that it is not a 
mule and, in particular, not a mule cleverly dis-
guised by the zoo authorities to look like a zebra. 
Do you know that these animals are not mules 
cleverly disguised by the zoo authorities to look 
like zebras? If you are tempted to say "Yes" to this 
question, think a moment about what reasons 
you have, what evidence you can produce in favor 
of this claim. The evidence you had for thinking 
them zebras has been effectively neutralized, since 
it does not count toward their not being mules 
cleverly disguised to look like zebras. You have 
some general uniformities on which you rely, 

ARE THERE COUNTEREXAMPLES TO THE CLOSURE PRINCIPLE? 
291 
regularities to which you give expression by such 
remarks as "That isn't very likely" or "Why should 
the zoo authorities do that?" Granted, the hypoth-
esis (if we may call it that) is not very plausible, 
given what we know about people and zoos. But 
the question here is not whether this alternative is 
plausible, not whether it is more or less plausible 
than that there are real zebras in the pen, but 
whether you know that this alternative hypothesis 
is false. I don't think you do.2 
According to Dretske, the Zebra Case is a 
counterexample to closure because you know (a) 
the animals in the pen are zebras, but don't know 
a clear logical consequence of (a), namely, (b) the 
animals in the pen aren't cleverly disguised mules. 
I find this description of the situation implausi-
ble. Given what Dretske has said in laying out the 
example, I think it is more reasonable to conclude 
that if you know (a) you know (b) as well, and 
closure is preserved after all. 
The reason you know that an animal in the 
pen is not a disguised mule (if you do know it's 
a zebra) is that you have a true belief to that 
effect backed up by good evidence. That evi-
dence includes background information about 
the nature and function of zoos. You know that 
zoos generally exhibit genuine specimens, and 
that it would be a great deal of trouble to disguise 
a mule and to substitute it for a zebra. Only under 
the most unlikely and bizarre circumstances, if at 
all, would such a substitution be made, and there 
is no reason whatsoever to think that any such 
circumstances obtain. If you did feel there was a 
chance that a switch had been made, you would 
have reason to doubt that the animal you see is a 
zebra. You would not, then, know that it is a zebra, 
contrary to what was assumed. 
Dretske's motivations for denying that you 
know you aren't seeing a disguised mule are not 
fully clear. He himself grants that the "hypothesis" 
that the animal is really a mule is "not very plau-
sible", yet adds 
But the question here is not whether this alterna-
tive is plausible, not whether it is more or less 
plausible than that there are real zebras in the 
pen, but whether you know that this alternative is 
false. 3 
One might have thought that if a belief is much 
more plausible than its denial, a person would be 
justified in accepting that belief. And, then, 
barring Gettier-like complications, that person's 
belief, if true, would be knowledge.4 
Perhaps Dretske's point is this: When you look 
at the pen where the animal is, you have evidence 
that there is a zebra there, namely that the animal 
looks like a zebra. Your visual evidence does not, 
though, give any support to your belief that the 
animal you are seeing isn't a disguised mule. For, if 
it were a disguised mule, your visual experience 
would be just as it is. As Dretske says, "The evi-
dence you had for thinking them zebras has been 
effectively neutralized, since it does not count 
toward their not being mules cleverly disguised to 
look like zebras':s The upshot is that you do know 
there is a zebra, since you have a true belief to that 
effect supported by evidence. You do not know 
that the animal isn't a disguised mule, since your 
belief in this case is true but not supported by 
available evidence. So, you know the first proposi-
tion, but don't know its clear logical consequence. 
I indicated above why I think this analysis is 
incorrect. Your background knowledge does give 
you justification for denying that the animal is a 
mule, so you know that it isn't one. Still, it may 
appear that the possibility of failure for the 
Closure Principle arises out of the situation as 
I described it. It seems that the usual adequate 
evidence for the claim "It's a zebra" (i.e. visual evi-
dence) is different from the background evidence 
which supports "It's not a cleverly disguised 
mule." If so, you could conceivably be in a posi-
tion where you had the visual evidence and knew 
there was a zebra, but lacked the background 
knowledge, and hence didn't know there wasn't a 
disguised mule. In such circumstances, the 
Closure Principle would face a counterexample. 
To my mind, this appraisal is based on an 
overly atomistic conception of evidence and jus-
tification. Your belief that the animal at the zoo is 
a zebra is justified in part by your visual evidence, 
but it is also supported by the background infor-
mation that counts against the animal's being a 
disguised mule. By itself, the visual evidence 
wouldn't be sufficient to give you knowledge that 
there is a zebra. To see this, consider a case where 
the proper background knowledge is lacking. 
Imagine that you are driving through ranchland 
out West and for some reason or other stop by the 
roadside. Across the way you see a black and white 
striped equine creature tranquilly grazing in its 

292 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
pen. In a situation of this sort, it seems to me, it is 
far from clear that you could know the animal 
before you to be a zebra, even though it looks just 
as much like a zebra as the animal in the zoo does. 
The difference here is that you have no applicable 
background information which makes it more 
likely that a zebra-like animal really is a zebra 
rather than an oddly colored mule. So, even back 
at the zoo, your justification that what you see is a 
zebra depends on background information - just 
as the justification for your denial that it's a dis-
guised mule would so depend.6 There is no dis-
crepancy here which provides grounds for 
thinking that the Closure Principle is false. 
One might object that the defense of closure 
just given makes unrealistically high demands so 
far as evidence is concerned. A young child at the 
zoo, seeing an animal that resembles an illustra-
tion in a picture book might point and happily 
say "Zebra!". Despite the fact that the child knows 
nothing about how zoos work, doesn't that child 
know the animal is a zebra? The issues here are 
complex, but there are various reasons not to take 
this objection as decisive. First, even if it is granted 
that the child knows in the full sense that the 
animal is a zebra, if he or she isn't capable of 
drawing the inference about disguised mules, the 
child's case doesn't bear on the validity of the 
Closure Principle. Moreover, it's unclear that, 
under the circumstances, the child really ought to 
be described as knowing that the animal is a zebra. 
Suppose that the child can't conceptually distin-
guish between "looks like an zebra" and "is a 
zebra:' Perhaps the child knows only that the 
animal it sees looks like a zebra, and wouldn't 
know that the animal is a zebra without acquiring 
further conceptual resources and information.7 
II 
Car Theft Cases 
I have maintained that Dretske's Zebra Case does 
not furnish a counterexample to the Closure 
Principle. But what I have said so far bears largely 
on the particular details of the case as Dretske sets 
it up. His remarks point towards the formulation 
of examples which cannot be treated so straight-
forwardly. I call these "Car Theft Cases", for rea-
sons which will become clear in a moment. It may 
be, in fact, that the Zebra Case properly under-
stood is one of these. 
Suppose you own a car which you parked a 
few hours ago on a side street in a major metro-
politan area. You remember clearly where you left 
it. Do you know where your car is? We are inclined 
to say that you do. Now it is true that every day 
hundreds of cars are stolen in the major cities of 
the United States. Do you know that your car has 
not been stolen? Many people have the intuition 
that you would not know that. If this intuition is 
combined with the previous one, then it seems 
that the closure principle is violated. That is: You 
know the proposition (p) "My car is now parked 
on (say) Avenue A." You also know that that prop-
osition entails (q) "My car has not been stolen 
and driven away from where it was parked." Yet, it 
seems, you do not know q, despite the fact that it 
is for you a clear logical consequence of p, which 
you do know. Since, in this instance, you (appar-
ently) fail to know a clear logical consequence of 
a proposition you do know, the Closure Principle 
is (apparently) violated. 
This example turns on a rather unusual fea-
ture of the clear logical consequence q. Given 
your evidence, that proposition is much more 
probable than not, and it is at least as likely to be 
true as p is. To that extent, it seems as though you 
should be as justified in believing q as you are in 
believing p. Nevertheless, even though your belief 
that p, if true, may be knowledge, your belief that 
q, if true, is not. You do not know that your car 
hasn't been stolen by someone and driven away, 
despite the high probability that your belief to 
that effect is true. 
In this respect, your belief that q resembles 
someone's belief that a ticket, which he holds, will 
not win a fair lottery. No matter how high the 
odds that the ticket will not win, it strikes us that 
the ticket-holder doesn't know that his ticket will 
not win. In fact, the analogy between a subject's 
belief about holding a losing lottery ticket and 
one's belief that one's car has not been stolen goes 
even further than this and is quite illuminating. 
A number of features of a lottery situation are 
especially relevant here. First, although winning a 
lottery on a particular ticket is unlikely or improb-
able, it would not be abnormal in some intuitive 
sense, for it to turn out that the ticket one holds 
happens to be a winner. Second, even though the 
weight of the evidence is certainly against any 
particular ticket's winning, there is still some sta-
tistical evidence in favor of the proposition that a 

ARE THERE COUNTEREXAMPLES TO THE CLOSURE PRINCIPLE? 
293 
certain particular ticket will win, i. e. there is some 
(small) reason to think a particular ticket-holder 
will win." 
A third important consideration is that, with 
respect to its chances of winning the lottery, each 
ticket is indistinguishable from every other one. 
So, any reason you have for thinking that your 
particular ticket will lose would be an equally 
good reason for believing of any other ticket in 
the lottery that it, too, will lose. Under these cir-
cumstances, it would be arbitrary to believe of 
some tickets (including your own) but not others 
that they will not win. So, if you are consistent 
rather than arbitrary, and you do conclude on the 
basis of the evidence available that your ticket will 
not win, you will conclude the same of every 
other lottery ticket. Nevertheless, you hold the 
belief that some ticket or other will win. On pain 
of arbitrariness, then, it seems that you can't jus-
tifiably hold both that your ticket will lose and 
that some ticket will win. A fortiori, you can't 
know that your ticket will lose and that some 
ticket will win. 9 
Now, in certain important ways, one's epis-
temic situation with respect to the lottery is like 
one's epistemic situation in the Car Theft Case.1O 
In effect, when you park your car in an area with 
an appreciable rate of auto theft, you enter a lot-
tery in which cars are picked, essentially at 
random, to be stolen and driven away. Having 
your car stolen is the unfortunate counterpart to 
winning the lottery. And, just as one doesn't know 
that one will not have one's number come up in 
the lottery, it seems one doesn't know that one's 
number won't come up, so to speak, for car theft. 
To be more particular, believing that your car 
won't be stolen is like believing you won't win the 
lottery, in the ways just canvassed. (1) If you park 
your car in an area with a high rate of car theft, 
an area where it is virtually certain that some car 
like yours will be stolen, it would not be abnor-
mal for your car to be stolen. (2) In the Car Theft 
Case, your knowledge that there is a considerable 
amount of auto theft gives you some real statisti-
cal reason to think you car will be stolenY (3) It 
would be arbitrary of you to believe that your car, 
but not all the others relevantly similar to it, won't 
be stolen. In general, if a person fails to know a 
proposition because of considerations like these, 
I will call the proposition not known a lQ.tFIY 
proposition. 
The point of this extended comparison of the 
lottery and the Car Theft Case has been to try to 
characterize a family of apparent counterexam-
ples to the Closure Principle. The essential feature 
of these examples is that they are cases in which 
the clear logical consequence of a known propo-
sition is itself a lottery proposition meeting the 
criteria just discussed. What makes the Zebra 
Case, in my opinion, a weaker potential coun-
terexample to the Closure Principle than the Car 
Theft Case, is just the fact that the clear logical 
consequence of the Zebra Case is harder to see as 
a lottery proposition. First, it would be abnormal 
for a disguised mule to be in a zoo enclosure 
marked "Zebras". Second, as Dretske describes the 
example, it isn't apparent that you have any reason 
(statistical or otherwise) to think that there might 
be a disguised mule in the zebra pen. These two 
weaknesses are related to the third: it is difficult to 
see the presence of a disguised mule in the zebra 
pen as the outcome of any lottery-like process. 
That is, it is not as though you know that a dis-
guised mule has been placed in some zebra pen in 
some zoo chosen at random. In that case, any 
reason you had for thinking that the animal you 
happen to see isn't the disguised mule would 
apply in every other situation. 'You would, then, 
have to conclude that no zoo had a disguised 
mule running around - in contradiction with 
what you know to be the case, viz. there is a dis-
guised mule in some zoo somewhere. However, 
this kind of lottery element isn't present in the 
Zebra Case as Dretske described it. So, it is unclear 
why, as Dretske maintains, you do not know that 
the striped animal before you isn't a disguised 
mule.'2 
III 
Car Theft Cases and Skepticism 
I would like to turn now to the implications of the 
Car Theft Case. That case is supposed to count as 
a counterexample to the Closure Principle. For, in 
the Car Theft Case, you seem to know a proposi-
tion about where your car is, but you apparently 
fail to know another proposition which is a clear 
logical consequence of the first one. I will main-
tain below that taking the Car Theft Case in this 
fashion, as a counterexample to closure, is not the 
only, or the best way, to understand it. But, sup-
pose that the Car Theft Case does stand as a 

294 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
counterexample to closure; does that really help 
us with the problem of skepticism? 
The thought was that the Car Theft Case 
would show that closure isn't valid in general. 
Then the skeptic's reliance on that principle in the 
course of the argument from deception would be 
illegitimate, and the argument wouldn't go 
through. However, what the Car Theft Case really 
shows about the Closure Principle, if it shows 
anything at all, is that that principle is invalid 
when the clear logical consequence involved is a 
lottery proposition with the features mentioned 
above. The Car Theft Case gives us no reason to 
think that closure fails to hold for clear logical 
consequences which don't satisfy those criteria. 
The question at this point is whether the 
clear logical consequence in the skeptic's argu-
ment is a lottery proposition in the specified 
sense. The clear logical consequence the skeptic 
invokes is something like "I am not a brain in a 
vat thoroughly deceived by sinister neurophysi-
ologists:' And this is clearly not a lottery propo-
sition satisfying the three criteria having to do 
with abnormality, reliance on statistical evidence, 
and non-arbitrariness. Let me take these out of 
order. (1) If the skeptic's logical consequence were 
a lottery proposition, I would have to be an indis-
tinguishable member of a class of subjects of 
which it is known that at least one member is a 
brain in a vat (making it arbitrary for me to 
believe that I'm not such a brain). This is hardly 
the case, since I don't know that there are any 
brains in vats anywhere. The lottery-like element 
which was crucial to the structure of the Car Theft 
Case is therefore lacking here. (2) Moreover, since 
there is no reason to think that some brains are 
put into vats as a matter of course, it might well 
be abnormal, in an intuitive sense, for someone to 
turn out to be a brain in a vat. (3) Finally, given 
(1), there is no basis for assigning a real, positive 
statistical probability to the proposition that 
someone is a brain in a vat. 
The force of these observations is that the situ-
ation in which the skeptic invokes closure cannot 
easily be assimilated to situations like the Car Theft 
Case, in which there is some reason to think clo-
sure fails. Hence, the Car Theft Case as such gives 
little support to the claim that the Closure Principle 
fails when the skeptic appeals to it. This means that 
the Car Theft Case provides no convincing basis 
for rejecting the Deceiver Argument. 
It may be that, if Cartesian skepticism is the 
issue, no more needs to be said about the Zebra 
Case or the Car Theft Case. I will, however, pursue 
the question of whether the Car Theft Case is a 
genuine counterexample to the Closure Principle. 
Aside from whatever intrinsic interest that ques-
tion may have, it is worth seeing that the results 
strengthen, rather than weaken, the conclusion 
that these examples do not undercut skepticism. 
IV 
The Interpretation of Intuitions 
about the Problem Cases 
The Car Theft Case and its analogues provide 
counterexamples to the Closure Principle if we 
take our intuitions about such cases at face-value. 
For, then, it seems that in the circumstances 
described, a person may know some proposition 
(e.g. "My car is on Avenue A, where I parked it") 
yet not know a clear logical consequence of that 
proposition (e.g. "My car hasn't been stolen and 
driven away from where it was parked"). It's 
worth noting, though, that some additional reac-
tions people have suggest that closure is preserved 
in these situations after all. Often, when faced 
with the possibility that their cars might have 
been stolen, people withdraw, at least temporar-
. ily, their initial claims to know where their cars 
are. Such a response is just what the Closure 
Principle would require. 
Now, I think it must be admitted that the intu-
itions we have here are weak. It would be difficult 
to find decisive support for closure in the ten-
dency people have to change their minds in the 
way just mentioned. Still, the fact that the Closure 
Principle seems to be respected to the extent that 
it is provides a motivation for analyzing that case 
in a way that doesn't presuppose the failure of 
closure. 
The problem facing any such analysis is to 
accommodate or discredit the intuitions that 
produce the impression of closure failure in the 
first place. Those are the intuitions which lead 
us to say, first, that a person, under certain cir-
cumstances, would know some proposition, and, 
second, that the person doesn't know a clear logi-
cal consequence of that proposition. One way of 
trying to reconcile these intuitions with closure is 
to argue that some kind of shift takes place 
between these responses. The claim would then 

ARE THERE COUNTEREXAMPLES TO THE CLOSURE PRINCIPLE? 
295 
be that, for no fixed set of circumstances, do we 
regard a subject as knowing a proposItlOn 
while failing to know one of its clear logical 
consequences. 
Certain psychological studies provide inde-
pendent reasons to believe that a shift of this kind 
takes place. These studies concern people's atti-
tudes towards improbable events. They are rele-
vant to the Car Theft Case because of the essential 
role played in that case by the unlikely possibility 
that your car has been stolen. If closure does fail 
here, it is because the possibility of theft, though 
highly improbable, undercuts the claim that you 
know that your car hasn't been stolen, even while 
that possibility somehow leaves intact your know-
ing that your car is at a certain spot. In the studies 
mentioned, it has been found that people may 
treat improbable events either as likelier than they 
really are or as having essentially no chance of 
occurring. Moreover, these assessments are unsta-
ble, and subjects can easily be influenced to grant 
a possibility more weight than otherwise, if that 
possibility is made salient to them.13 
Such psychological considerations provide an 
explanation for our intuitions about the Car 
Theft Case. Initially and generally, in evaluating 
the knowledge claims in that case, we treat the 
chance of your car's being stolen as essentially 
zero. You can, then, be as sure as you need to be 
that your car is where you left it; you are fully jus-
tified in that belief. Thus, we are likely to say with-
out hesitation that in the situation described you 
know where your car is. Later, however, when we 
dwell on the rate of car theft, the chance of your 
car's having been stolen is lent more weight. Given 
a (now) significant possibility that you may be 
wrong in believing that your car hasn't been 
stolen, we are no longer prepared to say that you 
know it hasn't been stolen. And, viewing the situ-
ation in this light, giving weight to the chance 
that the car isn't where you left it, we may be 
inclined to go on to say that you don't know 
where the car is after all. That is, there seems to be 
a motivation to deny your initial knowledge claim 
in a set of circumstances where you cannot claim 
to know a clear logical consequence of what you 
thought you knew. In that way, the Closure 
Principle is respected. 
In short, the fact that at one time we would say 
that you know the location of your car, and that 
shortly thereafter we might say that you don't 
know your car hasn't been stolen, does not estab-
lish the invalidity of the Closure Principle. For, it 
may be that at no one time do we affirm that you 
know something yet fail to know one of its clear 
logical consequences. It is doubtful, then, that the 
Car Theft Case, when properly understood, pro-
vides a counterexample to the Closure Principle. 
I have suggested that the anomalous character 
of our intuitions about the Car Theft Case may be 
due to some kind of epistemically important shift 
rather than to closure failure. My conjecture has 
been that the shift is a change in a probability 
assignment, but other mechanisms may be at 
work instead. An alternative explanation of our 
intuitions is that we are somehow induced to shift 
our sense of the degree of assurance knowledge 
requires. Thus, our estimation of the chance the 
subject could be wrong because of car theft would 
remain constant, but we would change our minds 
as to whether knowledge is consistent with that 
level of epistemic risk. There are still other forms 
the shift could take. It might even be that the 
movement in the Car Theft-type situations is 
between wholly distinct notions of knowledge 
embodying different sets of necessary and suffi-
cient conditions. 
For my purposes, the details of what actually 
occurs are relatively unimportant. The main 
point I wish to make is that there are explanations 
other than closure failure for our intuitions about 
the Car Theft Cases. 14 Or, to put it differently, a 
straightforward appeal to those intuitions is 
insufficient to establish that the Closure Principle 
does not hold without restriction. 
V 
The Problem of Semi-Skepticism 
I have just argued that a simple inspection of our 
intuitions about the Car Theft Case does not con-
clusively refute the Closure Principle. The advo-
cate of closure can claim that the Closure Principle 
only appears to fail, as the result of an epistemi-
cally important switch that takes place in the 
course of our thinking about the example. 
However, a claim of this sort leaves open what a 
subject, in fact, does and doesn't know in Car 
Theft-type situations. The Closure Principle faces 
a strong objection to the effect that it is incom-
patible with any acceptable account of what is 
known in Car Theft Cases. 

296 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
If closure holds, and some uniform standard 
of knowledge applies across the board, either you 
don't know where your car is, or you do know 
that it hasn't been stolen. The latter claim seems 
hard to sustain. This impression is strengthened 
by the similarity between the Car Theft Case and 
a real lottery situation. Knowing that your car 
hasn't been stolen would be, in the ways I've men-
tioned, like knowing someone will lose a fair lot-
tery. And that seems like the sort of thing one 
doesn't know. So, given the untenability of saying 
that you know your car hasn't been stolen, the 
Closure Principle will require that, contrary to 
what we might have thought, you don't know 
where your car is. 
This result seems unwelcome, and things 
worsen quickly. It turns out that, of the propo-
sitions about the external world which we take 
ourselves to know, a great many entail lottery 
propositions as in the Car Theft Case. (The proposi-
tions with these consequences are, specifically, 
propositions about the current state of the world 
beyond our immediate environments.) To see the 
range of Car Theft-type cases consider some 
other examples: 
Bush Case: 
Q. 
Do you know who the current President 
of the United States is? 
A. 
Yes, it's George Bush. 
Q. 
Do you know that Bush hasn't had a 
fatal heart attack in the last five 
minutes? 
A. 
No. 
Luncheonette Case: 
Q. 
Do you know where I can get a good 
hamburger? 
A. 
Yes, there's a luncheonette several blocks 
from here. 
Q. 
Do you know that a fire hasn't just 
broken out there? 
A. 
No. 
Meteorite Case: 
Q. Do you know what stands at the mouth 
of San Francisco Bay? 
A. 
Yes, the Bay is spanned by the Golden 
Gate Bridge. 
Q. 
Do you know that the Bridge wasn't just 
demolished by a falling meteorite? 
A. 
No. 
It's apparent that variations on these cases can be 
constructed for any number of propositions 
about people, things, or activities. That is to say, 
all the propositions about such matters, which we 
take ourselves to know, entail lottery propositions 
which, it seems, we do not know. If closure holds, 
along with the intuition that we do not in fact 
know the clear logical consequences in question, 
the result is that we have a great deal less knowl-
edge of the world than we had supposed. In other 
words, the Closure Principle leads, even without 
the argument from deception, to a fairly strong 
and unpalatable semi-skepticism. The case against 
closure appears that much the stronger. 
But does the threat of semi-skepticism really 
count against the Closure Principle? The key idea 
here is that there is supposed to be some feature 
which the lottery propositions in Car Theft Cases 
share with propositions about genuine lotteries, 
in virtue of which we can't be correctly described 
as knowing those propositions. What is that fea-
ture? One answer is that, because of the statistical 
probability that your ticket may win in a genuine 
lottery, there is a "real" possibility of error in 
believing that you will lose. In other words, the 
crucial belief in these circumstances lacks a kind 
of certainty, and hence can't count as knowledge. IS 
Similarly, the lottery propositions which figure in 
Car Theft Cases are such that a "real" possibility 
exists that they are false. Since, therefore, the sub-
ject can't be certain of the truth of these lottery 
propositions, the subject can't know them. By the 
Closure Principle, it would follow that the subject 
can't have knowledge of the propositions which 
he knows to entail those lottery propositions. 
This would result, as we have seen, in a pervasive 
semi -skepticism. 
The important thing to realize about this way 
of viewing matters is that it doesn't really justify 
concluding that the Closure Principle is invalid. 
For, according to the objection, the lesson of the 
genuine lottery examples is that a belief can't be 
knowledge if there is a "real': and not merely logi-
cal, possibility that the subject is wrong about it. 
If this is correct, then semi-skepticism follows 
without the Closure Principle. After all, there is a 
"real" possibility that, e.g. you may be wrong in 

ARE THERE COUNTEREXAMPLES TO THE CLOSURE PRINCIPLE? 
297 
believing that your car is at a certain spot; it is pos-
sible that your car has been stolen. The same point 
applies, mutatis mutandis, to any other Car Theft 
Case. So, perhaps, there is a legitimate epistemo-
logical problem in the threat of a semi-skepticism 
derived from a certainty requirement for knowl-
edge. However, since rejecting closure won't avoid 
that problem, that problem doesn't provide a 
reason for denying the Closure Principle's validity. 
On another way of analyzing the lottery exam-
ples, the unknowability in these contexts of prop-
ositions like "My ticket will lose" is due to the 
arbitrariness of accepting any proposition of that 
form. By analogy, in the Car Theft Case, you 
wouldn't know the proposition "My car has not 
been stolen"; there is reason to think that some 
car or cars similar to yours will be stolen, and you 
have no non-arbitrary ground for believing that 
your car in particular won't be the one (or one of 
the ones) stolen. Once more, it looks as though all 
knowledge claims about lottery propositions in 
other Car Theft cases would be undercut by simi-
lar considerations. Then, semi-skepticism will be 
inevitable if closure holds. 
Here again, though, I am inclined to think that 
there is no argument to be found against the 
Closure Principle as such. The analysis of the lot-
tery effect now being entertained makes the follow-
ing assumption: all other things being equal, it is 
unjustified to accept any member of a set of propo-
sitions L, such that the members of L are equiprob-
able and the subject knows (or has good reason to 
believe) that at least one member of L is false. 16 
It turns out that this principle is sufficient to 
establish semi-skepticism regardless of the valid-
ity of the Closure Principle. To see why this might 
be so, let's take the Car Theft Case as the basic 
model. The present attempt to attach the burden 
of semi-skepticism to the Closure Principle 
amounts to the claim that the non-arbitrariness 
requirement just stated defeats your claim to 
know the lottery proposition that your car hasn't 
been stolen - while it leaves intact your claim to 
know a proposition (i.e. "My car is on Avenue A, 
where I parked it") clearly entailing that lottery 
proposition. But the entailing proposition is itself 
a member of a set of equiprobable propositions 
which, you have good reason to believe, contains 
at least one falsehood. That set contains, along 
with "My car is on Avenue A, where I parked it;' 
propositions like "My neighbor's car is where he 
parked it," "The postman's car is where he parked 
it;' and so on. You may not be able to state all the 
members of the set explicitly, but you still have 
very good reason to think that there is such a set L. 
By the non-arbitrariness requirement, it would 
follow that you don't know the original proposi-
tion "My car is on Avenue A, where I parked it!'17 
The same line of thought would seem to apply 
to any case of the Car Theft-type where knowledge 
of a lottery proposition is blocked by the non-
arbitrariness constraint. So, if the non-arbitrari-
ness condition is strong enough to establish 
ignorance across the board for lottery proposi-
tions, it is also strong enough to establish igno-
rance of the propositions which, in Car Theft 
cases, entail the lottery propositions. That is to say, 
if the non-arbitrariness condition plus closure 
generates semi-skepticism, so too does the non-
arbitrariness condition alone. Therefore, the oppo-
nent of closure cannot use that condition as the 
basis for an argument that the Closure Principle is 
invalid because it would lead to semi-skepticism. 
The preceding discussion makes clearer what 
would be required in order to make the case 
against closure work. The critic of the Closure 
Principle has to identify some way in which beliefs 
in lottery propositions are epistemically defective, 
and this defect must not be shared by the mun-
dane beliefs whose contents, in Car Theft cases, 
are known to entail those lottery propositions. It 
isn't easy to see what such a defect would be, if 
not the ones just considered. 18 
In this section, I have tried to show that our 
anomalous intuitions about Car Theft Cases and 
the related threat of semi-skepticism really have 
little to do with closure. No attempt has been 
made here to give a fully acceptable positive 
account of what is really known in these cases, and 
I suspect that such an account may not be availa-
ble at all. For it may be that the Car Theft Cases 
together with the problem of semi-skepticism 
reflect deep-seated, unresolved conflicts in the 
way we think about knowledge. 19 
VI 
Car Theft Cases and Relevant 
Alternatives 
It is tempting to think that the omission of a 
positive account of what we know could be 
made good by adopting a version of the relevant 

298 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
alternatives approach to knowledge. 20 This 
approach promises all the advantages, without 
the defects, of the treatment just given. In my 
view, a turn to the relevant alternatives approach 
is not advisable, but the proposal is interesting 
and deserves consideration. 
According to the relevant alternatives theorist, 
the demands for knowledge are restricted and 
contextual. On one version of the theory,S knows 
that p just in case 5 possesses evidence which 
counts against all relevant alternatives to p; on 
another formulation, S knows that p just in case 5 
would be right about p over some class of relevant 
alternative situations. A major problem for the 
relevant alternatives approach is to explicate the 
crucial notion of relevance it invokes. Relevance 
of alternatives will vary according to the subject's 
situation; it may also (depending on the details of 
the theory) be determined by the content of the 
subject's belief and the context of attribution for 
the knowledge claim. If the standard of relevance 
obeys certain constraints, the relevant alternatives 
theory may be used to explain intuitions about 
the Car Theft Cases in a way that doesn't deny the 
validity of the Closure Principle. 
How would this go? Suppose the facts are as 
described in the Car Theft Case. Initially, we oper-
ate with a standard of relevance according to 
which the possibility of Car Theft is too remote to 
be considered. At this point, the fact that you 
would be wrong about the location of your car, 
had it been stolen,zl doesn't impair the claim that 
you know where your car is. Moreover, since the 
possibility of car theft is remote, that possibility 
doesn't undercut the claim that you know your 
car hasn't been stolen. Closure is maintained. 
What produces the impression to the contrary? 
When the possibility of car theft is explicitly 
raised, somehow a new, more generous standard 
of relevance is instated, according to which the 
possibility of car theft is relevant. By this stand-
ard, you know neither where your car is nor that 
it hasn't been stolen. Closure is still preserved, as 
beforeY 
There are several drawbacks to analyzing the 
Car Theft Cases in this fashion. First, the sup-
posed virtue of the analysis is that it provides an 
account of what you would and wouldn't know in 
the circumstances given. But in giving such an 
account, the relevant alternatives theorist must 
say that, in some sense or from some standpoint, 
you would know that your car hasn't been stolen. 
This seems plainly wrong, and the intuition that 
it is wrong is just what makes it so hard to give an 
adequate treatment of the Car Theft Case and its 
analogues. The relevant alternatives approach 
really doesn't accommodate the body of our intu-
itions in an unforced, convincing way, contrary to 
what one might have hoped. 
Let me turn to a further point. The relevant 
alternatives theorist hypothesizes that, in the 
problem cases, there is a shift in the standard of 
epistemic relevance. In the Car Theft Case spe-
cifically, the possibility of car theft is supposed to 
be, alternatively, too remote and not too remote 
to be relevant. It is natural to presume that 
"remoteness" here is to be understood in probabi-
listic terms. Thus, at one time, the chance of car 
theft is treated as small enough to be ignored; 
later, in a more scrupulous frame of mind, we 
find even that little probability of error sufficient 
to undercut knowledge. Relevance, then, is a 
function of an alternative's probability. 
This probabilistic criterion of relevance seems 
attractive, but it leads to trouble, especially if 
knowledge requires having evidence that excludes 
relevant alternatives. Suppose you know a propo-
sition k. Let 1 be an alternative probable enough 
to be relevant tol, and let m be any other alterna-
tive to k which should count as irrelevant. 
Consider, in addition, the disjunction (l v m), . 
which is logically incompatible with k. This dis-
junction is at least as probable as its disjunct I, so 
it is probable enough to be relevant to your 
knowing k. Now, since (l v m) is relevant to your 
knowing k, you have to have good evidence 
against it. That is to say, you have to have good 
evidence for the negation of (l v m), namely the 
conjunction (not-I & not-m). 
Why is this a problem? If you have good evi-
dence for (not-I & not-m), you presumably have 
good evidence for not-m aloneY Thus, your being 
in this favorable position with respect to not-m 
is a condition for your knowing k. So, m isn't 
irrelevant to your knowing k, contrary to what we 
originally supposed, and there is a threat of 
contradiction.24 In the face of this objection, the 
relevant alternatives theorist may eschew a prob-
abilistic criterion of relevance as such. Yet, it's 
hard to see what alternative, and otherwise satis-
factory, standard of relevance would yield the 
desired conclusions about the Car Theft Cases, 

ARE THERE COUNTEREXAMPLES TO THE CLOSURE PRINCIPLE? 
299 
and the value of the relevant alternatives approach 
in dealing with such cases seems questionable. 
An important motivation for pursuing that 
approach is the hope that this would contribute, 
down the line, to a solution of the problems 
raised by Cartesian skepticism. Typically, a rele-
vant alternatives theorist takes the position that 
we can have knowledge of the external world 
even though we may be victims of massive sen-
sory deception. On this view, the possibility of 
such deception leaves our knowledge of the 
world intact because, with respect to such knowl-
edge, the possibility of deception is an irrelevant 
alternative. Of course, it won't help just to declare 
skeptical alternatives irrelevant - that evaluation 
has to be made in a principled way. Now, sup-
pose that the relevant alternatives approach 
really did provide an acceptable account of the 
Car Theft Cases. Such success would mean that 
relatively pedestrian possibilities like car theft 
are, in some contexts at least, epistemically irrel-
evant. All the more reason, then, to hold that the 
outlandish possibilities raised by skeptics are 
irrelevant as well. 
The envisioned anti-skeptical strategy is to try 
to assimilate the problem of skepticism to the 
problem of knowledge in the Car Theft Cases. 
Such an attempt seems misguided, in light of 
considerations raised above. The issues arising in 
the Car Theft Cases have to do with knowledge 
on the basis of statistical evidence and, perhaps, 
the requirement of non-arbitrariness in forming 
Notes 
This formulation stands in need of further 
refinements. For, suppose someone knows 
both p and (p entails q); if that person doesn't 
put these things together, he or she might fail 
to infer, and hence not know, q. This kind of 
complication doesn't affect what I want to say 
below, so I will disregard it. Where a logical 
consequence is properly recognized as such, 
I will call it a "clear" logical consequence. 
2 Fred Dretske, [3], pp. 1015-16. Dretske also 
employs the example in his more recent [5], 
p.130. 
3 Dretske, [3]'p.1016. 
4 The problem can't be that you aren't certain 
that what you see isn't a mule. For, any chance 
justified beliefs. As I have argued, these are not 
the issues raised by Cartesian skepticism, and 
there is no reason to expect that a solution to one 
set of problems will have any bearing on the other 
set. To be more specific, let's imagine that a pre-
ponderance of statistical evidence can create situ-
ations in which some alternatives are irrelevant. 
This is not the situation in which we confront the 
skeptic (i.e., it's not as though we know, anteced-
ently, that just a handful of the sentient creatures 
in the universe are massively deceived). So, it isn't 
easy to see here any basis for the claim that the 
possibility raised by the skeptic is, for us now, an 
irrelevant alternative. 
VII 
Conclusions 
I have argued for a number of points concerning 
the Closure Principle. First, Dretske's Zebra 
Case does not, on my view, provide a genuine 
counterexample to the Closure Principle. It 
seems more plausible that there is a violation of 
closure in examples like the Car Theft Case. 
However, even if the Closure Principle does fail 
in cases of that sort, there is, I maintain, no 
reason to believe that such a failure carries over 
to the contexts where the skeptic may appeal to 
closure. Finally, in my view, serious questions 
may be raised as to whether the Car Theft Cases 
really do demonstrate any failure of the Closure 
Principle at all. 
or possibility that the animal is a mule is a 
chance that it's not a zebra. If this chance makes 
you uncertain of "It's not a mule" it should 
make you equally uncertain of "It's a zebra': 
5 Dretske, [3], p. 1016. 
6 Someone might maintain that you don't need 
this sort of background in formation at the 
zoo; such information is required out West 
only because there you have information 
which conflicts with the claim that the animal 
is a zebra (viz. zebras aren't generally found 
on Western ranchland). My first response 
would be that the zoo and ranchland situa-
tions are still analogous. If you happen to be 
at, say, the Bronx Zoo, you have evidence that 

300 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
conflicts with the claim that the animal in the 
pen is a zebra, namely, the information that 
zebras aren't native to New York City. In any 
case, the example could be further modified. 
Suppose you are in a situation where you 
mean to identify an animal by sight, but you 
have no information at all about whether such 
animals are found in your location, nor about 
the presence or absence of similar looking but 
different creatures in the area. Under those 
circumstances, I think, you couldn't know 
that the animal is of the sort you would take it 
to be. I am indebted here to Robert Audi. 
7 For a discussion of these issues, see Robert 
Stalnaker, [10], especially pp. 63-8. 
8 When I say that there is a statistical reason or 
statistical evidence in favor of the proposition, 
I mean roughly the following. Let us say that a 
statistical probability of an A's being a B is 
one that is assigned on the basis of relative 
frequencies, counting cases, and so forth. On 
the basis of such statistical probabilities, a 
statistical probability may be assigned by 
direct inference to the proposition "This A is 
a B". If this statistical probability, in turn, is 
not zero, we have, other things being equal, 
some reason - perhaps very small - to think 
that the A in question is a B. I am calling 
such a reason a statistical reason. (My usage 
here follows John Pollock, [10], pp. 231-52). 
9 This analysis will seem misguided to those 
who doubt that justified acceptance is closed 
under conjunction. However, it might still be 
that the existence of the relevantly similar 
tickets, one of which is known to win, some-
how undercuts justification (and knowledge) 
regardless of how things stand with conjunc-
tion. For such a view, see Laurence BonJour, 
[1]. The role of the non -arbitrariness con-
straint in situations like this is also clouded 
by the fact that someone may fail to know 
that his or her ticket will lose in lotteries in 
which the winning chances of the tickets are 
uneven. I hope to pursue these issues in a fur-
ther paper; for now, it would be sufficient for 
my purposes if nothing beyond statistical 
probability and abnormality enters into the 
proper characterization of these examples. 
My conclusions below should remain unaf-
fected by dropping any assumptions about 
the significance of non-arbitrariness in these 
contexts. 
10 
The connection between lottery-like situa-
tions and situations where closure (appar-
ently) fails has also been noticed by Jeffrey 
Olen in [8], pp. 521-6. I am indebted to 
David Shatz for this reference. 
11 
Compare this set of circumstances with 
those of a crime-free small town. In a locale 
where cars are never stolen, you would have 
no reason at all to think that your car in par-
ticular has been stolen, and you can know 
that it's where you left it. Notice, too, that in 
such circumstances your car's being taken 
would be abnormal. 
12 
Interestingly enough, the Zebra Case can be 
made more convincing by filling it out so 
that a lottery element is introduced. The 
example could be developed in this way: 
Q. 
Do you know what the animal in the 
pen is? 
A. 
Sure, it's a zebra. 
Q. 
Do you know for a fact that members 
of some college fraternity didn't steal 
the zebra last night as a prank, leaving 
behind a disguised mule? 
The reason one might hesitate to claim to 
know that such a prank wasn't carried out 
may be that there is some reason to think 
that successful, temporarily undetected 
college pranks are brought off from time to 
time. Then, in turn, you may not be enti-
tled to say that you know that there isn't a 
cleverly disguised mule before you. So, it 
may be that, properly understood or prop-
erly filled out, Dretske's Zebra Case should 
be taken as a member of the family of 
cases for which the Car Theft Case was the 
paradigm. 
13 
These findings are summarized and dis-
cussed by Daniel Kahneman and Amos 
Tversky, [6]. 
14 
Which is not to say, of course, that alterna-
tive explanations, involving closure failure, 
can't also be devised. I am indebted here to 
Richard Feldman. 
15 
By a "real" possibility, I mean just one for 
which there is a positive, even if small, statis-
tical probability; this is a richer notion than 
plain logical possibility. The associated 
notion of certainty is the absence of any real 
possibility of error. This notion of certainty 

ARE THERE COUNTEREXAMPLES TO THE CLOSURE PRINCIPLE? 
301 
is weaker than the conception of certainty 
according to which one must have evidence 
that entails the truth of a belief for that 
belief to be certain. It is questionable 
whether the stronger standard of certainty 
represents a condition for knowledge, since 
it ipso facto rules out the possibility of 
knowledge by induction. I should make it 
clear here, though, that I don't intend these 
glosses to serve as a substantive account of 
real possibility or of certainty. 
16 
The statement of this principle is rough, 
since it doesn't rule out that the members of 
L could be entirely unrelated in content. 
Some stipulation is needed to ensure that L 
be suitably natural or appropriate; this prob-
lem is, of course, closely related to that of 
choosing an appropriate reference class for 
direct inference about probabilities. 
17 
A similar point is made by BonJour, [1], 
p.73n. 
18 
Jeffrey Olen suggests that you know the 
mundane proposition because there is a 
"nomic connection" between the state of 
affairs picked out by the propositions which 
are your evidence and the state of affairs you 
believe to obtain; in the case of your belief 
in the clear logical consequence, however, 
the connection is merely probabilistic and 
not nomic, and you don't know. Notice, 
though, that in the Car Theft Case, it is 
nomologically possible for you to have the 
evidence you have and yet be wrong in your 
References 
BonJour, Laurence. "The Externalist Conception 
of Knowledge'; in P. French, T. Uehling, and H. 
Wettstein, eds, Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 
Vol. V: Studies in Epistemology (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1980). 
2 Cohen, Stewart. "How To Be A Fallibilist", in 
J. Tomberlin, ed. Philosophical Perspectives, Vol. 
II: 
Epistemology (Atascadero: 
Ridgeview 
Publishing Company, 1988). 
3 Dretske, Fred. "Epistemic Operators", The 
Journal of Philosophy 69 (1970), pp. 1015-16. 
4 Dretske, Fred. "The Pragmatic Dimension of 
Knowledge'; Philosophical Studies 40 (1981), 
pp.363-8. 
5 Dretske, Fred. Knowledge and the Flow of 
Information (Cambridge: Bradford Books, 1981). 
belief about both the initial proposition 
and the clear logical consequence. So, it is 
at least obscure exactly how Olen means to 
draw the crucial distinction. See Olen, [8]. 
Another explanation of closure failure that 
would fit the Car Theft Cases is that you 
"track", in the sense discussed by Nozick, 
the truth of initial proposition but not that 
of the clear logical consequence. Nozick's 
account is presented in his Philosophical 
Explanations (Cambridge: Harvard Univer-
sity Press, 1981); however a discussion of 
Nozick's work lies outside the scope of this 
essay. 
19 
For more discussion of this possibility, see 
my 
doctoral 
dissertation 
"Cartesian 
Skepticism and Epistemic Principles" (Yale 
University, 1986), Chapter II. 
20 
Important early statements of the relevant 
alternatives theory are found in Fred Dretske, 
[3] and [4l, and in Alvin Goldman [5]. 
21 
Or, alternatively: the fact that your evidence 
doesn't exclude the possibility of car theft. 
22 
A sophisticated version of this line of thought 
has been developed by Stewart Cohen in [2]. 
23 
The relevant-alternatives theorist can't balk 
at this point, since we're assuming that he or 
she endorses the Closure Principle. 
24 
A related argument may be given to show 
that the probabilistic criterion of relevance is 
unacceptable when the relevant alternatives 
theory is couched in terms of reliability over 
a rang~ of counterfactual situations. 
6 Goldman, 
Alvin. 
"Discrimination 
and 
Perceptual Knowledge'; The Journal of 
Philosophy 73 (1976), pp. 771-9l. 
7 Kahneman, Daniel and Tversky, Amos. 
"Choices, Values, and Frames", American 
Psychologist 39 (1984), pp. 341-50. 
8 Nozick, Robert. Philosophical Explanations 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press), 
1981. 
9 Olen, Jeffrey. "Knowledge, Probability, and 
Nomic Connections", The Southern Journal 
of Philosophy 15 (1977),pp. 521-6. 
10 
Pollock, 
John. 
"Epistemology 
and 
Probability", Synthese 55 (1983), pp. 231-52. 
11 
Stalnaker, Robert. Inquiry (Cambridge: MIT 
Press, 1984). 


PART V 
Theories of Epistemic 
Justification 


Introduction 
The selections in this section attempt to answer the following question: "Under what 
general conditions is one epistemically justified in believing a proposition?" In answer-
ing this question, one must examine how justification relates both to truth and to 
criticizability. 
One can plainly be justified in believing that p even if p is not true, but does being 
justified in believing that p at least make it objectively probable that p? If it doesn't, why 
should we care about justification? The question of whether having unjustified beliefs 
entails being criticizable might seem to be easily answered: yes, if one has an unjustified 
belief, then one ought not have that belief, and one can be rightly criticized for having 
a belief one ought not have. Yet, there is a basic problem with this response. Broadly 
speaking, epistemologists often use the term 'epistemic justification' to pick out a 
kind of positive value status related to gaining truth and avoiding error. The crucial 
point, emphasized by Richard Feldman and Earl Conee in their selection, is that deon-
tological statuses of being obligated, being forbidden, etc., do not exhaust positive value 
statuses. It is often acknowledged in ethics, for example, that it is bad to have cruel 
instincts. One arguably does not deserve blame for having cruel instincts because that 
is not in one's power; rather, such instincts have a negative moral or ethical value. 
Depending on one's theory of value, this may be a matter of not being conducive to the 
production of states of pleasure, states of desire satisfaction, etc. Not all criticism, i.e., 
all normative assessment, amounts to praise or blame. Similarly, a natural proclivity 
toward wishful thinking, while not being something for which one deserves blame, 
merits criticism due to its epistemic disvalue. 
Feldman and Conee argue in favor of evidentialism about justification. Whether a 
subject's doxastic attitude toward a proposition is justified is determined by whether 
taking that attitude fits the subject's evidence. Evidence here includes experiential as 
well as doxastic evidence. Feldman and Conee defend this view against reliabilist theo-
ries which connect justified belief essentially with objective probability of truth. They 
claim that important reliabilist intuitions can be captured in their framework by 
appealing to the notion of wellfoundedness, a notion which employs the evidentialist 

306 
INTRODUCTION 
conception of justification together with the notion of a basing relation. S's doxastic 
attitude D toward p is well-founded if and only if having D toward p is justified and S 
has D toward p on the basis of a body of evidence E that meets the following condi-
tions: (1) S has E as evidence; (2) having D toward p fits E; and (3) there is no more 
inclusive body of evidence I had by S such that having D toward p does not fit 1. Here 
(3) is necessary to ensure that S has no undermining justification. 
As do Feldman and Coney, Richard Foley insists there is a kind of positive epistemic 
status that is not essentially related to objective probability of truth. More generally, 
Foley sees a basic division of labor in epistemology. Some sorts of epistemic value 
depend on luck and some do not. Knowledge, for example, depends on a factor ofluck, 
which explains why we cannot have a Cartesian guarantee that our beliefs about the 
world are true. Yet there is still a kind of luck-free epistemic value that epistemologists 
may investigate, a kind that depends only on that over which we have substantial, if not 
full, control. This is what Foley calls egocentric rationality. If I would believe that p 
upon deep reflection, then it is egocentrically rational for me to believe that p. Whether 
I am egocentrically rational in believing what I do is thus an epistemic good over which 
I have control. If I lack egocentric rationality, I am to be criticized, for egocentric ration-
ality is something even a very hostile epistemic environment cannot strip from me. 
Why seek egocentric rationality, one might ask, if it provides no guarantee of truth or 
even of objective probability of truth? Foley's answer is that we believe by our best 
lights that it is effective to pursue our goal of having accurate and comprehensive beliefs 
by being egocentrically rational. We are working without nets, as Foley puts it, but this 
is the only way we can work, and it is a good way to work. 
Several of the selections in this section concern so-called "epistemic externalism." 
It is perhaps useful to think of the varieties of epistemic externalism as denying one 
or more internalist theses. Access internalists claim the believer must have reflective 
epistemic access to certain facts relevant to her justification, whether these be facts 
about the reliability of her source of belief, facts about what she would have believed 
under various conditions, or perhaps only facts about what her reasons are for 
believing as she does. To use an example of Keith Lehrer's: Truetemp's merely having 
a reliable mechanism in his brain for producing accurate and highly discriminatory 
beliefs about the temperature doesn't by itself suffice to make any of his correct tem-
perature judgments justified, since he has no reflective access to this mechanism or 
its reliability. Ontological internalists claim that justification is fixed by one's mental 
states, which, unlike Williamson, they typically take not to include states of knowing, 
and certainly not to include facts about reliability. Ontological internalism does not 
require access internalism, nor vice versa, though the two have often been thought to 
go together because mental states have been thought to be states to which we have 
reflective access. 
In his selection, Alvin Goldman formulates an externalist theory of justification 
according to which a belief is justified if and only if it is produced by a reliable belief-
forming process. This is eventually modified to take account of the difference between 
processes that take beliefs as inputs (belief-dependent processes) and those that do not 
(belief-independent processes). Thus, justification is specified recursively. According to 
Goldman, the principal intuitive benefit of reliabilism is that it explains why the way a 
belief is actually produced matters to justification. Wishful beliefs and hasty judgments 
lack justification because they are the products of unreliable ways of believing. 

PART V 
Goldman is also aware of several possible problems for his account, and he proposes 
solutions to each (some more tentative than others). Here are several of the problems 
his account faces. First, suppose wishful thinking is reliable in some world unlike ours. 
Would its products in such a world count as justified? Second, is the victim of a Cartesian 
evil demon totally lacking in justified belief merely owing to bad luck in having unreli-
able faculties of perception, testimony, and the rest? Third, it seems that someone who 
has excellent undermining evidence for a belief that, as it turns out, is reliably pro-
duced, cannot be justified in believing as he does, and yet reliabilism implies that he is 
justified. 
Jonathan Vogel and Laurence BonJour offer internalist critiques of, respectively, 
reliabilism specifically and externalism more generally. According to Vogel, the two 
most commonly defended varieties of reliabilism about knowledge have false implica-
tions regarding higher-order knowledge (knowledge about what we know). According 
to neighborhood reliabilism, you know that p if and only if in some specified neighbor-
hood of nearby possible worlds your believing that p implies that p. This is a safety 
condition. According to counterfactual reliabilism, you know that p if and only if the 
safety condition is met and if p were false, you would not believe that p. The second 
condition is a sensitivity condition. Vogel argues that both forms of reliabilism fail to 
account for our higher-order knowledge. Counterfactual reliabilism is too strong: it 
prohibits higher-order knowledge that we actually have. We often have higher-order 
knowledge of propositions of the form "I do not falsely believe that p." But were I to 
falsely believe that p I would believe I didn't falsely believe that p. Second, Vogel argues 
that neighborhood reliabilism is too weak: it grants us higher-order knowledge that we 
do not have. Neighborhood reliabilism seems to allow "bootstrapping," which amounts 
to using the beliefs generated by some process to establish the reliability of that very 
process. For example, a believer could come to know without any independent checks 
that a gas gauge was reliable simply by applying inductive reasoning to his reliably 
formed beliefs about what the gauge reads. Vogel notes that the only plausible solution 
to the bootstrapping objection strips reliabilism of one of its primary motivations: a 
solution to radical skepticism. 
Laurence BonJour argues that no form of externalism can succeed, because 
justification requires a strong form of uncriticizability. At a minimum, Bonjour argues, 
a belief is epistemically justified for a subject only if he has adequate reason to think 
the belief is true. Without an adequate reason to think the belief is true, the belief is 
irresponsible or irrational. However, a belief can meet externalist conditions despite 
the fact that the believer has no adequate reason to think the belief is true. For exam-
ple, suppose Norman - a completely reliable clairvoyant - comes to believe via his 
occult clairvoyant power that the president is in New York. By stipulation, Norman has 
no evidence for or against his clairvoyance and no evidence for or against the claim 
that the president is in New York. According to externalism, his belief is justified. 
Intuitively, it is not. BonJour strengthens this intuition by drawing parallels to justifi-
cation in both morality and rationality. The lesson of his cases is simple: "external or 
objective reliability is not enough to offset subjective irrationality." And since it is sub-
jectively irrational to accept beliefs which one has no reason to think true, externalistic 
theories of justification fail. 
Goldman defends externalism against its deontological critics in his second contri-
bution to this section. He reconstructs what he considers the most important argument 
307 

308 
INTRODUCTION 
given by internalists against externalism. Many internalists stress that the notion of 
justification is intimately tied to the problem of determining what to believe. They 
accept, in particular, the guidance deontological conception of justification (GD), accord-
ing to which justification should guide us in our beliefs and it is our duty or responsi-
bility to be so guided. Internalists then derive from GD the knowability constraint (KJ) 
upon the determiners of justification, according to which the only facts that qualify as 
justifiers are those which are knowable; for we can be guided by a fact only if we can 
know about it. Finally, internalists take KJ to imply that only internal conditions qual-
ify as legitimate determiners of justification. Only if the determiners of justification 
are internally accessible, and therefore knowable, can they potentially guide our belief-
formation in such a way that we are culpable for not being so guided. Among several 
problems which Goldman brings to light is that there is no cogent inferential route 
from the GD conception of justification to internalism via the knowability constraint. 
The simple version of the KJ constraint merely requires that facts about justification 
be readily knowable - and some readily knowable facts might be external rather than 
internal. The issue cannot be resolved, as has been attempted by some internalists, by 
making the constraint a direct knowability constraint. This is because GD implies that 
cognitive agents must know what justifiers are present, but no particular types of 
knowledge are intimated. So, GD cannot rationalize a restricted version of KJ. 
According to Richard Fumerton, however, the difficulty with externalism is not so 
much that it severs the connection between justification and strong criticizability but 
that it is a naturalistic account. If some form of externalism were correct, normative 
epistemology would not lie within the province of philosophy. Scientists, rather than 
philosophers (qua philosophers), have the qualifications necessary for identifying and 
describing the causal/nomological features of beliefs with which externalists identify 
justification. But this is not Fumerton's principal criticism in the end. He objects most 
of all to externalism's consequence that there is nothing epistemically problematic in 
using a method of belief to show that it is reliable, that is, about bootstrapping. Given 
externalism, there simply wouldn't be a problem of epistemic circularity. As long as, say, 
perception is a reliable process, there would be nothing problematic about concluding 
that perception is reliable by using perception itself. Such a conclusion would end up 
justified on a reliabilist model (and similarly for other externalist views). Fumerton 
claims there is no philosophically interesting conception of justification that meets this 
description, a fact revealed by the impossibility of even getting skeptical arguments off 
the ground in an externalist framework. Higher-order questions of justification, under 
externalism, cannot be treated any differently than lower-order questions. 
Finally, in their second contribution to this section, Feldman and eonee attempt to 
defend a form of ontological internalism from the contention that externalism is better 
able to deal with certain philosophical problems. Internalism is committed to the fol-
lowing theses - (S): the justificatory status of a person's doxastic attitudes strongly 
supervenes on the person's mental states, events and conditions, and (M): if two per-
sons are mentally identical then the same beliefs are justified for them to the same 
extent. They deal with two main categories of objections - (1) that there are some 
justified beliefs for which there are no internal justifying states, and (2) that internal-
ists cannot say anything definite about the connections between candidate internal 
justifiers and the beliefs they are supposed to justify. They argue that while some inter-
nalist theories may encounter problems with these objections, an approach which 

PART V 
309 
limits justifying states to currently conscious mental states or one which includes as 
potential justifiers anything that is retained in memory, can overcome them. Because 
these objections can be defeated, there is no reason to reject their form of ontological 
internalism. 
Further Reading 
Alston, William P., Epistemic Justification (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1989). 
--, Beyond "Justification": Dimensions of 
Epistemic Evaluation (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2005). 
Audi, Robert, The Structure of Justification 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1993). 
Bergmann, Michael,Justification withoutAwareness 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2006). 
BonJour, Laurence and Ernest Sosa, Epistemic 
Justification: I nternalism vs. Externalism, Found-
ations vs. Virtues (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003). 
Conee, Earl and Richard Feldman, Evidentialism 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2004). 
Foley, R., The Theory of Epistemic Rationality 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1987). 
--, Working Without a Net: A Study of Egocentric 
Epistemology (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1993). 
Haack, Susan, Evidence and Inquiry: Towards 
Reconstruction 
In 
Epistemology 
(Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1993). 
Lehrer, Keith, Theory of Knowledge (Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1990). 
Lycan, 
William, 
Judgment 
and 
Justification 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1988). 
Moser, Paul K., Knowledge and Evidence 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1989). 
Pappas, George 
S. 
(ed.), Justification 
and 
Knowledge (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1979). 
Plantinga, Alvin, Warrant: The Current Debate 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). 
Pollock, John, Contemporary Theories of Know-
ledge (Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 
1986). 
Sosa, Ernest, Knowledge in Perspective: Selected 
Essays in Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991). 
Steup, Matthias, Knowledge, Truth, and Duty: 
Essays on Epistemic Justification, Responsibility, 
and Virtue (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2004). 
Swinburne, Richard, Epistemic Justification (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2001). 

CHAPTER 24 
Evidentialism 
Richard Feldman 
and Earl Conee 
I 
We advocate evidentialism in epistemology. What 
we call evidentialism is the view that the epistemic 
justification of a belief is determined by the qual-
ity of the believer's evidence for the belief. 
Disbelief and suspension of judgment also can be 
epistemically justified. The doxastic attitude that 
a person is justified in having is the one that fits 
the person's evidence. More precisely: 
EJ Doxastic attitude D toward proposition p 
is epistemically justified for S at t if and 
only if having D toward p fits the evidence 
S has at t.! 
We do not offer EJ as an analysis. Rather it serves 
to indicate the kind of notion of justification that 
we take to be characteristically epistemic - a 
notion that makes justification turn entirely on 
evidence. Here are three examples that illustrate 
the application of this notion of justification. 
First, when a physiologically normal person under 
ordinary circumstances looks at a plush green 
lawn that is directly in front of him in broad day-
light, believing that there is something green 
before him is the attitude toward this proposition 
that fits his evidence. That is why the belief is 
Originally published in Philosophical Studies 48 (1985), 
pp.15-34. 
epistemically justified. Second, suspension of 
judgment is the fitting attitude for each of us 
toward the proposition that an even number of 
ducks exists, since our evidence makes it equally 
likely that the number is odd. Neither belief nor 
disbelief is epistemically justified when our evi-
dence is equally balanced. And third, when it 
comes to the proposition that sugar is sour, our 
gustatory experience makes disbelief the fitting 
attitude. Such experiential evidence epistemically 
justifies disbelief. 2 
EJ is not intended to be surprising or innova-
tive. We take it to be the view about the nature of 
epistemic justification with the most initial plau-
sibility. A defense of EJ is now appropriate because 
several theses about justification that seem to cast 
doubt on it have been prominent in recent litera-
ture on epistemology. Broadly speaking, these 
theses imply that epistemic justification depends 
upon the cognitive capacities of people, or upon 
the cognitive processes or information-gathering 
practices that led to the attitude. In contrast, 
EJ asserts that the epistemic justification of an 
attitude depends only on evidence. 
We believe that EJ identifies the basic con-
cept of epistemic justification. We find no ade-
quate grounds for accepting the recently 
discussed theses about justification that seem to 
cast doubt on EJ. In the remainder of this paper 
we defend evidentialism. Our purpose is to show 
that it continues to be the best view of epistemic 
justification. 

EVIDENTIALISM 
311 
II 
In this section we consider two objections to EJ. 
Each is based on a claim about human limits and 
a claim about the conditions under which an atti-
tude can be justified. One objection depends on 
the claim that an attitude can be justified only if it 
is voluntarily adopted, the other depends on the 
claim that an attitude toward a proposition or 
propositions can be justified for a person only if 
the ability to have that attitude toward the propo-
sition or those propositions is within normal 
human limits. 
Doxastic voluntarism 
EJ says that a doxastic attitude is justified for a 
person when that attitude fits the person's evi-
dence. It is clear that there are cases in which a 
certain attitude toward a proposition fits a per-
son's evidence, yet the person has no control over 
whether he forms that attitude toward that prop-
osition. So some involuntarily adopted attitudes 
are justified according to EJ. John Heil finds this 
feature of the evidentialist position questionable. 
He says that the fact that we "speak of a person's 
beliefs as being warranted, justified, or rational ... 
makes it appear that ... believing something can, 
at least sometimes, be under the voluntary con-
trol of the believer."3 Hilary Kornblith claims that 
it seems "unfair" to evaluate beliefs if they "are 
not subject" to "direct voluntary control."4 Both 
Heil and Kornblith conclude that although beliefs 
are not under direct voluntary control, it is still 
appropriate to evaluate them because "they are 
not entirely out of our control either."5 "One does 
have a say in the procedures one undertakes that 
lead to" the formation of beliefs.6 
Doxastic attitudes need not be under any sort 
of voluntary control for them to be suitable for 
epistemic evaluation. Examples confirm that 
beliefs may be both involuntary and subject to 
epistemic evaluation. Suppose that a person 
spontaneously and involuntarily believes that the 
lights are on in the room, as a result of the famil-
iar sort of completely convincing perceptual evi-
dence. This belief is clearly justified, whether or 
not the person cannot voluntarily acquire, lose, or 
modify the cognitive process that led to the belief. 
Unjustified beliefs can also be involuntary. A par-
anoid man might believe without any supporting 
evidence that he is being spied on. This belief 
might be a result of an uncontrollable desire to be 
a recipient of special attention. In such a case the 
belief is clearly epistemically unjustified even if 
the belief is involuntary and the person cannot 
alter the process leading to it. 
The contrary view that only voluntary beliefs 
are justified or unjustified may seem plausible if 
one confuses the topic of EJ with an assessment of 
the person.7 A person deserves praise or blame for 
being in a doxastic state only if that state is under 
the person's controI.B The person who involun-
tarily believes in the presence of overwhelming 
evidence that the lights are on does not deserve 
praise for this belief. The belief is nevertheless 
justified. The person who believes that he is being 
spied on as a result of an uncontrollable desire 
does not deserve to be blamed for that belief. But 
there is a fact about the belief's epistemic merit. It 
is epistemically defective - it is held in the pres-
ence of insufficient evidence and is therefore 
unjustified. 
Doxastic limits 
Apart from the questions about doxastic volun-
tarism, it is sometimes claimed that it is inappro-
priate to set epistemic standards that are beyond 
normal human limits. Alvin Goldman recom-
mends that epistemologists seek epistemic princi-
ples that can serve as practical guides to belief 
formation. Such principles, he contends, must 
take into account the limited cognitive capacities 
of people. Thus, he is led to deny a principle 
instructing people to believe all the logical conse-
quences of their beliefs, since they are unable to 
have the infinite number of beliefs that following 
such a principle would require. 9 Goldman's view 
does not conflict with EJ, since EJ does not 
instruct anyone to believe anything. It simply 
states a necessary and sufficient condition for 
epistemic justification. Nor does Goldman think 
this view conflicts with EJ, since he makes it clear 
that the principles he is discussing are guides to 
action and not principles that apply the traditional 
concept of epistemic justification. 
Although Goldman does not use facts about 
normal cognitive limits to argue against EJ, such 
an argument has been suggested by Kornblith 
and by Paul Thagard. Kornblith cites Goldman's 
work as an inspiration for his view that "having 

312 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
justified beliefs is simply doing the best one can in 
the light of the innate endowment one starts 
from:'l0 Thagard contends that rational or justi-
fied principles of inference "should not demand 
of a reasoner inferential performance which 
exceeds the general psychological abilities of 
human beings."lI Neither Thagard nor Kornblith 
argues against EJ, but it is easy to see how such an 
argument would go: A doxastic attitude toward a 
proposition is justified for a person only if having 
that attitude toward that proposition is within the 
normal doxastic capabilities of people. Some dox-
astic attitudes that fit a person's evidence are not 
within those capabilities. Yet EJ classifies them as 
justified. Hence, EJ is false. 
We see no good reason here to deny EJ. The 
argument has as a premise the claim that some 
attitudes beyond normal limits do fit someone's 
evidence. The fact that we are limited to a finite 
number of beliefs is used to support this claim. 
But this fact does not establish the premise. There 
is no reason to think that an infinite number of 
beliefs fits any body of evidence that anyone ever 
has. The evidence that people have under ordi-
nary circumstances never makes it evident, con-
cerning everyone of an infinite number oflogical 
consequences of that evidence, that it is a conse-
quence. Thus, believing each consequence will 
not fit any ordinary evidence. Furthermore, 
even if there are circumstances in which more 
beliefs fit a person's evidence than he is able to 
have, all that follows is that he cannot have at 
one time all the beliefs that fit. It does not follow 
that there is any particular fitting belief which is 
unattainable. Hence, the premise of the argu-
ment that says that EJ classifies as justified some 
normally unattainable beliefs is not established 
by means of this example. There does not seem 
to be any sort of plausible evidence that would 
establish this premise. While some empirical 
evidence may show that people typically do not 
form fitting attitudes in certain contexts, or that 
some fitting attitudes are beyond some individu-
al's abilities, such evidence fails to show that any 
fitting attitudes are beyond normal limits. 12 
There is a more fundamental objection to this 
argument against EJ. There is no basis for the 
premise that what is epistemically justified must 
be restricted to feasible doxastic alternatives. It 
can be a worthwhile thing to help people to 
choose among the epistemic alternatives open to 
them. But suppose that there were occasions 
when forming the attitude that best fits a person's 
evidence was beyond normal cognitive limits. 
This would still be the attitude justified by the 
person's evidence. If the person had normal abil-
ities, then he would be in the unfortunate posi-
tion of being unable to do what is justified 
according to the standard for justification 
asserted by EJ. This is not a flaw in the account of 
justification. Some standards are met only by 
going beyond normal human limits. Standards 
that some teachers set for an "/\' in a course are 
unattainable for most students. There are stand-
ards of artistic excellence that no one can meet, 
or at least standards that normal people cannot 
meet in any available circumstance. Similarly, 
epistemic justification might have been normally 
unattainable. 
We conclude that neither considerations of 
doxastic voluntarism nor of doxastic limits pro-
vide any good reason to abandon EJ as an account 
of epistemic justification. 
III 
EJ sets an epistemic standard for evaluating dox-
astic conduct. In any case of a standard for con-
duct, whether it is voluntary or not, it is 
appropriate to speak of "requirements" or "obli-
gations" that the standard imposes. The person 
who has overwhelming perceptual evidence for 
the proposition that the lights are on, epistemi-
cally ought to believe that proposition. The para-
noid person epistemically ought not to believe 
that he is being spied upon when he has no evi-
dence supporting this belief. We hold the general 
view that one epistemically ought to have the 
doxastic attitudes that fit one's evidence. We think 
that being epistemically obligatory is equivalent 
to being epistemically justified. 
There are in the literature two other sorts of 
view about epistemic obligations. What is epistem-
ically obligatory, according to these other views, 
does not always fit one's evidence. Thus, each of 
these views of epistemic obligation, when com-
bined with our further thesis that being epistemi-
cally obligatory is equivalent to being epistemically 
justified, yields results incompatible with eviden-
tialism. We shall now consider how these proposals 
affect EJ. 

EVIDENTIALISM 
313 
Justification and the obligation to believe 
truths 
Roderick Chisholm holds that one has an "intel-
lectual requirement" to try one's best to bring it 
about that, of the propositions one considers, one 
believes all and only the truthsY This theory of 
what our epistemic obligations are, in conjunc-
tion with our view that the justified attitudes are 
the ones we have an epistemic obligation to hold, 
implies the following principle: 
CJ Doxastic attitude D toward proposition p 
is justified for person S at time t if and 
only if S considers p at t and S's having D 
toward p at t would result from S's trying 
his best to bring it about that S believe pat 
tiff P is true. 
Evaluation of CJ is complicated by an ambiguity 
in "trying one's best." It might mean "trying in 
that way which will in fact have the best result." 
Since the goal is to believe all and only the truths 
one considers, the best results would be obtained 
by believing each truth one considers and disbe-
lieving each falsehood one considers. On this 
interpretation, CJ implies that believing each 
truth and disbelieving each falsehood one consid-
ers is justified whenever believing and disbeliev-
ing in these ways would result from something 
one could try to do. 
On this interpretation CJ is plainly false. We 
are not justified in believing every proposition 
we consider that happens to be true and which we 
could believe by trying for the truth. It is possible 
to believe some unsubstantiated proposition in a 
reckless endeavor to believe a truth, and happen 
to be right. This would not be an "epistemically 
justified belief."14 
It might be contended that trying one's best to 
believe truths and disbelieve falsehoods really 
amounts to trying to believe and disbelieve in 
accordance with one's evidence. We agree that 
gaining the doxastic attitudes that fit one's evi-
dence is the epistemically best way to use one's 
evidence in trying to believe all and only the 
truths one considers. This interpretation of CJ 
makes it nearly equivalent to EJ. There are two 
relevant differences. First, CJ implies that one can 
have justified attitudes only toward propositions 
one actually considers. EJ does not have this 
implication. CJ is also unlike EJ in implying that 
an attitude is justified if it would result from the 
trying to form the attitude that fits one's evidence. 
The attitude that is justified according to EJ is the 
one that as a matter of fact does fit one's evidence. 
This seems more plausible. What would happen if 
one tried to have a fitting attitude seems irrele-
vant - one might try but fail to form the fitting 
attitude. 
We conclude that the doxastic attitudes that 
would result from carrying out the intellectual 
requirement that Chisholm identifies are not the 
epistemically justified attitudes. 
Justification and epistemically responsible 
action 
Another view about epistemic obligations, pro-
posed by Hilary Kornblith, is that we are obligated 
to seek the truth and gather evidence in a respon-
sible way. Kornblith also maintains that the justi-
fication of a belief depends on how responsibly 
one carried out the inquiry that led to the belief. IS 
We shall now examine how the considerations 
leading to this view affect EJ. 
Kornblith describes a case of what he regards 
as "epistemically culpable ignorance." It is an 
example in which a person's belief seems to fit his 
evidence, and thus it seems to be justified accord-
ing to evidentialism. Kornblith contends that the 
belief is unjustified because it results from epis-
temically irresponsible behavior. His example 
concerns a headstrong young physicist who is 
unable to tolerate criticism. After presenting a 
paper to his colleagues, the physicist pays no atten-
tion to the devastating objection of a senior col-
league. The physicist, obsessed with his own 
success, fails even to hear the objection, which 
consequently has no impact on his beliefs, 
Kornblith says that after this, the physicist's belief 
in his own theory is unjustified. He suggests that 
evidentialist theories cannot account for this fact. 
Crucial details of this example are left unspec-
ified, but in no case does it provide a refutation of 
evidentialism. If the young physicist is aware of 
the fact that his senior colleague is making an 
objection, then this fact is evidence he has against 
his theory, although it is unclear from just this 
much detail how decisive it would be. So, believ-
ing his theory may no longer be justified for him 
according to a purely evidentialist view. On the 

314 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
other hand, perhaps he remains entirely ignorant 
of the fact that a senior colleague is objecting to 
his theory. He might be "lost in thought» - pri-
vately engrossed in proud admiration of the paper 
he has just given - and fail to understand what is 
going on in the audience. If this happens, and his 
evidence supporting his theory is just as it was 
prior to his presentation of the paper, then believ-
ing the theory does remain justified for him 
(assuming that it was justified previously). There 
is no reason to doubt EJ in the light of this exam-
ple. It may be true that the young physicist is an 
unpleasant fellow, and that he lacks intellectual 
integrity. This is an evaluation of the character of 
the physicist. It is supported by the fact that in 
this case he is not engaged in an impartial quest 
for the truth. But the physicist's character has 
nothing to do with the epistemic status of his 
belief in his theory. 
Responsible evidence-gathering obviously has 
some epistemic significance. One serious episte-
mological question is that of how to engage in a 
thoroughgoing rational pursuit of the truth. Such a 
pursuit may require gathering evidence in respon-
sible ways. It may also be necessary to be open to 
new ideas, to think about a variety of important 
issues, and to consider a variety of opinions about 
such issues. Perhaps it requires, as BonJour sug-
gests, that one "reflect critically upon one's 
belief.»16 But everyone has some justified beliefs, 
even though virtually no one is fully engaged in a 
rational pursuit of the truth. EJ has no implica-
tion about the actions one must take in a rational 
pursuit of the truth. It is about the epistemic eval-
uation of attitudes given the evidence one does 
have, however one came to possess that evidence. 
Examples like that of the headstrong physicist 
show no defect in the evidentialist view. Justified 
beliefs can result from epistemically irresponsible 
actions. 
Other sorts of obligation 
Having acknowledged at the beginning of this 
section that justified attitudes are in a sense oblig-
atory, we wish to forestall confusions involving 
other notions of obligations. It is not the case that 
there is always a moral obligation to believe in 
accordance with one's evidence. Having a fitting 
attitude can bring about disastrous personal or 
social consequences. Vicious beliefs that lead to 
... 
vicious acts can be epistemically justified. This 
rules out any moral obligation to have the 
epistemically justified attitude.'? 
It is also false that there is always a prudential 
obligation to have each epistemically justified 
attitude. John Heil discusses the following exam-
ple. I8 Sally has fairly good evidence that her hus-
band Burt has been seeing another woman. Their 
marriage is in a precarious condition. It would be 
best for Sally if their marriage were preserved. 
Sally foresees that, were she to believe that Burt 
has been seeing another woman, her resulting 
behavior would lead to their divorce. Given these 
assumptions, EJ counts as justified at least some 
measure of belief by Sally in the proposition that 
Burt has been seeing another woman. But Sally 
would be better off if she did not have this belief, 
in light of the fact that she would be best served 
by their continued marriage. Heil raises the ques-
tion of what Sally's prudential duty is in this case. 
Sally's epistemic obligation is to believe that her 
husband is unfaithful. But that gives no reason to 
deny what seems obvious here. Sally prudentially 
ought to refrain from believing her husband to be 
unfaithful. It can be prudent not to have a doxas-
tic attitude that is correctly said by EJ to be justi-
fied, just as it can be moral not to have such an 
attitude. 
More generally, the causal consequences of 
having an unjustified attitude can be more ben-
eficial in any sort of way than the consequences 
of having its justified alternative. We have seen 
that it can be morally and prudentially best not 
to have attitudes justified according to EJ. Failing 
to have these attitudes can also have the best 
results for the sake of epistemic goals such as the 
acquisition of knowledge. Roderick Firth points 
out that a scientist's believing against his evi-
dence that he will recover from an illness may 
help to effect a recovery and so contribute to 
the growth of knowledge by enabling the scien-
tist to continue his research. I9 William James's 
case for exercising "the will to believe» suggests 
that some evidence concerning the existence of 
God is available only after one believes in God 
in the absence of justifying evidence. EJ does 
not counsel against adopting such beliefs for 
the sake of these epistemic ends. EJ implies that 
the beliefs would be unjustified when adopted. 
This is not to say that the believing would do no 
epistemic good. 

EVIDENTIALISM 
315 
We acknowledge that it is appropriate to speak 
of epistemic obligations. But it is a mistake to 
think that what is epistemically obligatory, i.e., 
epistemically justified, is also morally or pruden-
tially obligatory, or that it has the overall best 
epistemic consequences. 
IV 
Another argument that is intended to refute the 
evidentialist approach to justification concerns 
the ways in which a person can come to have an 
attitude that fits his evidence. Both Kornblith and 
Goldman propose examples designed to show 
that merely having good evidence for a proposi-
tion is not sufficient to make believing that prop-
osition justified.2o We shall work from Kornblith's 
formulation of the argument, since it is more 
detailed. Suppose Alfred is justified in believing p, 
and justified in believing if p then q. Alfred also 
believes q. EJ seems to imply that believing q is 
justified for Alfred, since that belief does seem to 
fit this evidence. Kornblith argues that Alfred's 
belief in q may still not be justified. It is not justi-
fied, according to Kornblith, if Alfred has a strong 
distrust of modus ponens and believes q because 
he likes the sound of the sentence expressing it 
rather than on the basis of the modus ponens 
argument. Similarly, Goldman says that a person's 
belief in q is not justified unless the belief is 
caused in some appropriate way. 
Whether EJ implies that Alfred's belief in q is 
justified depends in part on an unspecified 
detail -
Alfred's evidence concerning modus 
ponens. It is possible that Alfred has evidence 
against modus ponens. Perhaps he has just seen a 
version of the Liar paradox that seems to render 
modus ponens as suspect as the other rules and 
premises in the derivation. In the unlikely event 
that Alfred has such evidence, EJ implies that 
believing q is not justified for him. If rather, as we 
shall assume, his overall evidence supports modus 
ponens and q, then EJ does imply that believing q 
is justified for him. 
When Alfred has strong evidence for q, his 
believing q is epistemically justified. This is the sense 
of "justified" captured by EJ. However, if Alfred's 
basis for believing q is not his evidence for it, but 
rather the sound of the sentence expressing q, then 
it seems equally clear that there is some sense in 
which this state of believing is epistemically"defec-
tive" - he did not arrive at the belief in the right way. 
The term "well-founded" is sometimes used to char-
acterize an attitude that is epistemically both well-
supported and properly arrived at. Well-foundedness 
is a second evidentialist notion used to evaluate dox-
astic states. It is an evidentialist notion because its 
application depends on two matters of evidence -
the evidence one has, and the evidence one uses in 
forming the attitude. More precisely: 
WF S's doxastic attitude D at t toward propo-
sition p is well-founded if and only if 
(i) 
having D toward p is justified for S at 
t; and 
(ii) 
S has D toward p on the basis of some 
body of evidence e, such that 
(a) 
S has e as evidence at t; 
(b) 
having D toward p fits e; and 
(c) 
there is no more inclusive body of 
evidence e had by S at t such that 
having D toward p does not fit e.ll 
Since the evidentialist can appeal to this notion of 
well-foundedness, cases in which a person has but 
does not use justifying evidence do not refute evi-
dentialism. Kornblith and Goldman's intuitions 
about such cases can be accommodated. A person 
in Alfred's position is in an epistemically defective 
state - his belief in q is not well-founded. Having 
said this, it is reasonable also to affirm the other 
evidentialist judgment that Alfred's belief in q is in 
another sense epistemically right - it is justified.22 
V 
The theory of epistemic justification that has 
received the most attention recently is reliabilism. 
Roughly speaking, this is the view that epistemi-
cally justified beliefs are the ones that result from 
belief-forming processes that reliably lead to true 
beliefs.23 In this section we consider whether 
reliabilism casts doubt on evidentialism. 
Although reliabilists generally formulate their 
view as an account of epistemic justification, it is 
clear that in its simplest forms it is better regarded 
as an account of well-foundedness. In order for a 
belief to be favorably evaluated by the simple sort 
of reliabilism sketched above, the belief must 

316 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
actually be held, as is the case with WE And just 
as with WF, the belief must be "grounded" in the 
proper way. Where reliabilism appears to differ 
from WF is over the conditions under which a 
belief is properly grounded. According to WF, this 
occurs when the belief is based on fitting evi-
dence. According to reliabilism, a belief is prop-
erly grounded if it results from a belief-forming 
process that reliably leads to true beliefs. These 
certainly are conceptually different accounts of 
the grounds of well-founded beliefs. 
In spite of this conceptual difference, reliabi-
lism and WF may be extensionally equivalent. The 
question of equivalence depends on the resolu-
tion of two unclarities in reliabilism. One pertains 
to the notion of a belief-forming process and the 
other to the notion of reliability. 
An unclarity about belief-forming processes 
arises because every belief is caused by a sequence 
of particular events which is an instance of many 
types of causal processes. Suppose that one 
evening Jones looks out of his window and sees a 
bright shining disk-shaped object. The object is 
in fact a luminous frisbee, and Jones clearly 
remembers having given one of these to his 
daughter. But Jones is attracted to the idea that 
extra-terrestrials are visiting the Earth. He man-
ages to believe that he is seeing a flying saucer. Is 
the process that caused this belief reliable? Since 
the sequence of events leading to his belief is an 
instance of many types of process, the answer 
depends upon which of these many types is the 
relevant one. The sequence falls into highly gen-
eral categories such as perceptually-based belief 
formation and visually-based belief formation. It 
seems that if these are the relevant categories, 
then his belief is indeed reliably formed, since 
these are naturally regarded as "generally reliable" 
sorts of belief-forming processes. The sequence 
of events leading to Jones's belief also falls into 
many relatively specific categories such as night-
vision-of-a-nearby-object and vision-in-Jones's-
precise-environmental-circumstances. These are 
not clearly reliable types. The sequence is also an 
instance of this contrived kind: process-Ieading-
from -obviously-defeated -evidence-to-the-belief-
that-one-sees-a-flying-saucer. This, presumably, 
is an unreliable kind of process. Finally, there is 
the maximally specific process that occurs only 
when physiological events occur that are exactly 
like those that led to Jones's belief that he saw a 
flying saucer. In all likelihood this kind of process 
occurred only once. Processes of these types are 
of differing degrees of reliability, no matter how 
reliability is determined. The implications of 
reliabilism for the case are rendered definite only 
when the kind of process whose reliability is rel-
evant is specified. Reliabilists have given little 
attention to this matter, and those that have spec-
ified relevant kinds have not done so in a way 
that gives their theory in intuitively acceptable 
extension.24 
The second unclarity in reliabilism concerns 
the notion of reliability itself. Reliability is funda-
mentally a property of kinds of belief-forming 
processes, not of sequences of particular events. 
But we can say that a sequence is reliable provided 
its relevant type is reliable. The problem raised 
above concerns the specification of relevant types. 
The current problem is that of specifying the con-
ditions under which a kind of process is reliable. 
Among possible accounts is one according to 
which a kind of process is reliable provided most 
instances of that kind until now have led to true 
beliefs. Alternative accounts measure the reliabil-
ity of a kind of process by the frequency with 
which instances of it produce true beliefs in the 
future as well as the past, or by the frequency with 
which its instances produce true beliefs in possi-
ble worlds that are similar to the world of evalua-
tion in some designated respect, or by the 
frequency with which its instances produce true 
beliefs in all possible worlds. 25 
Because there are such drastically different ways 
of filling in the details of reliabilism the applica-
tion of the theory is far from clear. The possible 
versions of reliabilism seem to include one that is 
extensionally equivalent to WE It might be held 
that all beliefs are formed by one of two relevant 
kinds of belief-forming process. One kind has as 
instances all and only those sequences of events 
leading to a belief that is based on fitting evidence; 
the other is a kind of process that has as instances 
all and only those sequences leading to a belief that 
is not based on fitting evidence. If a notion of reli-
ability can be found on which the former sort of 
process is reliable and the latter is not, the resulting 
version of reliabilism would be very nearly equiva-
lent to WE 26 We do not claim that reliabilists would 
favor this version of reliabilism. Rather, our point 
is that the fact that this is a version shows that 
reliabilism may not even be a rival to WFY 

EVIDENTIALISM 
317 
Evaluation of reliabilism is further compli-
cated by the fact that reliabilists seem to differ 
about whether they want their theory to have 
approximately the same extension as WF in fact 
has. The credibility of reliabilism and its relevance 
to WF depend in part on the concept reliabilists 
are really attempting to analyze. An example first 
described by Laurence BonJour helps to bring out 
two alternatives.28 BonJour's example is of a 
person who is clairvoyant. As a result of his clair-
voyance he comes to believe that the President is 
in New York City. The person has no evidence 
showing that he is clairvoyant and no other evi-
dence supporting his belief about the President. 
BonJour claims that the example is a counter-
example to reliabilism, since the clairvoyant's 
belief is not justified (we would add: and therefore 
ill-founded), although the process that caused it is 
reliable - the person really is clairvoyant. 
The general sort of response to this example 
that seems to be most commonly adopted by reli-
abilists is in effect to agree that such beliefs are 
not well-founded. They interpret or revise relia-
bilism with the aim of avoiding the counter-
example.29 An alternative response would be to 
argue that the reliability of clairvoyance shows 
that the belief is well-founded, and thus that the 
example does not refute reliabilism. 30 
We are tempted to respond to the second alter-
native - beliefs such as that of the clairvoyant in 
BonJour's example really are well-founded - that 
this is so clear an instance of an ill-founded belief 
that any proponent of that view must have in 
mind a different concept from the one we are dis-
cussing. The clairvoyant has no reason for hold-
ing his belief about the President. The fact that 
the belief was caused by a process of a reliable 
kind - clairvoyance - is a significant fact about it. 
Such a belief may merit some favorable term of 
epistemic appraisal, e.g., "objectively probable." 
But the belief is not well-founded. 
There are, however, two lines of reasoning that 
could lead philosophers to think that we must 
reconcile ourselves to the clairvoyant's belief 
turning out to be well-founded. According to one 
of these arguments, examples such as that of 
Alfred (discussed in Section IV above) show that 
the evidentialist account of epistemic merit is 
unsatisfactory and that epistemic merit must be 
understood in terms of the reliability of belief-
forming processes.3l Since the clairvoyant's belief 
is reliably formed, our initial inclination to regard 
it as ill-founded must be mistaken. 
This argument is unsound. The most that the 
example about Alfred shows is that there is a con-
cept of favorable epistemic appraisal other than 
justification, and that this other concept involves 
the notion of the basis of a belief. We believe that 
WF satisfactorily captures this other concept. 
There is no need to move to a reliabilist account, 
according to which some sort of causal reliability 
is sufficient for epistemic justification. The Alfred 
example does not establish that some version of 
reliabilism is correct. It does not establish that the 
clairvoyant's belief is well-founded. 
The second argument for the conclusion that 
the clairvoyant's belief is well-founded makes use 
of the strong similarity between clairvoyance in 
BonJour's example and normal perception. We 
claim that BonJour's clairvoyant is not justified in 
his belief about the President because that belief 
does not fit his evidence. Simply having a sponta-
neous uninferred belief about the whereabouts of 
the President does not provide evidence for its 
truth. But, it might be asked, what better evidence 
is there for any ordinary perceptual belief, say, 
that one sees a book? If there is no relevant epis-
temological difference between ordinary percep-
tual beliefs and the clairvoyant's belief, then they 
should be evaluated similarly. The argument con-
tinues with the point that reliabilism provides an 
explanation of the crucial similarity between 
ordinary perceptual beliefs and the clairvoyant's 
belief - both perception and clairvoyance work, in 
the sense that both are reliable. So beliefs caused 
by each process are well-founded on a reliabilist 
account. The fact that reliabilism satisfactorily 
explains this is to the theory's credit. On the other 
hand, in advocating evidentialism we have 
claimed that perceptual beliefs are well-founded 
and that the clairvoyant's belief is not. But there 
appears to be no relevant evidential difference 
between these beliefs. Thus, if the evidentialist 
view of the matter cannot be defended, then reli-
abilism is the superior theory and we should 
accept its consequence - the clairvoyant's belief is 
well-founded. 
One problem with this argument is that relia-
bilism has no satisfactory explanation of anything 
until the unclarities discussed above are removed 
in an acceptable way: What shows that perception 
and clairvoyance are relevant and reliable types of 

318 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
processes? In any event, there is an adequate evi-
dentialist explanation of the difference between 
ordinary perceptual beliefs and the clairvoyant's 
belief. On one interpretation of clairvoyance, it is 
a process whereby one is caused to have beliefs 
about objects hidden from ordinary view without 
any conscious state having a role in the causal 
process. The clairvoyant does not have the con-
scious experience of, say, seeming to see the 
President in some characteristic New York City 
setting, and on that basis form the belief that he is 
in New York. In this respect, the current version of 
clairvoyance is unlike ordinary perception, which 
does include conscious perceptual states. Because 
of this difference, ordinary perceptual beliefs are 
based on evidence - the evidence of these sensory 
states - whereas the clairvoyant beliefs are not 
based on evidence. Since WF requires that well-
founded beliefs be based on fitting evidence, and 
typical clairvoyant beliefs on the current interpre-
tation are not based on any evidence at all, the 
clairvoyant beliefs do not satisfy WE 
Suppose instead that clairvoyance does include 
visual experiences, though of remote objects that 
cannot stimulate the visual system in any normal 
way. Even if there are such visual experiences that 
could serve as a basis for a clairvoyant's beliefs, 
still there is a relevant epistemological difference 
between beliefs based on normal perceptual expe-
rience and the clairvoyant's belief in BonJour's 
example. We have collateral evidence to the effect 
that when we have perceptual experience of cer-
tain kinds, external conditions of the correspond-
ing kinds normally obtain. For example, we have 
evidence supporting the proposition that when 
we have the usual sort of experience of seeming to 
see a book, we usually do in fact see a book. This 
includes evidence from the coherence of these 
beliefs with beliefs arising from other perceptual 
sources, and it also includes testimonial evidence. 
This latter point is easily overlooked. One reason 
that the belief that one sees a book fits even a 
child's evidence when she has a perceptual expe-
rience of seeing a book is that children are taught, 
when they have the normal sort of visual experi-
ences' that they are seeing a physical object of the 
relevant kind. This testimony, typically from 
people whom the child has reason to trust, pro-
vides evidence for the child. And of course testi-
mony from others during adult life also gives 
evidence for the verdicality of normal visual 
experience. On the other hand, as BonJour 
describes his example, the clairvoyant has no con-
firmation at all of his clairvoyant beliefs. Indeed, 
he has evidence against these beliefs, since the 
clairvoyant perceptual experiences do not cohere 
with his other experiences. We conclude, there-
fore, that evidentialists can satisfactorily explain 
why ordinary perceptual beliefs are typically well-
founded and unconfirmed clairvoyant beliefs, 
even if reliably caused, are not. There is no good 
reason to abandon our initial intuition that the 
beliefs such as those of the clairvoyant in BonJour's 
example are not well-founded. 
Again, reliabilists could respond to BonJour's 
example either by claiming that the clairvoyant's 
belief is in fact well-founded or by arguing that 
reliabilism does not imply that it is well-founded. 
We turn now to the second of these alternatives, 
the one most commonly adopted by reliabilists. 
This view can be defended by arguing either that 
reliabilism can be reformulated so that it lacks 
this implication, or that as currently formulated it 
lacks this implication. We pointed out above that 
as a general approach reliabilism is sufficiently 
indefinite to allow interpretations under which it 
does lack the implication in question. The only 
way to achieve this result that we know of that is 
otherwise satisfactory requires the introduction 
of evidentialist concepts. The technique is to 
specify the relevant types of belief-forming 
processes in evidentialist terms. It is possible to 
hold that the relevant types of belief-forming 
process are believing something on the basis of 
fitting evidence and believing not as a result of fit-
ting evidence. This sort of "reliabilism" is a 
roundabout approximation of the straightfor-
ward evidentialist thesis, WE We see no reason to 
couch the approximated evidentialist theory in 
reliabilist terms. Moreover, the reliabilist approxi-
mation is not exactly equivalent to WF, and where 
it differs it appears to go wrong. The difference is 
this: it seems possible for the process of believ-
ing on the basis of fitting evidence to be unreli-
able. Finding a suitable sort of reliability makes 
all the difference here. In various possible worlds 
where our evidence is mostly misleading, the 
frequency with which fitting evidence causes 
true belief is low. Thus, this type of belief-form-
ing process is not "reliable" in such worlds in 
any straightforward way that depends on actual 
frequencies. Perhaps a notion of reliability that 

EVIDENTIALISM 
319 
avoids this result can be found. We know of no 
such notion which does not create trouble else-
where for the theory. So, the reliabilist view under 
consideration has the consequence that in such 
worlds beliefs based on fitting evidence are not 
well-founded. This is counterintuitive.32 
In this section we have compared reliabilism 
and evidentialism. The vagueness of reliabilism 
makes it difficult to determine what implications 
the theory has and it is not entirely clear what 
implications reliabilists want their theory to have. 
If reliabilists want their theory to have approxi-
mately the same extension as WF, we see no better 
way to accomplish this than one which makes the 
theory an unnecessarily complex and relatively 
implausible approximation to evidentialism. If, 
on the other hand, reliabilists want their theory to 
have an extension which is substantially different 
from that ofWF, and yet some familiar notion of 
"a reliable kind of process" is to be decisive for 
their notion of well-foundedness, then it becomes 
clear that the concept they are attempting to ana-
lyze is not one evidentialists seek to characterize. 
This follows from the fact that on this alternative 
they count as well-founded attitudes that plainly 
do not exemplify the concept evidentialists are 
discussing. In neither case, then, does reliabilism 
pose a threat to evidentialism. 
VI 
Summary and conclusion 
We have defended evidentialism. Some opposi-
tion to evidential ism rests on the view that a dox-
astic attitude can be justified for a person only if 
forming the attitude is an action under the per-
son's voluntary control. EJ is incompatible with 
Notes 
EJ is compatible with the existence of varying 
strengths of belief and disbelief. If there is 
such variation, then the greater the prepon-
derance of evidence, the stronger the doxastic 
attitude that fits the evidence. 
2 There are difficult questions about the con-
cept of fit, as well as about what it is for some-
one to have something as evidence, and of 
the conjunction of this sort of doxastic voluntar-
ism and the plain fact that some doxastic states 
that fit a person's evidence are out of that person's 
control. We have argued that no good reason has 
been given for thinking that an attitude is epis-
temically justified only if having it is under 
voluntary control. 
A second thesis contrary to EJ is that a doxas-
tic attitude can be justified only if having that 
attitude is within the normal doxastic limits of 
humans. We have held that the attitudes that are 
epistemically justified according to EJ are within 
these limits, and that even if they were not, that 
fact would not suffice to refute EJ. 
Some philosophers have contended that 
believing a proposition, p, is justified for S only 
when S has gone about gathering evidence about 
p in a responsible way, or has come to believe p as 
a result of seeking a meritorious epistemic goal 
such as the discovery of truth. This thesis conflicts 
with EJ, since believing p may fit one's evidence 
no matter how irresponsible one may have been 
in seeking evidence about p and no matter what 
were the goals that led to the belief. We agree that 
there is some epistemic merit in responsibly gath-
ering evidence and in seeking the truth. But we 
see no reason to think that epistemic justification 
turns on such matters. 
Another thesis conflicting with EJ is that 
merely having evidence is not sufficient to justify 
belief, since the believer might not make proper 
use of the evidence in forming the belief. 
Consideration of this claim led us to make use of 
a second evidentialist notion, well-foundedness. 
It does not, however, provide any good reason to 
think that EJ is false. Nor do we find reason 
to abandon evidentialism in favor of reliabilism. 
Evidentialism remains the most plausible view of 
epistemic justification. 
what kind of thing constitutes evidence. As a 
result, there are some cases in which it is dif-
ficult to apply EJ. For example, it is unclear 
whether a person has as evidence proposi-
tions he is not currently thinking of, but could 
recall with some prompting. As to what con-
stitutes evidence, it seems clear that this 
includes both beliefs and sensory states such 

320 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CO NEE 
as feeling very warm and having the visual 
experience of seeing blue. Some philosophers 
seem to think that only beliefs can justify 
beliefs. (See, for example, Keith Lehrer, 
Knowledge (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1974), pp. 187-8.) The application of EJ is 
clear enough to do the work that we intend 
here - a defense of the evidentialist position. 
3 See "Doxastic agency," Philosophical Studies 
43 (1983), pp. 355-64. The quotation is from 
p.355. 
4 See "The psychological turn:' Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy 60 (1982), pp. 238-53. 
The quotation is from p. 252. 
5 Ibid., p. 253. 
6 Heil, "Doxastic agency," p. 363. 
7 Kornblith may be guilty of this confusion. 
He writes, "if a person has an unjustified 
belief, that person is epistemically culpable:' 
"The psychological turn," p. 243. 
8 Nothing we say here should be taken to 
imply that any doxastic states are in fact vol-
untarily entered. 
9 See "Epistemics: The regulative theory of 
cognition:' The Journal of Philosophy LXXV 
(1978), pp. 509-23, esp. p. 510 and p. 514. 
10 
"Justified belief and epistemically responsible 
action:' The Philosophical Review 92 (1983), 
pp. 33-48. The quotation is from p. 46. 
11 
Paul Thagard, "From the descriptive to the 
normative 
III 
psychology 
and 
logic:' 
Philosophy of Science 49 (1982), pp. 24-42. 
The quotation is from p. 34. 
12 
Another version of this argument is that EJ is 
false because it classifies as justified for a person 
attitudes that are beyond that person's limits. 
This version is subject to similar criticisms. 
13 
See TheoryofKnowledge,2ndedn (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977), especially 
pp.12-15. 
14 
Roderick Firth makes a similar point against 
a similar view in "Are epistemic concepts 
reducible to ethical concepts:' in Alvin 
Goldman and J. Kim Values and Morals 
(Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1978), pp. 215-29. 
15 
Kornblith defends this view in "Justified belief 
and epistemically responsible action." Some 
passages suggest that he intends to introduce 
a new notion of justification, one to be under-
stood in terms of epistemically responsible 
action. But some passages, especially in 
Section II, suggest that the traditional analy-
sis of justification is being found to be objec-
tionable and inferior to the one he proposes. 
16 
Laurence BonJour, "Externalist theories of 
empirical justification:' Midwest Studies V 
(1980), p. 63. 
17 
This is contrary to the view of Richard Gale, 
defended in "William James and the ethics of 
belief;' American Philosophical Quarterly 17 
(1980), pp. 1-14, and of W. K. Clifford who 
said, "It is wrong always, everywhere, and for 
everyone, to believe anything upon insufficient 
evidence" (quoted by William James in "The 
will to believe:' reprinted in J. Feinberg (ed.), 
Reason and Responsibility, (Belmont, California: 
Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1981) p. 100). 
18 
See "Believing what one ought:' Journal of 
Philosophy 80, pp. 752ff. 
19 
See "Epistemic merit, intrinsic and instru-
mental:' Proceedings and Addresses of The 
American PhilosophicalAssociation 55 (1981), 
pp.5-6. 
20 
See Kornblith's "Beyond foundationalism 
and the coherence theory:' The Journal of 
Philosophy 77 (1980), pp. 597-612, esp. 
pp. 601 ff. and Goldman's "What is justified 
belief?" this vol., ch. 26. 
21 
Clause (ii) of WF is intended to accommo-
date the fact that a well-founded attitude 
need not be based on a person's whole body 
of evidence. What seems required is that the 
person base a well-founded attitude on a 
justifying part of the person's evidence, and 
that he not ignore any evidence he has that 
defeats the justifying power of the evidence 
he does base his attitude on. It might be that 
his defeating evidence is itself defeated by a 
still wider body of his evidence. In such a 
case, the person's attitude is well-founded 
only if he takes the wider body into account. 
WF uses our last main primitive concept -
that of basing an attitude on a body of 
evidence. This notion is reasonably clear, 
though an analysis would be useful. See Note 
22 below for one difficult question about 
what is entailed. 
22 
Goldman uses this sort of example only to 
show that there is a causal element in the 
concept of justification. We acknowledge 
that there is an epistemic concept - well-
foundedness - that appeals to the notion of 

EVIDENTIALISM 
321 
basing an attitude on evidence, and this may 
be a causal notion. What seems to confer 
epistemic merit on basing one's belief on the 
evidence is that in doing one appreciates 
the evidence. It is unclear whether one can 
appreciate the evidence without being 
caused to have the belief by the evidence. 
But in any event we see no such causal 
requirement in the case of justification. 
23 
The clearest and most influential discussion 
of reliabilism is in Goldman's "What is justi-
fied belief?" One of the first statements of the 
theory appears in David Armstrong's Belief, 
Truth and Knowledge (London: Cambridge 
University Press, 1973). For extensive bibli-
ographies on reliabilism, see Frederick 
Schmitt's "Reliability, objectivity, and the 
background of justification," Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy 62 (1984), pp. 1-15, 
and Richard Feldman's "Reliability and justi-
fication;' The Monist 68 (1985), pp. 159-74. 
24 
For discussion of the problem of determin-
ing relevant kinds of belief-forming proc-
esses, see Goldman, "What is justified belief?", 
Schmitt, "Reliability, objectivity, and the 
background of justification;' Feldman, 
"Reliability and justification;' and Feldman, 
"Schmitt on reliability, objectivity, and justi-
fication," Australasian Journal of Philosophy 
63 (1985), pp. 354-60. 
25 
In "Reliability and justified belief;' Canadian 
Journal of Philosophy 14, (1984), pp. 103-15, 
John Pollock argues that there is no account 
of reliability suitable for reliabilists. 
26 
This version of reliabilism will not be exactly 
equivalent to WF because it ignores the fac-
tors introduced by clause (ii) of WE 
27 
It is also possible that versions of reliabilism 
making use only of natural psychological 
kinds of belief-forming processes are exten-
sionally equivalent to WE Goldman seeks 
to avoid evaluative epistemic concepts in 
his theory of epistemic justification, so he 
would not find an account of justification 
satisfactory unless it appealed only to such 
natural kinds. See "What is justified belief?" 
28 
See "Externalist theories of empirical justifi-
cation;' p. 62. 
29 
See Goldman, "What Is Justified Belief?", this 
vol., p. 333, Kornblith, "Beyond foundationa-
lism and the coherence theory;' pp. 609-11, 
and Frederick Schmitt, "Reliability, objectivity, 
and the background of justification." 
30 
We know of one who has explicitly taken this 
approach. It seems to fit most closely with 
the view defended by David Armstrong in 
Belief, Truth and Knowledge. 
31 
We know of no one who explicitly defends 
this inference. In "The psychological turn," 
p. 241 ff., Kornblith argues that these 
examples show that justification depends 
upon "psychological connections" and "the 
workings of the appropriate belief forming 
process." But he clearly denies there that 
reliabilism is directly implied. 
32 
Stewart Cohen has made this point in 
"Justification 
and 
truth," Philosophical 
Studies 46 (1984), pp. 279-95. Cohen makes 
the point in the course of developing a 
dilemma. He argues that reliabilism has the 
sort of flaw that we describe above when we 
appeal to worlds where evidence is mostly 
misleading. Cohen also contends that relia-
bilism has the virtue of providing a clear 
explanation of how the epistemic notion of 
justification is connected with the notion of 
truth. A theory that renders this truth con-
nection inexplicable is caught on the second 
horn of Cohen's dilemma. 
Although Cohen does not take up evi-
dentialism as we characterize it, the second 
horn of his dilemma affects EJ and WE They 
do not explain how having an epistemically 
justified or well-founded belief is connected 
to the truth of that belief. Evidentialists can 
safely say this much about the truth connec-
tion: evidence that makes believing p justi-
fied is evidence on which it is epistemically 
probable that p is true. Although there is this 
connection between justification and truth, 
we acknowledge that there may be no analy-
sis of epistemic probability that makes the 
connection to truth as close, or as clear, as 
might have been hoped. 
Cohen argues that there must be a truth 
connection. This shows no flaw in EJ or WF 
unless they are incompatible with there being 
such a connection. Cohen does not argue for 
this incompatibility and we know of no 
reason to believe that it exists. So at most 
Cohen's dilemma shows that evidentialists 
have work left to do. 

CHAPTER 25 
Skepticism and Rationality 
Richard Foley 
Skeptical hypotheses have been allowed to set the 
terms of the epistemological debate. They con-
vince no one. Yet they have an enormous influ-
ence. It is often influence by provocation. They 
provoke epistemologists into endorsing meta-
physical and linguistic positions that antecedently 
would have seemed to have had little appeal. 
Skeptical hypotheses, it is said, cannot even be 
meaningfully asserted, or if they can, the nature 
of God or the nature of objects or the nature of 
thought makes it altogether impossible for them 
to be true. There are those who refuse to be pro-
voked, but even their epistemologies tend to be 
dominated by skeptical hypotheses. The hypoth-
eses push them into an overly defensive posture 
from which it can seem that the test of an epi-
stemology is how well it would fare in a hostile 
environment. There must be a third way. There 
must be a way to think about skeptical hypotheses 
that is neither dismissive nor submissive. 
The kind of skeptical challenge that is most 
familiar to us is the kind that concerned Descartes. 
To be sure, the skeptical tradition is an ancient 
one, but the challenges of the ancient skeptics had 
a different aim from those discussed by Descartes. 
The followers of Pyrrho of Elis, for example, saw 
skepticism as a way of life and a desirable one at 
Originally published in M. D. Roth and G. Ross (eds), 
Doubting (Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 
1990), pp. 69-81. 
that. Suspending judgement about how things 
really are was thought to be a means to tranquil-
lity. There is no hint of this in Descartes or in the 
Enlightenment philosophers who succeeded him. 
Descartes did think that skeptical doubt could be 
put to good use. It could help deliver us from 
prejudices and thereby help put our beliefs upon 
a secure foundation. But even for Descartes, skep-
ticism was first and foremost a threat rather than 
an opportunity, and it remains so for us. However, 
Descartes thought that it was a threat that could 
be successfully met. He thought that by making 
rational use of our cognitive resources, we can be 
guaranteed of the truth. Correspondingly, he 
thought that error is something for which we are 
always responsible. We have the tools to avoid it. 
Knowledge is ours for the taking. We need only to 
be sufficiently reflective and sufficiently cautious. 
For if we are sufficiently reflective we will come to 
perceive clearly and distinctly the truth of various 
claims, and if we are sufficiently cautious we will 
refrain from believing anything else. Skeptical 
hypotheses were of interest for Descartes because 
they provided him with a dramatic way to illus-
trate these assumptions. They helped him to 
dramatize the potential power of reason. One 
need not rely upon tradition or authority for 
one's opinions. One can stand alone intellectually, 
deciding for oneself what to make of the world 
and what to make of one's tradition. And if in 
doing so one makes proper use of one's reason, 
one can be assured of knowledge. 

SKEPTICISM AND RATIONALITY 
323 
An increasing specialization of intellectual 
labor has made us sensitive, in a way in which 
Descartes was not, about the extent to which we 
rely upon the opinions of others, just as a height-
ened appreciation of cultural relativity has made 
us more sensitive about the extent to which we 
are shaped by our traditions. Even so, we are as 
reluctant to rely uncritically upon our authori-
ties and traditions as Descartes and his 
Enlightenment successors were upon theirs. We 
realize how difficult it is to distance ourselves 
intellectually from our surroundings, but we 
realize also that even our best scientists can be 
mistaken and that even our most venerable tradi-
tions can be misguided. As a result, we too feel 
the need to make up our own minds. This creates 
for us an intellectual predicament that is much 
like the one that Descartes describes at the begin-
ning of the Meditations. It is an egocentric pre-
dicament, prompted by a simple question, "What 
am I to believe?" I cannot simply read off from 
the world what is true, nor can I unproblemati-
cally rely upon the acknowledged experts or the 
received traditions to guide me towards the truth. 
I instead must marshall my own resources. I must 
marshall them to determine by my own lights 
what is true and who is reliable and what if any-
thing is defensible about the traditions of my 
community. In this respect the individualism of 
Descartes has won the day. 
What we find unacceptable in Descartes is his 
optimism. We think it naive. We no longer think 
that by properly marshalling our resources we can 
be assured of the truth. Being sufficiently reflective 
and sufficiently cautious is no guarantee that we 
will avoid error. It is not even a guarantee of relia-
bility. Even so, philosophical problems come down 
to us through time, and today we remain under the 
spell ofthe epistemological aspirations of Descartes, 
Locke, Hume, Kant and others. The cure is to 
remind ourselves that their aims need not be ours. 
What they took to be an intellectual problem in 
need of a solution we can appreciate as part of the 
human condition. Given the kind of creatures that 
we are, we cannot help but lack guarantees of the 
sort that they sought. This is no more a problem 
for us than is that of finding a way to do without 
oxygen. We just are creatures who need oxygen. 
Similarly, the lack of intellectual guarantees just is 
part of the human condition. The problem is one 
of how to react to that condition. 
The reaction need not be one of abandoning 
egocentric epistemology. Reliabilism, for example, 
constitutes such an abandonment. The egocen-
tric question is "What am I to believe?" To answer 
this question, I must marshall my resources in an 
effort to determine what methods of inquiry are 
reliable. So, from the egocentric perspective, it is 
altogether unhelpful to be told that I am to have 
beliefs that are the products of reliable methods. 
Of course, no sensible reliabilist would claim oth-
erwise. The point, rather, is that reliabilists tend 
to be satisfied with an epistemology that does not 
address the problems of the egocentric predica-
ment, despite the fact that such problems have 
been at the heart of the great epistemological 
projects of the past. My point, in turn, is that we 
need not be satisfied with such an epistemology. 
We can do better. 
But if we are to do better, we must give up an 
assumption that has had a hold on epistemolo-
gists from Descartes through Gettier. According 
to Descartes, it is rational to believe just that 
which is clear and distinct for you, and what is 
clear and distinct for you is true. So, for Descartes 
rational belief always results in knowledge. This 
means that there are no Gettier problems within 
Cartesian epistemology. No one can rationally 
infer a truth from a rational but false belief, since 
there are no rational false beliefs. Today we stand-
ardly construe the link between rational belief 
and true belief in a looser manner than did 
Descartes. A rational belief can be false. So, Gettier 
problems do arise within our epistemologies. 
Even so, the difference between Cartesian and 
contemporary epistemologies is not so great, 
since within the latter it still is commonly assumed 
that a rational true belief absent Gettier problems 
is always knowledge. It is this assumption that 
must be abandoned. More exactly, it must be 
abandoned if the answer to the question "What is 
it rational for me to believe?" is to be relevant to 
the egocentric predicament. The assumption must 
be abandoned because it ties rational belief too 
closely with knowledge and, as a consequence, 
too closely with reliability. For ifby being rational 
one cannot be assured of having mostly true 
beliefs, then, contrary to the assumption, a 
rational true belief need not be a good candidate 
for knowledge even absent Gettier problems. 
Skeptical hypotheses can help illustrate this. 
Imagine a world in which a demon alters your 

324 
RICHARD FOLEY 
environment so that you make massive errors 
about it. You regularly make perceptual mistakes. 
Even so, the demon allows you to have a few iso-
lated true beliefs about your environment. 
Perhaps the demon permits the existence of only 
one chair and it is the one that you are now sit-
ting upon. So, your belief that you are now sitting 
upon a chair is true. Yet almost all of your other 
beliefs about your environment are false. This 
true belief of yours is not a particularly good 
candidate for knowledge, but why not? There 
need not be Gettier problems here. You need not 
have inferred the truth that you are now sitting 
upon a chair from any falsehood. But then, on 
the assumption that rational true belief absent 
Gettier problems is knowledge, the explanation 
must be that your belief is not rational. But why 
isn't it rational? Again we seem to have little 
choice. The explanation must cite whatever it is 
that we think prevents you from having knowl-
edge. So, if we think that you do not know that you 
are sitting upon a chair because your belief is the 
product of perceptual equipment that is unrelia-
ble in your current environment, this same fact 
must be what precludes your belief from being 
rational. The more closely rational belief is tied 
to knowledge, the more difficult it is to avoid this 
conclusion. 
My counterproposal is that the prerequisites 
of rational belief are not so closely tied to the con-
ditions of knowledge. More exactly, the proposal 
is that this is so for the sense of rational belief that 
presupposes the egocentric perspective. This is 
not the only sense of rational belief. On the con-
trary, we evaluate beliefs from a variety of per-
spectives, depending on the context and our 
purposes, and we tend to give expression to these 
evaluations using the language of rationality. I 
The more objective the perspective that is presup-
posed, the more plausible will be the idea that a 
rational true belief absent Gettier problems is 
always an instance of knowledge. However, this is 
not so for egocentrically rational belief. The 
evil demon or the scientist who envats your 
brain deprive you of knowledge, but they need 
not deprive you of the opportunity of being 
egocentrically rational. This is the real lesson of 
the evil demon and the brain in the vat. By 
hypothesis these are situations that you could not 
distinguish from what you take to be your current 
situation. From your skin in, everything about 
these situations is as it is now. And yet, from your 
skin out, things are drastically different from what 
you take them to be in the current situation. Still, 
you would have egocentric reasons in such situa-
tions to believe exactly what you do now. The 
demon does not deprive you of these reasons. 
Rather, he alters your environment so that these 
reasons are no longer reliable indicators of truths. 
In so doing he deprives you of knowledge. 
Knowledge, then, requires an element of luck, 
of good fortune. We cannot altogether eliminate 
the possibility of massive error by being egocen-
trically rational. We need the world to cooperate. 
This is what skeptical hypotheses teach us? 
Knowledge is not within our control to the degree 
that egocentric rationality is. If contrary to what 
we think, the world or something in it conspires 
against us, then so much the worse for us as 
knowing creatures. Nothing that we can do with 
respect to getting our own house in order will 
succeed in bringing us knowledge. This is not a 
comforting thought. We like to think of knowl-
edge as part of our birthright. The thought that it 
might not be is so discomforting that it makes an 
appeal to idealism in one of its many garbs attrac-
tive to some. This is an appeal to be resisted. 
It has all the advantages of metaphysics over a 
straightforward assessment of our situation. The 
better alternative is to give up success as a condi-
tion of egocentric rationality - to admit that this 
kind of rationality in and of itself is not enough 
to guarantee either truth or reliability. 
Many of us will find it difficult to admit this, 
especially when doing philosophy. Among phi-
losophers it is often taken for granted that the 
worst charge that we can make against others is 
that they are irrational. This attitude finds its way 
into our ethics as well as our epistemology. We 
resist the idea that egoists can be as rational as 
the rest of us. We think that we must prove that 
they are irrational, as if we would be at a loss as to 
how to criticize them if we could not do so. The 
remedy is to remind ourselves that not every fail-
ure need be one of rationality. There can be other 
explanations for moral failures. They might be 
the result of inadequate moral training, for 
example - a training that did not sufficiently 
develop our moral sensitivities. As a result, we 
might not be able to discriminate finely enough 
among the relevant features of morally difficult 
situations. Or more seriously, it may have left us 

SKEPTICISM AND RATIONALITY 
325 
with a fundamentally flawed character, one that 
has us caring for the wrong things. 
Analogously, we may be tempted to think that 
someone who has massively mistaken beliefs 
must be irrational, as if this were the only possible 
explanation of their being so thoroughly mis-
guided. But again, we need to remind ourselves 
that not every failure is a failure of rationality. There 
are other explanations for intellectual error, even 
widespread error. Like moral failure, it might be 
largely a matter of bad training. We might have 
been brought up in a culture whose intellectual 
traditions encourage error, a tradition that 
emphasizes magic, for example. Or more omi-
nously, we might have inappropriate cognitive 
equipment. We might not be cognitively suited to 
detect truths in the environment in which we find 
ourselves. But whatever the explanation, the point 
is the same: Rationality in the theoretical sphere 
need be no more intimately tied to knowledge 
than it is to goodness in the practical sphere. Just 
as you can be rational and yet lacking in virtue, so 
too you can be rational and yet lacking in knowl-
edge. Appreciating this can help cure the preoc-
cupation with skepticism that has dominated 
modern epistemology. It can allow egocentric 
epistemology to be done non-defensively.3 
A non-defensive epistemology is one that 
refuses to apologize for a lack of guarantees. 
There is no guarantee that by being rational you 
will avoid error. There is no guarantee that you will 
avoid massive error. It need not even be probable 
that you will avoid massive error. Much of the 
implausibility of the Cartesian project arises from 
its failure to recognize that this is part of our 
intellectual condition. It instead insists that by 
being rational we can be assured of success. This 
insistence has disastrous consequences for 
egocentric epistemology. For contrary to what 
Descartes thought, there is nothing that we can 
do with respect to marshalling our cognitive 
resources that will result in such guarantees. 
Marshall them as we please. We will still need the 
world to cooperate. Consider the trust that we 
place in our perceptual equipment. If unbe-
knownst to us there is a deceiving demon in this 
world, then many of our perceptual beliefs will be 
false. And if most other close worlds are also 
demon worlds, then trusting our perceptual 
equipment does not even make it probable that 
we will avoid massive error.4 A non-defensive 
epistemology refuses to be intimidated by this 
possibility. It refuses to be intimidated into 
making success or likely success a prerequisite of 
rationality. It allows that it might be rational for 
us to trust our perceptual equipment even if 
doing so, unbeknownst to us, is likely to result in 
massive error. 
It is a mistake for an egocentric epistemology 
to insist upon any kind of guarantee whatsoever 
between rationality and truth or likely-truth. This 
is the deepest flaw in the Cartesian approach to 
epistemology. It is not just that Descartes tried to 
guarantee too much, although this too is so. He 
unrealistically insisted that by being egocentri-
cally rational we can be altogether assured of 
avoiding error. He was thus forced to regard any 
skeptical conjecture, no matter how far-fetched, 
as a prima facie defeater, one which itself had to 
be conclusively defeated before a claim could be 
rationally believed. But of course, if this were so, 
not much of anything would be rational for us to 
believe. 
It might seem that the solution is simply to 
weaken the guarantee, but this would still leave 
us with a defensive epistemology, and one that 
would face exactly the same problem that plagues 
Cartesian epistemology. This problem arises 
regardless of the strength of the guarantee, and it 
arises in exactly the same form as it did for 
Descartes. It arises if we say that by being rational 
we can be assured of having mostly true beliefs. 
It arises if we say more cautiously that by being 
rational we can at least be assured of avoiding the 
likelihood of massive error. It even arises if we 
say that by being rational we can be assured only 
that the likelihood of our avoiding error is greater 
than if we were not rational. 5 For regardless of the 
nature of the guarantee, there will be no non-
question begging assurances that the way in which 
we are marshalling our cognitive resources gener-
ates beliefs that meet the guarantee. There will be 
no non-question begging assurances, in other 
words, that the way in which we are marshalling 
our resources is suitable for our environment. 
After all, the search for such assurances will 
itself require us to marshall our cognitive 
resources. It will itself involve the use of methods 
about which we can sensibly have doubts, doubts 
that cannot be addressed without begging the 
question. Any attempt to address them will employ 
methods either that are themselves already at issue 

326 
RICHARD FOLEY 
or that can be made so. There is a close analogy 
with the practical realm. There too self-directed 
inquiry can raise doubts that cannot be addressed 
without begging the question. I commit myself to 
various projects, ones that initially seem worth-
while, but if I examine my commitments and the 
values implicit in them, doubts can occur to me. 
I can ask whether I want to be the kind of person 
who makes these sorts of commitments. Can I 
endorse my being that kind of person? And even 
if I answer "yes;' this does not definitively settle 
the doubts. I can go on and ask about the values 
implicit in this latest endorsement. Either they are 
values that were implicit in the commitments 
about which I originally had doubts or they are 
new values about which I can also raise doubts. It 
is hopeless to search for a non-question begging 
way to endorse all of our values, including the 
values implicit in the endorsement itself. Any 
search of this sort would be based on the assump-
tion that there is a neutral position from which 
such endorsements can be made, but there isn't. 
Nor is there in epistemology. There is no neutral 
position from which to defend our intellectual 
commitments. 
But if not, we must admit that egocentric epis-
temology cannot provide non-question begging 
assurances that we will avoid massive error by 
being rational. The search for such assurances is 
doomed from the start. It is one thing to insist 
that skeptical hypotheses are genuinely possible. 
It is another to insist that the rationality of our 
beliefs depends upon our having a non-question 
begging way to discharge them. We have no such 
way, and our rationality does not depend upon 
our having one. 
Admitting this need not lead to quietism. One 
of our intellectual projects, arguably our most 
fundamental one, is to understand our own posi-
tion in the world, including our position as 
inquirers. Within the context of such a project, it 
is natural to raise general doubts about our intel-
lectual commitments. It is natural to entertain 
even radically skeptical doubts about them. Of 
course, making ourselves into an object of sys-
tematic inquiry is not an everyday occurrence. It 
requires some detachment from our ordinary 
concerns. You cannot with sanity raise general 
questions about your intellectual commitments 
when, say, discussing with your mechanic the 
problems you are having with your car.6 Nor can 
you raise them when you are doing physics or 
biology or geometry. But in the context of an 
inquiry into our place in the world, they arise with-
out force. We make ourselves into the objects of 
our study, and we recognize that these objects 
that we are studying are creatures who have a rich 
interaction with their environment. They have 
various beliefs about it and various desires for it, 
all of which become intertwined in their projects. 
The intellectual projects that find expression in 
their sciences, for example, are intertwined with 
projects that are aimed at controlling their envi-
ronment. These projects, we further recognize, 
can be conducted more or less successfully. In 
wondering about the relative success of their 
intellectual projects, we are raising general ques-
tions about their beliefs, questions that make it 
natural to entertain skeptical hypotheses. We are 
wondering whether their cognitive equipment 
and their ways of employing this equipment are 
sufficiently well-suited for their environment as 
to be prone to produce true beliefs about it. Even 
in wondering about the success of their non-
intellectual projects, these same questions arise 
indirectly. For even if we grant that these crea-
tures are mostly successful in controlling their 
environment, it is natural to want some explana-
tion for this success. Is it by having largely accu-
rate beliefs about their environment that they are 
able to exercise this control or is there some other 
explanation? But in wondering whether there 
might not be another explanation, we are once 
again taking skeptical possibilities seriously. It is 
perfectly natural for us to do so in this context. 
So, it is not a mistaken philosophical tradition 
that leads us to skeptical thoughts. 7 It is our 
natural curiosity. We are curious about these 
creatures' place in the world, including their place 
as inquirers. We know that they take themselves 
to be accurately representing their world. It is 
natural for us to wonder whether they are right in 
thinking this or whether their representations 
might be distorted in some systematic way. The 
hypothesis of the evil demon and the brain in the 
vat are merely dramatic devices to express these 
kinds of thoughts in their most radical form. 
There is, of course, something else that is 
unusual about these kinds of thoughts. They are 
about our beliefs, our presuppositions, our 
methods of inquiry. If we are to make these 
things the objects of concern, we must be able to 

SKEPTICISM AND RATIONALITY 
327 
distance ourselves from them in some way. This 
might make it seem as if the entertainment of 
skeptical hypotheses is inevitably an exercise in 
schizop hrenia. 
But if this be schizophrenia, it is of a common 
enough sort. Indeed, it is easy to come by even in 
the limiting case of belief, that which is indubita-
ble for you. Such propositions are irresistible for 
you once you bring them clearly to mind. Clarity 
about them is enough to command your assent.8 
So, you cannot directly doubt the truth of such a 
proposition. I may be able to do that, but you 
cannot. Otherwise, it would not be genuinely 
indubitable for you. Even so, you can do the next 
best thing. You can raise questions about its truth 
indirectly. You can do so by considering in a gen-
eral way whether that which is indubitable for 
you is really true. You can wonder whether you 
might not be the kind of creature who finds cer-
tain falsehoods impossible to doubt. Your won-
dering this does not prove that nothing is really 
indubitable for you. It does not prove that you 
really are capable of doubting that you exist and 
that 2 + 1 = 3. These propositions can still be irre-
sistible for you whenever you directly consider 
them. However, you can refuse to do this. You can 
refuse to bring them fully to mind, and by so 
refusing you gain the ability to suspend belief in 
them hypothetically. You need not cease believing 
them. You merely cease focusing your direct 
attention upon them. In doing this you can dis-
tance yourself even from that which is indubita-
ble for you, and thus you can make even these 
propositions an object of skeptical concern. There 
is nothing mysterious about your doing SO.9 
Similarly, there is nothing mysterious about your 
entertaining serious and general skeptical worries 
about the other propositions that you believe. 
You can doubt in a general way whether much of 
what of you believe is true, and you can do so 
without actually giving up those beliefs. It is 
enough for you to suspend them hypothetically. 
To think that there is something inevitably 
puzzling about entertaining general skeptical 
doubts is to make human thought into something 
far less flexible than it is. Atheists can debate even 
theological questions with theists and they can do 
so without altering their beliefs. They hypotheti-
cally suspend for the duration of the discussion 
a good portion of what they believe. Similarly, 
the morally upright can appreciate, admire, and 
even enjoy the ingenuity and resourcefulness of 
literary villains even when that ingenuity and 
resourcefulness is put to repugnant purposes. 
They can do so by hypothetically suspending 
their moral scruples. There may be limits as to 
how much of our beliefs and values we can put 
into suspension, but the limits are at best distant 
ones. They are not so constraining as to prevent 
sensible discussion between atheists and theists, 
and they are not such as to preclude appreciation 
of the great literary villains. Nor are they so strin-
gent as to rule out worries about the general reli-
ability of our beliefs. We need not abandon our 
beliefs in order to entertain such worries. It is 
enough for us to suspend them hypothetically. 10 
The way to respond to skeptical doubts is not 
to legislate against them metaphysically, and it is 
not to dismiss them as meaningless, self-defeating, 
or even odd. It is rather to live with them. It is to 
recognize that what makes epistemology possible 
also makes skeptical worries inevitable - namely, 
our ability to make our methods of inquiry them-
selves into an object of inquiry. Within the con-
text of such an inquiry, the worry that we might 
possibly have widely mistaken beliefs is as natural 
as it is ineradicable. If this illustrates our whimsi-
cal condition, then so be it, II but it is, after all, not 
so surprising. We want to be able to defend or at 
least explain the reliability of our methods of 
inquiry, but the only way to do so is within our 
own system of inquiry. We seek to use our meth-
ods to show that these same methods are to be 
trusted. This leaves us vulnerable to the charge 
that we are begging the question against the skep-
tic. If the only way to defend or to explain our 
general way of proceeding is by using that way of 
proceeding, then we will not have altogether ruled 
out the possibility that its products might be 
widely mistaken. This is no more than a generali-
zation of the problem of the Cartesian circle, and 
it is a circle from which we can no more escape 
than could Descartes. 
But if we too are caught in this circle, what's 
the point of inquiring into the reliability of our 
methods of inquiry? Why not relax and just 
assume that our fundamental methods are relia-
ble? Why not encourage or at least tolerate intel-
lectual complacency about these matters? Because 
striving to use our fundamental methods of 
inquiry to defend or to explain their own reliabil-
ity is far from pointless. Besides, even if it were, it 

328 
RICHARD FOLEY 
would not matter. We cannot help ourselves. Our 
curiosity compels us to seek such explanations. 
But in fact, it is not pointless to seek them, since 
they need not always be forthcoming. Not all 
methods of inquiry are even capable of begging 
the question in their own defense, even though 
this is the least we should expect from them. The 
least we should expect is that they be self-
referentially defensible. What this means, for 
beginners, is that they be logically coherent. It 
must be possible to employ them in their own 
defense,12 but possibility is not enough. In addi-
tion, the circumstances have to be favorable for 
such a defense, and the methods themselves might 
indicate that this is not so. It is sometimes sug-
gested that the collection of procedures that we 
call "the scientific method" is self-referentially 
indefensible in just this way. The history of sci-
ence, it is argued, is largely a history of error. We 
look back at the theories of even the best scientists 
of previous times and find much in those theories 
that is false and even silly. Moreover, there is no 
reason to think that future scientists won't think 
the same of our best current theories. In this way, 
the history of science might seem to give us good 
inductive grounds - grounds that are themselves 
acceptable given the methods of science - for 
thinking that the scientific method is unreliable. 
This is a perfectly respectable argumentative 
strategy. If the use of the scientific method in our 
environment has been proven, in accordance with 
canons acceptable to that method, to generate 
mistaken theories with regularity, then so much 
the worse for it as a procedure to generate true 
theories. The least we should expect from a pro-
posed method of inquiry is that it be abel to 
defend itself in its own terms. Much of recent 
philosophy of science can be read as trying to do 
just that. It can be read, that is, as trying to give a 
construal of the scientific method and a reading 
of the history of science that together constitute a 
response to this pessimistic induction. For exam-
ple, there are those who claim that any fair look at 
the history of science reveals not so much a 
history of repudiation of past theories but rather 
a history in which past theories are largely incor-
porated into their successor theories. In addition, 
they claim that the immediate aim of scientific 
theorizing is not so much to generate theories 
that are strictly and thoroughly true but rather 
ones that are at least approximately true. The aim 
is verisimilitude. They then point out that the 
history of science, so understood, provides no 
basis for an induction whose conclusion is that 
present theories are not even approximately true. 
On the contrary, that history is marked by ever 
increasing predictive success, and the best expla-
nation of this is that those sciences are getting 
closer and closer to the truth. So, far from sup-
porting a pessimistic induction, the history of sci-
ence gives us good reason to think that the terms 
of our sciences, especially our more mature ones, 
typically do referY 
It is tempting to dismiss arguments of this sort 
on the grounds that they beg the question. After 
all, the scientific method is a method that makes 
essential use of arguments to the best explana-
tion. So, questions about its reliability are in large 
measure questions about the truth preserving-
ness of such arguments. And yet, the response 
employs an argument to the best explanation in 
order to defend the scientific method. It is thus 
presupposing exactly that which it is trying to 
establish. 
Even so, what I have been arguing is that some 
questions deserve to be begged. Questions about 
the reliability of our fundamental methods of 
inquiry are just such questions. It need not be a 
fault of the scientific method that it cannot be 
defended without begging the question. The fault 
would lie in there being no argument by which 
the method can be defended. If there is no way 
that the method can be defended, not even a 
question begging way, then it would fail even the 
minimum test for a method of inquiry. This is 
only the minimum, however. There are patently 
silly methods that can be used to defend them-
selves. 14 So, if the only thing that can be said in 
favor of the scientific method is that it can be 
used to defend itself, this is not much. It is cer-
tainly not enough to provide assurances of its 
reliability, as proponents of arguments to the best 
explanation sometimes hint. On the other hand, 
it is not altogether insignificant either, as their 
opponents sometimes hint. 
Likewise, it is misguided to complain about the 
Cartesian circle, not because Descartes did not 
argue in a circle - he did - but rather because this 
is not the flaw in his strategy. The problem is not 
that he begs the question by appealing to what he 
takes to be clear and distinct considerations in 
order to show that clarity and distinctness assures 

SKEPTICISM AND RATIONALITY 
329 
us of truth. If a proposed method of rational 
inquiry is fundamental, it cannot help but be used 
in its own defense if it is to be defended at all. The 
problem, rather, is that Descartes thought that his 
strategy, if successful, could altogether extinguish 
serious skeptical worries. He was wrong about 
this. Suppose that Descartes had in fact provided a 
clear, distinct and hence irresistible proof of God's 
existence and had succeeded also in providing an 
irresistible proof that God would not allow that 
which is irresistible for us to be mistaken. This still 
would not have been enough to answer all of the 
skeptic's questions, although admittedly it per-
haps would come as close as possible to doing so. 
In large part it is this that makes the Cartesian 
strategy such an appealing one. If the arguments 
work, would-be skeptics are forced to go to 
extreme lengths to keep their skeptical concerns 
alive, but they can do so. They will not be able to 
do so as long as they have Descartes' irresistible 
proofs clearly in mind, for as long as these proofs 
are clearly in mind even would-be skeptics cannot 
help but believe that irresistible propositions are 
true. But of course, they need not always have the 
proofs in mind. Thus, as with other propositions, 
they can suspend belief hypothetically in the 
proposition that irresistible propositions are true. 
They can distance themselves from the spell of the 
proofs' irresistibility and by so doing they can sen-
sibly raise the question of whether irresistibility 
really is sufficient for truth. Descartes can urge 
them to recall his proofs, since by hypothesis this 
will dispel all of their doubts. However, and this is 
the most important point, while not under the 
influence of the irresistible proofs, the would-be 
skeptics can grant that recalling the proofs would 
have this effect upon them and yet still insist that 
this does not settle the issue of whether irresisti-
bility really is sufficient for truth. And they would 
be right. ls 
Thus, there is nothing wrong with trying to 
appeal to clear and distinct and hence irresistible 
ideas in an attempt to argue that such ideas are 
true. One of the things we should expect of 
those proposing strategies of inquiry is that they 
be able to use these strategies to defend their own 
proposals. On the other hand, it is a mistake to 
think any such defense will be capable of alto-
gether eliminating skeptical worries. Skeptical 
worries are ineradicable, and we might as well get 
ourselves used to this idea. 
Doing so will involve admitting that It IS 
alright to do epistemology, and egocentric episte-
mology in particular, non-defensively. The pre-
requisite of egocentric rationality is not truth or 
even reliability but rather the absence of any inter-
nal motivation for either retraction or supple-
mentation of our beliefs. Egocentric rationality 
requires that we have beliefs that are to our own 
deep intellectual satisfaction - ones that do not 
merely satisfy us in a superficial way but that 
would do so even with the deepest reflection. So, 
to be egocentrically rational is to be invulnerable 
to a certain kind of self-condemnation. It is to 
have beliefs that in our role as truth-seekers we 
wouldn't criticize ourselves for having even if 
were to be deeply reflective. There are various 
ways of trying to say what exactly this amounts 
to,16 but for the issue at hand these details are not 
important. What is important is that even if we 
are deeply satisfied with our beliefs, we cannot be 
assured of avoiding massive error. There are no 
such assurances. There are not even assurances of 
it being even likely that we will avoid massive 
error. The lack of assurances is built into us, and 
it is built into the nature of our inquiries. We 
must do epistemology with this in mind. 
Even so, it is equally important to remember 
that being deeply satisfied with one's methods 
and beliefs is not everything. You might be deeply 
satisfied with them because you are dogmatic, for 
example. You might have views about your meth-
ods of inquiry that effectively protect them against 
self-directed challenges. You have ready explana-
tions for any would-be oddity in your method or 
in the beliefs that they generate. Take astrology as 
a case in point. Most contemporary astrologers 
may be impostors, but suppose you are not. You 
are deeply convinced of its truth. No amount of 
disinterested reflection would prompt you to be 
critical of your methods or of the beliefs that they 
produce. Are your beliefs irrational? Not neces-
sarily. Are they dogmatic and misguided? Of 
course. 
Most of us are not afflicted with this kind of 
extreme dogmatism. If we are dogmatic, we are 
unlikely to be so all the way down. The deepest 
epistemic standards of even the most dedicated 
astrologers are not likely to be radically different 
from those of the rest of us. But if so, they are 
likely to be vulnerable to self-criticism. They 
themselves would be suspicious of their methods 

330 
RICHARD FOLEY 
and their beliefs were they to be sufficiently 
impartial and sufficiently reflective. 
There are those, no doubt, who will find this 
naive. Perhaps it is. But if so, the alternative is not 
to make all astrologers irrational by fiat. It is 
rather to admit that some might be rational albeit 
fundamentally misguided. The impulse to inject 
every intellectual desirable characteristic into the 
theory of rationality is one to be resisted. It is not 
inconceivable that someone can be dogmatic 
without being irrational. My approach is to 
explain as much dogmatism as possible internally. 
It is to rely upon our own characters as inquirers. 
Most dogmatists, I claim, are violating their own 
deepest standards. If there are some dogmatists 
left over, some who are not violating even their 
own deepest standards, they are to be dismissed 
as dogmatic and that is the end of the matter. It is 
a mistake to try to construct an objective theory 
of dogmatism and then to make the avoidance of 
that kind of dogmatism a prerequisite of rational-
ity. Not every shortcoming is one of rationality. 
Again, there is a useful analogy between the 
practical and the intellectual. There is no more 
unity among intellectually desirable characteris-
tics than there is among non-intellectual ones. 
Our actions are egocentrically rational insofar as 
we lack internal motivations to be dissatisfied 
with them. Much immoral behavior can be criti-
cized as being irrational in just this way. We do 
what we ourselves cannot sincerely endorse, given 
our own deepest values. But of course, this makes 
the irrationality of immorality contingent upon 
our characters. It makes it contingent upon our 
deepest values. If there are fanatics who lack even 
a deeply internal motivation to detach from their 
vicious behavior, then we must be content with 
regarding them as fanatics. Their problem, and 
ours, is that they have vicious characters. They 
need not be irrational. 
This is not to say that there is not a looser kind 
of unity between egocentric rationality and mor-
ally desirable characteristics on the one hand and 
between egocentric rationality and intellectually 
desirable ones on the other. It may be that when 
we have no internal motivations, not even deep 
ones, to be dissatisfied with what we are doing, 
then in general we will be acting in a morally vir-
tuous way, and it may be that when we are not 
acting virtuously, there generally will be some 
internal motivation for detachment that we have 
ignored or not noticed. Our normal psychologi-
cal make-up may ensure that in general this is so. 
As a result, it may be that egocentric rationality 
and morality go hand-in-hand except in situa-
tions that are bizarre or in people who are 
deranged. 
Similarly for 
egocentric rationality and 
intellectually desirable characteristics. It may be 
that when we have no internal motivations to 
retract what we believe, then in general we are nei-
ther dogmatic nor thoroughly misguided. It like-
wise may be that when we are either dogmatic or 
misguided, there is in general some internal 
motivation for retraction that we have ignored. 
Thus, it may be that egocentric rationality and 
knowledge, like egocentric rationality and 
morality, go hand-in-hand except in situations 
that are bizarre or in people who are deranged. If 
so, it will also be the case that except in such situ-
ations or with such people, we can expect disa-
greements of opinion to be largely the result of 
differences of information. Or put the other way 
around, if our intellectual peers persist in disa-
greeing with our opinions despite the fact that 
they have access to the same information, this 
calls for some explanation. It won't do simply to 
say that they are wrong and we are right. On the 
contrary, unless there is some plausible way to 
explain away their opinion, the disagreement 
ordinarily will give us a good reason to be 
suspicious of our own opinions. 
All these things may well be so. The mistake is 
to try to make these general truths, if that be what 
they are, into categorical ones. It is a mistake to 
make it a matter of necessity that being egocentri-
cally rational is likely to bring us knowledge, and 
it is equally a mistake to assume that those who 
have fundamentally misguided beliefs -
even 
those who are misguided to the point of being 
deranged - must of necessity also be irrational. 
Correspondingly, it is a mistake to make it a 
matter of necessity that rational people will agree 
with one another if they have the same informa-
tion. One of the presuppositions of the Cartesian 
project was that rationality is what stands between 
us and "a chaotic disagreement in which anything 
goes."!? However, this need not be our presuppo-
sition. We can say that what stands in the way of 
chaotic disagreement is not simply the nature of 
rationality but also the contingent fact that we are 
born with similar cognitive equipment and into 

SKEPTICISM AND RATIONALITY 
331 
similar environments, a contingent fact that 
makes it likely that the deep epistemic standards 
of one person will not be radically different from 
those of another. 
This then is a sketch of a way to think about 
egocentric rationality. According to this concep-
tion, egocentric rationality brings with it no 
guarantees of truth or likely-truth, and as a result 
it brings with it no guarantees that rational 
people with access to the same information will 
agree with one another. Why, then, should we be 
interested in egocentric rationality? Because we 
are interested in having beliefs that are accurate 
and comprehensive and because by being ego-
centrically rational we will be pursuing this end 
in a way that by our own lights seems effective. 
Notes 
See Richard Foley, The Theory of Epistemic 
Rationality (Cambridge: Harvard University 
Press, 1987), especially sec. 2.8. 
2 In his book Philosophical Explanations 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1981), 
Robert Nozick insists that for a belief to con-
stitute knowledge, it must be non-accidentally 
true. At first glance this might seem to be at 
odds with what I am claiming, but in fact it 
isn't. Knowledge may very well require that 
truth and belief be non-accidentally related, 
so that given the belief that P it is not matter 
of luck that P is true, and vice-versa. Even so, 
we need an element of luck - we need the 
world to cooperate - in order for there to be 
this non-accidental relationship between 
truth and belief. 
3 I have borrowed the phrase 'defensive episte-
mology' from Bas van Fraassen. 
4 
I assume here that if p is probable given q, 
then it cannot be the case that p is false in 
most close situations in which q is true. 
5 
Socrates argued that one never acts for the 
worse by having a virtue. The claim here is 
analogous; one never believes for the worse by 
being rational, where believing for the worse 
is a matter of believing in a way that is more 
likely to lead to error. Rationality, it is claimed, 
guarantees at least this much. 
6 
Descartes himself emphasized this, insisting 
that his method of doubt is not appropriate for 
To be sure, this involves a leap of intellectual 
faith. It involves our having confidence in those 
intellectual methods that are deeply satisfying to 
us despite the fact that we cannot vindicate this 
confidence in a non-question begging way. This 
may be regrettable but it is also undeniable. The 
reality of our intellectual lives is that we are 
working without nets. No procedure, no amount 
of reflection, no amount of evidence gathering 
can guarantee that we won't fall into error, per-
haps even massive error. We are thus forced to 
choose between proceeding in a way that we 
on reflection would take to be effective and pro-
ceeding in a way that we would not take to be 
effective. If we are rational, we opt for the 
former. 
use in ordinary life. See his Discourse on Method, 
in Descartes, Philosophical Writings, voL I, eds. 
Haldane and Ross (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1911), especially pp. 100-1. 
7 See Richard Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror 
of Nature (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1979). 
8 
In the Fifth Meditation, Descartes says " ... 
the nature of my mind is such that I would 
be unable not to assent to these things (which 
I clearly and distinctly perceive) so long as I 
clearly perceive them ... " See Haldane and 
Ross, vol. I, p. 180. 
9 Compare with Bernard Williams, Descartes: 
The Project of Pure Inquiry (Harmondsworth: 
Penguin Books, 1978), and "Descartes' Use 
of Skepticism;' in M. Burnyeat (ed.), The 
Skeptical Tradition (Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 1983), pp. 337-52. See also 
Anthony Kenny's discussion of first-order 
doubt and second-order doubt in "The 
Cartesian Circle and the Eternal Truths," The 
Journal of Philosophy 67(1970), pp. 685-700; 
and James Van Cleve, "Foundationalism, 
Epistemic Principles, and the Cartesian 
Circle;' The Philosophical Review 88 (1979), 
pp. 55-91 and E. Sosa and J. Kim (eds), 
Epistemology; An Anthology (Malden, MA; 
Oxford: Blackwell, 2000), pp. 242-60. 
10 
Contrast this with Hume, whose position 
does hint of schizophrenia. Hume reported 

332 
RICHARD FOLEY 
that while engaged in philosophical reflec-
tion he found himself forced to give up his 
ordinary beliefs about material objects, the 
future and the self, but that as soon as he left 
his study these reflections appeared strained 
to him and his ordinary beliefs returned. So, 
according to Hume, his beliefs changed dra-
matically depending upon which of his per-
sonalities was engaged, his philosophical one 
or his everyday one. The potential for schiz-
ophrenia here is made even more dramatic if 
we assume not only that the philosophical 
Hume knew that were he to quit reflecting 
he would begin believing but also that the 
everyday Hume knew (at least tacitly) that 
were he to begin reflecting he would cease 
believing. 
11 
"When [a Pyrrhonianl awakes from his 
dream, he will be the first to join in the laugh 
against himself, and to confess, that all his 
objections are mere amusement, and can have 
no other tendency than to show the whimsical 
condition of mankind, who must act and 
reason and believe; though they are not able, 
by their most diligent enquiry, to satisfy them-
selves concerning the foundations of these 
operations, or to remove the objections, which 
may be raised against them:' David Hume, 
An EnquiryConcerning Human Understanding, 
ed. 1. A. Selby-Bigge with text revised by 
P. H. Nidditch (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1975), sec. XII, p. 128. 
12 
Alvin Plantinga claims that certain versions 
of classical foundationalism cannot possibly 
be used to defend themselves. See Plantinga, 
"Is Belief in God Rational?" in C. F. Delaney 
(ed.), Rationality and Religious Belief (Notre 
Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, 
1979), pp. 7-27. 
13 
See, e.g. Hilary Putnam, Reason, Truth and 
History (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1986); William Newton-Smith, The 
Rationality of Science (London: Routledge & 
Kegan Paul, 1981); Ernan McMullin, "The 
Fertility of Theory and the Unity of Appraisal 
in Science;' in R. S. Cohen et al. (eds), Boston 
Studies 39 (1976), pp. 395-432. 
14 
Ernest Sosa gives the following example: "If 
a rule or principle contains the proposition 
that the earth is flat, then it is acceptable, as 
is the proposition that the earth is flat:' See 
Sosa, "Methodology and Apt Belief;' Synthese 
74 (1988), p. 418. 
15 
Contrast with Bernard Williams: "So the 
believer can always recall the skeptic, unless 
the skeptic is willfully obstinate, to consid-
ering the existence and benevolence of 
God, and if the skeptic concentrates on 
those proofs, he will believe not only those 
propositions themselves but also some-
thing that follows from them - namely, that 
clear and distinct perceptions are reliable, 
and hence skepticism unjustified."Williams, 
"Descartes' Use of Skepticism," p. 349. My 
position, in turn, is that in this context, 
where the issue is precisely whether irre-
sistible proofs might be mistaken, it is not 
mere obstinacy to refuse to recall the proofs. 
The skeptic's refusal to recall them is not 
unlike the alcoholic's refusal to enter the 
bar. In each case the refusal is motivated 
by a fear that one's weaknesses will be 
exploited. 
16 
For my suggestions, see The Theory of 
Epistemic Rationality. 
17 
The phrase is from Bernard Williams. See 
Williams, "Descartes' Use of Skepticism;' 
p.344. 

CHAPTER 26 
What Is Justified Belief? 
Alvin I. Goldman 
The aim of this essay is to sketch a theory of 
justified belief. What I have in mind is an explan-
atory theory, one that explains in a general way 
why certain beliefs are counted as justified and 
others as unjustified. Unlike some traditional 
approaches, I do not try to prescribe standards 
for justification that differ from, or improve 
upon, our ordinary standards. I merely try to 
explicate the ordinary standards, which are, I 
believe, quite different from those of many clas-
sical, e.g., "Cartesian;' accounts. 
Many epistemologists have been interested in 
justification because of its presumed close rela-
tionship to knowledge. This relationship is 
intended to be preserved in the conception of jus-
tified belief presented here. In previous papers on 
knowledge, I I have denied that justification is 
necessary for knowing, but there I had in mind 
"Cartesian" accounts of justification. On the 
account of justified belief suggested here, it is nec-
essary for knowing, and closely related to it. 
The term "justified," I presume, is an evalua-
tive term, a term of appraisal. Any correct defini-
tion or synonym of it would also feature evaluative 
terms. I assume that such definitions or syno-
nyms might be given, but I am not interested in 
them. I want a set of substantive conditions that 
specify when a belief is justified. Compare the 
Originally published in G. S. Pappas (ed.), Justification 
and Knowledge (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1976), pp. 1-23. 
moral term "right." This might be defined in other 
ethical terms or phrases, a task appropriate to 
meta-ethics. The task of normative ethics, by con-
trast, is to state substantive conditions for the 
rightness of actions. Normative ethics tries to 
specify non-ethical conditions that determine 
when an action is right. A familiar example is act-
utilitarianism, which says an action is right if and 
only if it produces, or would produce, at least as 
much net happiness as any alternative open to the 
agent. These necessary and sufficient conditions 
clearly involve no ethical notions. Analogously, I 
want a theory of justified belief to specify in non-
epistemic terms when a belief is justified. This is 
not the only kind of theory of justifiedness one 
might seek, but it is one important kind of theory 
and the kind sought here. 
In order to avoid epistemic terms in our 
theory, we must know which terms are epistemic. 
Obviously, an exhaustive list cannot be given, but 
here are some examples: "justified;' "warranted;' 
"has (good) grounds," "has reason (to believe)," 
"knows that;' "sees that;' "apprehends that;' "is 
probable" (in an epistemic or inductive sense), 
"shows that," "establishes that;' and "ascertains 
that." By contrast, here are some sample non-
epistemic expressions: "believes that," "is true," 
"causes,""it is necessary that;' "implies;'''is deduc-
ible from;' and "is probable" (either in the fre-
quency sense or the propensity sense). In general, 
(purely) doxastic, metaphysical, modal, semantic, 
or syntactic expressions are not epistemic. 

334 
ALVIN 1. GOLDMAN 
There is another constraint I wish to place on 
a theory of justified belief, in addition to the con-
straint that it be couched in non-epistemic lan-
guage. Since I seek an explanatory theory, i.e., one 
that clarifies the underlying source of justifica-
tional status, it is not enough for a theory to state 
"correct" necessary and sufficient conditions. Its 
conditions must also be appropriately deep or 
revelatory. Suppose, for example, that the follow-
ing sufficient condition of justified belief is 
offered: "If S senses redly at t and S believes at t 
that he is sensing redly, then S's belief at t that he 
is sensing redly is justified." This is not the kind of 
principle I seek; for, even if it is correct, it leaves 
unexplained why a person who senses redly and 
believes that he does, believes this justifiably. Not 
every state is such that if one is in it and believes 
one is in it, this belief is justified. What is distinc-
tive about the state of sensing redly, or "phenom-
enal" states in general? A theory of justified belief 
of the kind I seek must answer this question, and 
hence it must be couched at a suitably deep, gen-
eral, or abstract level. 
A few introductory words about my explican-
dum are appropriate at this juncture. It is often 
assumed that whenever a person has a justified 
belief, he knows that it is justified and knows 
what the justification is. It is further assumed 
that the person can state or explain what his jus-
tification is. On this view, a justification is an 
argument, defense, or set of reasons that can be 
given in support of a belief. Thus, one studies the 
nature of justified belief by considering what a 
person might say if asked to defend, or justify, 
his belief. I make none of these sorts of assump-
tions here. I leave it an open question whether, 
when a belief is justified, the believer knows it is 
justified. I also leave it an open question whether, 
when a belief is justified, the believer can state or 
give a justification for it. I do not even assume 
that when a belief is justified there is something 
"possessed" by the believer which can be called a 
"justification." I do assume that a justified belief 
gets its status of being justified from some proc-
esses or properties that make it justified. In short, 
there must be some justification-conferring 
processes or properties. But this does not imply 
that there must be an argument, or reason, or 
anything else, "possessed" at the time of belief by 
the believer. 
I 
A theory of justified belief will be a set of princi-
ples that specify truth-conditions for the schema 
r 
S's belief in p at time t is justified 1, i.e., condi-
tions for the satisfaction of this schema in all pos-
sible cases. It will be convenient to formulate 
candidate theories in a recursive or inductive 
format, which would include (A) one or more 
base clauses, (B) a set of recursive clauses (possi-
bly null), and (C) a closure clause. In such a 
format, it is permissible for the predicate "is a jus-
tified belief" to appear in recursive clauses. But 
neither this predicate, nor any other epistemic 
predicate, may appear in (the antecedent of) any 
base clause. 2 
Before turning to my own theory, I want to 
survey some other possible approaches to justi-
fied belief. Identification of problems associated 
with other attempts will provide some motiva-
tion for the theory I shall offer. Obviously, I 
cannot examine all, or even very many, alternative 
attempts. But a few sample attempts will be 
instructive. 
Let us concentrate on the attempt to formu-
late one or more adequate base-clause principles. 3 
Here is a classical candidate: 
(1) 
If S believes pat t, and p is indubitable for 
S (at t), then S's belief in pat t is justified. 
To evaluate this principle, we need to know what 
"indubitable" means. It can be understood in at 
least two ways. First, "p is indubitable for S" might 
mean: "s has no grounds for doubting p." Since 
"ground" is an epistemic term, however, principle 
(1) would be inadmissible in this reading, for 
epistemic terms may not legitimately appear in 
the antecedent of a base clause. A second inter-
pretation would avoid this difficulty. One might 
interpret "p is indubitable for S" psychologically, 
i.e., as meaning "s is psychologically incapable of 
doubting p." This would make principle (1) 
admissible, but would it be correct? Surely not. 
A religious fanatic may be psychologically inca-
pable of doubting the tenets of his faith, but that 
doesn't make his belief in them justified. Similarly, 
during the Watergate affair, someone may have 
been so blinded by the aura of the presidency that 
even after the most damaging evidence against 

WHAT IS JUSTIFIED BELIEF? 
335 
Nixon had emerged he was still incapable of 
doubting Nixon's veracity. It doesn't follow that 
his belief in Nixon's veracity was justified. 
A second candidate base-clause principle 
is this: 
(2) 
If S believes p at t and p is self-evident, 
then S's belief in p at t is justified. 
To evaluate this principle, we again need an inter-
pretation of its crucial term, in this case "self-
evident:' On one standard reading, "evident" is a 
synonym for "justified." "Self-evident" would 
therefore mean something like "directly justified:' 
"intuitively justified:' or "non-derivatively justi-
fied." On this reading "self-evident" is an epis-
temic phrase, and principle (2) would be 
disqualified as a base-clause principle. 
However, there are other possible readings of 
"p is self-evident" on which it isn't an epistemic 
phrase. One such reading is: "It is impossible to 
understand p without believing it:'4 According to 
this interpretation, trivial analytic and logical 
truths might turn out to be self-evident. Hence, 
any belief in such a truth would be a justified 
belief, according to (2). 
What does "it is impossible to understand p 
without believing it" mean? Does it mean 
"humanly impossible"? That reading would prob-
ably make (2) an unacceptable principle. There 
may well be propositions which humans have an 
innate and irrepressible disposition to believe, 
e.g., "Some events have causes." But it seems 
unlikely that people's inability to refrain from 
believing such a proposition makes every belief in 
it justified. 
Should we then understand "impossible" to 
mean "impossible in principle:' or "logically 
impossible"? If that is the reading given, I suspect 
that (2) is a vacuous principle. I doubt that even 
trivial logical or analytic truths will satisfy this 
definition of "self-evident." Any proposition, we 
may assume, has two or more components that 
are somehow organized or juxtaposed. To under-
stand the proposition one must "grasp" the com-
ponents and their juxtaposition. Now in the case 
of complex logical truths, there are (human) psy-
chological operations that suffice to grasp the 
components and their juxtaposition but do not 
suffice to produce a belief that the proposition is 
true. But can't we at least conceive of an analogous 
set of psychological operations even for simple 
logical truths, operations which perhaps are not 
in the repertoire of human cognizers but which 
might be in the repertoire of some conceivable 
beings? That is, can't we conceive of psychological 
operations that would suffice to grasp the com-
ponents and componential-juxtaposition of these 
simple propositions but do not suffice to produce 
beliefin the propositions? I think we can conceive 
of such operations. Hence, for any proposition 
you choose, it will be possible for it to be under-
stood without being believed. 
Finally, even if we set these two objections 
aside, we must note that self-evidence can at best 
confer justificational status on relatively few 
beliefs, and the only plausible group are beliefs in 
necessary truths. Thus, other base-clause princi-
ples will be needed to explain the justificational 
status of beliefs in contingent propositions. 
The notion of a base-clause principle is natu-
rally associated with the idea of "direct" justified-
ness, and in the realm of contingent propositions 
first -person-current -mental-state 
propOSItIOns 
have often been assigned this role. In Chisholm's 
terminology, this conception is expressed by the 
notion of a "self-presenting" state or proposition. 
The sentence "I am thinking," for example, 
expresses a self-presenting proposition. (At least I 
shall call this sort of content a "proposition:' 
though it only has a truth value given some 
assignment of a subject who utters or entertains 
the content and a time of entertaining.) When 
such a proposition is true for person S at time t, S 
is justified in believing it at t: in Chisholm's ter-
minology, the proposition is "evident" for S at t. 
This suggests the following base-clause principle. 
(3) 
If P is a self-presenting proposition, and 
p is true for S at t, and S believes p at t, 
then S's belief in pat t is justified. 
What, exactly, does "self-presenting" mean? In the 
second edition of Theory of Knowledge, Chisholm 
offers this definition: "h is self-presenting for S at 
t = df h is true at t; and necessarily, if h is true at 
t, then h is evident for S at t:'5 Unfortunately, since 
"evident" is an epistemic term, "self-presenting" 
also becomes an epistemic term on this defini-
tion, thereby disqualifying (3) as a legitimate base 

336 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
clause. Some other definition of self-presentingness 
must be offered if (3) is to be a suitable base-
clause principle. 
Another definition of self-presentation readily 
comes to mind. "Self-presentation" is an approxi-
mate synonym of "self-intimation," and a propo-
sition may be said to be self-intimating if and 
only if whenever it is true of a person that person 
believes it. More precisely, we may give the fol-
lowing definition: 
(SP) 
Proposition p is self-presenting if and 
only if: necessarily, for any S and any t, if 
P is true for S at t, then S believes p at t. 
On this definition, "self-presenting" is clearly not 
an epistemic predicate, so (3) would be an admis-
sible principle. Moreover, there is initial plausibil-
ity in the suggestion that it is this feature of 
first-person-current-mental-state propositions -
viz., their truth guarantees their being believed -
that makes beliefs in them justified. 
Employing this definition of self-presentation, 
is principle (3) correct? This cannot be decided 
until we define self-presentation more precisely. 
Since the operator "necessarily" can be read in 
different ways, there are different forms of self-
presentation and correspondingly different ver-
sions of principle (3). Let us focus on two of these 
readings: a "nomological" reading and a "logical" 
reading. Consider first the nomological reading. 
On this definition a proposition is self-presenting 
just in case it is nomologically necessary that if p 
is true for Sat t, then S believes pat t.6 
Is the nomological version of principle (3) -
call it "(3N)" - correct? Not at all. We can imagine 
cases in which the antecedent of (3N ) is satisfied, 
but we would not say that the belief is justified. 
Suppose, for example, that p is the proposition 
expressed by the sentence "I am in brain-state B," 
where "B" is shorthand for a certain highly spe-
cific neural state description. Further suppose it is 
a nomological truth that anyone in brain-state B 
will ipso facto believe he is in brain-state B. In 
other words, imagine that an occurrent belief 
with the content "I am in brain-state B" is realized 
whenever one is in brain-state B.7 According to 
(3N ), any such belief is justified. But that is clearly 
false. We can readily imagine circumstances in 
which a person goes into brain-state B and there-
fore has the belief in question, though this belief 
is by no means justified. For example, we can 
imagine that a brain-surgeon operating on S arti-
ficially induced brain-state B. This results, phe-
nomenologically, in S's suddenly believing - out 
of the blue - that he is in brain-state B, without 
any relevant antecedent beliefs. We would hardly 
say, in such a case, that S's belief that he is in 
brain -state B is justified. 
Let us turn next to the logical version of (3)-
call it "(3J' - in which a proposition is defined as 
self-presenting just in case it is logically necessary 
that if p is true for S at t, then S believes pat t. This 
stronger version of principle (3) might seem 
more promising. In fact, however, it is no more 
successful than (3 N). Let p be the proposition "I 
am awake" and assume that it is logically neces-
sary that if this proposition is true for some 
person S and time t, then S believes p at t. This 
assumption is consistent with the further assump-
tion that S frequently believes p when it is false, 
e.g., when he is dreaming. Under these circum-
stances, we would hardly accept the contention 
that S's belief in this proposition is always justi-
fied. Nor should we accept the contention that 
the belief is justified when it is true. The truth of 
the proposition logically guarantees that the belief 
is held, but why should it guarantee that the 
belief is justified? 
The foregoing criticism suggests that we have 
things backwards. The idea of self-presentation is 
that truth guarantees belief. This fails to confer 
justification because it is compatible with there 
being belief without truth. So what seems neces-
sary - or at least sufficient - for justification is 
that belief should guarantee truth. Such a notion 
has usually gone under the label of "infallibility" 
or "incorrigibility:' It may be defined as follows: 
(INC) 
Proposition p is incorrigible if and only 
if: necessarily, for any S and any t, if S 
believes pat t, then p is true for S at t. 
Using the notion of incorrigibility, we may pro-
pose principle (4). 
(4) 
If P is an incorrigible proposition, and S 
believes p at t, then S's belief in p at tis 
justified. 
As was true of self-presentation, there are differ-
ent varieties of incorrigibility, corresponding to 

WHAT IS JUSTIFIED BELIEF? 
337 
different interpretations of "necessarily." Accor-
dingly, we have different versions of principle (4). 
Once again, let us concentrate on a nomological 
and a logical version, (4N ) and (4L) respectively. 
We can easily construct a counterexample to 
(4N ) along the lines of the belief-state/brain-state 
counterexample that refuted (3 N). Suppose it is 
nomologically necessary that if anyone believes 
he is in brain-state B then it is true that he is in 
brain-state B, for the only way this belief-state is 
realized is through brain-state B itself. It follows 
that "I am in brain-state B" is a nomologically 
incorrigible proposition. Therefore, according to 
(4N ), whenever anyone believes this proposition 
at any time, that belief is justified. But we may 
again construct a brain-surgeon example in which 
someone comes to have such a belief but the 
belief isn't justified. 
Apart from this counterexample, the general 
point is this. Why should the fact that S's believ-
ingp guarantees the truth of p imply that S's belief 
is justified? The nature of the guarantee might be 
wholly fortuitous, as the belief-state/brain -state 
example is intended to illustrate. To appreciate 
the point, consider the following related possibi-
lity. A person's mental structure might be such 
that whenever he believes that p will be true (of 
him) a split second later, then p is true (of him) a 
split second later. This is because, we may sup-
pose, his believing it brings it about. But surely we 
would not be compelled in such a circumstance 
to say that a belief of this sort is justified. So why 
should the fact that S's believing p guarantees the 
truth of p precisely at the time of belief imply that 
the belief is justified? There is no intuitive plausi-
bility in this supposition. 
The notion of logical incorrigibility has a more 
honored place in the history of conceptions of 
justification. But even principle (4L), 1 believe, 
suffers from defects similar to those of (4N). The 
mere fact that belief in p logically guarantees its 
truth does not confer justificational status on 
such a belief. 
The first difficulty with (4L) arises from logical 
or mathematical truths. Any true proposition of 
logic or mathematics is logically necessary. Hence, 
any such proposition p is logically incorrigible, 
since it is logically necessary that, for any Sand 
any t, if S believes pat t then p is true (for Sat t). 
Now assume that Nelson believes a certain very 
complex mathematical truth at time t. Since such 
a proposition is logically incorrigible, (4L) implies 
that Nelson's belief in this truth at t is justified. 
But we may easily suppose that this belief of 
Nelson is not at all the result of proper mathe-
matical reasoning, or even the result of appeal to 
trust-worthy authority. Perhaps Nelson believes 
this complex truth because of utterly confused 
reasoning, or because of hasty and ill-founded 
conjecture. Then his belief is not justified, contrary 
to what (4L) implies. 
The case of logical or mathematical truths is 
admittedly peculiar, since the truth of these 
propositions is assured independently of any 
beliefs. It might seem, therefore, that we can 
better capture the idea of "belief logically guar-
anteeing truth" in cases where the propositions 
in question are contingent. With this in mind, we 
might restrict (4L) to contingent incorrigible 
propositions. Even this amendment cannot save 
(4J, however, since there are counterexamples to 
it involving purely contingent propositions. 
Suppose that Humperdink has been studying 
logic - or, rather, pseudo-logic - from Elmer 
Fraud, whom Humperdink has no reason to trust 
as a logician. Fraud has enunciated the principle 
that any disjunctive proposition consisting of at 
least 40 distinct disjuncts is very probably true. 
Humperdink now encounters the proposition p, a 
contingent proposition with 40 disjuncts, the 7th 
disjunct being "I exist:' Although Humperdink 
grasps the proposition fully, he doesn't notice that 
it is entailed by "I exist." Rather, he is struck by the 
fact that it falls under the disjunction rule Fraud 
has enunciated (a rule 1 assume Humperdink is 
not justified in believing). Bearing this in mind, 
Humperdink forms a belief in p. Now notice that 
p is logically incorrigible. It is logically necessary 
that if anyone believes p, then p is true (of him at 
that time). This simply follows from the fact that, 
first, a person's believing anything entails that he 
exists, and second, "I exist" entails p. Since p is 
logically incorrigible, principle (4L) implies that 
Humperdink's belief in p is justified. But surely, 
given our example, that conclusion is false. 
Humperdink's belief in p is not at all justified. 
One thing that goes wrong in this example is 
that while Humperdink's belief in p logically 
implies its truth, Humperdink doesn't recognize 
that his believing it implies its truth. This might 
move a theorist to revise (4L) by adding the 
requirement that S "recognize" that p is logically 

338 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
incorrigible. But this, of course, won't do. The 
term "recognize" is obviously an epistemic term, 
so the suggested revision of (4L) would result in 
an inadmissible base clause. 
II 
Let us try to diagnose what has gone wrong with 
these attempts to produce an acceptable base-
clause principle. Notice that each of the foregoing 
attempts confers the status of "justified" on a 
belief without restriction on why the belief is 
held, i.e., on what causally initiates the belief or 
causally sustains it. The logical versions of princi-
ples (3) and (4), for example, clearly place no 
restriction on causes of belief. The same is true of 
the nomological versions of (3) and (4), since 
nomological requirements can be satisfied by 
simultaneity or cross-sectional laws, as illustrated 
by our brain-state/belief-state examples. I suggest 
that the absence of causal requirements accounts 
for the failure of the foregoing principles. Many 
of our counterexamples are ones in which the 
belief is caused in some strange or unacceptable 
way, e.g., by the accidental movement of a brain-
surgeon's hand, by reliance on an illicit, pseudo-
logical principle, or by the blinding aura of the 
presidency. In general, a strategy for defeating a 
noncausal principle of justifiedness is to find a 
case in which the principle's antecedent is satis-
fied but the belief is caused by some faulty belief-
forming 
process. 
The 
faultiness 
of the 
belief-forming process will incline us, intuitively, 
to regard the belief as unjustified. Thus, correct 
principles of justified belief must be principles 
that make causal requirements, where "cause" is 
construed broadly to include sustainers as well as 
initiators of belief (i.e., processes that determine, 
or help to overdetermine, a belief's continuing to 
be held).8 
The need for causal requirements is not 
restricted to base-clause principles. Recursive 
principles will also need a causal component. One 
might initially suppose that the following is a 
good recursive principle: "If S justifiably believes 
qat t, and q entails p, and S believes pat t, then S's 
belief in p at t is justified." But this principle is 
unacceptable. S's belief in p doesn't receive justifi-
cational status simply from the fact that p is 
entailed by q and S justifiably believes q. If what 
causes S to believe p at t is entirely different, S's 
belief in p may well not be justified. Nor can the 
situation be remedied by adding to the anteced-
ent the condition that S justifiably believes that q 
entails p. Even ifhe believes this, and believes q as 
well, he might not put these beliefs together. He 
might believe p as a result of some other wholly 
extraneous considerations. So once again, condi-
tions that fail to require appropriate causes of a 
belief don't guarantee justifiedness. 
Granted that principles of justified belief must 
make reference to causes of belief, what kinds of 
causes confer justifiedness? We can gain insight 
into this problem by reviewing some faulty proc-
esses of belief-formation, i.e., processes whose 
belief-outputs would be classed as unjustified. 
Here are some examples: confused reasoning, 
wishful thinking, reliance on emotional attach-
ment, mere hunch or guesswork, and hasty gen-
eralization. What do these faulty processes have 
in common? They share the feature of unreliabil-
ity: they tend to produce error a large proportion 
of the time. By contrast, which species of belief-
forming (or belief-sustaining) processes are intu-
itively justification-conferring? They include 
standard perceptual processes, remembering, 
good reasoning, and introspection. What these 
processes seem to have in common is reliability: 
the beliefs they produce are generally true. My 
positive proposal, then, is this. The justificational 
status of a belief is a function of the reliability of 
the process or processes that cause it, where (as a 
first approximation) reliability consists in the 
tendency of a process to produce beliefs that are 
true rather than false. 
To test this thesis further, notice that justified-
ness is not a purely categorical concept, although 
I treat it here as categorical in the interest of sim-
plicity. We can and do regard certain beliefs as 
more justified than others. Furthermore, our 
intuitions of comparative justifiedness go along 
with our beliefs about the comparative reliability 
of the belief-causing processes. 
Consider perceptual beliefs. Suppose Jones 
believes he has just seen a mountain-goat. Our 
assessment of the belief's justifiedness is deter-
mined by whether he caught a brief glimpse of 
the creature at a great distance, or whether he had 
a good look at the thing only 30 yards away. His 
belief in the latter sort of case is (ceteris paribus) 
more justified than in the former sort of case. 

WHAT IS JUSTIFIED BELIEF? 
339 
And, if his belief is true, we are more prepared to 
say he knows in the latter case than in the former. 
The difference between the two cases seems to be 
this. Visual beliefs formed from brief and hasty 
scanning, or where the perceptual object is a long 
distance off, tend to be wrong more often than 
visual beliefs formed from detailed and leisurely 
scanning, or where the object is in reasonable 
proximity. In short, the visual processes in the 
former category are less reliable than those in the 
latter category. A similar point holds for memory 
beliefs. A belief that results from a hazy and indis-
tinct memory impression is counted as less justi-
fied than a belief that arises from a distinct 
memory impression, and our inclination to clas-
sify those beliefs as" knowledge" varies in the same 
way. Again, the reason is associated with the com-
parative reliability of the processes. Hazy and 
indistinct memory impressions are generally less 
reliable indicators of what actually happened, so 
beliefs formed from such impressions are less 
likely to be true than beliefs formed from distinct 
impressions. Further, consider beliefs based on 
inference from observed samples. A belief about a 
population that is based on random sampling, or 
on instances that exhibit great variety, is intui-
tively more justified than a belief based on biased 
sampling, or on instances from a narrow sector of 
the population. Again, the degree of justifiedness 
seems to be a function of reliability. Inferences 
based on random or varied samples will tend to 
produce less error or inaccuracy than inferences 
based on non-random or non-varied samples. 
Returning to a categorical concept of justified-
ness, we might ask just how reliable a belief-
forming process must be in order that its resultant 
beliefs be justified. A precise answer to this ques-
tion should not be expected. Our conception of 
justification is vague in this respect. It does seem 
clear, however, that perfect reliability isn't required. 
Belief-forming processes that sometimes produce 
error still confer justification. It follows that there 
can be justified beliefs that are false. 
I have characterized justification-conferring 
processes as ones that have a "tendency" to pro-
duce beliefs that are true rather than false. The 
term "tendency" could refer either to actual long-
run frequency, or to a "propensity," i.e., outcomes 
that would occur in merely possible realizations of 
the process. Which of these is intended? 
Unfortunately, I think our ordinary conception 
of justifiedness is vague on this dimension too. 
For the most part, we simply assume that the 
"observed" frequency of truth versus error would 
be approximately replicated in the actual long-
run, and also in relevant counterfactual situa-
tions, i.e., ones that are highly "realistic" or 
conform closely to the circumstances of the actual 
world. Since we ordinarily assume these frequen-
cies to be roughly the same, we make no concerted 
effort to distinguish them. Since the purpose of 
my present theorizing is to capture our ordinary 
conception of justifiedness, and since our ordi-
nary conception is vague on this matter, it is 
appropriate to leave the theory vague in the same 
respect. 
We need to say more about the notion of a 
belief-forming "process;' Let us mean by a "proc-
ess" a functional operation or procedure, i.e., 
something that generates a mapping from certain 
states - "inputs" - into other states - "outputs." 
The outputs in the present case are states of 
believing this or that proposition at a given 
moment. On this interpretation, a process is a 
type as opposed to a token. This is fully appropri-
ate, since it is only types that have statistical prop-
erties such as producing truth 80 per cent of the 
time; and it is precisely such statistical properties 
that determine the reliability of a process. Of 
course, we also want to speak of a process as caus-
ing a belief, and it looks as if types are incapable 
of being causes. But when we say that a belief is 
caused by a given process, understood as a func-
tional procedure, we may interpret this to mean 
that it is caused by the particular inputs to the 
process (and by the intervening events "through 
which" the functional procedure carries the inputs 
into the output) on the occasion in question. 
What are some examples of belief-forming 
"processes" construed as functional operations? 
One example is reasoning processes, where the 
inputs include antecedent beliefs and entertained 
hypotheses. Another example is functional proce-
dures whose inputs include desires, hopes, or 
emotional states of various sorts (together with 
antecedent beliefs). A third example is a memory 
process, which takes as input beliefs or experi-
ences at an earlier time and generates as output 
beliefs at a later time. For example, a memory 
process might take as input a belief at t/ that 
Lincoln was born in 1809 and generate as output 
a belief at tn that Lincoln was born in 1809. 

340 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
A fourth example is perceptual processes. Here it 
isn't clear whether inputs should include states of 
the environment, such as the distance of the stim-
ulus from the cognizer, or only events within or 
on the surface of the organism, e.g., receptor 
stimulations. I shall return to this point in a 
moment. 
A critical problem concerning our analysis is 
the degree of generality of the process-types in 
question. Input-output relations can be specified 
very broadly or very narrowly, and the degree of 
generality will partly determine the degree of reli-
ability. A process-type might be selected so nar-
rowly that only one instance of it ever occurs, and 
hence the type is either completely reliable or 
completely unreliable. (This assumes that relia-
bility is a function of actual frequency only.) If 
such narrow process-types were selected, beliefs 
that are intuitively unjustified might be said to 
result from perfectly reliable processes, and beliefs 
that are intuitively justified might be said to result 
from perfectly unreliable processes. 
It is clear that our ordinary thought about 
process-types slices them broadly, but I cannot at 
present give a precise explication of our intuitive 
principles. One plausible suggestion, though, is 
that the relevant processes are content-neutral. It 
might be argued, for example, that the process of 
inferring p whenever the Pope asserts p could pose 
problems for our theory. If the Pope is infallible, 
this process will be perfectly reliable; yet we would 
not regard the belief-outputs of this process as 
justified. The content-neutral restriction would 
avert this difficulty. If relevant processes are 
required to admit as input beliefs (or other states) 
with any content, the aforementioned process 
will not count, for its input beliefs have a restricted 
propositional content, viz., "the Pope asserts p." 
In addition to the problem of "generality" or 
"abstractness" there is the previously mentioned 
problem of the "extent" of belief-forming proc-
esses. Clearly, the causal ancestry of beliefs often 
includes events outside the organism. Are such 
events to be included among the "inputs" of 
belief-forming processes? Or should we restrict 
the extent of belief-forming processes to "cogni-
tive" events, i.e., events within the organism's 
nervous system? I shall choose the latter course, 
though with some hesitation. My general 
grounds for this decision are roughly as follows. 
Justifiedness seems to be a function of how a 
cognizer deals with his environmental input, i.e., 
with the goodness or badness of the operations 
that register and transform the stimulation that 
reaches him. ("Deal with," of course, does not 
mean purposeful action, nor is it restricted to 
conscious activity.) A justified belief is, roughly 
speaking, one that results from cognitive opera-
tions that are, generally speaking, good or suc-
cessful. But "cognitive" operations are most 
plausibly construed as operations of the cogni-
tive faculties, i.e., "information-processing" 
equipment internal to the organism. 
With these points in mind, we may now 
advance the following base-clause principle for 
justified belief. 
(5) 
If S's believing pat t results from a relia-
ble cognitive belief-forming process (or 
set of processes), then S's belief in pat tis 
justified. 
Since "reliable belief-forming process" has been 
defined in terms of such notions as belief, truth, 
statistical frequency, and the like, it is not an epis-
temic term. Hence, (5) is an admissible base 
clause. 
It might seem as if (5) promises to be not only 
a successful base clause, but the only principle 
needed whatever, apart from a closure clause. In 
other words, it might seem as if it is a necessary as 
well as a sufficient condition of justifiedness that 
a belief be produced by reliable cognitive belief-
forming processes. But this is not quite correct, 
given our provisional definition of "reliability." 
Our provisional definition implies that a rea-
soning process is reliable only if it generally pro-
duces beliefs that are true, and similarly, that a 
memory process is reliable only if it generally 
yields beliefs that are true. But these requirements 
are too strong. A reasoning procedure cannot be 
expected to produce true belief if it is applied to 
false premises. And memory cannot be expected 
to yield a true belief if the original belief it 
attempts to retain is false. What we need for rea-
soning and memory, then, is a notion of "condi-
tional reliability." A process is conditionally 
reliable when a sufficient proportion of its output-
beliefs are true given that its input-beliefs are true. 
With this point in mind, let us distinguish 
belief-dependent and belief-independent cogni-
tive processes. The former are processes some of 

WHAT IS JUSTIFIED BELIEF? 
341 
whose inputs are belief-states.9 The latter are 
processes none of whose inputs are belief-states. 
We may then replace principle (5) with the fol-
lowing two principles, the first a base-clause 
principle and the second a recursive-clause 
principle. 
(6A) 
If S's belief in pat t results ("immedi-
ately") from a belief-independent proc-
ess that is (unconditionally) reliable, 
then S's belief in pat t is justified. 
(6B) 
If S's belief in pat t results ("immedi-
ately") from a belief-dependent process 
that is (at least) conditionally reliable, 
and if the beliefs (if any) on which this 
process operates in producing S's belief 
in pat t are themselves justified, then S's 
belief in pat tis justified. 1O 
If we add to (6A) and (6B) the standard closure 
clause, we have a complete theory of justified 
belief. The theory says, in effect, that a belief is 
justified if and only if it is "well-formed;' i.e., it has 
an ancestry of reliable and/or conditionally relia-
ble cognitive operations. (Since a dated belief may 
be over-determined, it may have a number of dis-
tinct ancestral trees. These need not all be full of 
reliable or conditionally reliable processes. But at 
least one ancestral tree must have reliable or con-
ditionally reliable processes throughout.) 
The theory of justified belief proposed here, 
then, is an Historical or Genetic theory. It con-
trasts with the dominant approach to justified 
belief, an approach that generates what we may 
call (borrowing a phrase from Robert Nozick) 
"Current Time-Slice" theories. A Current Time-
Slice theory makes the justificational status of a 
belief wholly a function of what is true of the 
cognizer at the time of belief. An Historical 
theory makes the justificational status of a belief 
depend on its prior history. Since my Historical 
theory emphasizes the reliability of the belief-
generating processes, it may be called "Historical 
Reliabilism." 
The most obvious examples of Current Time-
Slice theories are "Cartesian" Foundationalist 
theories, which trace all justificational status (at 
least of contingent propositions) to current 
mental states. The usual varieties of Coherence 
theories, however, are equally Current Time-Slice 
views, since they too make the justificational 
status of a belief wholly a function of current 
states of affairs. For Coherence theories, however, 
these current states include all other beliefs of the 
cognizer, which would not be considered relevant 
by Cartesian Foundationalism. Have there been 
other Historical theories of justified belief? 
Among contemporary writers, Quine and Popper 
have Historical epistemologies, though the notion 
of "justification" is not their avowed explicandum. 
Among historical writers, it might seem that 
Locke and Hume had Genetic theories of sorts. 
But I think that their Genetic theories were only 
theories of ideas, not of knowledge or justifica-
tion. Plato's theory of recollection, however, is a 
good example of a Genetic theory of knowing. II 
And it might be argued that Hegel and Dewey 
had Genetic epistemologies (if Hegel can be said 
to have had a clear epistemology at all). 
The theory articulated by (6A ) and (6B) might 
be viewed as a kind of"Foundationalism" because 
of its recursive structure. I have no objection to 
this label, as long as one keeps in mind how dif-
ferent this "diachronic" form of Foundationalism 
is from Cartesian, or other "synchronic" varieties 
of, Foundationalism. 
Current Time-Slice theories characteristically 
assume that the justificational status of a belief is 
something which the cognizer is able to know or 
determine at the time of belief. This is made 
explicit, for example, by Chisholm. 12 
The 
Historical theory I endorse makes no such 
assumption. There are many facts about a cog-
nizer to which he lacks "privileged access," and I 
regard the justificational status of his beliefs as 
one of those things. This is not to say that a cog-
nizer is necessarily ignorant, at any given moment, 
of the justificational status of his current beliefs. 
It is only to deny that he necessarily has, or can 
get, knowledge or true belief about this status. 
Just as a person can know without knowing that 
he knows, so he can have justified belief without 
knowing that it is justified (or believing justifiably 
that it is justified). 
A characteristic case in which a belief is justi-
fied though the cognizer doesn't know that it's 
justified is where the original evidence for the 
belief has long since been forgotten. If the origi-
nal evidence was compelling, the cognizer's origi-
nal belief may have been justified, and this 
justificational status may have been preserved 
through memory. But since the cognizer no 

342 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
longer remembers how or why he came to believe, 
he may not know that the belief is justified. If 
asked now to justify his belief, he may be at a loss. 
Still, the belief is justified, though the cognizer 
can't demonstrate or establish this. 
The Historical theory of justified belief I advo-
cate is connected in spirit with the causal theory 
of knowing I have presented elsewhere.13 I had 
this in mind when I remarked near the outset of 
the essay that my theory of justified belief makes 
justifiedness come out closely related to knowl-
edge. Justified beliefs, like pieces of knowledge, 
have appropriate histories; but they may fail to be 
knowledge either because they are false or because 
they founder on some other requirement for 
knowing of the kind discussed in the post -Gettier 
knowledge-trade. 
There is a variant of the Historical conception 
of justified belief that is worth mentioning in this 
context. It may be introduced as follows. Suppose 
S has a set B of beliefs at time to' and some of these 
beliefs are unjustified. Between to and tJ he reasons 
from the entire set B to the conclusion p, which he 
then accepts at tr The reasoning procedure he 
uses is a very sound one, i.e., one that is condi-
tionally reliable. There is a sense or respect in 
which we are tempted to say that S's belief in pat 
tJ is "justified." At any rate, it is tempting to say 
that the person is justified in believing p at t. 
Relative to his antecedent cognitive state, he did 
as well as could be expected: the transition from 
his cognitive state at to to his cognitive state at t[ 
was entirely sound. Although we may acknowl-
edge this brand of justifiedness - it might be 
called "Terminal-Phase Reliabilism" - it is not a 
kind of justifiedness so closely related to know-
ing. For a person to know proposition p, it is not 
enough that the final phase of the process that 
leads to his belief in p be sound. It is also neces-
sary that some entire history of the process be 
sound (i.e., reliable or conditionally reliable). 
Let us return now to the Historical theory. In 
the next section, I shall adduce reasons for 
strengthening it a bit. Before looking at these rea-
sons, however, I wish to review two quite different 
objections to the theory. 
First, a critic might argue that some justified 
beliefs do not derive their justificational status 
from their causal ancestry. In particular, it might be 
argued that beliefs about one's current phenome-
nal states and intuitive beliefs about elementary 
logical or conceptual relationships do not derive 
their justificational status in this way. I am not per-
suaded by either of these examples. Introspection, I 
believe, should be regarded as a form of retrospec-
tion. Thus, a justified belief that I am "now" in pain 
gets its justificational status from a relevant, though 
brief, causal history.14 The apprehension of logical 
or conceptual relationships is also a cognitive proc-
ess that occupies time. The psychological process 
of "seeing" or "intuiting" a simple logical truth is 
very fast, and we cannot introspectively dissect it 
into constituent parts. Nonetheless, there are 
mental operations going on, just as there are mental 
operations that occur in idiots savants, who are 
unable to report the computational processes they 
in fact employ. 
A second objection to Historical Reliabilism 
focuses on the reliability element rather than the 
causal or historical element. Since the theory is 
intended to cover all possible cases, it seems to 
imply that for any cognitive process C, if C is reli-
able in possible world W, then any belief in W 
that results from C is justified. But doesn't this 
permit easy counterexamples? Surely we can 
imagine a possible world in which wishful think-
ing is reliable. We can imagine a possible world 
where a benevolent demon so arranges things 
that beliefs formed by wishful thinking usually 
come true. This would make wishful thinking a 
reliable process in that possible world, but surely 
we don't want to regard beliefs that result from 
wishful thinking as justified. 
There are several possible ways to respond to 
this case, and I am unsure which response is best, 
partly because my own intuitions (and those of 
other people I have consulted) are not entirely 
clear. One possibility is to say that in the possible 
world imagined, beliefs that result from wishful 
thinking are justified. In other words, we reject 
the claim that wishful thinking could never, intu-
itively, confer justifiedness. 15 
However, for those who feel that wishful 
thinking couldn't confer justifiedness even in the 
world imagined, there are two ways out. First, it 
may be suggested that the proper criterion of 
justifiedness is the propensity of a process to 
generate beliefs that are true in a non-manipulated 
environment, i.e., an environment in which there 
is no purposeful arrangement of the world 
either to accord or contlict with the beliefs that 
are formed. In other words, the suitability of a 

WHAT IS JUSTIFIED BELIEF? 
343 
belief-forming process is only a function of its 
success in "natural" situations, not situations of 
the sort involving benevolent or malevolent 
demons or any other such manipulative creatures. 
If we reformulate the theory to include this quali-
fication, the counterexample in question will be 
averted. 
Alternatively, we may reformulate our theory, 
or reinterpret it, as follows. Instead of construing 
the theory as saying that a belief in possible world 
W is justified if and only if it results from a cogni-
tive process that is reliable in W, we may construe 
it as saying that a belief in possible world W is 
justified if and only if it results from a cognitive 
process that is reliable in our world. In short, our 
conception of justifiedness is derived as follows. 
We note certain cognitive processes in the actual 
world, and form beliefs about which of these are 
reliable. The ones we believe to be reliable are 
then regarded as justification-conferring proc-
esses. In reflecting on hypothetical beliefs, we 
deem them justified if and only if they result from 
processes already picked out as justification-
conferring, or processes very similar to those. 
Since wishful thinking is not among these proc-
esses, a belief formed in a possible world W by 
wishful thinking would not be deemed justified, 
even if wishful thinking is reliable in W. I am not 
sure that this is a correct reconstruction of our 
intuitive conceptual scheme, but it would accom-
modate the benevolent demon case, at least if the 
proper thing to say in that case in that the wishful-
thinking-caused beliefs are unjustified. 
Even if we adopt this strategy, however, a prob-
lem still remains. Suppose that wishful thinking 
turns out to be reliable in the actual world!16 This 
might be because, unbeknownst to us at present, 
there is a benevolent demon who, lazy until now, 
will shortly start arranging things so that our 
wishes come true. The long-run performance of 
wishful thinking will be very good, and hence 
even the new construal of the theory will imply 
that beliefs resulting from wishful thinking (in 
our world) are justified. Yet this surely contra-
venes our intuitive judgment on the matter. 
Perhaps the moral of the case is that the stand-
ard format of a "conceptual analysis" has its short-
comings. Let me depart from that format and try 
to give a better rendering of our aim and the 
theory that tries to achieve that aim. What we 
really want is an explanation of why we count, or 
would count, certain beliefs as justified and others 
as unjustified. Such an explanation must refer to 
our beliefs about reliability, not to the actual facts. 
The reason we count beliefs as justified is that they 
are formed by what we believe to be reliable belief-
forming processes. Our beliefs about which belief-
forming processes are reliable may be erroneous, 
but that does not affect the adequacy of the expla-
nation. Since we believe that wishful thinking is an 
unreliable belief-forming process, we regard 
beliefs formed by wishful thinking as unjustified. 
What matters, then, is what we believe about wish-
ful thinking, not what is true (in the long run) 
about wishful thinking. I am not sure how to 
express this point in the standard format of con-
ceptual analysis, but it identifies an important 
point in understanding our theory. 
III 
Let us return, however, to the standard format 
of conceptual analysis, and let us consider a new 
objection that will require some revisions in the 
theory advanced until now. According to our 
theory, a belief is justified in case it is caused by 
a process that is in fact reliable, or by one we 
generally believe to be reliable. But suppose that 
although one of S's beliefs satisfies this condi-
tion, S has no reason to believe that it does. 
Worse yet, suppose S has reason to believe that 
his belief is caused by an unreliable process 
(although in fact its causal ancestry is fully reli-
able). Wouldn't we deny in such circumstances 
that S's belief is justified? This seems to show 
that our analysis, as presently formulated, is 
mistaken. 
Suppose that Jones is told on fully reliable 
authority that a certain class of his memory beliefs 
are almost all mistaken. His parents fabricate a 
wholly false story that Jones suffered from amnesia 
when he was seven but later developed pseudo-
memories of that period. Though Jones listens to 
what his parents say and has excellent reason to 
trust them, he persists in believing the ostensible 
memories from his seven-year-old past. Are these 
memory beliefs justified? Intuitively, they are not 
justified. But since these beliefs result from genu-
ine memory and original perceptions, which are 
adequately reliable processes, our theory says that 
these beliefs are justified. 

344 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
Can the theory be revised to meet this diffi-
culty? One natural suggestion is that the actual 
reliability of a belief's ancestry is not enough for 
justifiedness; in addition, the cognizer must be 
justified in believing that the ancestry of his belief 
is reliable. Thus one might think of replacing (6 A)' 
for example, with (7). (For simplicity, I neglect 
some of the details of the earlier analysis.) 
(7) 
If S's belief in pat t is caused by a reliable 
cognitive process, and S justifiably 
believes at t that his p-belief is so caused, 
then S's belief in pat t is justified. 
It is evident, however, that (7) will not do as a 
base clause, for it contains the epistemic term 
"justifiably" in its antecedent. 
A slightly weaker revision, without this prob-
lematic feature, might next be suggested, viz., 
(8) 
If S's belief in pat t is caused by a reliable 
cognitive process, and S believes at t that 
his p-belief is so caused, then S's belief in 
p at t is justified. 
But this won't do the job. Suppose that Jones 
believes that his memory beliefs are reliably 
caused despite all the (trustworthy) contrary tes-
timony of his parents. Principle (8) would be sat-
isfied, yet we wouldn't say that these beliefs are 
justified. 
Next, we might try (9), which is stronger than 
(8) and, unlike (7), formally admissible as a base 
clause. 
(9) 
If S's belief in pat t is caused by a reliable 
cognitive process, and S believes at t that 
his p-belief is so caused, and this meta-
belief is caused by a reliable cognitive 
process, then S's belief in pat t is justified. 
A first objection to (9) is that it wrongly precludes 
unreflective creatures - creatures like animals or 
young children, who have no beliefs about the 
genesis of their beliefs - from having justified 
beliefs. If one shares my view that justified belief is, 
at least roughly, well-formed belief, surely animals 
and young children can have justified beliefs. 
A second problem with (9) concerns its 
underlying rationale. Since (9) is proposed as a 
substitute for (6 A)' it is implied that the reliability 
of a belief's own cognitive ancestry does not make 
it justified. But, the suggestion seems to be, the 
reliability of a meta-belief's ancestry confers justi-
fiedness on the first-order belief. Why should that 
be so? Perhaps one is attracted by the idea of a 
"trickle-down" effect: if an n + I-level belief is 
justified, its justification trickles down to an n-
level belief. But even if the trickle-down theory is 
correct, it doesn't help here. There is no assurance 
from the satisfaction of (9)'s antecedent that the 
meta-belief itself is justified. 
To obtain a better revision of our theory, let us 
re-examine the Jones case. Jones has strong evi-
dence against certain propositions concerning his 
past. He doesn't use this evidence, but if he were 
to use it properly, he would stop believing these 
propositions. Now the proper use of evidence 
would be an instance of a (conditionally) reliable 
process. So what we can say about Jones is that he 
fails to use a certain (conditionally) reliable proc-
ess that he could and should have used. Admittedly, 
had he used this process, he would have "wors-
ened" his doxastic states: he would have replaced 
some true beliefs with suspension of judgment. 
Still, he couldn't have known this in the case in 
question. So he failed to do something which, 
epistemically, he should have done. This diagno-
sis suggests a fundamental change in our theory. 
The justificational status of a belief is not only a 
function of the cognitive process actually 
employed in producing it, it is also a function of 
processes that could and should be employed. 
With these points in mind, we may tenta-
tively propose the following revision of our 
theory, where we again focus on a base-clause 
principle but omit certain details in the interest 
of clarity. 
(10) 
If S's belief in pat t results from a relia-
ble cognitive process, and there is no 
reliable or conditionally reliable proc-
ess available to S which, had it been 
used by S in addition to the process 
actually used, would have resulted in S's 
not believing p at t, then S's belief in p 
at t is justified. 
There are several problems with this proposal. 
First, there is a technical problem. One cannot use 
an additional belief-forming (or doxastic-state-
forming) process as well as the original process if 

WHAT IS JUSTIFIED BELIEF? 
345 
the additional one would result in a different dox-
astic state. One wouldn't be using the original 
process at all. So we need a slightly different 
formulation of the relevant counterfactual. Since 
the basic idea is reasonably clear, however, I won't 
try to improve on the formulation here. 
A second problem concerns the notion of "avail-
able" belief-forming (or doxastic-state-forming) 
processes. What is it for a process to be "available" 
to a cognizer? Were scientific procedures "availa-
ble" to people who lived in pre-scientific ages? 
Furthermore, it seems implausible to say that all 
"available" processes ought to be used, at least if 
we include such processes as gathering new evi-
dence. Surely a belief can sometimes be justified 
even if additional evidence-gathering would yield 
a different doxastic attitude. What I think we 
should have in mind here are such additional 
processes as calling previously acquired evidence 
to mind, assessing the implications of that evi-
dence, etc. This is admittedly somewhat vague, 
but here again our ordinary notion of justified-
ness is vague, so it is appropriate for our analysans 
to display the same sort of vagueness. 
This completes the sketch of my account of 
justified belief. Before concluding, however, it 
is essential to point out that there is an impor-
tant use of "justified" which is not captured by 
this account but can be captured by a closely 
related one. 
There is a use of "justified" in which it is not 
implied or presupposed that there is a belief that 
is justified. For example, if S is trying to decide 
whether to believe p and asks our advice, we 
may tell him that he is "justified" in believing it. 
We do not thereby imply that he has a justified 
belief, since we know he is still suspending judg-
ment. What we mean, roughly, is that he would 
or could be justified if he were to believe p. The 
justificational status we ascribe here cannot be a 
function of the causes of S's believing p, for 
there is no belief by S in p. Thus, the account of 
justifiedness we have given thus far cannot 
explicate this use of "justified." (It doesn't follow 
that this use of "justified" has no connection 
with causal ancestries. Its proper use may 
depend on the causal ancestry of the cognizer's 
cognitive state, though not on the causal ancestry 
of his believing p.) 
Let us distinguish two uses of "justified": an 
ex post use and an ex ante use. The ex post use 
occurs when there exists a belief, and we say of 
that belief that it is (or isn't) justified. The ex ante 
use occurs when no such belief exists, or when we 
wish to ignore the question of whether such a 
belief exists. Here we say of the person, independ-
ent of his doxastic state vis-a-vis p, that p is (or 
isn't) suitable for him to believeY 
Since we have given an account of ex post jus-
tifiedness, it will suffice if we can analyze ex ante 
justifiedness in terms of it. Such an analysis, I 
believe, is ready at hand. S is ex ante justified in 
believing p at t just in case his total cognitive state 
at t is such that from that state he could come to 
believe p in such a way that this belief would be ex 
post justified. More precisely, he is ex ante justified 
in believing p at t just in case a reliable belief-
forming operation is available to him such that 
the application of that operation to his total cog-
nitive state at t would result, more or less imme-
diately, in his believing p and this belief would be 
ex post justified. Stated formally, we have the 
following: 
(11) 
Person S is ex ante justified in believ-
ing p at t if and only if there is a 
reliable 
belief-forming 
operation 
available to S which is such that if S 
applied that operation to this total 
cognitive state at t, S would believe p 
at t-plus-delta (for a suitably small 
delta) and that belief would be ex post 
justified. 
For the analysans of (11) to be satisfied, the total 
cognitive state at t must have a suitable causal 
ancestry. Hence, (11) is implicitly an Historical 
account of ex ante justifiedness. 
As indicated, the bulk of this essay was 
addressed to ex post justifiedness. This is the 
appropriate analysandum if one is interested in 
the connection between justifiedness and knowl-
edge, since what is crucial to whether a person 
knows a proposition is whether he has an actual 
belief in the proposition that is justified. 
However, since many epistemologists are inter-
ested in ex ante justifiedness, it is proper for a 
general theory of justification to try to provide 
an account of that concept as well. Our theory 
does this quite naturally, for the account of ex 
ante justifiedness falls out directly from our 
account of ex post justifiedness. 

346 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
Notes 
"A Causal Theory of Knowing:' Journal of 
Philosophy 64 (1967), pp. 335-72; "Innate 
Knowledge:' in S. P. Stich (ed.), Innate Ideas 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 
1975); and "Discrimination and Perceptual 
Knowledge," Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), 
pp.771-99. 
2 Notice that the choice of a recursive format 
does not prejudice the case for or against any 
particular theory. A recursive format is per-
fectly general. Specifically, an explicit set of 
necessary and sufficient conditions is just a 
special case of a recursive format, i.e., one in 
which there is no recursive clause. 
3 Many of the attempts I shall consider are sug-
gested by material in William P. Alston, 
"Varieties of Privileged Access," American 
Philosophical Quarterly 8 (1971), pp. 223-41. 
4 Such a definition (though without the modal 
term) is given, for example, by W. V. Quine 
and J. S. Ullian in The Web ofBelief(New York: 
Random House, 1970), p. 21. Statements are 
said to be self-evident just in case "to under-
stand them is to believe them." 
5 Ibid., 22. 
6 I assume, of course, that "nomologically nec-
essary" is de re with respect to "s" and "t" in 
this construction. I shall not focus on prob-
lems that may arise in this regard, since my 
primary concerns are with different issues. 
7 This assumption violates the thesis that 
Davidson calls "The Anomalism of the 
Mental." Cf. "Mental Events" in L. Foster and 
J. W. Swanson (eds), Experience and Theory 
(Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 
1970). But it is unclear that this thesis is a nec-
essary truth. Thus, it seems fair to assume its 
falsity in order to produce a counterexample. 
The example neither entails nor precludes the 
mental-physical identity theory. 
8 Keith Lehrer's example of the gypsy lawyer is 
intended to show the inappropriateness of a 
causal requirement (see Knowledge (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1974), pp. 124-5.) But I find 
this example unconvincing. To the extent that 
I clearly imagine that the lawyer fixes his 
beliefs solely as a result of the cards, it seems 
intuitively wrong to say that he knows - or has 
a justified belief-that his client is innocent. 
9 This definition is not exactly what we need 
for the purposes at hand. As Ernest Sosa 
points out, introspection will turn out to be 
a belief-dependent process, since sometimes 
the input into the process will be a belief 
(when the introspected content is a belief). 
Intuitively, however, introspection is not the 
sort of process which may be merely condi-
tionally reliable. I do not know how to refine 
the definition so as to avoid this difficulty, 
but it is a small and isolated point. 
10 
It may be objected that principles (6A) and 
(68 ) are jointly open to analogues of the lot-
tery paradox. A series of processes composed 
of reliable but less-than-perfectly-reliable 
processes may be extremely unreliable. Yet 
applications of (6 A) and (6B) would confer 
justifiedness on a belief that is caused by 
such a series. In reply to this objection, we 
might simply indicate that the theory is 
intended to capture our ordinary notion of 
justifiedness, and this ordinary notion has 
been formed without recognition of this 
kind of problem. The theory is not wrong as 
a theory of the ordinary (naive) conception 
of justifiedness. On the other hand, if we 
want a theory to do more than capture the 
ordinary conception of justifiedness, it might 
be possible to strengthen the principles to 
avoid lottery-paradox analogues. 
11 
I am indebted to Mark Pastin for this point. 
12 
Cf. Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edn, pp. 17, 
114-16. 
13 
Cf. "A Causal Theory of Knowing." The reli-
ability aspect of my theory also has its pre-
cursors in earlier papers of mine on knowing: 
"Innate Knowledge" and "Discrimination 
and Perceptual Knowledge." 
14 
The view that introspection is retrospection 
was taken by Ryle, and before him (as Charles 
Hartshorne points out to me) by Hobbes, 
Whitehead, and possibly Husserl. 
15 
Of course, if people in world W learn induc-
tively that wishful thinking is reliable, and 
regularly base their beliefs on this inductive 
inference, it is quite unproblematic and 
straightforward that their beliefs are justi-
fied. The only interesting case is where their 
beliefs are formed purely by wishful thinking, 

WHAT IS JUSTIFIED BELIEF? 
347 
without using inductive inference. The sug-
gestion contemplated in this paragraph of 
the text is that, in the world imagined, 
even pure wishful thinking would confer 
justifiedness. 
16 
I am indebted here to Mark Kaplan. 
17 The distinction between ex post and ex ante 
justifiedness is similar to Roderick Firth's 
distinction between doxastic and proposi-
tional warrant. See his "Are Epistemic 
Concepts Reducible to Ethical Concepts?" in 
Alvin I. Goldman and Jaegwon Kim (eds), 
Values and Morals, Essays in Honor of William 
Frankena, Charles Stevenson, and Richard 
Brandt (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1978). 

CHAPTER 27 
Reliabilism Leveled 
Jonathan Vogel 
Max knows that the 6 o'clock train goes all the 
way to Montauk. He just asked at the information 
booth in the station, where the staffers are highly 
competent and have direct access to the master 
timetable. But suppose that, instead of asking at 
the booth, Max had consulted an old, out-of-date 
schedule, and that many of the routes and times 
listed there had changed. Even if the schedule 
happened to say that the 6 o'clock goes to 
Montauk, Max would not know that it does. 
Whether Max knows or not seems to turn on the 
fact that information provided at the booth is 
extremely reliable, while information provided by 
the out-of-date schedule is not. Accordingly, one 
might hold that knowledge just is a reliably true 
belief, or, alternatively, a belief that results from a 
process that reliably produces true beliefs. 
To adopt such a view is to endorse reliabilism 
with respect to knowledge. Here, I distinguish 
two versions of this position, which I call neigh-
borhood reliabilism and counterfactual reliabilism. 
I then raise the question of what reliabilists can 
and must say about reflective or higher-level 
knowledge (that is, knowledge about one's knowl-
edge or beliefs). It will emerge that both versions 
of reliabilism encounter serious difficulties in this 
connection, and must be regarded as unsatisfac-
tory. These results suggest that the traditional 
Originally published in The Journal of Philosophy 97, 11 
(2000),pp.602-23. 
justification requirement for knowledge cannot 
be supplanted by a reliability requirement, as 
many now are inclined to suppose. 
I. Reliability and Reliabilism 
Reliabilism about knowledge takes different 
forms. To some extent, one can distinguish "reli-
able belief" accounts of knowledge from "reliable 
process" accounts. Roughly, according to the 
former, whether you know that P depends upon 
whether your belief that P is prone to error. 
According to the latter, whether you know that P 
depends upon whether the process that produced 
your belief that P is prone to error. Reliabilism 
about knowledge differs from reliabilism about 
justification, which seeks to explicate justification 
(rather than knowledge) in terms of reliability. 
The view I am considering involves no commit-
ment to the notion that justification can be so 
understood. I 
A principal motivation for adopting reliabi-
lism is the idea that truth is the ultimate epis-
temic norm, and that besides truth, there are no 
others. We want what we believe to be true. 
Moreover, because truth is so important, we want 
our beliefs to be not just adventitiously true, but 
securely true. Knowledge, then, is securely true 
belief, and knowledge is compromised to the 
extent that there is falsehood or the possibility of 
falsehood. The greatest security one could have 

RELIABILISM LEVELED 
349 
would be certainty or infallibility. A belief would 
be certain if it could not possibly be wrong. That 
is, in any possible world in which you believe X, 
X is true: 
(1) 
Necessarily, B(X) implies X. 
and, equivalently: 
(2) 
Necessarily, "'X implies ..,B(X). 
Similarly, a belief-forming process would be 
infallible if it could not possibly go wrong, and 
this conception can be spelled out along the lines 
of (1) and (2). 
But such logical invulnerability to error is often 
an unattainably high standard. Whenever someone 
believes a contingent proposition as the result of an 
inductive inference, it is logically possible for the 
belief she arrives at to be wrong. Hence, it seems 
that knowledge must demand something less than 
certainty or infallibility - that is, something less 
than truth in any logically possible situation. 
Knowledge may require reliability instead. What is 
crucial is that reliability, whether it pertains to 
beliefs or to processes, need not be total or absolute. 
Something may do Y reliably, even if it would fail to 
do Y under very extreme or extraordinary condi-
tions. An alarm clock may be reliable, despite the 
fact that it would not ring if the power went out, or 
if the ceiling collapsed on it. Accordingly, reliability 
as it pertains to knowledge may be understood as 
truth in all situations that could arise, except for 
extraordinary or outlandish ones that we do not, 
and need not, care about. Thus, perception, or par-
ticular beliefs formed by perception, may count as 
reliable, despite the fact that perception, or particu-
lar beliefs arrived at by perception, can go wrong 
under certain circumstances. 
This understanding of epistemic reliability 
can be sharpened somewhat, as follows. Think of 
possible worlds as being farther away from the 
actual world to the extent that they differ from 
the actual world. A belief is reliable just in case it 
turns out to be true whenever it is held in a neigh-
borhood N of worlds not too far away from the 
actual world; a process is reliable just in case it 
yields (mostly) true beliefs in a neighborhood N 
of worlds not too far away from the actual world. 
Proceeding in this vein, the reliabilist may set out 
as a condition of knowledge: 
or: 
or: 
(3a) 
In N, B(X) implies X.2 
(3b) 
In N, B(X) by process P implies X. 
(3c) 
In N, all or nearly all beliefs B(X) 
formed by process P are such that B(X) 
impliesX;-
Assume, at least for now, that the boundary of N 
is fixed. In particular, it does not vary with the 
content of the proposition believed, the process 
of belief formation, or pragmatic considerations. 
(3a)-(3c) invoke one conception of reliabil-
ity, but there are others. And, clearly, there will 
be different versions of reliabilism correspond-
ing to the different conceptions of reliability one 
might adopt. Theorists such as David Armstrong, 
Fred Dretske, Robert Nozick, and Keith DeRose 
have held that knowledge requires satisfaction of 
a co-variation or tracking condition: 
(4) 
If X were false, then ..,B(X).3 
A belief might meet a version of condition (3) as 
stated, yet not meet condition (4). Here is why. 
Consider (3a) and (4). Given the standard Lewis-
Stalnaker semantics for counterfactuals, instances 
of (4) are true if and only if the consequent is true 
in the closest possible world (or worlds) in which 
the antecedent holds. Which world that is, and 
how far it is from the actual world, depends upon 
what the value of X is. To illustrate, consider two 
propositions I know: 
(5) 
I am not carrying a pen with blue ink. 
(6) 
The Earth is not governed by cows. 
Condition (4) makes my knowledge of (5) depend 
upon what I would believe in the closest possible 
world in which I was carrying a pen with blue ink, 
and it makes my knowledge of (6) depend upon 
what I would believe in the closest possible world 
in which the Earth was governed by cows. The 
closest.., (5) world - one in which I happen to be 
carrying a pen with blue ink - need not be very 
different from the actual world, in which I happen 
to be carrying a pen with black ink. That is, the 

350 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
closest ---,(5) world is very close to the actual world, 
and we may assume that it falls within the bound-
ary of N. A possible world in which the Earth was 
governed by cows would, however, be very differ-
ent from the actual world, so different that it 
might well lie beyond the boundary of N. We may 
suppose that my belief as to whether the Earth is 
governed by cows is always true inside N, and that 
I thereby satisfy condition (3a). It remains open 
that I am wrong about this matter in the nearest 
world where cows do govern, contrary to (4). 
Thus, satisfaction of condition (3a) with respect 
to a given proposition does not guarantee satis-
faction of condition (4) with respect to that prop-
osition.4 
In light of the foregoing, we can distinguish 
two different versions of reliabilism. The first, which 
I shall call neighborhood reliabilism (NR), is the view 
that you know X, if and only if you have a true belief 
that X which satisfies some version of (3). The 
second, which I shall call counterfactual reliabi-
lism (CR), is the view that you know X, if and only 
if you have a true belief that X which satisfies 
some version of both ( 3) and (4). 
It is important to note what requirements 
these theories do not impose on knowledge. First, 
NR and CR eschew the traditional claim that one 
could not know a proposition without having 
justification for believing it. Let us say that to be 
justified in believing a proposition means some-
thing like having beliefs or nondoxastic states that 
provide good reasons for believing that proposi-
tion. Reliabilists who reject the justification 
condition sometimes argue as follows. The justifi-
cation condition is independent of the reliability 
condition only if holding beliefs for good reasons 
is not necessarily truth conducive. In that case, 
the pursuit of rational belief and the pursuit of 
true belief could, at least in principle, diverge. But 
truth is the sole and ultimate epistemic value, so 
any substantive, independent justification condi-
tion has no place among the requirements for 
knowledge.s 
That is one rationale for giving up the justifi-
cation condition. A highly advertised benefit of 
doing so is that it immediately allows us to be rid 
of at least some forms of skepticism. According 
to a very familiar line of skeptical argument, I 
have no justification for believing that I am not a 
thoroughly deceived brain in a vat, and conse-
quently I fail to know that I am not. Since I fail to 
know that I am not thoroughly deceived in this 
way, I have no knowledge of the external world. 
A reliabilist, or anyone else who rejects the justi-
fication condition, will balk at the first step. She 
may concede that I have no justification for 
believing that I am not a brain in a vat. Unless 
knowledge requires justification, however, it does 
not follow that I fail to know that I am not a brain 
in a vat, and the skeptical argument is blocked. 
I shall return to this issue later. 
A second point is that reliability theorists 
typicallyrejectvarious"higher-level"requirements 
on knowledge, such as: 
(7) 
K(X) entails K(K(X) ). 
and: 
(8) 
K(X) entails K(R(X) ).6 
The reliabilist has a number of motivations for 
denying (8), and, therefore, (7). 
For one thing, a reliable belief or process is 
truth tropic regardless of whether it is known 
to be so. Hence, a requirement that, beyond 
being reliable, a belief or process has to be known 
to be reliable would not do anything to foster the 
epistemic norm of truth. Such a requirement, 
then, has no place in an account of knowledge. 
Next, from the reliabilist standpoint, you know 
X in virtue of being reliable about X. X is one fact 
about the world; whether you are reliable about X 
is another, different fact about the world. You are 
reliable about X if, in your environment, you 
are suitably related to X. You may be so related to 
X without being so related to R(X). Hence, you 
can be reliable about X but not reliable about 
R(X). You would, then, know X, but not know 
that you are reliable about X. 
In addition, (8) as stated apparently requires 
an endless sequence ofbeliefsB(R(X) ),B(RR(X)), 
B(RRR(X) ), and so on, such that one is reliable 
about R(X), RR(X), RRR(X), and so on. That is 
unattractive, certainly. And, if each of these beliefs 
has to be generated by distinct or additionally 
complex mechanisms or procedures, the regress 
is utterly vicious. 7 
Finally, the denial of (8) must be independ-
ently plausible, if reliabilism is to withstand one of 
the main criticisms which has been directed 
against it. This criticism, due to Laurence BonJour8 

RELIABILISM LEVELED 
351 
and Keith Lehrer,9 is presented by way of various 
exam pies. Here is BonJ our's well-known "Norman" 
case: 
Norman, under certain conditions which usually 
obtain, is a completely reliable clairvoyant with 
respect to certain kinds of subject matter. He 
possesses no evidence or reasons of any kind for 
or against the general possibility of such a cogni-
tive power, or for or against the thesis that he 
possesses it. One day Norman comes to believe 
the President is in New York City .... In fact the 
belief is true and results from his clairvoyant 
power under circumstances under which it is 
completely reliable (op. cit., p. 62). 
BonJour maintains that Norman does not know 
in this instance, and concludes that reliabilism is 
untenable. Even among those who find this exam-
ple convincing, there is some difference of opin-
ion as to what defect in reliabilism it brings to 
light. But one prominent reaction is that Norman 
does not know the president is in New York 
because he fails to satisfy some higher-level 
requirement on knowledge. lO If Norman had ver-
ified that the deliverances of his clairvoyant power 
reliably report how things are, then he would 
know that the president is in New York. But, since 
he lacks this higher-level knowledge, Norman 
lacks the first-level knowledge that the president 
is in New York. 
I am not sure exactly what to make of this 
discussion, since I tend to lose my bearings when 
clairvoyance is so much as mentioned. 1I I do think, 
however, that this much is relatively clear: it is pos-
sible for one to be reliable about X without know-
ing that one is. According to reliabilist accounts of 
knowledge, simply being reliable about X is sup-
posed to be sufficient for knowing that X. If know-
ing that you are reliable about X is an additional 
necessary condition for your knowing X, then 
these reliabilist accounts are mistaken. 12 
To the reliabilists I have in mind, the big 
picture looks like this. We know a lot about the 
world. We are reliable about things we believe 
on the basis of perception, so we know all kinds 
of things by seeing, hearing, and so forth. In 
addition, we are competent reasoners, at least 
about relatively elementary matters. We are 
reliable when we arrive at beliefs by induction 
or deduction, and these beliefs also count as 
knowledge. If we think about it, we probably 
believe that we are reliable about the things 
we believe on the basis of perception and infer-
ence. It is not apparent, however, whether these 
higher-level judgments are themselves reliable. 
If and when they are not, then we fail to know 
that we know. But, says the reliabilist, there is 
nothing wrong with that. 
II. 
Counterfactual Reliabilism 
is Too Strong 
I think the right picture is somewhat different. 
I agree that we know a lot about the world. I also 
agree that, when we form various beliefs, those 
beliefs or belief-forming processes may be 
reliable without our knowing that they are. 
Nevertheless, we often know that our beliefs 
about the world are true, not false. On some 
occasions we know, further, that we are reliable 
about what we believe. And, finally, there are 
many instances when we know that we know. It 
is incumbent upon reliabilists to get these facts 
about higher-level knowledge straight. I do not 
think they can. 
Let me begin with CR. My treatment of it will 
be relatively brief, in part because I have discussed 
the status of (4) as a condition for knowledge 
elsewhere. (4) was the subject of intense scrutiny 
some years ago, and serious problems with it 
came to light. For one thing, it leads to unaccept-
able failures of what is known as the closure 
principle for knowledge: 
(9) 
If K(P) & K(P entails Q), then K( Q). 
Also, there are unexceptionable cases of inductive 
knowledge for which (4) does not hold, so (4) is 
too strong. 13 There is an additional difficulty: 
(4) is hard to square with a satisfactory account of 
higher-level knowledge. 14 
Consider the following example. You see your 
long-time friend Omar, who is a perfectly decent 
and straightforward sort of person. Noticing his 
shiny white footwear, you say, "Nice shoes, Omar, 
are they new?" Omar replies, "Yes, I bought them 
yesterday:' I think the following things are true: 
(10) 
You know Omar has a new pair of 
shoes. 

352 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
(11) 
You know that your belief that Omar 
has a new pair of shoes is true, or at 
least not false. 15 
(12) 
You know that your belief that Omar 
has a new pair of shoes is reliable. 16 
(13) 
Other things being equal, you know 
that you know that Omar has a new 
pair of shoes. 
(13) and (12) depend upon (ll), and (11) is 
certainly compelling in its own right. (13) entails 
(ll), because to know X entails that you have a 
true belief that X. (12) entails (11), if your being 
reliable about X is understood to entail that your 
belief that X is actually true. 
The prime question at this point whether CR 
can accommodate (ll). Does CR allow you to 
know that your belief that Omar has a new pair of 
shoes is true, not false? In particular, does (11) 
meet the condition set by (4)? I think the answer 
is no. I shall try to say why somewhat loosely and 
informally, and then more carefully. 
(4) requires that, if you know X, then you would 
not believe X, if X were false. As things actually are, 
you believe that your belief that Omar has new 
shoes is not false. What if it were? If somehow your 
belief that Omar has a new pair of shoes were false, 
you would still believe that your belief was true, 
not false. The alternative is hard to fathom. It is 
difficult to conceive of your not believing that 
something you believe is true, whenever the matter 
happens to cross your mind. So, if your belief that 
Omar has new shoes were false, you would still 
believe that your belief was true, not false. You 
thereby fail to satisfy condition (4). According to 
CR, then, you do not know that your belief that 
Omar has new shoes is true, not false. 
Let me now go through the same point a 
little more carefully. Let 0 = "Omar has new 
shoes"; B( 0) = "You believe Omar has new shoes"; 
B( ,(B( 0) & ,0)) = "You believe that you do not 
believe falsely that Omar has new shoes." 
(14) 
In the actual world, B(,(B(O) & ,0)). 
Consider the nearest possible world W in which 
your higher-level belief is false, that is, 
(15) 
In W, ,(,(B(O) & ,0)). 
Simplifying, 
(16) 
In W, ((B(O) & ,0)). 
From (16), 
(17) 
InW,B(O). 
If you believe 0, you believe that you do not 
falsely believe 0 (see above). Hence, 
Given (15) and (18), 
(19) 
In W,(B(O) &,0) &B(,(B(O) &,0)). 
That is, if your belief that 0 were false, you never-
theless would believe that it was not false. So, 
according to (4), you fail to know that you do not 
believe falsely that o. It follows, I take it, that you 
also fail to know that your belief is true. 17 
Note that the argumentation here is quite gen-
eral. (4) makes it impossible for you to know that 
any of your beliefs is true, not false. 18 Thus, it also 
seems to exclude your knowing that any of your 
beliefs is reliable, or that any of your beliefs is 
knowledge. That is going far too far, in my book. 19 
So, let us set CR aside, and move on to NR.20 
III. Neighborhood Reliabilism 
is Too Weak 
NR makes knowledge out to be true belief that 
satisfies some version of (3). The differences 
among the various formulations, and the forms 
of NR they give rise to, can be quite significant. 
The trend these days seems to be toward reliable-
process theories, which run along the lines of (3c) 
rather than (3a) or (3b). Hence, in what follows, 
I shall consider the variant of NR that incorpo-
rates (3c), although what I shall have to say car-
ries over to the other forms of NR as well.21 As I 
have set things up, NR is generally weaker than 
CR, since NR forgoes condition (4) while CR 
includes it. I have maintained that CR is too 
strong. It stints us higher-level knowledge we 
actually have. Now, I shall argue that NR is too 
weak. It would allow us higher-level knowledge 
we do not have. 
Once again, I shall proceed by considering an 
example, namely, the "gas-gauge case," due in its 

RELIABILISM LEVELED 
353 
original form to Michael Williams.22 Williams 
describes himself driving a car with a working, 
highly reliable gas gauge. Williams does not know, 
however, that the gauge is reliable. Let us stipulate 
that he has never checked it, he has never been 
told anything about its reliability, and he does not 
even have any background information as to 
whether gauges like his are likely to be working. 
He never takes any special steps to see whether 
the gauge is going up or down when it ought to 
be. Rather, without giving the matter a second 
thought, Williams simply goes by what the gauge 
says. The gauge reads "F;' and Williams believes that 
his gas tank is full. According to NR, he knows 
that his tank is full. He has this knowledge because 
his belief results from a reliable process, that is, 
going by a well-functioning gas gauge. But 
Williams does not know that he knows that his 
tank is full. To have this higher-level knowledge, 
he would need to know that the gauge reliably 
registers the level of gas in his tank, and we have 
stipulated that he has no such informationY 
No one should be distracted by the details of 
the case. Perhaps it is hard to imagine how, in the 
situation described, Williams could fail to have 
any background information about the reliability 
of his gas gauge. Then again, one might doubt 
whether the supposedly reliable process Williams 
uses is appropriately identified as "going by a 
well-functioning gas gauge." But what is essential 
here is just the claim that a subject might arrive at 
a belief by some reliable process, appropriately 
identified as P, yet not know that P is reliable. If 
particular features of my example create difficul-
ties for you, let reading the gas gauge be a proxy 
for any such process P. 
Now consider another driver, whom I shall call 
Roxanne. She is like Williams, in that she believes 
implicitly what her gas gauge says, without knowing 
that the gauge is reliable. But she undertakes the fol-
lowing, admittedly curious, procedure. She looks at 
the gauge often. Not only does she form a belief 
about how much gas is in the tank, but she also takes 
note of the state of the gauge itself. So, for example, 
when the gauge reads "F", she believes that, on this 
occasion, the tank is full. She also believes that, on 
this occasion, the gauge reads ''F:' Moreover, Roxanne 
combines these beliefs; she believes: 
(20) 
On this occasion, the gauge reads "F" 
andF. 
Certainly, the perceptual process by which 
Roxanne forms her belief that the gauge reads "F" 
is a reliable one. By hypothesis, her belief that the 
tank is full is also reached by a reliable process. 
Hence, there seems to be no good reason to deny 
that Roxanne's belief in (20) is the result of a reli-
able process, and the reliabilist will say that she 
knows (20).24 
Now, it is a completely straightforward logical 
consequence of (20) that: 
(21) 
On this occasion, the gauge is reading 
accurately. 
Assume that Roxanne deduces (21) from (22). 
Deduction is certainly a reliable process, so there 
is no loss of reliability at this step. Consequently, 
it seems that Roxanne must be credited with 
knowing (21). She knows this, supposedly, 
despite the fact that she has no independent 
information at all about the reliability of the 
gauge - whether it is broken or likely to be 
broken, whether it is hooked up properly, and so 
on. She just looks at the gauge and immediately 
believes what it says. 
Let us say further that Roxanne does this over 
and over again for a good while. At various times 
t, she looks at the gauge, which reads "X," and 
forms the belief that, on occasion t, the gauge says 
"X" and the tank is X. Given what has already 
been said, she comes to know that, on each of 
these occasions, the gauge was reading accurately. 
Then, putting these pieces of information 
together, Roxanne concludes by induction: 
(22) 
The gauge reads accurately all the time. 
Reliabilists generally accept that induction is a 
reliable belief-forming process. So they should 
concede that the transition from various beliefs 
like (21) to (22) is knowledge preserving. We can 
add that, from (22), Roxanne infers: 
(23) 
The gauge is reliable. 
If Roxanne knows that the gauge is reliable, then 
she can presumably deduce and know that the 
process by which she comes to believe that her gas 
tank is full is a reliable one. And with just a little 
more deduction, Roxanne can come to know that 
she knows that her gas tank is full. 2s 

354 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
This extraordinary procedure, which I shall 
call bootstrapping, seems to allow one to promote 
many, if not all, of one's beliefs that were formed 
by reliable processes into knowledge that those 
beliefs were formed by reliable processes.26 
I assume that bootstrapping is illegitimate. 
Roxanne cannot establish that her gas gauge is 
reliable by the peculiar reasoning I have just 
described. The challenge to NR is that it may go 
wrong here. On the face of things, it does improp-
erly ratify bootstrapping as a way of gaining 
knowledgeY 
To sort this out, we need to get clear about 
what the defect in bootstrapping is. I shall 
consider some possible diagnoses, in a point-
counterpoint format: 
Point. It is obvious what Roxanne did wrong. 
Suppose the gauge had not been reliable. Roxanne 
would have gone through exactly the same pro-
cedure, and reached the false conclusion that her 
gauge was reliable. Hence, she does not know that 
the gauge is reliable. 
Counterpoint. Say that if you like. But then you 
are really assuming that knowledge has to satisfy 
condition (4). In other words, you are abandon-
ing NR in favor of CR, and we have already seen 
that CR fails. 
Point. The problem with Roxanne's procedure 
is that it could not have possibly yielded any other 
result other than the one it did, namely, that the 
gauge is reliable. 
Counterpoint. It is not clear that the putative 
defect really is one. The process by which I know 
I am conscious when I am is surely a reliable one, 
yet that process could not return a verdict other 
than that I am conscious.28 
Point. Roxanne does not know that the gauge 
is reliable, because she reaches that conclusion by 
bootstrapping, and bootstrapping itself is an 
unreliable process. After all, you can apply boot-
strapping to a great many underlying processes, 
some reliable, some not. Every time, though, 
bootstrapping will tell you that the underlying 
process is reliable. When the underlying process is 
unreliable, bootstrapping will yield the false belief 
that the underlying process is reliable. So, boot-
strapping itself often generates false beliefs, and 
must be considered unreliable. 
Counterpoint. So far as I can tell, this is the best 
answer for the reliabilist to give, but it still seems 
problematic in various respects. My first worry is 
a methodological one. The response under 
consideration identifies the process leading up to 
Roxanne's belief in (23) as a token of a relatively 
wide process type, roughly bootstrapping in gen-
eral. The failures of other tokens of this broad 
type are supposed to discredit Roxanne's under-
taking, and the belief that results from it. Such a 
response is dissatisfying because it is generally 
possible to find a process type under which a 
given process token falls, such that the token 
counts as reliable, just as it is generally possible to 
find another process type under which the token 
falls, such that the token counts as unreliable. 
There is no agreed-upon, principled way of 
identifying which is the proper process type to 
consider in evaluating the epistemic status of a 
particular belief.29 
The reliabilist herself may encounter some 
embarrassment on just this score. One might 
describe Roxanne's initially going by her gas 
gauge as "forming a belief by an unauthenticated 
process;' that is, a process one does not know to 
be reliable. By parallel with the argument just 
given against bootstrapping, one might say that, 
if one forms beliefs by an unauthenticated pro-
cess, often enough the token process one employs 
will be unreliable, and one's belief will be false. 
Hence, forming a belief by an unauthenticated 
process is generally unreliable, and beliefs that 
result from unauthenticated processes do not 
count as knowledge. Of course, the reliabilist 
rejects the demand that a process must be known 
to be reliable if it is to be a source of knowledge. 
She then has to find some basis for allowing the 
criticism of Roxanne's bootstrapping to stand, 
while rejecting the corresponding criticism of 
Roxanne's forming a belief by an unauthenti-
cated process in the first place. Otherwise, the 
reliabilist's charge of guilt by association may 
boomerang. 
Suppose we set this scruple aside, and accept 
that Roxanne's way of reaching (23) is unreliable. 
What makes it so? Where does the unreliability 
enter in? It will be useful to compare Roxanne's 
bootstrapping with a procedure that really would 
establish that a car's gas gauge is reliable. Imagine 
that Catherine periodically uses a dipstick to 
measure the level of gas in the tank of her car, and 
she verifies that the reading of the gauge matches 
that of the dipstick. Each time she does this, she 
comes to know an instance of: 

RELIABILISM LEVELED 
355 
(21 *) 
On occasion t, the gauge is reading 
accurately. 
After enough repeated successes, we can agree, 
Catherine may know by induction that the gauge 
is accurate all the time, and she can properly 
reach the yet stronger (modalized) conclusion 
that the gauge is reliable. The crucial point is that 
this impeccable way of finding out that a gas 
gauge is reliable is identical to Roxanne's original 
procedure from a certain point onward. Both 
Catherine and Roxanne infer that their gauges 
are reliable from beliefs of the form given by 
(21 *). So, it seems that any lapse in reliability on 
Roxanne's part must occur in the way that she 
arrives at such beliefs. 
In each case, Roxanne deduces an instance of 
(21 *) from a belief of the form: 
(20*) 
On occasion t, the gauge reads "X" 
and X. 
As I said earlier, it would be hard to deny that 
Roxanne's beliefs about how the gas gauge reads 
are reliably formed. And, by hypothesis, Roxanne's 
beliefs about how much gas is in her car's tank are 
formed by a reliable process. So, the reliabilist 
seems committed to the claim that when Roxanne 
comes to believe instances of (20*), those beliefs 
result from reliable processes. Given what has 
already been said, the only point left at which 
some defect can enter into Roxanne's procedure 
has to be in her transition from instances of (20*) 
to belief in corresponding instances of (21 *). But, 
since any instance of (20*) entails an instance of 
(21 *), that instance of (21 *) must be true if the 
corresponding instance of (20*) is! In that sense, 
there is no more risk of error with respect to the 
instances of (21 *) than there is with respect to 
the instances of (20*). So, it is opaque how pro-
ceeding from instances of (20*) to corresponding 
instances of (21 *) turns a reliable process into an 
unreliable one.30 
Let us also waive this objection for the time 
being, and permit the proponent of NR to take 
refuge in the claim that bootstrapping is an unre-
liable process. Thus, her position will be that you 
cannot use the beliefs generated by some process 
to establish the accuracy or the reliability of that 
very process. Unfortunately for the reliabilist, 
such a response to the gas-gauge case disrupts the 
full-blooded, noncontextualist antiskepticism 
that reliabilists often regard as a great virtue of 
their position. For, while bootstrapping may seem 
absurd when it involves someone's gas gauge, it 
has been regarded as a sound response to 
Cartesian skepticism.31 
This answer to skepticism is basically G. E. Moore's 
vintage commonsense response, transposed and 
fortified by the addition of some early twenty-
first-century reliabilism. It goes as follows. You 
know you have a hand. Your belief that you have a 
hand was formed by perception, which is a reliable 
process. Hence, that belief counts as knowledge. 
Now, the proposition that you have a hand entails 
that you are not a brain in a vat, deceived into 
believing falsely that you have a hand. Hence, you 
can deduce that you are not a brain in a vat from 
the proposition that you have a hand. Your belief 
that you are not a brain in a vat qualifies as knowl-
edge, because it, too, is formed by a reliable pro-
cess. At least, that will be so if deduction from a 
belief arrived at by a reliable process itself counts 
as a reliable process. 
The correspondence between this neo-
Moorean argument and the rejected line of argu-
ment in the gas-gauge case emerges clearly if the 
former is reformulated slightly: 
(A) 
You know you have a hand. 
(B) 
You know that it appears to you as 
though you have a hand. 
(B) holds, because we may assume that your beliefs 
about how things appear to you are generated by a 
reliable process. Continuing: 
(C) 
Therefore, you know that your appear-
ance of having a hand is veridical. 
(D) 
Therefore, you know you are not a 
deceived brain in a vat. 
For comparison: 
(A') 
Roxanne knows that her gas tank is full. 
(B') 
Roxanne knows that the gas gauge reads 
"F." 
(C') 
Therefore, Roxanne knows that, on this 
occasion, her gas gauge is reading accu-
rately. 
Thus, the reliabilist version of Moore's refuta-
tion of skepticism sanctions the same kind of 

356 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
inference that created problems in connection 
with the gas-gauge case. Suppose we grant that 
the reliabilist is able to evade those problems by 
denying, either for principled reasons or by fiat, 
that bootstrapping can lead to knowledge. The 
upshot will be that reliabilism cannot provide a 
satisfactory response to skepticism along the 
lines just laid out.32 
Let me return to the status of NR in general. 
I have taxed that view for allowing bootstrapping 
to count as a source of knowledge, or for not 
being able to explain what is wrong with it. In the 
example given above, the crux of the matter came 
down to the status of beliefs of the form: 
(20*) 
On occasion t, the gauge reads "X" 
andX. 
and: 
(21 *) 
On occasion t, the gauge is reading 
accurately. 
It looked as though the reliabilist was committed 
to saying that Roxanne knows instances of (20*), 
but does not know corresponding instances of 
(21 *), even though she deduces the second from 
the first. Now, contextualism about knowledge 
might appear to offer the reliabilist a way out of 
this uncomfortable situation. The contextualist 
will say that our standards for knowledge rise as 
we think through the example. That is, the neigh-
borhood N which determines the reliability of 
processes expands. At first, when (20*) is under 
consideration, worlds in which the gas gauge fails 
are excluded from N. The gas gauge counts as reli-
able, and Roxanne is correctly judged to know 
both conjuncts of (20*), and (20*) itself. But overt 
considera!ion of (21 *) brings questions about the 
accuracy of the gauge into the picture, and worlds 
in which the gauge is wrong come to be included 
in N. In this setting, the gauge no longer counts as 
reliable, so Roxanne does not know that her gas 
tank is full. Hence, she does not know one of the 
conjuncts of (20*), and she does not know (20*) 
as a whole. Nor does she know (21*), which she 
derived from (20*). Contextualism relieves the 
reliabilist's embarrassment of having to explain 
how reliability is lost in the course of Roxanne's 
deducing a proposition from another one that 
entails it. 
I do not propose to enter into a full-blown dis-
cussion of contextualism here, but I shall make 
two brief points. First, if the standards of reliabil-
ity and knowledge can be elevated in something 
like the manner just described, then we almost 
never know explicitly that we know anything. We 
also lose some seemingly impeccable first-order 
knowledge. To see this, recall the example in 
which you believe that Omar has new shoes. Say 
that you reflect upon your epistemic situation, 
and you believe that your belief that Omar has a 
new pair of shoes is the outcome of a reliable 
process. According to the contextualist revision 
of NR, considering the reliability of a belief-
forming process expands the neighborhood N so 
that the process no longer counts as reliable. It 
follows that once you reflect upon the fact that 
your belief-forming process is reliable, you no 
longer know that Omar has a new pair of shoes. 
A fortiori, you do not know that you know that 
Omar has new shoes. Recourse to contextualism 
of this sort would make both first- and higher-
order knowledge very fragile, unable to survive 
virtually any reflection at all. Such a result is 
hardlyacceptable.33 
My second thought is that adding a contextu-
alist dimension to NR may be going to great 
lengths to save a view that does not want to be 
saved. I say this because a consequence of the 
contextualist maneuver is that, if it is possible to 
maintain low epistemic standards while the entire 
bootstrapping procedure is carried out, that pro-
cedure would be successful. Roxanne could con-
vert knowledge of how much fuel is in the tank of 
her car into knowledge that her gas gauge is reli-
able. But, for the reliabilist, knowledge of how 
much fuel is in the tank is knowledge of one 
empirical fact, and knowledge that the gauge is 
reliable is knowledge of another, independent 
empirical fact. One should not be able to trans-
mute the first into the second, as bootstrapping 
would allow one to do. 34 To put the same point 
another way: suppose a change in epistemic 
standards of the sort envisioned does thwart or 
suppress the bootstrapping procedure. Still, the 
standards' tendency to change would not elimi-
nate the possibility of bootstrapping in principle 
or somehow make bootstrapping intrinsically 
more acceptable. To that extent, whatever relief 
contextualism provides will strike the reliabilist as 
cosmetic, not real. 

RELIABILISM LEVELED 
357 
IV. 
Some Conclusions 
CR and NR, as I understand them, are meant to 
be general theories of what knowledge is. I have 
been arguing that both views encounter substan-
tial difficulties when they have to deal with 
higher-level knowledge. CR allows: 
(10) 
You know that Omar has new shoes. 
but not the higher-level: 
(11) 
You know that your belief that Omar 
has new shoes is true (not false). 
NR got into trouble with the gas-gauge case. 
A proponent of NR has to say that Roxanne knows: 
(20) 
On this occasion, the gauge says "F" 
andF. 
But if he goes on to grant that she knows: 
(21) 
On this occasion, the gauge is reading 
accurately. 
it appears that she can proceed to knowledge of: 
(23) 
The gauge is reliable. 
and beyond. This result is unacceptable, yet it is 
not clear how NR can avoid it. 
What lessons should we draw? First, these 
phenomena provide some reason - not a conclu-
sive reason, but some reason - to endorse the 
traditional view that knowledge requires justifi-
cation. The traditional view handles the problem 
cases with relative ease. First, it offers a natural 
explanation of why (11) follows so closely on 
(10). Good evidence that Omar has new shoes is 
good evidence that a belief that Omar has new 
shoes is true, not false. If you have such evidence 
(and you believe that Omar has new shoes, and 
your belief is true, and there are no Gettier traps), 
then you are in a good position to have the knowl-
edge reported in (10). Moreover, given that you 
have this evidence, you are also in a good position 
to have the higher-level knowledge reported in 
(11), so long as you recognize that you believe 
that Omar has new shoes, and you believe that 
your belief is true, not false. 
Bringing justification into the picture also 
helps to explain what is wrong with Roxanne's 
bootstrapping. Given the way the example was 
framed, Roxanne has no justification for (23), 
nor, I think, for (22) or (21). If justification is 
necessary for knowledge, she does not know any 
of these, which seems correct. What about (20)? 
Since (20) directly entails (21), Roxanne would be 
justified in believing (21) if she is justified in 
believing (20). If, as I claim, she is not justified 
in believing (21), then she is not justified in believ-
ing (20), either. That, too, seems plausible. If 
Roxanne has no independent reason to believe 
that the position of the needle on the gauge is reli-
ably correlated with how much gas is in the tank, I 
cannot see that she is justified in believing that her 
tank is full when she looks-at the gauge. So the 
traditionalist can say that Roxanne does not know 
(20) or (21), since she lacks justification for both. 
There are no bootstraps for her to pull on. 
Thus, re-instating a justification requirement 
for knowledge does make it easier to explain what 
is going on in the gas-gauge case. An objection is 
bound to arise, however. I have as much as said 
that for Roxanne to know how much gas she has 
by reading the gauge, she needs to have justifica-
tion for thinking that the gauge is reliable. This 
claim seems to invite a version of the regress 
problem discussed in section I. Suppose that, in 
general, justification for believing that X always 
requires justification for the belief that the proc-
ess by which you came to believe that X is reliable. 
It apparently follows that justification for any 
belief will require an endless hierarchy of further 
justified beliefs oflevel (N + 1) as to the reliability 
of the way one's belief at level N was formed. 35 
But to say that justification sometimes requires 
reason to believe that one's belief-forming proc-
ess is reliable, as it does in Roxanne's situation, 
does not imply that justification always requires 
such higher-level support or supplementation. 
It is this second, stronger claim that creates the 
regress, and one can refuse to agree to it. Note, 
though, that one can maintain that knowledge 
always requires justification, without maintaining 
that justification always requires further justifica-
tion for the higher-level belief that the process 
that led to the formation of one's initial belief was 
reliable. 36 
In sum, reliabilism encounters serious diffi-
culties in accounting for reflective knowledge, 

358 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
difficulties that might well be avoided by a justi-
ficationist approach to knowledge. The question 
now arises whether the weakness in reliabilism 
that has come to light is confined to its treat-
ment of reflective knowledge, or whether there is 
some deeper, more far-reaching problem with 
reliabilism which vividly shows itself when 
reflective knowledge is under consideration. 
Correlatively, one might ask whether the only 
essential work the justification condition does is 
to capture the relations between lower- and 
higher-level knowledge. 
My own view, which I shall state but not argue 
for, is that the inability of reliabilism to account 
for reflective knowledge has its roots in a more 
basic deficiency. I take it that knowledge is a kind 
Notes 
Rather, the reliabilist I have in mind denies 
that there is any independent, substantive 
justification condition for knowledge; see 
below. It may well be, though, that the argu-
ments I shall present also tell against reliabi-
lism about justified belief. I should mention 
that there is a hybrid of justificationist and 
reliabilist accounts, sometimes called the 
"reliable indicator theory." According to such 
a view,S knows that P only if S's belief that P 
is based on evidence E, where E is a reliable 
indicator of P. I shall not discuss this approach 
here. 
2 Note that we do not want the converse condi-
tion for knowledge, namely, that in N, X 
implies B(X). 
3 Like (3), the tracking condition is subject to 
modification. (4) as stated corresponds to 
(3a) above. An analogue to (3b) would be: 
(4b) 
If X were false, then -,(B(X) by process P). 
where P is the process you actually used to 
arrive at your belief that X. Proponents of the 
tracking condition, like Nozick and DeRose, 
have in fact been led to include some refer-
ence to methods or processes in their 
accounts. But that has proved to be some-
thing of a quagmire; it is unclear how the rel-
evant method or process is to be specified, 
and it is difficult to say exactly how reference 
of human success. It is something we accomplish; 
we have to do our part. The justification require-
ment is an attempt to formulate what that part is. 
Reliabilism either loses sight of this aspect of 
knowledge, or tries, in effect, to substitute some 
kind of de facto alignment between belief and 
the world for the knower's own contribution.3? 
As a consequence, reliabilist theories go wrong in 
their treatment of various cases, and these include 
the examples deployed above. Reliabilism has 
trouble accounting for reflective knowledge because 
it is defective as an account of knowledge in gen-
eral. A consideration of reflective knowledge 
shows that knowledge in general is neither 
reliably true belief nor belief that results from a 
reliable process. 
to the process should figure in the account. 
For further comment on (4b), see footnote 
18. I cannot think of any version of the track-
ing condition that corresponds neatly to 
(3c). 
4 Another way to make the point: suppose you 
know the proposition that the actual world is 
in N. Evaluation of whether that belief satis-
fies (4) requires considering the truth of what 
you believe in worlds outside N. 
5 For an argument in this spirit, see Alvin 
Goldman, 
Epistemology 
and 
Cognition 
(Cambridge: Harvard, 1986), pp. 97-103. 
6 
Read "R(X)" as "5 is reliable about X." When I 
say "5 is reliable about X," that locution is 
meant to stand in for whatever more specific 
reliabilist condition one might adopt. I shall 
assume, as a matter of terminology, that you 
are reliable about X only if you believe X and 
X is true. So, under this regimentation, R(X) 
entails B(X) and X. Moreover, for the reliabil-
ist, R(X) becomes equivalent to K(X), and (7) 
become equivalent to (8). 
7 See Goldman, "Naturalistic Epistemology and 
Reliabilism," in Peter A. French, Theodore 
E. Uehling, and Howard K. Wettstein, eds, 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, Volume XIX 
(Minneapolis: Minnesota University Press, 
1994), pp. 310-12. He claims that (7) and 
analogous principles create a vicious regress 
for nonreliabilist theories. 

RELIABILISM LEVELED 
359 
8 "ExternalistTheories of Empirical Knowledge;' 
in French, Uehling, and Wettstein, eds, Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy, Volume v (Minneapolis: 
Minnesota University Press, 1980), pp. 55-73. 
9 Theory of Knowledge (Boulder: Westview, 
1990). 
10 This is BonJour's own conclusion (pp. 62-4; 
see also Lehrer, p. 165). 
11 
It seems to me, though, that a less far-
fetched example to the same effect could be 
given. A few people have perfect pitch; they 
can immediately identify what absolute 
pitch they are hearing. I take it that whether 
someone does in fact have perfect pitch is 
not immediately apparent to that individ-
ual. To tell whether you have perfect pitch, 
you need to be tested. Let us suppose, then, 
that many people believe that they have 
perfect pitch, although they really do not. 
Now consider Norma, who has perfect 
pitch, but has never checked whether she 
does. Sh~ hears a tone, which she correctly 
takes to be an "A." Does she know that the 
tone is an "/\'? 
12 
I should note that Goldman distinguishes 
"basic psychological processes" (my emphasis) 
of belief formation from methods, which are 
"various sorts of algorithms, heuristics, and 
learnable methodologies" -
Epistemology 
and Cognition, p. 93. He also writes: "They 
are not part of the fixed, native architecture 
of the cognitive system. This is sufficient 
grounds for their not being basic processes" 
(p. 366). Goldman suggests that it is not 
enough for a method to be reliable to pass 
muster; it has to be acquired by a process or 
method that has higher-order reliability. 
That is, the first-order method needs to be 
acquired by a procedure that reliably leads to 
the acquisition of reliable methods (pp. 91-3). 
To this extent, a reliabilist account of knowl-
edge modeled on Goldman's account of jus-
tification might recognize a higher-order 
requirement in the case of non-native, 
acquired belief-forming methods. But as 
Goldman himself acknowledges, the distinc-
tion between processes and methods is dif-
ficult to draw (p. 92 note 11). For example, 
the capacity to see requires maturation and 
stimulation in order to develop, but Goldman 
does not want perceptual beliefs to be subject 
to higher-level requirements. A further 
qualm is that it is hard to see how instituting 
such a requirement for methods can be 
squared with the thought that all we should 
ask for from beliefs or ways of forming 
beliefs is reliable truth. 
13 
See my "Tracking, Closure, and Inductive 
Knowledge," m S. Luper-Foy, ed., The 
Possibility of Knowledge: Nozick and His 
Critics (Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 
1987),pp.197-215. 
14 
What follows is a more emphatic version of 
a criticism I originally directed against 
Nozick's account of knowledge (ibid., p. 203). 
In his "Solving the Skeptical Problem," The 
Philosophical Review, elv (1995), pp. 1-51, 
DeRose has defended something very like 
(4) (although, to be precise, DeRose's view is 
not that (4) is actually a condition for knowl-
edge per se, but works instead to set the 
standards for correct knowledge attribu-
tions). DeRose takes note of the sort of prob-
lem I raised, for which he offers no solution 
(p. 22). He nevertheless retains confidence in 
a version of the counterfactual requirement, 
though on what basis I cannot see. For addi-
tional discussion of counterfactuals and 
knowledge, 
see 
my 
"Subjunctivitis;' 
Philosophical Studies 134, 1 (May 2007), 
pp.73-88. 
15 
Note, in addition, that any proposition X 
itself entails that a belief that X is not false: 
X entails ..,(B(X) & ..,X). So, to say that you 
know that Omar has new shoes, but you fail 
to know that you do not believe falsely that 
Omar has new shoes would be to reject the 
closure principle for knowledge. 
16 
Alternatively: you know that the process by 
which you arrived at that belief is reliable. 
17 
Unfortunately, this maneuvering is clumsy 
and roundabout. I did it this way in part to 
avoid complications about counterfactuals 
with disjunctive antecedents. Such technical 
hazards will arise any time one tries to apply 
(4) to knowledge of a conjunction. So far as 
I am concerned, that itself is good reason to 
be suspicious about (4). 
18 
Very much the same goes for the modifica-
tion of (4) mentioned in footnote 3, namely, 
(4b). Suppose you believe 0 by some par-
ticular process P. It should be possible for 

360 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
you to know that you do not falsely believe 
o by process P. That knowledge requires 
B( ...,(P( 0) & ...,0)), where "P( 0)" now stands 
for the proposition that you believe 0 by 
way of process P. Suppose that your belief 
were false, that is, (P(O) & ...,0). Make the 
further, plausible assumption that your path 
from believing 0 by process P to a belief in the 
falsity of the conjunction would remain 
the same. Then, your belief in the falsity of 
the conjunction fails to satisfy condition 
(4b). In other words, you cannot know that 
you do not falsely believe 0 by process P. 
19 
This argument also cuts against reliabilism 
that accepts (4) without (3). 
20 
A proponent of CR might attempt to sur-
mount this difficulty by adding to her 
account a stipulation that you know any 
propositions you deduce from other propo-
sitions you know. This step is fraught with 
difficulties, however. The revised account 
may be too weak, and fail for the same reason 
that NR does (see below). Moving in this 
direction would also exacerbate other prob-
lems facing CR, such as those raised by Saul 
Kripke in widely heard but unpublished 
lectures. 
21 
For a somewhat different taxonomy of relia-
bilist positions, and for some arguments that 
would favor what he calls a "global" process 
theory like (3c), see Goldman, Epistemology 
and Cognition, pp. 43-9. I am not sure that 
Goldman's official scheme has room for NR 
as I construe it, since he seems to assume that 
what he calls a "relevant alternatives" theory 
is a broadening of a "pure subjunctive 
theory" (p. 45). As I would put it, Goldman 
assumes the reliabilist accepts (4), and the 
open question is then whether to add some 
version of (3). I have set things up the other 
way around. 
22 
Unnatural Doubts (New York: Oxford, 1991), 
p.347. 
23 
Williams himself says: "No item of knowl-
edge guarantees full knowledge of its own 
reliability conditions: indeed this is just 
another way of stating the externalist point 
that knowing does not guarantee knowing 
that one knows" (ibid., p. 348). 
24 
What I have said may provoke disquiet of the 
following sort. You might believe that A by 
way of a reliable process, and believe that B 
by way of a reliable process, yet your belief 
that (A & B) might not be the result of a reli-
able process. For one thing, the chances of 
error with respect to A may be just barely 
acceptable and the chances of error with 
respect to B may be just barely acceptable. 
The chances of error with respect to the con-
junction may then come out to be higher 
than the chances of error with respect to the 
conjuncts, and so the belief in the conjunc-
tion may not count as reliable. Another 
problem is that the process by which one 
comes to believe that A may interfere with 
the process by which one comes to believe 
that B, or vice versa. For example, one might 
use one instrument to measure for A, and 
another to measure for B, yet the operation 
of the second instrument may disrupt the 
functioning of the first. So, I think it is true 
in general that R(X) and R(y) do not entail 
R(X & Y). But it seems implausible that such 
a failure occurs in the situation under 
discussion. 
25 
There is a noteworthy similarity between the 
problem I am raising for reliabilism and a 
difficulty that faces co-variational accounts 
of semantic content. The former is an 
attempt to analyze knowledge in terms of 
the co-occurrence of beliefs and the facts; 
the latter is an attempt to analyze semantic 
content in terms of the co-occurrence of 
linguistic or mental tokens and the facts. 
A difficulty for the latter is that, if tokens of 
R co-occur with distal events X, they also co-
occur with the proximate process P that links 
X's with R's. So, the result would be that the 
R's just as well represent P as X. See Fred 
Dretske, "Misrepresentation;' reprinted in 
William Lycan, ed., Mind and Cognition: 
A Reader (New York: Oxford, 1992), pp. 
129-43. The parallel problem I am raising is 
that, if the output of some belief-forming 
process P reliably co-occurs with X, that 
output also reliably co-occurs with instances 
of a reliable belief-forming process, namely, P 
itself. Thus, the result seems to be that P itself 
can give one knowledge that one is linked to 
X by way of a reliable process, that is, P can 
directly give one knowledge that one knows 
that X. The general lesson to be drawn is that 

RELIABILISM LEVELED 
361 
co-occurrence can obtain for a variety of 
reasons, and is of questionable value in 
understanding relations like representation 
and knowledge. 
26 
For definiteness, let us say that bootstrap-
ping is the procedure that leads to beliefs, 
like (23), about the reliability of its underly-
ing process. Bootstrapping may require that 
one be able to identify appropriately the 
underlying process by which one has arrived 
at a particular belief, and sometimes one 
may not meet that condition. 
27 
Richard Fumerton independently arrived at 
a somewhat similar point - Metaepistemology 
and Skepticism (Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 1995), pp. 178-9. 
28 
Something like this objection is raised by 
William Alston, The Reliability of Sense 
Perception (Ithaca: Cornell, 1993), p. 17. He 
does want to allow, however, that introspec-
tion counts as a reliable process (p. 139). 
29 
This is the well-known "generality problem;' 
which itself raises difficulties for reliabilism. 
See Richard Feldman, "Reliability and 
Justification," The Monist, LXVII (1985), pp. 
159-74; and Feldman and Earl Conee, "The 
Generality 
Problem 
for 
Reliabilism," 
Philosophical Studies, XCIII (1997), pp. 1-29. 
In presenting my own objections to reliabi-
lism here, I have tried my best to steer clear 
of problems of this sort, allowing the relia-
bility of the underlying process to be a matter 
of stipulation. But at this point such compli-
cations may be unavoidable. 
30 
Williams insists that reliability cannot be 
lost through deduction (Unnatural Doubts, 
p. 328), leaving him little recourse at this 
point. Now, the thought may arise again 
that it is possible for processes to be reliable 
severally, but not in concatenation. One 
might then say that the process that led to 
Roxanne's belief in (20) is reliable, and that 
deduction is reliable, but that the combina-
tion of the two need not count as reliable. 
Goldman provides good reasons, however, 
for distinguishing processes that are reliable 
simpliciter (more precisely, "belief-inde-
pendent J-rules") from those which are 
conditionally reliable ("belief-dependent J-
rules"). The former generate (largely) true 
beliefs given nondoxastic inputs. The latter 
take beliefs as input, and will generate 
(largely) true beliefs, if their inputs are true. 
It seems to me that genuine deduction 
would be a paradigm of a conditionally reli-
able process, notwithstanding the logical 
errors made by subjects in certain experi-
mental situations. Goldman allows, as it 
seems he should, that a belief is reliably 
formed if it is the output of a conditionally 
reliable process whose inputs were the 
output of a reliable process or processes 
(Epistemology and Cognition, especially p. 
83). Some care may be necessary here, but I 
think a reliable process theory must include 
some provision such as the one Goldman 
makes. Consequently, I have difficulty envi-
sioning how the reliabilist can legitimately 
escape the difficulty raised in the text. 
31 
For an outline and discussion of reliabilism 
as an answer to skepticism, see Goldman, 
Epistemology and Cognition, especially pp. 
55-7 (though he couches that discussion in 
terms of a reliabilist theory of justification). 
The bootstrapping aspect of such a response 
to skepticism emerges clearly in Alston, pp. 
12-17, and in Williams, pp. 327ff. Alston 
endorses it reluctantly and with qualifica-
tions (pp. 138--40). Williams mistakenly 
believes that his own view avoids the kind of 
criticism I have raised. It is also noteworthy 
that reliabilists have embraced bootstrap-
ping in mounting an inductive defense of 
induction. See, for example, James Van Cleve, 
"Reliabilism, Justification, and the Problem 
of Induction," in French, Uehling, and 
Wettstein, eds, Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 
Volume 
IX 
(Minneapolis: 
Minnesota 
University Press, 1984), pp. 555-67; and 
David Papineau, "Reliabilism, Induction, 
and Scepticism;' The Philosophical Quarterly, 
XLII (1992), pp. 1-20. 
32 
One might think that the reliabilist can 
simply stand on the claim that we have per-
ceptual knowledge of the external world, 
insofar as our perceptual beliefs are gener-
ated by a reliable process. We cannot, on this 
more minimal view, move on to knowledge 
that our experiences are veridical; that fur-
ther step would allow for bootstrapping, 
which we have said is unreliable. One diffi-
culty, among others, with such a position 

362 
JONATHAN VOGEL 
is that it is inconsistent with the closure 
principle for knowledge. 
33 
To be sure, the contextualist scheme I have 
described is quite crude, and one might 
hope to find more satisfactory accounts of 
when and how epistemic standards get 
raised. But I am not aware of any worked-
out proposal that would serve the reliabilist's 
purposes any better; see my "The New 
Relevant Alternatives Theory," Philosophical 
Perspectives, XIII (1999), pp. 155-80, espe-
cially section 3. 
34 
I suppose Roxanne also has reliable beliefs, 
and knowledge, about the outputs of the 
gauge. What she still lacks is any access to 
whether the gauge itself is accurate or reliable. 
35 
Some coherentists cheerfully accept this 
consequence. 
36 
For such a view, see Alston, "What's Wrong 
with Immediate Knowledge?" reprinted in 
his Epistemic Justification: Essays in the 
Theory of Knowledge (Ithaca: Cornell, 1989), 
pp. 57-78. Another response would be to 
deny that the pertinent beliefs fall into the 
hierarchy of levels described in the text, set-
ting off the regress. Perhaps first-order 
beliefs about how various mechanisms per-
form can justify beliefs about the reliability 
of those mechanisms, and about the reliabil-
ity of belief-forming procedures that make 
use of those mechanisms. A view something 
like this was developed by Wilfrid Sellars, 
"Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind;' 
reprinted in Science, Perception and Reality 
(London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963), 
pp.127-96. 
37 
So-called "virtue epistemology" seeks to do 
justice to the contribution of the knower 
while retaining many of the central features 
of reliabilism. My impression is that the reli-
abilist component of such accounts prevents 
them from giving a proper treatment of the 
way a knower's evidence figures in knowl-
edge, but I shall not pursue that issue here. 

CHAPTER 28 
Externalist Theories of 
Empirical Knowledge 
Laurence BonJour 
Of the many problems that would have to be 
solved by a satisfactory theory of empirical 
knowledge, perhaps the most central is a general 
structural problem which I shall call the epistemic 
regress problem: the problem of how to avoid an 
infinite and presumably vicious regress of justifi-
cation in one's account of the justification of 
empirical beliefs. Foundationalist theories of 
empirical knowledge, as we shall see further 
below, attempt to avoid the regress by locating a 
class of empirical beliefs whose justification does 
not depend on that of other empirical beliefs. 
Externalist theories, the topic of the present paper, 
represent one species of foundationalism. 
I 
I begin with a brief look at the epistemic regress 
problem. The source of the problem is the 
requirement that beliefs that are to constitute 
knowledge must be epistemically justified. Such 
a requirement is of course an essential part of 
the "traditional" conception of knowledge as 
justified true belief, but it also figures in at least 
most of the revisions of that conception which 
Originally published in P. French, T. Uehling Jr., and 
H. Wettstein (eds), Midwest Studies in Philosophy, vol. 5 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1980), 
pp.53-73. 
have been inspired by the Gettier problem. 
Indeed, if this requirement is understood in a 
sufficiently generic way, as meaning roughly 
that the acceptance of the belief must be epis-
temically rational, that it must not be epistemi-
cally irresponsible, then it becomes hard to see 
how any adequate conception of knowledge can 
fail to include it. 
How then are empirical beliefs epistemically 
justified? Certainly the most obvious way to show 
that such a belief is justified is by producing a jus-
tificatory argument in which the belief to be justi-
fied is shown to follow inferentially from some 
other (perhaps conjunctive) belief, which is thus 
offered as a reason for accepting it. Beliefs whose 
justification would, if made explicit, take this 
form may be said to be inferentially justified. (Of 
course, such a justificatory argument would usu-
ally be explicitly rehearsed only in the face of 
some specific problem or challenge. Notice also 
that an inferentially justified belief need not have 
been arrived at through inference, though it often 
will have been.) 
The important point about inferential justifi-
cation, however, is that if the justificandum belief 
is to be genuinely justified by the proffered argu-
ment, then the belief that provides the premise of 
the argument must itself be justified in some 
fashion. This premise belief might of course itself 
be inferentially justified, but this would only raise 
a new issue of justification with respect to the 
premise(s) of this new justificatory argument, 

364 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
and so on, so that empirical knowledge is threat-
ened by an infinite and seemingly vicious regress 
of epistemic justification, with a thoroughgoing 
skepticism as the eventual outcome. So long as 
each new step of justification is inferential, it 
appears that justification can never be completed, 
indeed can never really even get started, and 
hence that there is no justification and no knowl-
edge. Thus the epistemic regress problem. 
What is the eventual outcome of this regress? 
There are a variety of possibilities, but the major-
ity of philosophers who have considered the 
problem have believed that the only outcome 
that does not lead more or less directly to skepti-
cism is foundational ism: the view that the regress 
terminates by reaching empirical beliefs (a) that 
are genuinely justified, but (b) whose justifica-
tion is not inferentially dependent on that of any 
further empirical belief(s), so that no further 
issue of empirical justification is thereby raised. 
These non-inferentially justified beliefs, or basic 
beliefs as I shall call them, are claimed to provide 
the foundation upon which the edifice of empir-
ical knowledge rests. And the central argument 
for foundationalism is simply that all other pos-
sible outcomes of the regress lead inexorably to 
skepticism. I 
This argument has undeniable force. None-
theless, the central concept of foundationalism, 
the concept of a basic belief, is itself by no means 
unproblematic. The fundamental question that 
must be answered by any acceptable version of 
foundationalism is: how are basic beliefs possible? 
How, that is, is it possible for there to be an 
empirical belief that is epistemically justified in a 
way completely independent of any believed 
premises that might provide reasons for accept-
ing it? As Chisholm suggests, a basic belief seems 
to be in effect an epistemologically unmoved (or 
perhaps self-moved) mover. But such a status is 
surely no less paradoxical in epistemology than it 
is in theology. 
This intuitive difficulty with the idea of a basic 
empirical belief may be elaborated by considering 
briefly the fundamental concept of epistemic jus-
tification. There are two points to be made. First, 
the idea of justification is generic, admitting in 
principle of many different species. Thus, for 
example, the acceptance of an empirical belief 
might be morally justified, or pragmatically justi-
fied, or justified in some still different sense. But a 
belief's being justified in one of these other senses 
will not satisfy the justification condition for 
knowledge. What knowledge requires is epistemic 
justification. And the distinguishing characteris-
tic of this particular species of justification is, I 
submit, its internal relationship to the cognitive 
goal of truth. A cognitive act is epistemically justi-
fied, on this conception, only if and to the extent 
that is aimed at this goal- which means at a min-
imum that one accepts only beliefs that there is 
adequate reason to think are true. 
Second, the concept of epistemic justification 
is fundamentally a normative concept. It has to 
do with what one has a duty or obligation to do, 
from an epistemic or intellectual standpoint. As 
Chisholm suggests, one's purely intellectual duty 
is to accept beliefs that are true, or likely to be 
true, and reject beliefs that are false, or likely to be 
false. To accept beliefs on some other basis is to 
violate one's epistemic duty - to be, one might 
say, epistemically irresponsible - even though such 
acceptance might be desirable or even mandatory 
from some other, non-epistemic standpoint. 
Thus if basic beliefs are to provide a suitable 
foundation for empirical knowledge, if inference 
from them is to be the sole basis for the justifica-
tion of other empirical beliefs, then that feature, 
whatever it may be, in virtue of which an empiri-
cal belief qualifies as basic, must also constitute 
an adequate reason for thinking that the belief is 
true. And now if we assume, plausibly enough, 
that the person for whom a belief is basic must 
himself possess the justification for that belief if 
his acceptance of it is to be epistemically rational 
or responsible, and thus apparently that he must 
believe with justification both (a) that the belief 
has the feature in question and (b) that beliefs 
having that feature are likely to be true, then we 
get the result that this belief is not basic after all, 
since its justification depends on that of these 
other beliefs. If this result is correct, then founda-
tionalism is untenable as a solution to the regress 
problem.' 
What strategies are available to the found a-
tionalist for avoiding this objection? One possi-
bility would be to grant that the believer must be 
in possession of the reason for thinking that his 
basic belief is true but hold that the believer's cog-
nitive grasp of that reason does not involve fur-
ther beliefs, which would then require justification, 
but instead cognitive states of a different and 

EXTERNALIST THEORIES OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE 
365 
more rudimentary kind: intuitions or immediate 
apprehensions, which are somehow capable of 
conferring justification upon beliefs without 
themselves requiring justification. Some such 
view as this seems implicit in most traditional 
versions of foundationalism. 3 
My concern in the present paper, however, is 
with an alternative foundationalist strategy, one of 
comparatively recent innovation. One way, per-
haps somewhat tendentious, to put this alternative 
approach is to say that according to it, though 
there must in a sense be a reason why a basic belief 
is likely to be true, the person for whom such a 
belief is basic need not have any cognitive grasp of 
this reason. On this view, the epistemic justifica-
tion or reasonableness of a basic belief depends on 
the obtaining of an appropriate relation, generally 
causal or nomological in character, between the 
believer and the world. This relation, which is dif-
ferently characterized by different versions of the 
view, is such as to make it either nomologically 
certain or else highly probable that the belief is 
true. It would thus provide, for anyone who knew 
about it, an undeniably excellent reason for accept-
ing such a belief. But according to proponents of 
the view under discussion, the person for whom 
the belief is basic need not (and in general will 
not) have any cognitive grasp of any kind of this 
reason or of the relation that is the basis for it in 
order for this basic belief to be justified; all these 
matters may be entirely external to the person's 
subjective conception of the situation. Thus the 
justification of a basic belief need not involve any 
further beliefs (or other cognitive states) so that no 
further regress of justification is generated. D. M. 
Armstrong calls this an "externalist" solution to 
the regress problem, and I shall adopt this label. 
My purpose in this paper is to examine such 
externalist views. I am not concerned with prob-
lems of detail in formulating a view of this kind, 
though some of these will be mentioned in pass-
ing, but rather with the overall acceptability of an 
externalist solution to the regress problem and 
thus of an externalist version of foundationalism. 
I shall attempt to argue that externalism is not 
acceptable. But there is a methodological prob-
lem with respect to such an argument which must 
be faced at the outset, since it determines the basic 
approach of the paper. 
When viewed from the general standpoint of 
the western epistemological tradition, externalism 
represents a very radical departure. It seems safe 
to say that until very recent times, no serious phi-
losopher of knowledge would have dreamed of 
suggesting that a person's beliefs might be epis-
temically justified simply in virtue of facts or rela-
tions that were external to his subjective 
conception. Descartes, for example, would surely 
have been quite unimpressed by the suggestion 
that his problematic beliefs about the external 
world were justified if only they were in fact reli-
ably related to the world - whether or not he had 
any reason for thinking this to be so. Clearly his 
conception, and that of generations of philoso-
phers who followed, was that such a relation 
could playa justificatory role only if the believer 
possessed adequate reason for thinking that it 
obtained. Thus the suggestion embodied in 
externalism would have been regarded by most 
epistemologists as simply irrelevant to the main 
epistemological issue, so much so that the phi-
losopher who suggested it would have been taken 
either to be hopelessly confused or to be simply 
changing the subject (as I note below, this may be 
what some externalists in fact intend to be doing). 
The problem, however, is that this very radical-
ism has the effect of insulating the externalist 
from any very direct refutation: any attempt at 
such a refutation is almost certain to appeal to 
premises that a thoroughgoing externalist would 
not accept. My solution to this threatened 
impasse will be to proceed on an intuitive level as 
far as possible. By considering a series of exam-
ples, I shall attempt to exhibit as clearly as possi-
ble the fundamental intuition about epistemic 
rationality that externalism seems to violate. 
Although this intuition may not constitute a 
conclusive objection to the view, it is enough, I 
believe, to shift the burden of proof decisively to 
the externalist. In the final section of the paper, I 
shall consider briefly whether he can discharge 
this burden. 
II 
Our first task will be the formulation of a clear 
and relatively adequate version of externalism. 
The recent epistemological literature contains a 
reasonably large number of externalist and quasi-
externalist views. Some of these, however, are not 
clearly relevant to our present concerns, either 

366 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
because they are aimed primarily at the Gettier 
problem, so that their implications for a founda-
tionalist solution of the regress problem are not 
made clear, or because they seem, on the surface 
at least, to involve a repudiation of the very con-
ception of epistemic justification or reasonable-
ness as a requirement for knowledge. Views of the 
latter sort seem to me to be very difficult to take 
seriously; but if they are seriously intended, they 
would have the consequence that the regress 
problem, at least in the form discussed here, 
would simply not arise, so that there would be no 
need for any solution, foundationalist or other-
wise. My immediate concern here is with versions 
of externalism that claim to solve the regress 
problem and thus that also claim that the accept-
ance of beliefs satisfying the externalist condi-
tions is epistemically justified or rational or 
warranted. Only such an externalist position gen-
uinely constitutes a version of foundationalism, 
and hence the more radical views, if any such are 
in fact seriously intended, may safely be left aside 
for the time being. 
The most completely developed externalist 
view of the sort we are interested in is that of 
Armstrong, as presented in his book, Belief, Truth 
and Knowledge. 4 Armstrong is explicitly con-
cerned with the regress problem, though he for-
mulates it in terms of knowledge rather than 
justification. And it seems reasonably clear that 
he wants to say that beliefs satisfying his external-
ist criterion are epistemically justified or rational, 
though he is not as explicit as one might like on 
this point.5 In what follows, I shall in any case 
assume such an interpretation of Armstrong and 
formulate his position accordingly. 
Another version of externalism, which fairly 
closely resembles Armstrong's except for being 
limited to knowledge derived from visual percep-
tion, is offered by Dretske in Seeing and Knowing. 6 
Goldman, in several papers, also suggests views 
of an externalist sort,7 and the view that Alston 
calls "Simple Foundationalism" and claims to be 
the most defensible version of foundationalism 
seems to be essentially externalist in character." 
The most extreme version of externalism would 
be one that held that the external condition 
required for justification is simply the truth of 
the belief in question. Such a view could not be 
held in general, of course, without obliterating 
the distinction between knowledge and mere 
true belief, thereby turning every lucky guess into 
knowledge. But it might be held with respect to 
some more limited class of beliefs. Such a view is 
mentioned by Alston as one possible account of 
privileged access,9 and seems, surprisingly 
enough, to be advocated by Chisholm (though it 
is very hard to be sure that this is what Chisholm 
really means). 10 
Here I shall concentrate mainly on Armstrong's 
view. Like all externalists, Armstrong makes the 
acceptability of a basic belief depend on an exter-
nal relation between the believer and his belief, 
on the one hand, and the world, on the other, spe-
cifically a law-like connection: "there must be a 
law-like connection between the state of affairs 
Bap [i.e., a's believing that p J and the state of 
affairs which makes 'p' true, such that, given Bap, 
it must be the case that p." [po 166J This is what 
Armstrong calls the "thermometer-model" of 
non-inferential knowledge: just as the readings of 
a reliable thermometer lawfully reflect the tem-
perature, so one's basic beliefs lawfully reflect the 
states of affairs that make them true. A person 
whose beliefs satisfy this condition is in effect a 
reliable cognitive instrument; and it is, according 
to Armstrong, precisely in virtue of this reliability 
that these basic beliefs are justified. 
Of course, not all thermometers are reliable, 
and even a reliable one may be accurate only 
under certain conditions. Similarly, it is not a 
requirement for the justification of a basic belief 
on Armstrong's view that all beliefs of that gen-
eral kind or even all beliefs of that kind held by 
that particular believer be reliable. Thus the law 
linking the having of the belief with the state of 
affairs that makes it true will have to mention 
properties, including relational properties, of the 
believer beyond his merely having that belief. 
Incorporating this modification yields the fol-
lowing schematic formulation of the conditions 
under which a non-inferential belief is justified 
and therefore basic: a non-inferential belief is jus-
tified if and only if there is some property H of 
the believer, such that it is a law of nature that 
whenever a person satisfies H and has that belief, 
then the belief is true. [po 197J 11 Here H may be as 
complicated as one likes and may include facts 
about the believer's mental processes, sensory 
apparatus, environment, and so on. But presum-
ably, though Armstrong does not mention this 
point, H is not to include anything that would 

EXTERNALIST THEORIES OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE 
367 
entail the truth of the belief; such a logical con-
nection would not count as a law of nature. 
Armstrong adds several qualifications to this 
account, aimed at warding off various objections, 
of which I shall mention only two. First, the 
nomological connection between the belief and 
the state of affairs that makes it true is to be 
restricted to "that of completely reliable sign to 
thing signified." [po 182] What this is intended to 
exclude is the case where the belief itself causes 
the state of affairs that makes it true. In such a 
case, it seems intuitively that the belief is not a 
case of knowledge even though it satisfies the 
condition of complete reliability formulated 
above. Second, the property H of the believer 
which is involved in the law of nature must not be 
"too specific"; there must be a "real possibility" of 
a recurrence of the situation described by the law. 
What Armstrong is worried about here is the pos-
sibility of a "veridical hallucination;' i.e., a case in 
which a hallucinatory belief happens to be cor-
rect. In such a case, if the state of affairs that 
makes the belief true happens to be part of the 
cause of the hallucination and if the believer and 
his environment are described in enough detail, it 
might turn out to be nomologically necessary 
that such a state of affairs obtain, simply because 
all alternative possible causes for the hallucina-
tory belief have been ruled out by the specificity 
of the description. Again, such a case intuitively 
should not count as a case of knowledge, but it 
would satisfy Armstrong's criterion in the absence 
of this additional stipulation. (Obviously this 
requirement of nonspecificity or repeatability is 
extremely vague and seems in fact to be no more 
than an ad hoc solution to this problem; but I 
shall not pursue this issue here.) 
There are various problems of detail, similar 
to those just discussed, which could be raised 
about Armstrong's view, but these have little rel-
evance to the main theme of the present paper. 
Here I am concerned with the more fundamen-
tal issue of whether Armstrong's view, or any 
other externalist view of this general sort, is 
acceptable as a solution to the regress problem 
and the basis for a foundationalist account of 
empirical knowledge. When considered from this 
perspective, Armstrong's view seems at the very 
least to be in need of considerable refinement in 
the face of fairly obvious counterexamples. Thus 
our first task will be to develop some of these 
counterexamples and suggest modifications in 
the view accordingly. This discussion will also 
lead, however, to a fundamental intuitive objec-
tion to all forms of externalism. 
III 
Although it is formulated in more general terms, 
the main concern of an externalist view like 
Armstrong's is obviously those non-inferential 
beliefs which arise from ordinary sources like 
sense-perception and introspection. For it is, of 
course, these beliefs which will on any plausible 
foundationalist view provide the actual founda-
tions of empirical knowledge. Nevertheless, cases 
involving sense-perception and introspection are 
not very suitable for an intuitive assessment of 
externalism, since one central issue between 
externalism and other foundationalist and non-
foundationalist views is precisely whether in such 
cases a further basis for justification beyond the 
externalist one is typically present. Thus it will be 
useful to begin by considering the application of 
externalism to other possible cases of non-
inferential knowledge, cases of a less familiar sort 
where it will be easier to stipulate in a way that 
will be effective on an intuitive level that only the 
externalist sort of justification is present. 
Specifically, in this section and the next, our focus 
will be on possible cases of clairvoyant knowl-
edge. Clairvoyance, the alleged psychic power of 
perceiving or intuiting the existence and charac-
ter of distant states of affairs without the aid of 
any sensory input, remains the subject of consid-
erable scientific controversy. Although many 
would like to dismiss out of hand the very idea of 
such a cognitive power, there remains a certain 
amount of evidence in favor of its existence which 
it is difficult to entirely discount. But in any case, 
the actual existence of clairvoyance does not 
matter at all for present purposes, so long as it is 
conceded to represent a coherent possibility. For 
externalism, as a general philosophical account of 
the foundations of empirical knowledge, must of 
course apply to all possible modes of non-
inferential empirical knowledge, and not just to 
those that in fact happen to be realized. 
The intuitive difficulty with externalism that 
the following discussion is intended to delineate 
and develop is this: on the externalist view, a 

368 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
person may be ever so irrational and irresponsi-
ble in accepting a belief, when judged in light of 
his own subjective conception of the situation, 
and may still turn out to be epistemically justi-
fied, i.e., may still turn out to satisfy Armstrong's 
general criterion of reliability. This belief may in 
fact be reliable, even though the person has no 
reason for thinking that it is reliable - or even 
though he has good reason to think that it is not 
reliable. But such a person seems nonetheless to 
be thoroughly irresponsible from an epistemic 
standpoint in accepting such a belief, and hence 
not justified, contrary to externalism. The fol-
lowing cases may help bring out this problem 
more clearly. 
Consider first the following case: 
Case 1. Samantha believes herself to have the 
power of clairvoyance, though she has no reasons 
for or against this belief. One day she comes to 
believe, for no apparent reason, that the President 
is in New York City. She maintains this belief, 
appealing to her alleged clairvoyant power, even 
though she is at the same time aware of a massive 
amount of apparently cogent evidence, consist-
ing of news reports, press releases, allegedly live 
television pictures, etc., indicating that the 
President is at that time in Washington, DC. Now 
the President is in fact in New York City, the evi-
dence to the contrary being part of a massive 
official hoax mounted in the face of an assassina-
tion threat. Moreover, Samantha does in fact 
have completely reliable clairvoyant power, under 
the conditions that were then satisfied, and her 
belief about the President did result from the 
operation of that power. 
In this case, it is clear that Armstrong's criterion 
of reliability is satisfied. There will be some com-
plicated description of Samantha, including the 
conditions then operative, from which it will 
follow, by the law describing her clairvoyant 
power, that her belief is trueY But it seems intui-
tively clear nevertheless that this is not a case of 
justified belief or of knowledge: Samantha is 
being thoroughly irrational and irresponsible in 
disregarding cogent evidence that the President is 
not in New York City on the basis of a clairvoyant 
power which she has no reason at all to think that 
she possesses; and this irrationality is not some-
how canceled by the fact that she happens to be 
right. Thus, I submit, Samantha's irrationality 
and irresponsibility prevent her belief from being 
epistemically justified. 
This case and others like it suggest the need for 
a further condition to supplement Armstrong's 
original one: not only must it be true that there is 
a law-like connection between a person's belief 
and the state of affairs that makes it true, such 
that given the belief, the state of affairs cannot fail 
to obtain, but it must also be true that the person 
in question does not possess cogent reasons for 
thinking that the belief in question is false. For, as 
this case seems to show, the possession of such 
reasons renders the acceptance of the belief irra-
tional in a way that cannot be overridden by a 
purely externalist justification. 
Nor is this the end of the difficulty for 
Armstrong. Suppose that the clairvoyant believer, 
instead of having evidence against the particular 
belief in question, has evidence against his pos-
session of such a cognitive power, as in the fol-
lowing case: 
Case II. Casper believes himself to have the power 
of clairvoyance, though he has no reasons for this 
belief. He maintains his belief despite the fact that 
on the numerous occasions on which he has 
attempted to confirm one of his allegedly clair-
voyant beliefs, it has always turned out apparently 
to be false. One day Casper comes to believe, for 
no apparent reason, that the President is in New 
York City, and he maintains this belief, appealing 
to his alleged clairvoyant power. Now in fact the 
President is in New York City; and Casper does, 
under the conditions that were then satisfied, 
have completely reliable clairvoyant power, from 
which this belief in fact resulted. The apparent 
falsity of his other clairvoyant beliefs was due in 
some cases to his being in the wrong conditions 
for the operation of his power and in other cases 
to deception and misinformation. 
Is Casper justified in believing that the President 
is in New York City, so that he then knows that 
this is the case? According to Armstrong's account, 
even with the modification just suggested, we 
must apparently say that the belief is justified and 
hence a case of knowledge: the reliability condi-
tion is satisfied, and Casper possesses no reason 
for thinking that the President is not in New York 
City. But this result still seems mistaken. Casper is 
being quite irrational and irresponsible from an 
epistemic standpoint in disregarding evidence 

EXTERNALIST THEORIES OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE 
369 
that his beliefs of this sort are not reliable and 
should not be trusted. And for this reason, the 
belief in question is not justified. 
In the foregoing case, Casper possessed good 
reasons for thinking that he did not possess the 
sort of cognitive ability that he believed himself 
to possess. But the result would be the same, I 
believe, if someone instead possessed good rea-
sons for thinking that in general there could be no 
such cognitive ability, as in the following case: 
Case III. Maud believes herself to have the power of 
clairvoyance, though she has no reasons for this 
belief. She maintains her belief despite being inun-
dated by her embarrassed friends and relatives with 
massive quantities of apparently cogent scientific 
evidence that no such power is possible. One day 
Maud comes to believe, for no apparent reason, 
that the President is in New York City, and she 
maintains this belief, despite the lack of any inde-
pendent evidence, appealing to her alleged clair-
voyant power. Now in fact the President is in New 
York City, and Maud does, under the conditions 
then satisfied, have completely reliable clairvoyant 
power. Moreover, her belief about the President did 
result from the operation of that power. 
Again, Armstrong's criterion of reliability seems 
to be satisfied. But it also seems to me that Maud, 
like Casper, is not justified in her belief about the 
President and does not have knowledge. Maud 
has excellent reasons for thinking that no cogni-
tive power such as she believes herself to possess 
is possible, and it is irrational and irresponsible of 
her to maintain her belief in that power in the 
face of that evidence and to continue to accept 
and maintain beliefs on this dubious basis. 
Cases like these two suggest the need for a fur-
ther modification of Armstrong's account: in addi-
tion to the law-like connection between belief and 
truth and the absence of any reasons against the 
particular belief in question, it must also be the case 
that the believer in question has no cogent reasons, 
either relative to his own case or in general, for 
thinking that such a law-like connection does not 
exist, i.e., that beliefs of that kind are not reliable. 
IV 
So far the modifications suggested for Armstrong's 
criterion are consistent with the basic thrust of 
externalism as a response to the regress problem. 
What emerges is in fact a significantly more 
plausible externalist position. But these cases 
and the modifications made in response to them 
also suggest an important moral which leads to a 
basic intuitive objection to externalism: external 
or objective reliability is not enough to offset 
subjective irrationality. If the acceptance of a 
belief is seriously unreasonable or unwarranted 
from the believer's own standpoint, then the 
mere fact that unbeknownst to the believer its 
existence in those circumstances lawfully guar-
antees its truth will not suffice to render the 
belief epistemically justified and thereby an 
instance of knowledge. So far we have been con-
cerned only with situations in which the believ-
er's subjective irrationality took the form of 
ignoring positive grounds in his possession for 
questioning either that specific belief or beliefs 
arrived at in that way. But now we must ask 
whether even in a case where these positive rea-
sons for a charge of irrationality are not present, 
the acceptance of a belief where only an exter-
nalist justification is available cannot still be said 
to be subjectively irrational in a sense that rules 
out its being epistemically justified. 
We may begin by considering one further case 
of clairvoyance, in which Armstrong's criterion 
with all the suggested modifications is satisfied: 
Case IV. Norman, under certain conditions that 
usually obtain, is a completely reliable clairvoy-
ant with respect to certain kinds of subject 
matter. He possesses no evidence or reasons of 
any kind for or against the general possibility of 
such a cognitive power, or for or against the 
thesis that he possesses it. One day Norman 
comes to believe that the President is in New 
York City, though he has no evidence either for 
or against this belief. In fact the belief is true and 
results from his clairvoyant power, under cir-
cumstances in which it is completely reliable. 
Is Norman epistemically justified in believing 
that the President is in New York City, so that his 
belief is an instance of knowledge? According to 
the modified externalist position, we must appar-
ently say that he is. But is this the right result? Are 
there not still sufficient grounds for a charge of 
subjective irrationality to prevent Norman's being 
epistemically justified? 

370 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
One thing that might seem relevant to this 
issue, which I have deliberately omitted from the 
specification of the case, is whether Norman 
believes himself to have clairvoyant power, even 
though he has no justification for such a belief. 
Let us consider both possibilities. Suppose, first, 
that Norman does have such a belief and that it 
contributes to his acceptance of his original belief 
about the President's whereabouts in the sense 
that were Norman to become convinced that he 
did not have this power, he would also cease to 
accept the belief about the President.13 But is it 
not obviously irrational, from an epistemic stand-
point, for Norman to hold such a belief when he 
has no reasons at all for thinking that it is true or 
even for thinking that such a power is possible? 
This belief about his clairvoyance fails after all to 
possess even an externalist justification. And if we 
say that the belief about his clairvoyance is epis-
temically irrational and unjustified, must we not 
say the same thing about the belief about the 
President which ex hypothesi depends upon it?14 
A possible response to this challenge would be 
to add one further condition to our modified 
externalist position, viz., that the believer not 
even believe that the law-like connection in ques-
tion obtains, since such a belief will not in general 
be justified (or at least that his continued accept-
ance of the particular belief that is at issue not 
depend on his acceptance of such a general belief). 
In our present case, this would mean that Norman 
must not believe that he has the power of clair-
voyance (or at least that his acceptance of the 
belief about the President's whereabouts not 
depend on his having such a general belief). But if 
this specification is added to the case, it now 
becomes more than a little puzzling to under-
stand what Norman thinks is going on. From his 
standpoint, there is apparently no way in which 
he could know the President's whereabouts. Why 
then does he continue to maintain the belief that 
the President is in New York City? Why is not the 
mere fact that there is no way, as far as he knows 
or believes, for him to have obtained this infor-
mation a sufficient reason for classifying this 
belief as an unfounded hunch and ceasing to 
accept it? And if Norman does not do this, is he 
not thereby being epistemically irrational and 
irresponsible? 
For these reasons, I submit, Norman's accept-
ance of the belief about the President's whereabouts 
is epistemically irrational and irresponsible, and 
thereby unjustified, whether or not he believes him-
self to have clairvoyant power, so long as he has no 
justification for such a belief. Part of one's epistemic 
duty is to reflect critically upon one's beliefs, and 
such critical reflection precludes believing things to 
which one has, to one's knowledge, no reliable 
means of epistemic access. IS 
Wearenowface-to-facewiththefundamental-
and seemingly obvious - intuitive problem with 
externalism: why should the mere fact that such 
an external relation obtains mean that Norman's 
belief is epistemically justified, when the relation 
in question is entirely outside his ken? As 
remarked earlier, it is clear that one who knew 
that Armstrong's criterion was satisfied would be 
in a position to construct a simple and quite 
cogent justifying argument for the belief in ques-
tion: if Norman has property H (being a com-
pletely reliable clairvoyant under the existing 
conditions and arriving at the belief on that 
basis), then he holds the belief in question only if 
it is true; Norman does have property H and does 
hold the belief in question; therefore, the belief is 
true. But Norman himself is by stipulation not in 
a position to employ this argument, and it is 
unclear why the mere fact that it is, so to speak, 
potentially available in the situation should jus-
tify his acceptance of the belief. Precisely what 
generates the regress problem in the first place, 
after all, is the requirement that for a belief to be 
justified for a particular person, not only is it nec-
essary that there be true premises somehow avail-
able in the situation which could in principle 
provide a basis for a justification, but also that the 
believer in question know or at least justifiably 
believe some such set of premises and thus be in a 
position to employ the corresponding argument. 
The externalist position seems to amount merely 
to waiving this general requirement in a certain 
class of cases, and the question is why this should 
be acceptable in these cases when it is not accept-
able generally. (If it were acceptable generally, 
then it seems likely that any true belief would be 
justified, unless some severe requirement is 
imposed as to how immediately available such 
premises must be. But any such requirement 
seems utterly arbitrary, once the natural one of 
actual access by the believer is abandoned.) Thus 
externalism looks like a purely ad hoc solution to 
the epistemic regress problem. 

EXTERNALIST THEORIES OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE 
371 
One reason why externalism may seem ini-
tially plausible is that if the external relation in 
question genuinely obtains, then Norman will in 
fact not go wrong in accepting the belief, and it is, 
in a sense, not an accident that this is so. But how 
is this supposed to justify Norman's belief? From 
his subjective perspective, it is an accident that the 
belief is true. Of course, it would not be an acci-
dent from the standpoint of our hypothetical 
external observer who knows all the relevant facts 
and laws. Such an observer, having constructed 
the justifying argument sketched above, would be 
thereby in a position to justify his own acceptance 
of the belief. Thus Norman, as Armstrong's ther-
mometer image suggests, could serve as a useful 
epistemic instrument for such an observer, a kind 
of cognitive thermometer; and it is to this fact, as 
we have seen, that Armstrong appeals in arguing 
that a belief like Norman's can be correctly said to 
be reasonable or justifiable. [183] But none of 
this seems in fact to justify Norman's own accept-
ance of the belief, for Norman, unlike the hypo-
thetical external observer, has no reason at all for 
thinking that the belief is true. And the sugges-
tion here is that the rationality or justifiability of 
Norman's belief should be judged from Norman's 
own perspective, rather than from one that is 
unavailable to him.16 
This basic objection to externalism seems to me 
to be intuitively compelling. But it is sufficiently 
close to being simply a statement of what the exter-
nalist wants to deny to make it helpful to buttress it 
a bit by appealing to some related intuitions. 
First, we may consider an analogy with moral 
philosophy. The same conflict between perspec-
tives which we have seen to arise in the process of 
epistemic assessment can also arise with regard to 
the moral assessment of a person's action: the 
agent's subjective conception of what he is doing 
may differ dramatically from that which would in 
principle be available to an external observer who 
had access to facts about the situation that are 
beyond the agent's ken. And now we can imagine 
an approximate moral analogue of externalism 
which would hold that the moral justifiability of 
an agent's action was, in certain cases at least, 
properly to be determined from the external per-
spective, entirely irrespective of the agent's own 
conception of the situation. 
Consider first the moral analogue of Armstrong's 
original, unmodified version of externalism. If we 
assume, purely for the sake of simplicity, a utilitar-
ian moral theory, such a view would say that an 
action might on occasion be morally justified 
simply in virtue of the fact that in the situation 
then obtaining, it would as a matter of objective 
fact lead to the best overall consequences - even if 
the agent planned and anticipated that it would 
lead to a very different, perhaps extremely unde-
sirable, consequence. But such a view seems 
plainly mistaken. There is no doubt a point to the 
objective, external assessment: we can say cor-
rectly that it turns out to be objectively a good 
thing that the agent performed the action. But this 
is not at all inconsistent with saying that his 
action was morally unjustified and reprehensi-
ble, given his subjective conception of the likely 
consequences. 
Thus our envisaged moral externalism must at 
least be modified in a way that parallels the modifi-
cations earlier suggested for epistemological exter-
nalism. Without attempting to make the analogy 
exact, it will suffice for our present purposes to add 
to the original requirement for moral justification, 
viz., that the action will in fact lead to the best over-
all consequences, the further condition that the 
agent not believe or intend that it lead to undesira-
ble consequences. Since it is also, of course, not 
required by moral externalism that the agent believe 
that the action will lead to good consequences, the 
sort of case we are now considering is one in which 
an agent acts in a way that will in fact produce the 
best overall consequences, but has no belief at all 
about the likely consequences of his action. 
Although such an agent is no doubt preferable to 
one who acts in the belief that his action will lead to 
undesirable consequences, surely he is not morally 
justified in what he does. On the contrary, he is 
being highly irresponsible, from a moral stand-
point, in performing the action in the absence of 
any evaluation of what will result from it. His moral 
duty, from our assumed utilitarian standpoint, is to 
do what will lead to the best consequences, but this 
duty is not satisfied by the fact that he produces this 
result willy-nilly, without any idea that he is doing 
SO.17 And similarly, the fact that a given sort of belief 
is objectively reliable, and thus that accepting it is in 
fact conducive to arriving at the truth, need not 
prevent our judging that the epistemic agent who 
accepts it without any inkling that this is the case 
violates his epistemic duty and is epistemically 
irresponsible and unjustified in doing so. 

372 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
Second, we may appeal to the connection 
between knowledge and rational action. Suppose 
that Norman, in addition to the clairvoyant belief 
described earlier, also believes that the Attorney-
General is in Chicago. This latter belief, however, is 
not a clairvoyant belief but is based upon ordinary 
empirical evidence in Norman's possession, evi-
dence strong enough to give the belief some fairly 
high degree of reasonableness, but not strong 
enough to satisfy the requirement for knowledge.ls 
Suppose further that Norman finds himself in a 
situation where he is forced to bet a very large 
amount, perhaps even his life or the life of someone 
else, on the whereabouts of either the President or 
the Attorney-General. Given his epistemic situation 
as described, which bet is it more reasonable for 
him to make? It seems relatively clear that it is more 
reasonable for him to bet the Attorney-General is in 
Chicago than to bet that the President is in New 
York City. But then we have the paradoxical result 
that from the externalist standpoint it is more 
rational to act on a merely reasonable belief than to 
act on one that is adequately justifed to qualify as 
knowledge (and which in fact is knowledge). It is 
very hard to see how this could be so. If greater epis-
temic reasonableness does not carry with it greater 
reasonableness of action, then it becomes most dif-
ficult to see why it should be sought in the first 
place. (Of course, the externalist could simply bite 
the bullet and insist that it is in fact more reasonable 
for Norman to bet on the President's whereabouts 
than the Attorney-General's, but such a view seems 
very implausible.) 
I have been attempting in this section to artic-
ulate the fundamental intuition about epistemic 
rationality, and rationality generally, that exter-
nalism seems to violate. This intuition the exter-
nalist would of course reject, and thus my 
discussion does not constitute a refutation of the 
externalist 
position 
on 
its 
own 
ground. 
Nevertheless it seems to me to have sufficient 
intuitive force at least to place the burden of proof 
squarely on the externalist. In the final section of 
the paper, I shall consider briefly some of the 
responses that seem to be available to him. 
v 
One possible defense for the externalist in the 
face of the foregoing intuitive objection would 
be to narrow his position by restricting it to those 
commonsensical varieties of non-inferential 
knowledge which are his primary concern, viz., 
sense-perception and introspection, thereby 
rendering the cases set forth above strictly irrel-
evant. Such a move seems, however, utterly ad 
hoc. Admittedly it is more difficult to construct 
intuitively compelling counterexamples involv-
ing sense-perception and introspection, mainly 
because our intuitions that beliefs of those kinds 
are in fact warranted in some way or other are 
very strong. But this does nothing to establish 
that the externalist account of their warrant is 
the correct one. Thus unless the externalist can 
give some positive account of why the same 
conclusion that seems to hold for non-standard 
cases like clairvoyance does not also hold for 
sense-perception and introspection, this nar-
rowing of his position seems to do him no 
good. 
If the externalist cannot escape the force of the 
objection in this way, can he perhaps balance it 
with positive arguments in favor of his position? 
Many attempts to argue for externalism are in 
effect arguments by elimination and depend on 
the claim that alternative accounts of empirical 
knowledge are unacceptable, either because they 
cannot solve the regress problem or for some 
other reason. Most such arguments, depending as 
they do on a detailed consideration of the alter-
natives, are beyond the scope of the present paper. 
But one such argument depends only on very 
general features of the competing positions and 
thus can usefully be considered here. 
The basic factual premise of this argument is 
that in very many cases that are commonsensi-
cally instances of justified belief and of knowl-
edge, there seem to be no justifying factors 
explicitly present beyond those appealed to by 
the externalist. An ordinary person in such a case 
may have no idea at all of the character of his 
immediate experience, of the coherence of his 
system of beliefs, etc., and yet may still have 
knowledge. Alternative theories, so the argument 
goes, may describe correctly cases of knowledge 
involving a knower who is extremely reflective 
and sophisticated, but they are obviously too 
demanding and too grandiose when applied to 
these more ordinary cases. In these cases, only 
the externalist condition is satisfied, and this 
shows that no more than that is necessary for 

EXTERNALIST THEORIES OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE 
373 
justification and for knowledge, though more 
might still be epistemically desirable. 
Although the precise extent to which it holds 
could be disputed, in the main this factual premise 
must be simply conceded. Any non-externalist 
account of empirical knowledge that has any plau-
sibility will impose standards for justification 
which very many beliefs that seem commonsensi-
cally to be cases of knowledge fail to meet in any 
full and explicit fashion. And thus on such a view, 
such beliefs will not strictly speaking be instances 
of adequate justification and of knowledge. But it 
does not follow that externalism must be correct. 
This would follow only with the addition of the 
premise that the judgments of common sense in 
this area are sacrosanct, that any departure from 
them is enough to demonstrate that a theory of 
knowledge is inadequate. But such a premise 
seems entirely too strong. There seems in fact to 
be no basis for more than a reasonably strong pre-
sumption in favor of the correctness of common 
sense, but one which is still quite defeasible. And 
what it would take to defeat this presumption 
depends in part on how great a departure from 
common sense is being advocated. Thus, although 
it would take very strong grounds to justify a very 
strong form of skepticism, not nearly so much 
would be required to make acceptable the view 
that what common sense regards as cases of justi-
fication and of knowledge are in fact only rough 
approximations to an epistemic ideal which strictly 
speaking they do not satisfy. 
Of course, a really adequate reply to the exter-
nalist would have to spell out in some detail the 
precise way in which such beliefs really do approx-
imately satisfy some acceptable alternative stand-
ard, a task which obviously cannot be attempted 
here. But even without such elaboration, it seems 
reasonable to conclude that this argument in 
favor of externalism fails to carry very much 
weight as it stands and would require serious but-
tressing in order to give it any chance of offsetting 
the intuitive objection to externalism: either the 
advocacy and defense of a quite strong presump-
tion in favor of common sense, or a detailed 
showing that alternative theories cannot in fact 
grant to the cases favored by common sense even 
the status of approximations to justification and 
to knowledge. 
The other pro-externalist argument I want to 
consider does not depend in any important way 
on consideration of alternative pOSItions. This 
argument is hinted at by Armstrong [pp. 185-88]' 
among others, but I know of no place where it is 
developed very explicitly. Its basic claim is that 
only an externalist theory can handle a certain 
version of the lottery paradox. 
The lottery paradox is standardly formulated 
as a problem confronting accounts of inductive 
logic that contain a rule of acceptance or detach-
ment, but we shall be concerned here with a 
somewhat modified version. This version arises 
when we ask how much or what degree of epis-
temic justification is required for a belief to qual-
ify as knowledge, given that the other necessary 
conditions for knowledge are satisfied. Given the 
intimate connection, discussed earlier, between 
epistemic justification and likelihood of truth, it 
seems initially reasonable to take likelihood or 
probability of truth as a measure of the degree of 
epistemic justification, and thus to interpret the 
foregoing question as asking how likely or prob-
able it must be, relative to the justification of one's 
belief, that the belief be true, in order for that 
belief to satisfy the justification requirement for 
knowledge. Most historical theories of knowledge 
tended to answer that knowledge requires cer-
tainty of truth, relative to one's justification. But 
more recent epistemological views have tended to 
reject this answer, for familiar reasons, and to 
hold instead that knowledge requires only a rea-
sonably high likelihood of truth. And now, if this 
high likelihood of truth is interpreted in the obvi-
ous way as meaning that, relative to one's justifi-
cation, the numerical probability that one's belief 
is true must equal or exceed some fixed value, the 
lottery paradox at once rears its head. 
Suppose, for example, that we decide that a 
belief is adequately justified to satisfy the require-
ment for knowledge if the probability of its truth, 
relative to its justification, is 0.99 or greater. 
Imagine now that a lottery is to be held, about 
which we know the following facts: exactly 100 
tickets have been sold, the drawing will indeed be 
held, it will be a fair drawing, and there will be 
only one winning ticket. Consider now each of 
the 100 propositions of the form: 
Ticket number n will lose 
where n is replaced by the number of one of the 
tickets. Since there are 100 tickets and only one 

374 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
winner, the probability of each such proposition 
is 0.99; and hence if we believe each of them, our 
individual beliefs will be adequately justified to 
satisfy the requirement for knowledge. And then, 
given only the seemingly reasonable assumptions, 
first, that if one has adequate justification for 
believing each of a set of propositions, one also 
has adequate justification for believing the con-
junction of the members of the set, and, second, 
that if one has adequate justification for believing 
a proposition, one also has adequate justification 
for believing any further proposition entailed by 
the first proposition, it follows that we are ade-
quately justified in believing that no ticket will 
win, contradicting our other information. 
Clearly this is a mistaken result, but how is it 
to be avoided? In the first place, it will plainly do 
no good to simply increase the level of numerical 
probability required for adequate justification. 
For no matter how high it is raised, short of cer-
tainty, it will obviously be possible to duplicate 
the paradoxical result by simply choosing a large 
enough lottery. Nor do the standard responses to 
the lottery paradox, whatever their merits may be 
in dealing with other versions of the paradox, 
seem to be of much help here. Most of them are 
ruled out simply by insisting that we do know 
that empirical propositions are true, not merely 
that they are probable, and that such knowledge is 
not in general relative to particular contexts of 
inquiry. This leaves only the possibility of avoid-
ing the paradoxical result by rejecting the two 
assumptions stated in the preceding paragraph. 
But this would be extremely implausible - involv-
ing in effect a denial that one may always justifi-
ably deduce conclusions from one's putative 
knowledge - and in any case would still leave the 
intuitively unacceptable result that one could on 
this basis come to know separately the 99 true 
propositions about various tickets losing (though 
not of course the false one). In fact, it seems intu-
itively clear that I do not know any of these prop-
ositions to be true: if I own one of the tickets, I do 
not know that it will lose, even if in fact it will, 
and would not know no matter how large the 
total number of tickets might be. 
At this stage, it may seem that the only way to 
avoid the paradox is to return to the traditional 
idea that any degree of probability or likelihood 
of truth less than certainty is insufficient for 
knowledge, that only certainty, relative to one's 
justification, will suffice. The standard objection 
to such a view is that it seems to lead at once to 
the skeptical conclusion that we have little or no 
empirical knowledge. For it seems quite clear that 
there are no empirical beliefs, with the possible 
and extremely problematic exception of beliefs 
about one's own mental states, for which we have 
justification adequate to exclude all possibility of 
error. Such a solution seems as bad as the original 
problem. 
It is at this point that externalism may seem to 
offer a way out. For an externalist position allows 
one to hold that the justification of an empirical 
belief must make it certain that the belief is true, 
while still escaping the clutches of skepticism. 
This is so precisely because the externalist justifi-
cation need not be within the cognitive grasp of 
the believer or indeed of anyone. It need only be 
true that there is some description of the believer, 
however complex and practically unknowable it 
may be, which, together with some true law of 
nature, ensures the truth of the belief. Thus, e.g., 
my perceptual belief that there is a cup on my desk 
is not certain, on any view, relative to the evidence 
or justification that is in my possession; I might be 
hallucinating or there might be an evil demon 
who is deceiving me. But it seems reasonable to 
suppose that if the belief is indeed true, then there 
is some external description of me and my situa-
tion and some true law of nature, relative to which 
the truth of the belief is guaranteed, and if so it 
would satisfy the requirement for knowledge. 
In some ways, this is a neat and appealing solu-
tion to the paradox. Nonetheless, it seems doubt-
ful that it is ultimately satisfactory. In the first 
place, there is surely something intuitively fishy 
about solving the problem by appealing to an 
inprinciple guarantee of truth which will almost 
certainly in practice be available to no one. 
A second problem, which cannot be elaborated 
here, is that insisting on this sort of solution seems 
likely to create insuperable difficulties for knowl-
edge of general and theoretical propositions. But 
in any case, the externalist solution seems to yield 
intuitively incorrect results in certain kinds of 
cases. A look at one of these may also suggest the 
beginnings of a more satisfactory solution. 
Consider then the following case: 
Case V. Agatha, seated at her desk, believes her-
self to be perceiving a cup on the desk. She also 

EXTERNALIST THEORIES OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE 
375 
knows, however, that she is one of a group of 100 
people who have been selected for a philosophi-
cal experiment by a Cartesian evil demon. The 
conditions have been so arranged that all 1 00 will 
at this particular time seem to themselves to be 
perceiving a cup upon their respective desks, 
with no significant differences in the subjective 
character of their respective experiences. But in 
fact, though 99 of the people will be perceiving a 
cup in the normal way, the last one will be caused 
by the demon to have a complete hallucination 
(including perceptual conditions, etc.) of a non-
existent cup. Agatha knows all this, but she does 
not have any further information as to whether 
she is the one who is hallucinating, though as it 
happens she is not. 
Is Agatha epistemically justified in her belief that 
there is a cup on the desk and does she know this 
to be so? According to the externalist view, we 
must say that she is justified and does know. For 
there is, we may assume, an external description 
of Agatha and her situation relative to which it is 
nomologically certain that her belief is true. 
(Indeed, according to Armstrong's original, 
unmodified view, she would be justified and 
would know even if she also knew instead that 99 
of the 100 persons were being deceived by the 
demon, so long as she was in fact the odd one 
who was perceiving normally.) But this result is, 
I submit, intuitively mistaken. If Agatha knows 
that she is perceiving a cup, then she also knows that 
she is not the one who is being deceived. But she 
does not know this, for reasons that parallel those 
operative in the lottery case. 
Is there then no way out of the paradox? The 
foregoing case and others like it seem to me to 
suggest the following approach to at least the 
present version of the paradox, though I can offer 
only an exceedingly brief sketch here. Intuitively, 
what the lottery case and the case of Agatha have 
in common is the presence of a large number of 
relevantly similar, alternative possibilities, all 
individually very unlikely, but such that the 
person in question knows that at least one of them 
will in fact be realized. In such a case, since there 
is no relevant way of distinguishing among these 
possibilities, the person cannot believe with ade-
quate justification and a fortiori cannot know that 
any particular possibility will not be realized, even 
though the probability that it will not be realized 
may be made as high as one likes by simply 
increasing the total number of possibilities. Such 
cases do show that high probability is not by itself 
enough to satisfy the justification condition for 
knowledge. They do not show, however, that cer-
tainty is required instead. For what rules out 
knowledge in such a case is not merely the fact 
that the probability of truth is less than certainty 
but also the fact that the person knows that at least 
one of these highly probable propositions is false. 
It is a necessary condition for justification and for 
knowledge that this not be so. But there are many 
cases in which a person's justification for a belief 
fails to make it certain that the belief is true, but 
in which the person also does not know that some 
possible situation in which the belief would be 
false is one of a set of relevantly similar, alterna-
tive possibilities, at least one of which will defi-
nitely be realized. And in such a case, the lottery 
paradox provides no reason to think that the 
person does not know. t9 
An example may help to make this point clear. 
Consider again my apparent perception of the 
cup on my desk. I think that I do in fact know that 
there is a cup there. But the justification that is in 
my possession surely does not make it certain that 
my belief is true. Thus, for example, it seems to be 
possible, relative to my subjective justification, 
that I am being deceived by an evil demon, who is 
causing me to have a hallucinatory experience of 
the cup, together with accompanying conditions 
of perception. But it does not follow from this 
that I do not know that there is a cup on the desk, 
because it does not follow and I do not know that 
there is some class of relevantly similar cases in at 
least one of which a person is in fact deceived by 
such a demon. Although it is only probable and 
not certain that there is no demon, it is still pos-
sible for all I know that never in the history of the 
universe, past, present, or future, is there a case in 
which someone in a relevantly similar perceptual 
situation is actually deceived by such a demon. 
And, as far as I can see, the same thing is true of 
all the other ways in which it is possible that 
my belief might be mistaken. If this is so, then 
the lottery paradox provides no obstacle to my 
knowledge in this case.20 
This response to the lottery paradox seems to 
me to be on the right track. It must be conceded, 
however, that it is in considerable need of further 
development and may turn out to have problems 
of its own. But that is a subject for another paper.21 

376 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
There is one other sort of response, mentioned 
briefly above, which the externalist might make to 
the sorts of criticisms developed in this paper. 
I want to remark on it briefly, though a full-scale 
discussion is impossible here. In the end it may be 
possible to make intuitive sense of externalism 
only by construing the externalist as simply aban-
doning the traditional idea of epistemic justifica-
tion or rationality and along with it anything 
resembling the traditional conception of knowl-
edge. I have already mentioned that this may be 
precisely what the proponents of externalism 
intend to be doing, though most of them are 
anything but clear on this pointY 
Against an externalist position that seriously 
adopts such a gambit, the criticisms developed in 
Notes 
For a fuller discussion of the regress argu-
ment, including a discussion of other possible 
outcomes of the regress, see my paper "Can 
Empirical Knowledge Have a Foundation?" 
American Philosophical Quarterly 15 (1978), 
pp. 1-13. That paper also contains a brief 
anticipation of the present discussion of 
externalism. 
2 It could, of course, still be claimed that the 
belief in question was empirically basic, so 
long as both the needed justifying premises 
were justifiable on an a priori basis. But this 
would mean that it was an a priori truth that a 
particular empirical belief was likely to be 
true. In the present paper, I shall simply 
assume, without further discussion, that this 
seemingly unlikely state of affairs does not in 
fact obtain. 
3 For criticism of this view, see the paper cited 
in note 1. 
4 
D. M. Armstrong, Belief, Truth and Knowledge 
(London, Press, 1973). Bracketed references 
in the text will be to the pages of this book. 
5 The clearest passages are at p. 183, where 
Armstrong says that a belief satisfying his 
externalist condition, though not "based on 
reasons," nevertheless "might be said to be 
reasonable (justifiable), because it is a sign, a 
completely reliable sign, that the situation 
believed to exist does in fact exist"; and at 
p. 189, where he suggests that the satisfaction 
the present paper are of course entirely ineffec-
tive. If the externalist does not want even to claim 
that beliefs satisfying his conditions are epistemi-
cally justified or reasonable, then it is obviously 
no objection that they seem in some cases to be 
quite unjustified and unreasonable. But, as already 
noted, such a view, though it may possess some 
other sort of appeal, constitutes a solution to the 
epistemic regress problem or to any problem aris-
ing out of the traditional conception of knowl-
edge only in the radical and relatively uninteresting 
sense that to reject that conception entirely is also, 
of course, to reject any problems arising out of it. 
Such "solutions" would seem to be available for 
any philosophical problem at all, but it is hard to 
see why they should be taken seriously. 
of a slightly weaker condition, though it does 
not yield knowledge, may still yield rational 
belief. There is no reason to think that any 
species of rationality or reasonableness other 
than the epistemic is at issue in either of these 
passages. But though these passages seem to 
me to adequately support my interpretation 
of Armstrong, the strongest support may well 
derive simply from the fact that he at no point 
disavows a claim of epistemic rationality. (See 
also the parenthetical remark in the middle 
ofp.77.) 
6 
Fred 1. Dretske, Seeing and Knowing (London, 
1969), chap. III. Dretske also differs from 
Armstrong in requiring in effect that the 
would-be knower also believe that the exter-
nalist condition is satisfied, but not of course 
that this belief be justified. 
7 Goldman does this most clearly in "Dis-
crimination and Perceptual Knowledge;' 
Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), pp. 771-91; 
and in "What is Justified Belief?" forthcom-
ing. See also "A Causal Theory of Knowing," 
Journal of Philosophy 64 (1967), pp. 355-72, 
though this last paper is more concerned with 
the Gettier problem than with a general 
account of the standards of epistemic 
justification. 
8 William P. Alston, "Two Types of Found-
ationalism," Journal of Philosophy 73 (1976), 
pp. 165-85; see especially p. 168. 

EXTERNALIST THEORIES OF EMPIRICAL KNOWLEDGE 
377 
9 Alston, "Varieties of Privileged Access," in 
Roderick Chisholm and Robert Swartz, 
Empirical Knowledge (Englewood Cliffs, 
NT, 1973), pp. 396-9. Alston's term for 
this species of privileged access is "truth-
sufficiency." 
1 0 See Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edn. 
(Englewood Cliffs, NT, 1977), p. 22, where 
Chisholm offers the following definition of 
the concept of a state of affairs being self-
presenting: 
b is self-presenting for S at t = Df b occurs at 
t; and necessarily, if b occurs at t then b is 
evident [i.e., justified) for S at t. 
Despite the overtones of the term "self-
presentation:' nothing in this passage seems to 
require that believer have any sort of immedi-
ate awareness of the state in question; all that is 
required is that it actually occur, i.e., that his 
belief be true. On the other hand, Chisholm 
also, in the section immediately preceding this 
definition, quotes with approval a passage 
from Leibniz which appeals to the idea of 
"direct awareness" and of the absence of medi-
ation "between the understanding and its 
objects:' thus suggesting the non-externalist 
variety of foundationalism (pp. 20-1). 
11 
Armstrong actually formulates the criterion 
as a criterion of knowledge, rather than 
merely of justification; the satisfaction of the 
belief condition is built into the criterion 
and this, with the satisfaction of the indi-
cated justification condition, entails that the 
truth condition is satisfied. 
12 
This assumes that clairvoyant beliefs are 
caused in some distinctive way, so that 
an appropriately complete description of 
Samantha will rule out the possibility that the 
belief is a mere hunch and will connect 
appropriately with the law governing her 
clairvoyance. 
13 
This further supposition does not prevent 
the belief about the President's whereabouts 
from being non-inferential, since it is not in 
any useful sense Norman's reason for accept-
ing that specific belief. 
14 
This is the basic objection to Dretske's version 
of externalism, mentioned above. Dretske's 
condition requires that one have an analogously 
unjustified (though true) belief about the 
reliability of one's perceptual belief. 
15 
The only apparent answer here would be to 
claim that the reasonable presumption is in 
favor of one's having such reliable means of 
access, unless there is good reason to the 
contrary. But it is hard to see why such a pre-
sumption should be thought reasonable. 
16 
Mark Pastin, in a critical study of Armstrong, 
has suggested that ascriptions of knowledge 
depend on the epistemic situation of the 
ascriber rather than on that of the ascribee at 
this point, so that I am correct in ascribing 
knowledge to Norman so long as I know that 
his belief is reliable (and hence also that the 
other conditions of knowledge are satisfied), 
even if Norman does not. But I can see no 
very convincing rationale for this claim. 
See Pastin, "Knowledge and Reliability: A 
Study of D. M. Armstrong's Belief, Truth and 
Knowledge," Metaphilosophy 9 (1978), pp. 
150-62. Notice further that if the epistemic 
regress problem is in general to be dealt with 
along externalist lines, then my knowledge 
that Norman's belief is reliable would depend 
on the epistemic situation of a further exter-
nal observer, who ascribes knowledge to me. 
And similarly for the knowledge of that 
observer, etc., ad infinitum. I do not know 
whether this regress of external observers is 
vicious, but it seems clearly to deprive the 
appeal to such an observer of any value as a 
practical criterion. 
17 
Of course there are cases in which one must 
act, even though one has no adequate knowl-
edge of the likely consequences; and one 
might attempt to defend epistemic external-
ism by arguing that in epistemic contexts the 
analogous situation always obtains. But there 
are several problems with such a response. 
First, to simply assume that this is always so 
seems to be question-begging, and the exter-
nalist can argue for this claim only by refut-
ing all alternatives to his position. Second, 
notice that in ethical contexts this situation 
usually, perhaps always, obtains only when 
not acting will lead definitely to bad conse-
quences, not just to the failure to obtain 
good ones; and there seems to be no parallel 
to this in the epistemic case. Third, and most 
important, the justification for one's action 

378 
LAURENCE BONJOUR 
in such a case would depend not on the 
external fact, if it is a fact, that the action 
leads to good consequences, but simply on 
the fact that one could do no better, given 
the unfortunate state of one's knowledge; 
thus this position would not be genuinely a 
version of moral externalism, and analo-
gously for the epistemic case. 
18 
I am assuming here, following Chisholm, 
that knowledge requires a degree of justifica-
tion stronger than that required to make a 
belief merely reasonable. 
19 
I do not, alas, have any real account to offer 
here of the notion of relevant similarity. 
Roughly, the idea is that two possibilities are 
relevantly similar if there is no known differ-
ence between them that has a bearing on the 
likelihood that they will be realized. But this 
will not quite do. For consider a lottery case 
in which there are two tickets bearing each 
even number and only one for each odd 
number. Intuitively, it seems to me, this dif-
ference does not prevent all the tickets, odd 
and even, from being relevantly similar, 
despite the fact that it is twice as likely that 
an even ticket will be drawn. 
20 
But if this account is correct, I may still fail 
to know in many other cases in which 
common sense would say fairly strongly that 
I do. E.g., do I know that my house has not 
burned down since I left it this morning? 
Ordinarily we are inclined to say that we do 
know such things. But if it is true, as it might 
well be, that I also know that of the class of 
houses relevantly similar to mine, at least 
one will burn down at some point, then I do 
not, on the present account, know that my 
house has not burned down, however 
improbable such a catastrophe may be. 
(On the other hand, knowledge would not 
be ruled out by the present principle simply 
because I knew that certain specific similar 
houses, other than mine, have in the past 
burned down or even that they will in the 
future burn down. For I know, ex hypothesi, 
that my house is not one of those. The force 
of the principle depends on my knowing 
that at least one possibility which might for 
all I know be the one I am interested in will be 
realized, not just on descriptively similar 
possibilities being realized.) 
21 
This response to the lottery paradox derives 
in part from discussions with C. Anthony 
Anderson. 
22 
The clearest example of such a position is in 
Goldman's 
paper "Discrimination 
and 
Perceptual Knowledge;' cited above, where 
he rejects what he calls "Cartesian-style jus-
tification" as a requirement for perceptual 
knowledge, in favor of an externalist account. 
He goes on to remark, however, that one 
could use the term "justification" in such a 
way that satisfaction of his externalist 
conditions "counts as justification," though 
a kind of justification "entirely different 
from the sort of justification demanded by 
Cartesian ism" (p. 790). What is unclear is 
whether this is supposed to be a purely verbal 
possibility, which would then be of little 
interest, or whether it is supposed to connect 
with something like the concept of epistemic 
rationality explicated in section I. Thus it is 
uncertain whether Goldman means to repu-
diate the whole idea of epistemic rationality, 
or only some more limited view such as the 
doctrine of the given (reference to which 
provides his only explanation of what he 
means by "Cartesian ism" in epistemology). 

CHAPTER 29 
Internalism Exposed 
Alvin I. Goldman 
In recent decades, epistemology has witnessed the 
development and growth of externalist theories 
of knowledge and justification. 1 Critics of exter-
nalism have focused a bright spotlight on this 
approach and judged it unsuitable for realizing 
the true and original goals of epistemology. Their 
own favored approach, internalism, is defended 
as a preferable approach to the traditional con-
cept of epistemic justification.2 I shall turn the 
spotlight toward internalism and its most promi-
nent rationale, revealing fundamental problems 
at the core of internalism and challenging the 
viability of its most popular rationale. Although 
particular internalist theories such as (internalist) 
foundationalism and coherent ism will occasion-
ally be discussed, those specific theories are not 
my primary concern. 
The principal concern is rather the general 
architecture of internal ism, and the attempt to 
justify this architecture by appeal to a certain con-
ception of what justification consists in. 
I. Deontology, Access, and Internalism 
I begin with a certain rationale for internalism 
that has widespread support. It can be recon-
structed in three steps: 
Originally published in The Journal of Philosophy 96, 6 
(1999), pp. 271-93. 
(1) 
The guidance-deontological (GD) con-
ception ofjustification is posited. 
(2) 
A certain constraint on the determiners 
of justification is derived from the GD 
c~nception, that is, the constraint that 
all justification determiners must be 
accessible to, or knowable by, the epis-
temic agent. 
(3) 
The accessibility or knowability con-
straint is taken to imply that only inter-
nal conditions qualify as legitimate 
determiners of justification. So justifi-
cation must be a purely internal affair.3 
What motivates or underlies this rationale for 
internalism? Historically, one central aim of episte-
mology is to guide or direct our intellectual conduct, 
an aim expressed in Rene Descartes's title, "Rules for 
the Direction of the Mind:'4 Among contemporary 
writers, John Pollock expresses the idea this way: 
I have taken the fundamental problem of episte-
mology to be that of deciding what to believe. 
Epistemic justification, as I use the term, is con-
cerned with this problem. Considerations of epis-
temic justification guide us in determining what 
to believe. We might call this the "belief-guiding" 
or "reason-guiding" sense of "justification." 
(Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, p. 10) 
The guidance conception of justification is com-
monly paired with the deontological conception 

380 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
of justification. John Lockes wrote of a person's 
"duty as a rational creature" (ibid., p. 413), and 
the theme of epistemic duty or responsibility has 
been echoed by many contemporary epistemolo-
gists, including Laurence Bonjour (The Structure 
of Empirical Knowledge), Roderick Chisholm 
(Theory of Knowledge), Carl Ginet, Paul Moser, 
Matthias Steup, Richard Feldman, and Hilary 
Kornblith.6 Chisholm defines cousins of the con-
cept of justification in terms of the relation "more 
reasonable than", and he re-expresses the relation 
"p is more reasonable than q for S at t" by saying: 
"S is so situated at t that his intellectual require-
ment, his responsibility as an intellectual being, is 
better fulfilled by p than by q."7 Similarly, Feldman 
says that one's epistemic duty is to "believe what 
is supported or justified by one's evidence and to 
avoid believing what is not supported by one's 
evidence" ("Epistemic Obligations;' p. 254). 
The guidance and deontological conceptions of 
justification are intimately related, because the 
deontological conception, at least when paired with 
the guidance conception, considers it a person's 
epistemic duty to guide his doxastic attitudes by his 
evidence, or by whatever factors determine the jus-
tificational status of a proposition at a given time. 
Epistemic deontologists commonly maintain that 
being justified in believing a proposition p consists 
in being (intellectually) required or permitted to 
believe p; and being unjustified in believing p con-
sists in not being permitted, or being forbidden, to 
believe p. When a person is unjustified in believing 
a proposition, it is his duty not to believe it. 
It is possible to separate the deontological con-
ception from the guidance idea. In ethical theory, a 
distinction has been drawn between accounts of 
moral duty that aim to specify what makes actions 
right and accounts of moral duty that aim to pro-
vide practical decision procedures for what to do.B 
If an account simply aims at the first desideratum, 
it need not aspire to be usable as a decision guide. 
Similarly, accounts of epistemic duty need not nec-
essarily be intended as decision guides. When the 
deontological conception is used as a rationale for 
epistemic internalism of the sort I am sketching, 
however, it does incorporate the guidance concep-
tion. Only if the guidance conception is incorpo-
rated can the argument proceed along the intended 
lines to the accessibility constraint, and from there 
to internalism. This is why I shall henceforth speak 
of the GD conception of justification. 
I turn now to the second step of the argument 
for internalism. Following William Alston,9 I shall 
use the term justifiers for facts or states of affairs 
that determine the justificational status of a belief, 
or the epistemic status a proposition has for an 
epistemic agent. In other words, justifiers deter-
mine whether or not a proposition is justified for 
an epistemic agent at a given time. It seems to 
follow naturally from the GD conception of justi-
fication that a certain constraint must be placed 
on the sorts of facts or states of affairs that qualify 
as justifiers. If a person is going to avoid violating 
his epistemic duty, he must know, or be able to 
find out, what his duty requires. By know, in this 
context, I mean only: have an accurate, or true, 
belief. I do not mean: have a justified true belief 
(or whatever else is entailed by the richer concept 
of knowledge). Admittedly, it might be possible to 
avoid violating one's duties by chance, without 
knowing (having true beliefs about) what one's 
duties are. As a practical matter, however, it is not 
feasible to conform to duty on a regular and con-
sistent basis without knowing what items of 
conduct constitute those duties. Thus, if you are 
going to choose your beliefs and abstentions from 
belief in accordance with your justificational 
requirements, the facts that make you justified or 
unjustified in believing a certain proposition at a 
given time must be facts that you are capable of 
knowing, at that time, to hold or not to hold. 
There is an intimate connection, then, between 
the GD conception of justification and the 
requirement that justifiers must be accessible to, 
or knowable by, the agent at the time of belief. If 
you cannot accurately ascertain your epistemic 
duty at a given time, how can you be expected to 
execute that duty, and how can you reasonably be 
held responsible for executing that duty?1O 
The knowability constraint on justifiers which 
flows from the GD conception may be formulated 
as follows: 
KJ: The only facts that qualify as justifiers of 
an agent's believing p at time t are facts 
that the agent can readily know, at t, to 
obtain or not to obtain. 
How can an agent readily know whether candidate 
justifiers obtain or do not obtain? Presumably, 
the agent must have a way of determining, for 
any candidate class of justifiers, whether or not 

INTERNALISM EXPOSED 
381 
they obtain. Such a way of knowing must be 
reliable, that is, it must generate beliefs about the 
presence or absence of justifiers that are usually 
(invariably?) correct. Otherwise, the agent will 
often be mistaken about what his epistemic duty 
requires. The way of knowing must also be "pow-
erful," in the sense that when justifiers obtain it is 
likely (certain?) that the agent will believe that 
they obtain; at least he will believe this if he 
reflects on the matter or otherwise inquires into 
itY As we shall soon see, internalists typically 
impose additional restrictions on how justifiers 
may be known. But the minimal, generic version 
of KJ simply requires justifiers to be the sorts of 
facts that agents have some way of knowing. In 
other words, justification-conferring facts must 
be the sorts of facts whose presence or absence is 
"accessible" to agents. 12 
Given the KJ constraint on justifiers, it 
becomes fairly obvious why internalism about 
justification is so attractive. Whereas external 
facts are facts that a cognitive agent might not be 
in a position to know about, internal facts are 
presumably the sorts of conditions that a cogni-
tive agent can readily determine. So internal facts 
seem to be the right sorts of candidates for justi-
fiers. This consideration leads to the third step of 
our rationale for internalism. Only internal facts 
qualify as justifiers because they are the only ones 
that satisfy the KJ constraint; at least so internal-
ists suppose. 
One possible way to criticize this rationale for 
internal ism is to challenge the GD conception 
directly. This could be done, for example, by 
arguing that the GD conception of justification 
presupposes the dubious thesis of doxastic volun-
tarism, the thesis that doxastic attitudes can be 
"guided" by deliberate choices or acts of will. This 
criticism is developed by Alston,l3 and I have 
sympathy with many of his points. But the volun-
tarism argument against the GD conception is 
disputed by Feldman ("Epistemic Obligations") 
and John Heil,'4 among others. Feldman, for 
example, argues that epistemic deontologism is 
not wedded to the assumption of doxastic volun-
tarism. Many obligations remain in force, he 
points out, even when an agent lacks the ability to 
discharge them. A person is still legally obligated 
to repay a debt even when his financial situation 
makes him unable to repay it. Perhaps epistemic 
obligations have analogous properties. 15 Since the 
complex topic of doxastic voluntarism would 
require article-length treatment in its own right, I 
set this issue aside and confine my attention to 
other issues. Although I do not accept the GD 
conception of justification, I take it as given for 
purposes of the present discussion and explore 
where it leads. In any case, what is ultimately cru-
cial for internalism is the accessibility require-
ment that the GD conception hopes to rationalize. 
Even if the GD conception fails to provide a good 
rationale, internalism would be viable if some 
other rationale could be provided for a suitable 
accessibility requirement. 
II. 
Direct Knowability and 
Strong Internalism 
The initial KJ constraint was formulated in terms 
of knowability plain and simple, but proponents 
of internalism often add the further qualification 
that determinants of justification must be directly 
knowable by the cognitive agent. Ginet, for exam-
ple, writes as follows: 
Everyone of every set of facts about S's position 
that minimally suffices to make S, at a given time, 
justified in being confident that p must be directly 
recognizable to S at that time (Knowledge, 
Perception, and Memory, p. 34). 
Similarly, Chisholm writes: 
[Tlhe concept of epistemic justification is 
internal and immediate in that one can find out 
directly, by reflection, what one is justified in 
believing at any time. '6 
Thus, Ginet and Chisholm do not endorse just 
the minimal KJ constraint as earlier formulated, 
but a more restrictive version, which might be 
written as follows: 
KJdir: The only facts that qualify as justifiers of 
an agent's believing p at time t are facts 
that the agent can readily know directly, 
at t, to obtain or not to obtain. 
An initial problem arising from KJ dir is this: 
What warrants the imposition of KJ dir as opposed 
to the looser constraint, KJ? KJ was derived from 

382 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
the GD conception on the grounds that one 
cannot reasonably be expected to comply with 
epistemic duties unless one knows what those 
duties are. How does such an argument warrant 
the further conclusion that direct knowledge of 
justification must be available? Even indirect 
knowledge (whatever that is) would enable an 
agent to comply with his epistemic duties. So the 
second step of the argument for internal ism 
cannot properly be revised to feature KJdi, in 
place of KJ. Proponents of KJdi, might reply that 
direct forms of knowledge are more powerful 
than indirect knowledge, but this reply is uncon-
vincing. The power requirement was already 
built into the original version of KJ, and it is 
unclear how directness adds anything of signifi-
cance on that score. Whether KJdi, can be derived 
from GD is a serious problem, because the argu-
ment for internal ism rests on something like the 
directness qualification. I shall say more about 
this later; for now I set this point aside in order to 
explore where KJdi, leads. 
What modes of knowledge count as direct? At 
least one form of direct knowledge is introspec-
tion. A reason for thinking that introspection is 
what Chisholm means by direct knowledge is that 
he restricts all determiners of justification to con-
scious states: 
A consequence of our "internalistic" theory of 
knowledge is that, if one is subject to an epis-
temic requirement at any time, then this require-
ment is imposed by the conscious state in which 
one happens to find oneself at that time (ibid., 
pp.59-60). 
Since he restricts justifiers to conscious states, it is 
plausible to assume that direct knowledge, for 
Chisholm, means introspective knowledge, and 
knowledge by "reflection" coincides with knowl-
edge by introspection.l 7 At least in the case of 
Chisholm, then, KJdi, might be replaced by: 
KJint: The only facts that qualify as justifiers of 
an agent's believing p at time t are facts 
that the agent can readily know by intro-
spection, at t, to obtain or not to obtain. 
Now, the only facts that an agent can know by 
introspection are facts concerning what conscious 
states he is (or is not) currently in, so these are the 
only sorts of facts that qualify as justifiers under 
KJint• This form of internalism may be called 
strong internalism: 
SI: Only facts concerning what conscious 
states an agent is in at time tare justifiers of 
the agent's beliefs at t. 
Strong internalism, however, is an unacceptable 
approach to justification, for it has serious, skep-
ticism-breeding, consequences. This is demon-
strated by the problem of stored beliefs. At any 
given time, the vast majority of one's beliefs are 
stored in memory rather than occurrent or active. 
Beliefs about personal data (for example, one's 
social security number), about world history, 
about geography, or about the institutional affili-
ations of one's professional colleagues, are almost 
all stored rather than occurrent at a given 
moment. Furthermore, for almost any of these 
beliefs, one's conscious state at the time includes 
nothing that justifies it. No perceptual experience, 
no conscious memory event, and no premises 
consciously entertained at the selected moment 
will be justificationally sufficient for such a belief. 
According to strong internalism, then, none of 
these beliefs is justified at that moment. Strong 
internalism threatens a drastic diminution in the 
stock of beliefs ordinarily deemed justified, and 
hence in the stock of knowledge, assuming that 
justification is necessary for knowledge. This is a 
major count against this type of theory. 
Feldman anticipates this problem because his 
own account of having evidence also implies that 
only consciously entertained factors have eviden-
tial force ("Epistemic Obligations, pp. 98-9). 
Feldman tries to meet the threat by distinguish-
ing between occurrent and dispositional senses of 
epistemic terms. (He actually discusses knowl-
edge rather than justification, but I shall address 
the issue in terms of justification because that is 
the target of our investigation.) Feldman is not 
simply restating the familiar point that "belief" 
has occurrent and dispositional senses. He is pro-
posing that the term "justified" is ambiguous 
between an occurrent and a dispositional sense. 
Feldman apparently claims that in the case of 
stored beliefs, people at most have dispositional 
justification, not occurrent justification. 
There are two problems with this proposal. 
First, if having a disposition to generate conscious 

INTERNALISM EXPOSED 
383 
evidential states qualifies as a justifier of a belief, 
why would this not extend from memorial to per-
ceptual dispositions? Suppose a train passenger 
awakes from a nap but has not yet opened his eyes. 
Is he justified in believing propositions about the 
details of the neighboring landscape? Surely not. 
Yet he is disposed, merely by opening his eyes, to 
generate conscious evidential states that would 
occurrently justify such beliefs. So the disposi-
tional approach is far too permissive to yield an 
acceptable sense of "justified".18 Second, can an 
internalist, especially a strong internalist, live with 
the idea that certain dispositions count as justifi-
ers? Having or not having a disposition (of the 
requisite type) is not the sort of fact or condition 
that can be known by introspection. Thus, the 
proposal to supplement the occurrent sense of 
"justified" with a dispositional sense of "justified" 
is simply the abandonment of strong internalism. 
III. 
Indirect Knowability and 
Weak Internalism 
The obvious solution to the problem of stored 
beliefs is to relax the KJ constraint: allow justifiers 
to be merely indirectly knowable. This yields: 
KJind: The only facts that qualify as justifiers of 
an agent's believing p at time t are facts 
that the agent can readily know at t, 
either directly or indirectly, to obtain or 
not to obtain. 
The danger here is that indirect knowledge might 
let in too much from an internalist perspective. 
How are externalist forms of knowledge - for 
example, perceptual knowledge - to be excluded? 
Clearly, internalism must propose specific forms of 
knowledge that conform with its spirit. It is fairly 
clear how internalism should deal with the prob-
lem of stored beliefs: simply allow knowledge of 
justifiers to include memory retrieval. Stored evi-
dence beliefs can qualify as justifiers because the 
agent can know that they obtain by the compound 
route of first retrieving them from memory and 
then introspecting their conscious contents. This 
yields the following variant of the KJ constraint: 
KJint+<et: The only facts that qualify as justifiers 
of an agent's believing p at time tare 
facts that the agent can readily know, 
at t, to obtain or not to obtain, by 
introspection and/or memory retrieval. 
This KJ constraint allows for a more viable form 
of internalism than strong internalism. We may 
call it weak internalism, and initially articulate it 
through the following principle: 
WI: Only facts concerning what conscious and/ 
or stored mental states an agent is in at time 
tare justifiers of the agent's beliefs at t. 
WI will certify the justification of many stored 
beliefs, because agents often have other stored 
beliefs that evidentially support them. A person 
who believes that Washington, DC is the capital 
of the United States may have a stored belief to 
the effect that a map of the US he recently con-
sulted showed Washington as the capital. The 
latter stored belief is what justifies the former 
one. So weak internalism is not plagued with the 
problem of stored justified beliefs. Weak internal-
ism seems to be a legitimate form of internalism 
because even stored beliefs qualify, intuitively, as 
internal states. 
Although weak internalism is better than strong 
internalism, it too faces severe problems. First is 
the problem of forgotten evidence. 19 Many justified 
beliefs are ones for which an agent once had ade-
quate evidence that she subsequently forgot. At the 
time of epistemic appraisal, she no longer pos-
sesses adequate evidence that is retrievable from 
memory. Last year, Sally read a story about the 
health benefits of broccoli in the "Science" section 
of the New York Times. She then justifiably formed 
a belief in broccoli's beneficial effects. She still 
retains this belief but no longer recalls her original 
evidential source (and has never encountered 
either corroborating or undermining sources). 
Nonetheless, her broccoli belief is still justified, 
and, if true, qualifies as a case of knowledge. 
Presumably, this is because her past acquisition of 
the belief was epistemically proper. But past acqui-
sition is irrelevant by the lights of internalism 
(including weak internalism), because only her 
current mental states are justifiers relevant to her 
current belief. All past events are "external" and 
therefore irrelevant according to internalism. 
It might be replied that Sally does currently 
possess evidence in support of her broccoli belief. 

384 
ALVIN 1. GOLDMAN 
One of her background beliefs, we may suppose, 
is that most of what she remembers was learned 
in an epistemically proper manner. So does she 
not, after all, now have grounds for the target 
belief? Admittedly, she has some evidence, but is 
this evidence sufficient for justification? Surely 
not. In a variant case, suppose that Sally still has 
the same background belief - namely, that most 
of what she remembers was learned in an epis-
temically proper manner - but she in fact acquired 
her broccoli belief from the National Inquirer 
rather than the New York Times. So her broccoli 
belief was never acquired, or corroborated, in an 
epistemically sound manner. Then even with the 
indicated current background belief, Sally cannot 
be credited with justifiably believing that broccoli 
is healthful. Her past acquisition is still relevant, 
and decisive. At least it is relevant so long as we 
are considering the "epistemizing" sense of justifi-
cation, in which justification carries a true belief 
a good distance toward knowledge. Sally's belief 
in the healthfulness of broccoli is not justified in 
that sense, for surely she does not know that broc-
coli is healthful given that the National Inquirer 
was her sole source of information. 
The category of forgotten evidence is a problem 
for weak internalism because, like the problem of 
stored beliefs facing strong internalism, it threatens 
skeptical outcomes. A large sector of what is ordi-
narily counted as knowledge are beliefs for which 
people have forgotten their original evidence. 
In reply to the problem of forgotten evidence, 
Steup20 offers the following solution. An addi-
tional requirement for memorial states to justify a 
belief that p, says Steup, is that the agent have 
adequate evidence for believing the following 
counterfactual: "If she had encountered p in a 
questionable source, she would not have formed 
the belief that p." Steup's suggestion is that in the 
National Inquirer variant, Sally fails to have ade-
quate evidence for this counterfactual, and that is 
why her broccoli belief is not justified. My 
response to this proposal is twofold. First, the 
proposed requirement is too strong to impose on 
memorially justified belief. It is quite difficult to 
get adequate evidence for the indicated counter-
factual. Second, the proposed requirement seems 
too weak as well. Sally might have adequate evi-
dence for the counterfactual but still be unjusti-
fied in holding her broccoli belief. She might have 
adequate evidence for the counterfactual without 
its being true; but if it is not true and the rest of 
the story is as I told it, her broccoli belief is not 
justified. So Steup's internalist-style solution does 
not work. 
A second problem confronting weak internal-
ism is what I call the problem of concurrent retrieval. 
Principle WI says that only conscious and stored 
mental states are justifiers, but it does not say that 
all sets or conjunctions of such states qualify as 
justifiers.21 Presumably, which sets of such states 
qualify is a matter to be decided by reference to 
KJintH,t" If a certain set of stored beliefs can all be 
concurrently retrieved at time t and concurrently 
introspected, then they would pass the test of 
KJint+ret' and could qualify as justifiers under the 
principle of indirect knowability. But if they can-
not all be concurrently retrieved and introspected 
at t, they would fail the test. Now it is clear that the 
totality of an agent's stored credal corpus at a time 
cannot be concurrently retrieved from memory. 
So that set of stored beliefs does not qualify as a 
justifier for purposes of weak internalism. 
Unfortunately, this sort of belief set is precisely 
what certain types of internalist theories require 
by way of a justifier. Consider holistic coherent-
ism, which says that a proposition p is justified for 
person 5 at time t if and only if p coheres with S's 
entire corpus of beliefs at t (including, of course, 
the stored beliefs). A cognitive agent could ascer-
tain, at t, whether p coheres with her entire corpus 
only by concurrently retrieving all of her stored 
beliefs. But such concurrent retrieval is psycho-
logically impossible. 22 Thus, the critically relevant 
justificational fact under holistic coherentism does 
not meet even the indirect knowability constraint, 
much less the direct knowability constraint. Here 
is a clash, then, between a standard internalist 
theory of justification and the knowability ration-
ale under scrutiny. Either that rationale is indefen-
sible, or a familiar type of internalism must be 
abandoned at the outset. Nor is the problem con-
fined to coherentism. Internalist foundationalism 
might also require concurrent retrieval of more 
basic (or low-level) beliefs than it is psychologi-
cally feasible to retrieve. 
IV. 
Logical and Probabilistic Relations 
As these last examples remind us, every tradi-
tional form of internalism involves some appeal 

INTERNALISM EXPOSED 
385 
to logical relations, probabilistic relations, or their 
ilk. Foundationalism requires that nonbasically 
justified beliefs stand in suitable logical or proba-
bilistic relations to basic beliefs; coherentism 
requires that one's system of beliefs be logically 
consistent, probabilistically coherent, or the like. 
None of these logical or probabilistic relations is 
itself a mental state, either a conscious state or a 
stored state. So these relations do not qualify as 
justifiers according to either SI or WI. The point 
may be illustrated more concretely within a foun-
dationalist perspective. Suppose that Jones pos-
sesses a set of basic beliefs at t whose contents 
logically or probabilistically support proposition 
p. This property of Jones's basic beliefs - the 
property of supporting proposition p - is not a 
justifier under WI, for the property itself is nei-
ther a conscious nor a stored mental state. Nor is 
the possession of this property by these mental 
states another mental state. So WI has no way of 
authorizing or permitting Jones to believe p. 
Unless WI is liberalized, no non basic belief will 
be justified, which would again threaten a serious 
form of skepticism. 
Can this problem be remedied by simply 
adding the proviso that all properties of conscious 
or stored mental states also qualify as justifiers?23 
This proviso is unacceptably permissive for inter-
nalism. One property of many conscious and 
stored mental states is the property of being caused 
by a reliable process, yet surely internalism cannot 
admit this archetypically externalist type of prop-
erty into the class of justifiers. How should the 
class of properties be restricted? An obvious sug-
gestion is to include only formal properties of 
mental states, that is, logical and mathematical 
properties of their contents. But should all formal 
properties be admitted? This approach would fly 
in the face of the knowability or accessibility con-
straint, which is the guiding theme of internal-
ism. Only formal properties that are knowable by 
the agent at the time of doxastic decision should 
be countenanced as legitimate justifiers under 
internal ism. Such properties, however, cannot 
be detected by introspection and/or memory 
retrieval. So some knowing operations suitable 
for formal properties must be added, yielding a 
liberalized version of the KJ constraint. 
How should a liberalized KJ constraint be 
designed? The natural move is to add some 
selected computational operations or algorithms, 
procedures that would enable an agent to ascer-
tain whether a targeted proposition p has appro-
priate logical or probabilistic relations to the 
contents of other belief states he is in. Precisely 
which computational operations are admissible? 
Again, problems arise. The first is the problem of 
the doxastic decision interval. 
The traditional idea behind internalism is that 
an agent is justified in believing p at time t if the 
evidential beliefs (and perhaps other, nondoxas-
tic states) possessed at t have an appropriate logi-
calor probabilistic relation to p. In short, 
justification is conferred simultaneously with evi-
dence possession. Feldman makes this explicit: 
"For any person S and proposition p and time t, S 
epistemically ought to believe p at t if and only if 
p is supported by the evidence S has at t" 
("Epistemic Obligations", p. 254). Once the know-
ability constraint is introduced, however, simul-
taneous justification looks problematic. If 
justification is contingent on the agent's ability to 
know what justifiers obtain, the agent should not 
be permitted to believe a proposition p at t unless 
she can know by t whether the relevant justifiers 
obtain. Since it necessarily takes some time to 
compute logical or probabilistic relations, the 
simultaneity model of justification needs to be 
revised so that an agent's mental states at t justify 
her in believing only p at t + E, for some suitable 
E. The value of E cannot be too large, of course, 
lest the agent's mental states change so as to affect 
the justificational status of p. But E must be large 
enough to allow the agent time to determine the 
relevant formal relations. 
These two conditions -
(1) avoid mental 
change, but (2) allow enough time to compute 
formal relations - may well be jointly unsatisfia-
ble, which would pose a severe problem for inter-
nalism. Mental states, including perceptual states 
that generate new evidence, change very rapidly 
and they could easily change before required 
computations could be executed. On the other 
hand, although mental states do change rapidly, 
the agent's belief system might not be epistemi-
cally required to reflect or respond to each change 
until interval E has elapsed. Some doxastic deci-
sion interval, then, might be feasible. 
Is there a short enough decision interval 
during which justificationally pertinent formal 
properties can be computed? Coherentism says 
that 5 is justified in believing proposition p only if 

386 
ALVIN 1. GOLDMAN 
p coheres with the rest of S's belief system held at 
the time. Assume that coherence implies logical 
consistency. Then coherentism requires that the 
logical consistency or inconsistency of any prop-
osition p with S's belief system must qualify as a 
justifier. But how quickly can consistency or 
inconsistency be ascertained by mental computa-
tion? As Christopher Cherniak24 points out, deter-
mination of even tautological consistency is a 
computationally complex task in the general case. 
Using the truth-table method to check for the 
consistency of a belief system with 138 independ-
ent atomic propositions, even an ideal computer 
working at "top speed" (checking each row of a 
truth table in the time it takes a light ray to 
traverse the diameter of a proton) would take 
twenty billion years, the estimated time from the 
"big-bang" dawn of the universe to the present. 
Presumably, twenty billion years is not an accept-
able doxastic decision interval! 
Any reasonable interval, then, is too constrain-
ing for garden-variety coherentism. The knowa-
bility constraint again clashes with one of the 
stock brands of internalism.25 Dyed-in-the-wool 
internalists might be prepared to live with this 
result. "So much the worse for traditional coher-
entism;' they might say, "we can live with its 
demise:' But this does not get internalism entirely 
off the hook. There threaten to be many logical 
and probabilistic facts that do not qualify as justi-
fiers because they require too long a doxastic 
interval to compute. Furthermore, it is unclear 
what is a principled basis for deciding what is too 
long. This quandary confronting internalism has 
apparently escaped its proponents' attention. 
A second problem for logical and probabilistic 
justifiers is the availability problem. Suppose that 
a particular set of computational operations - call 
it COMP - is provisionally selected for inclusion 
alongside introspection and memory retrieval. 
COMP might include, for example, a restricted 
(and hence noneffective) use of the truth-table 
method, restricted so as to keep its use within the 
chosen doxastic decision interval. 26 This yields a 
new version of the KJ constraint: 
KJinHreHCOMP: The only facts that qualify as jus-
tifiers of an agent's believing p at 
time t are facts that the agent can 
readily know within a suitable 
doxastic decision interval via 
introspection, memory retrieval, 
and/or COMPo 
Now, the KJ constraint is presumably intended to 
apply not only to the cleverest or best-trained 
epistemic agents but to all epistemic agents, 
including the most naive and uneducated persons 
on the street. After all, the point of the knowabil-
ity constraint is that justifiers should be facts 
within the purview of every epistemic agent. 
Under the GD conception, compliance with epis-
temic duty or responsibility is not intended to be 
the private preserve of the logical or mathemati-
cal elite. It is something that ought to be attained 
- and should therefore be attainable - by any 
human agent. The truth-table method, however, 
does not seem to be in the intellectual repertoire 
of naive agents, so it is illegitimate to include 
COMP operations within a KJ constraint. Unlike 
introspection and memory retrieval, it is not 
available to all cognitive agents. 
It may be replied that computational opera-
tions of the contemplated sort would be within 
the capacity of normal human agents. No super-
human computational powers are required. 
Computing power, however, is not the issue. 
A relevant sequence of operations must also be 
available in the agent's intellectual repertoire; that 
is, she must know which operations are appropri-
ate to obtain an answer to the relevant (formal) 
questionY Since truth-table methods and other 
such algorithms are probably not in the repertoire 
of ordinary cognitive agents, they cannot prop-
erly be included in a KJ constraint. 
A third problem concerns the proper method-
ology that should be used in selecting a KJ 
constraint that incorporates computational oper-
ations. As we see from the first two problems, a KJ 
constraint that conforms to the spirit of the GD 
rationale must reflect the basic cognitive skills or 
repertoires of actual human beings. What these 
basic repertoires consist in, however, cannot be 
determined a priori. It can only be determined 
with the help of empirical science. This fact fun-
damentally undermines the methodological pos-
ture of internalism, a subject to which I shall 
return in section VII. 
Until now, I have assumed a universal accessi-
bility constraint, one that holds for all cognitive 
agents. But perhaps potential justifiers for one 
agent need not be potential justifiers for another. 

INTERNALISM EXPOSED 
387 
Justifiers might be allowed to vary from agent to 
agent, depending on what is knowable by the par-
ticular agent. If two agents have different logical 
or probabilistic skills, then some properties that 
do not qualify as justifiers for one might yet qual-
ify as justifiers for the other. Indeed, the constraint 
KJint+ret+COMP might be read in precisely this agent-
relativized way. The subscripts may be interpreted 
as indicating knowledge routes that are available 
to the agent in question, not necessarily to all 
agents. 
If KJ constraints are agent relativized as a 
function of differences in knowledge skills, this 
means that two people in precisely the same evi-
dential state (in terms of perceptual situation, 
background beliefs, and so on) might have differ-
ent epistemic entitlements. But if the two agents 
are to comply with their respective epistemic 
duties, each must know which knowledge skills 
she has. This simply parallels the second step of 
the internalist's original three-step argument. If 
one's epistemic duties or entitlements depend on 
one's knowledge skills (for example, on one's 
computational skills), then compliance with one's 
duties requires knowledge of which skills one 
possesses. There are two problems with this 
approach. First, it is unlikely that many people -
especially ordinary people on the street - have 
this sort of knowledge, and this again threatens 
large-scale skepticism. Second, what is now 
required to be known by the agent is something 
about the truth-getting power of her cognitive 
skills - that is, the power of her skills in detecting 
justifiers. This seems to be precisely the sort of 
external property that internalists regard as anath-
ema. How can they accept this solution while 
remaining faithful to the spirit of internalism?28 
v. 
Epistemic Principles 
When the KJ constraint speaks of justifiers, it is 
not clear exactly what these comprehend. 
Specifically, do justifiers include epistemic princi-
ples themselves? I believe that principles should 
be included, because epistemic principles are 
among the items that determine whether or 
not an agent is justified in believing a 
proposition, which is just how "justifiers" was 
defined. Furthermore, true epistemic principles 
are items an agent must know if she is going to 
determine 
her 
epistemic 
duties 
correctly. 
Knowledge of her current states of mind and their 
properties will not instruct her about her epis-
temic duties and entitlements unless she also 
knows true epistemic principles. 
How are epistemic principles to be known, 
according to internalism? Chisholm29 says that 
central epistemic principles are normative super-
venience principles, which (when true) are neces-
sarily true. Since they are necessary truths, they 
can be known a priori - in particular, they can be 
known "by reflection." 
The internalist assumes that, merely by reflecting 
upon his own conscious state, he can formulate a 
set of epistemic principles that will enable him to 
find out, with respect to any possible belief he 
has, whether he is justified in having that 
belief.30 
This passage is ambiguous as to whether (correct) 
epistemic principles are accessible on reflection 
just to epistemologists, or accessible to naive epis-
temic agents as well. The latter, however, must be 
required by internalism, because justifiers are 
supposed to be determinable by all epistemic 
agents. 
Are ordinary or naive agents really capable of 
formulating and recognizing correct epistemic 
principles? This seems highly dubious. Even many 
career-long epistemologists have failed to articu-
late and appreciate correct epistemic principles. 
Since different epistemologists offer disparate 
and mutually conflicting candidates for epistemic 
principles, at most a fraction of these epistemolo-
gists can be right. Perhaps none of the principles 
thus far tendered by epistemologists is correct! In 
light of this shaky and possibly dismal record by 
professional epistemologists, how can we expect 
ordinary people, who are entirely ignorant of 
epistemology and its multiple pitfalls, to succeed 
at this task?3! Nor is it plausible that they should 
succeed at this task purely "by reflection" on their 
conscious states, since among the matters epis-
temic principles must resolve is what computa-
tional skills are within the competence of ordinary 
cognizers. I do not see how this can be answered a 
priori, "by reflection:' 
A crippling problem emerges for internalism. 
If epistemic principles are not knowable by all 
naive agents, no such principles can qualify as 

388 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
justifiers under the KJ constraint. If no epistemic 
principles so qualify, no proposition can be justi-
fiably believed by any agent. Wholesale skepticism 
follows. 
VI. 
The Core Dilemma for the 
Three-Step Argument 
I raise doubts here about whether there is any 
cogent inferential route from the GD conception 
to internalism via an acceptable KJ constraint. 
Here is the core dilemma. The minimal, unvar-
nished version of the KJ constraint does not 
rationalize internalism. That simple constraint 
merely says that justifiers must be readily know-
able, and some readily knowable facts might be 
external rather than internal. If all routes to 
knowledge of justifiers are allowed, then knowl-
edge by perception must be allowed. Ifknowledge 
by perception is allowed, then facts of an external 
sort could qualify for the status of justifiers. Of 
course, no epistemologist claims that purely 
external facts should serve as justifiers. But partly 
external facts are nominated by externalists for 
the rank of justifiers. Consider properties of the 
form: being a reliable perceptual indicator of a 
certain environmental fact. This sort of property 
is at least partly external because reliability 
involves truth, and truth (on the usual assump-
tion) is external. Now suppose that a certain audi-
tory perceptual state has the property of being a 
reliable indicator of the presence of a mourning 
dove in one's environment. Might the possession 
of this reliable indicatorship property qualify as a 
justifier on the grounds that it is indeed readily 
knowable? If every route to knowledge is legiti-
mate, I do not see how this possibility can be 
excluded. After all, one could use past perceptions 
of mourning doves and their songs to determine 
that the designated auditory state is a reliable 
indicator of a mourning dove's presence. So if 
unrestricted knowledge is allowed, the (partly) 
external fact in question might be perfectly know-
able. Thus, the unvarnished version of the KJ 
constraint does not exclude external facts from 
the ranks of the justifiers. 
The simple version of the KJ constraint, then, 
does not support internalism. Tacit recognition of 
this is what undoubtedly leads internalists to favor 
a "direct" knowability constraint. Unfortunately, 
this extra rider is not rationalized by the GD 
conception. The GD conception at best implies 
that cognitive agents must know what justifiers 
are present or absent. No particular types of 
knowledge, or paths to knowledge, are intimated. 
So the GD conception cannot rationalize a restric-
tive version of the KJ constraint that unambigu-
ously yields internalism. 
Let me put the point another way. The GD 
conception implies that justifiers must be readily 
knowable, but are internal facts always more read-
ily knowable than external facts? As discussed 
earlier, probabilistic relations presumably qualify 
as internal, but they do not seem to be readily 
knowable by human beings. An entire tradition 
of psychological research on "biases and heuris-
tics" suggests that naive agents commonly commit 
probabilistic fallacies, such as the "conjunction 
fallacy," and use formally incorrect judgmental 
heuristics, such as the representativeness heuristic 
and the anchoring-and-adjustment heuristic.32 
If this is right, people's abilities at detecting prob-
abilistic relationships are actually rather weak. 
People's perceptual capacities to detect external 
facts seem, by contrast, far superior. The unquali-
fied version of the KJ constraint, therefore, holds 
little promise for restricting all justifiers to inter-
nal conditions in preference to external condi-
tions, as internalism requires. 33 
VII. 
The Methodology of Epistemology: 
Empirical or a Priori? 
Internalism standardly incorporates the doctrine 
that epistemology is a purely a priori or armchair 
enterprise rather than one that needs help from 
empirical science. Chisholm puts the point this way: 
The epistemic principles that [the epistemolo-
gist 1 formulates are principles that one may come 
upon and apply merely by sitting in one's arm-
chair, so to speak, and without calling for any 
outside assistance. In a word, one need only con-
sider one's own state of mind.34 
Previous sections already raised doubts about the 
merits of apriorism in epistemology, even in the 
context of the theoretical architecture presented 
here. I now want to challenge the viability of 
apriorism in greater depth. 

INTERNALISM EXPOSED 
389 
Assume that, despite my earlier reservations, 
an internalist restriction on justifiers has some-
how been derived, one that allows only conscious 
states and certain of their nonexternal properties 
to serve as justifiers. How should the epistemolo-
gist identify particular conscious states and prop-
erties as justifiers for specific propositions 
(or types of propositions)? In other words, how 
should specific epistemic principles be crafted? 
Should the task be executed purely a priori, or can 
scientific psychology help? 
For concreteness, consider justifiers for 
memory beliefs. Suppose an adult consciously 
remembers seeing, as a teenager, a certain mati-
nee idol. This ostensible memory could have 
arisen from imagination, since he frequently fan-
tasized about this matinee idol and imagined 
seeing her in person. What clues are present in 
the current memory impression by which he can 
tell whether or not the recollection is veridical? 
This is precisely the kind of issue which internal-
ist epistemic principles should address. If there 
are no differences in features of memory states 
that stem from perceptions of real occurrences 
versus features of states that stem from mere 
imagination, does this not raise a specter of skep-
ticism over the domain of memory? If there are 
no indications by which to distinguish veridical 
from nonveridical memory impressions, can we 
be justified in trusting our memory impressions? 
Skepticism aside, epistemologists should surely 
be interested in identifying the features of con-
scious memory impressions by which people are 
made more or less justified (or prima facie justi-
fied) in believing things about the past. 
Epistemologists have said very little on this 
subject. Their discussions tend to be exhausted by 
characterizations of memory impressions as 
"vivid" or "nonvivid." There is, I suspect, a 
straightforward reason for the paucity of detail. It 
is extremely difficult, using purely armchair 
methods, to dissect the micro features of memory 
experiences so as to identify telltale differences 
between trustworthy and questionable memories. 
On the other hand, empirical methods have pro-
duced some interesting findings, which might 
properly be infused into epistemic principles in a 
way entirely congenial to internalism. Important 
research in this area has been done by Marcia 
Johnson and her colleagues.35 I shall illustrate my 
points by brief reference to their research. 
Johnson calls the subject of some of her 
research reality monitoring. She tries to character-
ize the detectable differences between (conscious) 
memory traces derived from veridical percep-
tion of events versus memory traces generated 
by mere imaginations of events. 36 Johnson and 
Raye 
("Reality Monitoring") propose four 
dimensions along which memory cues will typi-
cally differ depending on whether their origin 
was perceptual or imaginative. As compared 
with memories that originate from imagination, 
memories originating from perception tend to 
have (1) more perceptual information (for 
example, color and sound), (2) more contextual 
information about time and place, and (3) more 
meaningful detail. When a memory trace is rich 
along these three dimensions, this is evidence 
of its having originated through perception. 
Memories originating from imagination or 
thought, by contrast, tend to be rich on another 
dimension: they contain more information 
about the cognitive operations involved in the 
original thinkings or imaginings (for example, 
effortful attention, image creation, or search). 
Perception is more automatic than imagination, 
so a memory trace that originates from percep-
tion will tend to lack attributes concerning 
effortful operations. Johnson and Raye therefore 
suggest that differences in average value along 
these types of dimensions can form the basis for 
deciding whether the origin of a memory is per-
ceptual or nonperceptual. A memory with a 
great deal of visual and spatial detail, and with-
out records of intentional constructive and 
organizational processes, should be judged to 
have been perceptually derived. 3? 
Epistemologists would be well-advised to 
borrow these sorts of ideas and incorporate them 
into their epistemic principles. A person is (prima 
facie) justified in believing in the real occurrence 
of an ostensibly recalled event if the memory 
trace is strong on the first three dimensions and 
weak on the fourth dimension. Conversely, an 
agent is unjustified in believing in the real occur-
rence of the recalled event if the memory trace is 
strong on the fourth dimension but weak on the 
first three dimensions. All of these dimensions, of 
course, concern features of conscious experience. 
For this reason, internalist epistemologists should 
be happy to incorporate these kinds of features 
into their epistemic principles. 

390 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
Let me distinguish two categories of epistemo-
logically significant facts about memory experience 
which empirical psychology might provide. First, 
as we have seen, it might identify types of represen-
tational materials which are generally available in 
people's memory experiences. Second, it might 
indicate which of these representational materials 
are either reliable or counter-reliable indicators of 
the veridicality of the ostensibly recalled events. Is 
the reliability of a memory cue a legitimate issue 
from an internalist perspective? It might be thought 
not, since reliability is usually classed as an external 
property. But epistemologists might use reliability 
considerations to decide which memory character-
istics should be featured in epistemic principles. 
They need not insert reliability per se into the prin-
ciples. There is nothing in our present formulation 
of internalism, at any rate, which bars the latter 
approach. Any KJ constraint provides only a neces-
sary condition for being a justifier; it leaves open 
the possibility that additional necessary conditions, 
such as reliable indication, must also be met. 
Indeed, many internalists do use reliability as a 
(partial) basis for their choice of justifiers. BonJour 
(op. cit., p. 7) says that the basic role of justification 
is that of a means to truth, and he defends coher-
ence as a justifier on the ground that a coherent 
system of beliefs is likely to correspond to reality. 
This point need not be settled definitively, however. 
There are already adequate grounds for claiming 
that internalism cannot be optimally pursued 
without help from empirical psychology, whether 
or not reliability is a relevant consideration. 
VIII. 
Conclusion 
Let us review the parade of problems infecting 
internal ism which we have witnessed, though 
Notes 
Prominent statements of externalism include 
D. M. Armstrong, Belief, Truth and Knowledge 
(New York: Cambridge, 1973); Fred Dretske, 
Knowledge and the Flow of Information (Camb-
ridge: MIT, 1981 );RobertNozick,Philosophical 
Explanations (Cambridge: Harvard, 1981); 
my Epistemology and Cognition (Cambridge: 
Harvard, 1986); and Alvin Plantinga, Warrant 
not all in their order of presentation. (1) The 
argument from the GD conception of justifica-
tion to internalism does not work. Internalism 
can be derived only from a suitably qualified ver-
sion of the KJ constraint because the unqualified 
version threatens to allow external facts to count 
as justifiers. No suitably qualified version of the 
KJ constraint is derivable from the GD concep-
tion. (2) A variety of qualified KJ constraints are 
possible, each leading to a different version of 
internalism. None of these versions is intuitively 
acceptable. Strong internalism, which restricts 
justifiers to conscious states, is stuck with the 
problem of stored beliefs. Weak internalism, 
which allows stored as well as conscious beliefs to 
count as justifiers, faces the problem of forgotten 
evidence and the problem of concurrent retrieval. 
(3) The question of how logical and probabilistic 
facts are to be included in the class of justifiers is 
plagued by pUZzles, especially the puzzle of the 
doxastic decision interval and the issue of avail-
ability. (4) Epistemic principles must be among 
the class of justifiers, but such principles fail 
internalism's knowability requirement. (5) The 
favored methodology of internal ism - the arm-
chair method - cannot be sustained even if we 
grant the assumption that justifiers must be 
conscious states. 
Internalism is rife with problems. Are they all 
traceable to the GD rationale? Could internalism 
be salvaged by switching to a different rationale? 
A different rationale might help, but most of the 
problems raised here arise from the knowability 
constraint. It is unclear exactly which knowabil-
ity constraint should be associated with inter-
nalism, and all of the available candidates 
generate problematic theories. So I see no hope 
for internalism; it does not survive the glare of 
the spotlight. 
and Proper Function (New York: Oxford, 
1993). 
2 Major statements of internalism include 
Roderick Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966, 
1st edition; 1977, 2nd edition; 1989, 3rd edi-
tion); Laurence BonJour, The Structure of 
Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge: Harvard, 

INTERNALISM EXPOSED 
391 
1985); John Pollock, Contemporary Theories 
of Knowledge (Totowa, NJ: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 1986); Richard Foley, The Theory of 
Epistemic Rationality (Cambridge: Harvard, 
1987); and Keith Lehrer, Theory of Knowledge 
(Boulder: Westview, 1990). In addition to rel-
atively pure versions of externalism and inter-
nalism, there are also mixtures of the two 
approaches, as found in William Alston, 
Epistemic Justification (Ithaca: Cornell, 1989); 
Ernest Sosa, Knowledge in Perspective (New 
York: Cambridge, 1991); and Robert Audi, 
The Structure of Justification (New York: 
Cambridge, 1993). 
3 Plantinga also traces internal ism to the deon-
tological conception: "If we go back to the 
source of the internalist tradition ... we can 
see that internalism arises out of deontology; 
a deontological conception of warrant ... 
leads directly to internalism" (Warrant and 
Proper Function, pp. 24-5). Alston proposes a 
slightly different rationale for internalism, 
although his rationale also proceeds via the 
knowability constraint (Epistemic Justification, 
p. 236). He suggests that the concept of justi-
fication derives from the interpersonal prac-
tice of criticizing one another's beliefs and 
asking for their credentials. A person can 
appropriately respond to other people's 
demands for credentials only if he knows 
what those credentials are. So it is quite under-
standable, says Alston, that justifiers must 
meet the requirement of being accessible to 
the agent. Clearly, this is one way to derive the 
accessibility constraint without appeal to the 
deontological conception. But Alston is the 
only one I know of who advances this ground 
for the accessibility constraint. In any case, 
most of the problems I shall identify pertain 
to the accessibility constraint itself, which 
Alston's rationale shares with the deontologi-
cal rationale. 
4 Philosophical Works of Descartes, Volume I, 
Elizabeth Haldane and G. R. T. Ross, trans. 
(New York: Dover, 1955). 
5 An Essay Concerning Human Understanding, 
Volume II, A. C. Fraser, ed. (New York: Dover, 
1955). 
6 Ginet, Knowledge, Perception, and Memory 
(Dordrecht: Reidel, 1975); Moser, Empirical 
Justification (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1985); Steup, 
"The Deontic Conception of Epistemic 
Justification;' Philosophical Studies, 
LIII 
(1988), pp. 65-84; Feldman, "Epistemic 
Obligations;' in J. Tomberlin, ed., Philo-
sophical Perspectives, Volume II (Atascadero, 
CA: Ridgeview, 1988), pp. 235-56; and 
Kornblith, "Justified Belief and Epistemically 
Responsible Action;' Philosophical Review, 
XCII (1983), pp. 33-48. 
7 Theory of Knowledge, 2nd edition, p. 14 
(emphasis added). 
8 For example, R. Eugene Bales distinguishes 
between two possible aims of act-utilitarian-
ism: as a specifier of a right-making charac-
teristic or as a decision-making procedure. 
See "Act-utilitarianism: Account of Right-
making Characteristics or Decision-making 
Procedure," American Philosophical Quarterly, 
VIII (1971), pp. 257-65. He defends utilitari-
anism against certain critics by saying that 
it does not have to perform the latter 
function. 
9 "Internalism 
and 
Externalism 
III 
Epistemology;' reprinted in his Epistemic 
Justification, pp. 185-226, here p. 189. 
10 
Some internalists explicitly reject external-
ism on the grounds th,V it cannot be used as 
a decision guide. For example, Pollock says: 
"[Ilt is in principle impossible for us to actu-
ally employ externalist norms. I take this to 
be a conclusive refutation of belief external-
ism" (Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, 
p. 134). He would not subscribe to the full 
argument for internalism I am discussing, 
however, because it is committed to the 
"intellectualist model" of epistemology, 
which he disparages. 
11 
For the distinction between reliability and 
power (phrased slightly differently), see my 
Epistemology and Cognition, chapter 6. 
12 
Jack Lyons points out that to comply with 
one's epistemic duty it suffices to know that 
one has (undefeated) justifiers for proposi-
tion p; one does not have to know which jus-
tifiers these are. So the argument is not 
entitled to conclude that knowledge of par-
ticular justifiers is required by epistemic 
duty. Practically speaking, however, it is dif-
ficult to see how a cognitive agent could 
know that relevant justifiers exist without 
knowing which particular ones exist. So I 

392 
ALVIN I. GOLDMAN 
shall pass over this objection to the internal-
ist line of argument. 
13 
"The Deontological Conception of Justifi-
cation;' reprinted in his Epistemic Justification, 
pp.115-52. 
14 
"Doxastic Agency," Philosophical Studies, XL 
(1983), pp. 355-64. 
15 
Feldman's response, however, undercuts the 
step from the GD conception of justification 
to the knowability constraint. If epistemic 
duty does not require that the agent be able 
to discharge this duty, there is no longer a 
rationale for the knowability constraint. 
A different line of response to the voluntar-
ism worry is taken by Lehrer, who suggests 
that epistemological analysis should focus 
not on belief but on acceptance, where 
acceptance is some sort of action that is sub-
ject to the will-"A Self-Profile," in R. Bogdan, 
ed., Keith Lehrer (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1981), 
pp.3-104. 
16 
Theory of Knowledge, 3rd edition, p. 7; 
emphasis added and original emphasis 
deleted. 
17 
Other epistemologists who restrict justifiers 
to conscious states or discuss access in terms 
of introspection include Moser, p. 174; 
Feldman, "Having Evidence," in D. Austin, 
ed., 
Philosophical 
Analysis 
(Dordrecht: 
Kluwer, 1988), pp. 83-104; and Audi, 
"Causalist 
Internalism;' 
American 
Philosophical Quarterly, XXVI, 4 (1989), pp. 
309-20. 
18 
Feldman might reply that there is an impor-
tant distinction between memorial and per-
ceptual dispositions; but it is not clear on 
what basis a principled distinction can be 
drawn. 
19 
This sort of problem is discussed by Gilbert 
Harman, Change in View (Cambridge: MIT, 
1986); Thomas Senor, "Internalist Found-
ationalism and the Justification of Memory 
Belief," Synthese, XCIV (1993), pp. 453-76; 
and 
Audi, 
"Memorial 
Justification;' 
Philosophical Topics, XXIII (1995), pp. 31---45. 
20 
His proposal was part of his commentary at 
the meeting where this paper was first read. 
21 
Obviously, one would need to reject the 
principle that the knowability of fact A and 
the knowability of fact B entail the knowa-
bility of the conjunctive fact, A & B. 
22 
The "doxastic presumption" invoked by 
BonJour (The Structure of Empirical Know-
ledge, pp. 101--6) seems to assume that this is 
possible, but this is simply an undefended 
assumption. Pollock (Contemporary Theories 
of Knowledge, p. 136) also raises the problem 
identified here, though in slightly different 
terms. 
23 
More precisely, the contemplated proviso 
should say that the possession of any prop-
erty by a mental state (or set of mental states) 
qualifies as a justifier. This reading will be 
understood wherever the text talks loosely of 
"properties." 
24 
"Computational Complexity and the Universal 
Acceptance of Logic;' The Journal of Philosophy, 
LXXXI, 12 (December 1984), pp. 739-58. 
25 
This computational difficulty for coherent-
ism 
is 
identified by Kornblith, "The 
Unattainability of Coherence," in J. Bender, 
ed., The Current State of the Coherence Theory 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1989), pp. 207-14. 
26 
Because of the contemplated restriction, 
there will be many questions about formal 
facts to which COMP cannot deliver answers. 
Thus, formal facts that might otherwise 
qualify as justifiers will not so qualify under 
the version of the KJ constraint that incor-
porates COMP. 
27 
Propositional (or "declarative") knowledge of 
the appropriate sequence of operations is, 
perhaps, an unduly restrictive requirement. It 
would suffice for the agent to have "proce-
dural" skills of the right sort. But even such 
skills will be lacking in naive cognitive agents. 
28 
It might be argued that internalism's spirit 
leads to a similar requirement even for uni-
versal versions of a KJ constraint, not just for 
agent-relativized versions. Perhaps so; but so 
much the worse for the general form of 
internal ism. 
29 
"The Status of Epistemic Principles;' Nous, 
XXIV (1990), pp. 209-15. 
30 
Theory of Knowledge, 3rd edition, p. 76; 
emphasis omitted. 
31 
A similar worry is expressed by Alston in 
"Internalism and Externalism in Epistemol-
ogy;' pp. 221-2. 
32 
See Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman, 
"Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics 
and Biases;' in Kahneman, P. Slovic, and 

INTERNALISM EXPOSED 
393 
Tversky, eds, Judgment under Uncertainty 
(New York: Cambridge, 1982), pp. 3-20; and 
Tversky and Kahneman, "Extensional versus 
Intuitive Reasoning: The Conjunction Fallacy 
III Probability Judgment;' Psychological 
Review, XCI (1983), pp. 293-315. 
33 
It is not really clear, moreover, why logical or 
probabilistic facts intuitively count as "inter-
nal" facts. They certainly are not internal in 
the same sense in which mental states are 
internal. This is an additional problem about 
the contours of internalism. 
34 
Theory of Knowledge, 3rd edition, p. 76. 
35 
See Johnson and Carol Raye, "Reality 
Monitoring;' Psychological Review, LXXXVIII 
(1981), pp. 67-85; and Johnson, Mary Foley, 
Aurora Suengas, and Raye, "Phenomenal 
Characteristics of Memories for Perceived 
and Imagined Autobiographical Events," 
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 
CXVII (1988), pp. 371-6. 
36 
Memory errors are not confined, of course, 
to confusions of actual with imagined events. 
There are also errors that arise from confus-
ing, or blending, two actual events. But this 
research of Johnson's focuses on the actual/ 
nonactual (or perceived versus imagined) 
problem. 
37 
They also recognize that people can compare 
a target memory with memories of contex-
tually related events to assess the target's 
veridicality. This kind of "coherence" factor 
is a stock-in-trade of epistemology, however, 
and hence not a good example of the dis-
tinctive contributions psychology can make 
to this subject. I therefore pass over it. 

CHAPTER 30 
Externalism and Skepticism 
Richard Fumerton 
After examining a number of different controversies 
associated 
with 
the 
internalism/externalism 
debates in epistemology, I argued that two of the 
most fundamental issues separating internalists 
and externalists are the question of whether fun-
damental epistemic concepts can be "naturalized" 
and the question of whether one takes access to 
inferential connections to be a necessary condition 
for inferential justification. We introduced the 
labels "inferential internalism" and "inferential 
externalism" to refer to the two positions one 
might take on this last question. 
In this chapter I am primarily interested in 
exploring the ways in which an externalist might 
respond to the classic skeptical arguments 
sketched previously. For convenience I focus pri-
marily on reliabilism, but almost all of what I say 
will apply mutatis mutandis to other paradig-
matic externalists. My first aim is simply to be 
clear about the framework within which a foun-
dationalist version of externalism will face the 
skeptical challenge. I want to understand where 
externalism leaves the philosopher when it comes 
to approaching normative epistemological issues 
in general, and these issues as they relate to skep-
ticism in particular. But, as I implied earlier, I 
think the very examination of the way in which 
Originally published in R. Fumerton, Metaepistemology 
and Skepticism (Lanham, MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 
1995), pp. 159-81. 
the philosophical externalist should approach 
skepticism may reveal the fundamental weakness 
of externalism as a metaepistemological account 
of concepts fundamental to philosophical concern 
with epistemology. 
Externalism, Foundationalism, and the 
Traditional Skeptical Argument 
Previously, I have tried to characterize what I take 
to be the fundamental structure of skeptical argu-
ments. The skepticism I am most interested in is 
skepticism with respect to justified or rational 
belief. Furthermore, we are concerned, in the first 
place, with "local" rather than "global" skepticism. 
The skeptics we considered put forth arguments 
designed to establish that we have no justified 
beliefs with respect to certain classes of proposi-
tions. They offered skeptical arguments that 
concluded that we have no reason to believe prop-
ositions about the physical world, the past, other 
minds, the future, and so on. The traditional skep-
tic virtually always presupposed some version of 
foundationalism, presupposed that we do have 
noninferentially justified belief in at least some 
propositions. The presupposition was seldom 
stated explicitly, but one cannot read any of the 
important historical figures concerned with either 
advancing or refuting skepticism without reach-
ing the conclusion that they took some proposi-
tions to be epistemically unproblematic, where 

EXTERNALISM AND SKEPTICISM 
395 
their unproblematic character seemed to stem 
from the fact that one did not need to infer their 
truth from any other propositions believed. In 
both the rationalist and the empiricist tradition, 
at least some propositions about the content of 
one's current mental states were taken to have this 
unproblematic, noninferential character. 
The first step, then, in advancing an argument 
for skepticism with respect to some kind of prop-
osition is to establish that our access to the rele-
vant truth is at best indirect. In the terminology we 
have developed, the skeptic begins by denying that 
we have noninferential knowledge, or noninferen-
tially justified belief in the relevant sort of propo-
sition. Thus, for example, skeptics with respect to 
the physical world deny that we have noninferen-
tial "direct" access to physical objects. The stand-
ard claim is that if we have justification for 
believing anything about the physical world, that 
justification reduces to what we can legitimately 
infer about the physical world from what we know 
about the character of our past and present sensa-
tions. The skeptic about the past claims that we 
have no direct - that is, noninferential - knowl-
edge of the past. What we know or reasonably 
believe about the past is restricted to what we can 
legitimately infer about past events from what we 
know about the present state of our minds. 
One of the primary advantages that paradig-
matic externalist accounts have in the battle 
against skepticism is the ease with which they can 
deny the crucial first premise of skeptical argu-
ments. The class of noninferentially justified 
beliefs is likely to be much larger given an exter-
nalist epistemology. Notice that I say "likely" to be 
much larger. As far as I can see, virtually all exter-
nalist epistemologies entail that it is a purely con-
tingent question as to which beliefs are justified 
non inferentially and which are not. On the relia-
bilist's view, for example, the question of whether 
or not one is noninferentially justified in believ-
ing at least some propositions about the physical 
world is a question about the nature of the proc-
esses that yield beliefs about the physical world 
and the nature of their "input." If we have been 
programmed through evolution to react to sen-
sory stimuli with certain representations of the 
world, and we have been lucky enough to have 
"effective" programming, then we will have non-
inferentially justified beliefs about the physical 
world. If Nozick is right and our beliefs track facts 
about the physical world around us, and this 
tracking does not involve inference from other 
propositions, we will again have noninferentially 
justified beliefs about the physical world. If our 
beliefs about the physical world are acting like 
that reliable thermometer that Armstrong uses as 
his model for direct knowledge, if we are accu-
rately registering the physical world around us 
with the appropriate representations, then again 
we have non inferential, direct knowledge of that 
world. Whether or not we have such noninferen-
tial justification for believing propositions 
describing the physical world, on any of these 
externalist ways of understanding noninferential 
justification, is a purely contingent matter. 
That it is a contingent fact is not in itself sur-
prising, nor is it a consequence peculiar to exter-
nalist epistemologies. It is certainly a contingent 
fact on the acquaintance theory that I am 
acquainted with the fact that I am in pain. It is a 
contingent fact that I am in pain and so obviously 
contingent that I am acquainted with it. It is less 
obvious on traditional foundationalisms that it is 
a contingent fact that we are not acquainted with 
certain facts. It might seem, for example, that one 
could not be acquainted with facts about the dis-
tant past, the future, or even the physical world if 
it is understood as a construct out of actual or 
possible experience or as the cause of certain 
actual and possible experience. 1 But even here it is 
difficult to claim that it is necessarily the case that 
conscious minds are not acquainted with such 
facts. There may be no God, but it is not obvious 
that the concept of a consciousness far greater 
than ours is unintelligible. If the concept of a spe-
cious present makes sense, such a consciousness 
may have the capacity to directly apprehend a 
much greater expanse of time than can finite 
minds. In any event, it is not clear that the class of 
facts with which we can be acquainted exhausts 
the facts with which all possible consciousness 
can be acquainted. 
But even if the scope of noninferentially jus-
tified belief is contingent on both internalist and 
externalist versions of foundationalism, there 
are crucial differences. On traditional (internal-
ist) versions of foundationalism, philosophers 
are at least in a position to address reasonably 
the question of the content of noninferentially 
justified belief. The philosopher is competent, at 
least as competent as anyone else, to address the 

396 
RICHARD FUMERTON 
questions of whether or not we have noninferen-
tially justified beliefs in propositions about the 
physical world, for example. There are two sources 
of knowledge as to what we are noninferentially 
justified in believing. One is dialectical argument. 
The other is acquaintance itself. One can be 
directly acquainted with the fact that one is 
directly acquainted with certain facts. 
On the classic externalist views, the facts that 
determine whether one is non inferentially justi-
fied in believing a proposition are complex 
nomological facts. Given paradigm externalism, 
it is not clear that a philosopher qua philosopher is 
even in a position to speculate intelligently on the 
question of whether or not we have noninferen-
tially justified belief in any of the propositions 
under skeptical attack.2 Because the externalist 
has reduced the question of what is non inferentially 
justified to questions about the nature of the 
causal interaction between stimuli and response, 
and particularly to the processes of the brain that 
operate on the stimuli so as to produce the 
response, the search for non inferential justifica-
tion would seem to be as much in the purview of 
the neurophysiologist as the philosopher. 3 In the 
last two hundred years, the vast majority of phi-
losophers simply have not had the training to do 
a decent job of investigating the hardware and 
software of the brain. But without this training, it 
hardly seems reasonable for philosophers to be 
speculating as to what is or is not a reliable belief-
independent process. To be sure, some contem-
porary epistemologists are trying to "catch up" 
on developments in cognitive science and even 
neurophysiology, but I cannot help worrying that 
the experts in such fields will quite correctly 
regard these philosophers as simply dilettantes 
who, having tired of their a priori discipline, now 
want to get their hands dirty in the real-life work 
of science. 
Given this possibility, it is ironic that so many 
philosophers find externalist analyses of epis-
temic concepts attractive precisely because they 
seem to capture the prephilosophical intuition 
that there is something direct about our knowl-
edge of the physical world through sensations. 
Through sheer repetition of the arguments, many 
philosophers got used to talking about inferring 
the existence of a table from propositions about 
the character of sensation, or inferring proposi-
tions about the past from propositions describing 
present consciousness. But critics have correctly 
pointed out that if such claims are intended to be 
phenomenologically accurate descriptions of our 
epistemic relation to the world, they are hardly 
credible. Anyone who has tried to draw knows 
that it is very difficult to distinguish the world as 
it appears from the world as it is. That there is a 
conceptual distinction between phenomenologi-
cal appearance and reality seems obvious. If the 
difficulty of artistic representation shows that we 
rarely reflect on appearances (as opposed to real-
ity), it also shows that there is such a thing as 
appearance. A number of philosophers have 
argued that the most frequent use of "appears" 
terminology is not that of describing the phe-
nomenological character of sensation, but rather 
that of expressing tentative belief.4 When I say 
that he appears to be a doctor I am probably only 
indicating my tentative conclusion that he is a 
doctor. 
But even if we recognize what Chisholm called 
the "epistemic" use of "appears:' there is surely 
another use of the term that is designed to cap-
ture the intrinsic character of sensation. When I 
say that the people on the street below look like 
ants, I am not expressing the tentative conclusion 
that they are ants. Again, as Sellars pointed out, 
we cannot directly conclude from such examples 
that the descriptive use of "appears" gives us a 
"pure" description of experience uncontaminated 
by reference to the physical world. "Appears" 
sometimes has what Chisholm called a "compara-
tive" use.s To say that X appears F in this sense is 
to say that X appears the way F things appear 
under some set of conditions. The people down 
below look like ants in the sense that they look 
something like the way ants look when you are 
relatively close to them under standard condi-
tions. Such complex facts include reference to 
physical objects and their tendency to appear in 
certain ways under certain conditions, and conse-
quently are implausible candidates for objects of 
direct acquaintance. But Sellars aside, it is diffi-
cult to avoid the conclusion that the comparative 
use of "appears" virtually presupposes some other 
way of understanding the phenomenological 
character of appearance. There is some way that 
things appear and it is that way of appearing that 
the artist must think about in trying to represent 
realistically some aspect of the world. But whether 
or not this "noncomparative"" use of appears 

EXTERNALISM AND SKEPTICISM 
397 
exists and is intelligible, it does not alter the 
phenomenological fact that we do seldom, if ever, 
consciously infer propositions about the physical 
world from propositions describing the character 
of sensation. 
We also seldom consciously infer propositions 
about the past from anything we might call a 
memory "experience." The very existence of 
memory "experience" is far from obvious. And it 
is relatively seldom that our commonplace expec-
tations about the future are formed as a result of 
careful consideration of premises describing past 
correlations of properties or states of affairs. 
When I expect my next drink of water to quench 
my thirst instead of killing me, I do not first con-
sider past instances of water quenching thirst. It is 
useful to reflect carefully on this fact, for even 
most externalists will view this kind of knowledge 
as involving inductive inference. We must, there-
fore, be cautious in reaching conclusions about 
the role of phenomenology in determining 
whether a justification is inferential or not. We 
must distinguish questions about the causal 
origin of a belief from questions about the justifi-
cation available for a belief. 
We must also distinguish between occurrent 
and dispositional belief. It may be that I have all 
sorts of dispositional beliefs that are causally sus-
taining my beliefs when I am completely unaware 
of the causal role these dispositional beliefs play. 
In introducing this discussion I suggested that it 
was ironic that externalists would find attractive 
the fact that their externalism can accommodate 
the apparent phenomenological fact that far fewer 
commonsense beliefs involve inference than are 
postulated by traditional foundationalism. The 
irony is that phenomenology should have no par-
ticular role to play for the externalist in reaching 
conclusions about what is or is not inferentially 
justified. According to the externalist, the epis-
temic status of a belief is a function of the nomo-
logical relations that belief has to various features 
of the world. These nomological facts are com-
plex and are typically not the kinds of facts that 
have traditionally been thought to be under the 
purview of phenomenology. I suppose an exter-
nalist can define some belief-producing process 
as "phenomenological." But again, even if one can 
describe such a process, it will be a contingent 
question as to what beliefs such a process might 
justify, a contingent question that goes far beyond 
the competency of most philosophers (and cer-
tainly most phenomenologists) to answer. 
But perhaps I am being unfair in suggesting 
that the philosopher who is an externalist in epis-
temology has no particular credentials qualifying 
him to assess the question of whether the skeptic 
is right or wrong in denying the availability of 
noninferential justification for beliefs under skep-
tical attack. The skeptics, after all, had arguments 
in support of their conclusion that we have no 
non-inferentially justified beliefs in propositions 
about the physical world, the past, the future, 
other minds, and so on. The externalists can at 
least refute those arguments based on their a 
priori reasonings about the correct metaepiste-
mological position. The most common way of 
supporting the conclusion that we do not have 
noninferentially justified beliefs about the physi-
cal world is to point out that we can imagine 
someone having the very best justification possi-
ble for believing that there is a table, say, before 
him, when the table is not in fact there. A person 
who is vividly hallucinating a table can have just 
as good reason to think that the table exists as you 
do. But we can easily suppose that there is no 
table present before the victim of hallucination. If 
direct epistemic access to the table is anything like 
a real relation, then it cannot be present when the 
table is not present. But if the victim of halluc ina-
tion does not have direct access to the table, and 
the victim of hallucination has the same kind of 
justification you have for thinking that the table 
exists (when you take yourself to be standing 
before a table in broad daylight), then you do not 
have direct access to the table either. 
The reliabilist will deny the association 
between noninferential justification and direct 
access to the table. To have a non inferentially jus-
tified belief about the table's existence is to have a 
belief about the table produced by an uncondi-
tionally reliable belief-independent process. The 
victim of hallucination has (or at least might 
have) a belief in the table's existence produced by 
an unconditionally reliable belief-independent 
process. It depends in part on how we define the 
relevant process. But if we think of the stimuli as 
something like sensations (which the hallucinator 
has), and the process as what goes on in the brain 
when sensation is assimilated and turned into 
representation, there is no reason why someone 
who is hallucinating cannot satisfy the conditions 

398 
RICHARD FUMERTON 
for having a noninferentially justified belief, 
assuming of course that the process in question 
really is unconditionally reliable. The reliabilist's 
metaepistemology allows at least a conditional 
response to the skeptic's attack. More precisely, 
the reliabilist can point out that a reliabilist 
metaepistemology entails that the skeptic's con-
clusion about the non inferential character of 
belief about the physical world does not follow. 
And, of course, everything the reliabilist says 
about the physical world applies to the past, other 
minds, and even the future. The reliabilist proba-
bly will not claim that beliefs about the future are 
non inferentially justified, but he should claim 
that there is no reason in principle why they could 
not be, and should continue to assert that the 
skeptic has no argument for the conclusion that 
we have no direct, that is, noninferentially justi-
fied, beliefs about the future. 
Interestingly, not all externalists will reject the 
skeptic's claim about noninferential justification 
in the same way. Consider again the reliabilist's 
response to the argument from hallucination as a 
way of establishing that we have no noninferen-
tially justified beliefs about the physical world. 
The crucial move for the reliabilist was to deny 
that we are forced to regard the hallucinatory situ-
ation as one in which the subject lacked a nonin-
ferentially justified belief. A causal theorist about 
direct knowledge, like Armstrong, might admit 
that in hallucinatory experience we lack noninfer-
ential knowledge, but continue to assert that in 
veridical experience we have such knowledge. This 
externalist is more likely to deny the skeptic's pre-
supposition that we should say the same thing 
about the nature of the justification available to 
the victim of vivid hallucination and the person 
who has qualitatively indistinguishable veridical 
experiences. You will recall that there is one sense 
of "internalism" according to which the internalist 
holds that the conditions sufficient for justifica-
tion are always states internal to the subject. If 
sensations are not themselves relations (a contro-
versial claim, to be sure), and the sensory evidence 
of 5 and R is indistinguishable, and there is noth-
ing else "inside their minds" to distinguish their 
epistemic state, then this internalist will insist that 
if the one has a certain kind of justification for 
believing something, then so does the other. 
But a causal theorist thinks that the relevant 
question that determines the nature of the 
justification available for a belief involves the 
origin of the belief. The internal, that is, nonrela-
tional, states of 5 and R can be qualitatively indis-
tinguishable, but S's internal states can result in 
S's having a noninferentially justified belief by 
virtue of their being produced in the appropriate 
way. R's internal states might bring about the very 
same belief, but because they were not caused by 
the appropriate facts they will not result in the 
having of a non inferentially justified belief. In 
short, the hallucinator's belief cannot be traced 
via sensation back to the fact about the world that 
would make the belief true. The person lucky 
enough to have veridical experience typically has 
a belief that can be traced back to the fact that 
makes the belief true. This is a perfectly clear dis-
tinction, and there is nothing to prevent an epis-
temologist from arguing that this just is the 
distinction that determines whether or not some-
one has a justified or rational belief. Furthermore, 
the question of whether the justification is infer-
ential has only to do with the kinds of links in the 
causal chain leading to the relevant belief. If the 
causal connection goes directly from some fact 
about the physical world, to the occurrence of 
sensory states, to representations about the physi-
cal world, then there are no other beliefs that cru-
cially enter the story. The justification that results 
will be justification that does not logically depend 
on the having of other justified beliefs.7 It will be 
noninferential justification. So again, we can see 
how an externalist metaepistemology can put one 
in a position to claim that the skeptic has not 
established the crucial premise concerning the 
inferential character of our belief in the proposi-
tions under skeptical attack. 
Even if externalism allows one to point out 
that the skeptic has not established the crucial 
first premise of the argument, it does not follow, 
of course, that the externalist has given any posi-
tive reason to suppose that the skeptic is wrong in 
claiming that the propositions under skeptical 
attack are not the objects of noninferentially jus-
tified belief. Both skeptics and nonskeptics play 
on a level playing field. There is no "burden of 
proof" when it comes to fundamental issues in 
epistemology. If the philosopher wants to claim 
that we have noninferentially justified belief in 
certain propositions, then the philosopher can 
give us good reasons to think that such justifica-
tion exists. The skeptic who wishes to deny that 

EXTERNALISM AND SKEPTICISM 
399 
we have such justification can give us good rea-
sons to think that it does not exist. The skeptic, 
however, also has a fall-back position. Without 
arguing that we have no noninferentially justified 
beliefs in propositions about the physical world, 
the past, other minds, and the future, the skeptic 
can move "up" a level and deny that we have any 
good reason to believe that we have noninferential 
justification for these beliefs. A strong access inter-
nalist can move from the proposition that we have 
no justification for believing that we have a non-
inferentially justified belief that P to the conclu-
sion that we do not have a noninferentially 
justified belief that P. But the externalist rejects 
just such an inference. Even if we abandon strong 
access internalism, however, we might find skepti-
cism that maintains that we have no justification 
for believing that we have a justified belief that P 
just as threatening as skepticism that concludes 
that we are unjustified in believing P. Before we 
consider the question of whether skepticism will 
arise at the next level up within an externalist epis-
temology, let us briefly discuss the externalist 
approach to normative issues involving inferential 
justification. 
Skepticism, Externalism, and 
Inferential Justification 
Most of the general observations made about the 
externalist's response to skeptical challenges con-
cerning the class of non inferentially justified 
beliefs will apply as well to inferential justifica-
tion. If the skeptic were to succeed in convincing 
the externalist that we are not non inferentially 
justified in believing propositions about the 
physical world, for example, the externalist pre-
sumably would argue that such beliefs are infer-
entially justified. The reliabilist, for example, 
would argue that if our beliefs about the external 
world result from input that includes beliefs 
about the internal and external conditions of per-
ceiving, or even beliefs about the qualitative char-
acter of sensation, the relevant belief-dependent 
processes are conditionally reliable and therefore 
produce (inferentially) justified beliefs, provided 
that the input belieft are themselves justified. The 
proviso is crucial, of course, and reminds us that 
to establish that first-level skepticism is false, the 
externalist who concedes that the justification is 
inferential in character must establish the exist-
ence of at least one unconditionally reliable proc-
ess and at least one conditionally reliable process. 
We noted in discussing the externalist's views 
about noninferentially justified belief that exter-
nalism has a potentially significant advantage in 
dealing with skepticism precisely because there 
are no restrictions on how large the class of non-
inferentially justified beliefs might be. As I indi-
cated, there is no a priori reason for the externalist 
to deny even that we have noninferentially justi-
fied beliefs about the past and the future. 
Evolution might have taken care of us rather well 
when it comes to reaching true conclusions 
about the world, and evolution might have 
accomplished this end without burdening our 
brains with too many conditionally reliable 
belief-forming processes. Nozick's tracking rela-
tions can in principle hold between any fact and 
any belief, and the tracking relations need not 
involve any intermediate beliefs. 
Just as the externalist's class of noninferen-
tially justified beliefs can be very large in com-
parison to those recognized by traditional 
foundationalists, so the class of inferences recog-
nized as legitimate by the externalist can be 
equally large. Consider again the reliabilist's posi-
tion. There are no a priori restrictions on how 
many different kinds of conditionally reliable 
belief-dependent processes there might be. Valid 
deductive inference is presumably the paradigm 
of a conditionally reliable belief-dependent proc-
ess. Classical enumerative induction may satisfy 
the requirements as well, provided that we find 
some suitably restricted characterization of the 
inductive "process" that succeeds in denoting and 
that takes care of grue/green riddles of induc-
tion.8 I suspect most externalists will be reluctant 
to include perceptual beliefs among the beliefs 
produced by belief-dependent processes, but 
there is no reason why a reliabilist could not be a 
sense-datum theorist or an appearing theorist 
who holds that we do have at least dispositional 
beliefs about the qualitative character of sensa-
tion and who further holds that such beliefs are 
processed by conditionally reliable belief-dependent 
processes that churn out commonsense beliefs 
about the physical world. In short, take any kind 
of inference that people actually make and the 
reliabilist could hold that it involves a condition-
ally reliable belief-dependent process. All one 

400 
RICHARD FUMERTON 
needs to do is to formulate a description of the 
process that takes the beliefs one relies on as 
premises (the input) and produces the beliefs that 
constitute the conclusion (the output). The 
description will have to be such that we succeed 
in picking out a kind of process that does play the 
causal role described, but it will not need to 
involve any reference to the "hardware" of the 
brain. Indeed, we can try to denote the relevant 
process by directly referring only to the kind of 
premises and conclusion with which it is associ-
ated. Roughly, the idea is that we can try to denote 
a belief-dependent process X, for example, using 
the description "the process (whatever it is) that 
takes premises like these and churns out conclu-
sions like this." Of course, such a description is 
probably too vague to do the trick. The locution 
"like these" can hardly be said to characterize pre-
cisely enough a class of premises. One would need 
to characterize the relevant points of similarity to 
have a well-defined class of premises which could 
then enter into the definite description denoting 
the process that takes them as input. 
If we consider any argument someone actually 
makes, there will be indefinitely many classes of 
propositions to which the premises and the 
conclusion belong, and that will enable us to 
formulate any number of different descriptions 
of belief-forming processes. This is not a difficulty 
for the reliabilist, for as long as we have a locution 
that succeeds in denoting a process playing a 
causal role, we can use conditionals to define the 
conditions under which it is or is not condition-
ally reliable. The fact that a single inference might 
be subsumed under a number of different reliable 
belief-dependent processes is hardly a problem. If 
the inference can be subsumed under the descrip-
tion of both a reliable and an unreliable process, 
the crucial question will be which process is caus-
ally determining the production of a belief. Thus, 
if someone trustworthy tells me today that it 
rained in New York, I can describe this as a case of 
processing testimony to reach a conclusion about 
the truth of what is testified to, or I can describe it 
as a case of taking a statement I hear involving the 
name "New York" and believing all of the noun 
clauses containing that name. The former, let us 
suppose, is a reliable belief-dependent process, 
whereas the latter is not. But you recall that in 
formulating descriptions of processes appealing 
to kinds of premises and conclusions, we are 
merely hoping to denote some process (presuma-
blya complex brain process) that does take input 
and causally produce output beliefs. It does not 
follow, of course, that every definite description 
we formulate will succeed in denoting. In the 
hypothetical situation we are discussing, it may 
be that there is no programming in the brain that 
takes the "New York" input and processes it in the 
way described. If there is nothing denoted by the 
description playing the relevant causal role, then 
we do not need to worry about the fact that such 
a process, if used, would be unreliable. 
To emphasize the point made earlier, accord-
ing to externalism there are indefinitely many 
candidates for legitimate inferential processes. 
There are no a priori restrictions on how many 
conditionally reliable belief-dependent processes 
might be operating in normal human beings. 
There are no a priori restrictions on how many 
belief-dependent tracking relations might exist 
between beliefs and the facts that they track. 
Furthermore, just as in the case of noninferential 
justification, the question of which inferential 
processes generate justified beliefs for the exter-
nalist will be a purely contingent fact of a sort 
inaccessible to most philosophers qua philoso-
phers. The existence of conditionally reliable 
processes, tracking relations, and the like is some-
thing that could be discovered only as a result of 
empirical investigation into causal relations. 
Philosophers are not trained to engage in this sort 
of empirical investigation. 
Externalism, Normative Epistemology, and 
the Limits of Philosophy 
Based on the observations above, I argue that if 
externalist metaepistemologies are correct, then 
normative epistemology is an inappropriate sub-
ject matter for philosophy. Philosophers as they 
are presently trained have no special philosophical 
expertise enabling them to reach conclusions 
about which beliefs are or are not justified. Since 
the classic issues of skepticism fall under norma-
tive epistemology, it follows that if externalism 
were correct, philosophers should simply stop 
addressing the questions raised by the skeptic. 
The complex causal conditions that determine 
the presence or absence of justification for a belief 
are the subject matter of empirical investigations 

EXTERNALISM AND SKEPTICISM 
401 
that would take the philosopher out of the easy 
chair and into the laboratory. 
The realization that a good part of the history 
of epistemology becomes irrelevant to contem-
porary philosophy if we become metaepistemo-
logical externalists might cause a good many 
philosophers to reconsider externalism. I have 
always found the skeptical challenge to be fasci-
nating and it has always seemed to me that I can 
address the relevant issues from my armchair (or 
my bed, depending on how lazy I happen to feel 
on a given day). If I had wanted to go mucking 
around in the brain trying to figure out the causal 
mechanisms that hook up various stimuli with 
belief, I would have gone into neurophysiology. 
To rely on the philosopher's interest in skepti-
cism and penchant for armchair philosophy as a 
rhetorical device to convert potential externalists, 
however, might be viewed as a new low in the art 
of philosophical persuasion. The mere fact that 
philosophers have been preoccupied with a cer-
tain sort of question does not mean that they 
were qualified to answer it. There are all kinds of 
perfectly respectable candidates for misguided 
philosophical investigations. Many philosophers, 
for example, have taken the question of whether 
every event has a cause to be a deep metaphysical 
issue in philosophy. As a good Humean, I would 
be the first to argue that it is a purely contingent 
question and if one wants to know the answer to 
it, one should not ask a philosopher. 
Analogously, the fact that philosophers have 
been preoccupied with the skeptical challenge for 
literally thousands of years should not stop con-
temporary epistemologists from entertaining the 
thesis that the appropriate subject matter of epis-
temology ends with metaepistemology. After the 
metaepistemological analysis is complete, the 
externalist might argue, the only way to answer 
normative questions in epistemology is to engage 
in the kind of empirical investigation that con-
temporary philosophers have not been trained by 
philosophy to do. 
In reaching this conclusion I should be careful 
to admit that the philosophical externalist can, of 
course, embed normative epistemological con-
clusions in the consequents of conditional asser-
tions. One can talk about what one would be 
justified in believing were certain conditions to 
obtain. But these conditionals are still part of 
metaepistemology. Indeed, such conditionals are 
merely a way of illustrating the consequences of 
metaepistemological positions as they apply to 
particular hypothetical situations. A Nozick, for 
example, can discuss what one would or would 
not know about the external world if a tracking 
analysis of knowledge were correct and if our 
beliefs about the physical world track the facts 
that would make them true. Nozick's analysis of 
knowledge also has the interesting feature that we 
can apparently determine a priori that we do not 
know certain things, for example, that we do not 
know that there is no evil demon deceiving us. 
But there will be no positive normative claim with 
respect to empirical knowledge that Nozick is 
particularly competent to make qua philosopher. 
As we shall see in a moment, externalism does not 
prevent a philosopher from reaching rational 
conclusions about what one is justified in believ-
ing. My conclusion is only that a philosopher's 
philosophical expertise is nothing that helps in 
reaching such conclusions. To illustrate this claim 
more clearly, let us turn to the question of whether 
externalist metaepistemologies suggest that one 
should be a skeptic about whether or not one has 
justified belief. 
Second-Level Skepticism and the 
Fundamental Problem with Externalism 
It is tempting to think that externalist analyses of 
justified or rational belief and knowledge simply 
remove one level the traditional problems of 
skepticism. When one reads the well-known 
externalists, one is surely inclined to wonder why 
they are so sanguine about their supposition that 
our com men sense beliefs are, for the most part, 
justified, if not knowledge. When Nozick, for 
example, stresses that interesting feature of his 
account allowing us to conclude consistently that 
we know that we see the table even though we do 
not know that there is no demon deceiving us, we 
must surely wonder why he is so confident that 
the subjunctives that on his view are sufficient for 
knowledge are true. Perception, memory, and 
induction may be reliable processes in Goldman's 
sense, and thus given his metaepistemological 
position we may be justified in having the beliefs 
they produce, but, the skeptic can argue, we have 
no reason to believe that these processes are reli-
able, and thus, even if we accept reliabilism, we 

402 
RICHARD FUMERTON 
have no reason to conclude that the beliefs they 
produce are justified. 
In the previous section I emphasized that if 
externalism is true then philosophers qua philoso-
phers may not be particularly competent to 
answer normative questions in epistemology. I 
did not assert that if externalism is true we have 
no reason to believe that we have justified belief 
in commonsense truths about the world around 
us. According to externalist epistemologies, it is a 
purely contingent question as to what kinds of 
beliefs are justified. The existence of justified 
beliefs depends on nomological features of the 
world -
facts about the reliability of belief-
producing processes, the existence of tracking 
relations, causal connections between facts and 
beliefs, and the like. There are no a priori restric-
tions on what one might be justified in believing. 
But it follows from this that there are also no a 
priori restrictions on second-level knowledge or 
justified belief. It will also be a purely contingent 
question as to whether we have knowledge of 
knowledge or justified beliefs about justified 
beliefs. If we accept the externalist's metaepiste-
mological views, it may be true that not only do 
we know what we think we know, but we also 
know that we know these things. Similarly, we 
may not only have all the justified beliefs we think 
we have, but we might also be justified in believ-
ing that we have these justified beliefs. The pro-
cesses that yield beliefs about reliable processes 
may themselves be reliable. The beliefs about the 
truth of the subjunctives that Nozick uses to 
define first-level knowledge might themselves be 
embedded in true subjunctive conditionals that, 
given the metaepistemological view, are sufficient 
for second-level knowledge. My belief that my 
belief that P tracks the fact that P might track the 
fact that my belief that P tracks the fact that P. 
And there is no greater problem in principle when 
we move up levels. A reliable process might pro-
duce a belief that a reliable process produced the 
belief that my belief that P was produced by a reli-
able process. There might be a tracking relation 
tracking the tracking relation that tracks the fact 
that my belief that P tracks the fact that P. To be 
sure, the sentences describing the conditions for 
higher levels of metajustification might look 
more like tongue-twisters than metaepistemo-
logical analyses but, as ugly as they are, they are 
perfectly intelligible, and there is no a priori 
reason why the conditions required for higher-
level justified belief and knowledge might not be 
satisfied. 
It is also important to note that according to 
the externalist, in order to be justified in believing 
that I have a justified belief that P, I need not 
know anything about the details of the nomologi-
cal connections sufficient for knowledge. Consider 
again reliabilism. In order to be justified in believ-
ing that my belief that P is produced by a reliable 
process, I do not need to know the physiological 
details of the brain states linking stimuli and 
belief. I would need to believe that there is some 
process producing the belief and I would need to 
believe that the process is reliable, but I would not 
need to know very much about what that process 
is. As I indicated earlier, one can denote the pro-
cesses that produce beliefs using definite descrip-
tions that refer directly only to the kinds of 
premises and conclusions that are linked by the 
process. Of course, the definite descriptions might 
fail to denote, and the beliefs in propositions 
expressed using such definite descriptions will 
either be false or meaningless (depending on 
what one does with the truth value of statements 
containing definite descriptions that fail to 
denote). But the descriptions might be successful, 
and in any event the belief that there is a reliable 
process taking stimuli S and resulting in belief P 
might itself be produced by a reliable process. 
All this talk about what would in principle be 
possible given an externalist metaepistemology is 
fine, the skeptic might argue. But how exactly 
would one justify one's belief that, say, perception 
and memory are reliable processes? The rather 
startling and, I think, disconcerting answer is that 
if reliabilism is true, and if perception happens to 
be reliable, we could perceive various facts about 
our sense organs and the way in which they 
respond to the external world. Again, if reliabi-
lism is true, and if memory is reliable, we could 
use memory, in part, to justify our belief that 
memory is reliable. You want a solution to the 
problem of induction? There is potentially no dif-
ficulty for the externalist. If reliabilism is true, 
and if inductive inference is a conditionally relia-
ble belief-dependent process, then we can induc-
tively justify the reliability of inductive inference. 
Our inductive justification for the reliability of 
inductive inference might itself be reliable, and if 
it is, that will give us second-level justification 

EXTERNALISM AND SKEPTICISM 
403 
that our inductive conclusions are justified. 
A solution to the problem of induction will be 
important because with induction giving us 
inferentially justified conclusions, we can use 
inductive inference with the deliverances of per-
ception and memory to justify our belief that 
those processes are reliable. I can remember, for 
example, that I remembered putting my keys on 
the desk and I can remember the keys being on 
the desk. If memory is an unconditionally reliable 
belief-independent process, then both my belief 
that I remembered putting the keys on the desk 
and my belief that I put the keys on the desk will 
be justified. I now have a premise that can be used 
as part of an inductive justification for memory 
being reliable. The more occasions on which I can 
remember memory being reliable, the stronger 
my inductive argument will be for the general 
reliability of memory. 
The skeptic could not figure out how to get 
from sensations to the physical world. Assume 
that perception is itself a belief-independent, 
unconditionally reliable process. Assume also 
that whatever perception involves, its specifica-
tion involves reference to sensation, and assume 
further that we have "introspective" access to 
sensation. Introspective access might itself be 
another 
belief-independent, 
unconditionally 
reliable process. Given these suppositions, if reli-
abilism is true, then introspection can give us 
justified beliefs that we are perceiving, and per-
ception can give us justified beliefs that physical 
objects are present. The two reliable processes 
together can furnish a premise that, when com-
bined with others generated in a similar fashion, 
gives us inductive justification for believing that 
perception is reliable. So if both introspection 
and perception happen to be reliable, there seems 
to be no great obstacle to obtaining justified 
belief that they are reliable. Second-level justified 
belief is not much more difficult to get than first-
level justified belief. 
How successful inductive reasoning will be 
in answering second-level skeptical questions 
depends very much on how the externalist 
resolves some of the controversies discussed else-
where, specifically on how narrowly the relevant 
belief-forming processes are characterized. I have 
pointed out that as long as reliability is not defined 
in terms of actual frequencies, there is no concep-
tual difficulty in a reliabilist positing the existence 
of very narrowly defined, reliable belief-forming 
processes that have only a few, or even no, 
instances. Although there is no conceptual diffi-
culty in supposing that there are such processes, it 
obviously creates problems for any inductive jus-
tification for believing that they exist and are reli-
able. As should be clear by now, however, the 
unavailability of inductive justification in no way 
implies that there is not some other reliable belief-
forming process that will still yield second-level 
knowledge or justified belief. 
This reminds us, of course, of Quine's injunc-
tion to naturalize epistemology.9 Quine sug-
gested that we give ourselves full access to the 
deliverances of science when it comes to under-
standing how we have knowledge of the world 
around us. Contemporary externalists have 
simply given us more detailed metaepistemologi-
cal views which allow us to rationalize following 
the injuction to naturalize epistemology. If the 
mere reliability of a process, for example, is suffi-
cient to give us justified belief, then if that process 
is reliable we can use it to get justified belief wher-
ever and whenever we like. 
All of this will, of course, drive the skeptic 
crazy. You cannot use perception to justify the 
reliability of perception! You cannot use memory 
to justify the reliability of memory! You cannot 
use induction to justify the reliability of induc-
tion! Such attempts to respond to the skeptic's 
concerns involve blatant, indeed pathetic, circu-
larity. Frankly, this does seem right to me and I 
hope it seems right to you, but if it does, then I 
suggest that you have a powerful reason to con-
clude that externalism is false. I suggest that, iron-
ically, the very ease with which externalists can 
deal with the skeptical challenge at the next level 
betrays the ultimate implausibility of externalism 
as an attempt to explicate concepts that are of 
philosophical interest. If a philosopher starts won-
dering about the reliability of astrological infer-
ence, the philosopher will not allow the astrologer 
to read in the stars the reliability of astrology. 
Even if astrological inferences happen to be relia-
ble, the astrologer is missing the point of a philo-
sophical 
inquiry into 
the 
justifiability of 
astrological inference if the inquiry is answered 
using the techniques of astrology. The problem is 
perhaps most acute if one thinks about first-
person philosophical reflection about justifica-
tion. If I really am interested in knowing whether 

404 
RICHARD FUMERTON 
astrological inference is legitimate, if I have the 
kind of philosophical curiosity that leads me to 
raise this question in the first place, I will not for 
a moment suppose that further use of astrology 
might help me find the answer to my question. 
Similarly, if as a philosopher I start wondering 
whether perceptual beliefs are accurate reflections 
of the way the world really is, I would not dream 
of using perception to resolve my doubt. Even if 
there is some sense in which the reliable process 
of perception might yield justified beliefs about 
the reliability of perception, the use of perception 
could never satisfy a philosophical curiosity about 
the legitimacy of perceptual beliefs. When the 
philosopher wants an answer to the question of 
whether memory gives us justified beliefs about 
the past, that answer cannot possibly be provided 
by memory. 
Again, if one raises skeptical concerns under-
standing fundamental epistemic concepts as the 
externalist does, then there should be no objection 
to perceptual justifications of perception, induc-
tive justifications of induction, and reliance on 
memory to justify the use of memory. If one is 
understanding epistemic concepts as the reliabilist 
suggests, for example, then one can have no objec-
tion in principle to the use of a process to justify its 
use. After all, the whole point of inferential exter-
nalism is to deny the necessity of having access to 
the probabilistic relationship between premises 
and conclusion in order to have an inferentially 
justified belief. The mere reliability of the process 
is sufficient to generate justified belief in the con-
clusion of an argument. There is no conceptual 
basis for the reliabilist to get cold feet when episte-
mological questions are raised the next level up. 
Either reliability alone is sufficient or it is not. If it 
is, then it is sufficient whether one is talking about 
justification for believing P or justification for 
believing that one has a justified belief that P. 
It is both interesting and illuminating that 
even many access externalists seem to worry 
about the possibility of second-level justification 
in ways that they do not worry about the possibil-
ity of first -level justification. Alston explicitly 
rejects the idea that one needs access to the ade-
quacy of one's grounds for believing P in order to 
be justified in believing P. But in The Reliability of 
Sense Perception, he also seems to reject the idea 
that one can use a "track record" argument (an 
inductive argument of the sort I sketched above) 
to justify one's belief that perception and memory 
are reliable. Such arguments will inevitably pre-
suppose the adequacy of the very grounds whose 
adequacy is at issue. In doing so the argument will 
be viciously circular. 
But what exactly is Alston's complaint? To jus-
tify my belief that perception or memory is relia-
ble, I need only find a good argument whose 
premises I justifiably accept and whose premises 
support the conclusion that these ways of form-
ing beliefs are reliable. But if perception and 
memory are reliable and there is no requirement of 
access to adequacy of grounds in order for a belief 
to be justified, what is the problem? Why is it 
harder to justify my belief that my perceptual 
beliefs are justified than it is to have justified 
beliefs based on perception? 
Much of the time Alston seems to admit every-
thing I have just said, but the circular nature of 
the available arguments still clearly bothers him: 
if sense perception isreliable [Alston's emphasis], a 
track record argument will suffice to show that it 
is. Epistemic circularity does not in and of itself 
disqualify the argument. But even granting that 
point, the argument will not do its job unless we 
are justified in accepting its premises; and this is 
the case only if sense perception is in fact 
reliable. 
... But when we ask whether one or another 
source of belief is reliable, we are interested in 
discriminating those that can reasonably be 
trusted from those that cannot. Hence merely 
showing that if a given source is reliable it can be 
shown by its record to be reliable, does nothing 
to indicate that the source belongs with the sheep 
rather than with the goats. (p. 17) 
But again, as an externalist, what does Alston 
want? He obviously thinks that in some sense all 
we could ever really conclude is that we might 
have justification for thinking that we have justi-
fied beliefs based on perception. And the contex-
tual implication of this claim is that we also might 
not. But what "might" is this? Clearly, it is intended 
to refer to epistemic possibility. Let us say that P is 
epistemically possible for S when P is consistent 
with everything that S knows. Is it epistemically 
possible for us that perception is unreliable? Not 
if perception is reliable, because we will have 
inductive knowledge that it is not unreliable. But 
you are still just asserting a conditional, Alston 

EXTERNALISM AND SKEPTICISM 
405 
will complain. For all we know, it is possible that 
perception is unreliable. But this claim about 
epistemic possibility is precisely the claim that 
Alston, as an externalist, has no business making. 
Can we discriminate (his word) between reliable 
and unreliable fundamental sources of belief? As 
an externalist he has no reason to deny that we 
can and do discriminate between reliable and 
unreliable processes (using, of course, reliable 
processes). Alston clearly wants to assert (and 
assert justifiably) a conclusion about epistemic 
possibility. But the concept of epistemic possibil-
ity he wants to apply at the second level is not one 
that can be understood within the framework of 
the externalism he embraces. 
I agree, of course, with Alston's conclusion 
that one cannot use perception to justify one's 
belief that perception is reliable and memory to 
justify one's belief that memory is reliable. But 
that is only because the externalist is wrong in 
characterizing the concept of justification that 
even externalists are often interested in when they 
move up levels and start worrying about whether 
they can justify their belief that their beliefs are 
justified. The epistemic concept of discrimina-
tion that Alston invokes in the passage I quoted is 
precisely the concept that is at odds with his own 
attempt to defend an externalist understanding of 
epistemic concepts. 
The fundamental objection to externalism 
can be easily summarized. If we understand 
epistemic concepts as the externalists suggest we 
do, then there would be no objection in princi-
ple to using perception to justify reliance on 
perception, memory to justify reliance on 
memory, and induction to justify reliance on 
induction. But there is no philosophically inter-
esting concept of justification or knowledge that 
would allow us to use a kind of reasoning to jus-
tify the legitimacy of using that reasoning. 
Therefore, the externalist has failed to analyze a 
Notes 
For a detailed defense of this last view, see 
Fumerton, Metaphysical and Epistemological 
Problems of Perception (Lincoln,NE: University 
of Nebraska Press, 1985). 
2 I stress "qua philosopher" for there is a real 
danger that I will be misunderstood on this 
philosophically interesting concept of justifica-
tion or knowledge. 
The objection is by no means decisive. 
Obviously, many externalists will bite the bullet 
and happily embrace Quine's recommendation to 
naturalize epistemology. If the argument con-
vinces anyone, it will be those who were initially 
inclined to suppose that externalism will inevita-
bly encounter skepticism at the next level up. 
Maybe we have knowledge or justified belief as 
the externalist understands these concepts, some 
would argue, but we would never be in a position 
to know that we have knowledge or justified belief 
if the externalist is right. The only reason I can see 
for granting the first possibility but denying the 
second is that one is implicitly abandoning an 
externalist analysis of epistemic concepts as one 
moves to questions about knowledge or justifica-
tion at the next level. But if when one gets philo-
sophically"serious" one abandons the externalist's 
understanding of epistemic concepts, then, for 
philosophical purposes, one should not concede 
the externalist's understanding of epistemic con-
cepts at the first level. Once you concede that 
according to the externalist we might have knowl-
edge or justified belief about the past and the 
external world, you have also implicitly conceded 
that we might have knowledge that we have such 
knowledge, justified belief that we have such jus-
tified belief. And we might also have knowledge 
that we have knowledge that we have knowledge, 
and have justified beliefs that we have justified 
beliefs that we have justified beliefs. It seems to 
many of us that the externalist is simply missing 
the point of the philosophical inquiry when 
externalist analyses of epistemic concepts con-
tinue to be presupposed as the skeptical challenge 
is repeated at the metalevels. But the only expla-
nation for this is that the externalist analysis of 
epistemic concepts never was adequate to a philo-
sophical understanding of epistemic concepts. 
point. Later in this chapter I argue that exter-
nalism is perfectly compatible with philoso-
phers (and anyone else) having justified beliefs 
about whether or not they have justified beliefs. 
It will not, however, be their philosophical 
competence that yields such justification. 

406 
RICHARD FUMERTON 
3 As I shall argue shortly, this claim might be 
misleading. In one sense the detailed charac-
ter of belief-forming processes would be best 
discovered by neurophysiologists. But there is 
another sense in which anyone can form 
beliefs about such processes, even without any 
detailed knowledge of how the brain works. 
4 
See Wilfrid Sellars, Science Perception and 
Reality (London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 
1963), pp. 146-7. 
5 
Roderick M. Chisholm, Perceiving (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1957), p. 49. 
6 
Again the terminology and the distinction is 
introduced by Chisholm in ibid., pp. 50-3. 
7 It should go without saying that there may be 
causally necessary conditions for the existence 
of such non-inferential justification having to 
do with the capacity to form other beliefs. The 
dependency that concerns us, however, is logi-
cal. Justification is noninferential when no 
other belief is a constituent of the justification. 
8 
The allusion is, of course, to the problem dis-
cussed in Nelson Goodman, Fact, Fiction and 
Forecast (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1955), 
ch.3. 
9 
W. V. Quine, Ontological Relativity and Other 
Essays (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1969), ch. 3. 

CHAPTER 31 
Internalism Defended 
Richard Feldman 
and Earl Conee 
Internalism in epistemology has been getting bad 
press lately. Externalism is ascendant, partly 
because insurmountable problems for internal-
ism are supposed to have been identified. 1 We 
oppose this trend. In our view the purported 
problems pose no serious threat, and a convinc-
ing argument for internal ism is untouched by the 
recent criticism. 
Our main goal here is to refute objections to 
internalism. We begin by offering what we think 
is the best way to understand the distinction 
between internalism and externalism. We then 
present a new argument for internalism. This 
frees internalism from what we regard as suspect 
deontological underpinnings. Finally, we reply to 
what we take to be the most significant objections 
to internalism. 
I. What is Internalism? 
Internalism and externalism are views about which 
states, events, and conditions can contribute to 
epistemic justification - the sort of justification 
that, in sufficient strength, is a necessary condition 
for knowledge. Use of the terms "internalist" and 
"externalist" to classify theories of justification is a 
recent development, and the terms are routinely 
Originally published 
III American 
Philosophical 
Quarterly 38,1 (2001), pp. 1-18. 
applied to theories that predate their use. Thus, 
many proponents of theories of justification have 
not classified their views as internalist or external-
ist. The recent literature is, therefore, the best 
source of information about the nature of the dis-
tinction. Here are a few examples of how internal-
ism has been identified. Laurence BonJour writes: 
The most generally accepted account ... is that a 
theory of justification is internalist if and only if 
it requires that all of the factors needed for a 
belief to be epistemically justified for a given 
person be cognitively accessible to that person, 
internal to his cognitive perspective.2 
Robert Audi writes: 
Some examples suggest that justification is 
grounded entirely in what is internal to the mind, 
in a sense implying that it is accessible to intro-
spection or reflection by the subject-a view we 
might call internalism about justification.3 
Alvin Plantinga writes: 
The basic thrust of internalism in epistemology, 
therefore, is that the properties that confer warrant 
upon a belief are properties to which the believer 
has some special sort of epistemic access! 
John Pollock writes that: 
Internalism in epistemology is the view that only 
internal states of the cognizer can be relevant in 

408 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
determining which of the cognizer's beliefs are 
justified.5 
Finally, Ernest Sosa characterizes one version of 
internalism this way: 
Justification requires only really proper thought 
on the part of the subject: if a believer has 
obtained and sustains his belief through wholly 
appropriate thought, then the believer is justified 
in so believing - where the appropriateness of 
the thought is a matter purely internal to the 
mind of the subject, and not dependent on what 
lies beyond.6 
We find two distinct but closely related char-
acterizations of internalism in passages such as 
these. One characterization uses a notion of 
access. What we shall call "accessibilism" holds 
that the epistemic justification of a person's belief 
is determined by things to which the person has 
some special sort of access. BonJour calls this 
access a "suitable awareness."7 Audi says that the 
access is through "introspection or reflection." 
Others say that the access must be "direct."8 The 
quotations from Pollock and Sosa suggest a 
somewhat different account. They suggest that 
internal ism is the view that a person's beliefs are 
justified only by things that are internal to the 
person's mental life. We shall call this version of 
internalism "mentalism."9 A mentalist theory 
may assert that justification is determined 
entirely by occurrent mental factors, or by dispo-
sitional ones as well. As long as the things that are 
said to contribute to justification are in the 
person's mind, the view qualifies as a version of 
mentalism. 
We think it likely that philosophers have not 
separated mentalism from accessibilism because 
they have tacitly assumed that the extensions of 
the two do not differ in any significant way. They 
have assumed that the special kind of access on 
which many internalist theories rely can reach 
only mental items, and perhaps all mental items, 
or at least all that might be counted as playing a 
role in justification. 
We think that simplicity and clarity are best 
served by understanding internalism as mental-
ism. "Internalism" is a recent technical term. It has 
been introduced to refer to a variety of theories in 
epistemology that share some vaguely defined 
salient feature. Any definition of the term is to 
some extent stipulative. Mentalism codifies one 
standard way in which the word has been used. 
Somewhat more precisely, internalism as we 
characterize it is committed to the following two 
theses. The first asserts the strong supervenience 
of epistemic justification on the mental: 
S. 
The justificatory status of a person's dox-
astic attitudes strongly supervenes on the 
person's occurrent and dispositional mental 
states, events, and conditions. 
The second thesis spells out a principal implica-
tion of S: 
M. 
If any two possible individuals are exactly 
alike mentally, then they are exactly alike 
justificationally, e.g., the same beliefs are 
justified for them to the same extent. to 
(M) implies that mental duplicates in different 
possible worlds have the same attitudes justified 
for them. This cross world comparison follows 
from the strong supervenience condition in (S).ll 
Externalists characteristically hold that differ-
ences in justification can result from contingent 
non-mental differences, such as differing causal 
connections or reliability. Theories that appeal to 
such factors clearly deny (S) and (M). Thus, our 
way of spelling out the internalism/externalism 
distinction properly classifies characteristically 
externalist views. 
One advantage of our way of understanding 
the distinction between internalism and external-
ism in epistemology is that it closely parallels the 
counterpart distinction in the philosophy of 
mind. 12 In the philosophy of mind case, the main 
idea is to distinguish the view that the contents of 
attitudes depend entirely on things within a per-
son's own cognitive apparatus from the view that 
there are factors external to the person that help 
to determine attitudinal content. Mind internal-
ism is naturally rendered as a supervenience 
thesis. Roughly, the thesis is that a person's mental 
content supervenes on the person's "purely inter-
nal" states, events, and conditions. The relevant 
supervenience base cannot be specified as "the 
mental;' as we have done for epistemic internal-
ism, since a person's mental states, events, and 
conditions are trivially sufficient for the person's 

INTERNALISM DEFENDED 
409 
attitudes with their specific contents. But the root 
idea is the same. The mind internalist is trying to 
exclude such plainly external factors as the envi-
ronmental causal origins and the social milieu of 
the person's attitudes. Likewise, the epistemic 
internalist is principally opposed to the existence 
of any justification-determining role for plainly 
external factors such as the general accuracy of 
the mechanism that produces a given belief or the 
belief's environmental origin. Mentalism bears 
this out. 
What internalism in epistemology and philoso-
phy of mind have in common is that being in some 
condition that is of philosophical interest - being 
epistemically justified in certain attitudes, or 
having attitudes with certain contents - is settled 
by what goes on inside cognitive beings. The con-
dition of interest is in this sense an "internal" 
matter, thus justifying the use of this term. 
Mentalism obviously captures this feature of 
internalism. Accessibilism captures it only when 
conjoined with the further thesis that what is 
relevantly accessible is always internal to something, 
presumably the mind. 13 
Thus, one modest asset of mentalism is that it 
renders readily intelligible the nominal connec-
tion of epistemic internal ism to mind internal-
ism. A much stronger consideration in favor of 
mentalism is that it turns out to be entirely defen-
sible, as we shall try to show. 
II. 
A Defense of Internalism 
Our argument for internal ism focuses on pairs of 
examples that we take to be representative. Either 
in one member of the pair someone has a justi-
fied belief in a proposition while someone else's 
belief in that proposition is not justified, or one 
person's belief is better justified than the other's. 
We contend that these contrasts are best explained 
by supposing that internal differences make the 
epistemic difference. Here are the examples. 
Example 1) Bob and Ray are sitting in an air-
conditioned hotel lobby reading yesterday's news-
paper. Each has read that it will be very warm 
today and, on that basis, each believes that it is 
very warm today. Then Bob goes outside and feels 
the heat. They both continue to believe that it is 
very warm today. But at this point Bob's belief is 
better justified. 
Comment: Bob's justification for the belief 
was enhanced by his experience of feeling the 
heat, and thus undergoing a mental change which, 
so to speak, "internalized" the actual temperature. 
Ray had only the forecast to rely on. 
Example 2) A novice bird watcher and an 
expert are together looking for birds. They both 
get a good look at a bird in a nearby tree. (In 
order to avoid irrelevant complexities, assume 
that their visual presentations are exactly alike.) 
Upon seeing the bird, the expert immediately 
knows that it is a woodpecker. The expert has 
fully reasonable beliefs about what woodpeckers 
look like. The novice has no good reason to 
believe that it is a woodpecker and is not justified 
in believing that it is. 
Comment: The epistemic difference between 
novice and expert arises from something that dif-
ferentiates the two internally. The expert knows 
the look of a woodpecker. The novice would gain 
the same justification as the expert if the novice 
came to share the expert's internal condition con-
cerning the look of woodpeckers. 
Example 3) A logic Teaching Assistant and a 
beginning logic student are looking over a home-
work assignment. One question displays a sen-
tence that they both know to express a truth and 
asks whether certain other sentences are true as 
well. The TA can easily tell through simple reflec-
tion that some of the other sentences express 
logical consequences of the original sentence and 
thus she is justified in believing that they are true 
as well. The student is clueless. 
Comment: Again there is an internal differ-
ence between the two. The difference is that the 
TA has justification for her beliefs to the effect 
that certain propositions validly follow from the 
original one. She is expert enough to "see" that 
the conclusions follow without performing any 
computations. This case differs from example 2 in 
that here the mental difference concerns cogni-
zance of necessary truths of logic whereas in 
example 2 the expert was cognizant of contingent 
facts about visual characteristics of woodpeckers. 
But just as in example 2, relevant internal differ-
ences make the difference. The beginning student 
could come to share the epistemic state of the TA 
by coming to share the TA's familiarity with the 
logical consequence relation. 
Example 4) Initially, Smith has excellent rea-
sons to believe that Jones, who works in his office, 

410 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
owns a Ford. Smith deduces that someone in the 
office owns a Ford. The latter belief is true, but 
the former is false. Smith's reasons derive from 
Jones pretending to own a Ford. Someone else in 
the office, unknown to Smith, does own a Ford. 
The fact that Jones is merely simulating Ford 
ownership keeps Smith from knowing that some-
one in his office is a Ford owner, but it does not 
prevent Smith from being justified or diminish 
his justification. At a later time Smith gains ample 
reason to believe that Jones is pretending. At that 
point Smith is not justified in believing either 
that Jones owns a Ford or that someone in his 
office owns a Ford. 
Comment: Again the epistemic change occurs 
when a suitable external fact - this time, the fact 
that what Smith has seen is Jones pretending to 
own a Ford - is brought into Smith's mind. The 
difference between Smith being justified in believ-
ing that Jones owns a Ford (and that someone in 
the office owns a Ford) in the one case and not in 
the other is an internal change in Smith. 
Example 5) Hilary is a brain in a vat who has 
been abducted recently from a fully embodied life 
in an ordinary environment. He is being stimu-
lated so that it seems to him as though his normal 
life has continued. Hilary believes that he ate oat-
meal for breakfast yesterday. His memorial basis 
for his breakfast belief is artificial. It has been 
induced by his "envatters." Here are two versions 
of relevant details. 
Sa) Hilary's recollection is very faint and lack-
ing in detail. The meal seems incongruous to him 
in that it strikes him as a distasteful breakfast and 
he has no idea why he would have eaten it. 
Sb) Hilary's recollection seems to him to be 
an ordinary vivid memory of a typical breakfast 
for him. 
Comment: Although in both (Sa) and (Sb) 
Hilary's breakfast belief is false and its basis is 
abnormal, the belief is not well justified in (Sa) 
and it is well justified in (Sb). Hilary in (Sa) dif-
fers internally from Hilary in (Sb). His mental 
states in (Sb) include better evidence for the belief 
than he has in (Sa). 
In the first four of these examples the location 
of a relevant item of information - in the mind of 
a subject or outside of it - makes the epistemic 
difference. In the fifth example, a purely internal 
difference is decisive. It is reasonable to generalize 
from these examples to the conclusion that every 
variety of change that brings about or enhances 
justification either internalizes an external fact or 
makes a purely internal difference. It appears that 
there is no need to appeal to anything extramen-
tal to explain any justificatory difference. These 
considerations argue for the general internalist 
thesis that these epistemic differences have an 
entirely mental origin. 
In each case, it is natural to regard the mental 
difference as a difference in the evidence that the 
person has. Variations in the presence or strength 
of this evidence correspond to the differences in 
justification. Our favorite version of internalism, 
evidentialism, asserts that epistemic justification 
is entirely a matter of evidence. 14 However, our 
goal here is to defend internalism generally, and 
not just its evidentialist version. 
We have no proof that there is no exception to 
the pattern exhibited by our examples. The argu-
ment does not establish that internalism is true. It 
does support internalism. Further support will 
emerge from successful replies to objections. IS 
III. 
Objections and Replies 
The objections we shall consider fall into two 
broad and overlapping categories. One sensible 
general description of internalist theories is that 
they say belief B is justified just in case there is 
some combination of internal states - typically 
featuring an experience or another justified 
belief - that is suitably related to B. Objections of 
the first sort focus on internal states that are sup-
posed to justify beliefs, arguing that there are 
some justified beliefs for which there are no inter-
nal justifying states. Objections in the second 
group focus on the connections between candi-
date internal justifiers and the beliefs they are 
supposed to justify, arguing that internalists inev-
itably run into insurmountable difficulties when 
they attempt to say anything definite about the 
nature or status of the connections. 
While some internalist theories may have 
trouble dealing with some of these objections, 
there are several internalist approaches that can 
deal adequately with all of them. We concentrate 
primarily on two approaches, one that limits jus-
tifying states to currently conscious mental states 
and one that also includes as potential justifiers 
whatever is retained in memory. Since theories of 

INTERNALISM DEFENDED 
411 
each sort surmount all of the objections, the 
internalist approach is in no danger of a general 
refutation. 16 
A. 
Are there enough internal justifiers? 
Ai. Impulsional evidence 
Alvin Plantinga's objection focuses on evidential-
ist versions of internalism. 17 But the same sort of 
objection seems equally applicable against any 
prima facie plausible internalist view. Plantinga 
asserts that there are three views evidentialists can 
hold concerning what constitutes evidence, and 
he argues that each view renders evidential ism 
unsatisfactory. The three possibilities are: (1) evi-
dence consists only of other beliefs (all evidence is 
propositional); (2) evidence consists only of 
beliefs and sensory states (all evidence is proposi-
tional or sensory); (3) evidence can also include 
the sense of conviction or confidence that accom-
panies beliefs (all evidence is propositional, sen-
sory, or impulsionai). 
Plantinga uses knowledge of simple arithmeti-
cal facts to defend his objection. He asserts that 
we do not believe that 2 + 1 = 3 on the basis of 
propositional or sensory evidence. So, if eviden-
tialists adopt alternatives (1) or (2), their theory 
implies that this belief is not justified. Yet, of 
course, we do know that 2 + 1 = 3. Plantinga 
claims there is a "felt attractiveness" about the 
content of that belief, and he says 2 + 1 = 5 "feels 
wrong, weird, absurd, eminently rejectable."18 He 
calls the "felt attractiveness" an "impulse" and 
classifies it as "impulsional evidence." So internal-
ists might take Plantinga's third alternative and 
claim that this impulsional evidence is the inter-
nal factor that justifies simple mathematical 
beliefs. 
Plantinga argues that there is a problem with 
this account. He claims that necessarily all beliefs 
would have similar justification: "You have impul-
sional evidence for p just in virtue of believing p. 
... It isn't even possible that you believe p but lack 
impulsional evidence for it: how could it be that 
you believe p although it does not seem to you to 
be true?"19 He infers that on this view of evidence, 
the internalist justification condition for knowl-
edge that consists in having evidence is implied 
by the belief condition. If Plantinga is right about 
this, then evidentialists who take alternative (3) 
are stuck with the unacceptable conclusion that 
all actual beliefs are justified. The other initially 
plausible internalist views, for instance, those that 
appeal to epistemic responsibility as the key to a 
belief's justification, seem equally susceptible to 
this sort of objection. The "felt attractiveness" 
seems equally to render believing the epistemi-
cally responsible course of action to take. So, 
again, all beliefs would be justified. 
Even if Plantinga were right in claiming that 
the evidence for beliefs like 2 + 1 = 3 is impul-
sional, however, he would be mistaken in think-
ing that all beliefs have any similar sort of 
evidential support. There are several internal 
states to distinguish here. Perhaps we feel attracted 
to the proposition that 2 + 1 = 3 and we feel 
impelled to believe it. Not everything we believe 
feels attractive in this way or any other. For 
instance, some known propositions are believed 
reluctantly, on the basis of reasons, in spite of 
their seeming distinctly unattractive and implau-
sible. Some beliefs result from fears. They need 
not seem in any way attractive. Correspondingly, 
the denials of things we believe do not always feel 
"weird" or "absurd;' even if we think that they are 
false. There may be a sense of obviousness that 
accompanies belief in some propositions. This 
sense may contribute to their evidential support. 
But quite plainly not all believed propositions 
share that feature, or anything that resembles it. 
So it is not true that there is "impulsional evi-
dence" for every believed proposition. 
Furthermore, even if there were impulsional 
evidence for each belief, it would not follow that 
each belief satisfies any plausible evidential version 
of the justification condition for knowledge. The 
existence of a bit of supporting evidence is clearly 
not enough. A plausible evidential condition for 
knowledge requires something more, such as strong 
evidence on balance, or at least evidence unde-
feated by other evidence. An impulse to believe 
would not always qualify as strong evidence on bal-
ance, or undefeated evidence. Moreover, even if 
there were some impulsional evidence for all beliefs, 
it would not follow that all beliefs are justified to any 
degree. In some cases anything like impulsional evi-
dence is decisively outweighed by competing evidence. 
Therefore, the existence of impulsional evidence 
for all beliefs would not render redundant a plau-
sible evidential condition on knowledge and would 
not saddle internalists with the unacceptable result 
that all beliefs are justified. 

412 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
Even with regard to the simplest of mathematical 
beliefs, impulsional evidence of the sort Plantinga 
mentions is not our only evidence. We have evi-
dence about our success in dealing with simple 
arithmetical matters and knowledge of the accept-
ance our assertions about these matters enjoy. So, 
we have reason to think that our spontaneous 
judgments about simple mathematical matters are 
correct. Furthermore, we know that we learned 
these sorts of things as children and we have not 
had our more recent assertions about them con-
tradicted by others. If we had been making mis-
takes about these kinds of things, it is very likely 
that problems would have arisen and we would 
have been corrected. Finally, at least according to 
some plausible views, we have a kind of a priori 
insight that enables us to grasp simple mathemati-
cal propositions. This insight provides us with 
some evidence for the truth of simple mathemati-
cal truths. Much of this evidence is retained in 
memory; some of it is conscious whenever such 
propositions are consciously apprehended. There 
seems to be plenty of additional evidence, whether 
or not justifiers are restricted to conscious states. 
Indeed, the suggestion that the only evidential 
bases for simple arithmetical beliefs are impulses 
to believe is extremely implausible. 
Thus, Plantinga's objection makes no real 
trouble for evidentialism. Any other reasonable 
internalist view clearly has a similar response 
available to the counterpart objections. 
A2. 
Stored beliefs 
Alvin Goldman argues that internal states cannot 
account for the justification of stored beliefs.20 The 
problem is this. At any given moment almost noth-
ing of what we know is consciously considered. We 
know personal facts, facts that constitute common 
knowledge, facts in our areas of expertise, and so 
on. Since we know all these things, we believe 
them. These are stored beliefs, not occurrent 
beliefs. Since we know them, we are justified in 
believing them. But on what internalist basis can 
these beliefs be justified? As Goldman says, "No 
perceptual experience, no conscious memory 
event, and no premises consciously entertained at 
the selected moment will be justificationally suffi-
cient for such a belief:'21 Internalists are stuck with 
the unacceptable result that these beliefs are not 
justified, unless something internal that justifies 
them can be found. 
In formulating this objection Goldman 
assumes two propositions, either of which inter-
nalists can sensibly reject. On the one hand, he 
assumes that virtually all justified beliefs are 
stored beliefs. On the other hand, he assumes that 
internalists must find something conscious to 
serve as their justification. But internalists have 
good reason to reject this pair of propositions. 
One alternative is to argue that, in the most cen-
tral sense, few beliefs are justified, and typically 
the ones that are justified are occurrent. The 
second option is to argue that other non-occurrent 
internal states can contribute to the justification 
of non-occurrent beliefs. 
The first response relies on the idea that there 
are occurrent and dispositional senses of "justi-
fied;' just as there are occurrent and dispositional 
senses of "belief." In the most fundamental sense 
of "justified," a belief can be justified for a person 
only by the person's current evidence, and one's 
current evidence is all conscious. In this sense, 
non-occurrent beliefs are typically not justified. 
However, in the same way that there are proposi-
tions in which one has stored belief, one can have 
"stored justifications" for these beliefs. That is, 
one can have in memory reasons that justify the 
belief.22 Beliefs like this are disposition ally justi-
fiedY Thus, although stored beliefs are seldom 
justified in the most fundamental sense, they are 
often dispositionally justified. 
Goldman objects to a proposal along these 
lines that one of us made previously.24 He takes 
the general idea behind the proposal to be that a 
disposition to generate a conscious evidential 
state counts as a justifier. He then raises the fol-
lowing objection: 
Suppose a train passenger awakes from a nap but 
has not yet opened his eyes. Is he justified in 
believing propositions about the details of the 
neighboring landscape? Surely not. Yet he is dis-
posed, merely by opening his eyes, to generate 
conscious mental states that would occurrently 
justify such beliefs.25 
The idea behind the current proposal is not what 
Goldman criticizes here. It is not that any con-
scious mental state that one is disposed to be in 
counts as evidence. The idea is that some non-
occurrent states that one is already in, such as non-
occurrent memories of perceptual experiences, are 

INTERNALISM DEFENDED 
413 
stored evidence. Presently having this stored 
evidence justifies dispositionally some non-
occurrent beliefs that one already has. The train 
passenger does not have the evidence that he 
would have received were he to open his eyes. The 
dispositional state that he is in, his disposition to 
see the landscape by opening his eyes, is not stored 
evidence for propositions about the landscape. It 
is a potential to acquire evidence, and that is cru-
cially different. 
The second solution to the problem of stored 
beliefs does not invoke a distinction between 
occurrent 
and 
dispositional 
justification. 
Internalists can plausibly claim that if we have 
numerous ordinary justified beliefs that we are 
not consciously considering, then there is no 
reason to exclude from what justifies these beliefs 
further stored beliefs or other memories. These 
stored justifications are internalist by the stand-
ard of M and they are plausibly regarded as evi-
dence that the person has.26 
The description presented here of the second 
internalist approach leaves open important ques-
tions about which stored internal states can jus-
tify beliefs and what relation these stored states 
must have to a belief to justify it. No doubt these 
are difficult questions. Versions of internalism 
will differ concerning which stored states they 
count as justifiersY But there is no appearance 
that internalism lacks the resources to provide 
satisfactory answers to these questions. 
However, one might think that external factors 
having to do with the actual source of a memory 
belief can affect its justification. In fact, Goldman 
himself describes something similar to our second 
internalist approach and claims that it fails for just 
this reason. 2B We turn next to this objection. 
A3. 
Forgotten evidence 
Several authors have raised objections involving 
forgotten evidence.29 We will focus on an example 
Goldman provides: 
Last year Sally read about the health benefits of 
broccoli in a New York Times science-section 
story. She then justifiably formed a belief in 
broccoli's beneficial effects. She still retains this 
belief but no longer recalls her original evidential 
source (and has never encountered either cor-
roborating or undermining sources). Nonetheless, 
her broccoli belief is still justified, and, if true, 
qualifies as a case ofknowledge.30 
This example illustrates something that must be 
conceded to be common. We now know things 
for which we have forgotten our original evi-
dence. The problem for internalism arises most 
clearly if we assume that Sally's original evidence 
is irretrievably lost and not part of any stored jus-
tification that Sally might have. Let us assume 
that Sally is occurrently entertaining her justified 
belief about broccoli and that the facts about the 
original source of the belief are not part of any 
internalist justification of it. Externalists might 
argue that the contingent merits of the external 
source of this belief account for its justification. 
How can internalists explain why this belief is 
currently justified? 
One internalist answer to this question is that 
Sally's justification consists in conscious qualities 
of the recollection, such as its vivacity and her 
associated feeling of confidence. We see no fatal 
flaw in this response. It will be most attractive to 
internalists who hold that only what is conscious 
can justify a belief. We note that not all memory 
beliefs are justified according to this theory. Some 
memory beliefs are accompanied by a sense of 
uncertainty and a lack of confidence. Other 
memory beliefs are accompanied by a recogni-
tion of competing evidence. This competing evi-
dence can render vivacious memory beliefs 
unjustified. These are plausible results, so this 
restrictive version of internalism does have the 
resources to deal with forgotten evidence. 
Another defensible answer is available to inter-
nalists who think that not all evidence is con-
scious. If Sally is a normal contemporary adult, 
she is likely to have quite of a bit of readily retriev-
able evidence supporting her belief about broc-
coli. The healthfulness of vegetables is widely 
reported and widely discussed. Furthermore, her 
belief about broccoli is probably not undermined 
by any background beliefs she is likely to have. 
Finally, she, like most people, probably has sup-
porting evidence consisting in stored beliefs 
about the general reliability and accuracy of 
memory. She knows that she is generally right 
about this sort of thing. So Sally would have justi-
fication for her broccoli belief, though it is not 
her original evidence. If Sally lacks any support-
ing background information and also lacks any 

414 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
reason to trust her memory, then we doubt that 
her belief about broccoli really is justified. 
Goldman considers and rejects this second 
response on the basis of a new version of the 
example about Sally.3! The crucial feature of the 
revised example is that the belief originally came 
from a disreputable source. Sally has the same 
belief about broccoli and the same background 
beliefs about the reliability of her relevant capaci-
ties. But now it is part of the story that Sally 
obtained the belief about broccoli from an article 
in the National Inquirer, a source Goldman 
assumes to be unreliable. Goldman claims that 
Sally cannot be credited with justifiably believ-
ing that broccoli is healthful. Her past acquisi-
tion is still relevant, and decisive. At least it is 
relevant so long as we are considering the "epis-
temizing" sense of justification, in which justifi-
cation carries a true belief a good distance 
toward knowledge. Sally's belief in the healthful-
ness of broccoli is not justified in that sense, for 
surely she does not know that broccoli is health-
ful given that the National Inquirer was her sole 
source of information.32 
We agree that Sally does not know that broccoli 
is healthful under these conditions. We also agree 
that facts about her acquisition of the belief deter-
mine this result. However, it does not follow that 
Sally's belief is not justified. The "epistemizing" 
sense of justification is said by Goldman to be a 
sense according to which a belief that is justified 
is one that has been carried "a good distance 
toward knowledge." This fits with our initial char-
acterization of epistemic justification as the sort 
which is necessary for knowledge. But from the 
fact that Sally's belief falls short of knowledge, it 
does not follow that it has not been carried a good 
distance toward knowledge. Thus, an initial weak-
ness in this objection is that its concluding infer-
ence is invalid. 
A second fault is that the allegedly unjustified 
belief is actually a justified true belief that is not 
knowledge. It is a Gettier case. We endorse the fol-
lowing rule of thumb for classifying examples of 
true beliefs that are not knowledge: 
RT. 
If a true belief is accidentally correct, in 
spite of its being quite reasonably believed, 
then the example is a Gettier case. 
RT helps to show that the second version of the 
example about Sally is a Gettier case. Sally believes 
that broccoli is healthful. She believes (presuma-
bly justifiably) that she learned this from a reliable 
source. She is wrong about her source but, coinci-
dentally, right about broccoli. This fits exactly the 
pattern of Gettier cases, and RT classifies it as 
such. It is a quite reasonable belief on Sally's part 
which, in light of its unreliable source, is just acci-
dentally correct. It is a justified true belief that is 
not knowledge. 
Our view has an implication that may initially 
seem odd. When Sally first came to believe that 
broccoli is healthful, the belief was unjustified 
because Sally had reason to distrust her source. 
Yet we seem in effect to be saying that merely 
because she has forgotten about that bad source, 
the belief has become justified. We are not quite 
saying that. As we see it, when she forgets about 
the source she has lost a defeater of a justification 
for her broccoli belief. Assuming that Sally knows 
herself normally to be judicious about her sources, 
any belief she retains thereby has considerable 
internal support. Whatever beliefs she retains are 
justified by this, unless they are defeated. A belief 
is defeated in any case in which she has indica-
tions that impeach what it is reasonable for her to 
take to be the source of her belief. But when she 
no longer possesses any such indication, as in the 
present Sally case, the otherwise generally good 
credentials of her memorial beliefs support the 
belief and are undefeated. 
Some confirmation of our analysis comes 
from comparing the case as described to a case in 
which Sally does remember the unreliability of 
her source but retains the belief anyway. It is clear 
that there would be something far less reasonable 
about her belief in that situation. This suggests 
that forgetting the source does make the belief 
better justified. 
Further confirmation emerges from contrast-
ing the example with yet another variation. 
Suppose Sally believes both that broccoli is health-
ful and that peas are healthful. Suppose that her 
source for the former is still the National Inquirer 
but her source for the latter belief is the reliable 
New York Times. Again she has forgotten her 
sources, but she correctly and reasonably believes 
that she virtually always gets beliefs like these 
from trustworthy sources. Goldman's objection 
requires differentiating these two beliefs in an 

INTERNALISM DEFENDED 
415 
unacceptable way. It counts the former belief as 
unjustified, on the basis of the unreliability of its 
forgotten source. Yet from Sally's present perspec-
tive, the two propositions are on a par. It would be 
completely unreasonable for her to give up one 
belief but not the other. The best thing to say is that 
both are justified, but the broccoli belief does not 
count as knowledge because it is a Gettier case. 
We conclude that internalism does not have 
any difficulty finding adequate justification m 
cases of forgotten evidence.33 
B. 
Links and connections 
We turn next to two objections concerning the 
connections between perceptual experiences or 
other justified beliefs and the beliefs they are sup-
posed to justify. There are difficult questions 
about exactly how these states manage to justify 
the beliefs they support. These are problems of 
detail, and internalists have reasonable choices 
concerning how to work out the details. As we 
shall show by responding to several related objec-
tions, there are no unresolvable problems here. 
Bl. 
The need for higher order beliefs 
William Alston has argued that the considera-
tions that support internalism equally support 
the imposition of what he calls a "higher order 
requirement" on justification. The idea is that if 
the argument that leads to the conclusion that 
only internal factors can serve as justifiers is 
sound, then there is also a sound argument to the 
conclusion that for a belief to be justified the 
believer must be able to tell which factors justify 
the belief. Alston writes: 
Suppose that the sorts of things that can count as 
justifiers are always accessible to me, but that it is 
not accessible to me which items of these sorts 
count as justifications for which beliefs. I have 
access to the justifiers but not to their justifica-
tory efficacy. This will take away my ability to do 
what I am said to have an obligation to do just as 
surely as the lack of access to the justifiers them-
selves. To illustrate, let's suppose that experiences 
can function as justifiers, and that they are acces-
sible to us. I can always tell what sensory experi-
ences I am having at a given moment. Even so, if 
I am unable to tell what belief about the current 
physical environment is justified by a given sen-
sory experience, I am thereby unable to regulate 
my perceptual beliefs according as they possess 
or lack experiential justification.34 
Alston goes on to argue that this higher level 
requirement is one that few of us are able to sat-
isfy, and he rejects the requirement partly for this 
reason. Since the argument for the higher order 
requirement is clearly unsound, Alston concludes 
that the original argument for internalism is 
unsound as well. 
The argument that Alston is considering relies 
on a deontological conception of justification 
according to which justification is a matter of 
conforming to duties one must be in a position to 
know about. Internalists are free to reject that 
conception.35 They need not defend an identifica-
tion of justification with any sort of duty fulfill-
ment. They need not defend anything that makes 
having justified beliefs depend on having some 
way to know what justifies what. To cite our 
favorite instance, evidentialists hold that the pos-
session of the right evidence by itself secures the 
justification of the corresponding beliefs. The 
justification supervenes on the internal posses-
sion of appropriate evidence. Neither epistemic 
evaluations nor duties need enter in at all. 
It might be thought that evidentialism should 
be formulated in ways that require for justifica-
tion not only supporting evidence but also knowl-
edge of higher level principles about the 
justificatory efficacy of this evidence. Some inter-
nalists do seem to impose such a requirement.36 
We agree with Alston that any such theory is 
implausible, implying that few people have justi-
fied beliefs. However, we see no reason to think 
that evidentialists, or internalists generally, must 
endorse any higher order requirement. Having 
evidence can make for justification on its own. 
The appearance that justifying relations pose a 
problem for internalism arises partly from for-
mulating the debate between internalists and 
externalists as a debate over whether all "justifi-
ers" are internal. For example, Goldman takes to 
internalists to require that all "justifiers" must be 
in some suitable way accessible.37 This way of for-
mulating the issue is problematic. Suppose that a 
person who believes q on the basis of believing p 
is justified in believing q. We might then say, as 
a first approximation, that the justifiers for q are 
(i) the belief that p together with its justification, 
and (ii) the fact that p justifies q. The fact in (ii) is 

416 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
not itself an internal state, and so it might be 
thought that internalists are faced with the diffi-
cult task of finding some internal representation 
of this state to serve as a justifier.38 
There is a sense in which p's support for q is a 
"justifier." It is part of an explanation of the fact 
that the person's belief in q is justified. But this 
does not imply that internalists are committed to 
the view that there must be some internal repre-
sentation of this fact. It may be that a person's 
being in the state described by (i) is sufficient for 
the belief that q to be justified. If so, then all indi-
viduals mentally alike in that they share that state 
are justified in believing q. The fact in (ii) may 
help to account for the justification without the 
person making any mental use of that fact. 
General beliefs that relate evidence to a con-
clusion sometimes do make a justificatory differ-
ence. This occurs in some of the examples in our 
argument for internalism. But the sort of con-
necting information that the examples suggest to 
be necessary is nonepistemic information that 
justified believers typically have. The logic TA, for 
example, had justification for beliefs about impli-
cation relations that the student lacked. The 
expert bird watcher had justification for beliefs 
about what woodpeckers look like. This might 
take the form of various generalizations, e.g., any 
bird that looks like that is a woodpecker, any bird 
with that sort of bill is a woodpecker, etc.39 The 
student and the novice bird watcher lacked these 
justifications. It would be a mistake, however, to 
argue from these cases to any universal "higher 
order requirement;' especially to a higher order 
requirement to have epistemic information about 
what justifies what. 
A fully developed internalist theory must state 
whether linking information of the sort possessed 
by the logic TA and the expert bird watcher is 
required in the case of simpler connections. 
Suppose that a person has a justified belief in 
some proposition, p. Suppose further that q is an 
extremely simple and intuitively obvious (to us) 
logical consequence of p. For q to be justified for 
the person, must he have additional evidence, 
analogous the TA's additional evidence, for the 
proposition that q follows from p? 
One possible view is that the answer is "No': 
According to this view, there are certain elementary 
logical connections that are necessarily reflected in 
epistemic connections. The best candidates for this 
relation include cases where one proposition is a 
conjunction of which the other is a conjunct. The 
general idea is that some propositions, p and q, 
have a primitive or basic epistemic connection. If 
p and q have this connection, then, necessarily, if 
a person is justified in believing p, then the person 
is also justified in believing q. Perhaps it is part of 
understanding p that one grasps the connection 
between p and q. There is, then, no need for addi-
tional information about the link between p and 
q that a person who is justified in believing p 
might lack. By the test of the supervenience thesis 
asserted by S, internalists can accept this answer. 
Internalists can also hold that the answer to 
the question above is "Yes." In this case, there is 
something resembling a higher order require-
ment. However, it is not any implausible 
requirement to the effect that one have beliefs 
about justification. It is merely a requirement that 
one have evidence that there is a supporting con-
nection - for instance, the logical consequence 
relation - between what is ordinarily regarded as 
one's evidence and what it is evidence for. This 
evidence can come from direct insight or from 
any other source. This is evidence that people 
normally have in a variety normal situations:o 
A similar question arises concerning percep-
tual beliefs about the qualities of the objects one 
is perceiving. We said above that the expert bird 
watcher has background information about the 
look of woodpeckers that justified the belief that 
he saw a woodpecker. The novice lacked that 
information. The new question concerns simpler 
qualities such as redness. Must a person with a 
clear view of a red object have evidence about the 
look of red things in order to be justified in believ-
ing that there is something red before him or is 
the mere experience of redness (in the absence of 
defeaters) sufficient for justification? 
Again, it is not crucial to answer this question 
here. What is important for present purposes is 
that internalists have plausible options. If an 
experience of the phenomenal quality corre-
sponding to redness automatically justifies the 
belief (absent any defeater), then people inter-
nally alike in that they share the experience will 
be justified in believing the same external world 
proposition. If information about the look of red 
objects is required, then people internally alike in 
that they share this information as well as the 
experience of red will have the same external 

INTERNALISM DEFENDED 
417 
world proposition justified. There is a problem 
for internalism here only if there is some reason 
to think that internal differences are inadequate 
to account for some difference in justification. We 
see no threat of that. 
B2. 
Justification of introspective beliefs 
Ernest So sa raises a problem about how experi-
ences justify introspective beliefs: 
Some experiences in a certain sense "directly fit" 
some introspective beliefs. But not all experi-
ences directly fit the introspective beliefs that 
describe them correctly. Thus my belief that at 
the center of my visual field there lies a white tri-
angle against a black background would so fit the 
corresponding experience. But my belief that my 
visual field contains a 23-sided white figure 
against a black background would not fit that 
experience:! 
The question, then, is this: Why does having a 
suitable experience of a triangle justify the intro-
spective belief that one is having that experience, 
while our experience of a 23-sided figure does not 
justify for us the belief that we are having that 
experience? 
Internalism has resources to explain why the 
two experiences have different epistemic conse-
quences. We can best explain the relevant internal 
features through consideration of some hypo-
thetical person who does have the ability to iden-
tify 23-sided figures in his visual field and 
contrasting this person with ordinary people who 
lack that ability. According to one internalist 
option, someone who has the ability has an expe-
rience qualitatively different from the experiences 
of those who lack that ability. We will call the 
quality that underlies the ability "recognition." It 
can plausibly be held that recognition makes a 
justificatory difference. When our visual field 
contains a triangle that contrasts clearly with its 
surroundings, we recognize it as such. We do not 
similarly recognize 23-sided figures. The recogni-
tion is not a true belief linking the experience to a 
belief about its contentY It is, instead, a feature of 
experience itself. This experiential feature is what 
makes it true that triangles, optimally viewed, are 
generally seen as triangles, while 23-sided figures, 
even when optimally viewed, are not generally 
seen as being 23-sided. It is this aspect of the 
experience that provides evidential support for 
the corresponding belief. For most of us, this sort 
of feature is present when we experience clearly 
discriminable triangles and not present when we 
experience 23-sided figures. But a person who did 
have that remarkable ability would have an expe-
rience qualitatively unlike ours. 
Rather than appealing to any qualitative differ-
ence in experience, internalists can appeal instead 
to background information. Ordinary people have 
learned that the property of being a three-sided 
image is associated with a certain sort of visual 
appearance. They have not learned which sorts of 
visual appearances are associated with being a 23-
sided image. On this view, only by learning some 
such association could a person have justification 
from experience for making these sorts of classifi-
cations of images. Internalists can plausibly appeal 
to this sort of background information as the 
internal difference that accounts for differences in 
justification in these cases. As in the cases consid-
ered in section B1, the information here is not 
epistemic information about what justifies what, 
information people typically lack. It is simply 
information about properties that are associated 
with experiences of certain types. 
We conclude that Sosa is right to say that some 
but not all experiences lead to justification of intro-
spective beliefs that correctly describe them. But 
internal differences, either in the experiences them-
selves or in background information, are available 
to account for the difference between those that do 
lead to justification and those that do not. 
IV. 
Conclusion 
We have defended internalism not just to praise it, 
but to move the debate beyond it. We have tried to 
show that no genuine problem for this category of 
theories has been identified. We have seen that 
even versions of internalism that depend on only 
conscious elements have not been refuted. Various 
less restrictive views about what determines justi-
fication have emerged entirely unscathed as well. 
On any account of what internalism is, including 
the one we have offered here, internalism is noth-
ing more than a broad doctrine about the location 
of the determining factors for epistemic justifica-
tion. Having argued that internalist views stand in 
no jeopardy of being generally refuted, we recom-
mend that epistemological attention focus on 
more specific accounts that are more informative. 

418 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
Notes 
For a summary of the current state of epis-
temology that illustrates this sort of view, 
see Philip Kitcher, "The Naturalists Return;' 
The Philosophical Review, vol. 101 (1992), 
pp.53-114. 
2 Laurence BonJour"Externalism/In ternalism;' 
inA Companion to Epistemology,ed. Jonathan 
Dancy and Ernest Sosa (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1992), p. l32. 
3 Robert Audi, Epistemology: A Contemporary 
Introduction to the Theory of Knowledge (New 
York: Routledge, 1998), pp. 233-4. Emphasis 
in the original. 
4 Alvin Plantinga, Warrant: The Current 
Debate (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1993), p. 6. A very similar formulation 
appears in William Harper, "Paper Mache 
Problems in Epistemology: A Defense of 
Strong Internalism," Synthese, vol. 116 
(1998), pp. 27-49. See p. 28. 
5 John Pollock, "At the Interface of Philosophy 
and AI," The Blackwell Guide to Epistemology, 
ed. John Greco and Ernest Sosa (Malden, 
MA: Blackwell, 1999) pp. 383-414. The quo-
tation is from p. 394. 
6 Ernest Sosa, "Skepticism and the Internal! 
External Divide;' The Blackwell Guide to 
Epistemology, pp. 145-57. The quotation is from 
p. 147. Sosa goes on to describe another version 
of internalism that highlights accessibility. 
7 Laurence BonJour, "The Dialectic of Found-
ationalism and Coherentism," The Blackwell 
Guide to Epistemology, pp. 117-42. The quo-
tation is from p. 118. 
8 William Alston, "Internalism and Externalism 
in Epistemology;' reprinted in William Alston, 
Epistemic Justification: Essays in the Theory of 
Knowledge (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1989), pp. 185-222. See p. 186. 
9 Pollock does not make explicit that the inter-
nal states to which he refers must be mental 
states. However, it is reasonable to assume 
that this is what he has in mind. 
10 
It has become standard to distinguish between 
an existing belief (or other attitude) being jus-
tified and a person being justified in believing 
(or having another attitude toward) a proposi-
tion whether or not the person actually believes 
it (or has that attitude). We shall use phrases 
such as "justified belief" to refer to beliefs that 
are justified and we shall say of a person that 
he or she is justified in believing a proposition 
when we mean to say that the latter relation 
obtains. This distinction will not playa signifi-
cant role in the discussion that follows. As 
stated, (S) and (M) are about the justification 
of existing attitudes. They could easily be 
reformulated to state internalist constraints on 
the conditions under which a person is justi-
fied in having a particular attitude. 
11 
Whether (M) implies (S) depends upon 
details of the supervenience relation which 
we will not discuss here. 
12 
Not all philosophers who make this sort of 
comparison seek an account of internalism 
with this advantage. James Pryor takes inter-
nalism to be accessibilism, notes that inter-
nalism in the philosophy of mind is a 
supervenience thesis, and concludes that the 
two kinds of internalism are dissimilar. See 
"Highlights of Recent Epistemology;' The 
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science 
52,1 (March 2001), pp. 95-124. 
l3 
In "Skepticism and the Internal/External 
Divide," Sosa considers and rejects an argu-
ment that has mentalism as a premise and 
accessibilism as its conclusion. See pp. 146-8. 
14 
See Richard Feldman and Earl Conee, 
"Evidentialism;' Philosophical Studies vol. 48 
(1985), pp. 15-34. 
15 
In describing and assessing the beliefs in the 
examples of Section II, we did not say any-
thing about what the individuals had a duty 
or obligation to believe, what they were per-
mitted to believe, or what they might be 
praised or blamed for believing. There might 
be deontological truths of these sorts. We 
reject arguments for internalism based on 
the idea that epistemic concepts are to be 
analyzed in these deontological terms. 
16 
Other versions of internalism could be con-
sidered. For example, some internalists hold 
that a belief is justified only if the believer is 
able to formulate good reasons for it. We will 
not address the merits of these versions of 
internalism here. We note that a theory 
requiring for justified belief that the believer 
not only be able to formulate good reasons 

INTERNALISM DEFENDED 
419 
but also be able to articulate those reasons or 
persuade others is not an internalist theory 
by our standards. 
17 
"Respondeo Ad Feldman" in Warrant in 
Contemporary Epistemology: Essays in Honor 
of Plantinga's Theory of Knowledge, ed. Jon 
Kvanvig (London: Rowman and Littlefield, 
1996), pp. 357-61. 
18 
"Respondeo;' p. 259. 
19 
"Respondeo;' p. 360. 
20 
Alvin Goldman, "Internalism Exposed;' 
Journal of Philosophy, vol. 96, no. 6 (1999), 
p.278. 
21 
Ibid. 
22 
It may be that if one were to become conscious 
of the belief, one would also bring to mind 
some stored justification that one has for it. 
Thus, if these stored beliefs were occurrent, 
they would be justified in the fundamental 
sense. Whether this justification would happen 
to accompany an occurrent consideration of a 
belief does not seem crucial. What may be cru-
cial to having a stored epistemic justification 
for a stored belief is being capable of recalling 
a conscious justification, or at least being capa-
ble of recalling the key confirming evidence in 
such a justification. 
23 
Though it is possible for a stored belief to be 
justified by one's current evidence, in the 
usual case, one's evidence for a stored belief 
will also be stored. It is also possible for an 
occurrent belief to have only dispositional 
justification. 
24 
Richard Feldman, "Having Evidence;' in 
Philosophical Analysis, ed. David Austin 
(Dordrecht, the Netherlands: Kluwer, 1988), 
pp.83-104. 
25 
Goldman, "Internalism Exposed;' pp. 278-9. 
26 It is, in the typical case, an internal state that 
is accessible to the believer, so accessibilist 
versions of internalism can accept this 
approach as well. We suspect that many 
internalists will find the second sort of 
approach to the problem of stored beliefs 
more appealing. By limiting evidence to 
current conscious states, the former view 
limits severely the number of justified beliefs 
a person has at any time. We do not regard 
this limitation as clearly unsatisfactory, 
given the availability of a dispositional 
notion of justification to account for the 
favorable epistemic status of many stored 
beliefs. We shall continue to present both 
approaches in the remainder of this paper. 
27 
For example, they can differ with respect to 
how readily accessible those states must be. 
lt is also possible to hold that the degree of 
justification provided by a state is partly 
determined by how readily accessible it is. 
28 
Goldman, "Internalism Exposed," p. 279. 
29 
See, for example, Sosa, "Skepticism and the 
Internal/External Divide;' pp. 145-57. The 
relevant example appears on pp. 152f. 
Goldman cites Gilbert Harman, Thomas 
Senor, and Robert Audi as having raised simi-
lar objections. See Gilbert Harman, Change in 
View (Cambridge: MIT Press, 1986); Thomas 
Senor, "Internalist Foundationalism and the 
Justification of Memory Belief," Synthese, vol. 
94 (1993), pp. 453-76; and Robert Audi, 
"Memorial Justification;' Philosophical Topics, 
vol. 23 (1995), pp. 31--45. 
30 
Goldman, "Internalism Exposed;' p. 281. 
31 
The new example resembles one that Ernest 
So sa presents involving a generally reasona-
ble person who believes a conclusion as a 
result of a now-forgotten "tissue of fallacies:' 
Sosa thinks this origin renders the belief 
unjustified, no matter what the person now 
thinks about the source of her belief or her 
general capacities. See Sosa, "Skepticism and 
the Internal/External Divide;' p. 153. 
32 
Goldman, "Internalism Exposed;' pp. 280-1. 
33 
A third problem Goldman poses for inter-
nalism is the problem of concurrent retrieval. 
lt purports to affect only those internalist 
views that are versions of holistic coherent-
ism. A person has a large set of stored beliefs 
at any time. Holistic coherentism says that a 
belief is justified only if it coheres with one's 
whole corpus of beliefs, including stored 
beliefs. This leads to a problem for a defender 
of holistic coherentism who also accepts the 
deontologically defended claim that one can 
always find out whether a belief is justified. 
Ascertaining whether one belief coheres with 
the rest by bringing them all consciously to 
mind at once is well beyond the capacities of 
any person. 
This is a problem for holistic coherentism 
only when it is conjoined with the deonto-
logically defended thesis just mentioned. 

420 
RICHARD FELDMAN AND EARL CONEE 
A holistic coherentist need not accept a 
de ontological conception of epistemic justi-
fication, and can simply deny that epistemic 
status is something that one always can find 
out. The holist can also respond to Goldman's 
objection by denying that finding out epis-
temic status so as to comply with any rele-
vant duty requires the simultaneous retrieval 
of all that the status depends on. It might be 
held to be sufficient for complying with a 
duty to find out whether belief B1 coheres 
with one's other beliefs simply to form a true 
belief, B2, that B1 coheres with the others, as 
long as B2 itself coheres with the rest of one's 
beliefs. 
In any case, problems peculiar to holistic 
coherentism cast no doubt on internalism 
generally. There are, however, related ques-
tions concerning the accessibility of stored 
beliefs that might be raised for other inter-
nalist theories, including evidential ism. 
Here is one of them. Suppose that someone 
has a conscious belief that is supported by 
some currently conscious evidence. Suppose 
further that the person also has a large 
number of stored beliefs whose conjunction 
implies the falsity of the conscious belief. 
This conjunction is too complex for the 
person to entertain. Under these circum-
stances, what is the epistemic status of the 
current belief? 
Internalists have ample resources to deal 
with cases like this, whatever the correct 
answer to this question is. If beliefs like 
these are justified, internalists can hold 
that only currently accessed evidence is rel-
evant to the epistemic status of occurrently 
believed propositions. So, potentially de-
feating combinations of beliefs that are not 
accessed would not undermine justification. 
If beliefs like these are not justified, inter-
nalists can say instead that all stored beliefs 
are among the mental items relevant to jus-
tification and that any conjunction of them 
can serve as a defeater of the justification of 
current beliefs, regardless of whether the 
individual can consciously consider the 
conjunction. It is also consistent with M to 
say that justification supervenes on a 
restricted class of stored mental items. 
Perhaps items that are too complex to be 
retrieved are excluded. In that case, an 
unbelievably complex conjunction of stored 
beliefs would not be a defeater. Perhaps only 
combinations of stored beliefs whose nega-
tive relevance to the belief in question has 
been or could readily be noticed or appreci-
ated count as defeaters. Perhaps, as accessi-
bilists hold, only mental items that are in 
one way or another accessible can be defeat-
ers. The same variety of claims can be made 
about what constitutes supporting evidence 
that one has. 
Some of these approaches seem to us to 
be more promising than others. For present 
purposes it is not necessary to defend any 
particular view. We are arguing here for the 
explanatory power and credibility of inter-
nalist theorists. The devil may lurk in the 
details, for all that we have shown. But in the 
absence of any good reason to think that 
internalists must make ad hoc or indefensi-
ble claims about stored beliefs, there is no 
reason to think that there is a general prob-
lem here. 
34 
Alston, "Internalism and Externalism III 
Epistemology," p. 22l. 
35 
Feldman and Conee, "Evidentialism." 
36 
See, for example, Laurence BonJour, "Exter-
nalist Theories of Empirical Knowledge;' 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, vol. 5 (1980), 
p. 55. In "Epistemology c. 1988-2000;' James 
Pryor calls the view that endorses the higher 
order requirement "Inferential Internalism" 
and identifies several of its proponents. 
37 
Goldman, "Internalism Exposed," Section I. 
38 
For instance, Michael Bergmann, "A Dilemma 
for Internalism," APA, Central Division, 
2000. 
39 
Internalists who hold that all evidence is 
conscious can point to evidence such as the 
expert's feeling of confidence and sense of 
familiarity while making the judgment. 
40 
There is a non-evidentialist view that some 
internalists find attractive. The idea is that a 
mental fact about people is that they have 
fundamental inferential abilities. Perhaps 
this view could also be described in terms of 
the ability to see connections. But this view 
denies that this ability is, or leads to, differ-
ences in evidence. This is a mental difference, 
but not an evidential difference. 

INTERNALISM DEFENDED 
421 
These two views can also be applied to 
the original example about the logic student. 
We said the TA can see that the original sen-
tence has consequences that the student can't 
see. This is what accounts for the differences 
in what's justified for them. As we described 
the case, we interpreted these facts in an evi-
dentialist way, taking the difference in what 
they can see as an evidential difference. 
The non-evidentialist internalist alterna-
tive agrees that there is a mental difference 
between the two, but it characterizes that 
difference in terms of an inferential skill 
rather a difference in evidence. It is not 
essential to a defense of internalism to select 
between these alternatives. 
41 
Ernest Sosa, "Beyond Skepticism, to the Best 
of our Knowledge:' Mind, vol. 97 (1988), pp. 
153-88. The quotation is from p. 17l. 
42 
The term "recognize" suggests that the classi-
fication is accurate. There is no need to insist 
on an infallible capacity here. If there is some 
such phenomenon as seemingly recognizing a 
conscious quality while misclassifying it, then 
it is a seeming recognition which supplies the 
conscious evidence for the classification. 


PART VI 
Virtue Epistemology 
and the Value of Knowledge 


Introduction 
The novelty of reliabilism is not simply that it makes the justifier of a belief some 
feature we need not have internal epistemic access to. Reliabilism also seems to imply 
that the epistemic value of a justified belief - if justification is a form of value - derives 
from the epistemic value of the faculty that produced it. Of course, the reliabilist thinks 
that the relevant value-conferring feature of such a faculty is its reliability. But one 
might want to deny that reliability is the basis of epistemic value while agreeing with 
the reliabilist that epistemic value is properly located first in the faculty of the believer, or 
perhaps in the believer herself, and only secondarily in the belief To use a well-known 
example from Linda Zagzebski, a delicious espresso produced by a well-functioning 
espresso machine is no better than an equally delicious espresso produced (by luck) 
from a poor espresso machine. 
Virtue epistemology and proper functionalism may be fairly regarded as attempts to 
improve onreliabilism. Both require, for knowledge, that one's belief be produced by a 
reliable process, but both deny this is sufficient. Virtue theory requires, at least, that the 
belief-producing process also be an ability, a stable disposition to acquire or maintain 
beliefs, and proper functionalism requires that it be a faculty functioning the way it was 
designed to function. These restrictive modifications of reliabilism are aimed in part at 
solving some of the well-known problems facing reliabilism, including what John 
Greco calls the problem of epistemic responsibility, viz., the problem posed by reliably 
produced beliefs that fall short of knowledge (justification) owing to the epistemic 
irresponsibility of the believer, and the new evil demon problem, viz., the problem of 
accounting for the justification possessed by victims of the evil demon, subjects whose 
faculties are unreliable. 
In his selection, Alvin Plantinga outlines proper functionalism. Proper functional-
ism is a theory of warrant, viz., of that feature that turns true belief into knowledge. 
The account Plantinga provides notably works with the normative notion of a facul-
ty's functioning properly, and thus is a departure from standard externalist accounts. To 
function properly a faculty must function as it ought to function, that is, as it is 
designed to function. Our cognitive design plan, importantly, has a segment devoted 

426 
INTRODUCTION 
to the production of true beliefs. A belief is warranted, then, only if the faculty that 
produced it was aiming at truth. But this is not enough. The faculty must be reliable, 
perhaps not tout court, but in the kinds of environment for which the subject's facul-
ties were designed. A human clairvoyant in an imagined situation in which clairvoy-
ance is reliable employs a belief-forming process that hasn't been given a role in the 
design plan, and so his clairvoyant beliefs, however reliable, lack warrant. Although 
victims of an evil demon lack full-blown warrant on Plantinga's account, one can see 
that there is room for assigning to their beliefs some degree of positive epistemic status, 
since their faculties are functioning properly and would reliably produce true beliefs 
in the kinds of environments for which they were designed. 
Plantinga makes the value of a cognitive faculty a matter of its operating in accord-
ance with its design plan. Virtue epistemology makes the value of a cognitive faculty a 
matter of whether it is an epistemic virtue. But what is an epistemic virtue? Linda 
Zagzebski claims that a virtue, whether moral or intellectual, is an excellence, acquired 
through time and work, that contains both a motivational element and a success 
element. Correlated with every virtue is a motivation directed to some goal, and no 
ability can be a virtue unless its possessor succeeds in achieving that goal. The goal 
unifying the intellectual virtues is the understanding of reality. Reliable success at 
achieving this goal, moreover, isn't limited to the overall production of more truths 
than falsehoods. A virtue, such as originality or intellectual courage, may be reliable in 
the further sense of helping to advance understanding in a domain of inquiry. As long 
as such traits, working together with other virtues, operate to correct errors produced 
along the way, they serve the ultimate epistemic goal of understanding the world. 
John Greco argues that in order to solve the problems facing virtue theories, inter-
nalist elements must be introduced. It is not enough to say that the victims of the evil 
demon are justified because their faculties would be reliable in our environment. Even 
supposing our faculties are unreliable, many of the beliefs we form using them are jus-
tified. Facts about the success of our faculties are simply irrelevant. Nor can the prob-
lem of epistemic responsibility be solved by adding the requirement of a perspective on 
one's ways of believing. To achieve the right results, perspectives must be specified in a 
complicated way that the ordinary knower cannot be expected to understand. 
The problems can be solved, however, if we introduce the internalist notion of a 
subject's conformance to a norm she countenances. To countenance a norm is to be 
guided by it in conscientious reasoning. To be in conformance with norms one coun-
tenances is not merely to believe in accordance with them, but to believe because 
one countenances them. Epistemically irresponsible believers either flout norms they 
countenance or fail to be in conformance with them. Greco gives the example of a 
person, Mary, who unwittingly possesses a special non-experiential device for detect-
ing tigers. Mary's belief formed using this device cannot count as knowledge, since in 
forming the belief, she has flouted norms she countenances, for among the norms she 
countenances are norms that forbid forming beliefs about the presence of tigers in the 
absence of any evidence to that effect. In connection with the victims of the evil demon, 
Greco argues that, although they lack warrant, they have justification, for their beliefs 
are in conformance with norms they countenance. This, moreover, is a feature they 
possess independently of facts about the reliability of our faculties. 
Duncan Pritchard asks whether virtue theory enables us to explain how knowledge 
excludes certain sorts of luck. Some kinds of luck are incompatible with knowing. 

PART VI 
If I randomly guess that the president is eating a ham sandwich, then this won't count 
as a case of knowing that the president is eating a ham sandwich. I was just lucky. 
Pritchard distinguishes two importantly different sorts of luck at issue in contempo-
rary theories of knowledge. Veri tic epistemic luck occurs when a state of affairs obtains 
by a fluke (although it may seem quite probable given one's evidence). It is this sort of 
luck present in Gettier cases. Reflective epistemic luck occurs when the truth of a state 
of affairs is "accidental" or a fluke given one's available evidence. Despite the contem-
porary popularity of virtue-theoretic analyses of knowledge, Pritchard argues that 
virtue theories are not well-suited to explain how knowledge excludes either veritic or 
reflective luck. We do better with the safety-based accounts (see the Sosa paper 
included in Part IV). 
Virtue theorists take a particular stance on the source of the value of a justified 
belief (or instance of knowledge). This value derives from the value of the relevant 
faculty or person. Virtue theorists differ on whether the latter themselves have their 
value derivatively, perhaps by connection to some ultimate epistemic value, e.g., 
truth. The remaining selections in this section explore questions of epistemic value 
generally. In what sense, if any, is true belief valuable? Why should virtuously held 
true belief be more valuable than mere true belief? Does knowledge have its own 
distinctive value? 
As intellectual beings we are said to want the truth, but what does this mean? Ernest 
Sosa offers us a taxonomy of distinct epistemic values which may all be understood 
through their various relations to truth. Since we prefer truth to falsehood even if it 
comes by happenstance, there is the value of bare true believing. There is the praxical, 
extrinsic value of true believing. There is the eudaemonist, intrinsic value of true believ-
ing - the value of the eudaemonist virtue epistemologist - where what matters most is 
the agent grasping the truth in a manner attributable to her intellectual virtues acting 
of the agent's belief in concert conducted by reason (the truth of the agent's belief is 
thus attributable to the agent). Finally, there is the performance value of good cognitive 
performance, even when poor positioning robs it of its reward. Because a state of know-
ing is one where the truth is grasped in a manner attributable to an epistemic agent's 
skills and virtues, Sosa argues that knowledge is more valuable than true belief. And in 
the case of the evil demon, the performance value ensures that the state of believing is 
still valued, although the beliefs held may not be true. 
But is knowledge really more valuable than other cognitive states such as mere true 
belief or justified true belief? The question was asked long ago by Socrates (as 
portrayed in the Meno), and Jonathan Kvanvig presses the point in his selection. An 
answer to the question is important because traditional epistemology focuses on 
questions about the nature, extent, and importance of knowledge as opposed to other 
candidate epistemic states like true belief or understanding. But once we realize that 
knowledge does not imply infallibility, certainty, permanence, etc. (things that are 
valuable), it becomes difficult to see why knowledge is so valuable. Kvanvig considers 
a number of different cognitive goals that we might have as believers and argues that 
for any given goal, knowledge is no better (and sometimes worse) than some other 
epistemic state such as justified true belief for securing that goal. And if knowledge is 
not uniquely positioned to satisfy our cognitive goals, then it's unreasonable for epis-
temologists to focus on knowledge to the exclusion of intellectual virtues such as 
understanding and wisdom. 
427 

428 
INTRODUCTION 
Many analytic epistemologists today would agree that truth is the fundamental 
epistemic value. But Catherine Elgin argues that even the best theories are not true (be 
they scientific, philosophical, or from some other discipline). Science relies on laws, 
models, idealizations and approximations which diverge from the truth - but whose 
divergences are often necessary for the understanding science delivers. Because we take 
science to be cognitively reputable, an adequate theory of epistemology should be able 
to explain what makes good science cognitively good. Rejecting veritism, or truth-cen-
tered epistemology, Elgin argues that rather than requiring beliefs to be justified and 
true, epistemic acceptability should turn on whether beliefs are true enough. Because 
different statements in a theory play different roles, whether a given sentence in the 
theory is true is not the only epistemically relevant factor. Some statements may be fic-
tions that shed light on the phenomena they concern and thus contribute to our 
understanding. Assessing a theory requires determining whether the component sen-
tences are true enough given the parts they are assigned to play. 
Further Reading 
Axtell, Guy, "Recent Work on Virtue Epistemology;' 
American Philosophical Quarterly 34 (1997), 
pp.I-26. 
BonJour, Laurence and Ernest Sosa, Epistemic 
Justification: Internalism vs. Externalism, Found-
ations vs. Virtues (Oxford: Blackwell, 2003). 
Code, Lorraine, Epistemic Responsibility (Hanover, 
NH: University Press of New England, 1987). 
Fairweather, Abrol and Linda Zagzebski, Virtue 
Epistemology: Essays on Epistemic Virtue and 
Responsibility (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2004). 
Greco, John, "Internalism and Epistemically 
Responsible Belief;' Synthese 85 (1990), pp. 
245-77. 
--, "Virtues and Vices of Virtue Epistemology," 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy 23 (1993), pp. 
413-32. 
--, "Knowledge As Credit for True Belief;' in 
Michael 
DePaul 
(ed.), 
Intellectual 
Virtue: 
Perspectives from Ethics and Epistemology (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2004), pp. 111-34. 
Kawall, 
Jason, "Virtue 
Theory and 
Ideal 
Observers," Philosophical Studies 109 (2002), 
pp. 197-222. 
Kvanvig, Jonathan L., The Intellectual Virtues 
and the Life of the Mind (Lanham, MD: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 1992). 
--, The Value of Knowledge and the Pursuit of 
Understanding 
(Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University Press, 2003). 
Kvanvig, Jonathan L. (ed.), Warrant in Contem-
porary Epistemology: Essays in Honor of 
Plantinga's Theory of Knowledge (Lanham, 
MD: Rowman and Littlefield, 1996). 
Montmarquet, James A., Epistemic Virtue and 
Doxastic 
Responsibility 
(Lanham, 
MD: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 1993). 
Plantinga, Alvin, Warrant and Proper Function 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). 
Pritchard, Duncan, Epistemic Luck (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2005). 
Pritchard, Duncan and Michael Brady (eds), 
Moral andEpistemic Virtues (Oxford: Blackwell, 
2004). 
Reed, 
Baron, "Epistemic Agency and the 
Intellectual Virtues," The Southern Journal of 
Philosophy 39 (2001), pp. 507-26. 
Riggs, Wayne, "Beyond Truth and Falsehood: The 
Real Value of Knowing that P;' Philosophical 
Studies 107, 1,2002, pp. 87-108. 
Sosa, Ernest, Knowledge in Perspective: Selected 
Essays in Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991). 
Steup, Matthias (ed.), Knowledge, Truth, and 
Duty: 
Essays 
on 
Epistemic 
Justification, 
Responsibility, and Virtue (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2004). 
Zagzebski, Linda Trinkhaus, Virtues of the Mind: 
An Inquiry into the Nature of Virtue and the 
Ethical Foundations of Knowledge (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996). 

CHAPTER 32 
Warrant: A First Approximation 
Alvin Plantinga 
One thought emerging from our canvas of 
contemporary accounts of warrant in Warrant: 
The Current Debate is that there are many differ-
ent valuable epistemic states of affairs - epistemic 
values, we might call them, giving that oft-abused 
word a decent sense; and different conceptions of 
warrant appeal to different epistemic values. For 
example, there is doing one's subjective epistemic 
duty, doing one's objective epistemic duty, and 
doing both; these figure prominently in classical 
internalism. There is having a set of beliefs that is 
coherent to one or another degree; there is also 
the disposition to have coherent beliefs; these 
things are what the coherentist is quite naturally 
enthusiastic about. There is having adequate evi-
dence or good reasons for your beliefs; this goes 
with the evidentialism that has been a dominant 
feature of the epistemological tradition and is 
presently represented in different ways by 
Feldman and Conee,l and William Alston. 2 There 
is having a reliable set of faculties or belief-
producing mechanisms, which of course goes 
with reliabilism of various sorts. There is also 
knowing that you have a reliable set of epistemic 
faculties. There is also Foley rationality; and there 
are the several varieties of Foley rationality, such 
as believing what you think would contribute to 
Originally published in A. Piantinga, Warrant and 
Proper Function (Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1993), pp. 3-20. 
your attammg your epistemic goal, believing 
what on reflection you would think would cone 
tribute to your attaining that goal, believing what 
really would contribute to your doing so, and so 
on. There is having a set of beliefs that contrib-
utes to your nonepistemic goals such as happi-
ness, or living the good life, or living the moral 
life. There is having the right goals; there is aiming 
to have the right goals; and there is knowing that 
you have the right goals. There is believing what is 
true, and there is having true beliefs on important 
topics; there is accepting a given belief to the right 
degree. There is knowing that you know; there is 
being able to prove to the skeptic that you know. 
And there are a thousand other epistemic virtues. 
I Proper Function 
Now the notion of warrant is clearly connected 
with all of these epistemic values and more 
besides. (The problem here is to come up with a 
conception of warrant that gives to each its due 
and describes how each is connected with the 
others and with warrant.) As a first step toward 
developing a satisfying account of warrant, I 
should like to call attention to still another epis-
temic value: having epistemic faculties that func-
tion properly. The first thing to see, I think, is that 
this notion of proper function is the rock on which 
the canvassed accounts of warrant founder. 
Cognitive malfunction has been a sort of recurring 

430 
ALVIN PLANTINGA 
theme. Chisholm's dutiful epistemic agent who, 
whenever he is appeared to redly, always believes 
that nothing is appearing redly to him, Pollock's 
cognizer who by virtue of malfunction has the 
wrong epistemic norms, the Coherent but 
Inflexible Climber, Dretske's epistemic agent 
whose belief that Spot emits ultraviolet radia-
tion has been caused by the fact that Spot does 
indeed emit such radiation, Goldman's victim of 
the epistemically serendipitous lesion: all are 
such that their beliefs lack warrant for them. In 
each case the reason, I suggest, is cognitive mal-
function, failure of the relevant cognitive facul-
ties to function properly, to function as they 
ought to. Chisholm's agent meets Chisholm's 
conditions for warrant; his beliefs lack warrant, 
however, because they result from cognitive dys-
function due to a damaging brain lesion, or the 
machinations of an Alpha Centaur ian scientist, 
or perhaps the mischievous schemes of a 
Cartesian evil demon. Something similar must 
be said for each of the others. In each case the 
unfortunate in question meets the conditions 
laid down for warrant by the account in ques-
tion; in each case her beliefs fail to have warrant 
because of cognitive malfunction. Hence each of 
these accounts misfires, at least in part by virtue 
of its failure to take appropriate account of the 
notion of proper function. 
I therefore suggest initially that a necessary 
condition of a belief's having warrant for me is 
that my cognitive equipment, my belief-forming 
and belief-maintaining apparatus or powers, be 
free of such malfunction. A belief has warrant for 
you only if your cognitive apparatus is function-
ing properly, working the way it ought to work, in 
producing and sustaining it. (Of course this isn't 
nearly sufficient, and I shall try to supply some of 
what is necessary to achieve sufficiency.) 
The notion of proper function is one member 
of a connected group of interdefinable notions; 
some of the other members of the group are dys-
function, design, function (simpliciter), normality 
(in the normative nonstatistical sense), damage, 
and purpose. There is initial reason to doubt, I 
think, that this circle of concepts can be broken 
into from the outside - that is, reason to doubt 
that any of them can be defined without reference 
to the others. Here we have a situation like that 
with modality: possibility, contingency, necessity, 
entailment, and their colleagues form a circle of 
properties or concepts that can be defined or 
explained in terms of each other but cannot be 
defined in terms of properties outside the circle. 
(Of course that is nothing against these modal 
concepts.) The same goes here, I think. 
You may nonetheless think there is a serious 
problem with this notion right from the start. 
Isn't the idea of proper function an extremely 
unlikely idea to appeal to in explaining the 
notion of warrant? Isn't it every bit as puzzling, 
every bit as much in need of explanation and 
clarification, as the notion of warrant itself? 
Perhaps so; but even if so, at least we can reduce 
our total puzzlement by explaining the one in 
terms of the other; and we can see more clearly 
the source and location of some of our perplexi-
ties about warrant. Further, the idea of proper 
function is one we all have; we all grasp it in at 
least a preliminary rough-and-ready way; we all 
constantly employ it. You go to the doctor; he 
tells you that your thyroid isn't functioning quite 
as it ought (its thyroxin output is low); he pre-
scribes a synthetic thyroxin. If you develop cata-
racts, the lenses of your eyes become less 
transparent; they can't function properly and 
you can't see well. A loss in elasticity of the heart 
muscle can lead to left ventricular malfunction. 
If a bird's wing is broken, it typically won't func-
tion properly; the bird won't be able to fly until 
the wing is healed, and then only if it heals in 
such a way as not to inhibit proper function. 
Alcohol and drugs can interfere with the proper 
function of various cognitive capacities, so that 
you can't drive properly, can't do simple addi-
tion problems, display poor social judgment, get 
into a fist fight, and wind up in jail. 
And it isn't just in rough-and-ready everyday 
commonsense contexts that the notion of proper 
function is important; it is deeply embedded in 
science. 
We are accustomed to hearing about biological 
functions for various bodily organs. The heart, 
the kidneys, and the pituitary gland, we are told, 
have functions - things they are, in this sense 
supposed to do. The fact that these organs are sup-
posed to do these things, the fact that they have 
their functions, is quite independent of what me 
think they are supposed to do. Biologists discov-
ered these functions; they didn't invent or assign 
them. We cannot, by agreeing among ourselves, 

WARRANT: A FIRST APPROXIMATION 
431 
change the functions of these organs .... The same 
seems true for sensory systems, those organs by 
means of which highly sensitive and continuous 
dependencies are maintained between external, 
public events and internal, neural processes. Can 
there be a serious question about whether, in the 
same sense in which it is the heart's function to 
pump the blood, it is, say, the task or function of 
the noctuid moth's auditory system to detect the 
whereabouts and movements of its archenemy, 
the bat?3 
According to David Baltimore, "many instances 
of blood disorders, mental problems, and a host 
of other disabilities are traceable to a malfunc-
tioning gene:'4 According to the great Swiss child 
psychologist Jean Piaget, a seven-year-old child 
whose cognitive faculties are functioning prop-
erly will believe that everything in the universe 
has a purpose in some grand overarching plan or 
design; later on a properly functioning person, 
he said, will learn to "think scientifically" and 
realize that everything has either a natural cause 
or happens by chance.5 
Biological and social scientists, furthermore -
psychologists, medical researchers, neuroscientists, 
economists, sociologists, and many others -
continually give accounts of how human beings 
or other organisms or their parts and organs 
function: how they work, what their purposes are, 
and how they react under various circumstances. 
Call these descriptions (following John Pollock)6 
functional generalizations. For example, whenever 
a person is appeared to redly under such and such 
conditions, she will form the belief that there is 
something red present; whenever a person con-
siders an obvious a priori truth such as 2 + 1 = 3, 
she will find herself firmly believing it; whenever 
a person desires something and believes so and 
so, he will do such and such. To strike a more 
sophisticated if no more enlightening note: when-
ever an organism of kind K is in state Si and 
receives sensory input Pi' then there is a probabil-
ity of r that it will go into state Sj and produce 
output Or Pollock makes the important point 
that if these functional generalizations are taken 
straightforwardly and at face value, as universal 
generalizations about people and other organ-
isms and their parts, they are nearly always false. 
They don't hold of someone who is in a coma, 
having a stroke, crazed by strong drink, or has just 
hit the ground after a fall off a cliff. Clearly these 
functional generalizations contain something 
like an implicit restriction to organisms and 
organs that are functioning properly, functioning 
as they ought to, subject to no malfunction or 
dysfunction. The notion of proper function, 
therefore, is presupposed by the idea of functional 
generalizations. 
So the notion of proper function is a notion 
we have and regularly employ; I may therefore 
appeal to it in explaining warrant. Still, it needs 
exploration, clarification, and explication if it is 
to serve as the key notion in an account of war-
rant. Let us provisionally entertain the idea that a 
belief has warrant for me only if the relevant 
parts of my noetic equipment - the parts involved 
in its formation and sustenance - are functioning 
properly. It is easy to see, however, that proper 
function cannot be the whole story about war-
rant. You have just had your annual cognitive 
checkup at MIT; you pass with flying colors and 
are in splendid epistemic condition. Suddenly 
and without your knowledge you are transported 
to an environment wholly different from earth; 
you awake on a planet revolving around Alpha 
Centauri. There conditions are quite different; 
elephants, we may suppose, are invisible to 
human beings, but emit a sort of radiation 
unknown on earth, a sort of radiation that causes 
human beings to form the belief that a trumpet is 
sounding nearby. An Alpha Centaurian elephant 
wanders by; you are subjected to the radiation, 
and form the belief that a trumpet is sounding 
nearby. There is nothing wrong with your cogni-
tive faculties; they are working quite properly; 
still, this belief has little by way of warrant for 
you. Nor is the problem merely that the belief is 
false; even if we add that a trumpet really is 
sounding nearby (in a soundproof telephone 
booth, perhaps), your belief will still have little 
by way of warrant for you. 
To vary the example, imagine that the radia-
tion emitted causes human beings to form the 
belief not that a trumpet is sounding, but that 
there is a large gray object in the neighborhood. 
Again, an elephant wanders by; while seeing noth-
ing of any particular interest, you suddenly find 
yourself with the belief that there is a large gray 
object nearby. A bit perplexed at this discovery, 
you examine your surroundings more closely: 
you still see no large gray object. Your faculties are 

432 
ALVIN PLANTINGA 
displaying no malfunction (you have your 
certificate from MIT); you are not being epistem-
ically careless or slovenly (you are doing your 
epistemic best); nevertheless you don't know that 
there is a large gray object nearby. That belief has 
little or no warrant for you. Of course you may be 
justified, within your epistemic rights in holding 
this belief; you may be flouting no epistemic duty. 
Further, the belief may also be rational for you in 
every sensible sense of "rational."7 But it has little 
warrant for you. 
What this example is designed to show, of 
course, is that the proper function of your epis-
temic equipment is not (logically) sufficient for 
warrant: it is possible that your cognitive equip-
ment be functioning perfectly properly but your 
beliefs still lack warrant for you. And the reason is 
not far to seek: it is that your cognitive faculties 
and the environment in which you find yourself 
are not properly attuned. The problem is not with 
your cognitive faculties; they are in good working 
order. The problem is with the environment -
with your cognitive environment. In approxi-
mately the same way, your automobile might be 
in perfect working order, despite the fact that it 
will not run well at the top of Pike's Peak, or under 
water, or on the moon. We must therefore add 
another component to warrant; your faculties 
must be in good working order, and the environ-
ment must be appropriate for your particular 
repertoire of epistemic powers. It must be the sort 
of environment for which your faculties are 
designed - by God or evolution (or both). Perhaps 
there are creatures native to the planet in question 
who are much like human beings but whose cog-
nitive powers fit that epistemic environment and 
differ from ours in such a way that Alpha 
Centaur ian elephants are not invisible to them. 
Then their beliefs would have warrant where 
yours do not. 
It is tempting to suggest that warrant just is 
(or supervenes upon) proper functioning in an 
appropriate environment, so that a given belief 
has warrant for you to the degree that your facul-
ties are functioning properly (in producing and 
sustaining that belief) in an environment appro-
priate for your cognitive equipment: the better 
your faculties function, the more warrant. But 
this cannot be correct. Couldn't it happen that 
my cognitive faculties are working properly 
(in an appropriate environment) in producing 
and sustaining a certain belief in me, while none-
theless that belief enjoys less by way of warrant 
for me than some other belief? Say that a pair of 
beliefs are (for want of a better term) productively 
equivalent if they are produced by faculties func-
tioning properly to the same degree and in 
environments of equal appropriateness. Then 
couldn't it be that a pair of my beliefs should be 
productively equivalent while nonetheless one of 
them has more by way of warrant - even a great 
deal more - than the other? Of course that could 
be; as a matter of fact it happens all the time. The 
belief that 7 + 5 = 12, or the belief that I have a 
name, or the belief that I am more than seven 
years old - any of these has more by way of war-
rant for me than does the memory belief, now 
rather dim and indistinct, that forty years ago I 
owned a secondhand sixteen-gauge shotgun and 
a red bicycle with balloon tires; but all, I take it, 
are produced by cognitive faculties functioning 
properly in a congenial environment. Although 
both epistemic warrant and being properly 
produced come in degrees, there seems to be no 
discernible 
functional 
relationship between 
them: but then we can't see warrant as simply a 
matter of a belief's being produced by faculties 
working properly in an appropriate environ-
ment. We still have no real answer to the question 
What is warrant? That particular frog (with apol-
ogies to John Austin) is still grinning residually 
up from the bottom of the mug. 
Fortunately there is an easy response. Not only 
does the first belief, the belief that 7 + 5 = 12, have 
more by way of warrant for me than the second; 
it is also one I accept much more firmly. It seems 
obviously true, in a way in which the belief about 
the bicycle and shotgun do not. Among the things 
we believe, we believe some much more firmly 
than others. I believe that I live in Indiana, that 
2 + 1 = 3, that the sun is larger than the earth, that 
China has a larger population than India, and 
that Friesland used to be much larger than it is 
now; and I believe some of these things more 
firmly than others. Here I speak of full belief, not 
the partial- beliefs of which Bayesians speak." 
Following Ramsey, Bayesians sometimes suggest 
that my degrees of belief can be at least roughly 
determined by examining my betting behavior; 
the least odds at which I will bet on a proposition 
A measures the degree to which I believe A. If I 
am willing to bet at odds of 2: 1 that the die will 

WARRANT: A FIRST APPROXIMATION 
433 
come up either 5 or 6 then I must believe to degree 
.667 that it will come up that way. This seems to 
me wrong. The truth is I believe it probable to 
degree .667 that the die will come up that way. 
And no doubt I fully believe that; that is, in this 
case I don't believe anything to degree .667 
(strictly speaking, there is no such thing as believ-
ing something to degree .667), but I do believe 
(fully believe) that there is a .667 probability that 
the die will come up either 5 or 6. Suppose I buy a 
ticket in a thousand-ticket lottery I believe to be 
fair. Here it is false, I think, that I believe I will not 
win, or believe that to degree .999. What I do 
believe is that it is very probable (probable to 
degree .999) that I won't win. 9 
Return to the case in question, then: although 
I believe both 7 + 5 = 12 and 40 years ago I owned 
a secondhand 16-gauge shotgun and a red bicycle 
with balloon tires, I believe the former more 
strongly than the latter; this is correlated with the 
fact that the former has more by way of warrant 
for me than the latter. I therefore conjecture that 
when my cognitive establishment is working 
properly, then in the typical case, the degree to 
which I believe a given proposition will be pro-
portional to the degree it has of warrant - or if 
the relationship isn't one of straightforward 
proportionality, some appropriate functional 
relationship will hold between warrant and this 
impulse. When my faculties are functioning 
properly, a belief has warrant to the degree that I 
find myself inclined to accept it; and this (again, 
if my faculties are functioning properly and 
nothing interferes) will be the degree to which I 
do accept it. 
Initially, and to (at most) a zeroeth approxi-
mation, therefore, we may put it like this: in the 
paradigm cases of warrant, a belief B has warrant 
for S if and only if that belief is produced in S by 
his epistemic faculties working properly in an 
appropriate environment; and if both Band B* 
have warrant for S, B has more warrant than B* 
for S iff S believes B more firmly than B*. And 
knowledge requires both true belief, and a certain 
degree of warrant (a degree that may vary from 
context to context, so that knowledge may display 
a certain indexical character).10 
Putting the matter thus imports what is at this 
stage at best a wholly spurious pretense of preci-
sion and completeness; and the rest of this chap-
ter will be given over to some of the necessary 
qualifications, amplifications, and the like, including 
attention to the absolutely crucial notion of the 
design plan. To begin with some of the essential 
and obvious qualifications then: it is of first 
importance to see that this condition - that of 
one's cognitive equipment functioning properly-
is not the same thing as one's cognitive equip-
ment functioning normally, not, at any rate, if we 
take the term "normally" in a broadly statistical 
sense. Even if one of my systems functions in a 
way far from the statistical norm, it might still be 
functioning properly. (Alternatively, what we 
must see is that there is a distinction between a 
normative and statistical sense of "normal.") Carl 
Lewis is not defective with respect to jumping by 
virtue of the fact that he can jump much further 
than the average person. Perhaps most adult tom-
cats get into lots of fights and ordinarily move 
into late middle age with patches of fur torn out; 
it does not follow that an old tomcat with all of 
his fur suffers from some sort of tonsorial disor-
der. Perhaps most male cats get neutered; it does 
not follow that those that don't are incapable of 
proper function. If, by virtue of some nuclear dis-
aster, we were nearly all left blind, it would not 
follow that the few sighted among us would have 
improperly functioning eyes. So your belief's 
being produced by your faculties working nor-
mally or in normal conditions - that is, the sorts 
of conditions that most frequently obtain - must 
be distinguished from their working properly. 
Further, a belief has warrant for me only if my 
epistemic faculties are working properly in pro-
ducing and sustaining it; but of course it isn't true 
that all of my cognitive faculties have to be func-
tioning properly in order for a given belief to have 
warrant for me. Suppose my memory plays me 
tricks; obviously that does not mean that I can't 
have warrant for such introspective propositions 
as that I am appeared to redly. What must be 
working properly are the faculties (or subfacul-
ties, or modules) involved in the production of 
the particular belief in question. And even they 
need not be working properly over the entire 
range of their operation. Suppose I cannot prop-
erly hear high notes: I may still learn much byway 
of the hearing ability I do have. Furthermore, a 
faculty that does not function properly without 
outside aid can nonetheless furnish warrant; I can 
have warrant for visual propositions even if I 
need glasses and can see next to nothing without 

434 
ALVIN PLANTINGA 
them. Still further, even if my corrected vision is 
very poor, I can still have warrant for visual prop-
ositions; even if I can't perceive colors at all, I can 
still have warrant for the proposition that I per-
ceive something round. Again, even if I can't 
perceive colors at all, I can still have visual war-
rant for the proposition that something is red; 
even if for me nothing appears redly (everything 
is merely black and white) I might still be able to 
see that something is red, in the way in which one 
can see, on a black and white television, which 
boxer is wearing the red trunks. And of course 
there will be many more qualifications of this sort 
necessary:!! suppose my belief is based upon two 
different mechanisms and one but not the other 
is functioning properly; suppose the same process 
works properly over one part of its range of oper-
ation but not over another, and my belief is pro-
duced by its working over both of these parts of 
its range of operation; or suppose a process is not 
working properly over part of its range but pro-
duces in me in given circumstances the very same 
belief it would have if it were working properly; in 
these cases does my belief have warrant? These 
are good questions, but there isn't time to work 
out all the answers here. 
Still further, proper functioning, of course, 
comes in degrees; or if it does not, then approxi-
mation to proper functioning does. Clearly the 
faculties relevant with respect to a given belief 
need not be functioning perfectly for me to have 
warrant for my belief; many of my visual beliefs 
may constitute knowledge even if my vision is not 
20/20. Similarly, my faculties can function prop-
erly even if they do not function ideally, even if 
they do not function as well as those of some 
other actual or possible species (a point I discuss 
in chapter 6 of Warrant: The Current Debate). My 
locomotory equipment may be functioning prop-
erly even if I can't run as fast as a cheetah; my 
arithmetic powers may be in good working order 
even if I can't anywhere nearly keep up with a 
computer, or an angel, or an Alpha Centaurian. 
But how well, then, must such powers be func-
tioning? Part of the answer here, of course, is that 
there is no answer; the ideas of knowledge and 
warrant are to some degree vague; hence there 
needs to be no precise answer to the question in 
question. What I hope is that the vaguenesses 
involved in my account of warrant vary with the 
vaguenesses we independently recognize in the 
notion of warrant. If warrant and proper func-
tion are properly tied together, then we may 
expect that they will waver together. 
Similar comments and qualifications, of 
course, must be made about the environmental 
condition. For my beliefs to have warrant, the 
environment must be similar to that for which 
my epistemic powers have been designed; but just 
how similar must it be? Here, of course, we 
encounter vagueness; there is no precise answer. 
Further, suppose I know that the environment is 
misleading; and suppose I know in just which 
ways it is misleading. (I'm on a planet where 
things that look square are really round.) Then, 
clearly enough, the fact that my environment is 
misleading need not deprive my beliefs of war-
rant. And of course the same must be said for the 
requirement that my faculties be in good working 
order. Suppose (as in Castaneda's fantasy)!2 
I suffer from a quirk of memory: whenever I read 
a history book, I always misremember the dates, 
somehow adding ten years to the date as stated: 
beliefs formed by way of reading history books -
even beliefs about dates - can still have warrant 
for me; I can compensate for my erroneous ten-
dency. What counts, of course, are uncorrected 
and uncompensated malfunctionings. Clearly 
there is need here for a good deal of Chisholming; 
let me postpone it, however, in order to turn to 
other more pressing matters. 
II 
The Design Plan 
But aren't there cases in which our faculties func-
tion perfectly properly in the right sort of envi-
ronment but the resulting beliefs still lack 
warrant? Surely there are. Someone may remem-
ber a painful experience as less painful than it 
was, as is sometimes said to be the case with child-
birth.13 You may continue to believe in your 
friend's honesty long after evidence and cool, 
objective judgment would have dictated a reluc-
tant change of mind. I may believe that I will 
recover from a dread disease much more strongly 
than is justified by the statistics of which I am 
aware. William James's climber in the Alps, faced 
with a life or death situation, believed more 
strongly than the evidence warrants that he could 
leap the crevasse. In all of these cases, there is no 
cognitive dysfunction or failure to function 

WARRANT: A FIRST APPROXIMATION 
435 
properly; it would be a mistake, however, to say 
that the beliefs in question had warrant for the 
person in question. 
I cannot forbear quoting a couple of Locke's 
examples: 
Would it not be an insufferable thing for a 
learned professor, and that which his scarlet 
would blush at, to have his authority of forty 
years standing wrought out of hard rock Greek 
and Latin, with no small expence of time and 
candle, and confirmed by general tradition, and 
a reverent beard, in an instant overturned by an 
upstart novelist? Can anyone expect that he 
should be made to confess, that what he taught 
his scholars thirty years ago, was all errour and 
mistake; and that he sold them hard words and 
ignorance at a very dear rate?!4 
The professor's faculties may be functioning 
properly (there may be a properly functioning 
defense mechanism at work); but his belief that 
the young upstart is dead wrong would have little 
by way of warrant. Another of Locke's examples: 
Tell a man, passiounately in love, that he is jilted; 
bring a score of witnesses of the falsehood of his 
mistress, 'tis ten to one but three kind words of 
hers, shall invalidate all their testimonies. . .. 
What suits our wishes, is forwardly believed is, I 
suppose, what everyone hath more than once 
experiemented; and though men cannot always 
openly gain-say, or resist the force of manifest 
probabilities, that make against them; yet yield 
they not to the argument. (Essay, IV, xx, 12) 
Now it was widely believed in the eighteenth cen-
tury that love was or induced a sort of madness, 
so that the lover's epistemic faculties are not func-
tioning properly. Even if that isn't so, however, 
even if we are designed to act and believe in 
extravagant fashion when in love, the lover's belief 
that his mistress is true to him has little by way of 
warrant. 
Still another case: according to Freud, reli-
gious belief is "the universal obsessional neurosis 
of mankind"; religious belief consists in "illu-
sions, fulfillments of the oldest, strongest, and 
most insistent wishes of mankind."!5 Rather sim-
ilar sentiments are expressed by Marx, who holds 
that religious belief is produced by an unhealthy, 
perverted social order: "This State, this society, 
produce religion, produce a perverted world 
consciousness, because they are a perverted 
world .... Religion is the sigh of the oppressed 
creature, the feelings of a heartless world, just as 
it is the spirit of unspiritual conditions."!6 Now 
neither Freud nor Marx would be mollified if we 
pointed out that religion is very widespread 
among human beings, that is, "normal" in the 
statistical sense; what is statistically normal may 
still be a disease, a matter of malfunction, in this 
case a cognitive dysfunction. But there is a fur-
ther subtlety here; Freud and Marx differ in a 
significant way. Marx seems to think that reli-
gion is a sort of perversion, something unhealthy; 
it is as if he says, "Let's call it an aberration and 
be done with it." Freud, on the other hand, is 
ambivalent. First, he says that religious belief is 
or stems from neurosis: that sounds like he 
thinks religious belief arises from a cognitive 
malfunction of some sort. But then he also says 
it is a matter of illusion, and arises from the 
"oldest and strongest and most insistent wishes 
of mankind." That suggests not that religious 
belief arises from malfunction or failure of some 
cognitive module to function properly, but 
instead by way of wish fulfillment. What one 
believes in that way isn't necessarily a product of 
malfunction; illusion and wish fulfillment also 
have their functions. According to Freud, they 
enable us to mask the grim, threatening, fright-
ening visage of the world - a visage that would 
otherwise cause us to cower in terror or sink into 
utter and apathetic despair. On the second way 
of thinking, then, religious belief need not be a 
result of malfunction; it might be produced by 
faculties functioning just as they should. Even so, 
however - even if the wish fulfillment that pro-
duces religious belief does not result from cogni-
tive malfunction - religious belief won't enjoy 
much by way of warrant. 
So the proposed condition for warrant -
proper function in an appropriate environment -
isn't anywhere nearly sufficient for warrant. Why 
not? Well, consider the elements of our cognitive 
faculties responsible for beliefs of the above 
sorts - those produced by wishful thinking, or 
by the optimism that enables one to survive a 
deadly illness - one thinks that the purpose of 
these modules of our cognitive capacities is not 
to produce true beliefs. They are instead aimed at 
something else: survival, or the possibility of 

436 
ALVIN PLANTINGA 
friendship, or (Freud thinks) the capacity to carry 
on in this bleak and nasty world of ours. 
To get a better understanding of this matter, 
we must consider a notion of crucial importance: 
that of specifications, or blueprint, or design plan. 
Human beings are constructed according to a 
certain design plan. This terminology does not 
commit us to supposing that human beings have 
been literally designed - by God, for example. 
Here I use "design" the way Daniel Dennett (not 
ordinarily thought unsound on theism) does in 
speaking of a given organism as possessing a cer-
tain design, and of evolution as producing opti-
mal design: "In the end, we want to be able to 
explain the intelligence of man, or beast, in terms 
of his design; and this in turn in terms of the nat-
ural selection of this design."17 We take it that 
when the organs (or organic systems) of a human 
being (or other organism) function properly, they 
function in a particular way. Such organs have a 
function or purpose; more exactly, they have sev-
eral functions or purposes, including both prox-
imate and more remote purposes. The ultimate 
purpose of the heart is to contribute to the health 
and proper function of the entire organism 
(some might say instead that it is to contribute 
to the survival of the individual, or the species, 
or even to the perpetuation of the genetic mate-
rial itself)Y But of course the heart also has a 
much more circumscribed and specific function: 
to pump blood. Such an organ, furthermore, 
normally functions in such a way as to fulfill its 
purpose; but it also functions to fulfill that pur-
pose in just one of an indefinitely large number 
of possible ways. Here a comparison with artifacts 
is useful. A house is designed to produce shelter 
- but not in just any old way. There will be plans 
specifying the length and pitch of the rafters, what 
kind of shingles are to be applied, the kind and 
quantity of insulation to be used, and the like. 
Something similar holds in the case of us and our 
faculties; we seem to be constructed in accord-
ance with a specific set of plans. Better (since this 
analogy is insufficiently dynamic) we seem to 
have been constructed in accordance with a set of 
specifications, in the way in which there are spec-
ifications for, for example, the 1992 Buick. 
According to these specifications (I'm just guessing), 
after a cold start the engine runs at 1,500 RPM 
until the engine temperature reaches 190°F; it 
then throttles back to 750 RPM. 
Similarly, there is something like a set of spec-
ifications for a well-formed, properly function-
inghumanbeing-anextraordinarilycomplicated 
and highly articulated set of specifications, as 
any first-year medical student could tell you. 
Something like such a set: a copy of these specifi-
cations does not come with every newborn child, 
and we can't write to the manufacturer for a new 
copy to replace the one we have carelessly lost. 
Suppose we call these specifications a "design 
plan:' It is natural to speak of organisms and 
their parts as exhibiting design, and such talk is 
exceedingly common: "According to Dr Sam 
Ridgway, physiologist with the US Naval Ocean 
Systems Center in San Diego, seals avoid the 
bends by not absorbing nitrogen in the first place. 
'The lungs of marine mammals: Dr Ridgway 
explains, 'are designed to collapse under pressure 
exerted on deep dives. Air from the collapsed 
lungs is forced back into the windpipe, where the 
nitrogen simply can't be absorbed by the 
blood."'19 Of course the design plan for human 
beings will include specifications for our cogni-
tive system or faculties. Like the rest of our organs 
and systems, our cognitive faculties can work 
well or badly; they can malfunction or function 
properly. They too work in a certain way when 
they are functioning properly - and work in a 
certain way to accomplish their purpose. The 
purpose of the heart is to pump blood; that of 
our cognitive faculties (overall) is to supply us 
with reliable information: about our environ-
ment, about the past, about the thoughts and 
feeling of others, and so on. But not just any old 
way of accomplishing this purpose in the case of 
a specific cognitive process is in accordance with 
our design plan. It is for this reason that it is pos-
sible for a belief to be produced by a cognitive 
process or belief-producing mechanism that is 
accidentally reliable (as in the case of the processes 
I have cited as counterexamples to Goldman's 
version of reliabilism).20 Although such belief-
producing processes are in fact reliable, the beliefs 
they yield have little by way of warrant; and the 
reason is that these processes are pathologically 
out of accord with the design plan for human 
beings. 
Our design plan, of course, is such that our fac-
ulties are highly responsive to circumstances. Upon 
considering an instance of modus ponens, I find 
myself believing its corresponding conditional; 

WARRANT: A FIRST APPROXIMATION 
437 
upon being appeared to in the familiar way, I find 
myself with the belief that there is a large tree 
before me; upon being asked what I had for break-
fast, I reflect for a moment, and the belief that 
what I had was eggs on toast is formed within me. 
In these and other cases I do not deliberate; 
I do not total up the evidence (I am being appeared 
to redly; on most occasions when thus appeared 
to I am in the presence of something red; so most 
probably in this case I am) and thus come to a 
view as to what seems best supported; I simply 
find myself with the appropriate belief. Of course 
in some cases I may go through such a weighing of 
the evidence; for example, I may be trying to eval-
uate the alleged evidence in favor of the theory 
that human life evolved by means of such mecha-
nisms as random genetic mutation and natural 
selection from unicellular life (which itself arose 
by substantially similar mechanical processes 
from nonliving material); but in the typical case 
of belief formation nothing like this is involved. 
Here I wish to note just a couple of its salient 
features. According to our design plan, obviously 
enough, experience plays a crucial role in belief 
formation. A priori beliefs, for example, are not, 
as this denomination mistakenly suggests, 
formed prior to or in the absence of experience. 
Thinking of the corresponding conditional of 
modus ponens somehow feels different from 
thinking of, say, the corresponding conditional 
of affirming the consequent; and this difference in 
experience is connected with our accepting the 
one and rejecting the other. Of course experi-
ence plays a different role here from the role it 
plays in the formation of perceptual beliefs; it 
plays a still different role in the formation of 
memory beliefs, moral beliefs, beliefs about the 
mental lives of other persons, beliefs we form on 
the basis of inductive evidence, and the like. In 
later chapters we shall look into these matters 
in more detail. 
Further, our design plan is such that under-
certain conditions we form one belief on the evi-
dential basis of others. I may form the belief that 
Sam was at the party on the evidential basis of 
other beliefs - perhaps I learn from you that Sam 
wasn't at the bar and from his wife that he was 
either at the bar or at the party. Of course (if our 
faculties are functioning properly) we don't form 
just any belief on the evidential basis of just any 
other. I won't form the belief that Feike is a 
Catholic on the evidential basis of the proposi-
tions that nine out of ten Frisians are Protestants 
and Feike is a Frisian - not, at any rate, unless I 
am suffering from some sort of cognitive mal-
function. And here too experience plays an 
important role. The belief about Sam feels like the 
right one; that belief about Feike (in those cir-
cumstances) feels strange, inappropriate, worthy 
of rejection, not to be credited. Still further, the 
design plan dictates the appropriate degree or 
firmness of a given belief in given circumstances. 
You read in a relatively unreliable newspaper an 
account of a 53-car accident on a Los Angeles 
freeway; perhaps you then form the belief that 
there was a 53-car accident on the freeway. But if 
you hold that belief as firmly as, for example, 
that 2 + 1 = 3, then your faculties are not func-
tioning as they ought to and the belief has little 
warrant for you. Again, experience obviously 
plays an important role. What we need is a full 
and appropriately subtle and sensitive description 
of the role of experience in the formation and 
maintenance of all these various types of beliefs. 
For the moment, we may rest satisfied simply to 
note the importance of experience in the economy 
of our cognitive establishment. 
Now return to the examples that precipitated 
this excursus about the design plan - the cases of 
beliefs produced by wish fulfillment, or the opti-
mism necessary to surviving a serious illness, or 
willingness to have more children, or the like. In 
these cases, the relevant faculties may be func-
tioning properly, functioning just as they ought 
to, but nevertheless not in a way that leads to 
truth, to the formation of true beliefs. But then 
proper function in a right environment is not suf-
ficient for warrant. Different parts or aspects of 
our cognitive apparatus have different purposes; 
different parts or aspects of our design plan are 
aimed at different ends or goals. Not all aspects of 
the design of our cognitive faculties need be 
aimed at the production of true belief; some 
might be such as to conduce to survival, or relief 
from suffering, or the possibility of loyalty, or 
inclination to have more children, and so on. 
What confers warrant is one's cognitive faculties 
working properly, or working according to the 
design plan insofar as that segment of the design 
plan is aimed at producing true beliefs. But some-
one whose holding a certain belief is a result of an 
aspect of our cognitive design that is aimed not at 

438 
ALVIN PLANTINGA 
truth but at something else won't be such that the 
belief has warrant for him; he won't properly be 
said to know the proposition in question, even if 
it turns out to be true. 
So there are cases where belief-producing fac-
ulties are functioning properly but warrant is 
absent: cases where the design plan is not aimed 
at the production of true (or verisimilitudinous) 
beliefs but at the production of beliefs with some 
other virtue. But then there will also be cases 
where cognitive faculties are not functioning 
properly, but warrant is present; these will be 
inverses, so to speak, of the cases of the preced-
ing paragraph. Suppose our design demands 
that under certain special circumstances our 
ordinary belief-producing mechanisms are over-
ridden by a mechanism designed to deal with 
that specific case: perhaps there is a sort of opti-
mistic mechanism that cuts in when I am seri-
ously ill, causing me to believe more strongly 
than the evidence indicates that I will survive the 
illness, thereby enhancing my chances to survive 
it. Suppose I am taken seriously ill, and suppose 
through some malfunction (induced, perhaps, 
by the illness itself) the operation of the opti-
mistic mechanism is inhibited, so that, believing 
just in accord with the evidence, I form the belief 
that I probably will not survive. Then the rele-
vant segment of my cognitive faculties is not 
functioning properly; that is, it is not function-
ing in accordance with the design plan; but 
doesn't my belief have warrant anyway?21 Might 
I not have the degree of warrant that goes with 
the degree to which I believe that I probably 
won't survive, despite the fact that if my faculties 
were functioning properly, I would believe (to 
one or another degree of firmness) that I will 
survive? The answer, of course, is as before: those 
segments of my cognitive faculties (those mod-
ules, we might say) that are aimed at truth are 
functioning properly; my cognitive faculties are 
functioning in accord with the design plan inso-
far as the design plan is aimed at the production 
of true beliefs. There is malfunction only with 
respect to those cognitive modules aimed at 
something other than truth; so in this case the 
belief that I will not survive has the degree of 
warrant normally going with the degree of belief 
I display. 
Many questions remain,22 but I must leave 
them to the reader. 
III 
Reliability 
According to the zeroeth approximation, a belief 
has warrant for me, speaking roughly, if it is pro-
duced by my cognitive faculties functioning 
properly in a congenial environment. We have 
just seen that these two together are insufficient: 
the segment of the design plan governing the pro-
duction of the belief in question must also be 
aimed at truth. But this is still insufficient. For 
suppose a well-meaning but incompetent angel-
one of Hume's infant deities,23 say - sets out to 
design a variety of rational persons, persons capa-
ble of thought, belief, and knowledge. As it turns 
out, the design is a real failure; the resulting beings 
hold beliefs, all right, but most of them are 
absurdly false.24 Here all three of our conditions 
are met: the beliefs of these beings are formed by 
their cognitive faculties functioning properly in 
the cognitive environment for which they were 
designed, and furthermore the relevant modules 
of the design plan are aimed at truth (the relevant 
modules of their cognitive equipment have the 
production of true beliefs as their purpose). But 
the beliefs of these pitifully deceived beings do 
not have warrant.25 What must we add? That the 
design plan is a good one - more exactly, that the 
design governing the production of the belief in 
question is a good one; still more exactly, that the 
objective probability of a belief's being true, given 
that it is produced by cognitive faculties function-
ing in accord with the relevant module of the 
design plan, is high. Even more exactly, the 
module of the design plan governing its produc-
tion must be such that it is objectively highly 
probable that a belief produced by cognitive fac-
ulties functioning properly according to that 
module (in a congenial environment) will be 
true or verisimilitudinous. This is the reliabilist 
constraint on warrant, and the important truth 
contained in reliabilist accounts of warrant. 
It is easy to overlook this condition. The reason 
is that we ordinarily take it for granted that when 
our cognitive faculties - at any rate, those whose 
function it is to produce true beliefs - function 
properly in an appropriate environment, then for 
the most part the beliefs they produce are true. 
When our faculties function in accord with our 
design plan (in an appropriate environment), the 
beliefs they produce are for the most part true. 
Certainly we think so with respect to memory, 

WARRANT: A FIRST APPROXIMATION 
439 
perception, logical and arithmetical beliefs, 
inductively based beliefs, and so on. Further, we 
take it for granted that these faculties are reliable; 
they not only do produce true beliefs, but would 
produce true beliefs even if things were moder-
ately different. (They produce true beliefs in most 
of the appropriately nearby possible worlds; that 
is, most of the appropriately nearby possible 
worlds W meet the following condition: necessar-
ily, if Whad been actual, then our cognitive facul-
ties would have produced mostly true beliefs.) 
Still another way to put it: we take it for granted 
that the statistical or objective probability of a 
belief's being true, given that it has been pro-
duced by our faculties functioning properly in the 
cognitive environment for which they were 
designed, is high. Perhaps more specifically our 
presupposition is that in general (for a person S 
with properly functioning faculties in an appro-
priate environment, and given the cited qualifica-
tions) the more firmly S believes p, the more likely 
it is that p is true. Of course, we think some facul-
ties more reliable than others, and think a given 
faculty is more reliable under some conditions 
than others. This assumption on our part is a sort 
of presumption of reliability. Of course, it is a 
presumption or an assumption; it isn't or isn't 
obviously26 entailed by the notion of proper func-
tion itself. So the account of proper function must 
include it as another condition: if one of my 
beliefs has warrant, then the module of the design 
plan governing the production of that belief must 
be such that the statistical or objective probability 
of a belief's being true, given that it has been pro-
duced in accord with that module in a congenial 
cognitive environment, is high. 
How high, precisely? Here we encounter 
vagueness again; there is no precise answer. It is 
part of the presumption, however, that the degree 
of reliability varies as a function of degree of 
belief. The things we are most sure of - simple 
logical and arithmetical truths, such beliefs as 
that I now have a mild ache in my knee (that 
indeed I have knees), obvious perceptual truths-
these are the sorts of beliefs we hold most firmly, 
perhaps with the maximum degree of firmness, 
and the ones such that we associate a very high 
degree of reliability with the modules of the 
design plan governing their production. Even here, 
however, we are not immune from error: even 
what seems to be selfevident can be mistaken, 
as Frege learned to his sorrow.27 It may be worth 
noting, however, that Frege did not believe the 
offending "axiom" to the maximal degree; if he 
had, then he would have been no more likely to 
give up that "axiom" than to conclude that there 
really is a set that is and is not a member of 
itself. 
I say the presupposition of reliability is a fea-
ture of our usual way of thinking about warrant; 
but of course this presupposition is not inevitable 
for us. The skeptic, for example, can often best be 
seen as questioning this presupposition. She may 
agree that there is indeed a perfectly proper dis-
tinction between cognitive proper function and 
malfunction, but be agnostic about the question 
whether there is any correlation at all between 
proper function and truth. Or she may think 
there is indeed such a correlation, but think it far 
too weak to support our ordinary claims to 
knowledge. Or she may think that since the long-
run purpose of our beliefs, as she sees it, is to 
enable us to move about in the environment in 
such a way that we do not come to grief (or do 
not come to grief until we have had a chance to 
reproduce), there is no interesting correlation 
between a belief's being produced by faculties 
functioning properly and its being true.28 Of 
course one can be a skeptic about one particular 
area as opposed to others: a rationalist may think 
sense perception less reliable than reason and 
may thus maintain that it is only reason, not per-
ception, that gives us knowledge; an empiricist 
may see things the other way around. Philosophy 
itself is a good candidate for a certain measured 
skepticism: in view of the enormous diversity of 
competing philosophical views, one can hardly 
claim with a straight face that what we have in 
philosophy is knowledge; the diversity of views 
makes it unlikely that the relevant segments of 
the design plan are sufficiently reliable. (In a 
properly run intellectual establishment, therefore, 
most philosophical views will not enjoy anywhere 
nearly the maximal degree of belief.) 
To return to warrant then: to a first approxi-
mation, we may say that a belief B has warrant for 
S if and only if the relevant segments (the seg-
ments involved in the production of B) are func-
tioning properly in a cognitive environment 
sufficiently similar to that for which S's faculties 
are designed; and the modules of the design plan 
governing the production of Bare (1) aimed at 

440 
ALVIN PLANTINGA 
truth, and (2) such that there is a high objective 
probability that a belief formed in accordance 
with those modules (in that sort of cognitive 
environment) is true; and the more firmly S 
believes B the more warrant B has for S. This is at 
best a first approximation; it is still at most pro-
grammatic, a suggestion, an idea, a hint. 
Furthermore, it might be suggested (in fact, it has 
been suggested) that while it may be difficult to 
find counterexamples to the view, that is only 
Notes 
1 "Evidentialism," this vol., ch. 24. 
2 See his "Concepts of Epistemic Justification," 
Monist (January 1985), and "An Internalist 
Externalism," Synthese 74, no. 3 (1988); see 
also several of the articles collected in 
Epistemic 
Justification 
(Ithaca: 
Cornell 
University Press, 1989). 
3 
FredDretske,ExplainingBehavior( Cambridge: 
MIT Press, 1988), p. 91. 
4 "Limiting Science: a Biologist's Perspective:' 
Daedalus (Summer 1988), p. 336. 
5 
The Child's Conception of Physical Causality 
(London: Kegan Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1930). 
6 "How to Build a Person," in Philosophical 
Perspectives, 1, Metaphysics, 1987, ed. James 
Tomberlin 
(Atascadero, CA.: 
Ridgeview, 
1987), p. 146. 
7 See my Warrant: The Current Debate (New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1993), ch. 6, 
sec. 1, "The Varieties of Rationality:' 
8 See ibid., ch. 6, pp. 117 ff. 
9 It is sometimes suggested that whenever 
believe A no more firmly than not-A and 
not-A no more firmly than A, then I can be 
thought of as believing A (and not-A) to degree 
.5. This seems clearly mistaken. Consider a case 
where I have no idea at all whether the proposi-
tion in question is true. You ask me (a touch 
pedantically) "consider the proposition that the 
highest mountain on Mars is between ten and 
eleven thousand feet high and call it '1\; do you 
think A is true?" I have no idea about A and do 
not believe it more likely than its denial; I also 
do not believe its denial more likely than it. Then 
on the Bayesian view, I must believe A to degree 
.5. You then ask me the same question about B: 
the proposition that the highest mountain on 
because it is vague and imprecise. I have sympa-
thies with both complaints, although I would 
implore those who make the second to heed 
Aristotle's dictum and seek no more precision 
than the subject admits. Maybe there isn't any 
neat formula, any short and snappy list of condi-
tions (at once informative and precise) that are 
severally necessary and jointly sufficient for war-
rant; if so, we won't make much progress by 
grimly pursuing them. 
Mars is between eleven and twelve thousand 
feet high. Again, I have no idea; so on the 
Bayesian view I am considering, I must also 
believe B to degree .5. Now A and Bare 
mutually exclusive; according to the proba-
bility calculus, therefore, I should believe 
their disjunction to degree 1. But of course I 
do not; for I also have no idea whether the 
highest mountain on Mars is between ten 
and twelve thousand feet high. And the 
problem is not that I am desperately inco-
herent. The problem is that we can't properly 
represent ignorance of this sort as believing 
the proposition in question to degree .5. 
There is a vast difference between the situa-
tion in which I think A probable to degree .5 
(perhaps A is the proposition that the die 
will come up side 1,2, or 3) and the situation 
in which I have no idea what the probability 
of A's being true might be. 
lD 
See H. N. Castaneda's "The Indexical Theory 
of Knowledge," in Peter French, Theodore 
E. Uehling, Jr., and Howard Wettstein (eds), 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, vol. V 
(Minneapolis: University of Minnesota 
Press, 1980) . 
11 
Here I am indebted to Tom Senor. 
12 
"The Indexical Theory of Knowledge," p. 
202. 
13 
"A woman giving birth to a child has pain 
because her time has come; but when her 
baby is born she forgets the anguish because 
of her joy that a child is born into the world." 
John 16:21. 
14 
An Essay concerning Human Understanding, 
ed. A. C. Fraser (New York: Dover, 1953), IV, 
xx, 11, hereafter referred to as Essay. 

WARRANT: A FIRST APPROXIMATION 
441 
15 
The Future of an Illusion (1927), trans. and 
ed. James Strachey (London: Norton, 1961), 
p.30. 
16 
K. Marx, Introduction to a Critique of the 
Hegelian Philosophy of Right, in Collected 
Works, by K. Marx and F. Engels (London: 
Lawrence & Wishart, 1975),3: 175. 
17 
Brainstorms (Cambridge: Bradford Books, 
1978), p. 12. 
18 
See Richard Dawkins, The Selfish Gene 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1976). 
19 
National Geographic 171, no. 4 (April 1987), 
p.489. 
20 
See my Warrant: The Current Debate, ch. 9. 
21 
lowe this example to Caleb Miller. 
22 
Some of which were forcibly brought to my 
attention by Dean Zimmerman. 
23 
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, Part 
V (1779), ed. N. K. Smith (Bobbs-Merrill, 
1947), p. 169. 
24 
Some (Donald Davidson, for example) 
apparently hold that it is impossible that 
there be a sizeable community of believers 
most of whose beliefs are false; I disagree 
and explain why elsewhere. 
25 
This counterexample was called to myatten-
tion by Richard Swinburne, Ian Foster, and 
Thomas Senor. 
26 
I suppose it might sensibly be held that it is 
impossible that there be rational beings 
(beings capable of reasoning or belief) whose 
cognitive faculties function properly but 
who nonetheless hold predominantly false 
beliefs. Perhaps there are purposes or ends 
necessarily built into certain kinds of crea-
tures. Then if a malevolent Cartesian demon 
were to design a race of rational creatures 
whose beliefs were nearly always mistaken, 
their cognitive faculties would not be func-
tioning properly, even if they were function-
ing just as they were designed to. Instead, we 
should have to say that what this demon 
wanted to do was to design a race of cogni-
tive beings that did not function properly. 
27 
Frege produced a set of axioms for set theory, 
including the famous or infamous proposi-
tion that for any property P there exists the 
set of just those things that have P. Russell 
showed him that this axiom (together with 
the others) yields a contradiction: if it is true, 
there will be a set of nonselfmembered sets, 
which both will and will not be a member of 
itself. 
28 
Thus Patricia Church land: "Boiled down to 
essentials, a nervous system enables the 
organism to succeed in the four F's: feeding, 
fleeing, fighting and reproducing. The prin-
cipal chore of nervous systems is to get the 
body parts where they should be in order 
that the organism may survive. ... Truth, 
whatever that is, definitely takes the hind-
most" (Journal of Philosophy 84 (October 
1987), p. 548). 

CHAPTER 33 
Virtues of the Mind, Selections 
Linda Zagzebski 
General Account of a Virtue 
A serious problem in any attempt to give a gen-
eral account of the nature of virtue is that our 
language does not contain a sufficient number of 
names that convey the full unified reality of each 
virtue. Some names pick out reactive feelings 
(empathy), some pick out desires (curiosity), 
some pick out motivations to act (benevolence), 
whereas others pick out patterns of acting that 
appear to be independent of feeling and motive 
(fairness). For this reason it is easy to confuse a 
virtue with a feeling in some cases (empathy, 
compassion), and with a skill in others (fairness). 
The result is that it is very difficult to give a uni-
tary account of virtues using common virtue lan-
guage. MacIntyre (1984) blames the problem on 
a defect in our culture,! but this cannot be an 
adequate explanation since Aristotle's list was no 
better in this respect than ours. When we examine 
Aristotle's virtues and vices we see that he had dif-
ficulty in finding names for some of them, and a 
few of his names seem forced, such as his term 
"anaisthesia;' which he coins for the trait of insen-
sibility to pleasure. Gregory Trianosky's response 
to this situation is to say that virtues are not all 
traits of the same general type. 2 Robert Roberts 
Originally published in L. Zagzebski, Virtues of the 
Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996), 
pp. 134-7, 166-84. 
also concludes that there are several distinct kinds 
of virtue.3 This response is understandable and it 
is possible that we will eventually be forced into it, 
but I believe it should only be taken as a last 
resort, and I see no reason to take it yet. It is more 
plausible that the problem derives from a defect 
in our virtue language rather than a division in 
the nature of virtue itself. 
Let us begin by reviewing the features of virtue 
we have already identified. First, a virtue is an 
acquired excellence of the soul, or to use more 
modern terminology, it is an acquired excellence 
of the person in a deep and lasting sense. A vice is 
the contrary quality; it is an acquired defect of the 
soul. One way to express the depth required for a 
trait to be a virtue or a vice is to think of it as a 
quality we would ascribe to a person if asked to 
describe her after her death. Perhaps no quality is 
really permanent, or, at least, no interesting qual-
ity, but virtues and vices are in the category of the 
more enduring of a person's qualities, and they 
come closer to defining who the person is than 
any other category of qualities. 
Second, a virtue is acquired by a process that 
involves a certain amount of time and work on 
the part of the agent. This is not to suggest that a 
person controls the acquisition of a virtue entirely; 
that is plainly false. Nevertheless, the time and 
effort required partly account for a virtue's deep 
and lasting quality, one that in part defines a per-
son's identity and that leads us to think of her as 
responsible for it. This means that typically a 

VIRTUES OF THE MIND, SELECTIONS 
443 
virtue is acquired through a process of habitua-
tion, although the virtues of creativity may be an 
exception. 
Third, a virtue is not simply a skill. Skills have 
many of the same features as virtues in their 
manner of acquisition and in their area of appli-
cation, and virtuous persons are expected to have 
the correlative skills in order to be effective in 
action, but skills do not have the intrinsic value of 
virtues. 
Fourth, a virtue has a component of motiva-
tion. A motivation is a disposition to have a cer-
tain motive, and a motive is an emotion that 
initiates and directs action to produce an end 
with certain desired features. Motivations can 
become deep parts of a person's character and 
provide her with a set of orientations toward the 
world that emerge into action given the appro-
priate circumstances. A motivation is best 
defined, not as a way of acting in circumstances 
specifiable in advance, but in terms of the end at 
which it aims and the emotion that underlies it. 
The easiest way to identify a motivation is by 
reference to the end at which it aims, but it also 
involves an emotion disposition, and that is 
harder to identify by name. 
This brings us to another important feature of 
virtue: "Virtue" is a success term. The motiva-
tional component of a virtue means that it has an 
end, whether internal or external. A person does 
not have a virtue unless she is reliable at bringing 
about the end that is the aim of the motivational 
component of the virtue. For example, a fair 
person acts in a way that successfully produces a 
state of affairs that has the features fair persons 
desire. A kind, compassionate, generous, coura-
geous, or just person aims at making the world a 
certain way, and reliable success in making it that 
way is a condition for having the virtue in ques-
tion. For this reason virtue requires knowledge, 
or at least awareness, of certain nonmoral facts 
about the world. The nature of morality involves, 
not only wanting certain things, but being reliable 
agents for bringing those things about. The 
understanding that a virtue involves is necessary 
for success in bringing about the aim of its moti-
vational component. This means that virtue 
involves a component of understanding that is 
implied by the success component. 
A virtue therefore has two main elements: a 
motivational element, and an element of reliable 
success in bringing about the end (internal or 
external) of the motivational element. These 
elements express the two distinct aims of the 
moral project that we find in commonsense moral 
thinking. On the one hand, ordinary ways of 
thinking about morality tell us that morality is 
largely a matter of the heart, and we evaluate per-
sons for the quality of their motivations. But 
morality is also in part a project of making the 
world a certain kind of place - a better place, we 
might say, or the kind of place good people want 
it to be. Because of the latter interest, we are 
impressed with moral success, not to the exclu-
sion of an interest in people's cares and efforts, 
but in addition to it. 
A virtue, then, can be defined as a deep and 
enduring acquired excellence of a person, involv-
ing a characteristic motivation to produce a cer-
tain desired end and reliable success in bringing 
about that end. What I mean by a motivation is 
a disposition to have a motive; a motive is an 
action-guiding emotion with a certain end, either 
internal or external. 
This definition is broad enough to include the 
intellectual as well as the traditional moral vir-
tues. It may also be broad enough to include virtues 
other than the moral or intellectual, such as aes-
thetic, religious, or perhaps even physical virtues, 
but I will not consider virtues in these other cate-
gories in this work. The definition may not apply to 
higher-order virtues such as integrity and practical 
wisdom, however. 
The Motivation for Knowledge and 
Reliable Success 
In this section I will argue that the individual 
intellectual virtues can be defined in terms of 
motivations arising from the general motivation 
for knowledge and reliability in attaining the aims 
of these motives. Since all of the intellectual vir-
tues have the same foundational motivation and 
since all of the other moral virtues have different 
foundational motivations, this means that a dis-
tinction between an intellectual and a moral virtue 
can be made on the basis of the motivational com-
ponent of the virtue. I maintain that this is the 
only theoretically relevant difference between 
intellectual virtues and the other moral virtues, 
and so there are good grounds for continuing to 

444 
LINDA ZAGZEBSKI 
call these virtues "intellectual:' even though I have 
argued that they are best treated as a subset of the 
moral virtues. It may be that at the deepest level 
the moral and intellectual virtues arise from the 
same motivation, perhaps a love of being in gen-
eral.4 If so, such a motivation would serve to unify 
all the virtues, but I will not analyze the relations 
among the virtuous motivations in this work. 
The simplest way to describe the motivational 
basis of the intellectual virtues is to say that they 
are all based in the motivation for knowledge. 
They are all forms of the motivation to have cog-
nitive contact with reality, where this includes 
more than what is usually expressed by saying 
that people desire truth. Understanding is also a 
form of cognitive contact with reality, one that 
has been considered a component of the knowing 
state in some periods of philosophical history. 
I will not give an account of understanding in this 
work, but I have already indicated that it is a state 
that includes the comprehension of abstract 
structures of reality apart from the propositional. 
I will assume that it either is a form of knowledge 
or enhances the quality of knowledge. Altk~ugb. 
all intellectual virtues have a motivational com-
ponent that aims at cognitive contact with reality, 
some of them may aim more at understanding, or 
perhaps at other epistemic states that enhance the 
quality of the knowing state, such as certainty, 
than at the possession of truth per se. A few stellar 
virtues such as intellectual originality or inven-
tiveness are related, not simply to the motivation 
for the agent to possess knowledge, but to the 
motivation to advance knowledge for the human 
race. We will also look at how the motivation to 
know leads to following rules and belief-forming 
procedures known by the epistemic community 
to be truth conducive, and we will see how 
the individual intellectual virtues are knowledge 
conducive. 
The task of defining virtues immediately raises 
the question of how virtues are individuated and 
whether they are unified at some deeper level. 
I will not go very far into this matter, although it 
is an interesting one and ought to be pursued in a 
full theory of virtue. I have no position on the 
question of whether intellectual virtues that share 
a name with certain moral virtues are two differ-
ent virtues or one. Even within the class of intel-
lectual virtues it is difficult to demarcate the 
boundaries of the individual virtues if I am right 
that they all arise out of the motivation for 
knowledge since that implies that all intellectual 
virtues are unified by one general motivation. 
But, of course, the same thing can be said about 
all the other moral virtues since they also can be 
unified by one general motivation for good, and 
knowledge is a form of good. 
-7 Let me address one more point before begin-
ning. The definition of intellectual virtue in terms 
of the motivation for knowledge is circular if we 
then go on to define knowledge in terms of intel-
lectual virtue. The thesis here must be formulated 
less succinctly but without circularity as the thesis 
that the individual intellectual virtues can be 
defined in terms of derivatives of the motivations 
for truth or cognitive contact with reality, where 
the motivation for understanding is assumed to 
be a form of the motivation for cognitive contact 
with reality. I am formulating the position in 
terms of the motivation for knowledge because 
I think that that is closer to the way people actu-
ally think of their own motives and the way those 
motives are described by others, but I am not 
wedded to this view. The formulation in terms of 
knowledge motivation is simpler, and, of course, 
it is only circular when the theory of virtue is 
combined with the theory of knowledge. 
The motivation for knowledge 
Intellectual virtues have been neglected in the 
history of philosophy, but there were discussions 
of them in the early modern period as part of the 
general critical examination of human perceptual 
and cognitive faculties that dominated that era. 
Both Hobbes and Spinoza connected the intellec-
tual as well as the moral virtues with the passions, 
and both traced the source of these virtues to a 
single human motivation, the motivation for self-
preservation or power. In the early part of this 
century John Dewey stressed the place of the 
intellectual virtues in what he called "reflective 
thinking," arising from the desire to attain the 
goals of effective interaction with the world. We 
will look first at some remarks by Hobbes and 
Dewey, and then I will turn to the contemporary 
treatment of the intellectual virtues by James 
Montmarquet in the course of giving my own 
argument for the derivation of the motivational 
components of intellectual virtues from the 
motivation to know. 

VIRTUES OF THE MIND, SELECTIONS 
445 
Let us begin with the lively discussion of the 
causes of intellectual virtue and vice in Hobbes's 
Leviathan: 
The causes of this difference of wits are in the 
passions, and the difference of passions pro-
ceeded partly from the different constitution of 
the body and partly from different education. 
For if the difference proceeds from the temper of 
the brain and the organs of sense, either exterior 
or interior, there would be no less difference of 
men in their sight, hearing, or other sense than in 
their fancies and discretions.5 It proceeds, there-
fore, from the passions, which are different not 
only from the difference of men's complexions, 
but also from their difference of customs and 
education. 
The passions that most of all cause the differ-
ence of wit are principally the more or less desire 
of power, of riches, of knowledge, and of honor. 
All which may be reduced to the first - that is, 
desire of power. For riches, knowledge and honor 
are but several sorts of power. 
And therefore a man who has no great pas-
sion for any of these things but is, as men term it, 
indifferent, though he may be so far a good man 
as to be free from giving offense, yet he cannot 
possibly have either a great fancy or much judg-
ment. For the thoughts are to the desires as scouts 
and spies, to range abroad and find the way to 
the things desired, all steadiness of the mind's 
motion, and all quickness of the same, proceeding 
from thence; for as to have no desire is to be dead, 
so to have weak passions is dullness; and to have 
passions indifferently for everything, GIDDINESS 
and distraction; and to have stronger and more 
vehement passions for anything than is ordinar-
ily seen in others is that which men call 
MADNESS.6 
A couple of points in this passage are of inter-
est to our present concern. First, the motivation 
for knowledge is not a basic motive but is a form 
of the motivation for power, according to Hobbes. 
Second, Hobbes's cognitively ideal person is not 
passionless, but cognitive defects can be traced to 
an excessively strong, excessively weak, or mis-
placed desire for power. I will not question the 
first point. I think Hobbes is probably wrong in 
his reduction of the desire for knowledge to the 
desire for power, but I will not dispute it here 
since even if he is right, the effect is simply to add 
another motivational layer beneath the one I am 
proposing, and so it is no threat to the structure 
of the theory I am proposing. But I want to call 
attention to Hobbes's second point, which I find 
insightful. Hobbes says that cognitive virtues and 
vices arise from differences in a motivation, and 
that motivation is a passion that admits of excess, 
deficiency, and distortion of various sorts, and 
this seems to me to be generally right. I differ with 
Hobbes mainly in that I identify this motivation 
with the motivation for knowledge, whereas 
Hobbes includes several other forms of the moti-
vation for power along with the motivation for 
knowledge. 
If the human drive for knowledge naturally 
and inexorably led to success, there would be no 
need for intellectual virtues. But this motivation 
can be deficient or distorte_d}Il Illany ways, lead-
ing to intellectual vices. Deficiency is presumably 
one of the most common problems, and Ralph 
Waldo Emerson expresses a pessimistic view of 
the human drive for knowledge that illustrates 
how a natural human motivation can be affected 
by lethargy: 
God offers to every mind its choice between 
truth and repose. Take which you please, - you 
can never have both. Between these, as a pendu-
lum, man oscillates. He in whom the love of 
repose predominates will accept the first creed, 
the first philosophy, the first political party he 
meets, - most likely his father's. He gets rest, 
commodity, and reputation; but he shuts the 
door to truth. He in whom the love of truth pre-
dominates will keep himself aloof from all moor-
ings, and afloat. He will abstain from dogmatism, 
and recognize all the opposite negations between 
which, as walls, his being is swung. He submits to 
the inconvenience of suspense and imperfect 
opinion, but he is a candidate for truth, as the 
other is not, and respects the highest law of his 
being. ("Intellect;' Essay 11) 
In this passage Emerson describes how a deficiency 
in the desire for truth leads to such cognitive vices 
as lack of autonomy, closed-mindedness, and dog-
matism. This may lead us to wonder whether an 
excess of the motivation for knowledge can also 
lead to intellectual vices, as Hobbes implies in the 
passage quoted above. This is parallel to the ques-
tion of whether a person can be a moral fanatic: 
excessively motivated by a desire to do or to 

446 
LINDA ZAGZEBSKI 
produce good. Since it is problematic whether 
this is possible, we will not examine it here. 
Few philosophers have given positive directions 
on how to think that are intended to circumvent 
the pitfalls in forming beliefs. The stress has gener-
ally been on the mistakes. A well-known exception 
is Descartes in Rules for the Direction of the Mind, 
and another is John Dewey in How We Think. I will 
not discuss the former since it has been exhaus-
tively examined many times, but I find Dewey 
intriguing if rather nonspecific. Although he does 
not discuss the motivation for knowledge directly, 
he does discuss the motivations to reach our goals 
in action and to make systematic preparations for 
the future and the desire to be free from the control 
of nature, all of which are closely connected with 
knowledge.? These values require the practice of 
what Dewey calls "reflective thinking;' which he 
outlines in some detail: 
No one can tell another person in any definite 
way how he should think, any more than how he 
ought to breathe or to have his blood circulate. 
But the various ways in which we do think can 
be told and can be described in their general 
features. Some of these ways are better than 
others; the reasons why they are better can be 
set forth. The person who understands what 
the better ways of thinking are and why they 
are better can, if he will, change his own per-
sonal ways until they become more effective; 
until, that is to say, they do better the work that 
thinking can do and that other mental opera-
tions cannot do so well. The better way of think-
ing that is to be considered in this book is called 
reflective thinking. (p. 3) 
The disclaimer in the first sentence of the above 
passage is surely too strong, but the rest of the 
paragraph is reasonable. Dewey goes on to say 
that reflective thinking requires not only certain 
skills, but also certain "attitudes": 
Because of the importance of attitudes, ability 
to train thought is not achieved merely by 
knowledge of the best forms of thought. 
Possession of this information is no guarantee 
for ability to think well. Moreover, there are no 
set exercises in correct thinking whose repeated 
performance will cause one to be a good thinker. 
The information and the exercises are both of 
value. But no individual realizes their value 
except as he is personally animated by certain 
dominant attitudes in his own character [empha-
sis added). It was once almost universally 
believed that the mind had faculties, like 
memory and attention, that could be developed 
by repeated exercise, as gymnastic exercises are 
supposed to develop the muscles. This belief is 
now generally discredited in the large sense in 
which it was once held .... 
What can be done, however, is to cultivate 
those attitudes that are favorable to the use of the 
best methods of inquiry and testing. Knowledge 
of the methods alone will not suffice; there must 
be the desire, the will, to employ them. This 
desire is an affair of personal disposition. But on 
the other hand the disposition alone will not suf-
fice. There must also be understanding of the 
forms and techniques that are the channels 
through which these attitudes operate to the best 
advantage. (pp.29-30) 
In this passage Dewey places special importance 
on the desire to employ better ways of thinking, 
claiming that knowledge of methods is not suf-
ficient. He thus traces a path from our motiva-
tion to believe truly and to act effectively to the 
formation of "attitudes" or intellectual virtues 
that lead us to employ certain methods of think-
ing and forming beliefs. For my purposes, the 
salient point is that the foundation of these vir-
tues is a motivation: the motivation to think 
more effectively. 
The "attitudes" Dewey says one needs to culti-
vate are the following: 
Open-mindedness. "This attitude may be defined as 
freedom from prejudice, partisanship, and such 
other habits as close the mind and make it unwill-
ing to consider new problems and entertain new 
ideas" (p. 30). 
Wholeheartedness. "When a person is absorbed, the 
subject carries him on. Questions occur to him 
spontaneously; a flood of suggestions pour in on 
him; further inquiries and readings are indicated 
and followed; instead of having to use his energy 
to hold his mind to the subject. ... the material 
holds and buoys his mind up and gives an onward 
impetus to thinking. A genuine enthusiasm is an 
attitude that operates as an intellectual force. 
A teacher who arouses such an enthusiasm in his 
pupils has done something that no amount of 
formalized method, no matter how correct, can 
accomplish" (pp. 31-2). 

VIRTUES OF THE MIND, SELECTIONS 
447 
Responsibility. "Like sincerity or wholeheartedness, 
responsibility is usually conceived as a moral 
trait rather than as an intellectual resource. But 
it is an attitude that is necessary to win the 
adequate support of desire for new points of 
view and new ideas and of enthusiasm for and 
capacity for absorption in subject matter. These 
gifts may run wild, or at least they may lead the 
mind to spread out too far. They do not of 
themselves insure that centralization, that 
unity, which is essential to good thinking. To be 
intellectually responsible is to consider the 
consequences of a projected step; it means to 
be willing to adopt these consequences when 
they follow reasonably from any position 
already taken. Intellectual responsibility secures 
integrity; that is to say, consistency and har-
mony in belief" (p. 32). 
In the contemporary literature Laurence 
BonJour and Hilary Kornblith8 introduced a 
motivational element into the discussion of epis-
temic normativity in the notion of epistemic 
responsibility, defined by Kornblith as follows: 
"An epistemically responsible agent desires to have 
true beliefs, and thus desires to have his beliefs 
produced by processes which lead to true beliefs; 
his actions are guided by these desires" (p. 34). 
Although Kornblith does not specifically discuss 
intellectual virtues, he implies that a motivation 
or desire is at the root of the evaluation of epis-
temic agents, and that seems to me to be right. A 
more extensive treatment of epistemic virtue and 
its connection with motivation has been given by 
James Montmarquet9 who connects a large set of 
intellectual virtues with the desire for truth, 
claiming that these virtues are qualities a person 
who wants the truth would want to acquire. 
However, it is not Montmarquet's intention to 
define intellectual virtues the way I am proposing 
here or to derive them all from the motivation for 
truth or from the motivation for knowledge. Still, 
Montmarquet's work has an obvious affinity with 
the theory I am proposing. I want to give it close 
attention. 
Recall Montmarquet's classification of the 
epistemic virtues. Briefly, they are the virtues of 
impartiality, or openness to the ideas of others; 
the virtues of intellectual sobriety, or the virtues 
of the careful inquirer who accepts only what is 
warranted by the evidence, and the virtues of 
intellectual courage, which include perseverance 
and determination. Notice that there is quite a bit 
of overlap between these sets of virtues and 
Dewey's. The major differences are in Dewey's 
virtue of wholeheartedness and Montmarquet's 
virtues of courage. 
Montmarquet calls the desire for truth "epis-
temic conscientiousness" and argues that some 
intellectual virtues arise out of this desire. 
The first point to be made ... is that such quali-
ties as open-mindedness are widely regarded as 
truth-conducive. In contrast to the highly con-
troversial claims of various theories, the truth-
conduciveness of qualities such as openness and 
intellectual sobriety is widely acknowledged to 
be a fact, not only by the expert (if there are 
"experts" on any such matter as this), but also by 
the average nonexpert individual (at least if he or 
she is suitably queried). Take openness. Unless 
one starts from the unlikely presumption that 
one has found the truth already and that the con-
trary advice and indications of others is liable, 
therefore, only to lead one astray, one can hardly 
possess a sincere love of truth, but no concern 
about one's own openness. Or take intellectual 
sobriety. Here, too, unless one starts from the 
unlikely presumption that one's immediate reac-
tions and unchecked inferences are so highly 
reliable as not to be improved by any tendency to 
withhold full assent until they are further inves-
tigated, the virtue of sobriety will have to be 
acknowledged. Or, finally, take intellectual cour-
age. Again, unless one makes an initially unap-
pealing assumption that one's own ideas - true as 
they may seem to oneself - are so liable to be 
mistaken as to require not only deference to the 
opinions of others, but also a deep sense that 
these are opinions more liable to be correct than 
one's own (even when one cannot see how or 
why) [, unless] one makes such an initial assump-
tion, one will have to acknowledge intellectual 
courage as a virtue. 10 
The reader should not be misled into thinking 
that this is an argument that these virtues are 
truth conducive; in fact, Montmarquet questions 
the truth conduciveness of openness and courage, 
as we will see. It is, instead, an argument that they 
are traits persons who desire the truth would want 
to have. I take this to mean that such persons 
would be motivated to act the way open-minded, 
intellectually sober, cautious, courageous, and 

448 
LINDA ZAGZEBSKI 
persevering people act in their belief-forming 
processes. So if a person is motivated to get the 
truth, she would be motivated to consider the ideas 
of others openly and fairly, to consider the evi-
dence with care, not to back down too quickly 
when criticized, and all the rest. This seems to me 
to be correct. It means that the motivation for 
knowledge gives rise to the motivation to act in 
ways that are distinctive of the various intellectual 
virtues Montmarquet mentions. Undoubtedly it 
also leads to the motivation to acquire Dewey's 
trait of intellectual responsibility; in fact, the 
motivation to be able to accurately predict conse-
quences is a form of the motivation to know. The 
trait that Dewey calls "wholeheartedness;' the 
attitude of enthusiasm, which moves us onward 
in thinking, is also a form of the motivation to 
know, in fact, an intensification of it. It is reason-
able to conclude, then, that a wide range of intel-
lectual virtues arise out of the same general 
motivation, the motivation for knowledge, and 
have the same general aim, knowledge. 
The success component of the 
intellectual virtues 
Intellectually virtuous motivations lead the agent 
to guide her belief-forming processes in certain 
ways. They make her receptive to processes known 
to her epistemic community to be truth condu-
cive and motivate her to use them, even if it means 
overcoming contrary inclinations. As Dewey tells 
us, it is not enough to be aware that a process is 
reliable; a person will not reliably use such a proc-
ess without certain virtues. At least this is the case 
with reliable processes that are not unconscious 
or automatic. Contemporary research in episte-
mology has focused extensively on the concept of 
a truth-conducive belief-forming process, as well 
as on many specific examples of these processes. 
I have no intention of duplicating or replacing 
this work here. My purpose is to point out that 
the motivation for knowledge leads a person to 
follow rules and belief-forming processes that are 
truth conducive and whose truth conduciveness 
she is able to discover and use by the possession 
of intellectual virtue. 
Intellectually virtuous motivations not only 
lead to following reliable procedures but also lead 
to the development of particular skills suited to 
the acquisition of knowledge in a certain area. 
Skills are more closely connected to effectiveness 
in a particular area of life or knowledge than are 
virtues, which are psychically prior and provide 
the motivations to develop skills. Intellectual 
skills are sets of truth-conducive procedures that 
are acquired through habitual practice and have 
application to a certain area of truth acquisition. 
Since the path to knowledge varies with the con-
text, the subject matter, and the way a community 
makes a division of intellectual labor, people with 
the same intellectual virtues will not all need to 
have the same skills, at least not to the same 
degree. Clearly the importance of fact-finding 
skills, skills of spatial reasoning, and skills in the 
subtler branches of logic are not equally impor-
tant for all areas of the pursuit of knowledge. But 
all of these skills could arise in different people 
from the same intellectual virtues - for example, 
carefulness, thoroughness, and autonomy. 
We have already seen that virtue is more than 
a motivation. Of course, we would expect many 
virtuous motivations to lead to success in carry-
ing out the aims of the motive. So, for example, 
the motive to be careful or persevering probably 
leads somewhat reliably to success in being careful 
or persevering, but the correlation with success 
is probably much less in the case of such virtu-
ous motives as the motive to be autonomous, 
the motive to be courageous, and perhaps even the 
motive to be open-minded. The weak connection 
between motive and success is also noticeable in 
Dewey's virtue of wholeheartedness (if it is a 
virtue), since it is surely naive to think that the 
motivation to be enthusiastic reliably leads to 
being enthusiastic. But even when the motiva-
tional component of a virtue is generally related 
to success, we do not call a person virtuous who is 
not reliably successful herself, whether or not 
most people who have the trait are successful in 
carrying out the aims of the virtue in question. So 
if she is truly open-minded, she must actually be 
receptive to new ideas, examining them in an 
evenhanded way and not ruling them out because 
they are not her own; merely being motivated to 
act in these ways is not sufficient. Similarly, if she 
is intellectually courageous, she must, in actual 
fact, refrain from operating from an assumption 
that the views of others are more likely to be true 
than her own and must be willing to withstand 

VIRTUES OF THE MIND, SELECTIONS 
449 
attack when she has good reason to think she is 
right, but not otherwise. Parallel remarks apply to 
the other intellectual virtues. It follows that each 
of these intellectual virtues has a motivational 
component arising out of the motivation to know 
and a component of reliable success in achieving 
the aim of the motivational component. 
Most virtues are acquired by habituation and 
we only consider them virtues when they are 
entrenched in the agent's character. Entrenchment 
is a necessary feature of virtues because they are 
often needed the most when they encounter 
resistance. For example, the tendency to be moti-
vated by compassion does not signify the exist-
ence of the virtue of compassion in a person who 
loses this motivation in the presence of physically 
unattractive persons in need, even if these cir-
cumstances do not arise very often. Similarly, 
the tendency to be motivated to fairly evaluate the 
arguments of others does not signify the existence 
of the virtue of intellectual fairness in a person 
who loses this motivation when confronted with 
arguments for unappealing conclusions, even if 
she is lucky enough not to encounter such argu-
ments very often. So the motivational component 
of a virtue must be inculcated sufficiently to reli-
ably withstand the influence of contrary motiva-
tions when those motivations do not themselves 
arise from virtues. The more that virtuous moti-
vations and the resulting behavior become fixed 
habits, the more they are able to reliably achieve 
the ends of the virtue in those cases in which there 
are contrary tendencies to be overcome. 
One way to distinguish among the truth-
conducive qualities those that are virtues and 
those that are not is by the difference in the value 
we place on the entrenchment of these traits. 
Montmarquet mentions that we would not want 
the desire to uphold behaviorist psychology to be 
an entrenched trait even if it is truth conducive,ll 
unlike the desire for the truth itself or, I would 
add, the desire to be open-minded, careful in 
evaluating evidence, autonomous, etc. The latter 
traits, when entrenched, lead to the truth partly 
because of their entrenchment, whereas the desire 
to uphold behaviorism is less likely to lead to the 
truth if it is entrenched than if it is not. The intel-
lectual virtues are a subset of truth-conducive 
traits that are entrenched and whose entrenchment 
aids their truth conduciveness. 12 The value of the 
entrenchment of a trait would, of course, depend 
partly on the environment in which it is 
entrenched.13 Most of the qualities I have been 
calling intellectual virtues - traits such as open-
mindedness, carefulness, and perseverance - are 
to a great extent environment neutral, but this 
does not mean that there are not other intellec-
tual virtues that are more context sensitive. 
Many intellectual virtues, including those 
mentioned by Dewey, not only arise from and 
serve the motivation to know the truth, but are 
also crucial in such activities as the arts, crafts, 
and games. The ultimate aim of these activities is 
not knowledge but something practical: creating 
an artistically superior sonnet, making a fine 
violin, winning a chess game. 14 These ends cannot 
be successfully achieved without knowledge in 
one of its senses, but probably not the kind of 
knowledge whose object is true propositions. At 
least, that sort of knowledge is not the one most 
fundamentally connected to success in these 
activities, which is more a matter of knowing-
how rather than knowing-that. Still, some of the 
same virtues that arise out of the desire for knowl-
edge and aid its successful achievement can also 
aid the achievement of these practical ends and, 
in some people, may arise more out of a desire for 
the practical end than out of a desire for knowl-
edge. I do not claim, then, that intellectual virtues 
arise only from the motivation to know, much 
less do I claim they arise only from the motiva-
tion to have propositional knowledge, and I cer-
tainly do not claim that their exercise is properly 
directed only at knowledge. The value of intellec-
tual virtues extends beyond their epistemic use. 
So not only is the distinction between intellectual 
and moral virtues highly artificial, but the dis-
tinction between intellectual virtues and the 
practical virtues needed for doing such things as 
creating sonnets, making violins, or winning 
chess games is artificial as well. Again, I will not 
discuss the problem of virtue individuation. There 
may be some difference between, say, the kind of 
openness displayed in writing a Shakespeare 
sonnet and the kind of openness displayed in 
pure scientific investigation. This difference may 
amount to a distinction in the virtues themselves 
if virtue identity is determined by the ultimate 
end of the virtue. The point is that even if this is 
the case, there are practical and intellectual virtues 

450 
LINDA ZAGZEBSKI 
so similar to each other that they are very difficult 
to distinguish, and this means that it is highly 
implausible to maintain that intellectual virtues 
are fundamentally different in kind from the vir-
tues needed for the kinds of practical activities 
just named. 
Amelie Rorty points out that while the utility 
and success of intellectual virtues depend on their 
becoming habits that lead to action without prior 
deliberation, habits can become pathological or 
idiotic. 15 They become pathological, she says, 
when they become so habitual that their exercise 
extends to situations that no longer concern 
their internal aims. So generosity is pathological 
when it debilitates its recipients. The capacity 
to generate what Rorty calls "bravura virtuoso 
thought experiments" becomes pathological when 
it applies only to a very rare, narrow range of cir-
cumstances (p. 13). A virtuous habit becomes idi-
otic when its exercise resists a reasonable 
redirection of its aims, a redirection that is appro-
priate to changing circumstances. Rorty gives the 
example of courage when one is unable to make 
the transition from its military use to its use in 
political negotiation. In the intellectual sphere, 
the virtue of properly arguing from authority 
becomes idiotic when it is used to block the inves-
tigation of the legitimacy of the authority itself 
(p. 14). Some of these problems can be addressed 
by the function of the virtue of phronesis, but we 
do need to be reminded of the potential negative 
effects of habit. Nevertheless, these considera-
-tions do not falsify the claim that there is an ele-
ment of habit in virtue. So far, then, our analysis 
of the components of intellectual virtue has iden-
tified a component of habitual motivation arising 
from the motive to know and a component of 
reliable success in achieving the aims of the virtue 
in question. 
I have said that the primary motivation under-
lying the intellectual virtues is the motivation for 
knowledge. Such a motivation clearly includes 
the desire to have true beliefs and to avoid false 
ones, and we have looked at how such a motiva-
tion leads a person to follow rules or procedures 
of belief formation that are known to her epis-
temic community to be truth conducive. The 
motivation for knowledge also leads its posses-
sor to acquire the motivational components dis-
tinctive of the individual intellectual virtues: 
open-mindedness, fair-mindedness, intellectual 
flexibility, and so on. And the motivation to be, 
say, open-minded, will lead to acquiring patterns 
of behavior characteristic of the open-minded; 
the motivation to be fair-minded will lead to 
acquiring patterns of behavior characteristic of 
the intellectually fair; and so on. It is doubtful 
that such patterns of behavior are fully describa-
ble in terms of following rules or procedures. It is 
clear, then, that the following of truth-conducive 
procedures is not all that a knowledge-motivated 
person does, both because the motivation for 
truth leads to behavior that is not fully describa-
ble as the following of procedures, and because 
the motivation for knowledge includes more than 
the motivation for truth. The motivation for 
knowledge leads us to be aware of the re,liability 
of certain belief-forming processes and the unre-
liability of others, but it also leads us to be aware 
that there are reliable belief-forming mechanisms 
whose unreliability is not yet known. And simi-
larly, there are unreliable belief-forming mecha-
nisms whose unreliability is not yet known. This 
is something we cannot ignore; otherwise, knowl-
edge about knowledge would not progress. This 
means that intellectual virtues such as flexibility, 
open-mindedness, and even boldness are highly 
important. It also suggests that there is more than 
one sense in which a virtues can be truth condu-
cive. In the sense most commonly discussed by 
reliabilists, truth conduciveness is a function of 
the number of true beliefs and the proportion of 
true to false beliefs generated by a process. There 
is another sense of truth conduciveness, however, 
which is important at the frontiers of knowledge 
and in areas, like philosophy, that generate very 
few true beliefs, no matter how they are formed. 
I suggest that we may legitimately call a trait or 
procedure truth conducive if it is a necessary con-
dition for advancing knowledge in some area 
even though it generates very few true beliefs and 
even if a high percentage of the beliefs formed as 
the result of this trait or procedure are false. For 
example, the discovery of new reliable procedures 
may arise out of intellectual traits that lead a 
person to hit on falsehood many times before hit-
ting on the truth. As long as these traits (in com-
bination with other intellectual virtues) are 
self-correcting, they will eventually advance human 
knowledge, but many false beliefs may have to be 
discarded along the way. A person motivated to 
know would be motivated to act cognitively in a 

VIRTUES OF THE MIND, SELECTIONS 
451 
manner that is truth conducive in this sense, 
I would argue, in addition to acting in a way that is 
truth conducive in the more common sense. 
The virtues of originality, creativity, and 
inventiveness are truth conducive in the sense 
just described. Clearly, their truth conduciveness 
in the sense of producing a high proportion of 
true beliefs is much lower than that of the ordi-
nary virtues of careful and sober inquiry, but 
they are truth conducive in the sense that they 
are necessary for the advancement of human 
knowledge. If only 5 per cent of a creative think-
er's original ideas turn out to be true, her 
creativity is certainly truth conducive because 
the stock of knowledge of the human race has 
increased through her creativity. The way in 
which these virtues are truth conducive is prob-
ably circuitous and unpredictable, and for this 
reason it is doubtful that they give rise to a set of 
rules, and, in fact, they may even defy those rules 
already established. Often creative people simply 
operate on intuition, which is usually what we 
call an ability when it works and we don't know 
how it works. Ernest Dimnet relates the story 
that Pasteur was constantly visited by intuitions 
that he was afterward at great pains to check by 
the ordinary canons of science (1928, p. 187).16 
Presumably, following the canons in the absence 
of his bold and original ideas would not have 
gotten him (or us) nearly as far. Dimnet tells 
another anecdote about the creative process in 
novelists. Apparently, when Sir Walter Scott hit 
upon the idea for a new novel, he would read 
volume after volume that had no reference to his 
subject, merely because reading intensified the 
working of his mind. Dimnet comments that this 
process did for Scott's power of invention what 
the crowds in the city did for Dickens's (p. 7). Of 
course, novelists are not aiming for truth in the 
sense that is the major focus of this book, but the 
same point could apply to creative work in phi-
losophy, history, mathematics, and the sciences. 
The knowledge-motivated person will want to 
have the virtues of creativity to the extent that she 
is able, and that gives us another reason why the 
motive to know includes more than the motive to 
follow procedures known to be reliable. The divi-
sion of epistemic labor probably limits the 
number of people who are strongly motivated in 
,this way, but their existence is important for the 
knowledge of the whole community.17 
In "The Doctrine of Chances," C. S. Peirce 
expressed the opinion that even the scientific 
method is truth conducive only in a sense simi-
lar to the one I have just described. Peirce says 
that the scientist must be unselfish because he is 
not likely to arrive at the truth for himself in the 
short run. Instead, his procedures are likely to 
lead the scientific community to better theories 
and more comprehensive truths in the long 
run. 18 If Peirce is right, the sense in which the 
virtues of originality and creativity are truth 
conducive is not clearly different from the way in 
which the virtues of careful scientific inquiry are 
truth conducive. 
Another reason the motivation to know is not 
fully expressed by following well-known reliable 
belief-forming processes is that, as already 
remarked, the motivation to know includes the 
motivation for understanding. Knowledge has 
been associated with certainty and understand-
ing for long periods of its history, but generally 
not with both at the same time.19 The virtues 
that lead to the kind of knowledge that gives the 
possessor certainty may be different from the 
virtues that lead to understanding, and the fol-
lowing of belief-forming processes known to the 
epistemic community to be reliable may be 
insufficient for either one. For one thing, to aim 
at certainty is not just to aim at truth but to aim 
to have an awareness of truth that has a certain 
quality. To get an awareness with that quality it 
may not be enough to use processes known or 
truly believed by one's epistemic community to 
be reliable. One may need to be aware of how 
and why one's belief-forming process is justified, 
or at least how and why it is reliable and the 
degree of its reliability. The virtues that enable 
one to see how one's belief can stand up to attack 
contribute to certainty. Virtues that lead to clar-
ity in one's grasp of a matter may also contribute 
to certainty. Aiming at understanding is even 
farther removed from using procedures known 
to be reliable, because understanding is not a 
property whose object is a single proposition. 
Those virtues that enable the agent to see con-
nections among her beliefs - introspective atten-
tiveness and insight in its various forms - are 
understanding conducive. All of these virtues 
deserve careful attention, and although I will not 
stop to investigate them individually, I hope that 
others will do so. 

452 
LINDA ZAGZEBSKI 
Notes 
Alisdair MacIntyre, After Virtue (Notre 
Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 
1984). 
2 Gregory Trianosky, "Virtue, Action, and the 
Good Life: Towards a Theory of the Virtues," 
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 68 (1987), pp. 
124-47. 
3 Robert C. Roberts, "Aristotle on Virtues and 
Emotions;' Philosophical Studies 56 (1989), 
pp.293-306. 
4 In Reason and the Heart: A Prolegomenon to 
a Critique of Passional Reason (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1996), ch. 2, William 
Wainwright discusses the love of being in 
general as an epistemic virtue recognized by 
Jonathan Edwards. 
5 Hobbes implies here that people do not 
differ as much in their sensory faculties as in 
their virtues and vices. He also says that part 
of what leads us to call a quality a virtue 
is that it is uncommon. The Hobbesian 
approach would hesitate, then, in attributing 
anything virtuous to cases of simple percep-
tual beliefs that are produced by normally 
functioning faculties. 
6 Thomas Hobbes, Leviathan (New York: 
Macmillan, 1958), pt. 1, ch. 8, pp. 68-9. 
7 John Dewey, How We Think (Boston: D. C. 
Heath and Co., 1933), ch. 2, sec. 1; page 
numbers given in parenthesis in the text. 
8 Laurence BonJour, "Externalist Theories of 
Empirical 
Knowledge," 
III 
Studies 
In 
Epistemology. Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 
vol. 5 (Notre Dame, IN: Notre Dame University 
Press, 1980); Hilary Kornblith, "Justified 
Belief and Epistemically Responsible Action;' 
Philosophical Review 92 (1983), pp. 33-48. 
9 James A. Montmarquet, "Epistemic Virtue," 
Mind 96 (1986), pp. 482-97; "Epistemic 
Virtue," in Jonathan Dancy and Ernest Sosa 
(eds), A Companion to Epistemology (Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell, 1992); Epistemic Virtue and 
Doxastic 
Responsibility 
(Lanham, 
MD: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 1993), ch. 2. 
10 
Epistemic Virtue, pp. 27-8. 
11 
Ibid., pp. 26-7. 
12 
Charles Young has suggested to me that a 
problematic case is the desire that the inter-
esting be true, a quality whose entrenchment 
might have value, he suggests, independently 
of its capacity to reliably lead to the truth. 
There is a passage in the Meno (81de) in 
which Socrates seems to be saying that even 
if we have no rational grounds for preferring 
the religious story of 81ad to the eristic story 
of 80d, we are better off believing the former: 
it makes us energetic seekers, whereas the 
eristic story makes us lazy. I have noticed in 
myself and others the tendency to go for the 
more metaphysically exciting position on 
such issues as the nature of time or the exist-
ence of abstract objects, quite apart from a 
consideration of the weight of the argumen-
tative evidence. Such a tendency is clearly 
dangerous, but it is not obviously a bad 
thing. There might even be value in its 
entrenchment. 
13 
I thank Hilary Kornblith for drawing my 
attention to this point. 
14 
I thank Charles Young for this point. 
15 
Amelie Rorty, "From Exasperating Virtues to 
Civic 
Virtues," 
American 
Philosophical 
Quarterly 38 (1996), pp. 303-14. 
16 
Ernest Dimnet, The Art of Thinking (New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1928), p. 187. 
17 
A careful study of the psychology of crea-
tivity would probably show that motiva-
tion operates in a different way in the 
virtues of creativity and originality than it 
does in the other intellectual virtues. The 
motivation to be creative does not lead to 
being creative in the way the motivation to 
be careful leads to being careful. I imagine 
that creative people begin by being creative 
involuntarily and find it pleasant, exciting, 
even thrilling. These feelings give them the 
impetus to permit their creativity a certain 
latitude, which may lead them to ignore 
the established canons, at least temporar-
ily. This means that the motivational com-
ponent in creativity does not so much lead 
its possessors to acquire the trait as allow 
them to give it free rein, and this may lead 
to ignoring the dictates of certain other 
virtues. 
18 
Christopher Hookway has an interesting 
discussion of this position of Peirce and 
related views. See C. S. Peirce, The Essential 

VIRTUES OF THE MIND, SELECTIONS 
453 
Peirce, vol. 1, ed. Nathan Houser and 
Christian Kloesel (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1992) and Christopher 
Hookway, "Mimicking Foundationalism: On 
Sentiment and Self-Control," European 
Journal of Philosophy 1:2 (1993), pp. 156-74. 
19 
See Mary Tiles and Jim Tiles, An Introduction 
to Historical Epistemology (Cambridge, MA: 
Basil Blackwell, 1993), and Stephen Everson, 
Epistemology, 
Companions 
to 
Ancient 
Thought, vol. 1 (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1990), for historical discus-
sions of the difference between the values of 
certainty and understanding in different 
periods of epistemological history. 

CHAPTER 34 
Virtues and Vices of Virtue 
Epistemology 
John Greco 
In this paper I want to examine the virtues and 
vices of virtue epistemology. My conclusion will 
be that the position is correct, when qualified 
appropriately. The central claim of virtue episte-
mology is that, Gettier problems aside, knowledge 
is true belief which results from a cognitive virtue. 
In section one I will clarify this claim with some 
brief remarks about the nature of virtues in gen-
eral, and cognitive virtues in particular. In section 
two I will consider two objections to the theory of 
knowledge which results. In section three of the 
paper I will argue that virtue epistemology can be 
qualified so as to avoid the objections raised in 
section two. 
Specifically, I will argue that not all reliable 
cognitive virtues give rise to knowledge. Rather, 
a cognitive virtue gives rise to knowledge only 
if (i) it is reliable, and (ii) the reliability of the 
virtue is the result of epistemically responsible 
doxastic practices. In cases of knowledge, relia-
bility is grounded in responsible belief forma-
tion and maintenance. The resulting position 
has ramifications for the analysis of knowledge, 
the internalism-externalism debate concerning 
epistemic justification, and the problem of 
skepticism. 
Originally published in Canadian Journal of Philosophy 
23,3 (1993), selections from pp. 413-32. 
I What is a Cognitive Virtue? 
A virtue, in one important sense, is an ability. 
An ability, in turn, is a stable disposition to 
achieve certain results under certain conditions. 
Further, when we say that a subject S has an abil-
ity to achieve certain results, we imply that it is 
no accident that S achieves those results. S's dis-
position to achieve the relevant results is 
grounded in certain properties of S, such that 
under the appropri,!te conditions any subject 
with those properties would tend to achieve 
those results. 
For example, Don Mattingly has the ability to 
hit baseballs. This means that Mattingly has a 
stable disposition to hit baseballs under appro-
priate conditions, although Mattingly will not hit 
the baseball every time under those conditions. 
Further, it is no accident that Mattingly tends to 
hit baseballs. Mattingly's tendency to hit baseballs 
is grounded in certain properties of Mattingly, 
such that anyone with those properties would 
also tend to hit baseballs with similar success in 
similar conditions. 
A more exact definition of cognitive virtue is 
as follows: 
(V) 
A mechanism M for generating and/or 
maintaining beliefs is a cognitive virtue 
if and only if M is an ability to believe 
true propositions and avoid believing 

VIRTUES AND VICES OF VIRTUE EPISTEMOLOGY 
455 
false propositions within a field of 
propositions F, when one is in a set of 
circumstances C. 
According to the above formulation, what makes 
a cognitive mechanism a cognitive virtue is that 
it is reliable in generating true beliefs rather than 
false beliefs in the relevant field and in the rele-
vant circumstances. It is correct to say, therefore, 
that virtue epistemology is a kind of reliabilism. 
Whereas generic reliabilism maintains that justi-
fied belief is belief which results from a reliable 
cognitive process, virtue epistemology puts a 
restriction on the kind of process which is 
allowed. Specifically, the cognitive processes 
which are important for justification and knowl-
edge are those which have their bases in a cogni-
tive virtue. 
Let us use the term "positive epistemic status" 
to designate that property (whatever it may be) 
which turns true belief into knowledge, Gettier 
problems aside. Then an important corollary of 
virtue epistemology is as follows. 
(VE) 
S's belief that p has positive epistemic 
status for S if and only if S's believing 
that p is the result of some cognitive 
virtue of S. 
The claim embodied in (VE) has a high degree of 
initial plausibility. By making the idea of faculty 
reliability central, virtue epistemology explains 
nicely why beliefs caused by perception and 
memory often have positive epistemic status, 
while beliefs caused by wishful thinking and 
superstition do not. Second, the theory gives us a 
basis for answering certain kinds of skepticism. 
Specifically, we may agree that if we were brains 
in a vat, or victims of a Cartesian demon, then we 
would not have knowledge even in those rare 
cases where our beliefs turned out true. But 
virtue epistemology explains that what is impor-
tant for knowledge is that our cognitive faculties 
are in fact reliable in the conditions we are in. 
And so we do have knowledge so long as we are 
in fact not victims of a Cartesian demon, or 
brains in a vat. 
But although virtue epistemology has initial 
plausibility, it faces at least two substantial objec-
tions. I turn to those objections now. 
II 
Objections to Virtue Epistemology 
1 The evil demon problem for 
virtue epistemology 
The first objection faced by virtue epistemology is 
that (VE) seems too strong. This objection arises 
if we think that positive epistemic status is closely 
related to epistemic justification. More specifi-
cally, it seems possible that an epistemic agent 
could be justified in believing that p, even when 
her intellectual faculties are largely unreliable. 
Suppose, for example, that Kathy is the victim of a 
Cartesian deceiver. Despite her best efforts almost 
none of Kathy's beliefs about the world around 
her are true. It is clear that in this case Kathy's fac-
ulties of perception are almost wholly unreliable. 
But we would not want to say that none of Kathy's 
perceptual beliefs are justified. If Kathy believes 
that there is a tree in her yard, and if she bases this 
belief on the kind of experience usually caused by 
trees, then it seems that she is as justified as we 
would be regarding a similar belief. The problem 
for virtue epistemology is to account for this intu-
ition. There is something about Kathy's belief 
which is epistemically valuable, i.e., valuable in a 
way which is relevant for having knowledge. Yet it 
is clear that Kathy's belief is not the result of a cog-
nitive virtue in the sense defined by (V). 
Sosa's strategy for addressing the evil demon 
problem is to make justification relative to an 
environment. Thus Sosa recognizes that there is 
something valuable about Kathy's belief, even 
though that belief has its origin in wholly unreli-
able cognitive faculties. What is valuable about 
Kathy's belief, So sa argues, is that it is produced 
by cognitive faculties which would be reliable in 
our environment. 
On the present proposal, aptness is relative to an 
environment. Relative to our actual environment 
A, our automatic experience-belief mechanisms 
count as virtues that yield much truth and justifi-
cation and aptness. Of course, relative to the 
demonic environment D, such mechanisms are 
not virtuous and yield neither truth nor aptness. It 
follows that relative to D the demon's victims are 
not apt, and yet relative to A their beliefs are apt. 1 
The above proposal by Sosa is an interesting 
one, but some questions arise. First, couldn't we 

456 
JOHN GRECO 
construct the example so that Kathy's cognitive 
mechanisms are not reliable relative to our envi-
ronment? Thus suppose that Kathy is a brain in a 
vat, hooked up to a super computer which causes 
her to have experiences exactly similar to the 
experiences that I am having now. If in these cir-
cumstances Kathy forms the belief that there is a 
glass of water on the table in front of her, her 
belief should be as justified as is my belief that 
there is a glass of water on the table in front of 
me. But if Kathy were in my environment her 
cognitive faculties would not be reliable at all, 
and in fact would be incapable of connecting her 
with reality at all. For if Kathy were in myenvi-
ronment, rather than hooked up to a super 
computer, she would lack the faculties for pro-
ducing experiences. She would be a helpless brain 
on a desk. 
Or suppose that Kathy's powers of reasoning 
are helped by her vat environment. We may imag-
ine that Kathy's natural reasoning mechanisms 
are defective, but that the fluids in the vat serve to 
correct the defect. Thus inside the vat environ-
ment Kathy is a flawless reasoner. But if Kathy 
were in a normal environment, i.e., inside a 
normal head with normal sensory apparatus, her 
reasoning mechanisms would be defective and 
thus unreliable. Now suppose that Kathy believes 
that the house in front of her was built before 
1900, and that she believes this partly on the basis 
of her present experience and partly on the basis of 
her reasoning from this experience. It seems to 
me that Kathy could be perfectly justified in this 
belief, even though she is a brain in a vat and the 
cognitive mechanisms which produce her belief 
are not reliable. However, the mechanisms which 
produce Kathy's belief are not reliable relative to 
our environment either, since in our environment 
Kathy would lack the vat fluids which correct her 
cognitive defects. 
Sosa might attempt to solve the problem as 
follows. We could define environments very 
specifically, so as to include being in a normal 
head, etc., and then define sets of circumstances 
in terms of experiential and doxastic inputs. 
Cognitive mechanisms would then be disposi-
tions to form certain beliefs in a field, given 
certain experiential and doxastic inputs. We 
could then say that what is valuable about 
Kathy is not that she would have virtues if she 
were in our environment, but that the cognitive 
mechanisms she does have in her environment 
would be virtues in our environment. 2 
I take it that there are at least two problems 
with the latest proposal: one for Sosa's positions 
in particular; and one for virtue epistemology in 
general. First, Sosa's position requires an epis-
temic perspective on one's own cognitive virtues 
in order to have reflective justification, and in 
order to solve the generality problem.3 But it is 
implausible that the typical believer has such a 
perspective when virtues are defined in terms of 
experiential inputs. I take it that the experience-
belief pairs that would describe a reliable mecha-
nism must be very detailed regarding the quality 
of the experiences involved. But in the typical 
case there is no such detailed perspective on even 
our present experiences, much less the range 
of our possible experiences. 
Second, Sosa's account of what is valuable 
about Kathy's belief assumes that Kathy's cogni-
tive mechanisms would be reliable in our envi-
ronment. But this assumes that our cognitive 
mechanisms are reliable in our environment. 
We think Kathy is reliable because she is like us 
in relevant respects, and we think we are reli-
able. But suppose we are victims of an evil 
deceiver, or that we are brains in a community 
vat. Then Kathy's mechanisms are no more reli-
able in our environment than they are in hers. 
And thus, according to Sosa's account, Kathy's 
beliefs are not justified relative to our environ-
ment. But this seems wrong - there seems to be 
something valuable about Kathy's 
beliefs 
whether or not she or we are victims of an evil 
deceiver. There is something epistemically 
important about the way her and our beliefs are 
formed, whether or not they are formed via cog-
nitive faculties which are objectively reliable 
relative to our environment. 
We can pursue this point by considering the 
second of our two objections to virtue epistemology. 
2 
The problem of epistemic irresponsibility 
The second objection to be considered is that 
(VE) is too weak. Specifically, we can imagine 
cases where S's cognitive faculties are highly reli-
able with respect to his belief that p, but where 
Sis epistemically irresponsible in believing that p. 
Such a case may arise when S has substantial but 
misleading evidence against his belief that p. 

VIRTUES AND VICES OF VIRTUE EPISTEMOLOGY 
457 
Consider the case of Mary, who is in most 
respects a normal human being. The relevant dif-
ference is that Mary's cognitive faculties produce 
the belief in her that there is a tiger nearby when-
ever there is a tiger nearby, and even in cases 
where Mary does not see, hear or otherwise per-
ceive a nearby tiger. Mary's brain is designed so as 
to be sensitive to an electromagnetic field emitted 
only by tigers, thus causing her to form the rele-
vant belief in the appropriate situation, and with-
out any corresponding experience, sensory or 
otherwise. We can imagine that this cognitive fea-
ture was designed by natural processes of evolu-
tion, or that it was literally designed by a beneficent 
creator, one who realizes that tigers are dangerous 
to beings like Mary and who therefore wishes to 
equip her with a reliable warning device. Now 
suppose that a tiger is walking nearby, and that 
Mary forms the appropriate belief. Add that Mary 
has no evidence that there is a tiger in the area, 
nor any evidence that she has such a faculty. 
Rather, she has considerable evidence against her 
belief that there are tigers in the area. Clearly, 
Mary's belief that there is a tiger nearby does not 
have positive epistemic status in this situation, 
even though the belief is caused by properly func-
tioning faculties in an appropriate environment. 
Mary does not know that there is a tiger nearby. 
Again, the explanation for this is that Mary's 
belief is epistemically irresponsible. Given the 
way things look from Mary's point of view, she 
ought not to believe that there is a tiger nearby. 
Sosa's strategy for addressing this kind of 
example recognizes the importance of S's point of 
view by invoking S's epistemic perspective. Sosa 
makes a distinction between animal knowledge 
and reflective knowledge. For animal knowledge, 
it is sufficient that S's true belief be caused by a 
reliable faculty. For reflective knowledge, we must 
add that S has a true grasp of the fact that her 
belief is grounded in a reliable cognitive faculty. 
This grasp must in turn result from a faculty of 
faculties, which gives rise to the required epis-
temic perspective. 
For one is able to boost one's justification in 
favor of P if one can see one's belief of P as in a 
field F and in circumstances C, such that one has 
a faculty (a competence or aptitude) to believe 
correctly in field F when in conditions C. ... One 
thereby attributes to oneself some intrinsic 
state such that when there arises a question in 
field F and one is in conditions C, that intrinsic 
state adjusts one's belief to the facts in that field 
so that one always or very generally believes 
correctly! 
According to Sosa, to "see" one's belief that p 
as in a field and circumstances and to "attribute" 
to oneself reliability in that field and those cir-
cumstances, is to have true beliefs to that effect, 
where those true beliefs are themselves products 
of a cognitive virtue. And now we may see how 
this position can be applied to the case above. 
According to Sosa, Mary has animal knowledge 
but not reflective knowledge. Further, he can say 
that Mary's belief is reflectively unjustified, since 
her belief actually conflicts with her epistemic 
perspective on her faculties. 
But the problem with this proposal is that we 
seldom have such beliefs about our beliefs and 
about our cognitive faculties. In the typical case, 
we have no beliefs at all about the sources of our 
beliefs, or about our reliability in particular fields 
and circumstances. 
Or at least this is so for occurrent beliefs. Is it 
plausible that we typically have such beliefs dispo-
sitionally? Where we do have such a dispositional 
perspective, the field and circumstances that per-
spective specifies are probably the wrong ones. 
Specifically, to the extent that I attribute to myself 
certain cognitive faculties, those faculties are spec-
ified much too broadly to be of any use. For exam-
pie, consider my belief that there is a glass of water 
on the table. In the typical case I have no occur-
rent beliefs about the source of this belief in a 
given cognitive virtue. Let me now consider any 
dispositional beliefs I might have. After consider-
ing the issue for a moment, it occurs to me that 
my belief about the glass is the result of sight. But 
if you ask me to get very specific about a field of 
propositions F, or a set of circumstances C, such 
that I am highly reliable in that field when in those 
circumstances, I am at a loss. I simply do not have 
very specific beliefs in this area, nor is it plausible 
that such beliefs are available dispositionally if 
only I think about it a little more. 
We may conclude that in the typical case a 
believer will not have a true grasp of the inven-
tory of cognitive faculties she possesses, nor will 
she have a perspective on which faculty is 
responsible for producing the particular belief in 

458 
JOHN GRECO 
question. On the other hand, there does seem to 
be something importantly right about Sosa's 
proposal. I want to argue that Sosa is right to 
invoke S's point of view as an important element 
for having knowledge, but that he invokes 
S's point of view in the wrong sense. Below I will 
develop a different sense in which Mary's belief is 
correct or appropriate from her point of view, 
and I will argue that this is the sense which is rel-
evant for having knowledge. 
III 
An Internalist Version of 
Virtue Epistemology 
We have said that (VE) fails to take into account 
an important kind of epistemic value. Namely, 
(VE) fails to recognize the importance of S's 
belief being correct or appropriate from S's point 
of view. One way in which this lack presents itself 
is in the evil demon problem. Virtue epistemol-
ogy fails to recognize an appropriate sense in 
which S's beliefs might be epistemically valuable, 
even if those beliefs result from wholly unreliable 
cognitive faculties. Another way in which this 
problem presents itself is in examples which 
show that (VE) is too weak. There are cases where 
S's true belief is the result of a reliable cognitive 
faculty, but where S lacks knowledge because 
S's belief is somehow inappropriate from S's 
point of view. 
Sosa tries to address the latter problem by 
invoking the idea of an epistemic perspective. The 
problem with this proposal is that the relevant 
perspective is lacking in the typical case. It is 
implausible that believers typically have a true 
grasp of their cognitive faculties, or a true grasp 
of which faculty has produced a particular belief. 
Below I want to develop a different understand-
ing of what it means for a belief to be correct or 
appropriate from S's point of view. I will then 
argue that virtue epistemology can be amended 
so as to incorporate this understanding, and I will 
defend the theory of knowledge which results. 
Norm internalism 
Norm internalism is the position that justified 
belief is the result of following correct epistemic 
norms, or correct rules of belief formation and 
maintenance. More exactly, 
(NI) 
S is epistemically justified in believing 
that p if and only if S's believing that 
p is in conformance with the epistemic 
norms which S countenances, and the 
history of S's belief has also been in 
conformance with those norms.5 
It will be necessary to say more about two of the 
central notions involved in (NI): the notion of a 
belief being in conformance with an epistemic 
norm, and the notion of an epistemic norm being 
countenanced. I begin with the latter. 
We may get an idea of what it is to counte-
nance an epistemic norm if we consider the fol-
lowing example. Suppose that Jane, who is not 
very good at math, bases her belief in a compli-
cated theorem on a set of axioms which do in 
fact support the theorem. But suppose that she 
does so not because she sees the supporting rela-
tion, but because she has reasoned invalidly 
from the axioms to the theorem. Obviously Jane 
is not justified in her belief that the theorem is 
correct. 
What is required for Jane to be justified in 
believing the theorem? What is it that justifica-
tion requires but Jane lacks? A plausible sugges-
tion is that Jane must be sensitive to the inference 
relation between her theorem and the axioms on 
which she bases the theorem. Just what this sensi-
tivity amounts to, however, is not easy to state. 
For although we are often "aware" that some set 
of evidence supports a conclusion, it is not easy to 
state what this awareness consists in. 
One suggestion is that Jane must believe that 
her conclusion follows from her evidence. But 
this is obviously too weak. For Jane could believe 
that her conclusion follows from her evidence 
even if she has reasoned fallaciously and has no 
real insight into how her conclusion follows from 
her evidence. Alternatively, one might suggest 
that Jane must believe that the relevant general 
rule of inference is correct, and that her inference 
is an instance of the general rule. But this sugges-
tion is too strong. Typically only logicians have 
beliefs about the deductive rules which govern 
our reasoning, and it is agreed on all sides that no 
one has successfully characterized the rules which 
govern our non-deductive reasoning. But if we 
typically do not have beliefs about the rules 
which govern correct reasoning, how are we to 
understand our sensitivity to such rules? 

VIRTUES AND VICES OF VIRTUE EPISTEMOLOGY 
459 
I suggest that although we do not typically 
have beliefs about such rules, we do countenance 
such rules in our reasoning. In other words, we 
follow such rules when we reason conscientiously, 
although the way in which we follow them does 
not involve having beliefs about them, either 
occurrent or dispositional. Thus the way in which 
we countenance rules of reasoning is analogous 
to the way we countenance other action-governing 
norms. The norms which govern good hitting in 
baseball, for example, are countenanced by good 
hitters when they are batting conscientiously. But 
this does not mean that all good hitters are capa-
ble of articulating those norms, or otherwise 
forming true beliefs about them. Not all good hit-
ters make good hitting coaches. In fact, it is pos-
sible for a good hitter to form false beliefs about 
the norms which he countenances when he is 
actually playing. 
So although we do not typically have beliefs 
about the norms which govern our beliefs, we do 
countenance certain norms and not others. The 
norms that we countenance are the norms that 
we follow when we reason conscientiously. And 
thus it makes perfect sense to say that someone is 
reasoning in a way that he does not countenance. 
This is in fact what happens when we form our 
beliefs hastily, or fall into wishful thinking, or are 
swayed by our prejudices. 
I now turn to the notion of a belief's being in 
conformance with a norm. The notion can be 
made more clear by considering a distinction 
common in moral philosophy. It is common for 
moral philosophers to make a distinction between 
acting in accordance with one's duty and acting 
for the sake of one's duty. In the former case one's 
actions happen to coincide with one's duties. In 
the latter case one's actions are performed because 
one has certain duties. And now a similar distinc-
tion can be made with respect to our believings. 
While some of our beliefs are merely in accord-
ance with the norms of belief formation which 
we countenance, others of our beliefs are in con-
formance with those norms in the following 
sense; they arise, at least partly, because we coun-
tenance certain norms and not others. The latter 
beliefs are accepted (at least partly) because we 
follow certain norms when we are reasoning con-
scientiously.6 
Notice that the position articulated in (NI) is 
not subject to the objections raised against Sosa's 
idea of an epistemic perspective. Thus the posi-
tion does not require that S have beliefs about 
which norms she countenances, or about which 
norms are involved in the formation of a particular 
belief. All that is necessary is that S does in fact 
countenance the relevant norms, and that 
S's belief is in fact in conformance with those 
norms. Second, the present position explains 
what is valuable about the beliefs of the victim of 
the evil deceiver. In the case of the evil deceiver, 
Kathy's beliefs are justified because they are in 
conformance with the rules of belief formation 
and maintenance which Kathy countenances. 
Finally, the account explains why Mary's beliefs 
do not amount to knowledge. Even though Mary's 
belief results from a reliable tiger-detecting fac-
ulty, Mary's belief is not in accordance with the 
norms which Mary countenances. Presumably, 
Mary countenances norms which disallow believ-
ing that tigers are present in the absence of any 
evidence to that effect, or in cases where one has 
considerable evidence against that belief and no 
evidence in favor of it. 7 
2 
Norm internal ism applied to 
virtue epistemology 
We may see how the present position can be used 
to amend virtue epistemology if we make a dis-
tinction between a virtue and the basis for that 
virtue. We have been understanding virtues as 
abilities, and we have been understanding abilities 
as stable dispositions to achieve certain results 
under certain conditions. But then the same virtue 
might have different bases in different subjects. 
Thus the ability to absorb oxygen into the blood 
has a different basis in fish than it does in human 
beings. Similarly, the ability to roll down an 
inclined plane has a different basis in a pencil than 
it does in a baseball. Now, according to Sosa, the 
basis for a cognitive virtue is the inner nature of 
the cognitive subject. Thus So sa refers to the sub-
ject's inner nature explicitly in his latest account: 
"One has an intellectual virtue or faculty relative 
to an environment E if and only if one has an 
inner nature I in virtue of which one would mostly 
attain the truth and avoid error in a certain field 
of propositions F, when in certain conditions C."8 
A different proposal would be that the basis for 
cognitive virtues, at least where knowledge is con-
cerned, must be S's conformance to the epistemic 

460 
JOHN GRECO 
norms which S countenances. On this proposal 
cognitive virtues relevant to knowledge are 
grounded in conscientious belief formation and 
maintenance, rather than in an unchanging inner 
nature. 
Perhaps the following analogy will clarify the 
present proposal. Pitching machines and Nolan 
Ryan both have the ability to throw baseballs at 
high speeds. But the basis of this virtue in the 
pitching machine is different from the basis of 
the virtue in Ryan. Moreover, the basis for the 
virtue in the machine is the machine's inner 
nature; given the way that the machine is con-
structed and given the appropriate conditions, 
the machine throws baseballs at high speeds. The 
basis of the same virtue in Ryan is of a different 
sort; Ryan's ability to throw baseballs is based in 
Ryan's conformance to the norms governing 
good throwing. A person might have the same 
inner nature as Ryan and not have the ability to 
throw baseballs because that person fails to con-
form to the proper norms. Consider that Ryan 
himself would not throw baseballs at high speeds 
if he did not conform to the norms of good 
throwing. 
The analogy should be obvious. I am suggest-
ing that knowers are more like Ryan than like 
pitching machines. Specifically, I am suggesting 
that the virtues associated with knowledge have 
their bases in conformance to relevant norms 
rather than in a fixed inner nature.9 
Applying norm internalism to virtue episte-
mology results in the following account of posi-
tive epistemic status: 
(VEl) 
S's belief that p has positive epistemic 
status for S if and only if 
(i) 
S believes that p; 
(ii) 
S's believing that p is the result 
of a reliable cognitive virtue V 
ofS; and 
(iii) 
S's virtue V has its basis in 
S's conforming to epistemic 
norms which S countenances. 
3 
(VEl) defended 
According to (VEl), knowledge is true belief 
which results from a cognitive virtue, where this 
virtue has its basis in S's conforming to epistemic 
norms which S countenances. Thus on the 
present account, knowledge is virtuous in both a 
subjective and an objective sense. Knowledge is 
virtuous in a subjective sense in that knowledge 
is belief which is correct or appropriate from S's 
point of view. And this means that in cases of 
knowledge S's belief is in conformance with the 
rules of belief formation and maintenance which 
S countenances. Knowledge is virtuous in an 
objective sense in that belief which is knowledge 
is the result of a reliable cognitive faculty. Further, 
the two ways in which knowledge is virtuous are 
related. In cases of knowledge, a belief is objec-
tively virtuous because it is subjectively virtuous. 
In other words, in cases of knowledge the basis 
of S's objectively reliable cognitive virtue is in 
S's conformance to the epistemic norms which 
S herself countenances; reliability results from 
responsibility. 
We may now see that (VEl) avoids the two 
objections raised against virtue epistemology 
as defined by (VE). Because (VEl) recognizes 
an internalist element in knowledge, (VEl) 
explains what is valuable about the beliefs of 
the victim of an evil deceiver. Namely, someone 
whose cognitive faculties are made wholly 
unreliable by an evil deceiver migh t nevertheless 
reason in conformance with the norms that she 
countenances. Thus the victim of an evil deceiver 
might have beliefs which are subjectively 
responsible, even if they are not objectively 
reliable. Second, (VEl) avoids the counterex-
amples which show that (VE) is too weak. 
Specifically, (VEl) requires epistemic responsi-
bility for positive epistemic status. And this 
requires that S's belief be correct or appropri-
ate from S's point of view, in the sense defined 
by norm internalism. 
Thus (VEl) avoids the two objections raised 
against (VE). Does (VEl) still have the attractive 
features which we attributed to virtue epistemol-
ogy at the beginning of the paper? (VEl) contin-
ues to explain nicely why beliefs caused by 
perception and memory often have positive epis-
temic status, while beliefs caused by wishful 
thinking and superstition do not. But it has the 
added advantage of explaining why not all reliable 
cognitive faculties give rise to positive epistemic 
status. Thus it explains why Mary's tiger-detecting 
faculties do not. Second, the theory continues to 
give us a basis for answering certain kinds of 
skepticism. Thus it continues to explain why we 

VIRTUES AND VICES OF VIRTUE EPISTEMOLOGY 
461 
would lack knowledge if we were brains in a vat, 
or victims of a Cartesian demon, and why we do 
not lack knowledge so long as this is not the case. 
(VEl) in fact nuances our answer to skepticism by 
explaining what is epistemically valuable about 
Notes 
Ernest Sosa, "In tellectual Virtue in Perspective," 
in Knowledge in Perspective: Collected Essays 
in 
Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991), p. 289. 
2 Here I am indebted to Sosa, who suggested 
this response in conversation. 
3 The notion of an epistemic perspective and its 
role in Sosa's account of reflective justifica-
tion is discussed below. 
4 Sosa, Knowledge in Perspective, p. 282. Sosa 
develops this strategy in "Intellectual Virtue 
in Perspective" and in "Reliabilism and 
Intellectual Virtue," both in Knowledge in 
Perspective. 
5 This position is defended in detail in my 
"Internalism and Epistemically Responsible 
Belief," Synthese 85 (1990), pp. 245-77. 
,6 For a similar distinction, see John Pollock, 
Contemporary Theories of Knowledge (Totowa, 
NJ: Rowman and Littlefield 1986), p. 168. 
7 Of course questions remain. For example, it is 
plausible that a person's norms will change 
the beliefs of victims trapped in the skeptical 
scenarios. 
We may conclude that (VEl) retains all the 
advantages of (VE), while avoiding problems 
which (VE) cannot. 
and even conflict over time. How does this 
effect epistemic responsibility? There is also 
the problem of "norm schizophrenia;' or the 
problem of conflicting norms at the same 
time. Finally, it might be thought that the 
above account leads to an unacceptable kind 
of epistemic relativism. I address all of these 
questions in my "Internalism and Episte-
mically Responsible Belief." There I conclude 
that a) responsibility concerns conformance 
to one's present norms; b) when present 
norms conflict responsibility requires that 
none of S's norms disallow S's belief; and 
c) the only kind of relativism involved is 
harmless, and should be expected given the 
analogy to moral responsibility. 
8 Sosa, "Intellectual Virtue in Perspective;' 
p. 284. See also Sosa's definitions on pp. 286-9. 
9 Perhaps I should say "rather than merely in a 
fixed inner nature;' since it is possible that S's 
conformance to relevant norms is itself based 
in a deeper inner nature. 

CHAPTER 35 
Cognitive Responsibility 
and the Epistemic Virtues 
Duncan Pritchard 
Introduction 
... [We can identify] two varieties of epistemic 
luck that pose problems for any theory of knowl-
edge. The first variety - veritic epistemic luck - is 
the type of epistemic luck that is at issue in the 
Gettier-style counter-examples to the classical 
tripartite account of knowledge. It is the elimina-
tion of this kind of luck that is the focus of exter-
nalist epistemologies - particularly the paradigm 
case of an externalist epistemology, the safety-
based neo-Moorean account. We also saw that 
there was another epistemologically problematic 
variety of epistemic luck - reflective epistemic 
luck - and that when commentators charged 
externalist epistemologies with being far too 
concessive in their treatment of epistemic luck, it 
was specifically this variety of luck that they had 
in mind. Given that externalist accounts of 
knowledge are unable to eliminate reflective 
epistemic luck, this presents us with prima facie 
grounds in favour of an internalist safety-based 
epistemological theory. 
One explanation that might be offered for 
thinking that we need an epistemology that is able 
to eliminate relflective epistemic luck - and which 
would further support the case for adopting a 
safety-based internalist theory of knowledge - is 
Originally published in Duncan Pritchard, Epistemic Luck 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 200S), pp. 181-201. 
that it is only by proposing an epistemological 
theory that can eliminate reflective epistemic luck 
that one can adequately capture a conception of 
cognitive responsibility that is central to knowl-
edge possession. In essence, the thought is that 
what is epistemically problematic about the 
knowledge putatively possessed by the (unenlight-
ened) chicken-sexer is that she is unable to take 
cognitive responsibility for the truth of her 
beliefs in the kind of robust way that is at issue 
when we ascribe knowledge to agents. Crucially, 
for example, the naive chicken-sexer is unable to 
properly claim her brute externalist knowledge. 
The goal of this chapter is to examine this rela-
tionship between reflective epistemic luck and 
cognitive responsibility in more detail and, in so 
doing, look a little deeper into the issue of just 
what is involved in the idea of cognitive responsi-
bility. To this end, we will be discussing the 
"virtue-theoretic" challenge that has recently 
been directed against early externalist accounts of 
knowledge and justification, and which has been 
used to motivate the kind of virtue epistemic the-
ories that are currently popular in the literature. 
As I explain, this challenge largely concerns the 
difficulty that these externalist accounts have in 
eliminating epistemic luck and therefore in cap-
turing the kind of cognitive responsibility that is 
necessary for knowledge. So understood, how-
ever, this complaint is ambiguous, and this 
explains why there are two very divergent types 
of virtue epistemology currently on offer in the 

COGNITIVE RESPONSIBILITY AND EPISTEMIC VIRTUES 
463 
literature - 1m epistemologically externalist ver-
sion that models itself on process reliabilism, and 
an epistemologically internalist "neo-Aristotelian" 
version. Disentangling the various threads of 
motivation for virtue epistemology thus not only 
throws light on the issue of why we should seek to 
eliminate reflective luck from our knowledge 
(and hence on the epistemological externalist-
internalist distinction), but also on the issue of 
the status of virtue epistemology itself. Indeed, as 
we will see, by factoring our discussion of epis-
temic luck into the debate regarding virtue episte-
mology we are able to identify a core problem 
facing all such theories of knowledge. 
1. 
Epistemological Internalism and 
Cognitive Responsibility 
What we have then are two epistemically prob-
lematic varieties of luck. It is important to note, 
however, that in granting that these types of luck 
are both epistemically problematic one does not 
thereby concede the truth of epistemological 
internalism, since there may be ways in which an 
agent's beliefs, whilst epistemically undesirable in 
some fashion, are nevertheless able to meet the 
standards for knowledge. That is, whilst it is clear 
that both of these types of luck are epistemically 
undesirable, and that veri tic luck is incompatible 
with knowledge possession (such is the immedi-
ate moral of the post-Gettier literature), the 
further question of whether reflective luck is 
incompatible with knowledge is moot. There is 
certainly something epistemically deficient about 
the naIve chicken-sexer's beliefs, but it is not clear 
that this means that she lacks knowledge. 
Indeed, it is important to remember that 
whilst no one seriously thinks that the agents in 
the Gettier-type cases whose beliefs are infected 
with veri tic epistemic luck have knowledge, there 
are people - epistemological externalists - who 
think that the unenlightened chicken-sexer has 
knowledge, despite the presence of reflective epis-
temic luck. Indeed, such externalists will no doubt 
even grant that there is something epistemically 
lacking about the naive chicken-sexer's beliefs. 
Nevertheless, they will contend that there is noth-
ing epistemically lacking which is essential to 
knowledge possession. Accordingly, we cannot 
straightforwardly take the conclusion generated 
by our observations on reflective epistemic luck 
that there is something epistemically amiss with 
pure externalist knowledge and convert this into 
a knock-down argument for epistemological 
internalism. 
We have thus returned to the debate between 
epistemological externalism and internalism, in 
that the issue is whether the kind of internalist 
justification that would be needed to eliminate 
reflective luck should be made a necessary condi-
tion for knowledge. If you think that it should -
that only "enlightened" chicken-sexers can have 
knowledge - then your intuitions side with the 
internalists, whilst if you think that it shouldn't, 
then your intuitions side with the externalists. We 
shouldn't expect an easy resolution to this issue. 
The endurance of the debate between the inter-
nalists and the externalists in the recent literature 
is evidence, if evidence were needed, that our 
intuitions about such examples are divided. 
Nevertheless, the observation that epistemo-
logical internalists are more concerned about 
reflective epistemic luck than externalists does 
add something substantive to our understanding 
of this debate. In the first instance, it identifies one 
area about which internalists and externalists have 
managed to speak past one another. ... Linda 
Zagzebski argu[ es] that the problem with pure 
externalist knowledge [is] that it [is] no betterthan 
a lucky guess. Although ... there [is] some truth in 
this, it [isn't] altogether an accurate description of 
the situation given that even the unenlightened 
chicken-sexer [is] forming beliefs that [are] safe, 
and hence which [are] not veritically lucky. 
This failure to recognize the subtleties involved 
in the way that externalists and internalists 
respond to the problem posed by epistemic luck is 
common in the literature. Consider the following 
quotation from Zagzebski: 
The dispute between externalists and internalists 
looms large mostly because of ambivalence over 
the place of luck in normative theory. Theorists 
who resist the idea that knowledge ... is vulner-
able to luck are pulled in the direction of inter-
nalism .... Externalists are more sanguine about 
luck. ... There is lots of room for luck in exter-
nalist theories since the conditions that make it 
the case that the knower is in a state of knowl-
edge are independent of her conscious access. 
(1996, p. 39) 

464 
DUNCAN PRITCHARD 
Whilst superficially persuasive, this interpretation 
of the internalism-externalism debate is at best 
misleading. After all, it is just not true that exter-
nalists are sanguine about epistemic luck, since, 
like all post-Gettier epistemologists, they make 
the elimination of veritic epistemic luck an ade-
quacy condition on their theory of knowledge. 
What they are sanguine about (if that's the right 
word) is only the presence of reflective epistemic 
luck, and even then it is entirely consistent with 
their position to concede that such luck is epis-
temically undesirable, if ultimately compatible 
with knowledge possession. (Indeed, I would sug-
gest that any modest externalist epistemological 
theory would be inclined to allow that the naIve 
chicken-sexer's beliefs are epistemically problem-
atic.) 1 In any case, the issue about conscious access 
is itself misleading, since even internalists will 
want to eliminate veritic epistemic luck and this 
goal, as we have seen, will have the consequence 
that they are obliged to incorporate an external 
epistemic condition into their theory, a condition 
which the agent lacks "conscious access" to. Thus, 
internalists are also in an important sense "san-
guine" about epistemic luck as well (we will return 
to this point). So whilst Zagzebski's way of view-
ing the debate emphasizes the differences between 
the positions, focusing on the role of the two 
types of epistemically problematic luck in this 
debate brings out the common ground.2 
My sympathies here are with the externalist, 
but I doubt that any definitive considerations can 
be offered which will decide the matter one way 
or the other. What is important for present pur-
poses, however, is the issue of what is it about 
reflective epistemic luck that makes it an epistem-
ically undesirable feature of one's beliefs. That is, 
why is it that we value beliefs that are internalisti-
cally justified, even if we don't also insist that 
meeting this constraint is necessary for knowl-
edge? I think that the answer to this question 
relates to the fact that we tend to want beliefs that 
are more than just safe. That is, we don't just want 
agents to be forming beliefs in such a way that we 
can rely on the truth of those beliefs, we also want 
agents to be cognitively responsible for their beliefs, 
and this is only possible if they form beliefs in 
ways that are responsive to the reflectively acces-
sible grounds that they have in favour of their 
beliefs. The na'ive chicken-sexer may well be a reli-
able indicator of the truth regarding the subject 
matter at issue, but she is not in a position to take 
any credit for this reliability. Another way of 
putting this point is to say that whilst her safe true 
beliefs are in some minimal sense an achievement 
of hers, in that it is her cognitive trait that is giving 
rise to them, the achievement here is entirely at 
the sub-personal level. So whilst we might think 
that her chicken-sexing capacity is a good cogni-
tive trait to have - it does, after all, enable one to 
form safe true beliefs about the subject matter in 
question - we would not think that the naIve 
chicken-sexer herself is deserving of any epis-
temic credit for forming beliefs in this way 
because in the relevant sense the safety of her 
beliefs has nothing to do with any epistemic act of 
hers. In contrast, the enlightened chicken-sexer is 
deserving of epistemic credit because by forming 
beliefs in response to the reflectively accessible 
evidence that she possesses she has acted in a way 
that is epistemically responsible. 3 
I think that this point becomes clearer once 
one considers how the enlightened chicken-sexer 
is in a position to properly claim knowledge of 
what she believes whereas this is not the case for 
her naIve counterpart. ,.. Agents who do not 
meet internal epistemic conditions will typically 
be unable to properly claim to possess knowledge, 
even if one grants that what the agent would be 
asserting in making such a claim would be true. 
The reason for this is that a claim to know -
especially one that is made explicitly via a locu-
tion of the form "I know that .,," - carries the 
conversational implicature that one is able to 
offer relevant reflectively accessible grounds in 
support of that claim, and this is just what agents 
who don't meet internal epistemic conditions, 
such as naIve chicken-sexers, cannot do, The abil-
ity to properly claim the knowledge that one has 
is, however, a very desirable epistemic capacity. 
For whilst it might be useful to us to know that 
the naIve chicken-sexer is forming safe true 
beliefs, and thus know that she is a reliable indica-
tor when it comes to the subject matter in ques-
tion, she herself is not able to perform the role of 
being a reliable informant in this respect, since 
from her point of view she lacks any reason for 
thinking that she is forming beliefs in a safe fash-
ion, But the ability to be a reliable informant, to 
put our knowledge to use in this way, is clearly 
something of tremendous value to us and thus it is 
little wonder that we find the kind of "knowledge" 

COGNITIVE RESPONSIBILITY AND EPISTEMIC VIRTUES 
465 
(if that's what it is) that the naIve chicken-sexer 
has as being so intellectually dissatisfying. 
2. 
Process Reliabilism, Agent Reliabilism, 
and Virtue Epistemology 
This intuition that the possession of knowledge 
demands that the agent should in some way be 
able to take credit for the truth of her belief gets 
expression in recent work by virtue epistemolo-
gists, as does the more fine-grained thought that 
there are different ways in which an agent's belief 
can be of credit to the agent.4 In essence, what 
virtue epistemologists contend is that knowledge 
should actually be defined in terms of the epis-
temic virtues -
such as conscientiousness or 
open-mindedness - and perhaps also in terms of 
our cognitive faculties as well, such as our percep-
tual faculties. What is radical about this proposal 
is that we would ordinarily identify a trait as being 
an epistemic virtue or a cognitive faculty by 
noting that it is knowledge-conducive, and thus 
we would be presupposing a prior theory of 
knowledge. Indeed, whilst it is part of the recent 
epistemological tradition to regard any adequate 
epistemology as needing to include some account 
of how it is that agents such as ourselves come to 
have knowledge - a story which will undoubtedly 
make essential reference to the epistemic virtues 
and the cognitive faculties - it does not normally 
define knowledge in terms of the epistemic vir-
tues and cognitive faculties. Nevertheless, given 
the widespread intuition that we have noted con-
cerning how the cognitive achievement involved 
in knowledge possession excludes luck (in some 
sense), if a virtue epistemology is able to do this 
then it will be one way (if not the only way) of 
capturing what is involved in an anti-luck episte-
mology. As we will see, I am sceptical that we need 
to endorse the radical claim that virtue episte-
mologists make - i.e. that knowledge must actu-
ally be defined in terms of the epistemic virtues 
and cognitive faculties. Nevertheless, tracing the 
motivations for the development of the view will 
cast some light upon the distinction we have 
made here between veri tic and reflective epistemic 
luck. 
The early forms of virtue epistemology that 
have been developed in the recent literature were 
generally modelled along reliabilist lines and grew 
out of a certain kind of dissatisfaction with proc-
ess reliabilism. Consider a crude process reliabil-
ist account of knowledge as being one which 
simply demanded, in essence, that one has knowl-
edge if, and only if, one forms one's true belief via 
a reliable process (a process which ensures a high 
ratio of true beliefs relative to false beliefs). In 
terms of rather "low-grade" knowledge, such as 
basic perceptual knowledge, this is a fairly plausi-
ble account. 5 Intuitively, such beliefs count as 
knowledge just so long as they are formed in reli-
able ways which, as the products of our percep-
tual faculties in normal circumstances, we would 
expect them to be. Nothing more seems to be 
necessary to knowledge in this case than meeting 
such a condition. Such a view, however, at least if 
extended so that it applies to knowledge of con-
tingent propositions in general, faces a number of 
difficulties. 
For one thing, the position is clearly an exter-
nalist theory of knowledge that would allow 
ascriptions of knowledge to such agents as the 
naIve chicken-sexer, and we have already noted 
that there are those who would be unhappy about 
this consequence of the view. Moreover, there are 
notorious problems of formulation with process 
reliabilism, both in terms of the specification of 
reliability that is at issue and, relatedly, regarding 
the issue of how one individuates the relevant 
processes (the so-called "generality problem"). 6 
Although the early virtue epistemologists were 
naturally concerned with these kinds of familiar 
difficulties for the process reliabilist position,? 
their focus was not on these objections facing the 
process reliabilist position but rather on the 
manner in which process reliabilism seemed to 
allow that agents could possess knowledge even 
though the reliability in question in no way 
reflected a cognitive achievement on their part. 
Consider the following two problems. First, 
there is the difficulty of how process reliabilism as 
it stands seems to leave it open as to whether the 
reliability in question has anything to do with the 
agent's beliefs tracking the world. For example, 
suppose that there was a benevolent demon who 
ensured that every time our protagonist formed a 
belief the world was adjusted to make it such that 
the belief was true. Clearly, this would be a highly 
reliable way of forming beliefs since it would 
never fail to result in a true belief. Nevertheless, 
our intuition in such a case is that the agent lacks 

466 
DUNCAN PRITCHARD 
knowledge since her reliably formed true beliefs 
do not reflect a cognitive achievement on her part 
at all. John Greco describes just such an example 
as follows: 
Rene thinks he can beat the roulette tables with a 
system he has devised. Reasoning according to 
the Gambler's Fallacy, he believes that numbers 
which have not come up for long strings are 
more likely to come up next. However, unlike 
Descartes' demon victim, our Rene has a demon 
helper. Acting as a kind of epistemic guardian, 
the demon arranges reality so as to make the 
belief come out as true. Given the ever present 
interventions of the helpful demon, Rene's belief 
forming process is highly reliable. But this is 
because the world is made to confirm to Rene's 
beliefs, rather than because Rene's beliefs conform 
to the world. (1999, p. 286) 
Clearly here we would not regard Rene as having 
knowledge for the simple reason that the reliabil-
ity that he is exhibiting in his beliefs is nothing to 
do with him, but rather reflects the interference 
of the demon helper. 
Second, there is the problem that the process 
reliabilist account of knowledge seems to accord 
knowledge in cases where the reliability, whilst it 
might be "to do with the agent" in some basic causal 
sense, is not related to the agent's cognitive charac-
ter in quite the right fashion. A good way to bring 
this point out is via examples of reliable "malfunc-
tions': This is where an agent forms a belief in a reli-
able manner despite the fact that this reliability is 
the product of a malfunction. An example, due to 
Alvin Plantinga, concerns a rare brain lesion that 
causes the victim to believe that he has a brain 
lesion. He describes this scenario as follows: 
Suppose ... that S suffers from this sort of disor-
der and accordingly believes that he suffers from 
a brain lesion. Add that he has no evidence at all 
for this belief: no symptoms of which he is aware, 
no testimony on the part of physicians or other 
expert witnesses, nothing. (Add if you like, that 
he has much evidence against it; but then add 
also that the malfunction induced by the lesion 
makes it impossible for him to take appropriate 
account of this evidence.) Then the relent [proc-
ess 1 will certainly be reliable; but the resulting 
belief - that he has a brain lesion - will have little 
by way of warrant for S. (1993a, p. 199) 
We have a strong intuition that there is something 
epistemically amiss about forming true beliefs via 
malfunctions in this way, even where those mal-
functions happen to support a process of forming 
beliefs which is reliable. Although malfunction 
examples like this are different from the helpful 
demon case in that the reliability at issue has at 
least something to do with the agent (it is his brain 
lesion after all), it is nevertheless the case that the 
agent's true belief cannot be considered a cogni-
tive achievement on his part because it is in spite 
of himself that he formed a true belief. If his cog-
nitive faculties had been functioning properly, 
and thus had not been malfunctioning, then we 
would not have expected him to have formed a 
true belief in this proposition. 
In response to problems of this sort, early virtue 
epistemologists argued that process reliabilism 
should be rejected in favour of a kind of reliabilism 
that specifically focuses on the reliable traits of the 
agents. This view has come to be known as "fac-
ulty" or "agent" reliabilism. H The basic idea is that it 
is not reliability per se that epistemologists should 
be attending to, but rather the particular kind of 
reliability that represents a cognitive achievement 
on the part of the agent, and this means a reliability 
that is tied to stable belief-forming traits of the 
agent such as her intellectual faculties and epis-
temic virtues. In general, then, agent reliabilists 
advocate a thesis along the following lines: 
Agent reliabilism 
For all agents, <p, an agent has knowledge of a con-
tin gent proposition, <p, if, and only if, that agent 
forms a true belief that <p as a result of the stable 
and reliable dispositions that make up that agent's 
cognitive character. 
For example, think about the range of stable dis-
positions involved in the formation of our beliefs 
about our immediate environment that make up 
our faculty of sight. If this faculty is working 
properly and applied in the right conditions, then 
the beliefs that it generates will be highly reliable. 
Moreover, since this reliability is keyed into our 
cognitive character, forming a true belief in this 
way is a cognitive achievement on our part and 
will thus tend to be regarded as an instance of 
knowledge (though we will consider some 
Gettier-style complications in a moment). 

COGNITIVE RESPONSIBILITY AND EPISTEMIC VIRTUES 
467 
In contrast, the reliability that might attach 
itself to a cognitive malfunction will not count 
as knowledge-conducive on this view because 
the belief-forming process involved is not a 
stable feature of our cognitive character at all, 
and thus the reliable true beliefs that result are of 
no credit to us. Indeed, as we noted above, it is in 
spite of the stable cognitive dispositions that 
make up the agent's cognitive character that he is 
reliable in the malfunction case that we looked at 
earlier, not because of them. Similarly, forming 
beliefs in a reliable fashion where that reliability 
has nothing to do with one's cognitive character, 
as in the case in the "benevolent demon" exam-
ple, is also ruled out. The reliability at issue here 
cannot support knowledge because it represents 
no cognitive achievement at all on the part of the 
agent. Agent reliabilists are thus able to deal with 
a certain type of core objection that has been 
levelled against process reliabilism, and do so 
whilst staying within the general reliabilist 
framework. 9 
We noted above that these early virtue theo-
rists were not primarily concerned with the prob-
lems of formulation facing process reliabilism, 
nor with its commitment to epistemological 
externalism, and this sketch of the agent reliabilist 
position should make it obvious why. To begin 
with, whilst we might have a better intuitive grasp 
of how we should individuate our intellectual fac-
ulties and our epistemic virtues than how we 
should individuate cognitive processes simpliciter, 
it remains that there will still be issues of formu-
lation left over here. Recall the brain lesion case, 
for example. Although this example is defined in 
such a way that it won't count as a stable and reli-
able cognitive disposition that makes up the 
agent's cognitive character - for one thing, it is 
defined as a cognitive malfunction - it doesn't 
take too much imagination to think of a way in 
which ihis example could be understood so that it 
did appear to meet the agent reliabilist rubric. As 
Greco himself concedes: 
[IJt is not clear why the man with the brain lesion 
does not have a cognitive virtue, and it is there-
fore not clear how virtue reliabilism addresses 
the case. Put another way, it is not clear why the 
process associated with the brain lesion is not 
part of reliable cognitive character. Thus we can 
imagine that the lesion has been there since birth, 
and that the associated process is both stable and 
reliable in the relevant senses. (2003, pp. 356-7)10 
The problems of formulation associated with proc-
ess reliabilism thus resurface - albeit perhaps in a 
more manageable form - with agent reliabilism. 
Similarly - and these points are related - agent 
reliabilism is also clearly an externalist account of 
knowledge and so is subject, just like process reli-
abilism, to the counter-intuitions put forward by 
the epistemological internalist. Whatever one 
might want to say about reliable brain lesions, it is 
certainly true that the naive chicken-sexer dis-
cussed above is forming her true beliefs via stable 
and reliable dispositions that make up her cogni-
tive character. As a result, on the agent reliabilist 
view the chicken-sexer comes out as having 
knowledge, something which the epistemological 
internalist will find unacceptable. Again, the agent 
reliabilist can weaken this objection slightly by 
arguing that the externalism on offer here is tem-
pered by the fact that the reliability in question 
must be essentially related to the agent's cognitive 
character. Accordingly, they can claim that by 
advocating epistemological externalism they are 
not thereby allowing knowledge to be completely 
unconnected 
with 
cognItlve 
responsibility. 
Nevertheless, the issue remains that in these cases 
the cognitive achievement is entirely at a sub-
personal level, and in this sense the agent proper 
is not cognitively responsible for her reliably 
formed true beliefs at all. So whilst agent reliabil-
ist accounts of knowledge might ensure that 
agents are able to take a very minimal form of 
cognitive responsibility for their beliefs, what the 
epistemic internalist will demand is a more robust 
form of cognitive responsibility - a type of cogni-
tive responsibility that could legitimate a claim to 
know, for exampleY 
Indeed, this point dovetails with the further 
issue that it sounds odd, to the modern ear at 
least, to describe agent reliabilism as a virtue-
theoretic account of knowledge at all. After all, 
although there is, admittedly, a historical prece-
dent for thinking of the cognitive faculties as 
being epistemic virtues, our contemporary under-
standing of the virtues, and thus of the intellec-
tual virtues, tends to regard them as very different 
to cognitive facultiesP Indeed, in terms of the 
modern usage of the term "virtue" I think the 
consensus would be to regard the naive chicken-sexer 

468 
DUNCAN PRITCHARD 
as behaving in a way that exhibits an epistemic 
vice on the grounds that she is forming beliefs in 
the absence of any reflectively accessible evidence 
in favour of those beliefs. We will return to this 
point in the next section. 
For now, the more pressing issue is how this 
account of knowledge ties in with the remarks we 
have made so far about epistemic luck. We have 
already noted the close relationship between cog-
nitive achievement and the absence of epistemi-
cally problematic luck, so we should expect that 
the manner in which agent reliabilism constitutes 
an improvement on process reliabilism is directly 
related to how it eliminates luck of this sort. And, 
indeed, this is just what we find, since the counter-
examples that the agent reliabilists direct against 
process reliabilism are all Gettier-style examples, 
in that they are instances of true belief where the 
agent has met the epistemic conditions demanded 
by the theory of knowledge in question, and yet 
the agent lacks knowledge because her belief is 
nevertheless veritically lucky. 
Consider again the helpful demon example. 
Here we have an agent who would be forming 
beliefs in an unreliable fashion (via the Gambler's 
Fallacy) were it not for the fact that, as it happens, 
there is a helpful demon in town who not only 
has the capacity to ensure that any beliefs our 
agent forms in this regard are true, but also has 
the inclination to be helpful in this fashion. As a 
result, even though the agent has met the epis-
temic condition imposed by a basic form of proc-
ess reliabilism - in that he is forming his true 
belief via a process which counts as reliable on 
this view - it is nevertheless also the case that his 
true belief is here being formed in a way that is 
subject to a substantive degree of veritic epistemic 
luck. That is, there will be a large class of nearby 
possible worlds in which this agent forms his 
belief in the same way as in the actual world - and 
this means in this case that he forms his belief via 
the Gambler's Fallacy - and his belief is false. 
After all, the class of possible worlds at issue here 
will include worlds where there is no demon, or 
where there is a demon but he is not being help-
ful, or where there is a demon who is being help-
ful, but who is not being helpful in this particular 
respect, and so on. Accordingly, since the belief in 
question is infected by veri tic epistemic luck, it is 
therefore not safe, and so not an instance of 
knowledge in the light of a safety-based theory. 
Next, consider the malfunction case. Again, as 
the example is described at any rate, we have a 
case of a true belief that is infected by a substan-
tive degree of veritic epistemic luck. Whilst the 
agent has formed a true belief in the actual world 
via a causal process that meets the reliability con-
dition imposed by a basic form of process reliabi-
lism, in most nearby possible worlds we would 
expect the agent to form a false belief via this 
process. After all, if it is an incidental fact about 
the brain lesion that it supports a reliable belief-
forming process about this subject matter in this 
way, then in most nearby possible worlds we 
would expect it to not be supporting a reliable 
belief-forming process and thus expect it to not 
lead the agent to true beliefs about whether or not 
he has a brain lesion. His belief is thus veritically 
lucky and hence not safe. Both these examples 
thus lend support to the Gettier-style contention 
that meeting the epistemic condition laid down 
by a basic process reliabilist account of knowledge 
does not suffice to eliminate veritic epistemic 
luck, and hence that such a theory of knowledge 
is highly questionable. 
Of course, as we noted above, there is an added 
complication when it comes to the malfunction 
example in that there are alternative ways of 
understanding this case so that the reliability in 
question isn't incidental in the relevant way but is 
rather brought about by a stable cognitive disposi-
tion on the part of the agent. On this understand-
ing of the example, the agent reliabilist response 
starts to look suspect, since now the agent does 
seem to be forming true beliefs as a result of stable 
and reliable traits that make up his cognitive char-
acter, at least given the agent reliabilist construal 
of "cognitive character" as including the cognitive 
faculties. The brain lesion case now becomes akin 
to the naive chicken-sexer example in that it is an 
instance of merely externalist knowledge - i.e. 
knowledge where the agent has met no relevant 
internal justification condition. 
By the same token, the agent's true belief on 
this construal of the example is no longer (at least 
obviously) infected by veritic epistemic luck, and 
thus it will be, prima facie at least, in accordance 
with the demands laid down by a safety-based 
theory of knowledge. Of course (as in the naive 
chicken-sexer example), we would not be happy 
with the agent making self-ascriptions of knowl-
edge in this case and there is clearly something 

COGNITIVE RESPONSIBILITY AND EPISTEMIC VIRTUES 
469 
important epistemically lacking about this agent's 
belief (it is, as we saw above in our discussion of 
the naIve chicken-sexer, a true belief that is sub-
ject to a substantive degree of reflective epistemic 
luck). Nevertheless, depending on the details of 
the ~xample, if we knew that the agent was form-
ing beliefs about this subject matter in a safe way 
then we might be inclined to ascribe knowledge 
of a very brute sort to the agent even if we did not 
think that the agent should be ascribing this 
knowledge to himself. 
It seems then that the objection raised by 
agent reliabilism against process reliabilism is 
much the same objection that the proponent of 
an anti-veritic-luck epistemology would make 
against process reliabilism - that it cannot cap-
ture even a minimal sense in which knowledge is 
a cognitive achievement on the part of the agent 
because the rubric it sets down for knowledge 
does not exclude veritic epistemic luck. The two 
theses are not complementary, however, in that 
they end up defining knowledge in very different 
ways. For whilst the safety-based theorist might 
no doubt wish to tell an explanatory story about 
how creatures such as ourselves come to have safe 
true beliefs that makes essential reference to the 
cognitive faculties and the epistemic virtues, she 
does not define knowledge in terms of these cog-
nitive traits as the agent reliabilist does. Thus, 
despite being motivated by similar concerns, 
agent reliabilism, being a virtue-theoretic theory, 
is offering a much more radical epistemological 
thesis. 
The issue is therefore whether we need to 
endorse such a radical view in order to eliminate 
veritic epistemic luck, or whether we can simply 
advocate a safety-based view that incorporates an 
explanatory story that makes essential use of the 
cognitive faculties and epistemic virtues. It seems 
that we can do the latter, and ought to, for two 
reasons. The first reason concerns how the agent 
reliabilist account of knowledge is not necessary 
for the elimination of veri tic epistemic luck. As 
we have just seen, the examples of veritic epis-
temic luck that agent reliabilism claims to be able 
to deal with in a way that other theories cannot -
such as the helpful demon and the brain lesion 
cases - are examples where a safety-based view 
has direct application. 
As it stands, this observation alone merely 
puts the two views on a theoretical par in this 
respect, and thereby only leaves a mere safety-
based approach as a live - rather than a preferred -
option. 13 
There is a further consideration, 
however, which motivates a safety-based approach 
over an agent reliabilist alternative, and this is 
that the agent reliabilist theory of knowledge, 
unlike the safety-based theory, is not only unnec-
essary to deal with the problem of veritic luck, but 
is also insufficient. Consider the following Gettier-
style counter-example to agent reliabilism: 
Mary has good eyesight, but it is not perfect. It is 
good enough to allow her to identify her hus-
band sitting in his usual chair in the living room 
from a distance of fifteen feet in somewhat dim 
light. ... Of course, her faculties may not be 
functioning perfectly, but they are functioning 
well enough that if she goes on to form the belief 
My husband is sitting in the living room, her belief 
has enough warrant to constitute knowledge 
when true .... Suppose Mary simply misidenti-
fies the chair sitter, who is, we'll suppose, her 
husband's brother, who looks very much like 
him .... We can now easily amend the case as a 
Gettier example. Mary's husband could be sitting 
on the other side of the room, unseen by her. 
(Zagzebski 1996, pp. 285-7) 
What is the agent reliabilist to say about such a 
case? Clearly, Mary is forming a true belief which 
meets the epistemic conditions laid down by the 
agent reliabilist, in that her true belief is a result 
of the stable and reliable dispositions that make 
up her cognitive character. Crucially, however, the 
belief in this case is not an instance of knowledge 
because of the veritic epistemic luck involved. 
After all, there will be a wide class of nearby pos-
sible worlds in which Mary forms her belief in the 
same way as in the actual world and yet continues 
to form a false belief as a result because her 
husband is not, as it happens, in the room in these 
worlds. 
What is crucial about the fact that agent relia-
bilist views can be "Gettiered" in this way is that it 
completely undermines the agent reliabilist claim 
to be in a peculiarly good position to capture the 
sense in which knowledge is a cognitive achieve-
ment on the part of the agent. Whilst Mary is cer-
tainly deserving of some epistemic credit for 
forming the belief that she did, we would hardly 
regard it as a cognitive achievement on her part 
that she formed a true belief since the truth of her 

470 
DUNCAN PRITCHARD 
belief was largely due to luck. The inability of 
agent reliabilism to eliminate veritic epistemic 
luck means that it allows these Gettier-style cases 
where the agent meets the relevant epistemic 
rubric even whilst forming a veritically lucky 
true belief. Accordingly, the view legitimates a 
knowledge ascription even though the agent 
concerned is clearly not exhibiting anything like 
the kind of cognitive achievement (sub-personal 
or otherwise) that is necessary for knowledge. 
Moreover, note that safety-based views will 
not have this problem since Mary's true belief, 
since it is veritically lucky, will not be safe and 
thus will not be accorded the status of knowledge 
by the lights of a safety-based thesis. The adop-
tion of a safety-based view - unlike an agent relia-
bilist view - is thus sufficient for the elimination 
of veritic epistemic luck. 
Furthermore, note that any safety-based 
account of knowledge that offered an explanatory 
story about how agents gain safe true beliefs - and 
thus are able to acquire knowledge - will no doubt 
make reference to the kinds of cognitive traits at 
issue in agent reliabilism. In this way, safety-based 
views can account for why Mary is deserving of 
some epistemic credit even though in this case 
she lacks knowledge because the cognitive facul-
ties that she is employing in forming her belief 
are good ways in which to acquire safe beliefs. 
Nevertheless, since such a fully-fledged epistemo-
logical theory does not define knowledge in terms 
of the epistemic virtues and cognitive faculties, 
such an epistemology is still a safety-based theory 
rather than a virtue-theoretic account. 
So whilst agent reliabilists are right to be trou-
bled by veritic epistemic luck and thus to seek a 
theory of knowledge that eliminates such luck 
(thereby ensuring that knowing agents are able to 
take a minimal degree of cognitive responsibility 
for their beliefs), it remains that the way to achieve 
this is via a safety-based theory rather than via a 
virtue-theoretic account. 
3. 
Neo-Aristotelian Virtue Epistemology 
Not all virtue-theoretic accounts of knowledge 
are modelled along reliabilist lines, however, and 
more recent work on virtue epistemology has 
tended to move towards an epistemologically 
internalist version of the thesis which understands 
the epistemic virtues in a way that is more in 
keeping with our ordinary conception of them, 
and which thus does not treat mere cognitive fac-
ulties as epistemic virtues. Such views are often 
called "responsibilist" or "neo-Aristotelian" and 
stress that agents should not only exhibit reliable 
cognitive traits but that they should also be in a 
position to take the kind of robust reflective 
responsibility for their true beliefs that is notice-
ably lacking in externalist views of knowledge. 
Since epistemic virtues are reliable cognitive traits 
which also demand a certain level of reflective 
responsibility on the part of the agent, they fit the 
bill perfectly. 
Perhaps the most prominent and well-
developed version of a thesis of this sort is due to 
Zagzebski,14 who argues that mere reliability is 
not enough and that agents should have to meet 
internal epistemic conditions as well. On her 
view, the kind of sub-personal cognitive achieve-
ment that is present in, for example, naive 
chicken-sexer cases, will not suffice for knowl-
edge. For whilst the naive chicken-sexer might be 
forming belief in ways that are reliable, she is not 
forming beliefs in ways that are epistemically vir-
tuous (at least in the modern sense of the term). 
She is not, for example, forming her beliefs in a 
way that is epistemically conscientious, or, indeed, 
in a way that is responsive to the reflectively acces-
sible evidence that she has in favour of her beliefs 
at all. (In fact, as we noted above, the naive 
chicken-sexer is, if anything, forming her beliefs 
via an epistemic vice rather than a virtue, at least 
provided we understand the epistemic "virtues" 
in the standard way which excludes mere cogni-
tive faculties.) 
We saw above how Zagzebski also motivated 
her adoption of an internalist account of knowl-
edge by claiming that such internalism was neces-
sary to eliminate epistemic luck, but that the kind 
of epistemic luck that was at issue was, it turned 
out, specifically reflective epistemic luck rather 
than veritic epistemic luck. We would expect the 
motivation for most virtue epistemologies of this 
sort to be susceptible to the same diagnosis, in that 
their underlying concern regarding agent reliabil-
ism is that whereas the reliabilist element of the 
view deals with veritic epistemic luck, and does so 
in a way that makes the reliability a product (in 
some sense) of the agent's cognitive character, since 
this form of "virtue" theory allows sub-personal 

COGNITIVE RESPONSIBILITY AND EPISTEMIC VIRTUES 
471 
traits of the agent to count as knowledge-
conducive, it won't capture the fuller sense in 
which knowledge is a cognitive achievement of the 
agent. This "fuller sense" of cognitive achievement 
involves, of course, not just the elimination of veritic 
epistemic luck but also the elimination of reflective 
epistemic luck - hence the necessity of adding, via 
the focus on the epistemic virtues alone, an internal 
epistemic condition to the view. IS 
If one is persuaded by the general virtue-theoretic 
line and unpersuaded by the considerations in 
favour of epistemological externalism, then one 
will be inclined to adopt a virtue epistemology of 
this sort. As we will see in a moment, however, it 
is not at all clear that this new variant on the gen-
eral virtue-theoretic approach adds anything 
which can help it evade the criticisms that we lev-
elled against agent reliabilism above, since an 
internalized version of virtue epistemology 
doesn't appear to be in any better position to 
handle cases of veritic epistemic luck than an 
agent reliabilist view is. Accordingly, it appears 
that if one is troubled by the problem posed by 
reflective epistemic luck then one would be wiser 
to endorse an internalized version of a safety-based 
theory - i.e., a safety-based theory that also incor-
porated an internal epistemic condition - rather 
than a version of the more radical neo-Aristotelian 
virtue account. 
In order to see this, consider again the Gettier-
style example that we saw Zagzebski offering 
above which concerned an agent, Mary, who 
formed a true belief about whether or not her 
husband was in the room as a result of stable and 
reliable cognitive traits that made up her cogni-
tive character, and yet who lacked knowledge 
because her belief was subject to a substantive 
degree of veritic epistemic luck (she was not look-
ing at her husband, but her husband's brother). 
As it stands, this example doesn't demand that the 
agent should form her belief in a way that is epis-
temically virtuous rather than merely as a result 
of reliable and stable cognitive faculties, but we 
can easily understand the example along these 
lines. Suppose, for example, that Mary forms her 
belief in such a way that it is epistemically virtu-
ous (she has been conscientious about forming 
her belief on the basis of adequate reflectively 
accessible evidence and so forth), and that the 
belief in question is therefore internalistically jus-
tified. Since her belief is true, and has been formed 
via the stable and reliable epistemic virtues that 
make up her cognitive character, we would expect 
Mary to have knowledge about what she believes. 
Nevertheless, all these conditions could be met 
and her belief still be "Gettiered" because, as in 
the original example, she happens to be looking 
at her husband's brother whilst her husband is 
hidden from view elsewhere in the room. The 
belief is thus still veritically lucky and hence not a 
case of knowledge. 
Interestingly, Zagzebski is quite willing to 
grant that she cannot meet the Gettier examples 
head -on via her theory of knowledge in this way. 
Instead, she tries to motivate a response to this 
problem by bringing additional resources to bear 
on the issue, albeit resources that are, she claims, 
consistent with her general virtue-theoretic 
approach. Essentially, her contention is that what 
is lacking about agents in Gettier cases is that 
whilst they have managed to acquire true beliefs 
by forming their beliefs in ways that are epistemi-
cally virtuous, they do not believe the truth 
through an act of epistemic virtue. Consider the 
following passage: 
[I)n the case of Mary's belief that her husband is 
in the living room, she may exhibit all the rele-
vant intellectual virtues and no intellectual vices 
in the process of forming the belief, but she is not 
lead to the truth through those virtuous proc-
esses or motives. So even though Mary has the 
belief she has because of her virtues and the 
belief is true, she does not have the truth because 
of her virtues. (Zagzebski 1996, p. 297) 
Zagzebski's claim is thus that it is not enough to 
merely form a true belief via one's stable and reli-
able epistemic virtues in order to have knowledge; 
rather one must form that true belief because of 
one's stable and reliable epistemic virtues. 16 
This distinction is obscure, however, since it is 
not at all clear what it involves. What is the differ-
ence between the case where Mary's belief hasn't 
been "Gettiered", and where she thus has knowl-
edge, and the case under discussion in which she 
has been "Gettiered" and so lacks knowledge? 
Clearly, the difference does not relate to anything 
about Mary because, by hypothesis, Mary's cog-
nitive character is exactly the same in both cases. 
Zagzebski thus seems to be implicitly supple-
menting her putatively virtue-theoretic account 

472 
DUNCAN PRITCHARD 
of knowledge with an extra non-virtue-theoretic 
condition that is able to rule out Gettier cases. 
Indeed, Zagzebski seems to have a modal claim in 
mind here. Not only should the agent form her 
true belief via her stable and reliable epistemic 
virtues, but she should also believe what she does 
because it is true where, intuitively, this means 
that were what is believed not true, then she 
would not form the belief that she did via her 
stable and reliable epistemic virtues. So con-
strued, Zagzebski seems to be wanting to add a 
sensitivity condition to her virtue theory, such 
that the means by which the agent forms her true 
belief in the actual world should be via the epis-
temic virtues, and that in the nearest possible 
world or worlds in which the proposition in ques-
tion is false the agent does not believe that propo-
sition via this same method. 
... [A 1 dding a sensitivity condition will do the 
trick in Gettier-type cases like this, at least pro-
vided that the principle is understood in the right 
kind of way. But recall that we also noted that if 
any modal condition is applicable here, then it is 
the safety principle, not only because it directly 
defuses the veritic epistemic luck at issue in 
Gettier-type cases, but also because, unlike the 
sensitivity principle, it isn't committed to allow-
ing far-off possible worlds to be relevant to 
knowledge. Moreover, we also saw that once sen-
sitivity is modified so as to deal with Gettier-type 
cases - such that it is concerned with a range of 
nearby possible worlds - then it no longer differs 
from safety in any substantive respect, and thus 
there cannot be anything to gain by opting for the 
sensitivity principle over the safety principle. 
Presumably, then, Zagzebski ought to be happy 
to construe her modal requirement on knowledge 
along safety-based lines, and thus argue that the 
knowing agent should form her true belief via her 
epistemic virtues, and that her belief should, in 
addition, be safe. However, if this is what her 
response to Gettier amounts to then one could 
just as well adopt a safety-based view that deals 
with veritic epistemic luck - and thus the Gettier-
style examples - directly and then supplement it, if 
need be, with an internal justification condition to 
deal with the additional problem posed by reflec-
tive epistemic luck. Crucially, however, such a 
theory of knowledge need make no essential men-
tion of the epistemic virtues, even if an account 
of how agents gain internalistically justified safe 
beliefs will no doubt incorporate a virtue-theoretic 
story. Again, then, we find that the case for the 
virtue-theoretic account of knowledge is moot. 
The problem at issue here arises because even 
internalists need to advocate an external epis-
temic condition in order to eliminate veritic epis-
temic luck. The difficulty is that the only external 
epistemic condition that does the trick is a safety-
type condition, and once one has made the cru-
cial move to adopting a condition of this sort as 
part of one's theory of knowledge then one has 
thereby moved away from a virtue-theoretic 
account that defines knowledge in terms of the 
epistemic virtues because such a principle makes 
no essential reference to the epistemic virtues at 
all. It is not then as if Zagzebski is merely offering 
an internalized virtue-theoretic account that is 
supplemented by a safety-type condition, since 
the adoption of a safety-type condition makes the 
virtue-theoretic proposal obsolete. If one has 
externalist intuitions about knowledge, then one 
should seek a mere safety-based theory of know 1-
edge that will, no doubt, be supplemented by a 
further explanatory story concerning the epis-
temic virtues and cognitive faculties that explains 
how agents gain safe beliefs that are not veritically 
lucky. Alternatively, if one has internalist intui-
tions about knowledge, then one should seek an 
internalist safety-based theory of knowledge that 
will, no doubt, be supplemented by a further 
explanatory story concerning the epistemic vir-
tues that explains how agents gain safe and inter-
nalistically justified beliefs that are neither 
veritically nor reflectively lucky. Either way, one is 
left with a non-virtue-theoretic account of know 1-
edge and, far from motivating the virtue-theoretic 
position in this regard, reflection on the role of 
epistemic luck merely highlights the juncture at 
which the virtue epistemological thesis goes awry. 
One final point is in order. Recall that we saw 
Zagzebski arguing earlier that epistemological 
externalists, as opposed to internalists, were san-
guine about epistemic luck, and we noted there 
that this was a misleading way of putting matters. 
This discussion of Zagzebski's response to the 
Gettier problem brings this point nicely to the 
fore. Zagzebski is just as concerned about the ver-
itic epistemic luck that is at issue in the Gettier 
counter-examples as externalists are, and this is 
why she has a reliability condition in her account, 
one that is, moreover, implicitly coupled to a 

COGNITIVE RESPONSIBILITY AND EPISTEMIC VIRTUES 
473 
modal anti-veritic-Iuck condition for good meas-
ure. Moreover, we have also seen that an exter-
nalist theory of knowledge which eliminated 
veritic epistemic luck would capture one sense in 
which knowledge demands cognitive achieve-
ment, which is the minimal sense that the true 
belief in question is not gained via a matter of 
luck and so is, in this very limited sense, of credit 
to the agent. 
Furthermore, it is worth emphasizing that it is 
not as if externalists are necessarily unconcerned 
about reflective epistemic luck either, since it is 
entirely consistent with their view that they regard 
such luck as being epistemically undesirable. 
What distinguishes epistemic internalists from 
externalists on this issue is thus not whether or 
not they are sanguine about epistemic luck sim-
pliciter, but more specifically whether they think 
that the elimination of reflective epistemic luck 
should be a necessary condition for knowledge. 
The internalist thinks that it should be, and so 
adduces an internal epistemic condition, whereas 
the externalist disagrees. 
4. 
Concluding Remarks 
Epistemological externalists and epistemological 
internalists thus have a tendency to "speak past" 
one another, and we have seen that this is caused, 
at least in part, by a failure to realize that they are 
each primarily concerned with advancing a theory 
Notes 
For example, Foley (1987) argues that we 
should seek beliefs that are both internalisti-
cally justified and reliable, but that it is only 
the satisfaction of external epistemic condi-
tions that is necessary for knowledge. 
According to Foley, internalists and externalists 
are engaged in two distinct projects. Internalists 
are trying to identify the conditions under 
which an agent"s beliefs are rational, whilst 
externalists are aiming to elucidate the condi-
tions under which agents have knowledge. 
Crucially, according to Foley at any rate, one 
can meet the latter set of conditions without 
thereby having internalistically justified (and 
thus rational) true beliefs (and vice versa). As 
of knowledge that is able to eliminate a different 
species of epistemic luck. Indeed, as we saw with 
our discussion of the two main types of virtue 
epistemology, this issue about eliminating epis-
temic luck also explains the different conceptions 
of cognitive responsibility that are at issue in 
debates between proponents of these two theses. 
Since we have already granted the internalist 
claim that the possession of an internalist justifi-
cation for one's belief is epistemically desirable -
where this epistemic desirability is reflected in 
how one is able to take cognitive responsibility for 
one's belief in a fuller sense than would be possi-
ble if such justification were lacking - it follows 
that we ought to be at least sympathetic to the 
theoretical aspirations of epistemological inter-
nalists. The issue therefore comes down to 
whether we are willing to allow that there are 
some instances in which agents might have 
knowledge in the "brute" externalist sense where 
the agent's cognitive responsibility for her beliefs 
is, at best, entirely sub-personal. 
. .. [W] e cannot fully resolve this issue without 
returning to the problem of scepticism ... since 
... the sceptical problem is, first and foremost a 
challenge to the very sort of cognitive responsibil-
ity that epistemological internalists aspire to and 
which is downplayed by externalist theories of 
knowledge. The sceptical problem is thus, at root, 
concerned with the issue of eliminating reflective 
epistemic luck from our beliefs. 
a result, the naive chicken-sexer's beliefs are 
epistemically problematic, but not in a way 
that undermines her knowledge possession. 
See also Foley (1993). 
2 
It should be noted that Zagzebski character-
izes the internalist-externalist distinction in a 
somewhat unorthodox fashion such that 
internalist epistemologies are theories that 
only advance internal epistemic conditions. 
In light of this understanding of the distinc-
tion, her own view comes out as being what 
she calls a "mixed" externalist thesis because 
it incorporates both internal and external 
epistemic conditions, whereas it would be an 
internalist view in light of the more orthodox 

474 
DUNCAN PRITCHARD 
characterization of the distinction put for-
ward here. There are a number of problems 
with the way in which Zagzebski draws the 
internalist-externalist distinction, but the 
most pressing is that on this understanding 
it is not clear who the opposition is sup-
posed to be since hardly anyone in these 
post-Gettier days holds that knowledge is 
just internalistically justified true belief. 
The debate between internalists and exter-
nalists is thus trivialized. 
3 Of course, agents might have reflectively 
accessible evidence and yet fail to take appro-
priate account of it, and it will be part of any 
theory of internalist justification to elucidate 
just what it means to take "appropriate" 
account of the evidence that one has 
reflectively available to one. I ignore this 
complication in what follows. 
4 Indeed, Zagzebski's remarks cited in the last 
section were taken from a context in which 
she was discussing her own version of virtue 
epistemology, a version which we will dis-
cuss further below. 
5 And, indeed, process reliabilism was primar-
ily aimed at perceptual belief. For discussion 
of process reliabilism, see Armstrong (1973), 
Goldman (1976, 1979, 1986), and Talbott 
(1990). 
6 
For more on the generality problem, see 
Brandom (1998) and Conee and Feldman 
(1998). 
7 Indeed, as we will see below, they thought 
that their view could at least contribute 
towards a satisfactory resolution of them. A 
third sort of problem facing process reliabi-
lism, and which a virtue-theoretic reliabilism 
might also hope to resolve, is its failure to deal 
with certain Gettier-style examples. Again, 
this is an issue that we will return to below. 
8 Versions of this thesis have been proposed by 
Sosa (1985, 1991, 1993), Goldman (1993) 
and Greco (1993, 1999, 2000).A related view 
in this respect is Plantinga's (1988, 1993b, 
1993c) "proper functionalism", although he 
has explicity resisted any virtue-based inter-
pretation of his view. For an overview of 
proposals of this sort, see Axtell (1997, 
especially §2). 
9 Although I'm willing to grant the general 
point that agent reliabilism constitutes an 
improvement on process reliabilism, I think 
that the issue is somewhat more complicated 
than proponents of agent reliabilism some-
times suppose. In particular, I would argue that 
they tend to achieve their victory over process 
reliabilism rather cheaply by working with a 
very underdeveloped formulation of the 
process reliabilist position. I discuss this issue 
in more detail in Pritchard (2003), to which 
Axtell (2003) and Greco (2003) respond. 
10 
I develop this problem in Pritchard (2003c), 
and Greco was here responding to that 
objection. For more discussion of this issue, 
see the exchange between Plantinga (I993c) 
and Sosa (1993), and the references offered 
by Greco (2003, p. 357). 
11 
For an overview of the different ways in 
which the main virtue-theoretic forms of 
reliabilism try to meet the problems of for-
mulation facing process reliabilism and deal 
with the more counter-intuitive aspects of 
its commitment to epistemological external-
ism, see Axtell (1997, §2). 
12 
Sosa defends his broad usage of the term 
"virtue" in the following passage: 
For example, it may be one's faculty of sight 
operating in good light that generates one's 
belief in the whiteness and roundness of a 
facing snowball. Is possession of such a faculty 
a "virtue"? Not in the narrow Aristotelian 
sense, of course, since it is no disposition to 
make deliberate choices. But there is a broader 
sense of "virtue", still Greek, in which anything 
with a function - natural or artificial - does 
have virtues. The eye does, after all, have its vir-
tues, and so does a knife. And if we include 
grasping the truth about one's environment 
among the proper ends of a human being, then 
the faculty of sight would seem in a broad sense 
a virtue in human beings; and if grasping the 
truth is an intellectual matter then that virtue 
is also in a straightforward sense an intellectual 
virtue. (1991, p. 271) 
13 
Though one might argue, of course, that the 
safety-based view is the more minimal of the 
two proposals, and thus that when one is 
faced with an impasse of this sort it should 
be preferred. 
14 
See especially Zagzebski (1996). Views of this 
general sort have also been offered by Code 

COGNITIVE RESPONSIBILITY AND EPISTEMIC VIRTUES 
475 
(1984, 1987), Montmarquet (1987, 1993), 
Kvanvig (1992), and Hookway (1994). For an 
overview of responsibilist virtue-theoretic 
theses in the recent literature (though one that 
invokes a broader understanding of this 
description than that employed here), see 
Axtell (1997, §4). For some of the recent litera-
ture on this topic that covers both this type of 
virtue theory and faculty-based accounts, see 
the papers collected in the following antholo-
gies: Axtell (2000), Fairweather and Zagzebski 
(2001), DePaul and Zagzebski (2002), Steup 
(2002), and Brady and Pritchard (2003). 
15 
A secondary motivation that Zagzebski 
offers for preferring an internalist version 
References 
Armstrong, D. M. (1973). Belief, Truth and Know-
ledge (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Axtell, G. (1997). "Recent Work on Virtue 
Epistemology", 
American 
Philosophical 
Quarterly 34, pp. 1-26. 
--(2000). Knowledge, Belief, and Character: 
Readings in Virtue Epistemology (Lanham, 
MD: Roman & Littlefield). 
--(2003). "Felix Culpa: Luck in Ethics and 
Epistemology", Metaphilosophy 34, pp. 331-52; 
and reprinted in Brady and Pritchard (2003). 
Brady, M. S., and Pritchard, D. H. (eds) (2003). 
Moral and Epistemic Virtues (Oxford: Blackwell). 
Brandom, R. (1998). "Insights and Blindspots of 
Reliabilism", The Monist 81, pp. 371-92. 
Code, L. (1984). "Toward a 'Responsibilist' 
Epistemology", Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research 44, pp. 29-50. 
--(1987). Epistemic Responsibility (Hanover, 
NH: University Press of New England). 
Cohen, S. (1998a). "Contextualist Solutions to 
Epistemological Problems: Scepticism, Gettier, 
and the Lottery", Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy 76: 289-306. 
--(1998b). "Two Kinds of Skeptical Argument", 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 58: 
143-59. 
--(1999). "Contextualism, Skepticism, and the 
Structure of Reasons", Philosophical Perspectives 
13: 57-90. 
Conee, E., and Feldman, R. (1998). "The Generality 
Problem for Reliabilism", Philosophical Studies 
89, pp. 1-29. 
of virtue-theory over an externalist version 
is that only the former can meet what she 
calls the "value problem" which, essentially, 
is the claim that only an internalist virtue-
theoretic account of knowledge can explain 
what is valuable about knowledge. She devel-
ops this line in Zagzebski (2003; cf. Percival 
2003). For some of the key recent discussions 
of the value problem, see Jones (1997), 
Kvanvig (1998, 2003, 2004), Greco (2002), 
Riggs (2002), and Axtell (2003). 
16 
See also Zagzebski (1999). This idea has also 
gained expression in the work of a number of 
other proponents of virtue epistemology. See, 
e.g., Riggs (2002) and Greco (2002, 2003). 
DePaul, M., and Zagzebski, L. (eds) (2002). 
Intellectual Virtue: Perspectives from Ethics and 
Epistemology (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Fairweather, A., and Zagzebski, L. (eds) (2001). 
Virtue Epistemology: Essays on Epistemic Virtue 
and Responsibility (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press). 
Foley, R. (1987). A Theory ofEpistemic Rationality 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 
--(1993). Working without a Net (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press). 
Goldman, A. 
(1976). "Discrimination and 
Perceptual Knowledge", Journal of Philosophy 
73, pp. 771-9l. 
--(1979). "What is Justified Belief?", in 
Justification and Knowledge, ed. G. S. Pappas 
(Dordrecht, Holland: D. Reidel). 
--(1986). 
Epistemology 
and 
Cognition 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 
--(1993). "Epistemic Folkways and Scientific 
Epistemology'; Philosophical Issues 3, pp. 271-84. 
Greco, J. (1993). "Virtues and Vices of Virtue 
Epistemology", Canadian Journal of Philosophy 
23, pp. 413-32. 
--(1999). "Agent Reliabilism", Philosophical 
Perspectives 13, pp. 273-96. 
--(2002). "Knowledge as Credit for True 
Belief", in Intellectual Virtue: Perspectives from 
Ethics and Epistemology, ed. M. DePaul and 
L. Zagzebski (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
--(2003). "Virtue and Luck, Epistemic and 
Otherwise", Metaphilosophy 34, pp. 353-66; 
and repro in Brady and Pritchard (2003). 

476 
DUNCAN PRITCHARD 
Hookway, C. (1994). "Cognitive Virtues and 
Epistemic Evaluations", International Journal 
of Philosophical Studies 2, pp. 211-27. 
Jones, w. (1997). "Why Do We Value Knowledge?'; 
American Philosophical Quarterly 34, pp. 423--40. 
Kvanvig, J. (1992). The Intellectual Virtues and the 
Life of the Mind: On the Place of the Virtues in 
Contemporary Epistemology (Savage, MD: 
Rowman & Littlefield). 
--(1998). "Why Should Inquiring Minds Want 
to Know?", The Monist 81, pp. 426-51. 
--(2003). The Value of Knowledge and the 
Pursuit 
of 
Understanding 
(Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press). 
--(2004). "Nozickian Epistemology and the 
Value of Knowledge", Philosophical Issues 14. 
Montmarquet, J. (1987). "Epistemic Virtue", Mind 
96, pp. 487-97. 
--(1993). Epistemic Virtue and Doxastic 
Responsibility (Lanham, MD: Rowman & 
Littlefield). 
Percival, P. (2003). "The Pursuit of Epistemic 
Good", Metaphilosophy 34, pp. 29-47; and repr. 
in Brady and Pritchard (2003). 
Plantinga, A. (1988). "Positive Epistemic Status 
and Proper Function", Philosophical Perspectives 
2, pp. 1-50. 
--(1993a). Warrant: The Current Debate (New 
York: Oxford University Press). 
-- (1993b). Warrant and Proper Function (New 
York: Oxford University Press). 
--(1993c). "Why We Need Proper Function", 
NoCts 27, pp. 66-82. 
Pritchard, D. H. (2003). "Virtue Epistemology and 
Epistemic Luck'; Metaphilosophy 34, pp. 106-30; 
and repro in Brady and Pritchard (2003). 
Riggs, W. (2002). "Reliability and the Value of 
Knowledge", Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 64, pp. 79-96. 
Sosa, E. (1985). "Knowledge and Intellectual 
Virtue", The Monist 68, pp. 224-45. 
--(1988). "Beyond Skepticism, to the Best of 
our Knowledge", Mind 97: 153-89. 
--(1991). "Intellectual Virtue in Perspective", 
in his Knowledge in Perspective: Selected Essays 
in 
Epistemology 
(Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University Press). 
-- (1993). "Proper Functionalism and Virtue 
Epistemology", NoCts 27, pp. 51-65. 
Steup,M. (ed.) (2002). Knowledge, Truth, and Duty: 
Essays on Epistemic Justification, Responsibility, 
and Virtue (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Talbott, W. 1. (1990). The Reliability of the 
Cognitive Mechanism (New York: Garland 
Publishing). 
Zagzebski, L. (1996). Virtues of the Mind: An 
Inquiry into the Nature of Virtue and the Ethical 
Foundations 
of 
Knowledge 
(Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press). 
--(1999)."WhatisKnowledge?",inEpistemology, 
ed. 1. Greco and E. Sosa (Oxford: Blackwell). 
--(2003). "The Search for the Source of the 
Epistemic Good", Metaphilosophy 34, pp.12-28; 
and repro in Brady and Pritchard (2003). 

I 
CHAPTER 36 
The Place of Truth 
in Epistemology 
Ernest So sa 
... [Human} good turns out to be activity of soul in accordance with virtue, and if there are 
more than one virtue, in accordance with the best and most complete. 
(Aristotle, Nichomachean Ethics, Bk I, sec. 7) 
. .. With those who identify happiness [faring happily or well} with virtue or some one 
virtue our account is in harmony; for to virtue belongs virtuous activity. But it makes, per-
haps, no small difference whether we place the chief good in possession or in use, in state of 
mind or in activity. For the state of mind may exist without producing any good result, as 
in a man who is asleep or in some other way quite inactive, but the activity cannot; for one 
who has the activity will of necessity be acting, and acting well. And as in the Olympic 
Games it is not the most beautiful and the strongest that are crowned but those who com-
pete (for it is some of these that are victorious), so those who act win, and rightly win, the 
noble and good things in life. 
(Ibid., Bk I, sec. 8) 
... [OfJ the intellect which is contemplative, not practical nor productive, the good and the 
bad state are truth and falsity respectively (for this is the work of everything intellectual). 
(Ibid., Bk VI, sec. 2)1 
In order to qualify as knowledge, a belief need 
only be both true and "apt." What then is such 
aptness and what role might truth play in deter-
mining it? Is a belief (epistemically) apt insofar as 
it promotes some truth-involving goal? If so, 
which goal? 
Originally published in M. DePaul and L. Zagzebski (eds), 
Intellectual Virtue: Perspectives from Ethics and Epistemology 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003), pp. 155-79. 
If knowledge is better than mere true belief, 
moreover, in what way is it better? How does our 
conception of epistemic aptness help explain why 
it is better to have an apt true belief than a mere 
true belief? 

478 
ERNEST SOSA 
A belief does not count as apt simply because 
it promotes the goal of having true beliefs. 
A belief that a certain book is a good source of 
information may be ill-grounded and inapt 
though in fact true and, when acted upon, a 
source of much further true belief. A belief can 
promote a massive acquisition of true beliefs 
without thereby becoming apt. 
We do well to replace that diachronic goal, 
therefore, perhaps with a synchronic goal of now 
acquiring true beliefs (and no false ones). But this 
threatens a reductio: that all and only one's present 
true beliefs will then be epistemically rational, by 
promoting one's goal of now acquiring true 
beliefs. 
We might try replacing the simple synchronic 
goal with a subjunctive synchronic goal such as 
G 
Being such that (Vx)(One would now 
believe x if and only if x were true). 
This avoids the reductio. Not every true belief is 
such that one would believe it only if true. 
These truth goals nonetheless all share a prob-
lem: namely, how implausible it is to suppose that 
we either do or should have any such goal. We are, 
it is true, said to want the truth as intellectual 
beings. But what does this mean? It might mean 
that we want true beliefs, any true beliefs, since 
among the features that make a belief desirable is 
- its plain truth. If so, is our time and energy always 
well used in acquiring true beliefs, any true 
beliefs? Is no true belief wholly ineffectual, even if 
we might then attain ends that we rightly value 
even more? 
At the beach on a lazy summer afternoon, we 
might scoop up a handful of sand and carefully 
count the grains. This would give us an otherwise 
unremarked truth, something that on the view 
before us is at least a positive good, other things 
equal. This view I hardly understand. The number 
of grains would not interest most of us in the 
slightest. Absent any such antecedent interest, 
moreover, it is hard to see any sort of value in 
one's having that truth.2 
Are we then properly motivated to acquire 
true beliefs simply under the aspect of their being 
true? More plausible seems the view that, for any 
arbitrary belief of ours, we would prefer that it be 
true rather than not true, other things equal. In 
other words, 
(a) 
so far as truth goes, we'd rather have it in 
any given belief that we actually hold. 
However, this does not entail that 
(b) 
if all a belief has to be said for it is that it 
is true, then we prefer to have it than not 
to have it. 
Nor does this follow even if we add that the belief 
is evaluatively neutral in every respect other than 
its truth. 
To want the answer to a question, for its prac-
tical value or simply to satisfy our curiosity, is to 
want to know a truth. If I want to know whether 
p, for example, I want this: to know that p, if p, 
and to know that not-p, if not-po And to want to 
know that p, if p, is to want to know that it is true 
that p, if it is true that p; and similarly for not-po 
So our desire for truths is largely coordinate with 
our desire for answers to our various questions. 
Just as we want the food we eat to be nutri-
tious, so we want that the beliefs we hold be true, 
other things equal. Indeed, in pursuing the answe~ 
to a question we are automatically pursuing the 
truth on that question. But this does not mean 
we must value the truth as the truth, in the sense 
that, for any of the vast set of truths available, 
one must value one's having it at least in the 
respect that it is a truth. This no more follows 
for true propositions than does its correlate for 
nutritious food. 
That distinction bears emphasis. I can want 
food that is nutritious, in this sense: that if, for 
whatever reason, because I find it savory, per-
haps, I want to have - with my next meal, or just 
regularly and in general - bread, I would prefer 
that my bread be nutritious; which does not 
mean that I want, in itself and independently of 
its being food desired in other respects, that I 
have nutritious food simply for its nutritive 
value. In fact, of course, most of us do want regu-
larly to eat nutritious food, as its own separable 
desideratum. Nevertheless, from (a) the premise 
that we want the food we eat to be nutritious 
rather than not, we cannot validly draw (b) the 
conclusion that we have a separable desire that 
we consume nutritious food, that we have an 
objective of next, or regularly, doing so, regard-
less of whatever other desires we mayor may not 
have for sorts of food. 

THE PLACE OF TRUTH IN EPISTEMOLOGY 
479 
Similarly, we may want true beliefs, in this 
sense: that if, for whatever reason, we are inter-
ested in a certain question, we would prefer to 
believe correct rather than incorrect answers to 
that question; but this does not mean that we 
want, in itself and independently of our wanting 
these questions answered, for whatever independ-
ent reason, that we have true answers to them, 
simply for the truth this would give us. 
What then of our belief formation? What do 
we hope for in that regard? Insofar as our belief 
formation is directed to answering questions we 
want answered, it is of course aimed at truth, 
trivially so, as we have seen. But which questions 
should we want answered, if any? Some ques-
tions we can hardly avoid: our very survival 
turns on them. Other questions we want 
answered for the sake of our comfort, and so on. 
Even once we put aside the most mundane ques-
tions, that still leaves a lot open. We shall be 
interested in a huge variety of questions, as family 
members, as citizens, and just as rational, natu-
rally curious beings. Is there anything general to 
be said here? Can some general desire for the 
truth be recommended? It is hard to see what it 
could be. Remember, we have no desire for truths 
per se. When we have a desire for the truth, this is 
because that desire is implicated in our desire for 
an answer to a particular question or for answers 
to questions of some restricted sort. But our 
interest in the truth in such a case is just our inter-
est in the question(s). Ifwe can generalize beyond 
this to a recommendable desire for truth, accord-
ingly, it must involve a generalization to a sort of 
question that should draw our interest. But is 
there such a thing? Can we at least pick out a sort 
of truth that should interest us (apart from the 
sort of "truths that should interest us" or variants 
of this)? 
Your life goals may quite properly be different 
from mine once we move beyond the most 
abstract level of living a good life or living a good 
life in the company of good fellow human beings in 
a good society, or the like. Each of us may have 
such a goal, but great differences set in once we 
determine more specifically the shape of its reali-
zation in a life, given the constitution and context 
of that particular human being. Won't our intel-
lectual goals be subject to this same kind of diffi-
culty? Our interest in the truth is an interest in 
certain questions or in certain sorts of questions, 
and properly viewed as such. What questions 
interest a given thinker may properly differ, more-
over, from those that interest others. 
It might be replied that we do or at least should 
have these goals, if only with near-vanishing 
intensity when the truth is unimportant enough. 
Take again the synchronic goal: 
G 
Being such that (Vx)(One would now 
believe x if and only if x were true). 
If the scope of the propositional variable here 
includes the multitude of trivial truths of van-
ishingly small interest and importance to us, 
this will presumably induce a correspondingly 
diminished desire that we satisfy this goal, as 
opposed to the goal that, for all important truths 
P, one would believe P iff P were true. And con-
sider now the implication of this for the account 
of epistemic aptness through pursuit of synchronic 
goal G. If G is insignificant, the means to it cannot 
derive high epistemic status thereby. But the epis-
temic rationality and aptness of a belief in· a triv-
iality is not proportional to how well that belief 
furthers our goal G. The trivial truth may be one 
we only negligibly desire to believe if and only if it 
were true. Irrespective of that, however, it may be 
epistemically rational to the highest degree. The 
problem here is that the way in which the truth 
goal bears on our retail believing is wildly out of 
step with the degrees of epistemic justification 
of our unimportant beliefs. Accordingly, the 
epistemic normative status of these beliefs is not 
plausibly derivable from our interest in believ-
ing truths, or from any standing motive towards 
the truth. 
Perhaps we should weaken goal G to G': 
(Vx)(One would believe x only if x were true). 
This would be what elsewhere I call safety and 
defend as preferable to its contraposed sensitivity. 
A safe belief is thus one that you would have only 
if it were true, whereas a sensitive belief is one 
that you would not have if it were not true. So 
there is, I believe, a lot to be said for requiring 
safety of any belief candidate for the title of 
knowledge. Actually, the true requirement will 
have to be somewhat more complex, since a belief 
might be unsafe because overdetermined, and yet 
amount to knowledge. 3 
Regardless of how the safety goal is to be 
delineated, a sort of problem may remain. If the 

480 
ERNEST SOSA 
objective is to explain the epistemic rationality 
relevant to whether a belief amounts to knowl-
edge, and if the goal-theoretic strategy is that of 
understanding such epistemic rationality as a 
variety of means-ends rationality, then it will be 
important that the goal be one that potential 
knowers in fact have and that it be plausible that 
the positive normative status of our beliefs be 
explicable through their promoting or being 
thought to promote the goal in question. But 
how does our hosting a belief promote the goal 
of having safe beliefs, goal G' above? It is quite 
obscure how one promotes such a goal by having 
any particular belief. Whether we have or do not 
have the belief seems irrelevant to whether we 
satisfy that goal with respect to the proposition 
believed. That is to say, whether or not one is 
such that (B(p) ~ p) seems independent of 
whether one does or does not actually believe p. 
Indeed not believing that p would seem less risky 
with regard to making sure one does not fall 
short of one's goal. 
In any case, there is now this question: Why 
think of the epistemically normative status that 
turns a true- belief into knowledge in terms of a 
goal? Why not just say that the belief needs to be 
safe in order to be knowledge, while making no 
commitment on whether safety is or is not any-
one's goal? 
II 
Perhaps truth has a role to play not as a goal or as 
a component of a goal but more plausibly as a 
value in terms of which we can assess beliefs, 
whether anyone does or should have a corre-
sponding goal or not. We come thus to the value 
that beliefs have in virtue of being true. And we 
suppose, for the sake of argument, that truth is the 
only distinctively cognitive or intellectual intrinsic 
value or, at least, the only such fundamental value. 
If so, then cognitive methods, processes, faculties, 
virtues, etc., will have value only derivatively, per-
haps in virtue of their efficacy in yielding beliefs 
that are true. This approach to epistemology is 
distinctively "reliabilist." And now, it is argued, we 
may see how poorly such reliabilism fits our intu-
itive conviction that knowledge and epistemically 
rational true belief are more valuable than mere 
true belief. In brief the argument is as follows. 
The antireliabilist argument' 
1. To believe that p correctly and with epistemic 
rationality is more valuable than merely to 
believe that p and be right. 
2. The additional value of epistemically rational 
belief over mere true belief would have to 
derive from the value imported by the 
belief's additional property of being thus 
rational. 
3. According to reliabilist accounts of epistemic 
rationality, a belief is epistemically rational 
through deriving from a method, or process, 
or faculty, or virtue that is reliable, one that 
generally yields beliefs that are true. 
4. But in that case how can being yielded by 
such a source add any further value to a 
belief over and above the value that it has 
simply in virtue of being true? How can a 
true belief obtain further value, beyond the 
value of its truth, by deriving from such a 
source, when the whole point of using the 
source is to get beliefs that are true? This 
would be as absurd as a hedonist supposing 
that pleasure from a reliable pleasure-source 
would be better than that pleasure of the 
same intensity, duration, etc., derived from 
an unreliable pleasure-source. 
With this argument we focus on epistemic ration-
ality, at most one component of epistemic apt-
ness, of what a belief needs in order to qualify as 
knowledge. I will not here try to relate epistemic 
rationality more specifically to epistemic aptness. 
However these are related, since truth is by 
hypothesis the only fundamental epistemic value, 
the value of epistemic rationality must itself be 
explained in terms of truth.s 
In considering our argument let us first reflect 
on some varieties of value. One may distinguish 
first between two sorts of value: the intrinsic and 
the instrumental. Let us assume monistic hedon-
ism, and consider events Y and Z, each an instance 
of pleasure. Suppose event Y also brings about 
much future pleasure, while Z does not. Y is then 
better than Z, even if it is no better intrinsically. 
Moreover, an event X may not be an instance of 
pleasure, and hence not good inttinsic;ally, while 
yet it is still good instrumentally, because of the 
pleasure it yields. All of this we may appreciate, as 
good hedonists, from a judicial, spectatorial 

THE PLACE OF TRUTH IN EPISTEMOLOGY 
481 
stance that evaluates how matters stand, past, 
present, and future. 
Take now two situations, or even two worlds, 
wherein the only evaluatively relevant aspects are 
as follows, for X, Y, and Z as described above. Both 
worlds contain this sequence: X occurs, then Y 
occurs, then Z occurs. In world WI each member 
causes its successor if any. In world W2 no 
member causes any other member. Is world WI 
better than world W2? Not according to hedon-
ism, whose only source of intrinsic value is pleas-
ure, for there is no more pleasure in WI than in 
W2. And yet the X of WI, call it Xl, is anyhow 
better than the X of W2, call it X2. Xl is better 
than X2 since Xl brings into the world the intrin-
sic value that it entrains by causing Yl and, indi-
rectly, Zl, whereas X2 entrains nothing. And so, 
Xl is better than X2, and Yl is better than Y2. And 
Zl is the same in value as Z2. And yet WI is no 
better than W2. How can this be? 
The explanation: Worlds are evaluated by 
total intrinsic value, but particular events are 
not. Particular events are also evaluated by their 
instrumental value, a sort of value with its own 
distinctive status. True, it is not a fundamental 
kind of value, since it involves rather the amount 
of intrinsic value that an event causes. So instru-
mental value is logically constituted by causation 
plus intrinsic value. The instrumental value of 
an event derives from the intrinsic value found 
in the causal progeny of that event. Nevertheless, 
events can have a distinctively instrumental 
value over and above any intrinsic value they 
may also have. When we assess an event from the 
judicial stance, we may assess it as intrinsically 
valuable, and also, separately, as instrumentally 
valuable. 
An agent A may bring about an event E. The 
bringing about of E by A may then itself be 
assessed. This event, call it E', may not have any 
intrinsic value beyond the intrinsic value con-
tained already in E, but it will have instrumental 
value proper to the special relation involved in 
E's happening because of E'. Call this special 
sort of instrumental value praxical value, the 
sort of instrumental value in actions of bringing 
about something valuable. Now, for the hedon-
ist, an event of someone's being pleased does 
contain some measure of intrinsic value. 
Supposing that someone brings about that 
pleasure, is there also value in this further event? 
There is of course no distinctive intrinsic value, 
no intrinsic value beyond that found in the 
pleasure brought about. But even a monistic 
hedonist may yet find in that action some degree 
of praxical value. 
A world does not enhance its total value by 
containing not only intrinsically valuable but also 
instrumentally valuable states. Praxical value is in 
this respect just like any other variety of instru-
mental value. But, again, from this it does not 
follow that a particular event with praxical value 
is not itself valuable through the praxical value 
that it contains. Here again praxical value is like 
instrumental value in general. Instrumentally 
valuable events do have their proper value, their 
own sort of instrumental value. 
III 
Take a case of someone's knowing something in 
particular. Do we attribute to such knowledge any 
value over and above whatever value it has 
through being a true belief? When a thing has 
value it has it in respect of having a certain prop-
erty or satisfying a certain condition. More pre-
cisely, then, our question is this: Does a bit of 
knowledge have value in a respect other than 
being a true belief? It would seem so, but how 
- could you possibly explain this if you thought 
that any such additional value must derive from 
the belief's manifesting an intellectual virtue, 
understood as a psychological mechanism that 
would deliver a high enough preponderance of 
true beliefs (over false ones), at least in normal 
circumstances. This is hard to see as a respect in 
which a true belief could then be enhanced, any 
more than espresso itself is enhanced simply 
through the reliability of its source. 
If persuaded that knowledge must have some 
value beyond that of its constitutive true belief, 
therefore, one may well take the Antireliabilist 
argument to refute the following sort of virtue 
epistemology: 
VE (i) 
a belief's epistemic worth is consti-
tuted at least in important part 
through its deriving appropriately 
from an intellectual virtue, and 
(ii) 
what makes a feature of a subject's 
psychology an "intellectual virtue" is 

482 
ERNEST SOSA 
the reliable tendency of that feature 
to give rise to true beliefs on the part 
of that subject. 
Is VE refuted by the value problem? 
Within the sport of archery we aim to hit the 
bull's-eye, an end intrinsic to that sort of activity. 
When engaged in the activity, don't we also prefer to 
hit the bull's-eye by means of skill and not just by 
luck? A gust of wind might come along and guide 
our arrow to the bull's-eye, but this will not be as 
sweet a hit as one unaided by the lucky gust. Of 
course a hit that through skill compensates for the 
wind might be sweeter yet. So I see nothing unac-
ceptable in a notion of a good, skillful shot that goes 
beyond that of a mere winning or accurate shot. 
A winning, accurate shot may have been just lucky 
and not at all skillful, and not in that sense a good 
shot. In archery we want accurate, winning shots, 
but we also want shots that are good and skillful. 
Are the goodness and skill that we want in our shots 
qualities that we want merely as means? Maybe so, 
but it seems unlikely. We would not be fully satisfied 
even with many accurate, winning shots, if they all 
derived from sheer luck, and manifested no skill, 
despite our gaining some satisfaction through hit-
ting the mark (not to speak of prizes, fame, etc.). 
Whether or not we want such goodness and 
skill only as means, anyhow, a perfectly under-
standable concept of a good, skillful shot includes 
both hitting the mark and doing so through skill 
appropriate to the circumstances. Can there be any 
doubt that we have such a concept concerning 
archery? Surely we do, along with many analo-
gous concepts in other sports, mutatis mutandis. 
What precludes our conceiving of knowledge in a 
similar way, as a desideratum that includes an 
intrinsic success component, a hitting of the mark 
of truth, along with how one accomplishes that, 
how one succeeds in hitting the mark of truth? 
On this conception, knowledge is not just hitting 
the mark but hitting the mark somehow through 
means proper and skillful enough. There seems 
nothing "incoherent" in any pejorative sense in 
such a desideratum of "knowledge;' and there are 
plenty of analogous desiderata throughout the 
wide gamut of human endeavors. 
To recognize that, moreover, may not require 
us to think that only some additional intrinsic 
value could account for the value in the skillful 
shot over and above the mere hitting of the 
bull's-eye, nor need the additional value be fun-
damental. The further value might rather be 
just praxical value or the like. Can VE deal with 
the value problem by appealing thus to the 
praxical value of hitting the mark of truth 
through intellectual skill? 
IV 
In a very weak sense even a puppet "does" some-
thing under the control of the puppeteer, and 
even to stumble across a stage unintentionally is 
to "do" something. These are cases of "behavior" 
or even "acts" in correspondingly weak senses. 
Still a puppet's performance can be assessed. 
A puppet can be said to perform well or not, 
depending for example on whether its hinges are 
rusty and tend to stick. And the movements of the 
stumbling ballerina might be, as mere motions, 
indistinguishable from a lovely pas, though less 
admirable nonetheless. 
Greater independence is displayed by a tem-
perature control system consisting of a thermo-
stat with two triggers, one for a heater and one 
for a cooler. The system normally keeps the tem-
perature in a certain space within certain bounds. 
If it gets too hot, then the system triggers the 
cooler, if it gets too cool, it triggers the heater, 
and if the temperature is just right, then it idles. 
What makes it a good system for that space, 
moreover, is that it would perform thus in normal 
conditions. It is not enough that it does perform 
thus. That the system would perform thus rela-
tive to that space is due, finally, to two factors: 
(a) to its internal constitution and character, and 
(b) to its relation to the relevant space. In virtue 
of being stably thus constituted and related, 
therefore, the system is, at least in a minimal 
sense, a properly operative system of temperature 
control for that space. 
If it is a sheer accident that it is thus consti-
tuted and thus related, then the system falls short 
in respect of how properly operative it is for that 
space. At least it falls short in a certain stronger 
sense of what is required in such a system. 
A properly operative temperature-control system 
for a certain space over a certain interval is not 
one that accidentally remains so constituted and 
related that it would keep the temperature in that 
space within the desired bounds. 

THE PLACE OF TRUTH IN EPISTEMOLOGY 
483 
We can of course assess the system independ-
ently of its relation to the space. We might naturally 
assess how well it would control the temperature of 
such spaces if suitably related to them (in a way 
perhaps in which one can standardly make such 
systems be related to such spaces). One can of 
course then assess such a system independently of 
whether it then happens to be appropriately 
installed. It might be sitting in a display room in a 
store. The evaluation would then focus on 
whether it is so constituted that, if also suitably 
installed, it would reliably control the temperature 
of that space. 
Whether such a system performs well relative 
to a certain space would then go beyond whether 
by virtue of that performance it is or is not con-
tributing causally to keeping the temperature 
within proper bounds. A good system might per-
form in such a way that it does so contribute, not 
because it is working right, however, but only 
because, although it does not then work right, 
luck enables it to cause the right outcome anyhow. 
Thus the system may suffer a glitch, while yet, 
coincidentally, an insect happens to alight on a 
crucial component of its internal mechanism so 
that the system does trigger the cooler as it should 
if it is to keep the temperature within the proper 
bounds. Only because of that bit of luck does the 
system then contribute causally to keeping the 
temperature within the proper bounds. Had it 
not been for the insect, then, it would not have 
triggered the cooler. So it would be false to say 
that it "worked right" on that occasion, when it 
just suffers a glitch. It is a good enough system 
nevertheless, since it does work right in the great 
majority of circumstances where it is normally 
called on to operate." 
This example shows that for a system to work 
right or perform well, in ways that are creditable, 
more is required than just (a) that it is a good 
system (in the relevant respects), and (b) that it 
then contribute causally to the desired outcome. 
For it may contribute causally to that outcome 
only through some fluke, in which case it then 
contributes despite not working right or perform-
ing well. 
A system works right or performs well on a 
particular occasion, then, only if it unflukily 
enters a state that would lead in the relevant cir-
cumstances to the desired outcome. Accordingly, 
what the system does in entering that state, 
unaided by luck, must be sufficient to produce 
the desired outcome, given perhaps its normal 
relation to its relevant space. In our example the 
system did enter such a state, but only because of 
the insect in machina. 
v 
An artifact like our temperature control system 
that "does" things, that "works," might be evalu-
ated variously, along with its performances. We 
might evaluate it by reference to how well it 
serves those it is expected to serve in certain 
characteristic ways. Or we might evaluate it inde-
pendently of how well installed it is, if installed at 
all. Or we might evaluate its operation on a par-
ticular occasion: does it work right or perform 
well on that occasion? So there is the "agent" in a 
broad sense that includes mechanical agents of 
various degrees of sophistication, with various 
ranges of intended activity. There is the "per-
formance" of that agent on a particular occasion. 
And sometimes there is also a performance-dis-
tinct situation or object or quantity of stuff that 
such an agent brings about or produces through 
its performance, a performance-distinct result-
that might also be performance-transcendent. 
None of our three evaluations of aspects of 
such a situation, wherein an agent performs, 
uniquely determines any of the others. An agent 
could be a fine agent and perform poorly on a 
particular occasion, which in turn is compatible 
with the performance-distinct product being of 
high quality or of low quality or of any quality 
in between. Or the agent could be a mediocre 
or worse agent and yet perform well on a given 
occasion. It is even possible that a poor perform-
ance by a poor agent may lead to an excellent 
performance-distinct outcome. So the three dimen-
sions of evaluation seem largely independent of 
each other - but not entirely, or so I now argue. 
Performances relate in one direction to the 
agents involved, and in another direction to their 
performance-distinct products, if any. So they 
might be evaluated with a view towards one direc-
tion, or towards the other. An agent might be 
nearly incompetent and yet perform most effec-
tively on a particular occasion. This evaluates the 
performance in the light of its wonderful out-
come. Someone with a barely competent tennis 

484 
ERNEST SOSA 
serve may blast an ace past his opponent at 
130 mph. This is a most effective serve given its 
outcome: a ball streaking past the receiver 
untouched, having bounced within the service 
court. But from another point of view it may not 
have been so positively evaluable after all. If the 
player is a rank beginner, for example, one most 
unlikely to reproduce that performance or any-
thing close to it, then one may reasonably with-
hold one's encomium. It was still a wonderfully 
effective serve, but hardly a skillful one. 
Performances are in this way double-faced. So 
the evaluation of a performance seems not after 
all independent of the evaluation of the other 
two components of the performance situation. 
Either the evaluation is agent-involving or it is 
outcome-involving (or both). Performances that 
are creditable must be attributable to the agent's 
skills and virtues, and thus attributable to the 
agent himself. 
VI 
In evaluating the Antireliabilist Argument it will 
help to have in view the categories of praxis, of 
human doings and actions. To get something 
done you do not need much sophistication. Water 
flows downhill, for example, supermarket doors 
open when people approach, your knee jerks 
under the doctor's mallet, and so on. Distinctively 
human action is on a higher plane. A rational 
agent's action is controlled and informed by 
reason. At a minimum one must know what one 
is doing and must do it for a reason. Bees dance, it 
is true, perhaps guided not only by instincts but 
also by "reasons;' unlike puppets. Higher up the 
animal kingdom, in any case, and well before we 
reach humanity, much behavior is less and less 
plausibly explained by appeal to mere instinct. 
Differences of degree are still differences, how-
ever, and the rational animal stands head and 
shoulders above the rest. 
Three sorts of agency. The dimension of agency 
divides into at least three divisions, corresponding 
to at least three ways of o'ing. First, there is plain 
o'ing, however autonomously or informedly, or 
even attributively. Second, there is o'ing inten-
tionally, perhaps deliberately. Third, there is o'ing 
attributably, in a way that makes one's o'ing attrib-
utable to oneself as agent. Just as it is fallacious to 
infer that an agent o's intentionally from the fact 
that he o's, since he might 0 unintentionally, so it 
is a fallacy to infer that an agent o's attributably 
from the fact that he o's, since he might 0 unat-
tributably, as when someone falls, having been 
pushed off a roof. All intentionalo'ings are attrib-
utable, but the converse is false; and all attributa-
ble o'ings are plain o'ings, but again the converse 
is false. 
Three forms of evaluation. With regard to 
instruments, tools, mechanisms, and useful arti-
facts, methods, and procedures in general, there 
are three interestingly different forms of evalua-
tion, positive or negative, whether the evaluation 
takes the form of approval, favoring, or admiring, 
or the form of disapproval, disfavoring, or deplor-
ing. A useful cultural device is normally meant to 
help secure goods that we value independently of 
the device. Thus we value conveyance to one's 
destination, ambient temperature within certain 
bounds, savory and nourishing food, etc. And we 
also value devices whose normal operation will 
enable us to secure those goods, and also particu-
lar instances where the operation of the device 
secures one of its characteristic goods. 
We favor and approve of good performance in 
our devices. We admire and even "praise" such, 
performance. On the flip side, we disfavor and 
disapprove of malfunction, and deplore poor per-
formance, and may even "blame" it on the device. 
Such evaluations of performance, whether posi-
tive or negative, go beyond the evaluation of goods 
produced by the performance, whether it be con-
veyance to one's destination, ambient temperature 
within certain bounds, savory and nutritious food, 
etc. And they also go beyond evaluation of the 
artifact and of its general reliability. The evalua-
tion of a particular performance is distinct from 
the evaluation of the artifact that then performs 
and of any performance-transcendent product of 
the performance. A first-rate artifact may yield an 
excellent product despite the very low quality of 
its performance itself on that occasion. 7 
Why do we evaluate not only devices and their 
products, but also, separately, their performances? 
Well, why do we evaluate not only intrinsic value 
but also extrinsic value? Presumably we have con-
cepts of instrumental value because it is useful for 
us to keep track of the levers of useful power. We 
bend nature to our ends, and in doing so we rely 
on what works, on what leads causally to our 

THE PLACE OF TRUTH IN EPISTEMOLOGY 
485 
desiderata. Thus the importance of suitable con-
cepts that help us keep track of what does work, 
of what has value through its causal powers. These 
are often states we can bring about more directly, 
whereby we secure more remote effects, as when 
we switch on the light by flipping the switch. But 
an extrinsically evaluable state need not be such a 
potential instrument relative to human capaci-
ties. A hurricane can be awful even if uncontrol-
lable. The more general concept is the concept of 
what brings about value or disvalue; it is the more 
general concept of the extrinsically good or bad. 
Nevertheless, such a concept seems clearly impor-
tant to agents whose wills must work indirectly in 
securing outcomes desired for their intrinsic 
worth and in avoiding those intrinsically unwor-
thy. And it also seems important to those who 
need to adjust their conduct in the light of per-
ceived danger, regardless of our ability to control 
that sort of situation. Thus the hurricane; we can 
at least control our relationship to it. 
Tools, instruments, mechanisms, and other 
artifacts and devices, draw our interest primarily 
for the goods secured through their use. Efficiently 
smooth operation may of course be admired in 
its own right irrespective of its utilitarian impli-
cations. For the most part, nonetheless, what we 
care about in our artifacts is that they serve us 
well by helping produce the goods that we want 
from them. 
Derivatively from that, we evaluate also the 
artifacts themselves in respect of how reliably 
they operate in the normal circumstances of their 
operation. We need to keep track of the reliability 
of our thermostats, cars, airplanes, etc., so we 
need concepts, including evaluative concepts, that 
enable us to discriminate the reliable from the 
unreliable. And we evaluate the performances of 
our artifacts, using similar categories of evalua-
tion. What is the point of such evaluation? If 
we already know (a) that the performance-
transcendent product of the performance has a 
certain value, and (b) that the performing artifact 
also is reliable up to a certain level, why then are 
we also interested in (c) how worthy the particular 
performance is? 
It is hard to see what interest there could be in 
evaluations of artifactual performance except 
through the implications of such evaluations for 
assessment of the performing artifacts. Thus we 
have an important interest in the reliable quality 
of our artifacts, and from this interest derives 
rationally our interest in the quality of their par-
ticular performances. (Again I am leaving aside 
any purely aesthetic interest that artifactual per-
formances may acquire.) Artifacts are "agents," 
however, only weakly, perhaps in an extended and 
even metaphorical sense. And this is of a piece 
with our treating them as mere means (except 
when we treat them as objects of aesthetic appre-
ciation). Correlatively, our approval, admiration, 
and even praise for their performances is also 
qualified by the standing of the performers as 
mere tools at the service of our ends. 
VII 
Wise action. Suppose your raft glides downstream 
and comes to a fork. Down the right effluent 
there's treasure, down the left effluent only mud. 
Knowing this, and having control of the rudder, 
you take the right effluent and reach your reward. 
What you do and your attainment are then attrib-
utable to you, and properly admirable and praise-
worthy. The reward is something you win through 
your own well-directed rational effort. 
Consider now some ways one might fall short 
of that: 
(a) 
The raft might be completely beyond one's 
control, either because someone else con-
trols its rudder and disregards your prefer-
ences, or because it drifts rudderless. 
(b) 
One might not know that one is going down 
the right effluent, or that it is better to take 
that direction. 
If either (a) or (b) is true of you, then even if you 
do go down the right effluent and reach the prize, 
this will be something that happens to you, by 
luck; it will not be something properly attributa-
ble to you as your rational doing, as something 
properly admirable in you, or as something prop-
erly deserving of praise. 
Again, in a very broad sense you do something 
when you "go down the right effluent tied down 
and blindfolded." You do something at least as 
does water when it flows, as does the knee when 
it jerks. Take an arbitrary "doing" of yours, in 
this very general sense. What conditions must 
such a doing satisfy in order to qualify as a proper 

486 
ERNEST SOSA 
subject not only of admiration (as one may admire 
the swelling flow of Niagara) but as a proper basis 
for praise or blame, credit or discredit? One 
condition would require that it be autonomous 
enough, another that it be sufficiently well 
informed. 
What is true of our doings generally is true of 
our believings in particular. Belief, too, may be 
found up and down the evolutionary scale, and 
even below. A door may "think" somebody is 
approaching when a garbage can blows by. A dog 
may think it's about to be fed when it hears a clat-
ter in the kitchen. Man is rational when his belief 
is controlled and informed by reason (and 
"adroit" through his properly operating cognitive 
systems). We may believe in the weakest sense, 
however, as when a belief is instilled through 
subliminal suggestion or through hypnosis or 
brainwashing. 5uch a belief is insufficiently 
derived from the exercise of the distinctively 
intellectual capacities and abilities, the faculties, 
cognitive methods, and intellectual virtues of the 
subject (irrespective of whether its adoption 
counts as voluntary). The believing is hence not 
attributable to the subject, not even in the way in 
which the circulation of the blood is attributable 
to the subject's heart and thereby, indirectly, to 
the subject as well. You may believe something, 
again, in a way that does not derive from the 
exercise of your intellectual excellences, but only 
from some external source not appropriately 
under your cognitive control. If so, then the 
believing in question may not be prope_rly attrib-
utable to you as your doing. It may be something 
you do only as weakly as does the puppet dance 
when the puppeteer makes it do so. 
VIII 
Even when one does attributably bring about 
one's belief, one's believing something in par-
ticular, it remains to be seen whether its being 
a true believing is also attributable to oneself 
as one's own doing. The following is, again, 
fallacious: 
1. Attributably to 5 as 5's doing, 50'S. 
2. 50'S in way W. 
3. Therefore, attributably to 5 as 5's doing, 50'S 
inwayW. 
Consider: 
lao 
Attributably to your heart as its doing, it 
pumps blood through your body. 
2a. Your heart pumps blood in this building 
(pointing to the building where you are). 
3a. 
Therefore, attributably to your heart as its 
doing, it pumps blood in this building. 
Your heart's pumping blood in this building is 
perhaps your doing, since for one thing you could 
easily have been elsewhere, but that the pumping 
takes place in this building is not attributable to 
your heart as its doing. 
Analogously, the following would also be falla-
CIOUS. 
1 b. Attributably to you as your doing, you 
believe that p. 
2b. 
You believe that p correctly (with truth). 
3b. 
Therefore, attributably to you as you doing, 
you believe that p correctly. 
50 in order for correct belief to be attributable to 
you as your doing, the being true of your believ-
ing must derive sufficiently from "yourself;' which 
involves its deriving from constitutive features of 
your cognitive character, and of your psychology 
more generally. 
If truth has its own cognitive or intellectual 
value, then bringing about one's believing truly 
will have its corresponding praxical value, a dis-
tinctive sort of instrumental value. Compatibly 
with this, truth may still have a special role in 
explaining the normativity of belief. For the 
hedonist, similarly, pleasure has a special role in 
explaining the normativity of action, even if there 
are many things with value besides instances of 
pleasure. Eating savory food will have value 
instrumentally by promoting pleasure, for exam-
ple, and the bringing about of pleasure will have 
its own distinctive value, different from the 
intrinsic value of the pleasure brought about, but 
value nonetheless, praxical value. 
Does the bringing about of pleasure have value 
over and above the value of the contained pleas-
ure? Well, it does have a different sort of value, one 
distinct from the value of the pleasure brought 
about. 50 a world where that pleasure is present 
uncaused will have the same intrinsic value as this 
one, but it will be missing something present here, 

THE PLACE OF TRUTH IN EPISTEMOLOGY 
487 
which does here have value of a sort, praxical 
value. This is rather like the comparison between 
the world where the X-Y-Z sequence occurs 
unaided by any causation, and hence with no 
instrumental value in the X or the Y components, 
by comparison with the world where Y causes Z 
and X causes Y, wherein there is the same intrinsic 
value present in the three items, but wherein also 
(a) it's a good thing X happens, not because of any 
intrinsic value of its own but because of the intrin-
sic value t?at it yields by causing Y and Z, and 
(b) it's a good thing Y happens, not only because 
of its own intrinsic value but also because of the 
intrinsic value that it yields by causing Z. 
Similarly, in the world where an agent brings 
about some pleasure, there is not only the intrin-
sic value of the pleasure but also the distinctive 
value of the agent's action. We can say about that 
action that it's good that it is done, at least in the 
respect that it brings about some pleasure, which 
is intrinsically good. So there is this praxically 
good action in the world in addition to the intrin-
sically good pleasure that it brings about. 
Consider now a case where a true belief, a true 
believing is attributable to you as your doing. We 
may now say that, besides the epistemic good in 
that true belief, there is further the praxical good 
in your action of bringing it about. And this argu-
ably involves your exercise of excellences consti-
tutive of your cognitive character. 
That is, it seems to me, a way in which truth 
can have a distinctively important and funda-
mental place in explaining epistemic normativity, 
compatibly with knowledge having epistemic 
worth over and above the worth of mere true 
belief. We can see the good proper to an epistemic 
action creditable to the agent, who brings about 
that good for himself, and is more than just the 
recipient of blind epistemic luck. 8 
IX 
However, the account of the extra value of knowl-
edge in terms of the praxical value that it contains 
does not go far enough. For this praxical value 
does not explain the fact that we would prefer a 
life of knowing, where we gain truth through our 
own intellectual performance, to a life where we 
are visited with just as much truth but through 
mere external agency (brainwashing, hypnosis, 
subliminal suggestion, etc.). This might be the 
work of a less malevolent evil demon, who allows 
a world out there pretty much as we believe it to 
be, but one that fits our beliefs only through hap-
penstance, the happenstance that the demon has 
deigned to give us just those beliefs although he 
might more easily have given us beliefs dissonant 
from our external reality.9 
If we prefer a life in which we gain our truths 
through our own performances, then the value of 
our apt performances cannot be mere praxical 
value. For if it were merely praxical value, then 
the value of our performances would derive 
entirely from their callsing the intrinsic value 
resident in the true believings that they would 
bring about. In that case, and if true believing is 
the only intrinsically valuable epistemic good, 
then two worlds containing the same true believ-
ings could hardly differ in overall value, regard-
less of the fact that in one of them there is a lot 
more praxical value. Compare the case of extrin-
sic value more generally, and the two X-Y-Z 
worlds above. 
So if we rationally prefer a world in which our 
true beliefs derive from our own cognitive per-
formances to one with the same true beliefs, now 
courtesy of the less malevolent demon, then there 
must be some further value involved in the first 
world not exhausted merely by the praxical value 
that it contains. What could this further value be? 
When Aristotle speaks of the "chief good" as 
activity which goes beyond the state of mind that 
produces it since "the state of mind may exist with-
out producing any good result" it seems clear that 
in his view performances creditable to an agent as 
their own are the components of eudaimonia, of 
human good or faring well, which "turns out to be 
activity of soul in accordance with virtue." In 
purely theoretical activity, moreover, truth and fal-
sit yare the good and bad state respectively, and the 
work of everything intellectual. 
According to the Aristotelian view, then, pas-
sive reception of truth is not enough to count as 
human good, or at least .not as the chief human 
good. Our preference is not just the presence of 
truth, then, however it may have arrived there. We 
prefer truth whose presence is the work of our 
intellect, truth that derives from our intellectual 
performance. We do not want just truth that is 
given to us by happenstance, or by some alien 
agency, where we are given a belief that hits the 

488 
ERNEST SOSA 
mark of truth not through our own performance, 
but in a way that represents no accomplishment 
creditable to us. 10 
We have reached the following result. Truth-
connected epistemology might grant the value of 
truth, of true believing, might grant its intrinsic 
value, while allowing also the praxical extrinsic 
value of one's attributably hitting the mark of 
truth. This praxical extrinsic value would reside 
in such attributable intellectual deeds. But in 
addition to the extrinsic praxical value, we seem 
plausibly committed to the intrinsic value of such 
intellectual deeds. So the grasping of the truth 
central to truth-connected reliabilist epistemol-
ogy is not just the truth that may be visited upon 
our beliefs by happenstance or external agency. 
We desire rather truth gained through our own 
performance, and this seems a reflectively defen-
sible desire for a good preferable not just extrinsi-
cally but intrinsically. What we prefer is the deed 
of true believing, where not only the believing 
but also its truth is attributable to the agent as his 
or her own doing. 
Does this adequately account in reliabilist 
terms for the value of knowledge over and above 
its contained true belief? Is the additional value 
simply the value contained in the attributable, 
creditable attaining of the truth, as opposed to 
the mere presence of truth (which might conceiv-
ably derive from happenstance or external 
agency)? The foregoing considerations go quite 
far, but not all the way to therequired full account 
of epistemic value within reliabilist, truth-con-
nected epistemology. At least one further step is 
needed and that is the aim of our next section. 
x 
Compare two evil demon victims. The first victim 
takes in quite fully and flawlessly the import of 
her sense experience and other states of con-
sciousness, to an extent rarely matched by any 
human, and then reasons therefrom with equal 
prowess to conclusions beyond the reach of most 
people, and retains her results in memory well 
beyond the normal. The other victim is on the 
contrary extensively handicapped in her cogni-
tive faculties and performs with singular inept-
ness. Clearly one of these victims is better off than 
the other; you would prefer to be and perform 
like the first and unlike the second. However, nei-
ther one attains truth at all, not even as a doing, 
through being visited with truth; much less does 
either one attain truth as a deed, by hitting the 
mark of truth through the excellence of their per-
formance. So the epistemic value of the intellec-
tual conduct of the first victim, the value that lifts 
her performance over that of the second victim, is 
not to be explained in the terms of our earlier 
account. Neither subject hits the mark of truth at 
all, whether attributably and creditably or not. So 
how can one of them still attain more value than 
the other? What sort of value can this be? 
Recall the temperature-control device, with 
the two triggers. Suppose it is taken off the shelf 
in the display room for a demonstration, and a 
situation is simulated wherein it should activate 
the cooling trigger, and then a second situation is 
simulated wherein it should activate the warming 
trigger. In such a test the device might either per-
form well or not. But the quality of its perform-
ance is not to be assessed through how well it 
actually brings about the goods that it is meant to 
bring about in its normal operation. For in the 
display room it brings about neither the cooling 
nor the heating of any space. And yet we can and 
do assess the quality (and in a sense the "value") 
of its performance. What we are doing is quite 
obvious: we are assessing whether it performs in 
ways that would enable it to bring about the 
expected goods once it was properly installed, i.e., 
properly related to the target of its operation. We 
might call this sort of value "performance value." 
The performance value of a performance is the 
degree of positive or negative quality attained by 
that operation, measured by how well the per-
formance enables the "agent" to operate, by enter-
ing various states in various circumstances, so as 
to be such that, when suitably installed, it would 
in fact bring about the expected goods in its target 
(where of course the "agent" and "target" might 
be the same). 
It does not require an imaginative leap to con-
ceive of our cognitive systems as devices that 
operate normally with the expected result: truths 
of certain sorts acquired by the host organism. 
There are various ways of conceptualizing this, 
but one way might include the visual system, the 
auditory system, and so on. Alternatively, we 
might have the brain-including nervous system, 
together with sense organs. Alternatively, we might 

THE PLACE OF TRUTH IN EPISTEMOLOGY 
489 
have the animal, or the human being. In any case, 
there would be the system or organism on one 
side, and the normal environments in which it 
operates on the other. And we can evaluate the 
performances of the organism independently of 
its proper emplacement in a suitable environ-
ment. This would be similar to what we do in 
evaluating the performance of the temperature-
control device in the display room. Consider then 
the deliverings of our cognitive systems, of what-
ever level of complexity we pick, including the 
top, total-human, level. Such deliverings can be 
assessed for performance value, through assessing 
how well the performance would enable the 
system to deliver the expected goods if it were 
"properly installed" in a suitable environment. 
Recall the greater epistemic value, the higher 
epistemic quality, found in the performance of 
the first of our two victims of the less malevolent 
demon. We may now say that this higher value is 
performance. value. It is like the higher value of 
the glitch-free performance of the temperature 
control device in the display room under simula-
tion. If this is correct, then we have a way to 
understand the value of the epistemic justifica-
tion that we find in the beliefs of the properly 
"perceiving" and reasoning victim of the evil 
demon. It is performance value, and what is good 
about this performance value is still to be under-
stood in a truth-connected, reliabilist way. What 
is good about that performance value cannot be 
understood independently of the fundamental 
value of true believing, and especially of true 
believing that hits the mark of truth attributably 
to the agent. For this is the good that the relevant 
system is expected to deliver through its opera-
tion when "properly installed" in a suitable envi-
ronment, and the good that may thus be credited 
to the organism as a whole, in virtue of the proper 
operation of its cognitive architecture. 
Does that sufficiently identify the sorts of 
epistemic values that an adequate epistemology 
should be able to explain? We have identified: (a) 
the value of bare true believing (since we do prefer 
to be given truth rather than falsehood, even 
when it comes through happenstance or external 
agency); (b) the praxical, extrinsic value of true 
believing where the agent brings about the belief, 
and perhaps even hits the truth as his own doing; 
(c) the praxical, intrinsic value of true believing 
where the agent hits the mark of truth as his own 
attributable deed, one which is hence creditable 
to the agent as his own doing; and (d) the per-
formance value of a deliverance-induced believ-
ing, present even when the belief induced is false, 
so long as the performance is high on the quality 
scale for such performances, as measured by how 
well such performance would provide the 
expected goods, if the system were properly 
installed, in a suitable environment. Are we able 
to account for all our intuitions concerning epis-
temic evaluation, epistemic quality and value, in 
terms of these four concepts of epistemic norma-
tive or evaluative status? 
It might be objected now again that our pref-
erence for the life of the first of the two demon 
victims, the one who "perceives" and reasons 
properly is not explained exhaustively merely 
through appeal to the performance value of the 
believings of that victim. For if it were mere per-
formance value, then we would not hold that 
world and that life to be intrinsically better than 
the life and world of the other victim. But we do 
think it to be thus intrinsically better, do we not? 
Surely we care about our devices performing 
well in display rooms not intrinsically (again, 
leaving aside aesthetic evaluation) but only 
because that shows them to be devices suitable 
for delivering the goods. But it is the goods to 
be delivered that we really care about. Of 
course the goods to be delivered need not be 
performance-transcendent. And indeed, on 
the Aristotelian view, in our intellectual lives the 
goods to be delivered by our cognitive systems 
are not performance-transcendent. The "chief" 
intellectual goods involve attributable truth-
attainment, where one does hit the mark of 
truth through the quality of one's performance. 
Nevertheless, one cares about cognitive systems 
in good working order not for their own sake, but 
for the truth-attaining performances that they 
enable. Much less does one care about good per-
formances by cognitive systems "in display rooms" 
isolated from the environments within which 
they would enable one attributably to attain the 
truth. Such good performances are valued pre-
sumably only for their implications about the 
worth of the operative systems, so their value is, it 
seems to me, partly epistemic; they manifest within 
our view the worth of the operative systems. But 
partly it is a distinctive value of its own, even inde-
pendently of what they enable us to know. Even if 

490 
ERNEST SOSA 
there is no-one around to see it, the good per-
formance by a system is somehow better than its 
poor performance; and this is presumably at least 
in part a matter of the more-than-accidental con-
nection between the quality of the performance 
and the quality of the system. To the extent that 
the system performs poorly, to that extent is it a 
lesser system than it might be. 
In any case, whether through its epistemic 
value or through its connection with the worth of 
the performing system, the value of simulational 
good performance is, like extrinsic value, not of 
fundamental, intrinsic import. The world with 
such good performances is no better epistemi-
Notes 
My paper may amount to little more than a 
partial reading of these three passages by 
Aristotle (partial, perhaps, in more than one 
sense). 
2 It might be replied that the value is indeed 
there though nearly indiscernibly slight. This 
I am not inclined to dispute, since what I have 
to say could be cast about as well in terms of 
vanishingly slight value, irrespective of 
whether its magnitude is epsilon or zero. 
3 This point is due to Juan Comesafia. My 
"Reply to Critics" in Philosophical Issues 10 
(2000) contains a further reason why a belief 
might amount to knowledge despite being 
unsafe. 
4 The issues of epistemic normativity involved 
in this argument are discussed in a growing 
literature that includes the following, all of 
which I have found helpful and suggestive, as 
will be clear to those in the know. (Of course I 
would not have written this paper had I not 
been left with a question or two.) Ward E. 
Jones, "Why Do We Value Knowledge?" 
American Philosophical Quarterly 34 (1997), 
pp. 423-39; Jonathan L. Kvanvig, "Why Should 
Inquiring Minds Want to Know? Meno 
Problems and Epistemological Axiology;' The 
Monist 81 (1998),pp.426-51;LindaZagzebski, 
"From Reliability to Virtue Epistemology;' in 
G. Axtell, ed., Knowledge, 
Belief, 
and 
Character 
(Lanham, MD: 
Rowman 
& 
Littlefield, 2000), pp. 113-22; Marian David, 
"Truth as the Epistemic Goal;' in M. Steup, 
cally on the whole than the one without them, so 
long as the two worlds contain all the same intrin-
sically valuable epistemic goods. 
If so, then those who defend the fundamental 
status of truth or truth attainment at the basis of 
epistemic value would seem committed to denying 
that the good performance of the superior victim is 
of a higher intrinsic order than the poor perform-
ance of the other victim. They are different in qual-
ity, true enough, those two performances, but the 
difference is to be explained in terms of perform-
ance value, and hence not in terms of intrinsic 
value. That is how it would seem on the eudai-
monistic account, and that is how it seems to meY 
ed., Knowledge, Truth, and Duty (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2001), pp. 151-69; 
Michael 
DePaul, 
"Value 
Monism 
in 
Epistemology," in M. Steup, ed., Knowledge, 
Truth, and Duty (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2001), pp. 170-83; Wayne D. Riggs, 
"Reliability and the Value of Knowledge;' 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
64 (2002), pp. 79-96. 
In the present paper I develop an approach 
sketched in "Beyond Skepticism, to the Best of 
Our Knowledge," Mind (1988) and in 
"Reflective Knowledge in the Best Circles," 
Journal of Philosophy (1997), reprinted in 
Steup, Knowledge, Truth, and Duty. John 
Greco also treats related issues in his paper for 
this conference, and I agree with a lot in his 
contexualist approach. 
5 My value-monistic assumption is only a 
working assumption. I doubt that the value 
of understanding can be reduced to that of 
truth. I should also recognize that my use of 
"rationality" here is very broad, and does not 
pertain only to the proper operation of reason 
in any narrow sense. It pertains rather more 
broadly to the proper operation of one's cog-
nitive systems, skin-inwards, or, better, mind-
inwards. So epistemic "adroitness" might 
better capture my sense. 
6 It might be replied that the system did work 
right ... with the help of the insect. And I am in 
some linguistic sympathy with this reply. 
Perhaps, I am willing to grant, "working right" 

THE PLACE OF TRUTH IN EPISTEMOLOGY 
491 
is at least ambiguous, and in one sense it does 
permit this reply. In any case, there would 
presumably remain the sense in which the 
system itself does not really work right, which 
is tantamount to its not working well on that 
occasion, and "working well" lends itelf less 
well to the present reply, as it seems less sub-
ject to the ambiguity that affects "working 
right:' 
7 And things can come unravelled in other ways 
too. Thus an excellent performance may have 
an unfortunate outcome due to unfavorable 
circumstances. 
8 In fact the account here of praxical value is 
only a first approximation, perhaps sufficient 
unto the day. A more adequate account, in any 
case, would allow the possibility of a perform-
ance with praxical value that does not succeed 
in securing its characteristic inherent value. 
Even if some bad luck robs it of its expectable 
fruits, an action may still be a wonderful per-
formance, and properly admirable, and cor-
respondingly valuable, praxically valuable in 
our richer sense. (Delineating that sense 
should be within reach, and what follows is 
one attempt.) 
9 Nor does the account explain how the virtu-
ous bringing about of a true belief is better 
than the accidental bringing about of that 
belief even if the two bringings about are 
otherwise the same to the greatest possible 
extent. 
10 
When I presented these ideas at Notre Dame, 
Alvin Plantinga wondered what would be so 
bad about being the beneficiary of Divine 
revelation, where there are no special facul-
ties, really, that set one apart; where one is 
just visited by the overpowering light of the 
revealed truth. In response it seemed to me 
that even if, with Aristotle, one finds the de 
facto chief human good in active virtuous 
attainments of one's own, this need not pre-
vent one from granting that there may be 
other ways to the truth that might be just as 
desirable and even admirable. It seems to me 
that much of our epistemology and epis-
temic value theory could be isolated from 
such issues of rational theology. 
11 
Much of our reflection in epistemology seems 
applicable to ethics, mutatis mutandis. 

CHAPTER 37 
Why Should Inquiring Minds Want 
to Know?: Meno Problems 
and Epistemological Axiology 
Jonathan L. Kvanvig 
MENO: 
In that case, I wonder why knowledge should be so much more prized than right 
opinion, and indeed how there is any difference between them. 
SOCRATES: 
Shall I tell you the reason for your surprise, or do you know it? 
MENO: 
No, tell me. 
SOCRATES: 
It is because you have not observed the statues of Daedalus. Perhaps you don't have 
them in your country. 
MENO: 
What makes you say that? 
SOCRATES: 
They too, if no one ties them down, run away and escape. If tied, they stay where 
they are put. 
MENO: 
What of it? 
SOCRATES: 
If you have one of his works untethered, it is not worth much; it gives you the slip 
like a runaway slave. But a tethered specimen is very valuable, for they are magnificent crea-
tions. And that, I may say, has a bearing on the matter of true opinions. True opinions are a 
fine thing and do all sorts of good so long as they stay in their place, but they will not stay 
long. They run away from a man's mind; so they are not worth much until you tether them 
by working out the reason. That process, my dear Meno, is recollection, as we agreed earlier. 
Once they are tied down, they become knowledge, and are stable. That is why knowledge is 
something more valuable than right opinion. What distinguishes one from the other is the 
tether. l 
National Enquirer commercials tell us that some 
people want to know. I have no idea what such a 
desire has to do with reading tabloid journalism, 
but the avowal of wanting to know interests me. 
Maybe this desire is shared by all; at the very least, 
curiosity is universal. Curiosity may amount to a 
desire for knowledge, or perhaps it might be 
explained in other terms, such as a desire for 
understanding or for finding the truth. Perhaps 
Originally published III The Monist 81, 3 (1998), 
pp.426-51. 
none of these, even. Maybe the desire is only one 
of being able to make sense of one's experience of 
the world. Or maybe the important matter is not 
the existence of any desire at all. Perhaps, that is, 
it is not desire as such that drives the search, but 
rather some need or interest or purpose. 
The questions raised by these meandering 
thoughts all have to do with the internal, psycho-
logical constitution of typical human beings. Such 
psychological questions lead naturally to axiologi-
cal ones, for we can wonder whether what we desire 
and value is really valuable or desirable. So, regard-
less of whether humans desire or seek knowledge, 

WHY SHOULD INQUIRING MINDS WANT TO KNOW? 
493 
is knowledge valuable? Or is merely getting to the 
truth the appropriate goal? Why should one value 
knowledge if one already has understanding, or 
what would be the use of knowledge about a 
phenomenon once one had made sense of it? 
Such axiological questions appear first in the 
Meno, where Socrates addresses the question of 
what makes knowledge better than mere true 
belief. The question raises the possibility that 
knowledge isn't nearly so important as we might 
suppose. Here I will identify the discipline of 
epistemology with inquiry into the nature, extent, 
and importance of knowledge. Given this 
common understanding, the Socratic issue raises 
the specter that epistemology itself is not very 
important. Epistemology has long been a central 
subdiscipline of philosophy, but deserved cen-
trality must be earned by argument, for there is 
no a priori certainty that the relationship between 
mind and world, the nature of cognition and the 
appropriate standards for evaluating it, should be 
addressed employing the concept of knowledge. 
Reflecting on philosophical inquiry into cogni-
tion might lead us to the conclusion that address-
ing epistemological questions is ancillary to the 
fundamental tasks of philosophy. The hypothesis 
that I want to consider and argue for is the 
hypothesis that epistemology is really not central 
to the fundamental philosophical tasks of under-
standing the relationships between mind, world, 
and language; that epistemology is born of con-
fusion; that it arises when we legitimately desire 
or value some things which are confused with 
knowledge (things such as infallibility, incorrigi-
bility, permanence, unrevisability, metaphysical 
certainty, or the capacity to stand in the face of 
any amount of further learning). The result is 
that we think knowledge important, thereby com-
mitting ourselves to the centrality of epistemology 
to philosophy, when knowledge is really not all 
that important nor is epistemology central to our 
philosophical interests. 
Epistemological Axiology, Knowledge, 
and Truth 
In the Meno, Socrates and Meno discuss the value 
placed on knowledge over true opinion, but there 
are other problems of epistemological axiology 
besides this one. One could have arisen for 
Socrates, for a presupposition of the problem he 
discusses is that the value of true belief should be 
obvious. It is easy to see, however, that there is a 
question to be answered here as well: what value 
does true belief have over false belief, over belief 
that is merely empirically adequate, or over beliefs 
that make sense of experience? Furthermore, once 
time has introduced Gettier, we have the further 
question of what makes knowledge better than 
justified true belief2 (notice that this question is 
interesting and important even if one thinks that 
justification is not necessary for knowledge, for 
even if knowledge is, say, reliably produced true 
belief, we might have to conclude that it offers us 
nothing of value beyond justified true belief). 
The history of epistemology reveals much dis-
cussion of the question of the differences 
between truth and empirical adequacy, knowl-
edge and true belief, justified true belief and true 
belief, and knowledge and justified true belief. 
But there is little attention paid to Meno prob-
lems, problems of epistemological axiology. It is 
on those problems that I want to focus here. 
Let us begin, then, by asking what would jus-
tify the pre-eminence of knowledge, or what is 
the same thing, the pre-eminence of epistemol-
ogy, in philosophical inquiry regarding cognition, 
regarding the connection between mind and 
world. What do we want out of cognition that 
would make us focus so quickly on knowledge? 
A quick and easy answer might be that it is knowl-
edge itself that we want, but this answer is hasty. 
First, the history of epistemology is not on the 
side of this proposal, for it shows other concerns. 
Starting with Plato and Socrates, the importance 
of knowledge over true belief is explained, not on 
the basis of the intrinsic value of the former over 
the latter, but in other terms. For Plato, knowl-
edge is "tethered;' and true belief is not; for 
Descartes, knowledge is not open to doubt and 
cannot be undermined by further learning, 
whereas true belief is and can be. The history of 
epistemology suggests that knowledge is valuable 
because it is partially constituted by other prop-
erties that are obviously valuable. The problem 
for these defenses of the importance of knowl-
edge is that the properties cited, properties such 
as incorrigibility, infallibility, permanence, "teth-
eredness;' metaphysical certainty, and the like, 
though immensely valuable, simply are not 
among the constituents of knowledge. Such a his-
tory suggests that the focus on knowledge results 
from some sleight of hand whereby knowledge is 

494 
JONATHAN L. KVANVIG 
confused with that which is truly valuable. 
Furthermore, some acquaintance with the litera-
ture spawned by Gettier should make us wonder 
why we should want knowledge, if knowledge is 
ungettiered justified true belief. What interest do 
we have in such? I want to get to the truth, and I 
want to be sure I have. I'm sure you're roughly the 
same in this regard, and it is important to notice 
that no mention of the concept of knowledge, 
especially no mention of anything ungettiered, 
need be made to understand such desires. 
You might think I haven't tried very hard to 
find the importance of knowledge, so I'll work a 
bit harder at defending my thesis. First, I will con-
sider what it would be like for cognition to be 
ideal, to be everything we could ever want out of 
it. This ideal, we shall see, may imply knowledge, 
but is not identical to it. So, the theory of knowl-
edge is a mere footnote to what ideal cognition 
would get us. Of course, cognition is not ideal, 
and a bit more realistic approach to it might 
reveal an important place for epistemology, so I 
will consider what happens when we make adjust-
ments for various features of the human condi-
tion that make this ideal impossible for us to 
achieve. Backing off of the ideal will help us grasp 
what types of interaction between mind and 
world we find most valuable, and whether the 
concept of knowledge ever plays a central role in 
the kinds of interactions that are to be valued 
most. I will argue that knowledge plays only an 
ancillary role at best, and hence that epistemology 
deserves no central place in philosophy. 
Here's what I want: every time I consider a 
proposition, I want to be able to tell immediately 
whether or not it is true, and for every proposition 
whose truth value affects me in any way, I want to 
have considered that proposition and stored that 
information so that no cognitive mistake ever 
causes me not to get what I want. Well, not quite; I 
exaggerate a bit. There are some things I guess I 
prefer to remain ignorant of: the intimate details of 
my parents' sex life, for example. But the desire for 
ignorance here is a product of interests I have other 
than purely cognitive ones. If my only interests were 
purely cognitive ones, what I said earlier would be 
true. Of course, were I nothing more than a cogni-
tive machine, I might want other things as well, 
such as omniscience, but this will do for a start. 
Others might agree with the idea behind what 
I just wrote, but will balk at this way of putting 
the desire. They may, for example, prefer to avoid 
the concept of truth altogether. They might argue 
that we have no interest in truth but only in that 
which is empirically adequate, or that which 
makes sense out of the entirety of our experience. 
I am somewhat sympathetic to such claims. At 
times, I think all that matters is having an under-
standing of things that can stand up to further 
testing. As any good student of scientific method-
ology knows, true hypotheses purportedly do just 
that, and so we are tempted to value true beliefs in 
virtue of their ability to withstand testing. But 
such thinking is confused. True beliefs are no 
more immune to defeat than false ones. Experts 
can deceive us, pockets of misleading evidence 
are commonplace, and auxiliary hypotheses con-
found out testing procedures. 
There are other ways of attempting to secure 
the importance of truth, however, that I will only 
mention but not pursue here. Davidsonian argu-
ments concerning the role of truth in interpreta-
tion,3 and externalist theories of mental content4 
with their implications regarding the rarity of 
false belief come to mind. Alternatively, we might 
balk on theological grounds at the idea that truth 
is unimportant; if so, maybe epistemologists 
should be in Religious Studies departments! Since 
I don't want to focus here on these issues, I'll 
grant provisionally the value of truth, even though 
serious questions remain about the defense of 
this importance. 
Putting aside the question of truth, let's return 
to the picture of cognitive ideality above. There I 
noted that I want to be able to tell immediately 
and directly, without any special effort, the truth 
value of any claim that has or will have any effect 
on my life. I want cognitive excellence of a certain 
sort with minimal effort. I don't think I'm idio-
syncratic in this regard; I think we all want effi-
ciency in producing desired output. We want a 
maximally efficient cognitive machine. 
Alas, disappointment here is inevitable. One 
of the lessons of experience is that such machin-
ery is simply unavailable. So if we can't have max-
imally efficient cognitive machinery, what might 
we want short of that? One answer is provided by 
Descartes. He wants some way of guaranteeing 
that his beliefs are true, and he wants to be able to 
secure such a guarantee without having to leave 
the comfort of his warm stove. A little less lazy 
than I, but not much. I like it. 

WHY SHOULD INQUIRING MINDS WANT TO KNOW? 
495 
Notice, however, that neither what Descartes 
nor I want should be confused with knowledge. 
In both cases, knowledge would be a mere by-
product of getting what we want. So these desires 
provide no foundation for the centrality of epis-
temology to the philosophical enterprise. Hence, 
if these desires reflect what is valuable from a 
cognitive point of view, epistemology could 
become central only by confusing knowledge 
with something else distinct from it. 
Recall, however, that we are supposed to be 
trucking in reality here, and Descartes's ideal is 
every bit as chimerical as my earlier ideal for the 
lazy. Our goal should not be to provide an account 
of cognitive ideality simpliciter; it should be, rather, 
to elucidate a realistic ideal, one that is humanly 
possible to achieve. Descartes's ideal simply cannot 
be achieved; there is nothing or almost nothing 
about which we can be metaphysically certain. So 
the epistemological heaven described by Descartes 
turns out to be mere fancy. 
Cartesian ism is attractive in part because, like 
Descartes, we all want some guarantee that we 
have the right beliefs. First, we abhor the double 
minded ness constituted by instability in the cog-
nitive realm. We do not want to be in a condition 
in which we keep changing our minds from one 
moment to the next about what to believe, nor is 
it good for us to be continually in the Pyrrhonian 
state of suspension of belief. But mere stability of 
belief - fIxation of belief - is not what we want 
either. We are all aware of the delusional capacities 
of human beings, and we don't want to live a lie. 
What we want is fIxation on the right beliefs, not 
mere fIxation of belief. We want fIxed, true belie£ 
If Descartes's ideal were humanly achievable, it 
would get us fIxed, true belief. But it isn't. So we 
must ask, how do we retreat from Descartes? 
Truth and Justification 
Let's cut to the chase and see what can be made of 
the idea that an appropriate retreat from 
Descartes will lead us to the promised land of 
epistemology. Here's a try. If you want to fIx true 
belief, you should want to be responsive to indi-
cators of truth, or what is the same thing, to 
evidence of truth. When you are responsive to 
such, the beliefs on which you fIx will be justifIed, 
or warranted. 
This proposal attempts to sneak in a concept 
of evidence or justifIcation or warrant in terms of 
truth indication or likelihood of truth, but the 
attempt should be rejected at this point. The 
defense of the theory of justifIcation claims that if 
you desire fIxed, true belief, you should want to 
be sensitive to indicators of truth. If the proposal 
means to include among such indicators signs 
that are only suggestive of truth, it would be 
rejected at this point. If I want chocolate, I'll want 
to go to a store that sells it. I won't be inclined to 
take counsel from those who tell me which stores 
look like they sell chocolate, or are likely to sell 
chocolate, over counsel from those who tell me 
which stores in fact sell chocolate. Recall that the 
only value we have identifIed is fIxed, true belief. 
So all we are entitled to claim at this point is that 
if a belief is true and fIxed, it is valuable, and if it 
is not true and fIxed, it is not valuable. So, if a 
concept of evidence is legitimate here, the only 
things that will count as evidence are signs that 
imply the truth of what they signal. That is, no 
role has been found as yet for the epistemological 
pith of evidenced, false belief. Yet, if we have 
found a place for a concept of evidence, surely 
there must be such a role; so we should resist 
at this point the suggestion that the traditional 
epistemological concern with justification or 
warrant has found a place in our discussion. 
One might claim that we have failed to fInd 
a place for warrant because we have ignored 
the difference between the single case and the 
long run. Truth may be all that matters in the 
single case, it might be claimed, but there is also 
the matter of what will happen in the long run. 
The strategies for battle taught at West Point 
might fail in a single case, but they are taught 
because they will generate more victories in the 
long run. Just so, the procedures, mechanisms, 
and methods that produce mostly true beliefs 
should be valued because they will produce more 
true beliefs over the long run than procedures, 
mechanisms and methods that produce beliefs 
unlikely to be true. 
The response is unsuccessful. First, it does not 
follow from anything said so far, or anything that 
might reasonably be added, that more of one's 
beliefs will be true in the long run if one uses 
methods or procedures likely to get one to the 
truth. Second, and more important, the defense is 
irrelevant. For if there are methods, mechanisms, 

496 
JONATHAN L. KVANVIG 
and procedures that make it likely that we will get 
to the truth by employing them, there are other 
methods, mechanisms, and procedures that are 
even better. Consider the mechanism operative 
when and only when I believe the truth; ponder 
the method employed when one believes p if and 
only if p is true; contemplate the procedure fol-
lowed by accepting p just in case it is true. If we 
want focus on the long-term prospects of getting 
to the truth and if we want to adjust our counsel 
regarding strategies of belief-formation so as to 
maximize getting to the truth and avoiding error, 
why not prefer the very best strategies such as 
those just delineated? If we do, we get the earlier 
result that true belief is all that matters; justifica-
tion drops entirely out of the picture. 
One might argue that justification or 
warrant doesn't arise only when one adopts opti-
mal methods for getting to the truth; satisfactory 
methods, when employed properly, can also 
generate warrant. This point, however true, is of 
no use whatsoever in our context. For we do not 
yet have any reason for thinking that justification 
is important. What I want to know is whether tra-
ditional epistemology is worth doing, and to this 
point all we have found is that true belief is valu-
able. So the project is not to construct a theory of 
justification or warrant; we are asking instead 
why anyone should undertake such a project at 
all. The attempt above was to argue that the 
project is important on the basis of a distinction 
between features of a single case and features of a 
long-run pursuit of truth. That attempt failed, 
and any attempt to avoid that argument by distin-
guishing between optimal and adequate results of 
inquiry is a complete non sequitur. 
There are, however, two other ways I can think 
of to try to find a place for justification or warrant 
in a theory that grants the importance of true 
belief. One standard maneuver is to begin talking 
about means and ends, with truth as the end and 
justification as the means to it.s The other maneu-
ver pessimistically resigns on the task of clarifying 
justification in terms of the goal of truth, claim-
ing instead that it is itself valuable independently 
of any relation it might have to the goal of having 
fixed true beliefs.6 I will begin with the more pes-
simistic approach. 
The position that justification is valuable inde-
pendently of the importance or value of truth 
ought to strike us as an utterly mysterious one. It 
is akin to developing statistical categories in base-
ball that have nothing to do with winning baseball 
games. We keep statistics on batting average, slug-
ging percentage, numbers of home runs, stolen 
bases, earned run average, fielding percentage, 
etc., because each of these has something to do 
with success in the game, i.e., winning. But sup-
pose we introduce a further category: what per-
centage of times you step on home plate as you 
begin running toward first base, and claim that 
the lower percentage, the better (left-handers 
have an obvious advantage in this category, which, 
this left-hander holds, is all for the good). Puzzled, 
you query why anyone should be interested in 
this statistic. What does it have to do with success 
in the game of baseball? I answer that there is no 
connection, it's just a valuable characteristic to 
have independently of any role it might play in 
winning games. You'd walk away perplexed by 
such a claim, I submit. I further submit that the 
same reaction is appropriate when it is claimed 
that justification has a value completely inde-
pendent of the value of truth. The point of cogni-
tion is to get to the truth (so we have assumed 
here, at any rate), and the things we cite when we 
want to defend the truth of what we believe are 
usually (what we take to be) justifications of the 
truth. If that isn't what justification is, if it is not 
connected to the truth in any interesting way at 
all, I don't see why we'd be any more interested in 
it than in what percentage of times batters hit 
home plate on their way to first base. 
If justification does not have intrinsic value, 
then perhaps it has instrumental value. Instead 
of thinking of justification as having value inde-
pendently of truth, perhaps we will find its value 
in its relationship to truth: truth is the goal of 
inquiry and justification the means to it. There is 
even a way of seeing the first position, that justi-
fication must have intrinsic value, as arising out 
of this conception of the relationship between 
justification and truth. One gets forced into the 
intrinsic value position by assuming a restrictive 
account of what can count as a connection to 
truth. Once one restricts the possible connec-
tions, the next step is to become pessimistic 
about the prospects of connecting justification 
and truth on the restricted possibilities envis-
aged. Finally, uncomfortable with the idea that 
justification is unimportant, one decides that no 
connection at all is needed; justification is 

WHY SHOULD INQUIRING MINDS WANT TO KNOW? 
497 
valuable in itself, and not on the basis of any 
connection to truth. 
The undue restrictions on possible connec-
tions to truth come by ignoring other possi-
bilities. In particular, an ambiguity gets ignored 
in the concept of a means to a goal. This concept 
is ambiguous between intentional means and 
effective means. In the arena of action, the first 
concept is instanced when a person performs a 
certain action with the intention of realizing a 
certain goal. If I am chosen to take a shot from 
halfcourt at a Chicago Bulls basketball game for 
one million dollars, I will perform certain actions 
as a means to the goal of making the shot. I will, 
for example, face the basket; I'll even shoot the 
ball. But I will perform no action that constitutes 
an effective means toward winning the million 
dollars. For, to be an effective means, the action 
must make it objectively likely that the goal is 
realized, or at least more likely than it would have 
been otherwise. In many cases, however, there 
simply are no effective means available. In the 
example, nothing I could do will make it likely 
that I make a shot from halfcourt, and nothing I 
could do will even raise the likelihood of my 
making such a shot. After all, I'm not as young as 
I used to be; maybe I'm beyond the point of even 
throwing the ball that far. Nonetheless, one would 
still try, and in trying, adopt some intentional 
means to the goal of making the basket. 
When justification is conceived of as appro-
priately connected to the truth only when it is an 
effective way to truth, it is easy to become pessi-
mistic about the prospects of a satisfactory 
account of the connection between justification 
and truth. I don't want to vouch for the correct-
ness of any particular complaint here, but one of 
the most worrisome difficulties has come to be 
called the New Evil Demon Problem.7 If justifica-
tion must be an effective means to the truth, then 
inhabitants of evil demon worlds have hardly any 
justified beliefs. But how could that be? After all, 
the same is not true of us, even though they 
might, after all, be us. Or so the argument runs, at 
any rate. Plagued by this difficulty, one might 
simply give up on the idea that justification and 
truth are connected, resorting to the mysterious 
idea that justification is intrinsically valuable 
independently of any connection to the truth. 
Notice that if we do not limit our conception 
of means to effective means but also countenance 
intentional means, more can be said. Some goals 
cannot be achieved directly, requiring the adop-
tion of some means in achieving them. In the 
case of winning a million dollars at a Bulls game, 
that goal cannot be achieved directly. The first 
means that I must adopt is that of making a 
basket from midcourt. So that becomes my sec-
ondary goal. But note that it too cannot be 
achieved directly, so I must adopt some means of 
achieving it. Notice that this process of develop-
ing means toward goals stops when I get to 
actions that I can control with relative ease. I can, 
pretty directly, turn and face the basket. If you're 
a fan of basic actions in action theory, you might 
want to insist that I go further, perhaps all the 
way to tryings: in order to reach the goal of 
turning and facing the basket, I must try to do 
so. But I didn't want to become mired in action 
theory here. I only want to point out that if we 
countenance intentional means to a goal, we can 
develop an account of when means should be 
adopted and how the ways in which we ordinar-
ily approach such goals count as means to achiev-
ing them. If we talk only of effective means, 
nothing in the example is coherent. I have to 
make a basket in order to win a million dollars, 
but nothing I do is effective in making the basket. 
The only basis of evaluation available is, thus, 
whether or not I make the basket; no discussion 
of appropriate means can serve as a basis for pos-
itive evaluation in spite of missing my goal. 
Care must be shown in extending this discus-
sion, which is at home most in the arena of action 
to the arena of belief, for we do not want to 
assume that beliefs are voluntary in the way 
actions are.s Perhaps something like the following 
is what we are after. The goal of truth for belief is 
relatively remote; it is not a property we can 
always tell directly and immediately whether a 
belief has. So we should try to have, or value, 
beliefs with some other property, one that we can 
always tell directly and immediately whether a 
belief has. In order to count as an analogue of an 
intentional means to a goal in the arena of action, 
this property must be one that is appropriate 
(or the best we can do), by our own lights, for get-
ting to the truth. Such a description generates the 
appropriate analogue in the arena of belief of a 
concept most at home in the arena of action, and 
it does so without requiring that beliefs are 
voluntary. 

498 
JONATHAN L. KVANVIG 
These points yield a lesson for those who wish 
to defend the importance of justification by 
appealing to the distinction between means and 
ends, or between intrinsic and instrumental value. 
The very first question such an approach must be 
able to answer is why the distinction between 
means and ends is introduced in the first place. 
The only adequate response must appeal in some 
way to the mediacy of the goal and the immediacy 
of the means, to our inability always to achieve 
the goal directly and immediately in the case of 
action, to our inability always to tell immediately 
and directly whether the goal has been achieved 
in the arena of belief. Yet, if only effective means 
count as means, this answer is unavailable. For no 
property a belief has is such that it is necessarily 
likely to attach to a true belief and also one that is 
easier to tell a belief has than the property of truth 
itself. Thus, the position that justification has a 
value derived from that of truth becomes inde-
fensible when means are limited to effective 
means, for such a defense simply must be able to 
explain why the talk of means arises in the first 
place. Only by countenancing intentional means 
can such an explanation be developed, however. 
So, if justification is instrumentally valuable in 
virtue of its relationship to the truth, that rela-
tionship must be conceived in terms of inten-
tional means to the goal of truth rather than 
in terms of effective means. Intentional-means 
theorists can say that truth is not a property of a 
belief that we can always tell immediately and 
directly whether it is present, so we should adopt 
some means for getting to the truth. Moreover, in 
order to fulfill this motive for introducing the 
concept of a means to the truth, the property that 
results from following such means must be inter-
nalist in character - it must be such that one can 
always tell by reflection or introspection alone 
that a belief has that property; it must be a dis-
cernible property of a belief.9 
Effective means-theorists might not succumb 
yet, however. They may want to insist that even 
if justification must be introduced into the dis-
cussion in the guise of intentional means to the 
goal of truth, we won't have justification unless 
the intentional means are also effective means. 
This ploy is not directly relevant to the question 
of the importance of justification, but I will make 
one brief comment about it. I would remind the 
reader that the most thorough investigation of 
such an approach - Larry BonJour'slO - ends in 
the deepest skepticism about the existence of 
justified beliefs, a skepticism strong enough to 
entail all other forms of skepticism about justi-
fication. 
Effective-means theorists still have one com-
plaint. They may complain that we are showing a 
prejudice against approximations. They may say, 
that is, that even if the very best would be for us to 
always and only get to the truth, some failures are 
closer approximations to that ideal than others, 
and hence more valuable. They may insist that we 
are exhibiting a kind of childish response of 
saying that if we can't have the very best, we don't 
want anything at all. A more mature approach 
would be to recognize the unmatched value of 
always finding the truth, and yet grant the value, 
albeit lower, of always holding beliefs that are 
highly likely to be true. 
An appropriate retort to this insult is to point 
out that maturity often culminates in senility. 
Something like this culmination occurs here, I 
think. You might buy a TV that works half the 
time instead of one that works only ten percent 
of the time; but that decision gives you no reason 
to prize your acquisition. It gives you reason to 
prize your TV over the less reliable one, but that is 
a different point entirely. To say that x is more val-
uable than y simply does not imply that x is valu-
able. There is an old joke that close doesn't count 
except in hand-grenades, government work, and 
jazz. The point of the joke is not that approxima-
tions are sometimes valuable, but rather that, in 
certain areas, getting close to what would be the 
goal in other domains just is to have fulfilled the 
goal in other areas. That is, the goal is simply dif-
ferent, and easier to achieve, in some areas than in 
others. So the appeal to the value of approxima-
tions simply won't work. 
There is, however, one appeal to approxima-
tions that would work. If we first established that 
the goal could not be achieved, or could not be 
achieved directly, then we could turn to ways of 
getting to the goal that might only yield approxi-
mations of the ideal rather than fulfillment of it. 
Yet, if it is the best we can do, no more could rea-
sonably be expected, and the results of doing the 
best we can should be valued. If, for example, 
the best TV's only work half the time, then in 
purchasing such a machine, you've purchased 
something valuable (as long as there is something 

WHY SHOULD INQUIRING MINDS WANT TO KNOW? 
499 
valuable in watching TV). Such a response, 
however, returns us to the land of internalism. 
The best we can do, the best processes to instan-
tiate, the best methods to follow, must be 
understood first in terms of the doxastic ana-
logue of intentional means to a goal. The moral 
of the story is that the centrality of epistemology 
to the philosophical enterprise presupposes the 
internalistic character of warrant or justifica-
tion; without it, all we get is the value of truth 
over error. 
Let me make it clear that I am not endorsing 
the internalist proposal here, for I think this 
approach faces difficulties of its own. For most 
theories, e.g., foundationalist, coherentist, reliabi-
list, or evidentialist, do not honor the metatheo-
retical constraint that justification or warrant 
must be a property of a belief that one can always 
tell, immediately and directly, whether a belief 
has it. If not, then no matter what else one might 
say about such theories, they are irrelevant to the 
task of defending the importance of epistemol-
ogy. They may constitute theories of one require-
ment for knowledge, but they do nothing to show 
that there is anything cognitively important other 
than true belief. 
The fact that standard theories of justification 
typically do not yield the result that justification 
is transparent to reflection may lead us to ques-
tion the transparency defense of justification. We 
may decide, that is, that transparency is too 
strong a requirement on a theory of justification. 
Even if it is, however, there is a useful lesson here. 
The lesson of this result is that the appropriate 
focus for the question of the importance of epis-
temology as it relates to the theory of justifica-
tion must focus on the prospects for a strong 
internalism, for there is simply no place in a 
defense of the importance of epistemology by 
appeal to the distinction between means and 
ends for externalist theories of justification. Such 
theories make use of a tow by internalism across 
the waters from philosophical ignominy toward 
the land of useful theory, only to eschew inter-
nalism on sighting land, failing to take into 
account that they drown without the tow. I'm not 
saying the internalist will make it to shore; the 
two may drown together. But the least the inter-
nalist has this to be said on his behalf: he was, 
after all, making a significant effort, the only one 
with any hope of success. 
Knowledge and the Gettier Problem 
Though I have not defended the acceptability of 
the internalist defense of the importance of justi-
fication, I want to grant the importance of both 
truth and justification for the rest of this paper. 
For even if both of these are important, the 
importance of epistemology has not yet been 
shown, since knowledge is more than justified 
true belief. Let me repeat that I do not mean to 
suggest that there is no such thing as knowledge 
or that it would be improper to develop a theory 
of it; what I'm questioning is the importance of 
doing so. Why should we care at all what knowl-
edge is, even if it matters to us what truth and 
justification are and which of our beliefs have 
these properties? 
This question becomes more poignant when 
we reflect on the difference between knowledge 
and justified true belief. Knowledge, it is said, is 
not accidental; the connection between belief and 
truth is not accidental and the connection 
between justification and truth is not accidental 
either. Why should we be interested in such a con-
cept? Suppose all of your beliefs are justified and 
true; what difference would it make if you didn't 
have any knowledge, if all your justified true 
beliefs were only accidentally so? You would be an 
epistemological Mr. Magoo, accidentally getting 
things correct, right and left. But so what? Why 
should you care? 
Of course, I don't doubt that some do care. 
But maybe we care, when we do, because we desire 
something even stronger than knowledge, per-
haps something like the metaphysical certainty 
Descartes describes. We've been down this path 
already, however, and it is time for reality therapy 
to have its effect. Once we adopt more realistic 
desires, it is not clear that it matters at all 
whether we ever instance the ordinary concept of 
knowledge. 
You might think something in the literature 
on the nature of knowledge might provide ammu-
nition for defending the importance of knowl-
edge. A brief look at some representative 
approaches suggests otherwise. What we will find 
is that the capacity to address axiological issues in 
an interesting way is strongly correlated with fail-
ure at solving the Gettier problem, but I must 
caution that my argumentation here will be 
sketchy at best. As our continental brethren might 

500 
JONATHAN L. KVANVIG 
put the point, argumentation will appear in what 
follows in "the privative mode:' 
Some approaches to the Gettier problem focus 
on the role falsehoods play. According to such 
approaches, the absence of knowledge is a result 
of evidence that contains falsehoods, or presup-
poses falsehoods, or confirms falsehoodsY Such 
approaches suggest that knowledge might be 
important because it insulates us from error, 
beyond the object of belief itself. That viewpoint, 
however, is simply mistaken. First, among the 
lessons of the preface and fallibility paradoxes are 
that we nearly always have evidence in support of 
some false propositions: I also think that these 
same paradoxes can be used to show that the jus-
tifications for those aware of their own fallibility 
nearly always presuppose falsehoods. Second, the 
possibility of statistical knowledge undermines 
many of these approaches. A statistical sample 
can deviate in statistically significant ways from 
what it confirms about a population, and still be 
used to gather knowledge about that population. 
For example, a sample might give us knowledge 
that most swans are white even though the actual 
percentage of white swans is significantly differ-
ent than our sample confirms. We can agree that 
insulation from error is important, but the lesson 
here is that one can't defend the importance of 
knowledge by citing perhaps unfortunate features 
of the human condition that knowledge has no 
power to displace. 
Another approach to the nature of knowledge 
claims that if you don't have knowledge, then 
either your cognitive equipment is not function-
ing as it was designed to function or it is not 
operating in an environment suitable to that 
design. So suppose I regularly have justified 
true belief but no knowledge; then either I'm an 
engineering nightmare (perhaps, better put, an 
engineer's nightmare) or I'm not in Kansas any-
more. Upset, I'm not; I'll just blissfully smile and 
bless the gods for my justified true beliefs while 
some epistemologists sing their lament. I'd join 
in the refrain if there were an argument that my 
condition will lead, or likely will lead, to failures 
of justified true belief in the future, but no such 
argument is available. 
Another approach to the Gettier problem is 
the defeasibility approach, 12 and we might wonder 
whether there is some special value attaching to 
justified beliefs that are not defeated. I agree there 
is, but knowledge is not undefeated justified true 
belief. One of the lessons of that literature is that 
not all defeaters undermine knowledge; some 
defeaters are misleading ones and some are not 13 
(perhaps because some defeaters are ultimately 
overridden by other information and others are 
not). So even if we value undefeated justification, 
that gives us no reason to value knowledge over 
justified true belief, for knowledge does not elim-
inate defeaters. And if there are defeaters present, 
I don't see how the distinction between defeaters 
that undermine knowledge and those that do not 
is of any significant importance to human inter-
ests, needs, or purposes. One might answer like 
this: when you are subject only to the misleading 
defeaters, you could learn everything epistemi-
cally relevant to your belief and still be justified in 
believing what you presently believe. That is true, 
but it is also true when you are subject to non-
misleading defeaters, for there aren't any justified 
truths that one with all the evidence would fail to 
be justified in believing. 
Another approach to the Gettier problem 
imputes to knowers a truth-tracking power. 14 
When you lack knowledge, on this approach, 
either you would still believe the claim if it were 
false or there are close counterfactual circum-
stances in which it is still true in which you 
would not believe it. Yet, these counterfactuals 
alone are of little interest to us. A benevolent 
demon might just devote himself to making the 
appropriate counterfactuals true so that I count 
as a truth-tracker; another, malevolent demon 
might make those same counterfactuals false 
regardless of the quality of my evidence. The 
truth or falsity of these counterfactuals alone is of 
no special interest to us, so if their truth is what 
makes the difference between justified true belief 
and knowledge, then knowledge is of no special 
importance either. 
There is a reply here, that it is not the truth of 
the counterfactuals that interests us, but the expla-
nation of their truth. We want the counterfactuals 
to be true in virtue of capacities or abilities we 
have at finding the truth, so even though the mere 
truth of the counterfactuals may not be impor-
tant or valuable, their truth in virtue of our powers 
is. If the counterfactuals are true because of the 
activity of some demon, they don't interest us much; 
but if they are true in virtue of our cognitive powers, 
they do interest us, and properly so. 

WHY SHOULD INQUIRING MINDS WANT TO KNOW? 
501 
The question we must ask, however, is what all 
this has to do with knowledge. It is not hard to see 
that knowledge is not to be identified with justi-
fied true belief, even where the true belief occurs 
in virtue of our cognitive powers in such a way as 
to sustain the truth of the counterfactuals above. 
The closest such suggestion one can find in the 
literature is Nozick's truth-tracking theory, but 
this proposal is nothing more than Nozick's intu-
itive theory which he immediately amends in the 
face of obvious counterexamples. ls These coun-
terexamples imply that production of justified 
true belief by suitably impressive cognitive powers 
is neither necessary nor sufficient for knowledge. 
So even if we could defend the importance of 
impressive cognitive architecture as above, such a 
defense simply does not yield the conclusion that 
knowledge is important. 
There is another problematic feature of this 
proposal. This reply ignores the role a suitable, 
cooperative environment plays in making the 
counterfactuals in question true. When the coun-
terfactuals are true, they are never true solely in 
virtue of our cognitive powers. The environment 
itself must also be suitable for the operation of 
those powers. If we had infallible powers, we 
wouldn't need a cooperative environment, but we 
do not have such powers, and hence the coopera-
tion or suitability of the environment is required 
for the truth of the counterfactuals in question. 
What is attractive about the idea that we want 
to have a hold on the truth in virtue of our own 
abilities, I submit, is that we would like to be in 
control of the cognitive affairs in question so that 
our hold on the truth is not fortuitous or acciden-
tal. But once we see that it is never solely in virtue 
of our cognitive powers that we find the truth, we 
must grant that there is always a bit of fortuitous-
ness present when we find the truth. Without a 
suitable environment, none of our powers would 
be sufficient. So if it is fortuitousness that we 
hope to eliminate, we are hoping for something 
that cannot be had short of possessing infallible 
powers of discernment. I grant that such powers 
are surely desirable and valuable, but any attempt 
to salvage the importance of epistemology that 
appeals to the value of infallible powers of dis-
cernment will surely fail. 
Even if fortuity cannot be eliminated com-
pletely, one might still wonder why it wouldn't be 
valuable to eliminate some elements or kinds of it 
even if others can't be eliminated. So, since to 
know something is to eliminate a certain kind of 
fortuity regarding one's true belief, it is valuable 
to have knowledge. 
One problem with this response is that it is 
simply not obvious that there is a distinctive kind 
of fortuity that is ruled out by knowledge, except 
by stipulating that the kind in question is just that 
kind eliminated by whatever closes the gap 
between justified true belief and knowledge. It is 
often pointed out that the reason that justified 
true beliefs can fail to be knowledge is that they 
can be accidentally true, but that gives us no 
reason to think that knowledge can be defined in 
terms of non-accidentally true, justified belief, 
nor in terms of justified true belief that possesses 
some particular kind of non-accidentality. No 
one taking himself to provide an analysis of 
knowledge also takes himself to be analyzing the 
notion of accidentality or some kind of it or 
trying to get at the fundamental nature of acci-
dentality when giving an account of knowledge. 
Instead, what is being done is giving an account 
of knowledge on which the condition which plugs 
the gap between justified true belief and knowl-
edge falls under the genus of non-accidentality. 
This characterization leaves entirely open whether 
there is any kind of fortuity or accidentality that 
is ruled out by knowledge, except where that kind 
is stipulatively picked out in terms of the species 
of non-accidentality that plugs the gap between 
justified true belief and knowledge. 
If that is how we are conceiving of kinds of 
accidentality, however, I doubt there is any way to 
sustain the above claim that ruling out this kind 
of accidentality is valuable unless any other spe-
cies of the genus in question is similarly valuable 
to eliminate. And this latter claim is highly dubi-
ous. Consider the fortuity I experience of having 
many more beliefs about a particular locale within 
the state of Texas than other locales. Eliminate 
that fortuity and I won't have more detailed infor-
mation about any locale than any other, and, 
given our limited capacities for information, that 
implies that I would lose a certain depth of under-
standing that is valuable. So, eliminating fortuity 
of any kind whatsoever is not necessarily a good 
thing. And if it isn't, the proposal above stands in 
need of a defense of the claim that the particular 
kind of fortuity that knowledge rules out is 
valuable. 

502 
JONATHAN L. KVANVIG 
Moreover, as we've imagined the situation, we 
are considering individuals who are unusually 
blessed by luck, a kind ofluck I'd love to have. For 
the situation we've imagined is one where one 
finds the fortuity of having only justified true 
beliefs and a broad range of them in spite of 
having no knowledge. What luck! Even more, I'd 
prefer this kind of luck to the absence of luck of 
those who know a lot. And for those who have the 
luck of knowing everything they believe, it is 
simply not obvious why the way in which they fail 
to be lucky is to be preferred over the luck pos-
sessed by those who only have justified true 
beliefs. They fail to be lucky in a way I would be, 
and they've eliminated a kind of fortuity that I 
haven't, but there simply is no uniform answer to 
the question about when fortuity or non-fortuity 
is valuable. Furthermore, once one notices that 
eliminating the fortuity involved in failing to 
know what one justifiedly and truly believes 
makes no difference at all for one's present or 
future, it is hard to see how eliminating it could 
serve any important human need, interest, or 
purpose. I conclude that it is very hard to see how 
the importance of knowledge could be defended 
in this way. 
Knowledge, Assertion, and Understanding 
There are, however, two other ways to try to 
answer the Gettierized version of the Meno prob-
lem that strike me as deeper and more interesting 
than the attempts considered so far. The first 
attempt claims that we should want to avoid acci-
dentally true beliefs because they show that we 
lack an accurate picture of the interrelationship 
between things, that we lack an adequate under-
standing of the explanatory connections in 
nature. The second attempts to link the condi-
tions for knowledge with speech-act theory. I 
turn first to the lack-of-understanding approach. 
The lack-of-understanding approach insists 
that we should want to understand what makes 
what true, and having only accidentally justified 
true beliefs bars such understanding. This 
approach is interesting to me because it suggests 
that there are certain intellectual virtues that we 
will not possess if our beliefs are only accidentally 
true. Understanding is one such virtue; perhaps 
wisdom is another. This approach thus suggests 
that the virtues themselves are important, and 
that mere justified true belief is no definitive 
mark of them. I agree on both counts, but unfor-
tunately this emphasis on the virtues will not 
rescue epistemology, for such an approach to 
defending the importance of that discipline is at 
least too strong, and perhaps too weak as well. It 
is too strong because knowledge doesn't require 
explanatory understanding; instead, it is at most 
implied by this kind of understanding. One 
doesn't need to have any explanatory understand-
ing of the phenomenon in order to learn (say, by 
testimony) of its occurrence. Thus, if explanatory 
understanding is what is crucially important 
beyond justified true belief, we'd have a reason for 
replacing epistemology with the project of con-
structing an adequate account of explanatory 
understanding. The theory of knowledge might 
compose an addendum to such a project, but the 
point would remain that we should spend less of 
our time doing epistemology and more time 
thinking about understanding. This viewpoint is , 
one I am quite sympathetic with, but I will not 
defend it further here. 
The answer may also be too weak, for I am 
unsure that explanatory understanding implies 
knowledge. It may be that a suitable range of true 
beliefs, or justified true beliefs, will be enough for 
explanatory understanding. If I can correctly 
answer all questions directly from information I 
possess about, say, the rise and fall of Comanche 
dominance of the southern plains of North 
America in the late seventeenth century through 
1875, then, I'm inclined to think, I have some 
understanding of that phenomenon. Do I have 
knowledge? Maybe yes; maybe no. On behalf of 
knowledge ascription, there is ordinary language: 
if you heard me give all the answers, you would 
certainly say that I know a lot about the subject. 
Ordinary language, however, is far from decisive. 
All it shows for sure is that you'd have good 
evidence for concluding that I have knowledge. 
Furthermore, on the usual theories of knowledge, 
I could give all those answers from information 
possessed and still lack knowledge. I can answer in 
this way and lack justification, and I can answer 
in the way and still have only accidentally justified 
true beliefs. 
Of course, such vagaries may lead you to 
wonder whether being able to answer questions 
on the basis of information possessed is enough 

WHY SHOULD INQUIRING MINDS WANT TO KNOW? 
503 
for understanding. I grant the need for a good 
argument here, and I'm not sure there is one. But 
at least this much can be said. Whether a person 
understands seems to be principally a matter of 
that person seeing the relationships between vari-
ous (true) propositions. The contrary suggestion 
would have to be, then, that though someone 
might correctly see the relationships in question, 
they don't understand because, perhaps, it is only 
accidental that they see these connections. That 
strikes me as strained; I'm inclined to conclude 
that, if it is only accidental that they see these 
connections, then it is only accidental that they 
have the understanding that they have. I grant 
that there is more by way of confession than 
argument here, but the response that strikes me 
as the most natural one is to posit the possibility 
of understanding by accident rather than insist 
that understanding implies knowledge. 
Regardless of how that issue is resolved, the 
above appeal to loss of understanding when our 
justified true beliefs are only accidentally so 
doesn't justify a focus on knowledge, so let us 
turn to the speech -act attempt to see if it fares any 
better. The theory of speech acts posits conditions 
under which we are licensed to make various 
assertions - call these conditions "assertibility 
conditions." For your action of asserting p to be 
legitimate, you must satisfy the assertibility con-
ditions for p. The speech-act rescue of epistemol-
ogy posits that assertibility conditions include all 
the conditions for knowledge. First, you are 
required to believe p in order to assert it legiti-
mately. We often reprimand each other's asser-
tions by pointing out, "You don't really believe 
that," to which we might hear the reply, "Yes, 
you're right, I shouldn't have said that; I'm only 
feeling sorry for myself." Second, you must have 
good reasons for what you say, and what you say 
must be true. My father sometimes says that 
earthquakes are much more common in the 
twentieth century than in prior centuries. I ques-
tion how he can say this since he has no evidence 
for it. His only reason for asserting it is that it fits 
his eschatological views quite well. (I'm going to 
assume without argument here that fitting his 
eschatological views is not reason enough for him 
to believe what he does. He agrees in this case; his 
sheepishness at admitting that he has no better 
reason confirms it.) It turns out that he's right, 
and there is available scientific confirmation of 
what he thinks. But he didn't have the evidence, 
and so shouldn't have made the claim (stubborn 
cuss that he is, an inheritable trait by the way; he 
won't acknowledge the point, but that is another 
matter ... ). On the matter of truth, it is easy to 
elicit a retraction by showing that what a person 
said is false. I say, "Foley is not here;' and you 
point him out, and I take it back. Finally, failure to 
satisfy the Gettier condition for knowledge engen-
ders the same type of retraction. Consider the 
Nogot-Havit case, in which Nogot convinces you 
that he has a Ferrari, from which you infer that 
someone in the room owns a Ferrari. If you assert 
that someone in the room owns a Ferrari, we can 
get you to take it back by showing you that Nogot 
in fact does not own a Ferrari. You are required to 
withdraw your assertion as much as you are when 
the other conditions for knowledge fail. 
Such considerations are supposed to convince 
us that epistemology is a central sub-discipline of 
philosophy because the conditions for knowledge 
are assertibility conditions on utterances. 16 I do 
not think the defense is successful, however. First, 
I'll engage in a bit of border skirmishing, to the 
effect that the connections between legitimate 
assertion and knowledge are weaker than the 
above suggests. Afterwards, I'll get to the main 
reason why the proposal fails. 
Let's begin by being precise about the pro-
posal. First, it claims a logical relationship between 
the assertibility of p and knowing p: p's being 
assertible by S entails S's knowing p, where p's 
being assertible is understood to mean that it is 
permissible for S to assert p. This claim is false. 
Consider someone who takes Pascal's advice of 
going to Mass and hoping for the best; in line 
with such advice, a person may sincerely avow 
that God exists even though that person does not 
(yet) believe it. Furthermore, no one in such a 
condition need be moved to retract the assertion 
upon complaint that the assertion is not backed 
by belief; at most, what you would get is an excuse 
for saying it, suggesting that the speaker under-
stands that he or she has violated a condition on 
assertion that normally holds, but does not hold 
in this case. Or, again, consider someone, moved 
by William James's argumentsP who comes to 
believe that God exists and asserts it, all the while 
knowing that there is insufficient evidence to 
confirm this claim. Such a person need not retract 
the claim when the absence of evidence is noted; 

504 
JONATHAN L. KVANVIG 
at most, an excuse is needed. For a third case, 
imagine Churchland or Stich asserting, "I believe 
nothing that I assert;' something their writings 
imply.18 On the speech-act proposal, no such sen-
tence is assertible, but it is easy to see that neither 
would be guilty of any impropriety in his asser-
tion (I hesitate to say that an excuse is called for 
here, because there is no excuse for their views), 
even if it should turn out that they are philosoph-
ically mistaken in claiming that there are no 
beliefs. This latter case is a special instance of 
skeptical and Pyrrhonian assertion. (As an aside, 
such possibilities of appropriate assertion show 
that Moore's Paradox, the paradox that arises 
from a person's asserting that a certain proposi-
tion is true but that he or she doesn't believe it, is 
not always paradoxical; it is paradoxical only 
given certain assumptions about how standards 
for belief and standards for assertion are corre-
lated.) Skeptics are quite comfortable asserting 
that knowledge is not possible, and Pyrrhonian 
skeptics not only assert that knowledge is not 
possible but that it is best not to hold any beliefs 
at all (though the interpretation of their belief/ 
appearance distinction is quite subtle). In each of 
these cases, assertion is legitimate, even though 
the question of whether it is backed by knowledge 
is left open. 
So it would appear that the most that can 
be claimed is that knowing p is ordinarily a 
requirement for legitimately asserting p. What, 
precisely, does such a claim mean, however? It is, 
of course, senseless to claim that one thing ordi-
narily entails another. Perhaps the notion of a 
requirement should be understood differently. 
Instead of thinking of requirement in terms of 
entailment, perhaps we should think of it as a 
defeasible relation, so that x can require y even 
though x&z does not require y. If we understand 
the notion of requirement in this way, we might 
still be able to claim that the assertibility of p 
requires knowing p even though in the unusual 
cases described above additional factors come 
into play so that the assertibility of p in those 
circumstances does not require knowledge. 
Even such retrenchment cannot save the pro-
posal, however. Recall the way in which the 
proposal began. We look for ways in which we can 
require a person to take back an assertion, and it 
turns out that the conditions for knowledge are 
among those ways. There are, however, two quite 
different things a person might be doing in 
taking back an assertion. The person might 
be taking back only what is said, or she might be 
taking back the saying of it. So, for example, if Joe 
says, "I don't know why I keep trying to be friendly, 
nobody likes me at all;' and Mary says, "Joe, you 
don't really believe that; you're just upset," 
Joe might apologize for saying what he knows is 
false. Such cases support the view that belief is 
ordinarily a requirement on assertion because the 
retraction involves a taking back of the saying 
itself. Moreover, when people assert things with-
out any good reason whatsoever, we reprove such 
utterances, realizing that, even though what is 
said might be true, those individuals have no busi-
ness saying so. So once again, it is the saying itself 
that is at fault. But when new information is pre-
sented that undermines an assertion, only a retrac-
tion of what is said is in order. In the Nogot-Havit 
case,19 pointing out that Nogot does not own a 
Ferrari should lead you to retract your claim that 
someone in the office owns one. It would be quite 
bizarre to hear you apologizing for having made 
the original claim; it is what was said, in your 
view, that was mistaken, not the saying of it. 
Again, if I assert what is false, and you show me 
that it is false, I'll retract my statement. But I 
wouldn't say that my uttering of it was out of 
order. 
The distinction thus suggests that there is a 
better account of assertibility than the speech-act 
proposal aimed at rescuing epistemology. Instead 
of conditions of knowledge being assertibility 
conditions, only belief and justification are among 
such conditions. So here's the story we should tell 
about the connection between cognition and 
assertion. The appeal to knowledge to account for 
assertibility is superfluous, for all the explanatory 
work can be done by the concept of justified belief 
itself. When the saying itself is inappropriate, that 
is so in the ordinary case where standards of 
assertion and standards of belief converge because 
justified belief was not present when the assertion 
was made. When what was said must be retracted, 
that is so because justification for belief is no 
longer present. That is all the explanation that is 
needed, and no appeal to the concept of knowl-
edge is involved in it. 
There is, however, still a smidgen of a diffi-
culty. For when you find out that you've been 
Gettiered, there is some residual embarrassment 

WHY SHOULD INQUIRING MINDS WANT TO KNOW? 
505 
or regret for your assertion. If you assert that 
someone in this room owns a Ferrari on the 
basis of believing that Nogot owns one, and then 
are told that Nogot has deceived you, you might 
not only retract your statement, but experience 
some embarrassment or regret for the assertion. 
Are you thereby showing the inappropriateness 
of assertion in the absence of knowledge? No. 
You are showing that you dislike being duped, 
and one can be duped because of truths that 
undermine knowledge and because of truths 
that do not undermine knowledge. You'd experi-
ence the same embarrassment or regret if the 
defeater mentioned were a misleading one. The 
classic case involving misleading defeaters is the 
case of Tom stealing a book from the library.20 
You see Tom steal the book, and have a justified 
true belief that he stole it. But his mother, an 
inveterate liar, tells the police that it was his twin 
brother, Tim, who stole it. The police know the 
story is concocted; they know she is an inveterate 
liar and will say anything to protect Tom. They 
also know Tom has no twin. But you don't know 
all this, and if you were told what the mother 
said, you'd be every bit as inclined to take back 
the assertion that Tom stole the book and to 
experience some embarrassment or regret for 
having confidently claimed it. But the defeater is 
a misleading one; without having been told it, it 
does not undermine your knowledge, because it 
is so obviously farcical. Yet, even misleading 
defeaters, when discovered, undermine knowl-
edge; that is what makes them defeaters in the 
first place. The lesson, then, is that your 
Notes 
Plato, Meno 97d-98a, in Plato: The Collected 
Dialogues, Edith Hamilton and Huntington 
Cairns, eds, 
(Princeton, 
NJ: 
Princeton 
University Press, 1961). 
2 See Edmund Gettier's famous paper, "Is 
Justified True Belief Knowledge?" Analysis, 
vo!' 23, June, 1963, pp. 121-3. 
3 See Donald Davidson, "On the Very Idea of a 
Conceptual Scheme;' Inquiries into Truth and 
Interpretation, pp. 183-98, (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1984). 
4 For 
a 
discussion, 
see 
Tyler 
Burge, 
"Individualism and the Mental," Studies in 
embarrassment, shame, or regret is not an indi-
cator that knowledge is a prerequisite of appro-
priate assertion. Instead, it is only a sign that 
none of us are comfortable with the existence of 
information we are not aware of that would 
undermine the justification of our beliefs. To 
have justifications that are immune from defeat 
is, of course, a valuable characteristic of a belief 
(provided justification itself is), for such justifi-
cation has a kind of permanence to it - it is 
tethered, to use Socrates' metaphor, and will 
not flyaway. To conclude, however, that one 
should never say anything for which one lacks 
immunity from defeat is, to paraphrase William 
James, to show a preoccupation with not being 
duped. 21 
Conclusion 
So we have no good explanation as to why the 
philosophical inquiry concerning cognition 
should involve epistemology. Some of epistemol-
ogy may be worthwhile, stemming from the force 
of the internalists' argument that we cannot 
pursue truth directly. But at most that only allows 
for a place for a theory of justification. I suggest 
the lesson is this: epistemologists should quit 
contemplating the nature and extent of knowl-
edge as much as they do, and focus instead on the 
broader question of the nature of exemplary cog-
nition, constrained perhaps by the possibilities of 
such for us, and the intellectual virtues such as 
understanding and wisdom that make for it. 
Meta-physics, P. French, T. Uehling, and H. 
Wettstein, eds, (Minneapolis, MN: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1979). 
5 Recent exponents of this view include 
Roderick Chisholm, Keith Lehrer, and Richard 
Foley, among others. See Chisholm, Theory of 
Knowledge, 2nd edn, Prentice-Hall, 1977; 
Lehrer, Knowledge, Clarendon Press, 1975; 
Foley, The Theory of Epistemic Rationality 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard, 1985). 
6 Roderick Firth suggests such a view in 
"Epistemic Merit, Intrinsic and Instru-
mental," Proceedings and Addresses of the 

506 
JONATHAN L. KVANVIG 
American Philosophical Association 55 (1981), 
pp.5-23. 
7 I am not sure whom to credit with this dif-
ficulty, but an early statement of it can be 
found in Richard Foley, The Theory of 
Epistemic Rationality, pp. 72-3. 
8 The most prominent critic of belief volun-
tarism is William P. Alston. See his Epistemic 
Justification: Essays in the Theory of Know-
ledge, (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1989). 
9 For discussion of the internalism/external-
ism distinction, see Richard Fumerton, "The 
Internalism/Externalism Controversy;' Philo-
sophical Perspectives 2, Epistemology, 1988. 
10 
Laurence BonJour, The Structure of Empirical 
Knowledge, 
(Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard 
University Press, 1985). 
11 
See, e.g., Roderick Chisholm, Theory of 
Knowledge, 2nd edn, ch. 6; Ernest Sosa, 
"Epistemic 
Presupposition;' in 
George 
Pappas, ed., Justification and Knowledge: New 
Studies 
In Epistemology, (Dordrecht: D. 
Reidel, 1979), pp. 79-92. 
12 
See Keith Lehrer and Thomas D. Paxson, Jr., 
"Knowledge: 
Undefeated Justified True 
Belief;' The Journal of Philosophy, vol. 66 
(1969), pp. 225-37. 
13 
To my knowledge, Peter Klein first saw this. 
His own theory of the distinction is pre-
sented m 
Certainty: A Refutation of 
Skepticism, (Minneapolis, MN: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1981). 
14 
Robert Nozick is the most famous defender 
of this view, but the appeal to conclusive rea-
sons first offered by Fred Dretske is another 
example. See Nozick, Philosophical Explana-
tions, (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1981); Dretske, "Conclusive Reasons;' 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy, vol. 49 
(1971), pp. 1-22. 
15 
See 
Robert 
Nozick, 
Philosophical 
Explanations, esp. pp. 179-85. 
16 
For a defense of this view, see Timothy 
Williamson, "Knowing and Asserting;' The 
Philosophical Review lOS, 4 (1996), pp. 
489-523. 
17 
In "The Will to Believe," in The Will to Believe 
and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy (New 
York, 1897). 
18 
19 
See Stephen Stich, From Folk Psychology to 
Cognitive Science: The Case Against Belief 
(Cambridge, MA; MIT Press, 1983); Paul 
Churchland, Scientific Realism and the 
Plasticity of Mind, (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1979). 
From Lehrer and Paxson, "Knowledge: 
Undefeated Justified True Belief." 
20 
Also from Lehrer and Paxson. 
21 
The actual quote is: "He who says 'Better go 
without belief forever than believe a lie!' 
merely shows his own preponderant private 
horror of becoming a dupe." William James, 
Essays in Pragmatism, (New York: Hafner, 
1948), p. 100. 

CHAPTER 38 
True Enough 
Catherine Z. Elgin 
Epistemology valorizes truth. Sometimes practi-
cal, or prudential, or political reasons convince us 
to accept a known falsehood, but most epistemol-
ogists deny that we can have cognitively good rea-
sons to do so. Our overriding cognitive objective, 
they maintain, is the truth, preferably the whole 
truth, and definitely nothing but the truth 
(Goldman 1999, p. 5; Lehrer 1986, p. 6; BonJour 
1985, p. 9). If they are right, then at least insofar as 
our ends are cognitive, we should accept only 
what we consider true, take pains to insure that 
the claims we accept are in fact true, and promptly 
repudiate any previously accepted claims upon 
learning that they are false. I suggest, however, 
that the relation between truth and epistemic 
acceptability is both more tenuous and more cir-
cuitous than is standardly supposed. Sometimes, 
I contend, it is epistemically responsible to pre-
scind from truth to achieve more global cognitive 
ends. 
At first blush, this looks mad. To retain a false-
hood merely because it has epistemologically 
attractive features seems the height of cognitive 
irresponsibility. Allegations of intellectual dis-
honesty, wishful thinking, false consciousness, or 
worse immediately leap to mind. But science rou-
tinely transgresses the boundary between truth 
and falsehood. It smoothes curves and ignores 
Originally published in Philosophical Issues 
14, 
Epistemology (2004), pp. 113-31. 
outliers. It develops and deploys simplified 
models that diverge, sometimes considerably, 
from the phenomena they purport to represent. 
Even the best scientific theories are not true. Not 
only are they plagued with anomalies and out-
standing problems, but where they are successful, 
they rely on laws, models, idealizations and 
approximations that diverge from the truth. 
Truth-centered epistemology, or veritism, as Alvin 
Goldman calls it, easily accommodates anomalies 
and outstanding problems, since they are readily 
construed as defects. The problem comes with the 
laws, models, idealizations, and approximations 
which are acknowledged not to be true, but which 
are nonetheless critical to, indeed constitutive of, 
the understanding that science delivers. Far from 
being defects, they figure ineliminably in the suc-
cess of science. If truth is mandatory, much of our 
best science turns out to be epistemologically 
unacceptable and perhaps intellectually dishon-
est. Our predicament is this: We can retain the 
truth requirement and construe science either as 
cognitively defective or as non-cognitive, or we 
can reject, revise, or relax the truth requirement 
and remain cognitivists about; and fans of 
science. 
I take it that science provides an understand-
ing of the natural order. By this I do not mean 
merely that an ideal science would provide such 
an understanding or that in the end of inquiry 
science will provide one, but that much actual sci-
ence has done so and continues to do so. I take it 

508 
CATHERINE Z. ELGIN 
then that much actual science is cognitively repu-
table. So an adequate epistemology should explain 
what makes good science cognitively good. Too 
strict a commitment to truth stands in the way. 
Nor is science the only casualty. In other disci-
plines such as philosophy, and in everyday dis-
course, we often convey information and advance 
understanding by means of sentences that are not 
literally true. An adequate epistemology should 
account for this as well. A tenable theory is a tap-
estry of interconnected sentences that together 
constitute an understanding of a domain. I My 
thesis is that some sentences that figure inelimi-
nably in tenable theories make no pretense of 
being true, but are not defective on that account. 
If I am right, theories and the understandings 
they embed have a more intricate symbolic struc-
ture than we standardly suppose. Nevertheless, I 
do not think that we should jettison concern for 
truth completely. The question is what role a 
truth commitment should play in a holism that 
recognizes a multiplicity of sometimes conflicting 
episte~ological desiderata. 
Consensus has it that epistemic acceptability 
requires something like justified and/or reliable, 
true belief. The justification, reliability, and belief 
requirements involve thresholds. "[O]ne may 
need to be confident enough and well enough 
justified and one's belief must perhaps derive 
from a reliable enough source, and be little 
enough liable to be false" (Sosa 2000, p. 2). But 
truth, unlike the other requirements, is supposed 
to be an absolute matter. Either the belief is true or 
it is not. I suggest, however, that the truth require-
ment on epistemic acceptability involves a thresh-
old too. I am not saying that truth itself is a 
threshold concept. Perhaps such a construal of 
truth would facilitate treatments of vagueness, but 
that is not my concern. My point is rather that 
epistemic acceptability turns not on whether a sen-
tence is true, but on whether it is true enough - that 
is, on whether it is close enough to the truth. 
"True enough" obviously has a threshold. 
I should begin by attempting to block some 
misunderstandings. I do not deny that (unquali-
fied) truth is an intelligible concept or a realiza-
ble ideal. We readily understand instances of the 
(T) schema: 
"Snow is white" is true == snow is white 
"Power corrupts" is true == power corrupts 
"Neutrinos have mass" is true == neutrinos 
have mass 
and so on. A disquotational theory of truth suf-
fices to show that the criterion expressed in 
Convention (T) can be satisfied. One might, of 
course, want more from a theory of truth than 
satisfaction of Convention (T), but to make the 
case that the concept of truth is unobjectionable, 
a minimalist theory that evades the paradoxes 
suffices. Moreover, not only does it make sense to 
call a sentence true, we can often tell whether it is 
true. We are well aware not only that "Snow is 
white" is true == snow is white, but also that "Newly 
fallen snow is white" is true. The intelligibility 
and realizability of truth, of course, show nothing 
about which sentences are true or which truths 
we can discover. Nevertheless, as far as I can see, 
nothing about the concept of truth discredits 
veritism. Since truth is an intelligible concept, 
epistemology can insist that only truths are epis-
temically acceptable. Since truth is a realizable 
objective, such a stance does not lead inexorably 
to skepticism. I do not deny that veritism is an 
available epistemic stance. But I think it is an 
unduly limiting one. It prevents epistemology 
from accounting for the full range of our cognitive 
achievements. 
If epistemic acceptance is construed as belief, 
and epistemic acceptability as knowledge, the 
truth requirement seems reasonable. For cogniz-
ers like ourselves, there does not seem to be an 
epistemically significant gap between believing 
that p, and believing that p is true. Ordinarily, 
upon learning that our belief that p is false, we 
cease to believe that p. Moreover, we consider it 
cognitively obligatory to do so. One ought to 
believe only what is true. Perhaps a creature with-
out a conception of truth can harbor beliefs. 
A cat, for example, might believe that there is a 
mouse in the wainscoting without believing that 
"There is a mouse in the wainscoting" is true.2 In 
that case, the connection between believing that p 
and believing that p is true is not exceptionless. 
But whatever we should say about cats, it does not 
seem feasible for any creature that has a concep-
tion of truth to believe that p without believing 
that p is true. If epistemic acceptance is a matter 
of belief, acceptance is closely linked to truth. 
Assertion is too. Although asserting that p is not 
the same as asserting that p is true, it seems plain 

TRUE ENOUGH 
509 
that one ought not to assert that p if one is 
prepared to deny that p is true or to suspend judg-
ment about whether p is true; nor ought one 
assert that p is true if one is prepared to deny that 
p or to suspend judgment about whether p. 
Assertion and belief, then, seem committed to 
truth. So does knowledge. Whether or not we take 
knowledge to be equivalent to justified or reliably 
generated true belief, once we discover the falsity 
of something we 'took ourselves to know, we with-
draw the claim to knowledge. We say, "I thought I 
knew it, but I was wrong", not "I knew it, but I was 
wrong". 
Being skeptical about analyticity, I do not con-
tend that a truth commitment is part of the 
meanings of "belief;' "assertion," and "knowledge': 
But whatever the explanation, because the truth 
commitment tightly intertwines with our views 
about belief, assertion, and knowledge, it seems 
best to retain that connection and revise episte-
mology by making compensatory adjustments 
elsewhere. Once those adjustments are made, 
knowledge and belief turn out to be less central to 
epistemology than we standardly think. I do not 
then claim that it is epistemically acceptable to 
believe what is false or that it is linguistically 
acceptable to assert what is false. Rather, I suggest 
that epistemic acceptance is not restricted to 
belief (Cohen 1992). Analogously, uttering or 
inscribing seriously and sincerely for cognitive 
purposes - call it "professing" - is not limited to 
asserting. Understanding is often couched in and 
conveyed by symbols that are not, and do not 
purport to be, true. Where such symbols are sen-
tential, I call them felicitous falsehoods. I contend 
that we cannot understand the cognitive contri-
butions of science, philosophy, or even our ordi-
nary take on things, if we fail to account for such 
symbols., Let's look at some cases: 
Curve smoothing: Ordinarily, each data point 
is supposed to represent an independently ascer-
tained truth. (The temperature at tl , the tempera-
ture at t2 ••• ) By interpolating between and 
extrapolating beyond these truths, we expect to 
discern the pattern they instantiate. If the curve 
we draw connects the data points, this is reason-
able. But the data rarely fall precisely on the curve 
adduced to account for them. The curve then 
reveals a pattern that the data do not instantiate. 
Veritism would seem to require accepting the data 
only if we are convinced that they are true, and 
connecting these truths to adduce more general 
truths. Unwavering commitment to truth would 
seem then to require connecting all the data 
points no matter how convoluted the resulting 
curve turned out to be. This is not done. To 
accommodate every point would be to abandon 
hope of finding order in most data sets, for jagged 
lines and complicated curves mask underlying 
regularities. Nevertheless, it seems cognitively 
disreputable simply to let hope triumph over 
experience. Surely we need a better reason to skirt 
the data and ignore the outliers than the fact that 
otherwise we will not get the kind of theory we 
want. Nobody, after all, promised that the phe-
nomena would accommodate themselves to the 
kind of theory we want. 
There are often quite good reasons for think-
ing that the data ought not, or at least need not be 
taken as entirely accurate. Sometimes we recog-
nize that our measurements are relatively crude 
compared with the level of precision we are look-
ing for. Then any curve that is within some 0 of 
the evidence counts as accommodating the evi-
dence. Sometimes we suspect that some sort of 
interference throws our measurements off. Then 
in plotting the curve, we compensate for the 
alleged interference. Sometimes the measure-
ments are in fact accurate, but the phenomena 
measured are complexes only some of whose 
aspects concern us. Then in curve smoothing we, 
as it were, factor out the irrelevant aspects. 
Sometimes we have no explanation for the data's 
divergence from the smooth curve. But we may 
be rightly convinced that what matters is the 
smooth curve the data indicate, not the jagged 
curve they actually instantiate. Whatever the 
explanation, we accept the curve, taking its prox-
imity to the data points as our justification. We 
understand the phenomena as displaying the pat-
tern the curve marks out. We thus dismiss the 
data's deviation from the smooth curve as 
negligible. 
Ceteris paribus claims: Many lawlike claims in 
science obtain only ceteris paribus.3 The familiar 
law of gravity 
is not universally true, for other forces may be in 
play. The force between charged bodies, for exam-
ple, is a resultant of electrical and gravitational 

510 
CATHERINE Z. ELGIN 
forces. Nevertheless, we are not inclined to jettison 
the law of gravity. The complication that charge 
introduces just shows that the law obtains only cete-
ris paribus, and when bodies are charged, ceteris 
are not paribus. This is no news. "Ceteris paribus" 
is Latin for "other things being equal", but it is not 
obvious what makes for equality in a case like 
this. Sklar glosses it as "other things being normal" 
(Sklar 1999, p. 702), where "normal" seems to 
cash out as "typical" or "usual". Then a "ceteris 
paribus law" states what usually happens. In that 
case, to construe the law of gravity as a ceteris 
paribus law is to contend that although there are 
exceptions, bodies usually attract each other in 
direct proportion to the product of their masses 
and in inverse proportion to the square of the dis-
tance between them. 
This construal does not always work. Some 
laws do not even usually hold. The law of gravity 
is one. Snell's law 
which expresses the relation between the angle of 
incidence and the angle of refraction of a light ray 
passing from one medium to another, is a second.4 
As standardly stated, the law is perfectly general, 
ranging over every case of refraction. It is not true 
of every case, though; it obtains only where both 
media are optically isotropic. The law then is a 
ceteris paribus law. But it is not even usually true, 
since most media are optically anisotropic 
(Cartwright 1983, pp. 46-7). One might wonder 
why physicists don't simply restrict the scope of 
the law: "For any two optically isotropic media, 
n)sini = n2sinr". The reason is Gricean: expressly 
restricting the scope of the law implicates that it 
affords no insight into cases where the restriction 
does not obtain. Snell's law is more helpful. Even 
though the law is usually false, it is often not far 
from the truth. Most media are anisotropic, but 
lots of them - and lots of the ones physicists are 
interested in - are nearly isotropic. The law sup-
plies good approximations for nearly isotropic 
cases. So although explanations and calculations 
that rely on Snell's law do not yield truths, they 
are often not off by much. 
The law is valuable for another reason as well. 
Sometimes it is useful to first represent a light ray 
as conforming to Snell's law, and later introduce 
"corrections" to accommodate anisotropic media. 
If we were interested only in the path of a 
particular light ray, such a circuitous approach 
would be unattractive. But if we are interested in 
optical refraction in general, it might make sense 
to start with a prototypical case, and then show 
how anisotropy perturbs. By portraying aniso-
tropic cases as perturbations, we point up affini-
ties that direct comparisons would not reveal. The 
issue then is what sort of understanding we want. 
Showing how a variety of cases diverge from the 
prototypical case contributes valuable insights 
into the phenomenon we are interested in. And 
what makes the case prototypical is not that it 
usually obtains, but that it cleanly exemplifies the 
features we deem important. 
Idealizations: Some laws never obtain. They 
characterize ideal cases that do not, perhaps 
cannot, occur in nature. The ideal gas law repre-
sents gas molecules as perfectly elastic spheres 
that occupy negligible space and exhibit no 
mutual attraction. There are no such molecules. 
Explanations that adduce the ideal gas law would 
be epistemically unacceptable if abject fidelity to 
truth were required. Since helium molecules are 
not dimensionless, mutually indifferent, elastic 
spheres, an account that represents them as such 
is false. If veritism is correct, it is epistemically 
unacceptable. But, at least if the explanation con-
cerns the behavior of helium in circumstances 
where divergence from the ideal gas law is negligi-
ble (roughly, where temperature is high and 
pressure is low), scientists are apt to find it 
unexceptionable. 
Stylized facts are close kin of ceteris paribus 
claims. They are "broad generalizations, true in 
essence, though perhaps not in detail" (Bannock 
et al. 1998, pp. 396-7). They playa major role in 
economics, constituting explananda that eco-
nomic models are required to explain. Models of 
economic growth, for example, are supposed to 
explain the (stylized) fact that the profit rate is 
constant.s The unvarnished fact of course is that 
profit rates are not constant. All sorts of non-eco-
nomic factors - such as war, pestilence, drought, 
and political chicanery - interfere. Manifestly, 
stylized facts are not (what philosophers would 
call) facts, for the simple reason that they do not 
obtain. It might seem then that economics takes 
itself to be required to explain why known false-
hoods are true. (Voodoo economics, indeed!) 
This cannot be correct. Rather, economics is 

TRUE ENOUGH 
511 
committed to the view that the claims it recog-
nizes as stylized facts are in the right neighbor-
hood, and that their being in the right 
neighborhood is something economic models 
need to account for. The models may show them 
to be good approximations in all cases, or where 
deviations from the economically ideal are slight, 
or where economic factors dominate non-eco-
nomic ones. Or the models might afford some 
other account of their often being nearly right. 
The models may differ over what is actually true, 
or as to where, to what degree, and why the styl-
ized facts are as good as they are. But to fail to 
acknowledge the stylized facts would be to lose 
valuable economic information (for example, the 
fact that if we control for the effects of non-eco-
nomic interference such as wars, epidemics, and 
the president for life absconding with the national 
treasury, the profit rate is constant). Stylized facts 
figure in other social sciences as well. I suspect 
that under a less alarming description, they occur 
in the natural sciences too. The standard charac-
terization of the pendulum, for example, strikes 
me as a stylized fact of physics. The motion of the 
pendulum that physics is supposed to explain is a 
motion that no actual pendulum exhibits. What 
such cases point to is this: The fact that a strictly 
false description is in the right neighborhood is 
sometimes integral to our understanding of a 
domain. 
A fortiori arguments from limiting cases: Some 
accounts focus on a single, carefully chosen case 
and argue that what holds in that case holds in 
general. If so, it does no harm to represent the 
phenomena as having the features that character-
'ize the exemplary case. Astronomy sometimes 
represents planets as point masses. Manifestly, 
they are not. But because the distance between 
planets is vastly greater than their size, their spa-
tial dimensions can safely be neglected. Given the 
size and distribution of planets in the solar system, 
what holds for properly characterized point 
masses also holds for the planets. Another famil-
iar example comes from Rawls. A Theory of Justice 
represents people as mutually disinterested. Rawls 
is under no illusion that this representation is 
accurate. He recognizes that people are bound to 
one another by ties of affection of varying degrees 
of strength, length, and resiliency. But, he believes, 
if political agents have reason to cooperate even 
under conditions of mutual disinterest, they will 
have all the more reason to cooperate when ties of 
affection are present. I do not want to discuss 
whether Rawls is right. I just want to highlight the 
form of his argument. If what holds for the one 
case holds for the others, then it does no harm to 
represent people as mutually disinterested. That 
people are mutually disinterested is far from the 
truth. Conceivably, no one on Earth is wholly 
indifferent to the fates of every other person. But 
if Rawls is right, the characterization's being far 
from the truth does not impede its function in his 
argument. 
The foregoing examples show that in some 
cognitive endeavors we accept claims that we do 
not consider true. But we do not indiscriminately 
endorse falsehoods either. The question then is 
what makes a claim acceptable? Evidently, to 
accept a claim is not to take it to be true, but to 
take it that the claim's divergence from truth, if 
any, is negligible. The divergence need not be 
small, but whatever its magnitude, it can be safely 
neglected. We accept a claim, I suggest, when we 
consider it true enough. The success of our cogni-
tive endeavors indicates that we are often right to 
do so. If so, a claim is acceptable when its diver-
gence from truth is negligible. In that case it is 
true enough. 
In practical, political, or prudential contexts, 
both the acceptance and the acceptability of false-
hoods are widely recognized. One can accept, and 
be right to accept, the dean's latest dictum, if what 
matters is that the dean hath said it, not that it is 
true. But epistemic contexts are supposed to be 
different. Many epistemologists contend that 
when our concerns are cognitive we should accept 
only what we consider true. I disagree. I suggest 
that to accept that p is to take it that p's divergence 
from truth, if any, does not matter. To cognitively 
accept that p, is to take it that p's divergence from 
truth, if any, does not matter cognitively. The 
falsehood is "as close as one needs for the purposes 
at hand" (Stalnaker 1987, p. 93). In what follows, I 
take "acceptance" to mean "cognitive acceptance': 
This raises a host of issues. Perhaps the most 
pressing is to say something about what I mean 
by "cognitive". A familiar line is that for a consid-
eration to be cognitive is for it to aim at truth or 
to be truth conducive. Plainly, I can say no such 
thing. I suggest rather that a consideration is cog-
nitive to the extent that it figures in an under-
standing of how things are. This is admittedly 

512 
CATHERINE Z. ELGIN 
vague, but I am not sure that it is any worse than 
untethered remarks about truth-conduciveness 
and the like. 
It might seem that my characterization just 
postpones the evil day (and not for long enough!), 
since "an understanding of how things are" must 
itselfbe explicated in terms of truth or truth-con-
duciveness. To see the problem, compare three 
concepts -. belief, thought, and understanding. 
Belief aims at truth. Roughly, a belief fulfills its 
goal in life only if it is true (Wedgwood 2002; 
Adler 2002). Thought, however, can be aimless. 
Musings, fantasies, and imaginings can be fully in 
order whether or not they are true. Understanding, 
the argument goes, is more like belief than like 
thought. Since there is such a thing as misunder-
standing, understanding is subject to a standard 
of rightness. It has an aim. Misunderstanding evi-
dently involves representing things as they are 
not. This suggests that the aim of understanding 
is truth. If so, it may seem, divergences from truth, 
even if unavoidable, are always cognitive defects. 
The argument goes too fast. That misunder-
standing involves representing things as they are 
not does not entail that whenever we represent 
things as they are not, we misunderstand them. At 
most it indicates that understanding is not indif-
ferent to truth. But it does not follow that every 
sentence - or for that matter, any sentence - that 
figures in an understanding of how things are has 
its own truth as an objective. Understanding 
involves a network of commitments. It is not 
obvious that an aim of the network must be an 
aim of every, or indeed any, sentential node in the 
network. A goal of the whole need not be a goal of 
each of its parts. "Understanding" is a cognitive 
success term but, in my view, not a factive. I do 
not expect these sketchy remarks to persuade 
anyone that I am right to loosen the tie between 
understanding and truth. My hope is that they are 
enough to persuade you that the jig is not yet up, 
that a willing suspension of disbelief is still in 
order. 
Let us turn then to acceptance. To accept that 
p, I said, is to take it that p's divergence from truth, 
if any, is negligible. In that case, p is true enough. 
Whether this is so is manifestly a contextual 
matter. A sentence can be true enough in some 
contexts but not in others. A variety of factors 
contribute constraints. Background assumptions 
playa role. ''A freely falling body falls at a rate of 
32 ft./sec. 2" is true enough, assuming that the 
body is within the Earth's gravitational field, that 
nothing except the Earth exerts a significant grav-
itational force on the body, that the effects of 
non-gravitational forces are insignificant, and so 
on. But even when these assumptions are satis-
fied, the formula is not always true enough, since 
gravity varies slightly with longitude. Sometimes 
it matters where in the gravitational field the 
freely falling body is. Whether "G = 32 ft'/sec. 2" is 
true enough depends on what we want the for-
mula for, what level of precision is needed for the 
calculation or explanation or account it figures 
in. There is no saying whether a given contention 
is true enough independently of answering, or 
presupposing an answer to the question "True 
enough for what?" So purposes contribute con-
straints as well. Whether a given sentence is true 
enough depends on what ends its acceptance is 
supposed to serve. 
Function is critical too. If to accept that p is 
simply to take it that p's divergence from truth 
does not matter, it might seem that we accept all 
irrelevant propositions. None of my projects, 
cognitive or otherwise, is affected by the truth or 
falsity of the claim that Ethelred the Unready was 
a wise leader. So its divergence from truth, if any, 
does not matter to me. Since acceptance can be 
tacit, the fact that I have never considered the 
issue is not decisive. Nevertheless it seems wrong 
to say that my indifference makes the claim true 
enough. The reason is that the contention is idle. 
It performs no function in my cognitive economy. 
Owing to my indifference, there is no answer to 
the question "True enough for what?" 
Context provides the framework. Purposes fix 
the ends. Function is a matter of means. The sen-
tences that concern us tend not to have purposes 
or functions in isolation. Rather, they belong to 
and perform functions in larger bodies of dis-
course, such as arguments, explanations, or theo-
ries that have purposes. In accepting a sentence, 
then, we treat it in a given context as performing 
a function in a body of discourse which seeks to 
achieve some end. Whether "G = 32 ft'/sec. 2" is 
acceptable depends on whether the body of dis-
course it figures in serves its cognitive purpose -
whether, that is, it yields the understanding of the 
domain that we seek. 
A statement's divergence from truth is negligi-
ble only if that divergence does not hinder its 

TRUE ENOUGH 
513 
performing its cognitive function. Hence whether 
a contention is true enough depends not just on 
its having a function, but on what its function 
is - on what role it plays in the account it belongs 
to. To determine whether a statement is true 
enough, we thus need to identify its function. It 
might seem that for cognitive purposes only one 
function matters. If the criterion for felicity is 
being true enough, one might think, the function 
of all felicitous falsehoods is to approximate. 
There is, as it were, a tacit "more or less" in front 
of all such claims. This will not do. 
One reason is that the proposal is not suffi-
ciently sensitive. Not all approximations perform 
the same function. Some are accepted simply 
because they are the best we can currently do. 
They are temporary expedients which we hope 
and expect eventually to replace with truths. We 
improve upon them by bringing them closer to 
the truth. Such approximations are, in Sellars's 
terms, promissory notes that remain to be dis-
charged. The closer we get to the truth, the more 
of the debt is paid. They are, and are known to be, 
unsatisfactory. But not all approximations have 
this character. Some are preferable to the truths 
they approximate. For example, it is possible to 
derive a second-order partial differential equa-
tion that exactly describes fluid flow in a bound-
ary layer. The equation, being non-linear, does 
not admit of an analytic solution. We can state the 
equation, but cannot solve it. This is highly incon-
venient. To incorporate the truth into the theory 
would bring a line of inquiry to a halt, saying in 
effect: "Here's the equation; it is impossible to 
solve." Fluid dynamicists prefer a first-order par-
tial differential equation, which approximates the 
truth, but admits of an analytical solution 
(Morrison 1999, pp. 56-60). The solvable equa-
tion advances understanding by providing a close 
. enough approximation that yields numerical 
values that can serve as evidence for or constraints 
on future theorizing. The approximation then is 
more fruitful than the truth. There is no hope 
that future inquiry will remedy the situation, for 
it is demonstrable that the second-order equa-
tion cannot be solved numerically, while the 
first -order equation can.6 That reality forces such 
a choice upon us may be disappointing, but 
under the circumstances it does not seem intellec-
tually disreputable to accept and prefer the trac-
table first-order equation. One might say that 
acceptance of the first-order approximation is 
only practical. It is preferable merely because it is 
more useful. This may be so, but the practice is a 
cognitive one. Its goal is to understand fluid flow 
in boundary layers. In cases like this, the practical 
and the theoretical inextricably intertwine. The 
practical value of the approximation is that it 
advances understanding of a domain. A felicitous 
falsehood thus is not always accepted only in 
default of the truth. Nor is its acceptance always 
"second best': It may make cognitive contribu-
tions that the unvarnished truth cannot match. 
Moreover, not all felicitous falsehoods are 
approximations. Idealizations may be far from 
the truth, without thereby being epistemically 
inadequate. Political agents are not mutually dis-
interested. They are not nearly mutually disinter-
ested. Nor is it the case that most political agents 
are mutually disinterested. There is no way I can 
see to construe Rawls's model as approximately 
true. Nevertheless, for Rawls's purposes, the char-
acterization of political agents as mutually disin-
terested is felicitous if the features it highlights are 
constitutive of fair terms of cooperation underly-
ing the basic structure of a democratic regime. 
There is no reason to think that in general the 
closer it is to the truth, the more felicitous a 
falsehood. 
I suggest that felicitous falsehoods figure in 
cognitive discourse not as mistaken or inaccurate 
statements of fact, but as fictions. We are familiar 
with fictions and with reasoning about fictions. 
We regularly reason within the constraints dic-
tated by a fiction, inferring, for example, that 
Hamlet may not have been mad, but Ophelia 
surely was. We also reason (with more trepida-
tion) from a fiction to matters of fact. We may 
come to see a pattern in the facts through the lens 
that a fiction supplies. For example, we might 
understand the contemporary youth gang con-
ception of being "dissed" by reference to the wrath 
of Achilles at Agamemnon's affront.? What is 
needed then is an account of how fictions can 
advance understanding. 
David Lewis (1983) interprets fictional state-
ments as descriptions of other possible worlds. 
We understand them in the same way that we 
understand ordinary statements of fact. For 
example, we understand the Sherlock Holmes 
stories in the same way we understand histories 
of Victorian England, the crucial difference being 

514 
CATHERINE Z. ELGIN 
that the histories pertain to the actual world, 
while the stories pertain to other possible worlds. 
Lewis's realism about possible worlds is hard to 
countenance, but we need not enter into debates 
about it here. For even if we accept his metaphys-
ics, a problem remains. It is puzzling how know-
ing what happens in another possible world can 
afford any insight into what happens in this 
world. Lewis measures the proximity of possible 
worlds in terms of similarity (Lewis 1973). The 
closest possible worlds are the ones most similar 
to the actual world. But even if one thinks that 
there is a non-question-begging way to assess the 
relative similarity of different possible worlds, the 
gap remains. It is hard to see how the knowledge 
that a nearby world is populated by rational eco-
nomic agents should contribute to our under-
standing of the economic behavior of actual 
human agents. 
Kendall Walton (1990) construes fiction as 
make-believe. To understand a fiction is to make 
believe or pretend that it is true. Stephen Yablo 
uses Walton's account to underwrite fictionalism 
in the philosophy of mathematics (1998; 2002). 
We can, Yablo maintains, avoid ontological com-
mitment to mathematical entities by construing 
mathematics as an elaborate, highly systematic 
fiction. Then in doing mathematics, we make 
believe that there are such entities and make believe 
that they are related to one another in the ways 
the theorems say. Although at first glance this 
seems promising, it faces two serious problems. 
First, what it is to pretend is by no means clear. 
Exactly how one can pretend that power sets or 
cube roots exist if they do not, is not obvious. 
Second, the problem we saw with Lewis's theory 
also plagues Walton and Yablo. It is not at all clear 
how a pretense illuminates reality - how, for 
example, pretending that human beings are 
rational economic agents provides any insight 
into actual human economic behavior. 
Philip Kitcher (1993) suggests that scientific 
idealizations are stories whose referents are fixed 
by stipulation. The scientific statements involving 
the idealizations are true by convention. The gap 
remains. If a story is to advance scientific under-
standing we need to know the connection between 
the story and the facts. Otherwise, the realization 
that certain relations among pressure, tempera-
ture, and volume are true by stipulation in the 
story of the ideal gas leaves us in the dark about 
the relations among pressure, temperature, and 
volume in actual gases. 
The gap can be bridged by appeal to exempli-
fication, the device by which samples and exam-
ples highlight, exhibit, display, or otherwise make. 
manifest some of their features (Goodman 1968, 
pp. 45-67). To make this out requires a brief dis-
cussion of the device. A commercial paint sample 
consists of a patch of color on a card. The patch is 
not merely an instance of the color, but a telling 
instance - an instance that exemplifies the color. 
By so doing, the sample equips us to recognize the 
color, to differentiate it from similar shades. The 
sample then affords epistemic access to the color. 
Although the patch on the sample card has a host 
of other features - size, shape, location, and so 
on -
it standardly does not exemplify them. 
Exemplification is selective. It brings out some 
features of an exemplar by over-shadowing, 
downplaying, or marginalizing others. Nothing 
in the nature of things dictates that the patch's 
color is worthy of selection, but its shape is not. 
What, if anything, an item exemplifies depends 
on its function. The very same item might per-
form any of a variety of functions. The patch on 
the sample card could be used to teach children 
what a rectangle is. In that case, it would exem-
plify its shape, not its color. The sample card 
could be used as a fan. Then the patch would not 
exemplify at all. Exemplification is not restricted 
to 
commercial 
and 
pedagogical 
contexts. 
Whatever an item exhibits, highlights, or displays, 
it exemplifies. A poem might exemplify its rhyme 
scheme, its imagery, or its style. A water sample 
might exemplify its mineral content, its flavor, or 
its impurities. Exemplification, I have argued 
elsewhere, is ubiquitous in art and science (Elgin 
1996,pp.171-83). 
Treating paint samples as paradigmatic exem-
plars may encourage the idea that exemplified 
features are all like expanses of color - homoge-
neous qualities spread out before us, lacking 
depth and complexity, hence able to be taken in at 
a glance. Many are not like that. Pick up a rock 
containing iron ore. It might serve as a sample of 
iron, or of hematite, or of something that bears a 
striking resemblance to your high school algebra 
teacher. It can exemplify such features only where, 
certain background assumptions are in place. Not 
just anyone looking at the rock could tell that it 
exemplified these features. 

TRUE ENOUGH 
515 
Moreover, although in principle any item can 
serve as an exemplar and any feature can be exem-
plified, a good deal of effort may be required to 
bring about the exemplification of a recondite 
feature. Some of that effort is mental. Just as we 
ignore the shape of the paint sample and focus on 
the color, we can ignore the fact that the rock 
looks like your algebra teacher and focus on its 
hardness. This is a start. But some irrelevant fea-
tures so intricately intertwine with relevant ones 
that more drastic measures are called for. If we 
seek to exemplify recondite features of iron, 
mental agility alone may not be enough to bracket 
the effects of other minerals in the rock. So we 
refine the ore and filter out the impurities. The 
result of our efforts is pure iron. It is a product of 
a good deal of processing8 which eliminates com-
plicating factors and brings to the fore character-
istics that are hard to detect and difficult to 
measure in nature. To facilitate the exemplifica-
tion of the feature of interest, we do not just men-
tally sideline features we consider irrelevant, we 
physically remove some of them. 
Even then, we do not just contemplate the bit 
of iron as we might a paint sample. We subject it 
to a variety of tests. We seek to produce circum-
stances where the features of interest stand out. 
We not only investigate the iron's behavior in 
standard conditions, we study what happens in 
extreme conditions - very high or low pressure or 
temperature, in a vacuum, under intense radia-
tion, and so forth. Although we recognize that the 
test conditions do not ordinarily (or perhaps 
eyer) obtain in nature, we take it that the behavior 
of the refined metal in the test conditions dis-
closes something about the natural order. If so, by 
understanding what happens in the lab, we can 
understand something of what happens in the 
world. The connection is, of course, indirect. It 
involves a complicated extrapolation from situa-
tions and materials that are highly artificial and 
carefully contrived. One might argue that the lab 
itself is a fictional setting and the conclusions we 
draw about nature on the basis of our laboratory 
findings are projections from fiction to fact. I 
don't quite want to say that (although I suspect 
that Nancy Cartwright does). But I do want to 
point out that experimentation involves a lot of 
. stage setting. 
There is a tendency to think of experiments as 
processes that generate information, hence as 
ways to find things out. This of course is true. But 
it is worth noting that an experiment is not like 
an oracle,9 or an anchorman, or a fortune cookie. 
It does not just issue a report stating its results. It 
displays them. It shows what happens to the mag-
netic properties of iron in conditions near the 
melting point. The experiment exemplifies its 
results. 
No matter how carefully we set the stage, irrel-
evancies remain. We do not and ought not read 
every aspect of the experimental result back onto 
the world. Not only are there irrelevant features, 
there are issues about the appropriate vocabulary 
and level of precision for characterizing what 
occurs. The fact that the experiment occurred in 
Cleveland is unimportant. The fact that the 
sample has a certain mass or lattice structure may 
or may not be significant. The fact that the tem-
perature is above 770
0 C may matter, while the 
fact that it was above 790
0 C does not. Some fea-
tures of the iron in the experimental situation are 
telling features. Others are not. The telling fea-
tures are the ones that the experiment discloses or 
makes manifest. By exemplifying certain features, 
the experiment brings them to light and affords 
epistemic access to them. That is its cognitive 
contribution. Other features, though equally real, 
are not exemplified. The experiment embodies an 
understanding of the phenomenon in question 
through its exemplification of telling features. By 
making these features manifest, it affords an 
understanding of the phenomenon. 
If the cognitive contribution of an exemplar 
consists in the exemplification of select features, 
then anything that exemplifies exactly those fea-
tures can, in a suitable context, make the same 
contribution. Return for a moment to the paint 
sample. I spoke of it as though it is a sample of 
paint, a telling instance of the stuff you might use 
to paint the porch. This is not true. The sample 
on the card does not consist of paint, but of an 
ink or dye of the same color as the paint whose 
color it exemplifies. If the sample were supposed 
to exemplify the paint itself, or the chemical fea-
tures of the paint, the fact that it is not paint or 
has a different chemical composition would be 
objectionable. But since it exemplifies only the 
color, all that is needed is something that is the 
same color as the paint. The exemplar need not 
itself be paint. Similarly in scientific cases. 
Consider a DNA molecule that exemplifies its 

516 
CATHERINE Z. ELGIN 
molecular structure. Anything that exemplifies 
the same structure has the capacity to perform the 
same function in our understanding of DNA. No 
more than the paint sample needs to consist of 
paint, does the exemplar of DNA's molecular 
structure need to consist of DNA. A schematic 
model that exemplifies the same features but has a 
different material (or even immaterial) substrate 
could to the job. 
Here is where felicitous falsehoods enter the 
picture. Something other than paint can serve as 
a paint sample, affording epistemic access to a 
color also instantiated by the paint. Something 
other than a molecule can exemplify molecular 
structure, thereby affording epistemic access to a 
structure also instantiated by the molecule. A 
felicitous falsehood then is a fiction that exempli-
fies a feature in a context where the exemplification 
of that feature contributes to understanding. The 
utility of such a falsehood is plain. It is sometimes 
inconvenient, difficult, or even impossible to 
bring it about that the phenomena exemplify all 
and only the features that interest us. (DNA mol-
ecules are. very small, charged pions are short 
lived.) If we introd'uce a falsehood that exempli-
fies those features - a bigger, longer-lasting model, 
for example - we can highlight them and display 
their significance for the understanding of the 
phenomenon in question. By exemplifying fea-
tures it shares with the phenomena, a felicitous 
falsehood affords epistemic access to how things 
actually are. The camel's nose is now officially 
inside the tent. 
There is more than one role that such fictions 
can play. Some serve as points of reference. We 
understand things in terms of them. In the sim-
plest cases, like the model displaying the helical 
structure of the DNA molecule, they are simply 
schemata that exemplify factors they share with 
the phenomena they concern. They qualify as fic-
tions because they diverge from the phenomena 
in unexemplified properties. (DNA molecules are 
not made of tinker toys.) In other cases, the con-
nection to the facts is less direct. No real gas has 
the properties of the ideal gas. The model is illu-
minating though because we understand the 
properties of real gases in terms of their deviation 
from the ideal. In such cases, understanding 
involves a pattern of schema and correction. We 
represent the phenomena with a schematic model, 
and introduce corrections as needed to closer 
accord with the facts. Different corrections are 
needed to accord with the behavior of different 
gases. The fictional ideal then serves as a sort of 
least common denominator that facilitates rea-
soning about and comparison of actual gases. We 
"solve for" the simple case first, then introduce 
complications as needed. 
Acknowledging the role of corrections might 
seem to suggest that the detour through fictions is 
just a circuitous route to the truth. Rather than a 
simple true description of the behavior of neon, 
we get a complicated truth that makes reference 
to deviations from some ideal. But the full cogni-
tive contribution of the exercise resides in the 
truth, not the fiction. I don't think this is right for 
several reasons. The first is that sometimes the 
corrections that would be needed to yield a truth 
are unnecessary or even counter-productive. A 
fortiori arguments from limiting cases succeed 
because the corrections are unnecessary. If a con-
sideration holds for one case, even if that case is a 
fiction, it holds for all. The multiple and compli-
cated ways actual cases diverge from the fictive 
ideal make no difference. If Rawls's argument is 
sound, "correcting for" ties of affection just mud-
dies the waters. Nor is this the only case where 
fidelity to the facts can prove a hindrance. It fol-
lows from the ideal gas law that as volume goes to 
zero, pressure becomes infinite. This would not 
happen. Given a fixed number of molecules, pres-
sure increases as volume decreases - not to infin-
ity, but only to the point where the container 
explodes. No one of course denies this. But to 
understand what would happen in the limit, we 
need to prescind from such material inconven-
iences and pretend that the walls of the container 
are infinitely strong. We need then to introduce 
not corrections that bring us back to the facts, but 
further idealizations. A second reason is that the 
requisite corrections often yield not truths, but 
more refined models. They supplant one false-
hood with another. A third reason is that even 
where corrections yield truths, the fiction may be 
more than a fa~on de parler. It can structure our 
understanding in a way that makes available 
information we would not otherwise have access 
to. If, e.g., we draw a smooth curve that skirts the 
data, and construe the data as a complex of rele-
vant and irrelevant factors (signal and noise), or 
construe a transaction in terms of an economic 
model overlaid with non-economic factors which 

TRUE ENOUGH 
517 
skew the outcome, we impose an order on things, 
highlight certain aspects of the phenomena, reveal 
connections, patterns and discrepancies, and 
make possible insights that we could not other-
wise obtain (Dennett 1991). We put ourselves in a 
position to see affinities between disparate occur-
rences by recognizing them as variations on a 
common theme. 
Still, to say that felicitous falsehoods figure 
ineliminably in our understanding of certain 
phenomena is not to say that without them we 
would have no understanding whatsoever of 
those phe;Qrtiena. Even without Snell's law, 
inspection and instantial induction would pro-
vide some insight into what happens when light 
passes between air and water, or between any 
other two specified media. What we would lack is 
a systematic understanding of how the several 
cases are alike. Felicitous falsehoods configure a 
domain, enabling us to characterize the phenom-
ena in ways that would otherwise be unavailable. 
When, for example, we can construe seemingly 
di,:,ergent phenomena as variants of a common 
scheme, or as perturbations of a regular pattern, 
or as deviations from a simple norm, we see them 
and their relations to one another in a new light. 
We can discern systematic interconnections that 
direct inspection of the facts would not reveal. 
The fictions and the configurations of the 
domains that they engender provide conceptual 
resources for representing and reasoning about 
the phenomena in new and sometimes fruitful 
ways. 
If I am right, not every theory is a conjunction 
of sentences, all of which are supposed to be true. 
Rather, a theory may be composed of both factual 
and fictional sentences, and the fictional sen-
tences may play any of several different roles. This 
means that to understand what a theory conveys, 
and to understand the phenomena in terms of the 
theory requires sensitivity to the different roles 
the different sentences play. And to assess a theory 
requires determining whether the component 
sentences are true enough for the parts they are 
assigned to play. Yablo is investigating the meta-
physical implications of the idea that fictions 
infuse even our most fundamental theories (Yablo 
1998; 2002). I want to underscore the epistemo-
logical implications. One obvious consequence is 
that it is not plausible to think of an acceptable 
theory as a mirror of nature. Even if the goal of a 
theory is to afford an understanding of a range of 
facts, it need not approach or achieve that goal by 
providing a direct reflection of those facts. 
I have argued that a variety of components of 
cognitively acceptable theories neither are nor 
purport to be true. Rather, they are fictions that 
shed light on the phenomena they concern. They 
thereby contribute to our understanding of those 
phenomena. Even if my account makes sense of 
models and idealizations in science, a worry 
remains. My position threatens to make the world 
safe for postmodernist claptrap. If truth is not 
required for epistemic acceptability, why isn't a 
flagrantly false account acceptable? What is the 
objection to claiming that a theory attesting to 
the healing powers of crystals is as acceptable as 
the theories constituting mainstream crystallog-
raphy? We seem to lose a valuable resource if we 
can't simply say, "Because it is false!" My seem-
ingly wimpy requirement that an acceptable 
account must yield an understanding of how 
things are gives us what we need. An account that 
yields such an understanding must accommodate 
the facts in a domain. The accommodation may 
be indirect. Strictly false 'idealizations may be 
deployed. Detours through stylized facts may be 
made. The justification for the falsehoods is that 
they figure in accounts that make sense of the 
facts. A cognitively acceptable account sheds light 
on its subject. Where felicitous falsehoods are 
involved, the light may be oblique. 
A theory can claim to make sense of a range of 
facts only if it is factually defeasible - only if, that 
is, there is some reasonably determinate, epistem-
ically accessible factual arrangement which, if it 
were found to obtain, would discredit the theory. 
A felicitous falsehood is acceptable only if the 
theory or system of thought it belongs to accom-
modates the epistemically accessible facts. Exactly 
what this requires needs to be spelled out. The 
usual considerations about evidence, simplicity, 
scope, and so forth come into play. Even though 
some of the sentences in a theory are not sup-
posed to be true, the way the world is constrains 
the acceptability of the theory they figure in. If, 
for example, evidence shows that friction plays a 
major role in collisions between gas molecules, 
then unless compensating adjustments are made 
elsewhere, theories that model collisions as per-
fectly elastic spheres will be discredited. An 
acceptable theory must be at least as good as any 

518 
CATHERINE Z. ELGIN 
available alternative, when judged in terms of cur-
rently available standards of cognitive goodness. 
So such a theory would also be discredited by a 
theory that better satisfied those standards. Neither 
a defeated nor an indefeasible theory is tenable. 
Because it is indifferent to evidence, claptrap is 
indefeasible. Hence it is untenable. I said earlier 
that even in theories that include felicitous false-
hoods truth plays a role. We see now what the role 
is. A factually defeasible theory has epistemically 
accessible implications which, if found to be false, 
discredit the theory. So a defeasible theory, by pre-
serving a commitment to testable consequences 
Notes 
I use the term "theory" broadly, to compre-
hend the ways mature sciences and other dis-
ciplines account for the phenomena in their 
domains. Under my usage, a physical theory 
would include its models rather than being 
distinct from them. 
2 I do not have strong intuitions about this case, 
but I do not think it is clearly wrong to say 
that the cat has such a belief. 
3 Whether so-called ceteris paribus laws are really 
laws is a subject of controversy. See, for example, 
Erkenntnis 57, 2002, for a range of papers on the 
issue. Although for brevity I speak of them as 
laws, for my purposes, nothing hangs on whether 
the generalizations in questions really are laws, 
at least insofar as this is an ontological question. 
I am interested in the role such generalizations 
play in ongoing science. Whether or not they 
can (in some sense of "can") be replaced by gen-
eralizations where all the caveats and restrictions 
are spelled out, in practice scientists typically 
make no effort to do so. Nor, often, do they 
know (or care) how to do so. 
4 
i and r are the angles made by the incident 
beam to the normal and n l and n2 are the 
refractive indices of the two media. 
References 
Adler, Jonathan. (2002) Belief's Own Ethics, 
Cambridge, MA: MIT. 
Bannock, Graham, R.E. Baxter, Evan Davis. 
(1998) Dictionary of Economics, New York: 
John Wiley and Sons. 
retains a commitment to truth. My account then 
does not turn science into a genre of fiction. 
Quine said that the sentences of a theory face the 
tribunal of experience as a corporate body (Quine, 
1961, p. 41). Although he recognized that not all 
the members of the corporation could be sepa-
rately tested against experience, he probably 
believed that all were supposed to be fine, 
upstanding truths. I suggest that this is not so. An 
acceptable theory must make its case before the 
tribunal of experience. But the members of the 
corporation are more various and some a bit 
shadier than Quine suspected. 
5 "The profit rate is the level of profits in the 
economy relative to the value of capital stock" 
(Bannock et al. 1998, p. 397). 
6 Conceivably, of course, the equations in 
question will be superceded by some other 
understanding of the subject, but the fact 
that the equation we consider true does not 
have an analytical solution provides no 
reason to think so. Nor does it provide 
reason to think that the considerations that 
supersede it will be mathematically more 
tractable, much less that in the long run 
science will be free of all such irksome 
equations. 
7 I am indebted to Amelie Rorty for this 
example. 
8 This is why Nancy Cartwright thinks the laws 
of physics lie. The laws are developed on the 
basis of, and are strictly true only of, the pro,: 
essed samples, not their naturally occurring 
counterparts. 
9 Actually, of course, I don't know how oracles 
are supposed to operate. I have always assumed 
that they simply emit true sentences like 
"Socrates is the wisest of men." 
BonJour, Laurence. (1985) The Structure of 
Empirical 
Knowledge, 
Cambridge, 
MA: 
Harvard. 
Cartwright, Nancy. (1983) How the Laws of Physics 
Lie, Oxford: Oxford. 

TRUE ENOUGH 
519 
Cohen, 1. Jonathan. (1992) An Essay on Belief and 
Acceptance, Oxford: Clarendon. 
Dennett, Daniel. (1991) "Real Patterns;' Journal of 
Philosophy 88, pp. 27-5l. 
Elgin, Catherine Z. (1996) Considered Judgment, 
Princeton: Princeton. 
Goldman, Alvin. (1999) Knowledge in a Social 
World, Oxford: Clarendon. 
Goodman, Nelson. (1968) Languages of Art, 
Indianapolis: Hackett. 
Kitcher, Philip. (1993) The Advancement of 
Science, Oxford: Oxford. 
Lehrer, Keith. (1986) "The Coherence Theory of 
Knowledge;' Philosophical Topics 14, pp. 5-25. 
Lewis, David. (1983) "Truth in Fiction;' Philoso-
phical Papers I, Oxford: Oxford, pp. 261-8l. 
--. (1973) Counterfactuals, Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard. 
Morrison, 
Margaret. 
(1999) 
"Models 
as 
Autonomous Agents," Models as Mediators, ed. 
Mary S. Morgan and Margaret Morrison, 
Cambridge: Cambridge, pp. 38-65. 
Quine, W. V. (1961) "Two Dogmas of Empiricism;' 
From a Logical Point of View, New York: Harper 
& Row, pp. 20-46. 
Sklar, Lawrence. (1999) "Philosophy of Science;' 
Cambridge Dictionary of Philosophy, ed. Robert 
Audi, Cambridge: Cambridge, pp. 700-4. 
Sosa,Ernest. (2000) "Skepticism and Contextualism;' 
Skepticism, ed. Ernest Sosa and Enrique 
Villanueva, Boston: Blackwell, pp. 1-18. 
Stalnaker, Robert. (1987) Inquiry, Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press. 
Walton, Kendall. (1990) Mimesis as Make-Believe, 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard. 
Wedgwood, Ralph. (2002) "The Aim of Belief," 
Philosophical Perspectives 16, pp. 267-97. 
Yablo, 
Stephen. 
(2002) 
"Abstract Objects;' 
Philosophical Issues 12, pp. 220-40. 
--. (1998) "Does Ontology Rest on a Mistake?" 
Proceedings 
of the 
Aristotelian 
Society, 
Supplementary Volume 72, pp. 229-61. 


PART VII 
Naturalized Epistemology 
and the A Priori 


Introduction 
W. V. Quine is well known for urging the abandonment of epistemology, as tradition-
ally pursued, in favor of the scientific project he calls "naturalized epistemology." 
Traditional epistemology, he claims, consists of two projects: one doctrinal and one 
conceptual. The doctrinal project aims to deduce our material object beliefs from 
premises about observations; the conceptual project aims to reduce material object 
concepts to sense experience concepts. Both projects are doomed to failure. Yet episte-
mology, or something like it, "still goes on, though in a new setting and a clarified 
status." Epistemology becomes "a chapter of psychology and hence of natural science." 
Epistemology has always been concerned with the foundations of science, and rightly 
so, says Quine. But the relations between science and its foundations, the evidence on 
which it is based, viz. the totality of our sensory stimulations, are more usefully inves-
tigated scientifically, causally. It is true that scientific theories explaining the relation 
between stimulation and theory themselves have their source ultimately in stimulation. 
Yet there is no circularity here, for there is no attempt, as there is in traditional episte-
mology, to find a form of understanding better than our best science. We may legitimately 
use science to investigate its foundations. 
One advantage of Quine's position is that it might be useful in addressing epistemo-
logical questions important for feminist analysis. According to some theorists, main-
stream epistemology is misguided because of its neglect of feminist epistemology. 
Louise Antony argues that much of the criticism by feminists of mainstream episte-
mology depends upon a misreading of contemporary analytic philosophy and of the 
tradition from which it derives. Despite being a part of the contemporary analytic 
scene, Antony argues that Quine's naturalized epistemology - the view that the study of 
knowledge should be treated as an empirical investigation of knowers - serves as an 
adequate feminist epistemology. Quine's critique of epistemological foundationalism 
bears important similarities to contemporary feminist attacks on "modernist" concep-
tions of objectivity and scientific rationality, and his positive views on the holistic 
nature of justification provide a theoretical basis for pressing the kinds of critical 
questions feminist critics are now raising. As a case study, Antony considers the bias 

524 
INTRODUCTION 
paradox. On the one hand, feminists have been quick to challenge the liberal goal of 
impartiality. Not only does this ideal reinforce the power status quo, but it is also impos-
sible to achieve. On the other hand, it is difficult to distinguish good from bad biases: if 
impartiality is impossible, then why criticize a theory or a believer for being biased? 
Naturalized epistemology, together with a traditional objective theory of truth, can 
help us make progress on these questions. We can distinguish good from bad biases by 
seeing which are conducive to truth and which are not. We don't see this by some form 
of completely unbiased, pure reason but by empirical inquiry. Of course, empirical 
inquiry, too, is biased but this does not mean it cannot be used to discover how things 
are. Empirical inquiry can expose the badness of the very androcentric biases feminists 
have revealed. 
But naturalized epistemology has apparent difficulties. Jaegwon Kim argues that 
Quine is not entitled to think of naturalized epistemology as investigating the eviden-
tial foundations of science. Quine is urging us to dispense with the normative element 
in epistemology, yet evidence itself is a normative concept, distinct from and irreduci-
ble to the naturalistic concepts employed in science, e.g., the concepts of stimulation, 
causation, law, etc. Traditional epistemology asks what makes certain states, certain 
experiences and beliefs, evidence for other beliefs. Empirical psychology offers no help 
in answering this question, nor any other question about what confers positive epis-
temic value. Kim goes on to provide a Davidsonian argument for the claim that Quine 
is not even entitled to speak of naturalized epistemology as investigating the ancestry 
of beliefs. For to investigate this ancestry, one must identify beliefs, but the identifica-
tion of beliefs is possible only on the assumption that one's subjects are rational, where 
rationality here is normative and includes epistemic rationality. If Quine's "successor 
subject" is to avoid the normative entirely, then contra Quine, it is a radically different 
subject from epistemology. 
Kim ends his piece by providing an argument for the possibility of traditional nor-
mative epistemology. Epistemic properties, like all normative properties, are superven-
ient. If something is morally right, it is so because it possesses certain non-moral, 
ultimately non-normative, properties. There is thus a guarantee that there are correct 
normative epistemological principles, though not necessarily ones that admit of simple 
formulation, for there is a guarantee that there are non-epistemic, and ultimately non-
normative, conditions that underlie epistemic properties. 
So, one difficulty for naturalized epistemology is the challenge of accounting for 
epistemic normativity. Some philosophers worry, as well, about Quine's claim that 
there is no statement that is unrevisable in the face of some recalcitrant experience. On 
one traditional notion of the a priori, this is tantamount to rejecting the a priori entirely. 
Why might this be problematic? In a paper written prior to his contribution to this sec-
tion, Hilary Putnam interpreted Quine's unrevisability thesis as claiming that there are 
no truths that it would never be rational to give up. (Putnam himself argued for this posi-
tion on the basis of a theory of induction which, among other things, explained why 
certain statements seem to be a priori. The theory employed the notion of contextual a 
priority, which gives certain statements the status of being a priori relative to a body of 
knowledge.) Departing from his original sympathetic position, in the selection included 
here Putnam argues that there is at least one a priori truth - the Minimal Principle of 
Contradiction: that not every statement is both true and false. Putnam argues that this a 

PART VII 
priori truth cannot be counted as merely contextually a priori. In a separate note at the 
end of the paper Putnam challenges his own conclusion and returns to the Quinean 
position, above. In a final note, added some months after the last, Putnam considers his 
original argument, his initial recanting of the conclusion, and the epistemological value 
of the questions at issue. 
Putnam's response to Quine grants the Quinean account of the a priori - that it 
must be immune from empirical revision - but denies that all statements are subject to 
empirical revision. But the nature of the a priori is not at all settled. Al Casullo empha-
sizes this point in defense of a priori knowledge against the Quinean challenge, firstly 
by showing that it is not the case that a priori knowledge entails rational unrevisability 
independent of any particular account of knowledge. A priori knowledge is a matter of 
the source of a belief, not what it takes to undermine the belief. Therefore, even if 
Quine is right that all statements are rationally revisable, this will not mean that there 
is no such thing as a priori knowledge. Secondly, Casullo explores the relationship 
between a specific account of knowledge - reliabilism - and the a priori. He suggests 
that the framework of reliabilism provides additional reasons for rejecting the thesis of 
rational unrevisability. Further, Casullo suggests that reliabilism is a useful account of 
knowledge for defending the existence of a priori knowledge. 
A more traditional defense of a priori knowledge - though one consistent with Casullo's 
recommendation to adopt a kind of reliabilism, is provided by George Bealer's contri-
bution. Bealer argues for two principles: (1) the thesis of the autonomy of philosophy, 
which holds that among the central questions of philosophy, most can be answered 
without relying on the sciences, and (2) the thesis of the authority of philosophy, which 
says that insofar as science and philosophy purport to answer the same philosophical 
questions, philosophy provides the better answer of the two. The method philosophers 
standardly use to answer philosophical questions involves canvassing and critiquing 
our intuitions (the procedure of a priori justification). Such intuitions, according to 
Bealer, are evidence, and modal reliabilism can explain why this is the case. Modal 
reliabilism states that something counts as a basic source of evidence relative to a given 
subject if and only if it is deemed to have a strong modal tie to the truth. But modal 
reliabilism implies the autonomy and authority of philosophy as long as scientific 
essentialism is no barrier (this being the concern that while cognitive conditions may 
improve, the scope of our intuitions could reach a limit). According to Bealer, however, 
scientific essentialism can be ruled out. 
But should we place so much theoretical weight on our intuitions? Jonathan 
Weinberg, Shaun Nichols and Stephen Stich argue that recent empirical data concern-
ing the diversity of epistemic intuitions should give us pause. The authors refer to the 
standard intuition-based methodology in contemporary philosophy as Intuition Driven 
Romanticism. The problem is that there is good reason to think that there is no such 
thing as "our" intuitions on the matter. Initial data suggests that intuitions regarding 
epistemic matters co-vary systematically with cultural and socio-economic factors. For 
example, people of East Asian origin are far more likely to grant knowledge in classic 
Gettier cases than those of Western descent. But if the conclusions of Intuition Driven 
Romanticism are so thoroughly affected by features such as culture, what is the norma-
tive force of these conclusions? Why should we care about epistemic principles that best 
explain the intuitions of a small class of epistemologists? 
525 

526 
INTRODUCTION 
Not all naturalists are so skeptical about the value of intuitions. In Hilary Kornblith's 
selection, the first chapter of his book Knowledge and its Place in Nature, he argues that 
knowledge is a natural kind, to be investigated in the way natural kinds are investigated. 
This involves reliance on intuition especially early on in the investigation when it is 
important to pin down samples of the putative kind one wants to understand, whether 
it be a kind of rock or a kind of cognitive achievement. Intuitions, he emphasizes, 
shouldn't be understood as a priori insights but as a certain sort of empirical belief 
(exemplified in the classic cases such as Gettier cases, twin earth cases, etc.). Intuitions 
therefore do have their place. But they cannot reveal the nature of the kind. That is a job 
for theory. And theory can do this only through careful examination of the commonal-
ties of the phenomenon. 
Further Reading 
Armstrong, D. M., Belief Truth, and Knowledge 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973). 
Boghossian, Paul, and Christopher Peacocke 
(eds.), New Essays on the A Priori (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2001). 
Bonjour, Laurence, In Defense of Pure Reason: A 
Rationalist Account of A Priori Justification 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1997). 
Casullo, Albert, A Priori Justification (Oxford, 
Oxford University Press, 2003). 
Casullo, Albert (ed.), A 
Priori Knowledge 
(Aldershot, UK: Ashgate, 1999). 
Field, Hartry, "The A Prioricity of Logic;' 
Proceedings oftheAristotelian Society 96 (1996), 
pp.359-79. 
--, "Epistemological Nonfactualism and the A 
Priori city of Logic," Philosophical Studies 92 
(1998), pp. 1-24. 
--, "Apriority as an Evaluative Notion;' in Paul 
Boghossian and Christopher Peacocke (eds.), 
New Essays on the A Priori (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000), pp. 117-49. 
Foley, 
Richard, 
"Quine 
and 
Naturalized 
Epistemology," Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 
XIX (1994), pp. 243-61. 
Goldman, Alvin, Epistemology and Cognition 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1986). 
--, Liaisons: Philosophy Meets the Cognitive and 
Social Sciences (Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press, 1992). 
--, "Epistemic Folkways and Scientific Epi-
stemology;' reprinted in Hilary Kornblith 
(ed.), Naturalizing Epistemology, 2nd edn 
(Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Press, 1994), pp. 2l9-315. 
Haack, Susan, Evidence and Inquiry: Towards 
Reconstruction 
in 
Epistemology 
(Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1993). 
Hookway, Christopher, Quine (Cambridge, UK: 
Polity Press, 1988), pt. IV. 
Katz, Jerrold, Realistic Rationalism (Cambridge, 
MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology 
Press, 1997). 
Kitcher, 
Philip, 
"The 
Naturalists 
Return;' 
Philosophical Review CI (1992), pp. 53-114. 
Kornblith, Hilary, Inductive Inference and Its 
Natural Ground: An Essay in Naturalized 
Epistemology (Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press, 1993). 
--, Knowledge and Its Place in Nature (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2005). 
Kornblith, Hilary (ed.), 
Naturalizing Epi-
stemology, 
2nd 
edn 
(Cambridge, 
MA: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 
1994). 
Plantinga, Alvin, Warrant and Proper Function 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993). 
Quine, W. V. 0., Pursuit of Truth (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1992), ch. 1. 
Ramsey, Michael R. and William DePaul (eds), 
Rethinking Intuition (Totowa, NJ: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 1999). 
Sosa, Ernest, Knowledge in Perspective: Selected 
Essays in Epistemology (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991). 

PART VII 
527 
Stein, Edward, 
Without good Reason: 
The 
Rationality Debate in Philosophy and Cognitive 
Science (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1996). 
Stich, Stephen, The Fragmentation of Reason: 
Preface to a Pragmatic Theory of Cognitive 
Evaluation (Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press, 1990). 
Stich, Stephen and Richard Nisbett, "Justification 
and the Psychology of Human Reasoning," 
Philosophy of Science 47 (1980), pp. 188-202. 

CHAPTER 39 
Epistemology Naturalized 
w. V. Quine 
Epistemology is concerned with the foundations 
of science. Conceived thus broadly, epistemology 
includes the study of the foundations of mathe-
matics as one of its departments. Specialists at the 
turn of the century thought that their efforts in 
this particular department were achieving nota-
ble success: mathematics seemed to reduce alto-
gether to logic. In a more recent perspective this 
reduction is seen to be better describable as a 
reduction to logic and set theory. This correction 
is a disappointment epistemologically, since the 
firmness and obviousness that we associate with 
logic cannot be claimed for set theory. But still 
the success achieved in the foundations of math-
ematics remains exemplary by comparative 
standards, and we can illuminate the rest of epis-
temology somewhat by drawing parallels to this 
department. 
Studies in the foundations of mathematics 
divide symmetrically into two sorts, conceptual 
and doctrinal. The conceptual studies are con-
cerned with meaning, the doctrinal with truth. 
The conceptual studies are concerned with clari-
fying concepts by defining them, some in terms of 
others. The doctrinal studies are concerned with 
establishing laws by proving them, some on the 
basis of others. Ideally the more obscure concepts 
Originally published in W. V. Quine, Ontological 
Relativity and Other Essays (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1969), pp. 69-90. 
would be defined in terms of the clearer ones so 
as to maximize clarity, and the less obvious laws 
would be proved from the more obvious ones so 
as to maximize certainty. Ideally the definitions 
would generate all the concepts from clear and 
distinct ideas, and the proofs would generate all 
the theorems from self-evident truths. 
The two ideals are linked. For, if you define all 
the concepts by use of some favored subset of 
them, you thereby show how to translate all theo-
rems into these favored terms. The clearer these 
terms are, the likelier it is that the truths couched 
in them will be obviously true, or derivable from 
obvious truths. If in particular the concepts of 
mathematics were all reducible to the clear terms 
of logic, then all the truths of mathematics would 
go over into truths of logic; and surely the truths 
oflogic are all obvious or at least potentially obvi-
ous, i.e., derivable from obvious truths by indi-
vidually obvious steps. 
This particular outcome is in fact denied us, 
however, since mathematics reduces only to set 
theory and not to logic proper. Such reduction 
still enhances clarity, but only because of the 
inter-relations that emerge and not because the 
end terms of the analysis are clearer than others. 
As for the end truths, the axioms of set theory, 
these have less obviousness and certainty to rec-
ommend them than do most of the mathematical 
theorems that we would derive from them. 
Moreover, we know from Godel's work that no 
consistent axiom system can cover mathematics 

EPISTEMOLOGY NATURALIZED 
529 
even when we renounce self-evidence. Reduction 
in the foundations of mathematics remains math-
ematically and philosophically fascinating, but it 
does not do what the epistemologist would like of 
it: it does not reveal the ground of mathematical 
knowledge, it does not show how mathematical 
certainty is possible. 
Still there remains a helpful thought, regard-
ing epistemology generally, in that duality of 
structure which was especially conspicuous in the 
foundations of mathematics. I refer to the bifur-
cation into a theory of concepts, or meaning, and 
a theory of doctrine, or thruth; for this applies to 
the epistemology of natural knowledge no less 
than to the foundations of mathematics. The par-
allel is as follows. Just as mathematics is to be 
reduced to logic, or logic and set theory, so natu-
ral knowledge is to be based somehow on sense 
experience. This means explaining the notion of 
body in sensory terms; here is the conceptual side. 
And it means justifying our knowledge of truths 
of nature in sensory terms; here is the doctrinal 
side of the bifurcation. 
Hume pondered the epistemology of natural 
knowledge on both sides of the bifurcation, the 
conceptual and the doctrinal. His handling of the 
conceptual side of the problem, the explanation 
of body in sensory terms, was bold and simple: he 
identified bodies outright with the sense impres-
sions. If common sense distinguishes between the 
material apple and our sense impressions of it on 
the ground that the apple is one and enduring 
while the impressions are many and fleeting, then, 
Hume held, so much the worse for common 
sense; the notion of its being the same apple on 
one occasion and another is a vulgar confusion. 
Nearly a century after Hume's Treatise, the 
same view of bodies was espoused by the early 
American philosopher Alexander Bryan Johnson. l 
"The word iron names an associated sight and 
feel;' Johnson wrote. 
What then of the doctrinal side, the justifica-
tion of our knowledge of truths about nature? 
Here, Hume despaired. By his identification of 
bodies with impressions he did succeed in con-
struing some singular statements about bodies as 
indubitable truths, yes; as truths about impres-
sions, directly known. But general statements, 
also singular statements about the future, gained 
no increment of certainty by being construed as 
about impressions. 
On the doctrinal side, I do not see that we are 
further along today than where Hume left us. The 
Humean predicament is the human predicament. 
But on the conceptual side there has been progress. 
There the crucial step forward was made already 
before Alexander Bryan Johnson's day, although 
Johnson did not emulate it. It was made by 
Bentham in his theory of fictions. Bentham's step 
was the recognition of contextual definition, or 
what he called paraphrasis. He recognized that to 
explain a term we do not need to specify an object 
for it to refer to, nor even specify a synonymous 
word or phrase; we need only show, by whatever 
means, how to translate all the whole sentences in 
which the term is to be used. Hume's and 
Johnson's desperate measure of identifying bodies 
with impressions ceased to be the only conceiva-
ble way of making sense of talk of bodies, even 
granted that impressions were the only reality. 
One could undertake to explain talk of bodies in 
terms of talk of impressions by translating one's 
whole sentences about bodies into whole sen-
tences about impressions, without equating the 
bodies themselves to anything at all. 
This idea of contextual definition, or recogni-
tion of the sentence as the primary vehicle of 
meaning, was indispensable to the ensuing devel-
opments in the foundations of mathematics. It 
was explicit in Frege, and it attained its full flower 
in Russell's doctrine of singular descriptions as 
incomplete symbols. 
Contextual definition was one of two resorts 
that could be expected to have a liberating effect 
upon the conceptual side of the epistemology of 
natural knowledge. The other is resort to the 
resources of set theory as auxiliary concepts. The 
epistemologist who is willing to eke out his aus-
tere ontology of sense impressions with these set-
theoretic auxiliaries is suddenly rich: he has not 
just his impressions to play with, but sets of them, 
and sets of sets, and so on up. Constructions in the 
foundations of mathematics have shown that such 
set-theoretic aids are a powerful addition; after all, 
the entire glossary of concepts of classical mathe-
matics is constructible from them. Thus equipped, 
our epistemologist may not need either to identify 
bodies with impressions or to settle for contextual 
definition; he may hope to find in some subtle 
construction of sets upon sets of sense impres-
sions a category of objects enjoying just the 
formula properties that he wants for bodies. 

530 
w. V. QUINE 
The two resorts are very unequal in episte-
mological status. Contextual definition is unas-
sailable. Sentences that have been given meaning 
as wholes are undeniably meaningful, and the 
use they make of their component terms is there-
fore meaningful, regardless of whether any 
translations are offered for those terms in isola-
tion. Surely Hume and A. B. Johnson would have 
used contextual definition with pleasure if they 
had thought of it. Recourse to sets, on the other 
hand, is a drastic ontological move, a retreat from 
the austere ontology of impressions. There are 
philosophers who would rather settle for bodies 
outright than accept all these sets, which 
amount, after all, to the whole abstract ontology 
of mathematics. 
This issue has not always been clear, however, 
owing to deceptive hints of continuity between 
elementary logic and set theory. This is why 
mathematics was once believed to reduce to logic, 
that is, to an innocent and unquestionable logic, 
and to inherit these qualities. And this is probably 
why Russell was content to resort to sets as well as 
to contextual definition when in Our Knowledge 
of the External World and elsewhere he addressed 
himself to the epistemology of natural knowl-
edge, on its conceptual side. 
To account for the external world as a logical 
construct of sense data - such, in Russell's terms, 
was the program. It was Carnap, in his Der logische 
Aufbau der Welt of 1928, who came nearest to 
executing it. 
This was the conceptual side of epistemology; 
what of the doctrinal? There the Humean pre-
dicament remained unaltered. Carnap's con-
structions, if carried successfully to completion, 
would have enabled us to translate all sentences 
about the world into terms of sense data, or 
observation, plus logic and set theory. But the 
mere fact that a sentence is couched in terms of 
observation, logic, and set theory does not mean 
that it can be proved from observation sentences 
by logic and set theory. The most modest of gen-
eralizations about observable traits will cover 
more cases than its utterer can have had occasion 
actually to observe. The hopelessness of ground-
ing natural science upon immediate experience 
in a firmly logical way was acknowledged. The 
Cartesian quest for certainty had been the remote 
motivation of epistemology, both on its concep-
tual and its doctrinal side; but that quest was seen 
as a lost cause. To endow the truths of nature with 
the full authority of immediate experience was 
as forlorn a hope as hoping to endow the truths 
of mathematics with the potential obviousness of 
elementary logic. 
What then could have motivated Carnap's 
heroic efforts on the conceptual side of episte-
mology, when hope of certainty on the doctrinal 
side was abandoned? There were two good rea-
sons still. One was that such constructions could 
be expected to elicit and clarify the sensory evi-
dence for science, even if the inferential steps 
between sensory evidence and scientific doctrine 
must fall short of certainty. The other reason was 
that such constructions would deepen our under-
standing of our discourse about the world, even 
apart from questions of evidence; it would make 
all cognitive discourse as clear as observation 
terms and logic and, I must regretfully add, set 
theory. 
It was sad for epistemologists, Hume and 
others, to have to acquiesce in the impossibility of 
strictly deriving the science of the external world 
from sensory evidence. Two cardinal tenets of 
empiricism remained unassailable, however, and 
so remain to this day. One is that whatever evi-
dence there is for science is sensory evidence. The 
other, to which I shall return, is that all inculca-
tion of meanings of words must rest ultimately 
on sensory evidence. Hence the continuing attrac-
tiveness of the idea of a logischer Aufbau in which 
the sensory content of discourse would stand 
forth explicitly. 
If Carnap had successfully carried such a con-
struction through, how could he have told 
whether it was the right one? The question would 
have had no point. He was seeking what he called 
a rational reconstruction. Any construction of 
physicalistic discourse in terms of sense experi-
ence, logic, and set theory would have been seen 
as satisfactory if it made the physicalistic dis-
course come out right. If there is one way there 
are many, but any would be a great achievement. 
But why all this creative reconstruction, all 
this make-believe? The stimulation of his sensory 
receptors is all the evidence anybody has had to 
go on, ultimately, in arriving at his picture of the 
world. Why not just see how this construction 
really proceeds? Why not settle for psychology? 
Such a surrender of the epistemological burden 
to psychology is a move that was disallowed in 

EPISTEMOLOGY NATURALIZED 
531 
earlier times as circular reasoning. If the episte-
mologist's goal is validation of the grounds of 
empirical science, he defeats his purpose by using 
psychology or other empirical science in the vali-
dation. However, such scruples against circularity 
have little point once we have stopped dreaming 
of deducing science from observations. If we are 
out simply to understand the link between obser-
vation and science, we are well advised to use any 
available information, including that provided by 
the very science whose link with observation we 
are seeking to understand. 
But there remains a different reason, uncon-
nected with fears of circularity, for still favoring 
creative reconstruction. We should like to be able 
to translate science into logic and observation 
terms and set theory. This would be a great epis-
temological achievement, for it would show all 
the rest of the concepts of science to be theoreti-
cally superfluous. It would legitimize them - to 
whatever degree the concepts of set theory, logic, 
and observation are themselves legitimate - by 
showing that everything done with the one appa-
ratus could in principle be done with the other. If 
psychology itself could deliver a truly transla-
tional reduction of this kind, we should welcome 
it; but certainly it cannot, for certainly we did not 
grow up learning definitions of physicalistic lan-
guage in terms of a prior language of set theory, 
logic, and observation. Here, then, would be good 
reason for persisting in a rational reconstruction: 
we want to establish the essential innocence of 
physical concepts, by showing them to be theo-
retically dispensable. 
The fact is, though, that the construction 
which Carnap outlined in Der logische Aufbau 
der Welt does not give translational reduction 
either. It would not even if the outline were filled 
in. The crucial point comes where Carnap is 
explaining how to assign sense qualities to 
positions in physical space and time. These 
assignments are to be made in such a way as to 
fulfill, as well as possible, certain desiderata which 
he states, and with growth of experience the 
assignments are to be revised to suit. This plan, 
however illuminating, does not offer any key to 
translating the sentences of science into terms of 
observation, logic, and set theory. 
We must despair of any such reduction. 
Carnap had despaired of it by 1936, when, in 
"Testability and Meaning,"2 he introduced so-called 
reduction forms of a type weaker than definition. 
Definitions had shown always how to translate 
sentences into equivalent sentences. Contextual 
definition of a term showed how to translate 
sentences containing the term into equivalent 
sentences lacking the term. Reduction forms of 
Carnap's liberalized kind, on the other hand, do 
not in general give equivalences; they give impli-
cations. They explain a new term, if only par-
tially, by specifying some sentences which are 
implied by sentences containing the term, and 
other sentences which imply sentences containing 
the term. 
It is tempting to suppose that the countenanc-
ing of reduction forms in this liberal sense is just 
one further step of liberalization comparable to 
the earlier one, taken by Bentham, of countenanc-
ing contextual definition. The former and sterner 
kind of rational reconstruction might have been 
represented as a fictious history in which we 
imagined our ancestors introducing the terms of 
physicalistic discourse on a phenomenalistic and 
set-theoretic basis by a succession of contextual 
definitions. The new and more liberal kind of 
rational reconstruction is a fictitious history in 
which we imagine our ancestors introducing 
those terms by a succession rather of reduction 
forms of the weaker sort. 
This, however, is a wrong comparison. The 
fact is rather that the former and sterner kind of 
rational reconstruction, where definition reigned, 
embodied no fictitious history at all. It was noth-
ing more nor less than a set of directions - or 
would have been, if successful- for accomplish-
ing everything in terms of phenomena and set 
theory that we now accomplish in terms of 
bodies. It would have been a true reduction by 
translation, a legitimation by elimination. 
Definire est eliminare. Rational reconstruction by 
Carnap's later and looser reduction forms does 
none of this. 
To relax the demand for definition, and settle 
for a kind of reduction that does not eliminate, is 
to renounce the last remaining advantage that we 
supposed rational reconstruction to have over 
straight psychology; namely, the advantage of 
translational reduction. If all we hope for is a 
reconstruction that links science to experience in 
explicit ways short of translation, then it would 
seem more sensible to settle for psychology. Better 
to discover how science is in fact developed and 

532 
w. V. QUINE 
learned than to fabricate a fictitious structure to a 
similar effect. 
The empiricist made one major concession 
when he despaired of deducing the truths of 
nature from sensory evidence. In despairing now 
even of translating those truths into terms of 
observation and logico-mathematical auxiliaries, 
he makes another major concession. For suppose 
we hold, with the old empiricist Peirce, that the 
very meaning of a statement consists in the differ-
ence its truth would make to possible experience. 
Might we not formulate, in a chapter-length sen-
tence in observational language, all the difference 
that the truth of a given statement might make to 
experience, and might we not then take all this as 
the translation? Even if the difference that the 
truth of the statement would make to experience 
ramifies indefinitely, we might still hope to 
embrace it all in the logical implications of our 
chapter-length formulation, just as we can axi-
omatize an infinity of theorems. In giving up 
hope of such translation, then, the empiricist is 
conceding that the empirical meanings of typical 
statements about the external world are inacces-
sible and ineffable. 
How is this inaccessibility to be explained? 
Simply on the ground that the experiential impli-
cations of a typical statement about bodies are 
too complex for finite axiomatization, however 
lengthy? No; I have a different explanation. It is 
that the typical statement about bodies has no 
fund of experiential implications it can call its 
own. A substantial mass of theory, taken together, 
will commonly have experiential implications; 
this is how we make verifiable predictions. We 
may not be able to explain why we arrive at theo-
ries which make successful predictions, but we do 
arrive at such theories. 
Sometimes also an experience implied by a 
theory fails to come off; and then, ideally, we 
declare the theory false. But the failure falsifies 
only a block of theory as a whole, a conjunction 
of many statements. The failure shows that one or 
more of those statements is false, but it does not 
show which. The predicted experiences, true and 
false, are not implied by anyone of the compo-
nent statements of the theory rather than another. 
The component statements simply do not have 
empirical meanings, by Peirce's standard, but a 
sufficiently inclusive portion of theory does. If we 
can aspire to a sort of logischer Aujbau der Welt at 
all, it must be to one in which the texts slated for 
translation into observational and logico-mathe-
matical terms are mostly broad theories taken as 
wholes, rather than just terms or short sentences. 
The translation of a theory would be a ponderous 
axiomatization of all the experiential difference 
that the truth of the theory would make. It would 
be a queer translation, for it would translate the 
whole but none of the parts. We might better 
speak in such a case not of translation but simply 
of observational evidence for theories; and we 
may, following Peirce, still fairly call this the 
empirical meaning of the theories. 
These considerations raise a philosophical 
question even about ordinary unphilosophical 
translation, such as from English into Arunta or 
Chinese. For, if the English sentences of a theory 
have their meaning only together as a body, then 
we can justify their translation into Arunta only 
together as a body. There will be no justification 
for pairing off the component English sentences 
with component Arunta sentences, except as these 
correlations make the translation of the theory as 
a whole come out right. Any translations of the 
English sentences into Arunta sentences will be as 
correct as any other, so long as the net empirical 
implications of the theory as a whole are pre-
served in translation. But it is to be expected that 
many different ways of translating the compo-
nent sentences, essentially different individually, 
would deliver the same empirical implications for 
the theory as a whole; deviations in the transla-
tion of one component sentence could be com-
pensated for in the translation of another 
component sentence. Insofar, there can be no 
ground for saying which of two glaringly unlike 
translations of individual sentences is right. 3 
For an uncritical mentalist, no such indeter-
minacy threatens. Every term and every sentence 
is a label attached to an idea, simple or complex, 
which is stored in the mind. When on the other 
hand we take a verification theory of meaning 
seriously, the indeterminacy would appear to be 
inescapable. The Vienna Circle espoused a verifi-
cation theory of meaning but did not take it seri-
ously enough. If we recognize with Peirce that 
the meaning of a sentence turns purely on what 
would count as evidence for its truth, and if we 
recognize with Duhem that theoretical sen-
tences have their evidence not as single sentences 
but only as larger blocks of theory, then the 

EPISTEMOLOGY NATURALIZED 
533 
indeterminacy of translation of theoretical sen-
tences is the natural conclusio'n. And most 
sentences, apart from observation sentences, are 
theoretical. This conclusion, conversely, once it is 
embraced, seals the fate of any general notion of 
propositional meaning or, for that matter, state 
of affairs. 
Should the unwelcomeness of the conclusion 
persuade us to abandon the verification theory of 
meaning? Certainly not. The sort of meaning that 
is basic to translation, and to the learning of one's 
own language, is necessarily empirical meaning 
and nothing more. A child learns his first words 
and sentences by hearing and using them in the 
presence of appropriate stimuli. These must be 
external stimuli, for they must act both on the 
child and on the speaker from whom he is learn-
ing.4 Language is socially inculcated and control-
led; the inculcation and control turn strictly on 
the keying of sentences to shared stimulation. 
Internal factors may vary ad libitum without prej-
udice to communication as long as the keying of 
language to external stimuli is undisturbed. Surely 
one has no choice but to be an empiricist so far as 
one's theory of linguistic meaning is concerned. 
What I have said of infant learning applies 
equally to the linguist's learning of a new lan-
guage in the field. If the linguist does not lean on 
related languages for which there are previously 
accepted translation practices, then obviously he 
had no data but the concomitances of native 
utterance and observable stimulus situation. No 
wonder there is indeterminacy of translation - for 
of course only a small fraction of our utterances 
report concurrent external stimulation. Granted, 
the linguist will end up with unequivocal transla-
tions of everything; but only by making many 
arbitrary choices - arbitrary even though uncon-
scious - along the way. Arbitrary? By this I mean 
that different choices could still have made every-
thing come out right that is susceptible in 
principle to any kind of check. 
Let me link up, in a different order, some of the 
points I have made. The crucial consideration 
behind my argument for the indeterminacy of 
translation was that a statement about the world 
does not always or usually have a separable fund of 
empirical consequences that it can call its own. That 
consideration served also to account for the impos-
sibility of an epistemological reduction of the sort 
where every sentence is equated to a sentence in 
observational and logico-mathematical terms. 
And the impossibility of that sort of epistemo-
logical reduction dissipated the last advantage 
that rational reconstruction seemed to have over 
psychology. 
Philosophers have rightly despaired of trans-
lating everything into observational and logico-
mathematical terms. They have despaired of this 
even when they have not recognized, as the reason 
for this irreducibility, that the statements largely 
do not have their private bundles of empirical 
consequences. And some philosophers have seen 
in this irreducibility the bankruptcy of epistemol-
ogy. Carnap and the other logical positivists of 
the Vienna Circle had already pressed the term 
"metaphysics" into pejorative use, as connoting 
meaninglessness; and the term "epistemology" 
was next. Wittgenstein and his followers, mainly 
at Oxford, found a residual philosophical voca-
tion in therapy: in curing philosophers of the 
delusion 
that 
there 
were 
epistemological 
problems. 
But I think that at this point it may be more 
useful to say rather that epistemology still goes 
on, though in a new setting and a clarified status. 
Epistemology, or something like it, simply falls 
into place as a chapter of psychology and hence of 
natural science. It studies a natural phenomenon, 
viz., a physical human subject. This human sub-
ject is accorded a certain experimentally control-
led input - certain patterns of irradiation in 
assorted frequencies, for instance - and in the 
fullness of time the subject delivers as output a 
description of the three-dimensional external 
world and its history. The relation between the 
meager input and the torrential output is a rela-
tion that we are prompted to study for somewhat 
the same reasons that always prompted episte-
mology; namely, in order to see how evidence 
relates to theory, and in what ways one's theory of 
nature transcends any available evidence. 
Such a study could still include, even, some-
thing like the old rational reconstruction, to 
whatever degree such reconstruction is practica-
ble; for imaginative constructions can afford hints 
of actual psychological processes, in much the 
way that mechanical simulations can. But a con-
spicuous difference between old epistemology 
and the epistemological enterprise in this new 
psychological setting is that we can now make 
free use of empirical psychology. 

534 
w. V. QUINE 
The old epistemology aspired to contain, in a 
sense, natural science; it would construct it some-
how from sense data. Epistemology in its new set-
ting, conversely, is contained in natural science, as 
a chapter of psychology. But the old containment 
remains valid too, in its way. We are studying how 
the human subject of our study posits bodies and 
projects his physics from his data, and we appre-
ciate that our position in the world is just like his. 
Our very epistemological enterprise, therefore, 
and the psychology wherein it is a component 
chapter, and the whole of natural science wherein 
psychology is a component book - all this is our 
own construction or projection from stimula-
tions like those we were meting out to our episte-
mological subject. There is thus reciprocal 
containment, though containment in different 
senses: epistemology in natural science and natu-
ral science in epistemology. 
This interplay is reminiscent again of the old 
threat of circularity, but it is all right now that we 
have stopped dreaming of deducing science from 
sense data. We are after an understanding of sci-
ence as an institution or process in the world, and 
we do not intend that understanding to be any 
better than the science which is its object. This 
attitude is indeed one that Neurath was already 
urging in Vienna Circle days, with his parable of 
the mariner who has to rebuild his boat while 
staying afloat in it. 
One effect of seeing epistemology in a psycho-
logical setting is that it resolves a stubborn old 
enigma of epistemological priority. Our retinas 
are irradiated in two dimensions, yet we see things 
as three-dimensional without conscious infer-
ence. Which is to count as observation - the 
unconscious two-dimensional reception or the 
conscious three-dimensional apprehension? In 
the old epistemological context the conscious 
form had priority, for we were out to justify our 
knowledge of the external world by rational 
reconstruction, and that demands awareness. 
Awareness ceased to be demanded when we gave 
up trying to justify our knowledge of the external 
world by rational reconstruction. What to count 
as observation now can be settled in terms of the 
stimulation of sensory receptors, let conscious-
ness fall where it may. 
The Gestalt psychologists' challenge to sensory 
atomism, which seemed so relevant to epistemol-
ogy forty years ago, is likewise deactivated. 
Regardless of whether sensory atoms or Gestalten 
are what favor the forefront of our consciousness, 
it is simply the stimulations of our sensory recep-
tors that are best looked upon as the input to our 
cognitive mechanism. Old paradoxes about 
unconscious data and inference, old problems 
about chains of inference that would have to be 
completed too quickly - these no longer matter. 
In the old anti-psychologistic days the ques-
tion of epistemological priority was moot. What 
is epistemologically prior to what? Are Gestalten 
prior to sensory atoms because they are noticed, 
or should we favor sensory atoms on some more 
subtle ground? Now that we are permitted to 
appeal to physical stimulation, the problem dis-
solves; A is epistemologically prior to B if A is 
causally nearer than B to the sensory receptors. 
Or, what is in some ways better, just talk explicitly 
in terms of causal proximity to sensory receptors 
and drop the talk of epistemological priority. 
Around 1932 there was debate in the Vienna 
Circle over what to count as observation sen-
tences, or Protokollsiitze. 5 One position was that 
they had the form of reports of sense impressions. 
Another was that they were statements of an ele-
mentary sort about the external world, e.g., "A red 
cube is standing on the table:' Another, Neurath's, 
was that they had the form of reports of relations 
between percipients and external things: "Otto 
now sees a red cube on the table." The worst of it 
was that there seemed to be no objective way of 
settling the matter: no way of making real sense 
of the question. 
Let us now try to view the matter unreservedly 
in the context of the external world. Vaguely 
speaking, what we want of observation sentences 
is that they be the ones in closest causal proximity 
to the sensory receptors. But how is such proxim-
ity to be gauged? The idea may be rephrased this 
way: observation sentences are sentences which, 
as we learn language, are most strongly condi-
tioned to concurrent sensory stimulation rather 
than to stored collateral information. Thus let us 
imagine a sentence queried for our verdict as to 
whether it is true or false, queried for our assent 
or dissent. Then the sentence is an observation 
sentence if our verdict depends only on the sen-
sory stimulation present at the time. 
But a verdict cannot depend on present stimu-
lation to the exclusion of stored information. The 
very fact of our having learned the language 

EPISTEMOLOGY NATURALIZED 
535 
evinces much storing of information, and of 
information without which we should be in no 
position to give verdicts on sentences however 
observational. Evidently then we must relax our 
definition of observation sentence to read thus: a 
sentence is an observation sentence if all verdicts 
on it depend on present sensory stimulation and 
on no stored information beyond what goes into 
understanding the sentence. 
This formulation raises another problem: how 
are we to distinguish between information that 
goes into understanding a sentence and informa-
tion that goes beyond? This is the problem of dis-
tinguishing between analytic truth, which issues 
from the mere meanings of words, and synthetic 
truth, which depends on more than meanings. 
Now I have long maintained that this distinction 
is illusory. There is one step toward such a dis-
tinction, however, which does make sense: a sen-
tence that is true by mere meanings of words 
should be expected, at least if it is simple, to be 
subscribed to by all fluent speakers in the com-
munity. Perhaps the controversial notion of ana-
lyticity can be dispensed with, in our definition 
of observation sentence, in favor of this straight-
forward attribute of community-wide acceptance. 
This attribute is of course no explication of 
analyticity. The community would agree that 
there have been black dogs, yet none who talk of 
analyticity would call this analytic. My rejection 
of the analyticity notion just means drawing no 
line between what goes into the mere understand-
ing of the sentences of a language and what else 
the community sees eye-to-eye on. I doubt that 
an objective distinction can be made between 
meaning and such collateral information as is 
community-wide. 
Turning back then to our task of defining 
observation sentences, we get this: an observation 
sentence is one on which all speakers of the lan-
guage give the same verdict when given the same 
concurrent stimulation. To put the point nega-
tively, an observation sentence is one that is not 
sensitive to differences in past experience within 
the speech community. 
This formulation accords perfectly with the 
traditional role of the observation sentence as the 
court of appeal of scientific theories. For by our 
definition the observation sentences are the sen-
tences on which all members of the community 
will agree under uniform stimulation. And what 
is the criterion of membership in the same com-
munity? Simply, general fluency of dialogue. This 
criterion admits of degrees, and indeed we may 
usefully take the community more narrowly for 
some studies than for others. What count as 
observation sentences for a community of spe-
cialists would not always so count for a larger 
community. 
There is generally no subjectivity in the phras-
ing of observation sentences, as we are now con-
ceiving them; they will usually be about bodies. 
Since the distinguishing trait of an observation 
sentence is intersubjective agreement under 
agreeing stimulation, a corporeal subject matter 
is likelier than not. 
The old tendency to associate observation sen-
tences with a subjective sensory subject matter is 
rather an irony when we reflect that observation 
sentences are also meant to be the intersubjective 
tribunal of scientific hypotheses. The old ten-
dency was due to the drive to base science on 
something firmer and prior in the subject's expe-
rience; but we dropped that project. 
The dislodging of epistemology from its old 
status of first philosophy loosed a wave, we saw, 
of epistemological nihilism. This mood is 
reflected somewhat in the tendency of Pohinyi, 
Kuhn, and the late Russell Hanson to belittle the 
role of evidence and to accentuate cultural rela-
tivism. Hanson ventured even to discredit the 
idea of observation, arguing that so-called obser-
vations vary from observer to observer with the 
amount of knowledge that the observers bring 
with them. The veteran physicist looks at some 
apparatus and sees an x-ray tube. The neophyte, 
looking at the same place, observes rather "a glass 
and metal instrument replete with wires, reflec-
tors, screws, lamps, and pushbuttons:'6 One 
man's observation is another man's closed book 
or flight of fancy. The notion of observation as 
the impartial and objective source of evidence 
for science is bankrupt. Now my answer to the 
x-ray example was already hinted a little while 
back: what counts as an observation sentence 
varies with the width of community considered. 
But we can also always get an absolute standard 
by taking in all speakers of the language, or most.7 
It is ironical that philosophers, finding the old 
epistemology untenable as a whole, should react 
by repudiating a part which has only now moved 
into clear focus. 

536 
w. V. QUINE 
Clarification of the notion of observation 
sentence is a good thing, for the notion is funda-
mental in two connections. These two correspond 
to the duality that I remarked upon early in this 
essay: the duality between concept and doctrine, 
between knowing what a sentence means and 
knowing whether it is true. The observation sen-
tence is basic to both enterprises. Its relation to 
doctrine, to our knowledge of what is true, is very 
much the traditional one: observation sentences 
are the repository of evidence for scientific 
hypotheses. Its relation to meaning is fundamen-
tal too, since observation sentences are the ones 
we are in a position to learn to understand first, 
both as children and as field linguists. For obser-
vation sentences are precisely the ones that we 
can correlate with observable circumstances of 
the occasion of utterance or assent, independ-
ently of variations in the past histories of indi-
vidual informants. They afford the only entry to a 
language. 
The observation sentence is the cornerstone of 
semantics. For it is, as we just saw, fundamental to 
the learning of meaning. Also, it is where mean-
ing is firmest. Sentences higher up in theories 
have no empirical consequences they can call 
their own; they confront the tribunal of sensory 
evidence only in more or less inclusive aggregates. 
The observation sentence, situated at the sensory 
periphery of the body scientific, is the minimal 
verifiable aggregate; it has an empirical content 
all its own and wears it on its sleeve. 
The predicament of the indeterminacy of 
translation has little bearing on observation sen-
tences. The equating of an observation sentence 
of our language to an observation sentence of 
another language is mostly a matter of empirical 
generalization; it is a matter of identity between 
the range of stimulations that would prompt 
assent to the one sentence and the range of stimu-
lations that would prompt assent to the other.8 
Notes 
A. B. Johnson, A Treatise on Language (New 
York, 1836; Berkeley, 1947). 
2 Carnap, Philosophy of Science 3 (1936), pp. 
419-71; 4 (1937), pp. 1-40. 
3 See Quine, Ontological Relativity (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1969), pp. 2ff. 
It is no shock to the preconceptions of old 
Vienna to say that epistemology now becomes 
semantics. For epistemology remains centered as 
always on evidence, and meaning remains cen-
tered as always on verification; and evidence is 
verification. What is likelier to shock preconcep-
tions is that meaning, once we get beyond obser-
vation sentences, ceases in general to have any 
clear applicability to single sentences; also that 
epistemology merges with psychology, as well as 
with linguistics. 
This rubbing out of boundaries could con-
tribute to progress, it seems to me, in philosophi-
cally interesting inquiries of a scientific nature. 
One possible area is perceptual norms. Consider, 
to begin with, the linguistic phenomenon of pho-
nemes. We form the habit, in hearing the myriad 
variations of spoken sounds, of treating each as 
an approximation to one or another of a limited 
number of norms - around thirty altogether -
constituting so to speak a spoken alphabet. All 
speech in our language can be treated in practice 
as sequences of just those thirty elements, thus 
rectifying small deviations. Now outside the 
realm of language also there is probably only a 
rather limited alphabet of perceptual norms alto-
gether, toward which we tend unconsciously to 
rectify all perceptions. These, if experimentally 
identified, could be taken as epistemological 
building blocks, the working elements of experi-
ence. They might prove in part to be culturally 
variable, as phonemes are, and in part universal. 
Again there is the area that the psychologist 
Donald T. Campbell calls evolutionary epistemol-
ogy.9 In this area there is work by Htiseyin Yilmaz, 
who shows how some structural traits of color 
perception could have been predicted from sur-
vival value. lO And a more emphatically epistemo-
logical topic that evolution helps to clarify is 
induction, now that we are allowing epistemol-
ogy the resources of natural science." 
4 
See ibid., p. 28. 
5 Carnap and Neurath in Erkenntnis 3 (1932), 
pp.204-28. 
6 N. R. Hanson, "Observation and Inter-
pretation;' in S. Morgenbesser (ed.), Philosophy of 
Science Today (New York: Basic Books, 1966). 

EPISTEMOLOGY NATURALIZED 
537 
7 This qualification allows for occasional devi-
ants such as the insane or the blind. 
Alternatively, such cases might be excluded by 
adjusting the level of fluency of dialogue 
whereby we define sameness oflanguage. (For 
prompting this note and influencing the 
development of this essay also in more sub-
stantial ways I am indebted to Burton 
Dreben.) 
8 Cf. Quine, Word and Object (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1960), pp. 31-46, 68. 
9 D. T. Campbell, "Methodological Sugges-
tions from a Comparative Psychology of 
Knowledge Processes," Inquiry 2 (1959), 
pp.152-82. 
10 
Huseyin Yilmaz, "On Color Vision and a 
New Approach to General Perception," in 
E. E. Bernard and M. R. Kare (eds), Biological 
Prototypes and Synthetic Systems (New York: 
Plenum, 1962); "Perceptual Invariance and 
the Psychophysical Law;' Perception and 
Psychophysics 2 (1967), pp. 533-8. 
11 
See Quine, "Natural Kinds;' in Ontological 
Relativity, ch. 5. 

CHAPTER 40 
What Is "Naturalized Epistemology"? 
Jaegwon Kim 
Epistemology as a Normative Inquiry 
Descartes's 
epistemological inquiry in 
the 
Meditations begins with this question: What 
propositions are worthy of belief? In the First 
Meditation Descartes canvasses beliefs of various 
kinds he had formerly held as true and finds him-
self forced to conclude that he ought to reject 
them, that he ought not to accept them as true. 
We can view Cartesian epistemology as consisting 
of the following two projects: to identify the crite-
ria by which we ought to regulate acceptance and 
rejection of beliefs, and to determine what we 
may be said to know according to those criteria. 
Descartes's epistemological agenda has been the 
agenda of Western epistemology to this day. The 
twin problems of identifying criteria of justified 
belief and coming to terms with the skeptical 
challenge to the possibility of knowledge have 
defined the central tasks of theory of knowledge 
since Descartes. This was as true of the empiri-
cists, of Locke and Hume and Mill, as of those 
who more closely followed Descartes in the 
rationalist path. 1 
It is no wonder then that modern epistemol-
ogy has been dominated by a single concept, that 
of justification, and two fundamental questions 
Originally published in J. Tomberlin (ed.), Philosophical 
Perspectives, 2. Epistemology (Atascadero, CA: Ridgeview 
Publishing Co., 1988), pp. 381-405. 
involving it: What conditions must a belief meet 
if we are justified in accepting it as true? and What 
beliefs are we in fact justified in accepting? Note 
that the first question does not ask for an "analy-
sis" or "meaning" of the term "justified belief." 
And it is generally assumed, even if not always 
explicitly stated, that not just any statement of a 
necessary and sufficient condition for a belief to 
be justified will do. The implicit requirement has 
been that the stated conditions must constitute 
"criteria" of justified belief, and for this it is neces-
sary that the conditions be stated without the use 
of epistemic terms. Thus, formulating conditions 
of justified belief in such terms as "adequate evi-
dence," "sufficient ground;' "good reason;' 
"beyond a reasonable doubt," and so on, would be 
merely to issue a promissory note redeemable 
only when these epistemic terms are themselves 
explained in a way that accords with the 
requirement. 2 
This requirement, while it points in the right 
direction, does not go far enough. What is crucial 
is this: the criteria ofjustified belief must be formu-
lated on the basis of descriptive or naturalistic terms 
alone, without the use of any evaluative or norma-
tive ones, whether epistemic or of another kind. 3 
Thus, an analysis of justified belief that makes use 
of such terms as "intellectual requirement"{ and 
"having a right to be sure"5 would not satisfy this 
generalized condition; although such an analysis 
can be informative and enlightening about the 
interrelationships of these normative concepts, 

WHAT IS "NATURALIZED EPISTEMOLOGY"? 
539 
it will not, on the present conception, count as a 
statement of criteria of justified belief, unless of 
course these terms are themselves provided with 
nonnormative criteria. What is problematic, 
therefore, about the use of epistemic terms in 
stating criteria of justified belief is not its possible 
circularity in the usual sense; rather it is the fact 
that these epistemic terms are themselves 
essentially normative. We shall later discuss the 
rationale of this strengthened requirement. 
As many philosophers have observed,6 the two 
questions we have set forth, one about the criteria 
of justified belief and the other about what we 
can be said to know according to those criteria, 
constrain each other. Although some philoso-
phers have been willing to swallow skepticism 
just because what we regard as correct criteria of 
justified belief are seen to lead inexorably to the 
conclusion that none, or very few, of our beliefs 
are justified, the usual presumption is that our 
answer to the first question should leave our epis-
temic situation largely unchanged. That is to say, 
it is expected to turn out that according to the cri-
teria of justified belief we come to accept, we 
know, or are justified in believing, pretty much 
what we reflectively think we know or are entitled 
to believe. 
Whatever the exact history, it is evident that 
the concept of justification has come to take 
center stage in our reflections on the nature of 
knowledge. And apart from history, there is a 
simple reason for our preoccupation with justifi-
cation: it is the only specifically epistemic compo-
nent in the classic tripartite conception of 
knowledge. Neither belief nor truth is a specifi-
cally epistemic notion: belief is a psychological 
concept and truth a semantical-metaphysical one. 
These concepts may have an implicit epistemo-
logical dimension, but if they do, it is likely to be 
through their involvement with essentially nor-
mative epistemic notions like justification, evi-
dence, and rationality. Moreover, justification is 
what makes knowledge itself a normative con-
cept. On the surface at least, neither truth nor 
belief is normative or evaluative (I shall argue 
below, though, that belief does have an essential 
normative dimension). But justification mani-
festly is normative. If a belief is justified for us, 
then it is permissible and reasonable, from the 
epistemic point of view, for us to hold it, and it 
would be epistemically irresponsible to hold beliefs 
that contradict it. If we consider believing or 
accepting a proposition to be an "action" in an 
appropriate sense, belief justification would then 
be a special case of justification of action, which 
in its broadest terms is the central concern of nor-
mative ethics. Just as it is the business of norma-
tive ethics to delineate the conditions under 
which acts and decisions are justified from the 
moral point of view, so it is the business of episte-
mology to identify and analyze the conditions 
under which beliefs, and perhaps other proposi-
tional attitudes, are justified from the epistemo-
logical point of view. It probably is only an 
historical accident that we standardly speak of 
"normative ethics" but not of "normative episte-
mologY:' Epistemology is a normative discipline 
as much as, and in the same sense as, normative 
ethics. 
We can summarize our discussion thus far in 
the following points: that justification is a central 
concept of our epistemological tradition, that 
justification, as it is understood in this tradition, 
is a normative concept, and in consequence that 
epistemology itself is a normative inquiry whose 
principal aim is a systematic study of the condi-
tions of justified belief. I take it that these points 
are un controversial, although of course there 
could be disagreement about the details - for 
example, about what it means to say a concept or 
theory is "normative" or "evaluative:' 
The Foundationalist Strategy 
In order to identify the target of the naturalistic 
critique - in particular, Quine's - it will be useful 
to take a brief look at the classic response to the 
epistemological program set forth by Descartes. 
Descartes's approach to the problem of justifica-
tion is a familiar story, at least as the textbook tells 
it: it takes the form of what is now commonly 
called "foundationalism." The foundationalist 
strategy is to divide the task of explaining justifi-
cation into two stages: first, to identify a set of 
beliefs that are "directly" justified in that they are 
justified without deriving their justified status 
from that of any other belief, and then to explain 
how other beliefs may be "indirectly" or "inferen-
tially" justified by standing in an appropriate rela-
tion to those already justified. Directly justified 
beliefs, or "basic beliefs;' are to constitute the 

540 
JAEGWON KIM 
foundation upon which the superstructure of 
"nonbasic" or "derived" beliefs is to rest. What 
beliefs then are directly justified, according to 
Descartes? Subtleties aside, he claimed that beliefs 
about our own present conscious states are among 
them. In what does their justification consist? 
What is it about these beliefs that makes them 
directly justified? Somewhat simplistically again, 
Descartes's answer is that they are justified 
because they are indubitable, that the attentive 
and reflective mind cannot but assent to them. 
How are nonbasic beliefs justified? By "deduc-
tion" - that is, by a series of inferential steps, or 
"intuitions:' each of which is indubitable. If, 
therefore, we take Cartesian indubitability as a 
psychological notion, Descartes's epistemological 
theory can be said to meet the desideratum of 
providing nonepistemic, naturalistic criteria of 
justified belief. 
Descartes's foundationalist program was 
inherited, in its essential outlines, by the empiri-
cists. In particular, his "mentalism:' that beliefs 
about one's own current mental state are episte-
mologically basic, went essentially unchallenged 
by the empiricists and positivists, until this cen-
tury. Epistemologists have differed from one 
another chiefly in regard to two questions: first, 
what else belonged in our corpus of basic beliefs, 
and second, how the derivation of the nonbasic 
part of our knowledge was to proceed. Even the 
Logical Positivists were, by and large, foundation-
alists, although some of them came to renounce 
Cartesian mentalism in favor of a "physicalistic 
basis."? In fact, the Positivists were foundational-
ists twice over: for them "observation," whether 
phenomenological or physical, served not only as 
the foundation of knowledge but as the founda-
tion of all "cognitive meaning" - that is, as both 
an epistemological and a semantic foundation. 
Quine's Arguments 
It has become customary for epistemologists who 
profess allegiance to a "naturalistic" conception 
of knowledge to pay homage to Quine as the chief 
contemporary provenance of their inspiration -
especially to his influential paper "Epistemology 
Naturalized."8 Quine's principal argument in this 
paper against traditional epistemology is based 
on the claim that the Cartesian foundationalist 
program has failed - that the Cartesian "quest for 
certainty" is "a lost cause." While this claim about 
the hopelessness of the Cartesian "quest for cer-
tainty" is nothing new, using it to discredit the 
very conception of normative epistemology is 
new, something that any serious student of epis-
temology must contend with. 
Quine divides the classic epistemological pro-
gram into two parts: conceptual reduction whereby 
physical terms, including those of theoretical sci-
ence, are reduced, via definition, to terms refer-
ring to phenomenal features of sensory experience, 
and doctrinal reduction whereby truths about the 
physical world are appropriately obtained from 
truths about sensory experience. The "appropri-
ateness" just alluded to refers to the requirement 
that the favored epistemic status ("certainty" for 
classic epistemologists, according to Quine) of 
our basic beliefs be transferred, essentially undi-
minished, to derived beliefs, a necessary require-
ment if the derivational process is to yield 
knowledge from knowledge. What derivational 
methods have this property of preserving epis-
temic status? Perhaps there are none, given our 
proneness to err in framing derivations as in any-
thing else, not to mention the possibility of lapses 
of attention and memory in following lengthy 
proofs. But logical deduction comes as close to 
being one as any; it can at least be relied on to 
transmit truth, if not epistemic status. It could 
perhaps be argued that no method can preserve 
certainty unless it preserves (or is known to pre-
serve) truth; and if this is so, logical deduction is 
the only method worth considering. I do not 
know whether this was the attitude of most 
classic epistemologists; but Quine assumes that if 
deduction doesn't fill their bill, nothing will. 
Quine sees the project of conceptual reduc-
tion as culminating in Carnap's Der logische 
Aufbau der Welt. As Quine sees it, Carnap "came 
nearest to executing" the conceptual half of the 
classic epistemological project. But coming close 
is not good enough. Because of the holistic 
manner in which empirical meaning is generated 
by experience, no reduction of the sort Carnap 
and others so eagerly sought could in principle be 
completed. For definitional reduction requires 
point-to-point meaning relations" between physi-
cal terms and phenomenal terms, something that 
Quine's holism tells us cannot be had. The second 
half of the program, doctrinal reduction, is in no 

WHAT IS "NATURALIZED EPISTEMOLOGY"? 
541 
better shape; in fact, it was the one to stumble 
first, for, according to Quine, its impossibility was 
decisively demonstrated long before the Aujbau, 
by Hume in his celebrated discussion of induc-
tion. The "Humean predicament" shows that 
theory cannot be logically deduced from observa-
tion; there simply is no way of deriving theory 
from observation that will transmit the latter's 
epistemic status intact to the former. 
I don't think anyone wants to disagree with 
Quine in these claims. It is not possible to "vali-
date" science on the basis of sensory experience, if 
"validation" means justification through logical 
deduction. Quine of course does not deny that 
our theories depend on observation for evidential 
support; he has said that sensory evidence is the 
only evidence there is. To be sure, Quine's argu-
ment against the possibility of conceptual reduc-
tion has a new twist: the application of his 
"holism." But his conclusion is no surprise; 
"translational phenomenalism" has been mori-
bund for many years.
1O And, as Quine himself 
notes, his argument against the doctrinal reduc-
tion, the "quest for certainty:' is only a restate-
ment 
of 
Hume's 
"skeptical" 
conclusions 
concerning induction: induction after all is not 
deduction. Most of us are inclined, I think, to 
view the situation Quine describes with no great 
alarm, and I rather doubt that these conclusions 
of Quine's came as news to most epistemologists 
when "Epistemology Naturalized" was first pub-
lished. We are tempted to respond: of course we 
can't define physical concepts in terms of sense-
data; of course observation "underdetermines" 
theory. That is why observation is observation 
and not theory. 
So it is agreed on all hands that the classical 
epistemological project, conceived as one of 
deductively validating physical knowledge from 
indubitable sensory data, cannot succeed. But 
what is the moral of this failure? What should 
be its philosophical lesson to us? Having noted 
the failure of the Cartesian program, Quine 
goes on: ll 
The stimulation of his sensory receptors is all 
the evidence anybody has had to go on, ultimately, 
in arriving at his picture of the world. Why not 
just see how this construction really proceeds? 
Why not settle for psychology? Such a surrender 
of the epistemological burden to psychology is a 
move that was disallowed in earlier times as cir-
cular reasoning. If the epistemologist's goal is 
validation of the grounds of empirical science, 
he defeats his purpose by using psychology or 
other empirical science in the validation. 
However, such scruples against circularity have 
little point once we have stopped dreaming of 
deducing science from observation. If we are out 
simply to understand the link between observa-
tion and science, we are well advised to use any 
available information, including that provided by 
the very science whose link with observation we 
are seeking to understand. 
And Quine has the following to say about the fail-
ure of Carnap's reductive program in the 
Aujbau:!2 
To relax the demand for definition, and settle for 
a kind of reduction that does not eliminate, is to 
renounce the last remaining advantage that we 
supposed rational reconstruction to have over 
straight psychology; namely, the advantage of 
translational reduction. If all we hope for is a 
reconstruction that links science to experience in 
explicit ways short of translation, then it would 
seem more sensible to settle for psychology. 
Better to discover how science is in fact devel-
oped and learned than to fabricate a fictitious 
structure to a similar effect. 
If a task is entirely hopeless, if we know it cannot 
be executed, no doubt it is rational to abandon it; 
we would be better off doing something else that 
has some hope of success. We can agree with 
Quine that the "validation" - that is, logical deduc-
tion - of science on the basis of observation 
cannot be had; so it is rational to abandon this 
particular epistemological program, if indeed it 
ever was a program that anyone seriously under-
took. But Quine's recommendations go further. In 
particular, there are two aspects of Quine's pro-
posals that are of special interest to us: first, he is 
not only advising us to quit the program of "vali-
dating science," but urging us to take up another 
specific project, an empirical psychological study 
of our cognitive processes; second, he is also 
claiming that this new program replaces the old, 
that both programs are part of something appro-
priately called "epistemology." Naturalized episte-
mology is to be a kind of epistemology after all, a 
"successor subject"!3 to classical epistemology. 

542 
JAEGWON KIM 
How should we react to Quine's urgings? What 
should be our response? The Cartesian project of 
validating science starting from the indubitable 
foundation of first-person psychological reports 
(perhaps with the help of certain indubitable first 
principles) is not the whole of classical epistemol-
ogy- or so it would seem at first blush. In our char-
acterization of classical epistemology, the Cartesian 
program was seen as one possible response to the 
problem of epistemic justification, the two-part 
project of identifying the criteria of epistemic justi-
fication and determining what beliefs are in fact 
justified according to those criteria. In urging "nat-
uralized epistemology" on us, Quine is not suggest-
ing that we give up the Cartesian foundationalist 
solution and explore others within the same frame-
work14 - perhaps, to adopt some sort of "coheren-
tist" strategy, or to require of our basic beliefs only 
some degree of "initial credibility" rather than 
Cartesian certainty, or to permit some sort of prob-
abilistic derivation in addition to deductive deriva-
tion of nonbasic knowledge, or to consider the use 
of special rules of evidence, like Chisholm's "prin-
ciples of evidence;' 15 or to give up the search for a 
derivational process that transmits undiminished 
certainty in favor of one that can transmit dimin-
ished but still useful degrees of justification. Quine's 
proposal is more radical than that. He is asking us 
to set aside the entire framework of justification-
centered epistemology. That is what is new in 
Quine's proposals. Quine is asking us to put in its 
place a purely descriptive, causal-nomological sci-
ence of human cognition.16 
How should we characterize in general terms 
the difference between traditional epistemological 
programs, such as foundationalism and coherence 
theory, on the one hand and Quine's program of 
naturalized epistemology on the other? Quine's 
stress is on the factual and descriptive character of 
his program; he says, "Why not see how [the con-
struction of theory from observation] actually pro-
ceeds? Why not settle for psychology?";I? again, 
"Better to discover how science is in fact developed 
and learned than ... "18 We are given to understand 
that in contrast traditional epistemology is not a 
descriptive, factual inquiry. Rather, it is an attempt 
at a "validation" or "rational reconstruction" of sci-
ence. Validation, according to Quine, proceeds via 
deduction, and rational reconstruction via defini-
tion. However, their point is justificatory - that is, 
to rationalize our sundry knowledge claims. So 
Quine is asking us to set aside what is "rational" in 
rational reconstruction. 
Thus, it is normativity that Quine is asking us 
to repudiate. Although Quine does not explicitly 
characterize traditional epistemology as "normative" 
or "prescriptive," his meaning is unmistakable. 
Epistemology is to be "a chapter of psychology;' a 
law-based predictive-explanatory theory, like any 
other theory within empirical science; its princi-
pal job is to see how human cognizers develop 
theories (their "picture of the world") from obser-
vation ("the stimulation of their sensory recep-
tors"). Epistemology is to go out of the business 
of justification. We earlier characterized tradi-
tional epistemology as essentially normative; we 
see why Quine wants us to reject it. Quine is 
urging us to replace a normative theory of cognition 
with a descriptive science. 
Losing Knowledge from Epistemology 
If justification drops out of epistemology, knowl-
edge itself drops out of epistemology. For our 
concept of knowledge is inseparably tied to that 
of justification. As earlier noted, knowledge itself 
is a normative notion. Quine's nonnormative, 
naturalized epistemology has no room for our 
concept of knowledge. It is not surprising that, in 
describing 
naturalized 
epistemology, 
Quine 
seldom talks about knowledge; instead, he talks 
about "science" and "theories" and "representa-
tions." Quine would have us investigate how sen-
sory stimulation "leads" to "theories" and 
"representation" of the world. I take it that within 
the traditional scheme these "theories" and "rep-
resentations" correspond to beliefs, or systems of 
beliefs; thus, what Quine would have us do is to 
investigate how sensory stimulation leads to the 
formation of beliefs about the world. 
But in what sense of "lead"? I take it that Quine 
has in mind a causal or nomological sense. He is 
urging us to develop a theory, an empirical theory, 
that uncovers lawful regularities governing the 
processes through which organisms come to 
develop beliefs about their environment as a 
causal result of having their sensory receptors 
stimulated in certain ways. Quine says:19 
[Naturalized epistemology] studies a natural 
phenomenon, viz., a physical human subject. 

WHAT IS "NATURALIZED EPISTEMOLOGY"? 
543 
This human subject is accorded experimentally 
controlled input - certain patterns of irradiation 
in assorted frequencies, for instance - and in the 
fullness of time the subject delivers as output a 
description of the three-dimensional external 
world and its history. The relation between the 
meager input and torrential output is a relation 
that we are prompted to study for somewhat the 
same reasons that always prompted epistemol-
ogy; namely, in order to see how evidence relates 
to theory, and in what ways one's theory of nature 
transcends any available evidence. 
The relation Quine speaks of between "meager 
input" and "torrential output" is a causal relation; 
at least it is qua causal relation that the naturali-
zed epistemologist investigates it. It is none of the 
naturalized epistemologist's business to assess 
whether, and to what degree, the input "justifies" 
the output, how a given irradiation of the sub-
ject's retinas makes it "reasonable" or "rational" 
for the subject to emit certain representational 
output. His interest is strictly causal and nomo-
logical: he wan ts us to look for patterns of lawlike 
dependencies characterizing the input-output 
relations for this particular organism and others 
of a like physical structure. 
If this is right, it makes Quine's attempt to 
relate his naturalized epistemology to traditional 
epistemology look at best lame. For in what sense 
is the study of causal relationships between phys-
ical stimulation of sensory receptors and the 
resulting cognitive output a way of "seeing how 
evidence relates to theory" in an epistemologi-
cally relevant sense? The causal relation between 
sensory input and cognitive output is a relation 
between "evidence" and "theory"; however, it is 
not an evidential relation. This can be seen from 
the following consideration: the nomological pat-
terns that Quine urges us to look for are certain to 
vary from species to species, depending on the 
particular way each biological (and possibly non-
biological) species processes information, but the 
evidential relation in its proper normative sense 
must abstract from such factors and concern itself 
only with the degree to which evidence supports 
hypothesis. 
In any event, the concept of evidence is insep-
arable from that of justification. When we talk of 
"evidence" in an epistemological sense we are 
talking about justification: one thing is "evidence" 
for another just in case the first tends to enhance 
the reasonableness or justification of the second. 
And such evidential relations hold in part because 
of the "contents" of the items involved, not merely 
because of the causal or nomological connections 
between them. A strictly nonnormative concept 
of evidence is not our concept of evidence; it is 
something that we do not understand. 20 
None of us, I think, would want to quarrel 
with Quine about the interest or importance of 
the psychological study of how our sensory input 
causes our epistemic output. This is only to say 
that the study of human (or other kinds of) cog-
nition is of interest. That isn't our difficulty; our 
difficulty is whether, and in what sense, pursuing 
Quine's "epistemology" is a way of doing episte-
mology - that is, a way of studying "how evidence 
relates to theory." Perhaps, Quine's recommenda-
tion that we discard justification-centered episte-
mology is worth pondering; and his exhortation 
to take up the study of psychology perhaps 
deserves to be heeded also. What is mysterious is 
why this recommendation has to be coupled with 
the rejection of normative epistemology (if nor-
mative epistemology is not a possible inquiry, 
why shouldn't the would-be epistemologist turn 
to, say, hydro-dynamics or ornithology rather 
than psychology?). But of course Quine is saying 
more; he is saying that an understandable, if mis-
guided, motivation (that is, seeing "how evidence 
relates to theory") does underlie our proclivities 
for indulgence in normative epistemology, but 
that we would be better served by a scientific 
study of human cognition than normative 
epistemology. 
But it is difficult to see how an "epistemology" 
that has been purged of normativity, one that 
lacks an appropriate normative concept of justifi-
cation or evidence, can have anything to do with 
the concerns of traditional epistemology. And 
unless naturalized epistemology and classical 
epistemology share some of their central con-
cerns, it's difficult to see how one could replace 
the other, or be a way (a better way) of doing the 
other.21 To be sure, they both investigate "how 
evidence relates to theory." But putting the matter 
this way can be misleading, and has perhaps 
misled Quine: the two disciplines do not investi-
gate the same relation. As lately noted, normative 
epistemology is concerned with the evidential 
relation properly so-called - that is, the relation 

544 
JAEGWON KIM 
of justification - and Quine's naturalized episte-
mology is meant to study the causal- nomologi-
cal relation. For epistemology to go out of the 
business of justification is for it to go out of 
business. 
Belief Attribution and Rationality 
Perhaps we have said enough to persuade our-
selves that Quine's naturalized epistemology, 
while it may be a legitimate scientific inquiry, is 
not a kind of epistemology, and, therefore, that 
the question whether it is a better kind of episte-
mology cannot arise. In reply, however, it might 
be said that there was a sense in which Quine's 
epistemology and traditional epistemology could 
be viewed as sharing a common subject matter, 
namely this: they both concern beliefs or "repre-
sentations." The only difference is that the former 
investigates their causal histories and connections 
whereas the latter is concerned with their eviden-
tial or justificatory properties and relations. This 
difference, if Quine is right, leads to another 
(so continues the reply): the former is a feasible 
inquiry, the latter is not. 
I now want to take my argument a step fur-
ther: I shall argue that the concept of belief is 
itself an essentially normative one, and in conse-
quence that if normativity is wholly excluded 
from naturalized epistemology it cannot even be 
thought of as being about beliefs. That is, if natu-
ralized epistemology is to be a science of beliefs 
properly so called, it must presuppose a norma-
tive concept of belief. 
Briefly, the argument is this. In order to imple-
ment Quine's program of naturalized episte-
mology, we shall need to identify, and individuate, 
the input and output of cognizers. The input, for 
Quine, consists of physical events ("the stimula-
tion of sensory receptors") and the output is said 
to be a "theory" or "picture of the world" - that is, 
a set of "representations" of the cognizer's envi-
ronment. Let us focus on the output. In order to 
study the sensory input-cognitive output rela-
tions for the given cognizer, therefore, we must 
find out what "representations" he has formed as 
a result of the particular stimulations that have 
been applied to his sensory transducers. Setting 
aside the jargon, what we need to be able to do is 
to 
attribute beliefs, 
and other contentful 
intentional states, to the cognizer. But belief attri-
bution ultimately requires a "radical interpreta-
tion" of the cognizer, of his speech and intentional 
states; that is, we must construct an "interpretive 
theory" that simultaneously assigns meanings to 
his utterances and attributes to him beliefs and 
other propositional attitudes.22 
Even a cursory consideration indicates that 
such an interpretation cannot begin - we cannot 
get a foothold in our subject's realm of meanings 
and intentional states - unless we assume his total 
system of beliefs and other propositional atti-
tudes to be largely and essentially rational and 
coherent. As Davidson has emphasized, a given 
belief has the content it has in part because of its 
location in a network of other beliefs and propo-
sitional attitudes; and what at bottom grounds 
this network is the evidential relation, a relation 
that regulates what is reasonable to believe given 
other beliefs one holds. That is, unless our cog-
nizer is a "rational being;' a being whose cognitive 
"output" is regulated and constrained by norms 
of rationality - typically, these norms holistically 
constrain his propositional attitudes in virtue of 
their contents - we cannot intelligibly interpret 
his "output" as consisting of beliefs. Conversely, if 
we are unable to interpret our subject's meanings 
and propositional attitudes in a way that satisfies 
a minimal standard of rationality, there is little 
reason to regard him as a "cognizer," a being that 
forms representations and constructs theories. 
This means that there is a sense of "rational" in 
which the expression "rational belief" is redun-
dant; every belief must be rational in certain min-
imal ways. It is not important for the purposes of 
the present argument what these minimal stand-
ards of rationality are; the only point that matters 
is that unless the output of our cognizer is subject 
to evaluation in accordance with norms of ration-
ality, that output cannot be considered as consis-
ting of beliefs and hence cannot be the object of 
an epistemological inquiry, whether plain or 
naturalized. 
We can separate the core of these considera-
tions from controversial issues involving the 
so-called "principle of charity;' minimal rational-
ity, and other matters in the theory of radical 
interpretation. What is crucial is this: for the inter-
pretation and attribution of beliefs to be possible, 
not only must we assume the overall rationality of 
cognizers, but also we must continually evaluate 

WHAT IS "NATURALIZED EPISTEMOLOGY"? 
545 
and re-evaluate the putative beliefs of a cognizer 
in their evidential relationship to one another 
and other propositional attitudes. It is not merely 
that belief attribution requires the umbrella 
assumption about the overall rationality of cog-
nizers. Rather, the point is that belief attribution 
requires belief evaluation, in accordance with nor-
mative standards of evidence and justification. If 
this is correct, rationality in its broad and funda-
mental sense is not an optional property of beliefs, 
a virtue that some beliefs may enjoy and others 
lack; it is a precondition of the attribution and 
individuation of belief - that is, a property with-
out which the concept of belief would be unintel-
ligible and pointless. 
Two objections might be raised to counter 
these considerations. First, one might argue that 
at best they show only that the normativity of 
belief is an epistemological assumption - that we 
need to assume the rationality and coherence of 
belief systems when we are trying to find out what 
beliefs to attribute to a cognizer. It does not follow 
from this epistemological point, the objection 
continues, that the concept of belief is itself nor-
mative.23 In replying to this objection, we can 
bypass the entire issue of whether the rationality 
assumption concerns only the epistemology of 
belief attribution. Even if this premise (which I 
think is incorrect) is granted, the point has already 
been made. For it is an essential part of the busi-
ness of naturalized epistemology, as a theory of 
how beliefs are formed as a result of sensory stim-
ulation' to find out what particular beliefs the 
given cognizers have formed. But this is precisely 
what cannot be done, if our considerations show 
anything at all, unless the would-be naturalized 
epistemologist continually evaluates the putative 
beliefs of his subjects in regard to their rationality 
and coherence, subject to the overall constraint of 
the assumption that the cognizers are largely 
rational. The naturalized epistemologist cannot 
dispense with normative concepts or disengage 
himself from valuational activities. 
Second, it might be thought that we could 
simply avoid these considerations stemming from 
belief attribution by refusing to think of cognitive 
output as consisting of "beliefs," namely as states 
having propositional contents. The "representa-
tions" Quine speaks of should be taken as appro-
priate neural states, and this means that all we 
need is to be able to discern neural states of 
organisms. This requires only neurophysiology 
and the like, not the normative theory of rational 
belief. My reply takes the form of a dilemma: 
either the "appropriate" neural states are identi-
fied by seeing how they correlate with beliefs,24 in 
which case we still need to contend with the prob-
lem of radical interpretation, or beliefs are entirely 
bypassed. In the latter case, belief, along with jus-
tification, drops out of Quinean epistemology, 
and it is unclear in what sense we are left with 
an inquiry that has anything to do with 
knowledge.25 
The "Psychologistic" Approach 
to Epistemology 
Many philosophers now working in theory of 
knowledge have stressed the importance of sys-
tematic psychology to philosophical episte-
mology. Reasons proffered for this are various, 
and so are the conceptions of the proper relation-
ship between psychology and epistemology.26 But 
they are virtually unanimous in their rejection of 
what they take to be the epistemological tradition 
of Descartes and its modern embodiments in 
philosophers like Russell, C. I. Lewis, Roderick 
Chisholm, and A. J. Ayer; and they are united in 
their endorsement of the naturalistic approach of 
Quine we have been considering. Traditional 
epistemology is often condemned as "aprioristic;' 
and as having lost sight of human knowledge as a 
product of natural causal processes and its func-
tion in the survival of the organism and the spe-
cies. Sometimes, the adherents of the traditional 
approach are taken to task for their implicit anti-
scientific bias or indifference to the new develop-
ments in psychology and related disciplines. Their 
own approach in contrast is hailed as "naturalis-
tic" and "scientific;' better attuned to significant 
advances in the relevant scientific fields such as 
"cognitive science" and "neuroscience;' promis-
ing philosophical returns far richer than what the 
aprioristic method of traditional epistemology 
has been able to deliver. We shall here briefly con-
sider how this new naturalism in epistemology 
is to be understood in relation to the classic epis-
temological program and Quine's naturalized 
epistemology. 
Let us see how one articulate proponent of the 
new approach explains the distinctiveness of his 

546 
JAEGWON KIM 
position vis-it-vis that of the traditional episte-
mologists. According to Philip Kitcher, the 
approach he rejects is characterized by an "apsy-
chologistic" attitude that takes the difference 
between knowledge and true belief - that is, justi-
fication - to consist in "ways which are independ-
ent of the causal antecedents of a subject's states."27 
Kitcher writes:28 
we can present the heart of [the apsychologistic 
approach] by considering the way in which it 
would tackle the question of whether a person's 
true belief that p counts as knowledge that p. The 
idea would be to disregard the psychological life 
of the subject, looking just at the various propo-
sitions she believes. If p is "connected in the right 
way" to other propositions which are believed, 
then we count the subject as knowing that p. Of 
course, apsychologistic epistemology will have to 
supply a criterion for propositions to be "con-
nected in the right way' ... but proponents of 
this view of knowledge will emphasize that the 
criterion is to be given in logical terms. We are 
concerned with logical relations among proposi-
tions, not with psychological relations among 
mental states. 
On the other hand, the psychologistic approach 
considers the crucial difference between knowl-
edge and true belief - that is, epistemic justifica-
tion - to turn on "the factors which produced the 
belief' focusing on "processes which produce 
belief, processes which will always contain, at 
their latter end, psychological events."29 
It is not entirely clear from this characteriza-
tion whether a psychologistic theory of justifica-
tion is to be prohibited from making any reference 
to logical relations among belief contents (it is 
difficult to believe how a theory of justification 
respecting such a blanket prohibition could suc-
ceed); nor is it clear whether, conversely, an apsy-
chologistic theory will be permitted to refer at all 
to beliefs qua psychological states, or exactly what 
it is for a theory to do so. But such points of detail 
are unimportant here; it is clear enough, for 
example, that Goldman's proposal to explicate 
justified belief as belief generated by a reliable 
belief-forming process30 nicely fits Kitcher's char-
acterization of the psychologistic approach. This 
account, one form of the so-called "reliability 
theory" of justification, probably was what 
Kitcher had in mind when he was formulating his 
general characterization of epistemological natu-
ralism. However, another influential form of the 
reliability theory does not qualify under Kitcher's 
characterization. This is Armstrong's proposal to 
explain the difference between knowledge and 
true belief, at least for noninferential knowledge, 
in terms of "a law-like connection between the 
state of affairs [of a subject's believing that p 1 and 
the state of affairs that makes 'p' true such that, 
given the state of affairs [of the subject's believing 
that p 1, it must be the case that p."3l There is here 
no reference to the causal antecedents of beliefs, 
something that Kitcher requires of apsychologistic 
theories. 
Perhaps, Kitcher's preliminary characteriza-
tion needs to be broadened and sharpened. 
However, a salient characteristic of the naturalis-
tic approach has already emerged, which we can 
put as follows: justification is to be characterized 
in terms of causal or nomological connections 
involving beliefs as psychological states or proc-
esses, and not in terms of the logical properties or 
relations pertaining to the contents of these 
beliefs.32 
If we understand current epistemological nat-
uralism in this way, how closely is it related to 
Quine's conception of naturalized epistemology? 
The answer, I think, is obvious: not very closely at 
all. In fact, it seems a good deal closer to the 
Cartesian tradition than to Quine. For, as we saw, 
the difference that matters between Quine's epis-
temological program and the traditional program 
is the former's total renouncement of the latter's 
normativity, its rejection of epistemology as a 
normative inquiry. The talk of "replacing" episte-
mology with psychology is irrelevant and at best 
misleading, though it could give us a momentary 
relief from a sense of deprivation. When one 
abandons justification and other valuational con-
cepts, one abandons the entire framework of nor-
mative epistemology. What remains is a descriptive 
empirical theory of human cognition which, if 
Quine has his way, will be entirely devoid of the 
notion of justification or any other evaluative 
concept. 
As I take it, this is not what most advocates of 
epistemological naturalism are aiming at. By and 
large they are not Quinean eliminativists in regard 
to justification, and justification in its full-fledged 
normative sense continues to playa central role 
in their epistemological reflections. Where they 

WHAT IS "NATURALIZED EPISTEMOLOGY"? 
547 
differ from their nonnaturalist adversaries is the 
specific way in which criteria of justification are 
to be formulated. Naturalists and non naturalists 
("apsychologists") can agree that these criteria 
must be stated in descriptive terms - that is, with-
out the use of epistemic or any other kind of 
normative terms. According to Kitcher, an apsy-
chologistic theory of justification would state 
them primarily in terms of logical properties and 
relations holding for propositional contents of 
beliefs, whereas the psychologistic approach 
advocates the exclusive use of causal properties 
and relations holding for beliefs as events or 
states. Many traditional epistemologists may 
prefer criteria that confer upon a cognizer a posi-
tion of special privilege and responsibility with 
regard to the epistemic status of his beliefs, 
whereas most self-avowed naturalists prefer 
"objective" or "externalist" criteria with no such 
special privileges for the cognizer. But these dif-
ferences are among those that arise within the 
familiar normative framework, and are consistent 
with the exclusion of normative terms in the 
statement of the criteria of justification. 
Normative ethics can serve as a useful model 
here. To claim that basic ethical terms, like "good" 
and "right;' are definable on the basis of descrip-
tive or naturalistic terms is one thing; to insist 
that it is the business of normative ethics to pro-
vide conditions or criteria for "good" and "right" 
in descriptive or naturalistic terms is another. 
One may properly reject the former, the so-called 
"ethical naturalism;' as many moral philosophers 
have done, and hold the latter; there is no obvious 
inconsistency here. G. E. Moore is a philosopher 
who did just that. As is well known, he was a pow-
erful critic of ethical naturalism, holding that 
goodness is a "simple" and "nonnatural" property. 
At the same time, he held that a thing's being 
good "follows" from its possessing certain natu-
ralistic properties. He wrote:33 
I should never have thought of suggesting that 
goodness was "non-natural;' unless I had sup-
posed that it was "derivative" in the sense that, 
whenever a thing is good (in the sense in ques-
tion) its goodness ... "depends on the presence 
of certain non-ethical characteristics" possessed 
by the thing in question: I have always supposed 
that it did so "depend," in the sense that, if a thing 
is good (in my sense), then that it is so follows 
from the fact that it possesses certain natural 
intrinsic properties ... 
It makes sense to think of these "natural intrinsic 
properties" from which a thing's being good is 
thought to follow as constituting naturalistic cri-
teria of goodness, or at least pointing to the exist-
ence of such criteria. One can reject ethical 
naturalism, the doctrine that ethical concepts are 
definitionally eli minable in favor of naturalistic 
terms, and at the same time hold that ethical 
properties, or the ascription of ethical terms, 
must be governed by naturalistic criteria. It is 
clear, then, that we are here using "naturalism" 
ambiguously in "epistemological naturalism" and 
"ethical naturalism:' In our present usage, episte-
mological naturalism does not include (nor does 
it necessarily exclude) the claim that epistemic 
terms are definitionally reducible to naturalistic 
terms. (Quine's naturalism is eliminative, though 
it is not a definitional eliminativism.) 
If, therefore, we locate the split between Quine 
and traditional epistemology at the descriptive vs. 
normative divide, then currently influential natu-
ralism in epistemology is not likely to fall on 
Quine's side. On this descriptive vs. normative 
issue, one can side with Quine in one of two ways: 
first, one rejects, with Quine, the entire justifica-
tion-based epistemological program; or second, 
like ethical naturalists but unlike Quine, one 
believes that epistemic concepts are naturalisti-
cally definable. I doubt that very many epistemo-
logical naturalists will embrace either of these 
alternatives. 34 
Epistemic Supervenience - Or Why 
Normative Epistemology Is Possible 
But why should we think that there must be natu-
ralistic criteria of justified belief and other terms 
of epistemic appraisal? If we take the discovery 
and systematization of such criteria to be the cen-
tral task of normative epistemology, is there any 
reason to think that this task can be fruitfully 
pursued, that normative epistemology is a possi-
ble field of inquiry? Quine's point is that it is not. 
We have already noted the limitation of Quine's 
negativeargumentsin"EpistemologyNaturalized;' 
but is there a positive reason for thinking that 
normative epistemology is a viable program? One 

548 
JAEGWON KIM 
could consider a similar question about the 
possibility of normative ethics. 
I think there is a short and plausible initial 
answer, although a detailed defense of it would 
involve complex general issues about norms and 
values. The short answer is this: we believe in the 
supervenience of epistemic properties on natu-
ralistic ones, and more generally, in the super-
venience of all valuational and normative 
properties on naturalistic conditions. This comes 
out in various ways. We think, with R. M. Hare,35 
that if two persons or acts coincide in all descrip-
tive or naturalistic details, they cannot differ in 
respect of being good or right, or any other valu-
ational aspects. We also think that if something is 
"good" - a "good car," "good drop shot:' "good 
argument" - then that must be so "in virtue of" 
its being a "certain way:' that is, its having certain 
"factual properties." Being a good car, say, cannot 
be a brute and ultimate fact: a car is good because 
it has a certain contextually indicated set of prop-
erties having to do with performance, reliability, 
comfort, styling, economy, etc. The same goes for 
justified belief: if a belief is justified, that must be 
so because it has a certain factual, non-epistemic 
properties, such as perhaps that it is "indubita-
ble," that it is seen to be entailed by another belief 
that is independently justified, that it is appropri-
ately caused by perceptual experience, or what-
ever. That it is a justified belief cannot be a brute 
fundamental fact unrelated to the kind of belief it 
is. There must be a reason for it, and this reason 
must be grounded in the factual descriptive prop-
erties of that particular belief. Something like 
this, I think, is what we believe. 
Two important themes underlie these convic-
tions: first, values, though perhaps not reducible 
to facts, must be "consistent" with them in that 
objects that are indiscernible in regard to fact 
must be indiscernible in regard to value; second, 
there must be nonvaluational "reasons" or 
"grounds" for the attribution of values, and these 
Notes 
In making these remarks I am only repeating 
the familiar textbook history of philosophy; 
however, what our textbooks say about the 
history of a philosophical concept has much 
to do with our understanding of that concept. 
"reasons" or "grounds" must be generalizable -
that is, they are covered by rules or norms. These 
two ideas correspond to "weak supervenience" 
and "strong supervenience" that I have discussed 
elsewhere.36 Belief in the supervenience of value 
upon fact, arguably, is fundamental to the very 
concepts of value and valuation.37 Any valuational 
concept, to be significant, must be governed by a 
set of criteria, and these criteria must ultimately 
rest on factual characteristics and relationships of 
objects and events being evaluated. There is 
something deeply incoherent about the idea of an 
infinitely descending series of valuational con-
cepts, each depending on the one below it as its 
criterion of application.38 
It seems to me, therefore, that epistemological 
supervenience is what underlies our belief in the 
possibility of normative epistemology, and that 
we do not need new inspirations from the sci-
ences to acknowledge the existence of naturalistic 
criteria for epistemic and other valuational con-
cepts. The case of normative ethics is entirely par-
allel: belief in the possibility of normative ethics is 
rooted in the belief that moral properties and 
relations are supervenient upon nonmoral ones. 
Unless we are prepared to disown normative 
ethics as a viable philosophical inquiry, we had 
better recognize normative epistemology as one, 
tOO.39 We should note, too, that epistemology is 
likely to parallel normative ethics in regard to the 
degree to which scientific results are relevant or 
useful to its development.4o Saying this of course 
leaves large room for disagreement concerning 
how relevant and useful, if at all, empirical psy-
chology of human motivation and action can be 
to the development and confirmation of norma-
tive ethical theories:l In any event, once the nor-
mativity of epistemology is clearly taken note of, 
it is no surprise that epistemology and normative 
ethics share the same metaphilosophical fate. 
Naturalized epistemology makes no more, and no 
less, sense than naturalized normative ethics.42 
2 Goldman 1979 explicitly states this require-
ment as a desideratum of his own analysis of 
justified belief. Chisholm's 1977 definition of 
"being evident" does not satisfy this require-
ment as it rests ultimately on an unanalyzed 

WHAT IS "NATURALIZED EPISTEMOLOGY"? 
549 
epistemic concept of one belief being more 
reasonable than another. What does the real 
"criteriological" work for Chisholm is his 
"principles of evidence." See especially (A) 
on p. 73 of his 1977, which can usefully be 
regarded as an attempt to provide nonnor-
mative, descriptive conditions for certain 
types of justified beliefs. 
3 
The basic idea of this stronger requirement 
seems implicit in Firth's notion of "warrant-
increasing property" in his 1964. It seems 
that Alston 1976 has something similar in 
mind when he says, "like any evaluative 
property, epistemic justification is a super-
venient property, the application of which is 
based on more fundamental properties" (at 
this point Alston refers to Firth's paper cited 
above) (the quoted remark occurs on p. 170). 
Although Alston doesn't further explain 
what he means by "more fundamental prop-
erties," the context makes it plausible to sup-
pose that he has in mind non-normative, 
descriptive properties. See further below for 
more discussion. 
4 See Chisholm 1977, p. 14. Here Chisholm 
refers to a "person's responsibility or duty 
qua intellectual being:' 
5 This term was used by Ayer 1956 to charac-
terize the difference between lucky guessing 
and knowing, p. 33. 
6 Notably by Chisholm in 1977, 1st edn, ch. 4. 
7 See Carnap, 1936. We should also note the 
presence of a strong coherentist streak 
among some positivists; see, e.g., Hempel 
1935. 
8 In Quine 1969; see this vol., ch. 39. Also see 
his 1960; 1973; 1970; and especially 1975. 
See Schmitt's excellent bibliography on nat-
uralistic epistemology in Kornblith 1985. 
9 Or conformational relations, given the 
Positivists' verificationist theory of meaning. 
10 
I know of no serious defense of it since Ayer's 
1940. 
11 
See Kornblith 1985a, pp. 19-20. 
12 
Ibid., p. 2I. 
13 
To use an expression of Rorty's 1979, p. II. 
14 
Sober 1978 makes a similar point: ''And on 
the question of whether the failure of a foun-
dationalist programme shows that questions 
of justification cannot be answered, it is 
worth noting that Quine's advice 'Since 
Carnap's foundationalism failed, why not 
settle for psychology' carries weight only to 
the degree that Carnapian epistemology 
exhausts the possibilities of epistemology." 
15 
See Chisholm 1977, ch. 4. 
16 
"If we are seeking only the causal mecha-
nism of our knowledge of the external world, 
and not a justification of that knowledge in 
terms prior to science ... " Quine 1970, p. 2. 
17 
Ibid., p. 75. Emphasis added. 
18 
Ibid., p. 78. Emphasis added. 
19 
Ibid., p. 83. Emphasis added. 
20 
But aren't there those who advocate a "causal 
theory" of evidence or justification? I want 
to make two brief points about this. First, the 
nomological or causal input-output rela-
tions are not in themselves evidential rela-
tions, whether these latter are understood 
causally or otherwise. Second, a causal theory 
of evidence attempts to state criteria for "e is 
evidence for h" in causal terms; even if this is 
successful, it does not necessarily give us a 
causal "definition" or "reduction" of the con-
cept of evidence. For more details see further 
below. 
21 
I am not saying that Quine is under any illu-
sion on this point. My remarks are directed 
rather at those who endorse Quine without, 
it seems, a clear appreciation of what is 
involved. 
22 
Here I am drawing chiefly on Davidson's 
writings on radical interpretation. See Essays 
9, 10, and 11 in his 1984. See also Lewis 
1974. 
23 
Robert Audi suggested this as a possible 
objection. 
24 
For some considerations tending to show 
that these correlations cannot be lawlike, see 
my 1985. 
25 
For a more sympathetic account of Quine 
than mine, see Kornblith's introductory 
essay in his 1985. 
26 
See, for more details, Goldman 1986. 
27 
Kitcher 1983, p. 14. 
28 
Ibid. 
29 
Ibid., p. 13. I should note that Kitcher con-
siders the apsychologistic approach to be an 
aberration of the twentieth-century episte-
mology, as represented by philosophers like 
Russell, Moore, C. I. Lewis, and Chisholm, 
rather than an historical characteristic of the 

550 
JAEGWON KIM 
Cartesian tradition. Kornblith 1982 gives an 
analogous characterization of the two 
approaches to justification; he associates 
"justification-conferring processes" with the 
psychologistic approach and "epistemic 
rules" with the apsychologistic approach. 
30 
See Goldman 1979. 
31 
Armstrong 1973, p. 166. 
32 
The aptness of this characterization of the 
"apsychologistic" approach for philosophers 
like Russell, Chisholm, Lehrer, Pollock, etc. 
can be debated. Also, there is the issue of 
"internalism" vs. "externalism" concerning 
justification, which I believe must be distin-
guished from the psychologistic vs. apsycho-
logistic division. 
33 
Moore, 1942, p. 588. 
34 
Rorty's claim, which plays a prominent role 
in his arguments against traditional episte-
mology, that Locke and other modern epis-
temologists conflated the normative concept 
of justification with causal-mechanical con-
cepts is itself based, I believe, on a conflation 
of just the kind I am describing here. See 
Rorty, 1979, pp. 139ff. Again, the critical 
conflation consists in not seeing that the 
view, which I believe is correct, that epis-
temic justification, like any other normative 
concept, must have factual, naturalistic cri-
teria, is entirely consistent with the rejection 
of the doctrine, which I think is incorrect, 
that justification is, or is reducible to, a natu-
ralistic-nonnormative concept. 
35 
Hare 1952, p. 145. 
36 
See Kim 1984. 
37 
Sosa, too, considers epistemological super-
venience as a special case of the superveni-
ence of valuational properties on naturalistic 
conditions in his 1980, especially p. 551. See 
also Van Cleve's instructive discussion in his 
1985, especially, pp. 97-9. 
References 
Alston, 
William, 
1976. 
"Two 
Types 
of 
Foundationalism;' Journal of Philosophy 73, 
pp.165-85. 
Armstrong, David M., 1973. Truth, Belief and 
Knowledge (London: Cambridge University 
Press). 
38 
Perhaps one could avoid this kind of criteri-
ological regress by embracing directly appre-
hended valuational properties (as in ethical 
intuitionism) on the basis of which criteria 
for other valuational properties could be 
formulated. The denial of the supervenience 
of valuational concepts on factual character-
istics, however, would sever the essential 
connection between value and fact on which, 
it seems, the whole point of our valuational 
activities depends. In the absence of such 
supervenience, the very notion of valuation 
would lose its significance and relevance. 
The elaboration of these points, however, 
would have to wait for another occasion; but 
see Van Cleve's paper cited in the preceding 
note for more details. 
39 
Quine will not disagree with this: he will 
"naturalize" them both. For his views on 
values see 1978. For a discussion of the rela-
tionship between epistemic and ethical con-
cepts see Firth 1978. 
40 
For discussions of this and related issues see 
Goldman 1986. 
41 
For a detailed development of a normative 
ethical theory that exemplifies the view that 
it is crucially relevant, see Brandt 1979. 
42 
An earlier version of this paper was read at a 
meeting of the Korean Society for Analytic 
Philosophy in 1984 in Seoul. An expanded 
version was presented at a symposium at the 
Western Division meetings of the American 
Philosophical Association in April, 1985, and 
at the epistemology conference at Brown 
University in honor of Roderick Chisholm 
in 1986. I am grateful to Richard Foley and 
Robert Audi who presented helpful com-
ments at the APA session and the Chisholm 
Conference respectively. I am also indebted 
to Terence Horgan and Robert Meyers for 
helpful comments and suggestions. 
Ayer, A. J., 1940. The Foundations of Empirical 
Knowledge (London: Macmillan). 
--,1956. The Problem of Knowledge (London: 
Penguin Books). 
Brandt, Richard, 1979. A Theory of the Good and 
the Right (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 

WHAT IS "NATURALIZED EPISTEMOLOGY"? 
551 
Carnap, Rudolf, 1936. "Testability and Meaning," 
Philosophy of Science 3. 
Chisholm, Roderick M., 
1977. 
Theory of 
Knowledge, 2nd edn (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall). 
Davidson, Donald, 1984. Inquiries into Truth and 
Interpretation (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Firth, Roderick, 1964. "Coherence, Certainty, and 
Epistemic Priority;' Journal of Philosophy 61, 
pp.545-57. 
--, 1978. "Are Epistemic Concepts Reducible 
to Ethical Concepts?" in A. I. Goldman and 
J. Kim (eds), Values and Morals (Dordrecht: 
Reidel). 
Goldman, Alvin 1.,1979. "What Is Justified Belief?" 
this vol., ch. 26. 
--, 1986.EpistemologyandCognition (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press). 
Hare, R. M., 1952. The Language of Morals 
(London: Oxford University Press). 
Hempel, Carl G., 1935. "Some Remarks on 'Facts' 
and Propositions," Analysis 2, pp. 93-6. 
Kim, Jaegwon, 1984. "Concepts of Supervenience;' 
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 45, 
pp.153-76. 
--, 1985. "Psychophysical Laws;' in Ernest 
LePore and Brian McLaughlin (eds), Actions 
and Events: Perspectives on the Philosophy of 
Donald Davidson (Oxford: Basil Blackwell). 
Kitcher, Philip, 1983. The Nature of Mathematical 
Knowledge (New York: Oxford University 
Press). 
Kornblith, Hilary, 1982. "The Psychological Turn;' 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy 60, pp. 
238-53. 
--,1985. "What Is Naturalistic Epistemology?" 
in 
Hilary 
Kornblith 
(ed.), Naturalizing 
Epistemology (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press). 
--, 1985a.NaturalizingEpistemology( Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press). 
Lewis, David, 1974. "Radical Interpretation," 
Synthese 27, pp. 331-44. 
Moore, G. E., 1942. "A Reply to My Critics;' in 
P. A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy of G. E. 
Moore (Chicago & Evanston: Open Court). 
Quine, W. V., 1960. Word and Object (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press). 
--, 1969. Ontological Relativity and Other 
Essays 
(New York: 
Columbia University 
Press). 
--, 1970. "Grades of Theoreticity;' in L. Foster 
and J. W. Swanson (eds), Experience and Theory 
(Amherst, MA: University of Massachusetts 
Press). 
--, 1973. The Roots of Reference (La Salle, IL: 
Open Court). 
--,1975. "The Nature of Natural Knowledge;' 
in Samuel Guttenplan (ed.), Mind and 
Language (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
--, 1978. "The Nature of Moral Values," in 
Alvin I. Goldman and Jaegwon Kim (eds), 
Values and Morals (Dordrecht: Reidel). 
Rorty, Richard, 1979. Philosophy and the Mirror 
Of Nature (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press). 
Schmitt, Frederick, 1985. Bibliography, in Hilary 
Kornblith (ed.), Naturalizing Epistemology. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
Sober, Elliott, 1978. "Psychologism;' Journal of 
Theory of Social Behavior 8, pp. 165-9l. 
Sosa, 
Ernest, 
1980. "The Foundations of 
Foundationalism;' Nous 14, pp. 547-64. 
Van Cleve, James, 1985. "Epistemic Supervenience 
and the Circle of Belief;' The Monist 68, pp. 
90-104. 

CHAPTER 41 
Quine as Feminist: The Radical 
Import of Naturalized Epistemology 
Louise M. Antony 
The truth is always revolutionary. 
Antonio Gramsci 
I. Introduction 
Do we need a feminist epistemology? This is a 
very complicated question. Nonetheless it has a 
very simple answer: yes and no. 
Of course, what I should say (honoring a 
decades-old philosophical tradition) is that a great 
deal depends on what we mean by "feminist epis-
temology." One easy - and therefore tempting -
way to interpret the demand for a feminist 
epistemology is to construe it as nothing more 
than a call for more theorists doing epistemology. 
On this way of viewing things, calls for "feminist 
political science;' "feminist organic chemistry," 
and "feminist finite mathematics" would all be on 
a par, and the need for anyone of them would be 
justified in exactly the same way, viz., by arguing 
for the general need for an infusion of feminist 
consciousness into the academy. 
Construed in this way, an endorsement of 
"feminist epistemology" is perfectly neutral with 
respect to the eventual content of the epistemo-
logical theories that feminists might devise. 
Would it turn out, for example, that feminists as a 
group reject individualism or foundationalism? 
Would they favor empiricism over rationalism? 
Would they endorse views that privileged intui-
Originally published in L. Antony and C. Witt (eds), A 
Mind afOne's Own (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1993), pp. 
185-225. 
tion over reason or the subjective over the objec-
tive? We'd just have to wait and see. It must even 
be left open, at least at the outset, whether a femi-
nist epistemology would be discernibly and sys-
tematically different from epistemology as it 
currently exists, or whether there would instead 
end up being exactly the same variety among 
feminists as there is now among epistemologists 
in general. 
Now it might appear that the project of devel-
oping a feminist epistemology in this sense is one 
that we can all happily sign on to, for who could 
object to trying to infuse the disciplines with fem-
inist consciousness? But now I must honor a 
some-what newer philosophical tradition than 
the one I honored earlier, and ask, "We, who?" For 
though the determined neutrality of this way of 
conceiving feminist epistemology - let me call it 
"bare proceduralism" - may give it the superficial 
appearance of a consensus position, it is in fact 
quite a partisan position. Even setting aside the 
fact that there are many people - yes, even some 
philosophers - who would rather be infused with 
bubonic plague than with feminist consciousness, 
it's clear that not everyone is going to like bare 
proceduralism. And ironically, it is its very neu-
trality that makes this an unacceptable reading of 
many, if not most, of the theorists who are cur-
rently calling for a feminist epistemology.l 
To see the sticking point, consider the ques-
tion of whether we should, as feminists, have an 
obligation to support any project whose 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
553 
partiCIpants represent themselves as feminists. 
Should we, for example, support the development 
of a "feminist sociobiology" or a "feminist mili-
tary science," on the grounds that it's always a 
good idea to infuse a discipline, or a theory, with 
feminist consciousness, or on the grounds that 
there are people who are engaged in such projects 
who regard themselves as feminists and therefore 
have a claim on our sympathies? The answer to 
these questions, arguably, is no. Some projects, 
like the rationalization of war, may simply be 
incompatible with feminist goals; and some theo-
ries, like those with biological determinist pre-
suppositions, may be inconsistent with the results 
of feminist inquiry to date. 
Bare proceduralism, with its liberal, all-purpose, 
surely-there's-something-we-can-all-agree-on 
ethos, both obscures and begs the important 
question against those who believe that not all 
epistemological frameworks cohere - or cohere 
equally well- with the insights and aims of femi-
nism. Specifically, it presupposes something that 
many feminist philosophers are at great pains to 
deny, namely the prima facie adequacy, from a 
feminist point of view, of those epistemological 
theories currently available within mainstream 
Anglo-American philosophy. At the very least, 
one who adopts the bare proceduralist stand-
point with respect to feminist epistemology is 
making a substantive presupposition about 
where we currently stand in the process of femi-
nist theorizing. To allow even that a feminist 
epistemology might utilize certain existing epis-
temological frameworks is to assert that feminist 
theorizing has not yet issued in substantive 
results regarding such frameworks. 2 Such a view, 
if not forthrightly expressed and explicitly 
defended, is disrespectful to the work of those 
feminists who claim to have already shown 
that those very epistemological theories are 
incompatible with feminism. 
So we can't simply interpret the question, "Do 
we need a feminist epistemology?" in the bare 
proceduralist way and nod an enthusiastic assent. 
If we do, we'll be obscuring or denying the exist-
ence of substantive disagreements among femi-
nists about the relation between feminism and 
theories of knowledge. One natural alternative to 
the bare proceduralist interpretation would be to 
try to give feminist epistemology a substantive 
sense - that is, take it to refer to a particular kind 
of epistemology or to a particular theory within 
epistemology, one that is specifically feminist. 
But this won't work either, for two good 
reasons. First, there simply is no substantive con-
sensus position among feminists working in epis-
temology, so that it would be hubris for anyone to 
claim that his or her epistemology was the femi-
nist one.3 Second, many feminists would find the 
idea that there should be such a single "feminist" 
position repellent. Some would dislike the idea 
simply for its somewhat totalitarian, "PC" ring. 
(Me, I'm not bothered by that - it seems to me 
that one should strive to be correct in all things, 
including politics.) Some theorists would argue 
that variety in feminist philosophical positions is 
to be expected at this point in the development of 
feminist consciousness, and that various intra-
and inter-theoretic tensions in philosophical 
inquiry reflect unprocessed conflicts among 
deeply internalized conceptions of reality, of our-
selves as human beings, and of ourselves as 
women.4 Still others would see the expectation or 
hope that there will ever be a single, comprehen-
sive, "true" feminist position as nothing but a 
remnant of outmoded, patriarchal ways of 
thinking.5 
Thus, while individual feminist theorists may 
be advertising particular epistemological theories 
as feminist theories, general calls for the develop-
ment of a feminist epistemology cannot be con-
strued as advocacy for any particular one of these. 
But recognition of this fact does not throw us all 
the way back to the bare proceduralist notion. It 
simply means that in order to decide on the need 
for a feminist epistemology, we need to look at 
details - both with respect to the issues that femi-
nism is supposed to have raised for the theory of 
knowledge and with respect to the specific episte-
mological theories that have been proffered as 
answering to feminist needs. 
This is where the yes-and-no comes in. If we 
focus on the existence of what might be called a 
"feminist agenda" in epistemology - that is, if the 
question, "Do we need a feminist epistemology?" 
is taken to mean, "Are there specific questions or 
problems that arise as a result of feminist analysis, 
awareness, or experience that any adequate epis-
temology must accommodate?" - then I think the 
answer is clearly yes. But if, taking for granted the 
existence of such an agenda, the question is taken 
to be, "Do we need, in order to accommodate 

554 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
these questions, insights, and projects, a specifi-
cally feminist alternative to currently available 
epistemological frameworks?" then the answer, to 
my mind, is no. 
Now it is on this point that I find myself in 
disagreement with many feminist philosophers. 
For despite the diversity of views within contem-
porary feminist thought, and despite the dis-
agreements about even the desiderata for a 
genuinely feminist epistemology, one theoretical 
conclusion shared by almost all those feminists 
who explicitly advocate the development of a 
feminist epistemology is that existing epistemo-
logical paradigms - particularly those available 
within the framework of contemporary analytic 
philosophy - are fundamentally unsuited to the 
needs of feminist theorizing. 
It is this virtual unanimity about the inade-
quacy of contemporary analytic epistemology 
that I want to challenge. There is an approach to 
the study of knowledge that promises enormous 
aid and comfort to feminists attempting to expose 
and dismantle the oppressive intellectual ideol-
ogy of a patriarchal, racist, class-stratified society, 
and it is an approach that lies squarely within the 
analytic tradition. The theory I have in mind is 
Quine's "naturalized epistemology" - the view 
that the study of knowledge should be treated as 
the empirical investigation of knowers. 
It's both unfortunate and ironic that Quine's 
work has been so uniformly neglected by femi-
nists interested in the theory of knowledge, 
because although naturalized epistemology is 
nowadays as mainstream a theory as there is, 
Quine's challenges to logical positivism were rad-
ical in their time, and still retain an untapped 
radical potential today. His devastating critique 
of epistemological foundationalism bears many 
similarities to contemporary feminist attacks on 
"modernist" conceptions of objectivity and scien-
tific rationality, and his positive views on the 
holistic nature of justification provide a theoreti-
cal basis for pressing the kinds of critical ques-
tions feminist critics are now raising. 
Thus my primary aim in this essay is to high-
light the virtues, from a feminist point of view, of 
naturalized epistemology. But - as is no doubt 
quite clear - I have a secondary, polemical aim as 
well. I want to confront head-on the charges that 
mainstream 
epistemology 
is 
irremediably 
phallocentric, and to counter the impression, 
widespread among progressives both within and 
outside of the academy, that there is some kind of 
natural antipathy between radicalism on the one 
hand and the methods and aims of analytic 
philosophy on the other. I believe that this 
impression is quite false, and its promulgation is 
damaging not only to individual feminists -
especially women - working within the analytic 
tradition, but also to the prospects for an ade-
quate feminist philosophy. 
The "bias" paradox 
I think the best way to achieve both these aims -
defending the analytic framework in general and 
showcasing naturalized epistemology in particular -
is to put the latter to work on a problem that is 
becoming increasingly important within feminist 
theory. The issue I have in mind is the problem of 
how properly to conceptualize bias. There are sev-
eral things about this issue that make it particu-
larly apt for my purposes. 
In the first place, the issue provides an exam-
ple of the way in which feminist analysis can gen-
erate 
or 
uncover 
serious 
epistemological 
questions, for the problem about bias that I want 
to discuss will only be recognized as a problem by 
individuals who are critical, for one reason or 
another, of one standard conception of objectiv-
ity. In the second place, because of the centrality 
of this problem to feminist theory, the ability of 
an epistemological theory to provide a solution 
offers one plausible desideratum of a theory's 
adequacy as a feminist epistemology. Last of all, 
because the notions of bias and partiality figure 
so prominently in feminist critiques of main-
stream analytic epistemology, discussion of this 
issue will enable me to address directly some of 
the charges that have led some feminist theorists 
to reject the analytic tradition. 
But what is the problem? Within certain the-
oretical frameworks, the analysis of the notion 
of "bias" is quite straightforward. In particular, 
strict empiricist epistemology concurs with lib-
eral political theory in analyzing bias as the 
mere possession of belief or interest prior to 
investigation. But for anyone who wishes to 
criticize the liberal/empiricist ideal of an "open 
mind," the notion of bias is enormously prob-
lematic and threatens to become downright 
paradoxical. 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
555 
Consider feminist theory: On the one hand, it 
is one of the central aims of feminist scholarship 
to expose the male-centered assumptions and 
interests - the male biases, in other words -
underlying so much of received "wisdom." But on 
the other hand, there's an equally important 
strain of feminist theory that seeks to challenge 
the ideal of pure objectivity by emphasizing both 
the ubiquity and the value of certain kinds of par-
tiality and interestedness. Clearly, there's a ten-
sion between those feminist critiques that accuse 
science or philosophy of displaying male bias and 
those that reject the ideal of impartiality. 
The tension blossoms into paradox when cri-
tiques of the first sort are applied to the concepts 
of objectivity and impartiality themselves. 
According to many feminist philosophers, the 
flaw in the ideal of impartiality is supposed to be 
that the ideal itself is biased: Critics charge either 
that the concept of "objectivity" serves to articu-
late a masculine or patriarchal viewpoint (and 
possibly a pathological one),6 or that it has the 
ideological function of protecting the rights of 
those in power, especially men.7 But how is it pos-
sible to criticize the partiality of the concept of 
objectivity without presupposing the very value 
under attack? Put baldly: If we don't think it's 
good to be impartial, then how can we object to 
men's being partial? 
The critiques of "objectivity" and "impartial-
ity" that give rise to this paradox represent the 
main source of feminist dissatisfaction with exist-
ing epistemological theories. It's charged that 
mainstream epistemology will be forever unable 
to either acknowledge or account for the partial-
ity and locatedness of knowledge, because it is 
wedded to precisely those ideals of objective or 
value-neutral inquiry that ultimately and inevita-
bly subserve the interests of the powerful. The 
valorization of impartiality within mainstream 
epistemology is held to perform for the ruling 
elite the critical ideological function of denying 
the existence of partiality itselp 
Thus Lorraine Code, writing in the APA 
Newsletter on Feminism and Philosophy,9 charges 
that mainstream epistemology (or what she has 
elsewhere dubbed "malestream" epistemologylO) 
has "defined 'the epistemological project' so as to 
make it illegitimate to ask questions about the 
identities and specific circumstances of these 
knowers:' It has accomplished this, she contends, 
by promulgating a view of knowers as essentially 
featureless and interchangeable, and by donning a 
"mask of objectivity and value-neutrality:' The 
transformative potential of feminist - as opposed 
to a malestream - epistemology lies in its ability 
to tear off this mask, exposing the "complex 
power structure of vested interest, dominance, 
and subjugation" that lurks behind it. 
But not only is it not the case that contempo-
rary analytic epistemology is committed to such 
a conception of objectivity, it was analytic episte-
mology that was largely responsible for initiating 
the critique of the empiricistic notions Code is 
attacking. Quine, Goodman, Hempel, Putnam, 
Boyd, and others within the analytic tradition 
have all argued that a certain received conception 
of objectivity is untenable as an ideal of epistemic 
practice. The detailed critique of orthodox 
empiricism that has developed within the ana-
lytic tradition is in many ways more pointed and 
radical that the charges that have been leveled 
from without. 
Furthermore, these philosophers, like many 
feminist theorists, have emphasized not only the 
ineliminability of bias but also the positive value 
of certain forms of it. As a result, the problems 
that arise for a naturalized epistemology are strik-
ingly similar to those that beset the feminist theo-
ries mentioned above: Once we've acknowledged 
the necessity and legitimacy of partiality, how do 
we tell the good bias from the bad bias? 
What kind of epistemology is going to be able 
to solve a problem like this? Code asserts that the 
specific impact of feminism on epistemology has 
been "to move the question 'Whose knowledge are 
we talking about?' to a central place in epistemo-
logical discussion;'ll suggesting that the hope lies 
in finding an epistemological theory that assigns 
central importance to consideration of the nature 
of the subjects who actually do the knowing. 
I totally agree: No theory that abjures empirical 
study of the cognizer, or of the actual processes by 
which knowledge develops, is ever going to yield 
insight on this question. 
But more is required than this. If we as femi-
nist critics are to have any basis for distinguish-
ing the salutary from the pernicious forms of 
bias, we can't rest content with a description of 
the various ways in which the identity and social 
location of a subject make a difference to her 
beliefs. We need, in addition, to be able to make 

556 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
normative distinctions among various process of 
belief-fIxation as well. Otherwise, we'll never 
escape the dilemma posed by the bias paradox: 
either endorse pure impartiality or give up 
criticizing bias. 12 
It is here that I think feminist philosophy 
stands to lose the most by rejecting the analytic 
tradition. The dilemma will be impossible to 
escape, I contend, for any theory that eschews the 
notion of truth - for any theory, that is, that tries 
to steer some kind of middle course between 
absolutism and relativism. Such theories inevitably 
leave themselves without resources for making the 
needed normative distinctions, because they 
deprive themselves of any conceptual tools for 
distinguishing the grounds of a statement's truth 
from the explanation of a statement's acceptance. 
Naturalized epistemology has the great advan-
tage over epistemological frameworks outside the 
analytic tradition (I have in mind specifIcally 
standpoint and postmodern epistemologies) in 
that it permits an appropriately realist conception 
of truth, viz., one that allows a conceptual gap 
between epistemology and metaphysics, between 
the world as we see it and the world as it is.13 
Without appealing to at least this minimally real-
ist notion of truth, I see no way to even state the 
distinction we ultimately must articulate and 
defend. Quine simply, an adequate solution to the 
paradox must enable us to say the following: 
What makes the good bias good is that it facilitates 
the search for truth, and what makes the bad bias 
bad is that it impedes it. 
Now that my absolutist leanings are out in the 
open, let me say one more thing about truth that I 
hope will forestall a possible misunderstanding of 
my project here. I do believe in truth, and I have 
never understood why people concerned with 
justice have given it such a bad rap. Surely one of 
the goals of feminism is to tell the truth about 
women's lives and women's experience. Is institu-
tionally supported discrimination not a fact? Is 
misogynist violence not a fact? And isn't the exist-
ence of ideological denial of the fIrst two facts 
itself a fact? What in the world else could we be 
doing when we talk about these things, other than 
asserting that the world actually is a certain way? 
Getting at the truth is complicated, and one 
of the things that complicates it considerably is 
that powerful people frequently have strong 
motives for keeping less powerful people from 
getting at the truth. It's one job of a critical epis-
temology, in my view, to expose this fact, to make 
the mechanisms of such distortions transparent. 
But if we, as critical epistemologists, lose sight of 
what we're after, if we concede that there's 
nothing at stake other than the matter of whose 
"version" is going to prevail, then our projects 
become as morally bankrupt and baldly self-
interested as Theirs. 
This brings me to the nature of the current 
discussion. I would like to be clear that in 
endorsing the project of fInding a "feminist epis-
temology," I do not mean to be advocating the 
construction of a serviceable epistemological ide-
ology "for our side." And when I say that I think 
naturalized epistemology makes a good feminist 
epistemology, I don't mean to be suggesting that 
the justifIcation for the theory is instrumental. A 
good feminist epistemology must be, in the first 
place, a good epistemology, and that means being 
a theory that is likely to be true. But of course I 
would not think that naturalized epistemology 
was likely to be true unless I also thought it 
explained the facts. And among the facts I take to 
be central are the long-ignored experiences and 
wisdom of women. 
In the next section, I will explain in more detail 
the nature of the charges that have been raised by 
feminist critics against contemporary analytic 
epistemology. I'll argue that the most serious of 
these charges are basically misguided - that they 
depend on a misreading of the canonical figures 
of the Enlightenment as well as of contemporary 
epistemology. In the last section, I'll return to the 
bias paradox and try to show why a naturalized 
approach to the study of knowledge offers some 
chance of a solution. 
II. 
What is Mainstream Epistemology 
and Why is It Bad? 
One difficulty that confronts anyone who wishes 
to assess the need for a "feminist alternative" in 
epistemology is the problem of finding out exactly 
what such an epistemology would be an alterna-
tive to. What is "mainstream" epistemology 
anyway? Lorraine Code is more forthright than 
many in her willingness to name the enemy. 
According to her, "mainstream epistemology:' the 
proper object of feminist critique, is "post -positivist 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
557 
emplflClst epistemology: the epistemology that 
still dominates in Anglo-American philosophy, 
despite the best efforts of socialist, structuralist, 
hermeneuticist, and other theorists of knowledge 
to deconstruct or discredit it."14 
By the "epistemology that still dominates in 
Anglo-American philosophy," Code would have 
to be referring to the set of epistemological theo-
ries that have developed within the analytic 
paradigm, for analytic philosophy has been, in 
fact, the dominant philosophical paradigm in the 
English-speaking academic world since the early 
twentieth century.IS This means, at the very least, 
that the agents of sexism within academic phi-
losophy - the individuals who have in fact been 
the ones to discriminate against women as stu-
dents, job applicants, and colleagues - have been, 
for the most part, analytic philosophers, a fact 
that on its own makes the analytic paradigm an 
appropriate object for feminist scrutiny. 
But this is not the main reason that Code and 
others seek to "deconstruct or discredit" analytic 
epistemology. The fact that the analytic paradigm 
has enjoyed such an untroubled hegemony within 
this country during the twentieth century - the 
period of the most rapid growth of American 
imperial power - suggests to many radical social 
critics that analytic philosophy fills an ideological 
niche. Many feminist critics see mainstream ana-
lytic philosophy as the natural metaphysical and 
epistemological complement to liberal political 
theory, which, by obscuring real power relations 
within the society, makes citizens acquiescent or 
even complicit in the growth of oppression, here 
and abroad. 
What is it about analytic philosophy that 
would enable it to play this role? Some have 
argued that analytic or "linguistic" philosophy, 
together with its cognate fields (such as formal 
linguistics and computationalist psychology), is 
inherently male, "phallogocentric:'16 Others have 
argued that the analytic paradigm, because of its 
emphasis on abstraction and formalization and 
its valorization of elite skills, may be an instru-
ment of cognitive control, serving to discredit 
the perspectives of members of nonprivileged 
groupsY 
But most of the radical feminist critiques of 
"mainstream" epistemology (which, as I said, 
must denote the whole of analytic epistemology) 
are motivated by its presumed allegiance to the 
conceptual structures and theoretical commitments 
of the Enlightenment, which provided the general 
philosophical background to the development of 
modern industrialized "democracies."18 By this 
means, "mainstream" epistemology becomes 
identified with "traditional" epistemology, and 
this traditional epistemology becomes associated 
with political liberalism. Feminist theorists like 
Alison Jaggar and Sandra Harding, who have both 
written extensively about the connection between 
feminist political analysis and theories of knowl-
edge, have encouraged the idea that acceptance of 
mainstream epistemological paradigms is tanta-
mount to endorsing liberal feminism. Jaggar con-
tends that the connection lies in the radically 
individualistic conception of human nature 
common to both liberal political theory and 
Enlightenment epistemology. In a chapter entitled 
"Feminist Politics and Epistemology: Justifying 
Feminist Theory:' she writes: 
Just as the individualistic conception of human 
nature sets the basic problems for the liberal 
political tradition, so it also generates the prob-
lems for the tradition in epistemology that is 
associated historically and conceptually with lib-
eralism. This tradition begins in the 17th century 
with Descartes, and it emerges in the 20th cen-
turyas the analytic tradition. Because it conceives 
humans as essentially separate individuals, this 
epistemological tradition views the attainment 
of knowledge as a project for each individual on 
her or his own. The task of epistemology, then, is 
to formulate rules to enable individuals to under-
take this project with success.19 
Harding, in a section of her book called "A 
Guide to Feminist Epistemologies:' surveys what 
she sees as the full range of epistemological 
options open to feminists. She imports the essen-
tially conservative political agenda of liberal fem-
inism, which is focused on the elimination of 
formal barriers to gender equality, into main-
stream epistemology, which she labels "feminist 
empiricism": "Feminist empiricism argues that 
sexism and androcentrism are social biases cor-
rectable by stricter adherence to the existing 
methodological norms of scientific inquiry:'20 
Harding takes the hallmark of feminist empiri-
cism (which on her taxonomy is the onJy alterna-
tive to feminist standpoint and postmodernist 
epistemologies) to be commitment to a particular 

558 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
conception of objectivity, which, again, is held to 
be part of the l~gacy of the Enlightenment. In her 
view, acceptance of this ideal brings with it faith 
in the efficacy of "existing methodological norms 
of science" in correcting biases and irrationalities 
within science, in the same way that acceptance of 
the liberal ideal of impartiality brings with it faith 
in the system to eliminate political and social 
injustice. 
In Harding's mind, as in Jaggar's, this politi-
cally limiting conception of objectivity is one that 
can be traced to traditional conceptions of the 
knowing subject, specifically to Enlightenment 
conceptions of "rational man:' The message, then, 
is that mainstream epistemology, because it still 
operates with this traditional conception of the 
self, functions to limit our understanding of the 
real operations of power, and of our place as 
women within oppressive structures. A genuine 
feminist transformation in our thinking therefore 
requires massive overhaul, if not outright repu-
diation, of central aspects of the tradition. 
This is clearly the message that political scien-
tist Jane Flax gleans from her reading of feminist 
philosophy; she argues that feminist theory ought 
properly to be viewed as a version of postmodern 
thought, since postmodern theorists and feminist 
theorists are so obviously engaged in a common 
project: 
Postmodern philosophers seek to throw into 
radical doubt beliefs still prevalent in (especially 
American) culture but derived from the 
Enlightenment ... ;21 feminist notions of the self, 
knowledge and truth are too contradictory to 
those of the Enlightenment to be contained 
within its categories. The way to feminist 
future(s) cannot lie in reviving or appropriating 
Enlightenment concepts of the person or 
knowledge.2' 
But there are at least two serious problems 
with this argument. The first is that the "tradi-
tion" that emerges from these critiques is a gross 
distortion and oversimplification of the early 
modern period. The critics' conglomeration of all 
classical and Enlightenment views into a uniform 
"traditional" epistemology obscures the enor-
mous amount of controversy surrounding such 
notions as knowledge and the self during the sev-
enteenth and eighteenth centuries, and encourages 
crude misunderstandings of some of the central 
theoretical claims. Specifically, this amalgamation 
makes all but invisible a debate that has enor-
mous relevance to discussions of bias and objec-
tivity, viz., the controversy between rationalists 
and empiricists about the extent to which the 
structure of the mind might constrain the devel-
opment ofknowledge.23 
The second problem is that the picture of ana-
lytic epistemology that we get once it's allied with 
this oversimplified "traditional" epistemology is 
downright cartoonish. When we look at the actual 
content of the particular conceptions of objectiv-
ity and scientific method that the feminist critics 
have culled from the modern period, and which 
they subsequently attach to contemporary episte-
mology, it turns out that these conceptions are 
precisely the ones that have been the focus of 
criticism among American analytic philosophers 
from the 1950s onward. The feminist critics' 
depiction of "mainstream" epistemology utterly 
obscures this development in analytic epistemol-
ogy, and in glossing over the details of the analytic 
critique of positivism, misses points that are of 
crucial relevance to any truly radical assault on 
the liberal ideology of objectivity.24 
The second problem is partly a consequence of 
the first. The feminist critics, almost without 
exception, characterize mainstream epistemology 
as "empiricist." But one of the chief accomplish-
ments of the analytic challenge to positivism was 
the demonstration that a strictly empiricistic con-
ception of knowledge is untenable. As a result, 
much of analytic epistemology has taken a decid-
edly rationalistic turn. Neglect of the rationalist/ 
empiricist debate and misunderstanding of ration-
alist tenets make the critics insensitive to these 
developments and blind to their implications. 
But the misreading of contemporary episte-
mology is also partly just a matter of the critics' 
failure to realize the extent to which analytic phi-
losophy represents a break with tradition. I do not 
mean to deny that there were any important the-
oretical commitments common to philosophers 
of the early modern period. One such commit-
ment, shared at least by classical rationalists and 
empiricists, and arguably by Kant, was an episte-
mological meta-hypothesis called "externalism:' 
This is the view that the proper goal of epistemo-
logical theory is the rational vindication of human 
epistemic practice. But if externalism is regarded 
as the hallmark of "traditional epistemology:' 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
559 
then the identification of analytic epistemology 
with traditional epistemology becomes all the 
more spurious. 
It was the main burden of Quine's critique 
of positivism to demonstrate the impossibility 
of an externalist epistemology, and his sug-
gested replacement, "naturalized epistemology," 
was meant to be what epistemology could be 
once externalist illusions were shattered. As a 
result of the analytic critique of externalism, 
the notions of objectivity and rationality avail-
able to contemporary analytic epistemologists 
are necessarily more complicated than the tra-
ditional conceptions they replace. This is so 
even for epistemologists who would not iden-
tify themselves as partisans of naturalized 
epistemology. 
In what follows, I'll discuss in turn these two 
problems: first, the mischaracterization of the 
tradition, and then the caricature of contempo-
rary analytic epistemology. 
Rationalism v. empiricism: The importance 
of being partial 
What I want to show first is that the "traditional 
epistemology" offered us by Jaggar and Flax grafts 
what is essentially a rationalist (and in some 
respects, specifically Cartesian) theory of mind 
onto what is essentially an empiricist conception 
of knowledge. This is a serious error. Although 
Jaggar and Flax claim that there are deep connec-
tions between the one and the other, the fact of 
the matter is that they are solidly opposed. The 
conception of objectivity that is ultimately the 
object of radical critique - perfect impartiality -
is only supportable as an epistemic ideal on an 
empiricist conception of mind. Thus, I'll argue, 
the rationalistic conception of the self attacked by 
Jaggar and Flax as unsuitable or hostile to a femi-
nist point of view actually provides the basis for a 
critique of the view of knowledge they want ulti-
mately to discredit. 
Much of what is held to be objectionable in 
"traditional epistemology" is supposed to derive 
from the tradition's emphasis on reason. But dif-
ferent traditional figures emphasized reason in 
different ways. Only the rationalists and Kant 
were committed to what I'll call "cognitive essen-
tialism," a feature of the "traditional" conception 
of mind that comes in for some of the heaviest 
criticism. I take cognitive essentialism to be the 
view (1) that there are certain specific properties 
the possession of which is both distinctive of and 
universal among human beings, (2) that these 
properties are cognitive in nature, (3) that our 
possession of these properties amounts to a kind 
of innate knowledge, and (4) that our status as 
moral agents is connected to the possession of 
these properties. Empiricists denied all these 
claims - in particular, they denied that reason had 
anything but a purely instrumental role to play in 
either normative or nonnormative activity, and 
tended to be opposed to any form of essentialism, 
cognitive or otherwise. 
Although the purely instrumental conception 
of reason is also criticized by feminist scholars, 
cognitive essentialism is the focus of one specific 
set of feminist concerns. It is held to be suspect on 
the grounds that such a doctrine could easily 
serve to legitimate the arrogant impulses of privi-
leged Western white men: first to canonize their 
own culture- and time-bound speculations as 
revelatory of the very norms of human existence, 
and then simultaneously to deny the very proper-
ties deemed "universal" to the majority of human 
beings on the planet. 
Here's how it is supposed to work: Cognitive 
essentialism is supposed to engender a kind of 
fantasy concerning actual human existence and 
the actual prerequisites of knowledge. Because of 
its emphasis on cognitive characteristics, it's 
argued, the view permits privileged individuals to 
ignore the fact of their embodiment, and with 
that, the considerable material advantages they 
enjoy in virtue of their class, gender, and race. 2S 
To the extent that the characteristics they find in 
themselves are the result of their particular privi-
leges instead of a transcendent humanity, the fan-
tasy provides a basis for viewing less-privileged 
people - who well may lack such characteristics -
as inherently less human. But since these char-
acteristics have been lionized as forming the 
essence of moral personhood, the fantasy offers a 
rationale for viewing any differences between 
themselves and others as negative deviations from 
a moral norm. 
Recall, for example, that the particular 
elements of Enlightenment thought that Flax 
finds inimical to feminist theory and praxis are 
the alleged universality, transcendence, and 
abstractness assigned to the faculty of reason: 

560 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
The notion that reason is divorced from "merely 
contingent" existence still predominates in con-
temporary Western thought and now appears 
to mask the embeddedness and dependence of 
the self upon social relations, as well as the par-
tiality and historical specificity of this self's 
existence .... 
In fact, feminists, like other postmodernists, 
have begun to suspect that all such transcenden-
tal claims reflect and reify the experience of a few 
persons - mostly White, Western males. '6 
But moreover, cognitive essentialism is sup-
posed to lead to what Jaggar calls "individual-
ism,"2? the view that individual human beings 
are epistemically self-sufficient, that human 
society is unnecessary or unimportant for the 
development of knowledge. If the ideal "man of 
reason" is utterly without material, differentiat-
ing features, then the ideal knower would appear 
to be pure rationality, a mere calculating mecha-
nism, a person who has been stripped of all those 
particular aspects of self that are of overwhelm-
ing human significance. Correlatively, as it is 
precisely the features "stripped off" the self by 
the Cartesian method that "traditional" episte-
mology denigrates as distorting influences, the 
ideally objective cognizer is also the man of 
reason. Knowledge is then achieved, it appears, 
not by active engagement with one's world and 
with the people in it, but by a pristine transcend-
ence of the messy contingencies of the human 
condition.28 
Lending support to Lorraine Code's grievance 
against "traditional" epistemology, Jaggar .th~s 
insists that it is this abstract and detached mdl-
vidualism that underwrites a solipsistic view of 
the construction of knowledge and precludes 
assigning any epistemological significance to the 
situation of the knower. 
Because it conceives humans as essentially sepa-
rate individuals, this epistemological tradition 
views the attainment of knowledge as a project 
for each individual on his or her own. The task of 
epistemology, then, is to formulate rules to enable 
individuals to undertake this project with 
success.'9 
It is here that the link is supposed to be forged 
between the Cartesian/Kantian conception of the 
self and the particular conception of objectivity -
objectivity as pure neutrality - that is thought to 
be pernicious. 
But the individualism Jaggar takes to unite 
rationalists and empiricists is not in fact a view 
that anyone held. She derives it from a fairly 
common-indeed, almost canonical - misread-
ing of the innate ideas debate. Significantly, Jaggar 
acknowledges the existence of disagreements 
within the early modern period, but avers that 
such issues as divided rationalists from empiri-
cists are differences that make no difference. Both 
were foundationalists, she points out, and though 
the foundation for rationalists was self-evident 
truths of reason and the foundation for empiri-
cists was reports of sensory experience, "in either 
case ... the attainment of knowledge is conceived 
as essentially a solitary occupation that has no 
necessary social preconditions."3o 
The reading, in other words, is that whereas 
the empiricists thought all knowledge came from 
experience, the rationalists thought all knowledge 
came from reason. But the second element of this 
interpretation is simply wrong. It was no part of 
Descartes's project (much less Kant's) to assert the 
self-sufficiency of reason. Note that a large part of 
the goal of the exercise of hyperbolic doubt in the 
Meditations was to establish the reliability of sen-
sory experience, which Descartes took to be 
essential to the development of adequate knowl-
edge of the world. And although he maintained 
the innateness of many ideas, including sensory 
ideas, he carefully and repeatedly explained that 
he meant by this only that human beings were 
built in such a way that certain experiences would 
trigger these ideas and no others.3] 
Furthermore, Descartes himself explicitly 
endorses two of the very epistemic values his 
position is supposed to preclude. Not only does 
he clearly reject the sort of epistemic individual-
ism Jaggar deplores, but he strongly upholds the 
necessity of acquainting oneself with the variety 
of human experience in order to form a just con-
ception of the world. Expressing his contempt for 
the contradictions and sophistries of his learned 
and cloistered teachers, he recounts how, as soon 
as he was old enough to "emerge from the control 
of [his] tutors;' he "entirely quitted the study of 
letters." 
And resolving to seek no other science than that 
which could be found in myself, or at least in the 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
561 
great book of the world [my emphasis l, I employed 
the rest of my youth in travel, in seeing courts 
and armies, in intercourse with men of diverse 
temperaments and conditions, in collecting 
varied experiences, in proving myself in the vari-
ous predicaments in which I was placed by for-
tune, and under all circumstances bringing my 
mind to bear on the things which came before it, 
so that I might derive some profit from my 
experience.32 
And far from recommending the divestiture of 
one's particular concerns as sound epistemic 
practice, Descartes affirms the importance of 
concrete engagement in finding the truth, point-
ing to the degradation of knowledge that can 
result from disinterestedness. 
For it seemed to me that I might meet with much 
more truth in the reasonings that each man 
makes on the matters that specially concern him, 
and the issue of which would very soon punish 
him if he made a wrong judgment, than in the 
case of those made by a man of letters in his 
study touching speculations which lead to no 
result, and which bring about no other conse-
quences to himself excepting that he will be all 
the more vain the more they are removed from 
common sense, since in this case it proves him to 
have employed so much the more ingenuity and 
skill in trying to make them seem probable.33 
The bottom line is that rationalists, Descartes 
especially, did not hold the view that experience 
was inessential or even that it was unimportant; 
nor did they hold the view that the best epistemic 
practice is to discount one's own interests. The 
misreading that saddles Descartes with such views 
stems from a popular misconception about the 
innate ideas debate. 
The disagreement between rationalists and 
empiricists was not simply about the existence of 
innate ideas. Both schools were agreed that the 
mind was natively structured and that that struc-
ture partially determined the shape of human 
knowledge. What they disagreed about was the spe-
cificity of the constraints imposed by innate mental 
structure. The rationalists believed that native 
structure placed quite specific limitations on the 
kinds of concepts and hypotheses the mind could 
form in response to experience, so that human 
beings were, in effect, natively biased toward certain 
ways of conceiving the world. Empiricists, on the 
other hand, held that there were relatively few 
native constraints on how the mind could organize 
sensory experience, and that such constraints as did 
exist were domain-general and content-neutral. 
According to the empiricists, the human mind 
was essentially a mechanism for the manipula-
tion of sensory data. The architecture of the 
mechanism was supposed to ensure that the con-
cepts and judgments constructed out of raw sense 
experience accorded with the rules of logic. This 
did amount to a minimal constraint on the pos-
sible contents of human thought - they had to be 
logical transforms of sensory primitives - but it 
was a highly general one, applying to every sub-
ject domain in precisely the same way. Thus, on 
this model, anyone hypothesis should be as good 
as any other as far as the mind is concerned, as 
long as both hypotheses are logically consistent 
with the sensory evidence.34 This strict empiricist 
model of mind, as it turns out, supports many of 
the elements of epistemology criticized by Code, 
Jaggar, and others (e.g., a sharp observation/ 
theory distinction, unmediated access to a sen-
sory "given:' and an algorithmic view of justifica-
tion). I'll spell this out in detail in the next section. 
For present purposes, however, the thing to note 
is that the model provides clear warrant for the 
particular conception of the ideal of objectivity-
perfect neutrality - that is the main concern of 
Jaggar and the others and that is supposed to 
follow from cognitive essentialism. Here's how. 
Because the mind itself, on the empiricist 
model, makes no substantive contribution to the 
contents of thought, knowledge on this model is 
entirely experience-driven: All concepts and judg-
ments are held to reflect regularities in an indi-
vidual's sensory experience. But one individual 
cannot see everything there is to see - one's expe-
rience is necessarily limited, and there's always the 
danger that the regularities that form the basis of 
one's own judgments are not general regularities, 
but only artifacts of one's limited sample. (There 
is, in other words, a massive restriction-of-range 
problem for empiricists.) The question then arises 
how one can tell whether the patterns one per-
ceives are present in nature generally, or are just 
artifacts of one's idiosyncratic perspective. 
The empiricists' answer to this question is that 
one can gauge the general validity of one's judg-
ments by the degree to which they engender 

562 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
reliable expectations about sensory experience. 
But although this answer addresses the problem 
of how to tell whether one's judgments are good 
or bad, it doesn't address the problem of how to 
get good judgments in the first place. Getting 
good judgments means getting good data - that 
is, exposing oneself to patterns of sensations that 
are representative of the objective distribution of 
sensory qualities throughout nature. 
This idea immediately gives rise to a certain 
ideal (some would say fantasy) of epistemic loca-
tion - the best spot from which to make judg-
ments would be that spot which is least particular. 
Sound epistemic practice then becomes a matter 
of constantly trying to maneuver oneself into 
such a location - trying to find a place (or at least 
come as close as one can) where the regularities in 
one's own personal experience match the regu-
larities in the world at large. A knower who could 
be somehow stripped of all particularities and 
idiosyncrasies would be the best possible knower 
there is. 
This is not, however, a fantasy that would hold 
any particular appeal for a rationalist, despite the 
image of detachment evoked by a cursory reading 
of the Meditations. The rationalists had contended 
all along that sensory experience by itself was 
insufficient to account for the richly detailed body 
of knowledge that human beings manifestly pos-
sessed, and thus that certain elements of human 
knowledge -
what classical rationalists called 
innate ideas - must be natively present, a part of 
the human essence. 
Because the rationalists denied that human 
knowledge was a pure function of the contingen-
cies of experience, they didn't need to worry 
nearly as much as the empiricists did about epis-
temic location. If it is the structure of mind, 
rather than the accidents of experience, that 
largely determines the contours of human con-
cepts, then we can relax about at least the broad 
parameters of our knowledge. We don't have to 
worry that idiosyncratic features of our epistemic 
positions will seriously distort our worldviews, 
because the development of our knowledge is not 
dependent upon the patterns that happen to be 
displayed in our particular experiential histories. 
The regularities we "perceive" are, in large meas-
ure, regularities that we're built to perceive. 
"Pure" objectivity - if that means giving equal 
weight to every hypothesis consistent with the 
data, or if it means drawing no conclusions 
beyond what can be supported by the data - is 
thus a nonstarter as an epistemic norm from a 
rationalist's point of view. The rationalists were in 
effect calling attention to the value of a certain 
kind of partiality: if the mind were not natively 
biased - i.e., disposed to take seriously certain 
kinds of hypotheses and to disregard or fail to 
even consider others - then knowledge of the sort 
that human beings possess would itself be impos-
sible. There are simply too many ways of combin-
ing ideas, too many different abstractions that 
could be performed, too many distinct extrapola-
tions from the same set of facts, for a pure induc-
tion machine to make much progress in figuring 
out the world. 
The realization that perfect neutrality was not 
necessarily a good thing, and that bias and parti-
ality are potentially salutary, is thus a point that 
was strongly present in the early modern period, 
pace Jaggar and Flax. There was no single "tradi-
tional" model of mind; the model that can prop-
erly be said to underwrite the conceptions of 
rationality and objectivity that Jaggar brings 
under feminist attack is precisely a model to 
which Descartes and the other rationalists were 
opposed, and, ironically, the one that, on the face 
of it, assigns the most significance to experience. 
And although it is the cognitive essentialists who 
are charged with deflecting attention away from 
epistemically significant characteristics of the 
knower, it was in fact these same essentialists, in 
explicit opposition to the empiricists, who cham-
pioned the idea that human knowledge was nec-
essarily"partial." 
Hume, Quine, and the break with tradition 
Let me turn now to the second serious problem 
with the feminist criticisms of "mainstream" epis-
temology: To the extent that there really is a "tra-
dition" in epistemology, it is a tradition that has 
been explicitly rejected by contemporary analytic 
philosophy. 
If the rationalists solved one problem by posit-
ing innate ideas, it was at the cost of raising 
another. Suppose that there are, as the rationalists 
maintained, innate ideas that perform the salu-
tary function of narrowing down to a manageable 
set the hypotheses that human minds have to 
consider when confronted with sensory data. 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
563 
That eliminates the problem faced by the empiri-
cists of filtering out idiosyncratic "distortions." 
But now the question is, How can we be sure that 
these biases - so helpful in getting us to a theory 
of the world - are getting us to the right theory of 
the world? What guarantees that our minds are 
inclining us in the right direction? Innate ideas 
lead us somewhere, but do they take us where we 
want to go? 
The rationalists took this problem very 
seriously. A large part of their project was aimed 
at validating the innate constraints, at showing 
that these mental biases did not lead us astray. 
Descartes's quest for "certainty" needs to be 
understood in this context: The method of hyper-
bolic doubt should be viewed not as the efforts of 
a paranoid to free himself forever from the inse-
curity of doubt, but as a theoretical exercise 
designed to show that the contours imposed on 
our theories by our own minds were proper 
reflections of the topography of reality itself. 
It is at this point that we're in a position to see 
what rationalists and empiricists actually had in 
common - not a conception of mind, not a theory 
of how knowledge is constructed, but a theory of 
theories of knowledge. If there is a common thread 
running through Enlightenment epistemologies, 
it is this: a belief in the possibility of providing a 
rational justification of the processes by which 
human beings arrive at theories of the world. For 
the empiricists, the trick was to show how the 
content of all knowledge could be reduced to pure 
reports of sensory experience; for the rationalists, 
it was showing the indubitability of the innate 
notions that guided and facilitated the develop-
ment of knowledge. Philosophers in neither 
group were really on a quest for certainty - all 
they wanted was a reliable map of its boundaries. 
But if one of the defining themes of the 
modern period was the search for an externalist 
justification of epistemic practice, then Hume 
must be acknowledged to be the first postmod-
ernist. Hume, an empiricist's empiricist, discov-
ered a fatal flaw in his particular proposal for 
justifying human epistemic practice. He realized 
that belief in the principle of induction - the 
principle that says that the future will resemble 
the past or that similar things will behave simi-
larly - could not be rationally justified. It was 
clearly not a truth of reason, since its denial was 
not self-contradictory. But neither could it be 
justified by experience: Any attempt to do so 
would be circular, because the practice of using 
past experience as evidence about the future is 
itself only warranted if one accepts the principle 
of induction. 
Hume's "skeptical solution" to his own prob-
lem amounted to an abandonment of the exter-
nalist hopes of his time. Belief in induction, he 
concluded, was a custom, a tendency of mind 
ingrained by nature, one of "a species of natural 
instincts, which no reasoning or process of the 
thought and understanding is able, either to pro-
duce or to prevent."35 For better or worse, Hume 
contended, we're stuck with belief in induction -
we are constitutionally incapable of doubting it 
and conceptually barred from justifying it. The 
best we can do is to explain it. 
Hume's idea was thus to offer as a replacement 
for the failed externalist project of rational justifi-
cation of epistemic practice, the empirical project 
of characterizing the cognitive nature of creatures 
like ourselves, and then figuring out how such 
creatures, built to seek knowledge in the ways we 
do, could manage to survive and flourish. In this 
way, he anticipated to a significant degree the 
"postmodernist" turn taken by analytic philoso-
phy in the twentieth century as the result of 
Quine's and others' critiques of externalism's last 
gasp -logical positivism. 
Before fast-forwarding into the twentieth cen-
tury, let me summarize what I take to be the real 
lessons of the modern period - lessons that, I've 
argued, have been missed by many feminist cri-
tiques of "traditional" epistemology. First, there is 
the essentially rationalist insight that perfect 
objectivity is not only impossible but undesirable, 
that certain kinds of "bias" or "partiality" are nec-
essary to make our epistemic tasks tractable. 
Second, there is Hume's realization that external-
ism won't work, that we can never manage to 
offer a justification of epistemic norms without 
somehow presupposing the very norms we wish 
to justify. See this, if you will, as the beginning of 
the postmodern recognition that theory always 
proceeds from an "embedded" location, that there 
is no transcendent spot from which we can inspect 
our own theorizing. 
The rationalist lesson was pretty much lost 
and the import of Hume's insight submerged by 
the subsequent emergence and development of 
neo-empiricist philosophy. This tradition, which 

564 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
involved primarily the British empiricists Mill 
and Russell, but also Wittgenstein and the Vienna 
Circle on the Continent, culminated in the school 
of thought known as logical positivism.36 The 
positivists' project was, in some ways, an external-
ist one. They hoped to develop criteria that would 
enforce a principled distinction between empiri-
cally significant and empirically meaningless sen-
tences. In the minds of some positivists (Schlick, 
arguably, and Ayer), this criterion would help to 
vindicate scientific practice by helping to distin-
guish science from "metaphysics;' which was for 
positivists, a term of abuse. 
The positivists were perfectly well aware of 
Hume's dilemma about the status of the principle 
of induction - similar problems about even more 
fundamental principles of logic and mathematics 
had come to light since his time. But the positiv-
ists in effect attempted to rehabilitate epistemo-
logical externalism by means of a bold move. 
They took all the material that was needed to 
legitimize scientific practice but that could not be 
traced directly to sensory experience, and rele-
gated it to the conventions of human language. 
This tack had, at least prima facie, some advan-
tages over Hume's nativist move: If our epistemic 
norms are a matter of convention, then (1) there's 
no longer any question of explaining how we got 
them - they're there because we put them there; 
and (2) there's no need to justify them because 
the parameter of evaluation for conventions is 
not truth but utility. 
The positivists thus embarked on a program 
they called "rational reconstruction" -
they 
wanted to show, in detail, how any empirically 
meaningful claim could be reduced, by the suc-
cessive application of semantic and logical rules, 
to statements purely about sensory experience. If 
such reconstructions could be shown to be pos-
sible at least in principle, then all theoretical disa-
greements could be shown to be susceptible to 
resolution by appeal to the neutral court of 
empirical experience. And in all of this, the posi-
tivists were committed to basically the same series 
of assumptions that warranted the view of objec-
tivity that I earlier associated with classical 
empiricism. 
But there were two things absolutely essential 
to the success of this project. First, there had to be 
a viable distinction that could be drawn between 
statements whose truth depended on empirical 
contingencies (the contentful claims of a theory 
that formed the substance of the theory) and 
statements that were true "by convention" and 
thus part of the logical/semantic structure of the 
theory. Second, it would have to be shown that 
the reduction of empirically contentful state-
ments to specific sets of claims about sensory 
experience could be carried out. But in the early 
1950s, Quine (together with Hempel, Goodman, 
Putnam, and others) began producing decisive 
arguments against precisely these assumptions.37 
The ensuing changes in analytic epistemology 
were nothing short of radical. 
Quine's main insight was that individual state-
ments do not have any specific consequences for 
experience if taken individually - that it is only in 
conjunction with a variety of other claims that 
experiential consequences can even be derived. It 
follows from this that no single experience or 
observation can decisively refute any theoretical 
claim or resolve any theoretical dispute, and that 
all experimental tests of hypotheses are actually 
tests of conjunctions of hypotheses. The second 
insight - actually a corollary of the first point -
was that no principled distinction can be drawn 
among statements on the basis of the grounds of 
their truth - there can be no distinction between 
statements made true or false by experience and 
those whose truth value depends entirely on 
semantic or logical conventions. 
The implications of these two insights were 
far-reaching. Quine's arguments against the "two 
dogmas of empiricism" entailed, in the first place, 
that the confirmation relation could not be hier-
archical, as the foundationalist picture required, 
but must rather be holistic. Because theories have 
to face "the tribunal of sensory experience as a 
corporate body" (to use Quine's military-
industrial metaphor), there can be no evidentially 
foundational set of statements that asymmetri-
cally confirm all the others - every statement in 
the theory is linked by some justificatory connec-
tions to every other. 
It also meant that responses at the theoretical 
level to the acquisition of empirical data were not 
fully dictated by logic. If experimental tests were 
always tests of groups of statements, then if the 
prediction fails, logic will tell us only that some-
thing in the group must go, but not what. If logic 
plus data don't suffice to determine how belief is 
modified in the face of empirical evidence, then 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
565 
there must be, in addition to logic and sensory 
evidence, extra-empirical principles that partially 
govern theory selection. The "justification" of 
these principles can only be pragmatic - we are 
warranted in using them just to the extent that 
they work.38 
But to say this is to say that epistemic norms -
a category that must include any principle that in 
fact guides theory selection - are themselves sub-
ject to empirical disconfirmation. And indeed, 
Quine embraces this consequence, explicitly 
extending the lesson to cover not only pragmatic 
"rules of thumb," but to rules of logic and lan-
guage as well. In short, any principle that facili-
tates the development of knowledge by narrowing 
down our theoretical options becomes itself a 
part of the theory, and a part that must be 
defended on the same basis as any other part. So 
much for the fact/value distinction. 
The reasoning above represents another of the 
many routes by which Quine's attack on founda-
tionalism can be connected with his critique of 
the analytic/synthetic distinction, so central to 
positivist projects. With the demonstration that 
any belief, no matter how apparently self-evident, 
could in principle be rejected on the basis of 
experience, Quine effectively destroyed the pros-
pects for any "first philosophy" - any Archimedean 
fixed point from which we could inspect our own 
epistemic practice and pronounce it sound. 
But his critique also pointed the way (as 
Hume's "skeptical solution" did to the problem of 
induction) to a different approach to the theory 
of knowledge. Epistemology, according to Quine, 
had to be "naturalized," transformed into the 
empirical study of the actual processes - not 
"rational reconstructions" of those processes - by 
which human cognizers achieve knowledge.39 If 
we accept this approach, several consequences 
follow for our understanding of knowledge and 
of the norms that properly govern its pursuit. 
The first lesson is one that I believe may be 
part of what the feminist critics are themselves 
pointing to in their emphasis on the essential 
locatedness of all knowledge claims. The lesson is 
that all theorizing takes some knowledge for 
granted. Theorizing about theorizing is no excep-
tion. The decision to treat epistemology as the 
empirical study of the knower requires us to 
presume that we can, at least for a class of clear 
cases, distinguish epistemic success from epistemic 
failure. The impossibility of the externalist project 
shows us that we cannot expect to learn from our 
philosophy what counts as knowledge and how 
much of it we have; rather, we must begin with 
the assumption that we know certain things and 
figure out how that happened. 
This immediately entails a second lesson. 
A naturalized approach to knowledge requires us 
to give up the idea that our own epistemic prac-
tice is transparent to us - that we can come to 
understand how knowledge is obtained either by 
a priori philosophizing or by casual introspection. 
It requires us to be open to the possibility that the 
processes that we actually rely on to obtain and 
process information about the world are signifi-
cantly different from the ones our philosophy 
told us had to be the right ones. 
Let me digress to point out a tremendous irony 
here, much remarked upon in the literature on 
Quine's epistemology and philosophy of mind. 
Despite his being the chief evangelist of the gospel 
that everything is empirical, Quine's own philos-
ophy is distorted by his a prioristic commitment 
to a radically empiricistic, instrumentalist theory 
of psychology, namely psychological behavior-
ism. Quine's commitment to this theory - which 
holds that human behavior can be adequately 
explained without any reference to mental states 
or processes intervening between environmental 
stimuli and the organism's response - is largely 
the result of his philosophical antipathy to inten-
tional objects, together with a residual sympathy 
for the foundationalist empiricism that he him-
self was largely responsible for dismantling. 
Chomsky, of course, was the person most 
responsible for pointing out the in-principle lim-
itations of behaviorism, by showing in compelling 
detail the empirical inadequacies of behaviorist 
accounts of the acquisition of language.") 
Chomsky also emphasized the indefensibility of 
the a prioristic methodological constraints that 
defined empiricistic accounts of the mind, appeal-
ing to considerations that Quine himself mar-
shaled in his own attacks on instrumentalism in 
nonpsychological domains.41 
Chomsky's own theory of language acquisi-
tion did not differ from the behaviorist account 
only, or even primarily, in its mentalism. It was 
also rationalistic: Chomsky quite self-consciously 
appealed to classical rationalistic forms of argu-
ment about the necessity of mental partiality in 

566 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
establishing the empirical case for his strong 
nativism. Looking at the actual circumstances of 
language acquisition, and then at the character of 
the knowledge obtained in those circumstances, 
Chomsky argued that the best explanation of the 
whole process is one that attributes to human 
beings a set of innate biases limiting the kinds of 
linguistic hypotheses available for their consider-
ation as they respond to the welter of data con-
fronting themY 
Chomsky can thus be viewed, and is viewed by 
many, as a naturalized epistemologist par excel-
lence. What his work shows is that a naturalized 
approach to epistemology -
in this case, the 
epistemology of language - yields an empirical 
vindication of rationalism. Since Chomsky's 
pathbreaking critique of psychological behavior-
ism, and the empiricist conception of mind that 
underlies it, nativism in psychology has flour-
ished, and a significant degree of rationalism has 
been imported into contemporary epistemology. 
A casual student of the analytic scene who has 
read only Quine could, of course, be forgiven for 
failing to notice this, given Quine's adamant com-
mitment to an empiricist conception of mind; 
this may explain why so many of the feminist crit-
ics of contemporary epistemology seem to iden-
tify analytic epistemology with empiricism and to 
ignore the more rationalistic alternatives that 
have developed out of the naturalized approach. 
But I think, too, that the original insensitivity to 
the details of the original rationalist/empiricist 
controversy plays a role. Anyone who properly 
appreciates the import of the rationalist defense 
of the value of partiality will, I think, see where 
Quine's rejection of externalism is bound to lead. 
So let's do it. I turn now to the feminist cri-
tique of objectivity and the bias paradox. 
III. 
Quine as Feminist: What Naturalized 
Epistemology Can Tell Us About Bias 
I've argued that much of the feminist criticism of 
"mainstream" epistemology depends on a mis-
reading of both contemporary analytic philoso-
phy, and of the tradition from which it derives. 
But it's one thing to show that contemporary 
analytic philosophy is not what the feminist 
critics think it is, and quite another to show 
that the contemporary analytic scene contains an 
epistemology that can serve as an adequate femi-
nist epistemology. To do this, we must return to 
the epistemological issues presented to us by fem-
inist theory and see how naturalized epistemol-
ogy fares with respect to them. I want eventually 
to show how a commitment to a naturalized epis-
temology provides some purchase on the prob-
lem of conceptualizing bias, but in order to do 
that, we must look in some detail at those femi-
nist arguments directed against the notion of 
objectivity. 
Capitalist science and the ideal of objectivity 
As we've seen, one of the most prominent themes 
in feminist epistemology and feminist philosophy 
of science concerns the alleged ideological func-
tion of a certain conception of objectivity. Many 
feminist critics see a connection between radical 
(i.e., nonliberal) critiques of science and feminist 
critiques of "received" epistemology. Such critics 
take as their starting point the observation that 
science, as it has developed within industrialized 
capitalist societies like the United States, is very 
much an instrument of oppression: Rather than 
fulfilling its Enlightenment promise as a libera-
tory and progressive force, institutionalized 
science serves in fact to sustain and even to 
enhance existing structures of inequality and 
domination.43 
Although all feminists agree that part of the 
explanation of this fact must be that modern sci-
ence has been distorted by the sexist, racist, and 
classist biases it inherits from the society in which 
it exists, feminist theorists divide on the issue of 
whether some "deeper" explanation is required. 
Alison Jaggar's "liberal feminists" and Sandra 
Harding's "feminist empiricists" hold that society 
and science are both potentially self-correcting -
that more equitable arrangements of power and 
more scrupulous enforcement of the rules of fair-
ness would turn science back to its natural 
progressive course. 
But Harding and Jaggar, together with Lorraine 
Code and Evelyn Fox Keller, disagree with this 
liberal analysis. They contend that the modern 
scientific establishment has not simply inherited 
its oppressive features from the inequitable soci-
ety that conditions it. Rather, they claim, a large 
part of the responsibility for societal injustices 
lies deep within science itself, in the conception of 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
567 
knowledge and knowers that underlies "scientific 
method." These critics charge that the very ideals 
to which Western science has traditionally aspired 
- particularly rationality and objectivity - serve 
to sanction and promote a form of institutional-
ized inquiry uniquely suited to the needs of patri-
archy. Thus, it's argued, feminist critique must 
not stop at exposing cases in which science has 
broken its own rules; it must press on to expose 
the androcentric bias inherent in the rules 
themselves. 
Thus Evelyn Fox Keller claims that any cri-
tique that does not extend to the rules of scien-
tific method allies itself with political liberalism 
in virtue of its epistemology. Any such critique, 
she argues, "can still be accommodated within 
the traditional framework by the simple argu-
ment that the critiques, if justified, merely 
reflect the fact that [science 1 is not sufficiently 
scientific." In contrast, there is "the truly radi-
cal critique that attempts to locate androcen-
tric bias ... in scientific ideology itself. The 
range of criticism takes us out of the liberal 
domain and requires us to question the very 
assumptions of rationality that underlie the 
scientific enterprise."44 
All this seems to set a clear agenda for feminist 
philosophers who wish to be part of the struggle 
for a genuinely radical social transformation: If 
one's going to go deeper politically and criticize 
the presuppositions of liberal political theory, 
then one must coordinately go deeper conceptu-
ally and criticize the presuppositions of the epis-
temology and metaphysics that underwrite the 
politics. 
But does this argument work? I think that it 
doesn't. To see why, we need to look more closely 
at the epistemological position that the feminist 
critics take to be allied with liberalism and look in 
more detail at the argument that is supposed to 
show that such a view of knowledge 
IS 
oppressive. 
The "traditional" epistemology pictured in 
the work of Flax, Code, and Jaggar, I've argued, is 
an unvigorous hybrid of rationalist and 
empiricist elements, but the features that are 
supposed to limit it from the point of view of 
feminist critique of science all derive from the 
empiricist strain. Specifically, the view of know 1-
edge in question contains roughly the following 
elements: 
(1) 
it is strongly foundationalist: It is commit-
ted to the view that there is a set of epis-
temically privileged beliefs, from which all 
knowledge is in principle derivable. 
(2) 
it takes the foundational level to be consti-
tuted by reports of sensory experience, and 
views the mind as a mere calculating device, 
containing no substantive contents other 
than what results from experience. 
(3) 
as a result of its foundationalism and its 
empiricism, it is committed to a variety of 
sharp 
distinctions: 
observation/theory, 
fact/value, context of discovery/context of 
justification. 
This epistemological theory comes very close to 
what Hempel has termed "narrow inductivism,"45 
but I'm just going to call it the "Dragnet" theory 
of knowledge. To assess the "ideological poten-
tial" of the Dragnet theory, let's look first at some 
of the epistemic values and attitudes the theory 
supports. 
To begin with, because of its empiricistic foun-
dationalism, the view stigmatizes both inference 
and theory. On this view, beliefs whose confirma-
tion depends upon logical relations to other 
beliefs bear a less direct, less "objective" connec-
tion to the world than reports of observations, 
which are supposed to provide us transparent 
access to the world. To "actually see" or "directly 
observe" is better, on this conception, than to 
infer, and an invidious distinction is drawn 
between the "data" or "facts" (which are incontro-
vertible) on the one hand and "theories" and 
"hypotheses" (unproven conjectures) on the 
other. 
Second, the view supports the idea that any 
sound system of beliefs can, in principle, be 
rationally reconstructed. That is, a belief worth 
having is either itself a fact or can be assigned a 
position within a clearly articulated confirma-
tional hierarchy erected on fact. With this view 
comes a denigration of the epistemic role of 
hunches and intuitions. Such acts of cognitive 
impulse can be difficult to defend "rationally" if 
the standards of defense are set by a foundation-
alist ideal. When a hunch can't be defended, but 
the individual persists in believing it anyway, 
that's ipso facto evidence of irresponsibility or 
incompetence. Hunches that happen to payoff 
are relegated to the context of discovery and are 

568 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
viewed as inessential to the justification of the 
ensuing belief. The distinction between context 
of discovery and context of justification itself fol-
lows from foundationalism: As long as it's possi-
ble to provide a rational defense of a belief ex post 
facto by demonstrating that it bears the proper 
inferential relation to established facts, we needn't 
give any thought to the circumstances that actu-
ally gave rise to that belief. Epistemic location 
becomes, to that extent, evidentially irrelevant. 
Finally, the Dragnet theory is going to lead to 
a certain conception of how systematic inquiry 
ought to work. It suggests that good scientific 
practice is relatively mechanical: that data gather-
ing is more or less passive and random, that 
theory construction emerges from the data in a 
relatively automatic way, and that theory testing 
is a matter of mechanically deriving predictions 
and then subjecting them to decisive experimen-
tal tests. Science (and knowledge-seeking gener-
ally) will be good to the extent that its practitioners 
can conform to the ideal of objectivity. 
This ideal of objective method requires a good 
researcher, therefore, to put aside all prior beliefs 
about the outcome of the investigation, and to 
develop a willingness to be carried wherever the 
facts may lead. But other kinds of discipline are 
necessary, too. Values are different in kind from 
facts, on this view, and so are not part of the confir-
mational hierarchy. Values (together with the emo-
tions and desires connected with them) become, at 
best, epistemically irrelevant and, at worst, distur-
bances or distortions. Best to put them aside, and 
try to go about one's epistemic business in as calm 
and disinterested a way as possible. 
In sum, the conception of ideal epistemic 
practice yielded by the Dragnet theory is precisely 
the conception that the feminist critics disdain. 
Objectivity, on this view (I'll refer to it from now 
on as "Dragnet objectivity"), is the result of com-
plete divestiture - divestiture of theoretical com-
mitments, of personal goals, of moral values, of 
hunches and intuitions. We'll get to the truth, 
sure as taxes, provided everyone's willing to be 
rational and to play by the (epistemically rele-
vant) rules. Got an especially knotty problem to 
solve? Just the facts, rna' am. 
Now let's see how the Dragnet theory of 
knowledge, together with the ideal of objectivity 
it supports, might playa role in the preservation 
of oppressive structures. 
Suppose for the sake of argument that the 
empirical claims of the radical critics are largely 
correct. Suppose, that is, that in contemporary 
US society institutionalized inquiry does func-
tion to serve the specialized needs of a powerful 
ruling elite (with trickle-down social goods per-
mitted insofar as they generate profits or at least 
don't impede the fulfillment of ruling-class objec-
tives). Imagine also that such inquiry is very 
costly, and that the ruling elite strives to socialize 
those costs as much as possible. 
In such a society, there will be a great need 
to obscure this arrangement. The successful 
pursuit of the agendas of the ruling elite will 
require a quiescent - or, as it's usually termed, 
"stable" - society, which would surely be threat-
ened if the facts were known. Also required is 
the acquiescence of the scientists and scholars, 
who would like to view themselves as auto-
nomous investigators serving no masters but 
the truth and who would deeply resent the sug-
gestion (as anyone with any self-respect would) 
that their honest intellectual efforts sub serve 
any baser purpose. 
How can the obfuscation be accomplished? 
One possibility would be to promote the idea that 
science is organized for the sake of public rather 
than private interests. But the noble lie that sci-
ence is meant to make the world a better place is a 
risky one. It makes the public's support for sci-
ence contingent upon science's producing tangi-
ble and visible public benefits (which may not be 
forthcoming) and generates expectations of pub-
licity and accountability that might lead to 
embarrassing questions down the road. 
An altogether more satisfactory strategy is to 
promote the idea that science is value-neutral -
that it's organized for the sake of no particular 
interests at all! Telling people that science serves 
only the truth is safer than telling people that sci-
ence serves them, because it not only hides the 
truth about who benefits, but deflects public atten-
tion away from the whole question. Belief in the 
value-neutrality of science can thus serve the con-
servative function of securing unconditional public 
support for what are in fact ruling-class initiatives. 
Any research agenda whatsoever - no matter how 
pernicious - can be readily legitimated on the 
grounds that it is the natural result of the self-
justifying pursuit of truth, the more or less inevita-
ble upshot of a careful look at the facts. 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
569 
It will enhance the lie that science is objective, 
to augment it with the lie that scientists as indi-
viduals are especially "objective," either by nature 
or by dint of their scientific training. If laypersons 
can be brought to believe this, then the lie that 
scientific practice can transcend its compromised 
setting becomes somewhat easier to swallow. And 
if scientists can be brought to embrace this grati-
fying self-image, then the probability of their 
acquiescence in the existing system will be 
increased. Scientists will find little cause for criti-
cal reflection on their own potential biases (since 
they will believe that they are more able than 
others to put aside their own interests and back-
ground beliefs in the pursuit of knowledge), and 
no particular incentive to ponder the larger ques-
tion of who actually is benefiting from their 
research. 46 
Now in such a society, the widespread 
acceptance of a theory of knowledge like the 
Dragnet theory would clearly be a good thing 
from the point of view of the ruling elite. By 
fostering the epistemic attitudes it fosters, the 
Dragnet theory helps confer special authority 
and status on science and its practitioners and 
deflects critical attention away from the mate-
rial conditions in which science is conducted. 
Furthermore, by supporting Dragnet objectiv-
ity as an epistemic ideal, the theory prepares 
the ground for reception of the ideology of the 
objectivity of science. 
In a society in which people have a reason to 
believe that science is successful in yielding 
knowledge, the Dragnet theory and the ideology 
of objectivity will in fact be mutually reinforcing. 
If one believes that science must be objective to be 
good, then if one independently believes that sci-
ence is good, one must also believe that science is 
objective! The Dragnet theory, taken together with 
propagandistic claims that science is value-
neutral, etc., offers an explanation of the fact that 
science leads to knowledge. Against the back-
ground belief that knowledge is actually struc-
tured the way the Dragnet theory says it is, the 
success of science seems to confirm the ideology. 
We can conclude from all this that the Dragnet 
theory, along with the ideal of objectivity it sanc-
tions, has clear ideological value, in the sense 
that their acceptance may playa causal role in 
people's acceptance of the ideology of scientific 
objectivity. 
But we cannot infer from this fact either that 
the Dragnet theory is false or that its ideals are 
flawed. Such an inference depends on conflating 
what are essentially prescriptive claims (claims 
about how science ought to be conducted) with 
descriptive claims (claims about how science is in 
fact conducted). It's one thing to embrace some 
particular ideal of scientific method and quite 
another to accept ideologically useful assump-
tions about the satisfaction of that ideal within 
existing institutions. 47 
Note that in a society such as the one I've 
described, the ideological value of the Dragnet 
theory depends crucially on how successfully it 
can be promulgated as a factual characterization 
of the workings of the intellectual establishment. 
It's no use to get everyone to believe simply that it 
would be a good thing if scientists could put aside 
their prior beliefs and their personal interests; 
people must be brought to believe that scientists 
largely succeed in such divestitures. The ideologi-
cal cloud of Dragnet objectivity thus comes not 
so much from the belief that science ought to be 
value-free, as from the belief that it is value-free. 
And of course it's precisely the fact that science is 
not value-free in the way it's proclaimed to be that 
makes the ideological ploy necessary in the first 
place. 
If science as an institution fails to live up to its 
own ideal of objectivity, then the character of 
existing science entails nothing about the value of 
the ideal, nor about the character of some imag-
ined science which did live up to it. In fact, notice 
that the more we can show that compromised sci-
ence is bad science (in the sense ofleading to false 
results), the less necessary we make it to challenge 
the Dragnet theory itself. A good part of the radi-
cal case, after all, is made by demonstrating the 
ways in which scientific research has been dis-
torted by some of the very factors a Dragnet epis-
temologist would cite as inhibitors of epistemic 
progress: prejudiced beliefs, undefended hunches, 
material desires, ideological commitments. 
There's no reason, in short, why a Dragnet 
theorist couldn't come to be convinced of the 
radical analysis of the material basis of science. 
Such a person might even be expected to experi-
ence a special kind of outrage at discovering the 
way in which the idea of objectivity is ideologi-
cally exploited in the service of special interests, 
much the way many peace activists felt when they 

570 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
first learned of some of the realities masked by US 
officials' pious avowals of their commitment to 
"human rights" and "democracy." 
A materialist analysis of institutionalized sci-
ence leads to awareness of such phenomena as the 
commoditization of knowledge, the "rationaliza-
tion" of scientific research, and the proletariani-
zation of scientists. Such phenomena make the 
limits of liberal reformism perfectly clear: Not 
even the most scrupulous adherence to prescribed 
method on the part of individual scientists could 
by itself effect the necessary transformations. But 
it's possible for even a Dragnet theorist to 
acknowledge these limits, and to do so without 
giving up the ideal of neutral objectivity. 
I began by considering the claim, defended by 
several feminist theorists, that "traditional" epis-
temology limits the possibilities for exposing the 
machinations of the elite because it endorses the 
rules of the elite's game. On the contrary, I've 
argued; since a big part of the lie that needs expos-
ing is the fact that capitalist science doesn't follow 
its own rules, the task of exposing the ideology of 
scientific objectivity needn't change the rules. A 
radical critique of science and society, even if it 
implicates certain ideals, does not require repudia-
tion of those ideals. 
Naturalized epistemology and the bias 
paradox 
What I think I've shown so far is that if our only 
desideratum on an adequate critical epistemol-
ogy is that it permits us to expose the real work-
ings of capitalist patriarchy, then the Dragnet 
theory will do just fine, pace its feminist critics. 
But I certainly do not want to defend that theory; 
nor do I want to defend as an epistemic ideal the 
conception of objectivity as neutrality. In fact, I 
want to join feminist critics in rejecting this ideal. 
But I want to be clear about the proper basis for 
criticizing it. 
There are, in general, two strategies that one 
can find in the epistemological literature for chal-
lenging the ideal of objectivity as impartiality. (I 
leave aside for the moment the question of why 
one might want to challenge an epistemic ideal, 
though this question will figure importantly in 
what follows.) The first strategy is to prove the 
impossibility of satisfying the ideal - this involves 
pointing to the ubiquity of bias. The second 
strategy is to try to demonstrate the undesirability 
of satisfying the ideal - this involves showing the 
utility of bias. The second strategy is employed by 
some feminist critics, but often the ·first strategy is 
thought to be sufficient, particularly when it's 
pursued together with the kind of radical critique 
of institutionalized science discussed above. Thus 
Jaggar, Code, and others emphasize the essential 
locatedness of every individual knower, arguing 
that if all knowledge proceeds from some partic-
ular perspective, then the transcendent stand-
point suggested by the ideology of objectivity is 
unattainable. All knowledge is conditioned by the 
knower's location, it is claimed; if we acknowl-
edge that, then we cannot possibly believe that 
anyone is "objective" in the requisite sense. 
But the appeal to the de facto partiality of all 
knowledge is simply not going to justify rejecting 
the ideal of objectivity, for three reasons. In the 
first place, the wanted intermediate conclusion -
that Dragnet objectivity is impossible - does not 
follow from the truism that all knowers are 
located. The Dragnet conception of impartiality 
is perfectly compatible with the fact that all 
knowers start from some particular place. The 
Dragnet theory, like all empiricist theories, holds 
that knowledge is a strict function of the contin-
gencies of experience. It therefore entails that dif-
ferences in empirical situation will lead to 
differences in belief, and to that extent validates 
the intuition that all knowledge is partial.48 Thus 
the neutrality recommended by the Dragnet 
theory does not enjoin cognizers to abjure the 
particularities of their own experience, only to 
honor certain strictures in drawing conclusions 
from that experience. Impartiality is not a matter 
of where you are, but rather how well you do 
from where you sit. 
In the second place, even if it could be shown 
to be impossible for human beings to achieve per-
fect impartiality, that fact in itself would not speak 
against Dragnet objectivity as an ideal. Many 
ideals - particularly moral ones - are unattaina-
ble, but that does not make them useless, or reveal 
them to be inadequate as ideals.49 The fact - and I 
have no doubt that it is a fact - that no one can 
fully rid oneself of prejudices, neurotic impulses, 
selfish desires, and other psychological detritus, 
does not impugn the moral or the cognitive value 
of attempting to do so. Similarly, the fact that no 
one can fully abide by the cognitive strictures 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
571 
imposed by the standards of strict impartiality 
doesn't entail that one oughtn't to try. The real 
test of the adequacy of a norm is not whether it 
can be realized, but (arguably) whether we get 
closer to what we want if we try to realize it. 
But the third and most serious problem with 
this tack is that it is precisely the one that is going 
to engender the bias paradox. Notice that the 
feminist goal of exposing the structures of inter-
estedness that constitute patriarchy and other 
forms of oppression requires doing more than 
just demonstrating that particular interests are 
being served. It requires criticizing that fact, 
showing that there's something wrong with a 
society in which science selectively serves the 
interests of one dominant group. And it's awfully 
hard to see how such a critical stand can be sus-
tained without some appeal to the value of 
impartiality. 
A similar problem afflicts the variation on this 
strategy that attempts to base a critique of the 
norm of objectivity on the androcentric features 
of its source. Even if it could be established that 
received epistemic norms originated in the andro-
centric fantasies of European white males (and I 
meant to give some reason to question this in sec-
tion 11), how is that fact supposed to be elabo-
rated into a critique of those norms? All knowledge 
is partial-let it be so. How then does the particu-
lar partiality of received conceptions of objectiv-
ity diminish their worth? 
The question that must be confronted by 
anyone pursuing this strategy is basically this: If 
bias is ubiquitous and ineliminable, then what's 
the good of exposing it? It seems to me that the 
whole thrust of feminist scholarship in this area 
has been to demonstrate that androcentric biases 
have distorted science and, indeed, distorted the 
search for knowledge generally. But if biases are 
distorting, and if we're all biased in one way or 
another, then it seems there could be no such 
thing as an undistorted search for knowledge. So 
what are we complaining about? Is it just that we 
want it to be distorted in our favor, rather than in 
theirs? We must say something about the badness 
of the biases we expose or our critique will carry 
no normative import at all. 
We still have to look at the second of the two 
strategies for criticizing the ideal of objectivity, 
but this is a good place to pick up the question I 
bracketed earlier on: Why might one want to 
challenge an epistemic ideal? If my arguments 
have been correct up to this point, then I have 
shown that many of the arguments made against 
objectivity are not only unsound but ultimately 
self-defeating. But by now the reader must surely 
be wondering why we need any critique of the 
notion of objectivity as neutrality. If radical cri-
tiques of the ideology of scientific objectivity are 
consistent with respect for this ideal, and if we 
need some notion of objectivity anyway, why not 
this one? 
The short answer is this: because the best 
empirical theories of knowledge and mind do not 
sanction pure neutrality as sound epistemic 
policy. 
The fact is that the Dragnet theory is wrong. 
We know this for two reasons: First, the failure of 
externalism tells us that its foundationalist under-
pinnings are rotten, and second, current work in 
empirical psychology tells us that its empiricist 
conception of the mind is radically incorrect. But 
if the Dragnet theory is wrong about the struc-
ture of knowledge and the nature of the mind, 
then the main source of warrant for the ideal of 
epistemic neutrality is removed. It becomes an 
open question whether divestiture of emotions, 
prior beliefs, and moral commitments hinders, or 
aids, the development of knowledge. 
The fact that we find ourselves wondering 
about the value of a proposed epistemic ideal is 
itself a consequence of the turn to a naturalized 
epistemology. As I explained in section II, Quine's 
critique of externalism entailed that epistemic 
norms themselves were among the presupposi-
tions being subjected to empirical test in the 
ongoing process of theory confirmation. This in 
itself authorizes the project of criticizing norms -
it makes coherent and gives point to a project 
which could be nothing but an exercise in skepti-
cism, to an externalist's way of thinking. 
Naturalized epistemology tells us that there is 
no presuppositionless position from which to 
assess epistemic practice, that we must take some 
knowledge for granted. The only thing to do, 
then, is to begin with whatever it is we think we 
know, and try to figure out how we came to know 
it: Study knowledge by studying the knower. Now 
if, in the course of such study, we discover that 
much of human knowledge is possible only 
because our knowledge seeking does not conform 
to the Dragnet model, then we will have good 

572 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
empirical grounds for rejecting perfect objectivity 
as an epistemic ideal. And so we come back to the 
second of the two strategies I outlined for chal-
lenging the ideal of objectivity. Is there a case to 
be made against the desirability of epistemic neu-
trality? Indeed there is, on the grounds that a 
genuinely open mind, far from leading us closer 
to the truth, would lead to epistemic chaos. 
As I said in section II, empirical work in lin-
guistics and cognitive science is making it increas-
ingly clear how seriously mistaken the empiricist 
view of the mind actually is. From Chomsky's 
groundbreaking research on the acquisition of 
language, through David Marr's theory of the 
computational basis of vision, to the work of 
Susan Carey, Elizabeth Spelke, Barbara Landau, 
Lila Gleitman, and others in developmental psy-
chology, the evidence is mounting that inborn 
conceptual structure is a crucial factor in the 
development of human knowledge.so 
Far from being the streamlined, uncluttered 
logic machine of classical empiricism, the mind 
now appears to be much more like a bundle of 
highly specialized modules, each natively fitted 
for the analysis and manipulation of a particular 
body of sensory data. General learning strategies 
of the sort imagined by classical empiricists, if 
they are employed by the mind at all, can apply to 
but a small portion of the cognitive tasks that 
confront us. Rationalism vindicated. 
But if the rationalists have turned out to be 
right about the structure of the mind, it is because 
they appreciated something that the empiricists 
missed - the value of partiality for human know-
ers. Whatever might work for an ideal mind, 
operating without constraints of time or space, 
it's clear by now that complete neutrality of the 
sort empiricists envisioned would not suit human 
minds in human environments. A completely 
"open mind," confronting the sensory evidence we 
confront, could never manage to construct the rich 
systems of knowledge we construct in the short 
time we take to construct them. From the point of 
view of an unbiased mind, the human sensory 
flow contains both too much information and 
too little: too much for the mind to generate all 
the logical possibilities, and too little for it to 
decide among even the relatively few that are 
generated. 
The problem of paring down the alternatives 
is the defining feature of the human epistemic 
condition. The problem is partly solved, I've been 
arguing, by one form of "bias" - native concep-
tual structure. But it's important to realize that 
this problem is absolutely endemic to human 
knowledge seeking, whether we're talking about 
the subconscious processes by which we acquire 
language and compute sensory information, or 
the more consciously accessible processes by 
which we explicitly decide what to believe. The 
everyday process of forming an opinion would be 
grossly hampered if we were really to consider 
matters with anything even close to an "open 
mind." 
This point is one that Quine has emphasized 
over and over in his discussions of the underde-
termination of theory by data. If we had to rely on 
nothing but logic and the contingencies of sen-
sory experience, we could never get anywhere in 
the process of forming an opinion, because we 
would have too many choices. There are an infinite 
number of distinct and incompatible hypotheses 
consistent with any body of data, never mind that 
there are always more data just around the corner, 
and never mind that we're logically free to reinter-
pret the "data" to save our hypotheses. If we really 
had to approach data gathering and theory build-
ing with a perfectly open mind, we wouldn't get 
anywhere. 
This insight is also borne out by the history of 
science. As Thomas Kuhn has pointed out, sci-
ence is at its least successful during the periods in 
its history when it most closely resembles the 
popular models of scientific objectivity. During a 
discipline's "pre-paradigm" phase, when there is 
no consensus about fundamental principles, nor 
even about what to count as the central phenom-
ena, research is anarchic and unproductive. But 
progress accelerates dramatically when a disci-
pline enters its mature period, marked by the 
emergence of a theory - a paradigm - capable of 
organizing the phenomena in a compelling 
enough way that it commands near-universal 
acceptance. 
Kuhn emphasizes that one of the chief benefits 
a paradigm brings with it is a degree of closure 
about foundational issues, instilling in members 
of the community a principled and highly func-
tional unwillingness to reconsider basic assump-
tions. The paradigm not only settles important 
empirical controversies, but also decides more 
methodological matters - what are the acceptable 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
573 
forms of evidence, what is the right vocabulary 
for discussing things, what are the proper stand-
ards for judging research. The fact is that all of 
these matters are disputable in principle - but a 
paradigm relieves its adherents of the considera-
ble burden of having constantly to dispute them. 
But what this means is that the practice and 
attitudes of scientists working within a paradigm 
will systematically deviate from the popular ideal 
of scientific objectivity: They will approach their 
research with definite preconceptions, and they 
will be reluctant to entertain hypotheses that con-
flict with their own convictions. Kuhn's point, 
however, is that the existence of such closed-
mindedness among working scientists - what he 
calls "the dogmatism of mature science" - is not 
to be regretted; that it is actually beneficial to the 
course of scientific development: "Though pre-
conception and resistance to innovation could 
very easily choke off scientific progress, their 
omnipresence is nonetheless symptomatic of 
characteristics upon which the continuing vitality 
of research depends."sl 
Once we appreciate these aspects of mature 
science, we can explain a great deal about how a 
fantasy of the pure objectivity of science can take 
hold independently of any ideological purposes 
such a fantasy might serve. (This is important if 
we want a serious, nuanced story about how ide-
ologies work.) The fact that certain tenets of 
theory are, for all practical purposes, closed to 
debate can render invisible their actual status as 
hypotheses. Deeply entrenched theoretical prin-
ciples, like the laws of thermodynamics or the 
principle of natural selection, become established 
"facts."52 Similarly, the high degree of theoretical 
background required to translate various num-
bers and images into observations or data is for-
gotten by people accustomed to performing the 
requisite inferences on a daily basis. 
Consensus and uniformity thus translate into 
objectivity. The more homogeneous an epistemic 
community, the more objective it is likely to 
regard itself, and, if its inquiries are relatively self-
contained, the more likely it is to be viewed as 
objective by those outside the community. This 
suggests one fairly obvious explanation for the 
general perception that the physical sciences are 
more objective than the social sciences: Sociology, 
political science, economics, and psychology are 
disciplines that still lack paradigms in Kuhn's 
technical sense. Because there is still public debate 
in these fields about basic theoretical and meth-
odological issues, there can be no credible pre-
tense by any partisan of having hold of the 
unvarnished truth. 
The kind of bias that Kuhn is here identifying 
is, of course, different in several important 
respects from the kinds of biases that classical 
rationalists and contemporary cognitive psychol-
ogists are concerned with. For one thing, the 
biases that come with belief in a paradigm are 
acquired rather than innate; for another, there is 
an important social component in one case but 
not in the other. The lesson, however, is still the 
same: Human beings would know less, not more, 
if they were to actualize the Dragnet ideal. 
What all this means is that a naturalized 
approach to knowledge provides us with empiri-
cal grounds for rejecting pure neutrality as an 
epistemic ideal, and for valuing those kinds of 
"biases" that serve to trim our epistemic jobs to 
manageable proportions. But it also seems to 
mean that we have a new route to the bias para-
dox - if biases are now not simply ineliminable, 
but downright good, how is it that some biases 
are bad? 
I'm going to answer this question, honest, but 
first let me show how bad things really are. It's 
possible to see significant analogies between the 
function of a paradigm within a scientific com-
munity, and what is sometimes called a "world-
view" within other sorts of human communities. 
Worldviews confer some of the same cognitive 
benefits as paradigms, simplifying routine epis-
temic tasks, establishing an informal methodol-
ogy of inquiry, etc., and they also offer significant 
social benefits, providing a common sense of 
reality and fostering a functional sense of nor-
malcy among members of the community. 
But what about those outside the community? 
A shared language, a set of traditions and mores, 
a common sense of what's valuable and why - the 
very things that bind some human beings together 
in morally valuable ways - function simultane-
ously to exclude those who do not share them. 
Moreover, human communities are not homoge-
neous. In a stratified community, where one 
group of people dominates others, the worldview 
of the dominant group can become a powerful 
tool for keeping those in the subordinate groups 
in their places. 

574 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
The real problem with the liberal conceptions 
of objectivity and neutrality begins with the fact 
that while they are unrealizable, it's possible for 
those resting comfortably in the center of a con-
sensus to find that fact invisible. Members of the 
dominant group are given no reason to question 
their own assumptions: Their world -view acquires, 
in their minds, the status of established fact. Their 
opinions are transformed into what "everybody" 
knOWS.53 Furthermore, these privileged individu-
als have the power to promote and elaborate their 
own worldview in public forums while excluding 
all others, tacitly setting limits to the range of 
"reasonable" opinion. 54 
Because of the familiarity of its content, the 
"objectivity" of such reportage is never chal-
lenged. If it were, it would be found woefully lack-
ing by liberal standards. That's because the liberal 
ideal of objectivity is an unreasonable one; it is 
not just unattainable, but unattainable by a long 
measure. But because the challenge is only 
mounted against views that are aberrant, it is only 
such views that will ever be demonstrated to be 
"non-objective:' and thus only marginal figures 
that will ever be charged with bias.55 
Lorraine Code makes a similar point about 
the unrealistic stringency of announced stand-
ards for knowledge. 56 She rightly points out that 
most of what we ordinarily count as knowledge 
wouldn't qualify as such by many proposed crite-
ria. I would go further and say that as with all 
unrealistically high standards, they tend to sup-
port the status quo - in this case, received opinion 
- by virtue of the fact that they will only be 
invoked in "controversial" cases, i.e., in case of 
challenge to familiar or received or "expert" opin-
ion. Since the standards are unreasonably high, 
the views tested against them will invariably be 
found wanting; since the only views so tested will 
be unpopular ones, their failure to pass muster 
serves to add additional warrant to prevailing 
prejudices, as well as a patina of moral vindica-
tion to the holders of those prejudices, who can 
self-righteously claim to have given "due consid-
eration" to the "other side:' 
But what are we anti-externalist, naturalized 
epistemologists to say about this? We can't simply 
condemn the members of the dominant class for 
their "bias," for their lack of "open-mindedness" 
about our point of view. To object to the hegem-
ony of ruling-class opinion on this basis would be 
to tacitly endorse the discredited norm of neutral 
objectivity. "Biased" they are, but then, in a very 
deep sense, so are we. The problem with ruling-
class "prejudices" cannot be the fact that they are 
deeply-held beliefs, or beliefs acquired "in 
advance" of the facts - for the necessity of such 
kinds of belief is part of the human epistemic 
condition. 
The real problem with the ruling-class world-
view is not that it is biased; it's that it is false. The 
epistemic problem with ruling-class people is not 
that they are closed-minded; it's that they hold 
too much power. The recipe for radical epistemo-
logical action then becomes simple: Tell the truth 
and get enough power so that people have to 
listen. Part of telling the truth, remember, is tell-
ing the truth about how knowledge is actually 
constructed - advocates of feminist epistemology 
are absolutely correct about that. We do need to 
dislodge those attitudes about knowledge that 
give unearned credibility to elements of the 
ruling-class worldview, and this means dislodg-
ing the hold of the Dragnet theory of knowledge. 
But we must be clear: The Dragnet theory is not 
false because it's pernicious; it's pernicious 
because it is false. 
Whether we are talking in general about the 
ideology of scientific objectivity, or about partic-
ular sexist and racist theories, we must be willing 
to talk about truth and falsity. If we criticize such 
theories primarily on the basis of their ideological 
function, we risk falling prey to the very illusions 
about objectivity that we are trying to expose. I 
think this has happened to some extent within 
feminist epistemology. Because so much of femi-
nist criticism has been oblivious to the rationalis-
tic case that can be made against the empiricistic 
conceptions of mind at work in the Dragnet 
theory, empiricistic assumptions continue to 
linger in the work of even the most radical femi-
nist epistemologists. This accounts, I believe, for 
much of the ambivalence about Dragnet objec-
tivity expressed even by those feminist critics who 
argue most adamantly for its rejection. 
This ambivalence surfaces, not surprisingly, in 
discussions about what to do about bad biases, 
where positive recommendations tend to fall 
perfectly in line with the program of liberal 
reformism. LorraineCode'sdiscussion of stereotypical 
thinking provides a case in point.57 Code emphasizes, 
quite correctly, the degree to which stereotypical 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
575 
assumptions shape the interpretation of experi-
ence, both in science and in everyday life. But 
despite her recognition of the "unlikelihood of 
pure objectivity,"SR the "unattainability of pure 
theory-neutrality,"S9 and her acknowledgment of 
the necessary role of background theory in sci-
ence, her recommendations for reforming every-
day epistemic practice are very much in the spirit 
of liberal exhortations to open-mindedness. She 
sees a difference between a scientist's reliance on 
his or her paradigm, and ordinary dependence on 
stereotypes: 
It is not possible for practitioners to engage in 
normal science without paradigms to guide their 
recognition of problems, and their problem-
solving endeavours. Stereotype-governed think-
ing is different in this respect, for it is both 
possible and indeed desirable to think and to 
know in a manner not governed by stereo-
types.
611 
But it's by no means clear that it is possible. 
I sense that Code has not appreciated the depth 
of human reliance on theories that cannot be 
shown to be "derived from the facts alone." In 
characterizing certain kinds of background belief 
and certain forms of "hasty generalization" as 
stereotypes, she is presupposing a solution to the 
very problem that must be solved: viz., telling 
which of the background theories that we rou-
tinely bring to bear on experience are reliable and 
which ones are not. 
The liberal epistemological fantasy, still some-
what at work here, is that there will be formal 
marks that distinguish good theories from bad. 
The empiricist version of this fantasy is that the 
formal mark consists in a proper relation between 
theory and "fact." In this case, the good theories 
are supposed to be the ones that derive in the 
proper way from the data, whereas the bad ones -
the biases, the prejudices, the stereotypes - are the 
ones that antedate the data. But once we realize 
that theory infects observation and that confir-
mation is a multidirectional relation, we must 
also give up on the idea that the good theories are 
going to look different from the bad theories. 
They can't be distinguished on the basis of their 
formal relation to the "facts," because (1) there 
are no "facts" in the requisite sense, and (2) there 
are too many good biases whose relation to the 
data will appear as tenuous as those of the bad 
ones. 
But what's the alternative? 
A naturalized approach to knowledge, because 
it requires us to give up neutrality as an epistemic 
ideal, also requires us to take a different attitude 
toward bias. We know that human knowledge 
requires biases; we also know that we have no 
possibility of getting a priori guarantees that our 
biases incline us in the right direction. What all 
this means is that the "biasedness" of biases drops 
out as a parameter of epistemic evaluation. 
There's only one thing to do, and it's the course 
always counseled by a naturalized approach: We 
must treat the goodness or badness of particular 
biases as an empirical question. 
A naturalistic study of knowledge tells us 
biases are good when and to the extent that they 
facilitate the gathering of knowledge - that is, 
when they lead us to the truth. Biases are bad 
when they lead us away from the truth. One 
important strategy for telling the difference 
between good and bad biases is thus to evaluate 
the overall theories in which the biases figure. 
This one point has important implications for 
feminist theory in general and for feminist atti-
tudes about universalist or essentialist theories of 
human nature in particular. 
As we saw in section II, much of the feminist 
criticism raised against cognitive essentialism 
focused on the fact that rationalist and Kantian 
theories of the human essence were all devised by 
men, and based, allegedly, on exclusively male 
experience. Be that so - it would still follow from 
a naturalized approach to the theory of knowl-
edge that it is an empirical question whether or 
not "androcentrism" of that sort leads to bad the-
ories. Partiality does not in general compromise 
theories; as we feminists ourselves have been 
insisting, all theorizing proceeds from some loca-
tion or other. We must therefore learn to be cau-
tious of claims to the effect that particular forms 
of partiality will inevitably and systematically 
influence the outcome of an investigation. Such 
claims must be treated as empirical hypotheses, 
subject to investigation and challenge, rather than 
as enshrined first principles. 
So what about universalist or essentialist 
claims concerning human nature? I have argued 
that there really are no grounds for regarding 
such claims as antipathetic to feminist aspirations 

576 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
or even to feminist insights regarding the 
importance of embodiment or the value of 
human difference. Suggestions that essentialist 
theories reify aspects of specifically male experi-
ence, I argued, involve a serious misunderstand-
ing of the rationalist strategy. But notice that even 
if such charges were true, the real problem with 
such theories should be their falseness, rather than 
their androcentrism. A theory that purports to 
say what human beings are like essentially must 
apply to all human beings; if it does not, it is 
wrong, whatever its origins. 
In fact, I think there is excellent evidence for 
the existence of a substantial human nature and 
virtually no evidence for the alternative, the view 
that there is no human essence. But what's really 
important is to recognize that the latter view is as 
much a substantive empirical thesis as the 
Cartesian claim that we are essentially rational 
language-users. We need to ask ourselves why we 
ought to believe that human selves are, at the 
deepest level, "socially constructed" - the output 
of a confluence of contingent factors. 6! 
Another thing that a naturalized approach to 
knowledge offers us is the possibility of an empir-
ical theory of biases. As we've already seen, there 
are different kinds of biases - some are natively 
present, some are acquired. An empirical study of 
biases can refine the taxonomy and possibly tell 
us something about the reliability and the corri-
gibility of biases of various sorts. It may turn out 
that we can on this basis get something like a 
principled sorting of biases into good ones and 
bad ones, although it will be more likely that we'll 
learn that even a "good" bias can lead us astray in 
certain circumstances.62 
One likely upshot of an empirical investiga-
tion of bias is a better understanding of the proc-
esses by which human beings design research 
programs. What we decide to study and how we 
decide to study it are matters in which uncon-
scious biases - tendencies to see certain patterns 
rather than others, to attend to certain factors 
rather than others, to act in accordance with cer-
tain interests rather than others - playa crucial 
role. We can't eliminate the biases - we shouldn't 
want to, for we'd have no research programs left if 
we did - but we can identify the particular empir-
ical presuppositions that lie behind a particular 
program of research so that we can subject them, 
if necessary, to empirical critique. 
One important issue is the saliency of certain 
properties. Every time a study is designed, a deci-
sion is made, tacitly or explicitly, to pay attention 
to some factors and to ignore others. These "deci-
sions" represent tacit or explicit hypotheses about 
the likely connection between various aspects of 
the phenomena under study, hypotheses that can 
be subjected to empirical scrutiny. 
Imagine a study purporting to investigate the 
development of human language by examining a 
sample of two hundred preschoolers. Must the 
sample, to be a valid basis for extrapolation, con-
tain boys and girls? Must it be racially mixed? 
How one answers this question will depend on 
the empirical assumptions one makes about the 
likely connection between parameters like gender 
and race, on the one hand, and the language fac-
ulty on the other. To think that gender or race 
must be controlled for in such studies is to make 
a substantive empirical conjecture - in this case, it 
is to deny the rationalistic hypothesis that human 
beings' biological endowment includes a brain 
structured in a characteristic way, and to make 
instead the assumption that cognitive develop-
ment is sensitive to the kinds of differences that 
we socially encode as gender and race. 
Such an assumption, laid out this baldly, seems 
pretty dubious. Indeed, it's hard to see what such 
an assumption is doing other than reflecting 
sexist, racist, and classist beliefs to the effect that 
social groupings are determined by biological 
groupings. Realizing this is a necessary first step 
to countering the genuinely pernicious "essential-
ist" theories ofJensen, Herrnstein, and the human 
sociobiologists and to exposing the racism and 
sexism inherent in their programs of "research." 
Such "research" is precisely at odds with rational-
ist methodology, which only invokes human 
essences as a way of explaining human common-
alities - and then, only when such commonalities 
cannot plausibly be explained by regularities in 
the environment. 
Consider, for example, the claims that blacks 
are "innately" less intelligent than whites.63 In the 
first place, we must point out, as we do, that race 
is not a biological kind, but rather a social kind. 
That is to say that while there may be a biological 
explanation for the presence of each of the char-
acteristics that constitute racial criteria - skin 
color, hair texture, and the like - the selection of 
those characteristics as criteria of membership in 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
577 
some category is conventionally determined. Here 
is where the empiricist notion of "nominal 
essence" has some work to do: race, in contrast to 
some other categories, is socially constructed. 
The second step is to point out that if such 
classifications as race fail to reflect deep regulari-
ties in human biology, and reflect instead only 
historically and culturally specific interests, then 
there is no reason, apart from racist ones, to inves-
tigate the relation between race and some pre-
sumably biological feature of human beings. 
Again, it takes an extreme form of empiricism to 
believe that brute correlations between one arbi-
trarily selected characteristic and another consti-
tutes science - but even from such a perspective it 
must be an arbitrary choice to investigate one set 
of such correlations rather than another. Why 
intelligence and race? Why not intelligence and 
number of hair follicles? 
It is this point that really gives the lie to 
Herrnstein's repugnant invocation of "scientific 
objectivity" in defense of his racist undertak-
ings.64 The fact that there is no empirical ground-
ing for the selection of race as a theoretical 
parameter in the study of intelligence utterly 
defeats the disingenuous defense that such "sci-
ence" as Herrnstein is engaged in is simply 
detached fact gathering - call in' 'em like he sees 
'em. The decision to use race as an analytical cat-
egory betrays a host of substantive assumptions 
that would be exceedingly hard to defend once 
made explicit. How could one defend the propo-
sition that race and intelligence are connected 
without confronting the embarrassing fact that 
there's no biologically defensible definition of 
"race"? And how could one defend the proposi-
tion that human "mating strategies" will receive 
their explanation at the biological level, without 
having to explicitly argue against the wealth of 
competing explanations available at the social 
and personallintentionallevels?65 
In sum, a naturalized approach to knowledge 
requires us, as feminists and progressives, to be 
critical of the saliency such categories as gender 
and race have for us. The fact that such parame-
ters have been egregiously overlooked in cases 
where they are demonstrably relevant shouldn't 
make us think automatically that they are always 
theoretically significant. The recognition that 
selection of analytical categories is an empirical 
matter, governed by both background theory and 
consideration of the facts, is in itself part of the 
solution to the paradox of partiality. 
The naturalized approach proceeds by show-
ing the empirical inadequacy of the theory of 
mind and knowledge that makes perfect neutral-
ity seem like a good thing. But at the same time 
that it removes the warrant for one epistemic 
ideal, it gives support for new norms, ones that 
will enable us to criticize some biases without 
presupposing the badness of bias in general. The 
naturalized approach can therefore vindicate all 
of the insights feminist theory has produced 
regarding the ideological functions of the concept 
of objectivity without undercutting the critical 
purpose of exposing androcentric and other 
objectionable forms of bias, when they produce 
oppressive falsehoods. 
The End 
I began this essay by asking whether we need a 
"feminist" epistemology, and I answered that we 
did, as long as we understood that need to be the 
need for an epistemology informed by feminist 
insight, and responsive to the moral imperatives 
entailed by feminist commitments. But I've 
argued that we do not necessarily need a concep-
tual transformation of epistemological theory in 
order to get a feminist epistemology in this sense. 
We need, in the first instance, a political transfor-
mation of the society in which theorizing about 
knowledge takes place. We've got to stop the 
oppression of women, eliminate racism, redis-
tribute wealth, and then see what happens to our 
collective understanding of knowledge. 
My bet? That some of the very same questions 
that are stimulating inquiry among privileged 
white men, right now in these sexist, racist, capi-
talist-imperialist times, are still going to be exer-
Clsmg 
the 
intellects 
and 
challenging 
the 
imaginations of women of color, gay men, physi-
cally handicapped high school students, etc. 
I'm not saying that we should stop doing epis-
temology until after the revolution. That would 
of course be stupid, life being short. What I am 
saying is that those of us who think we know what 
feminism is, must guard constantly against the 
presumptuousness we condemn in others, of 
claiming as Feminist the particular bit of ground 
upon which we happen to be standing. We need 

578 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
to remember that part of what unites philoso-
phers who choose to characterize their own work 
as "feminist" is the conviction that philosophy 
ought to matter - that it should make a positive 
contribution to the construction of a more just, 
humane, and nurturing world than the one we 
currently inhabit. 
1 have argued that contemporary analytic 
philosophy is capable of making such a contri-
bution and that it is thus undeserving of the 
stigma "malestream" philosophy. But there's 
more at stake here than the abstract issue of mis-
characterization. Attacks on the analytic tradi-
tion as "androcentric," "phallogocentric," or 
"male-identified" are simultaneously attacks on 
the feminist credentials of those who work 
within the analytic tradition. And the stereotyp-
ing of contemporary analytic philosophy - the 
tendency to link it with views (like the Dragnet 
theory) to which it is in fact antipathetic - has 
Notes 
A possible exception may be Jean Grimshaw, 
who comes closer than any other thinker I've 
encountered to endorsing what I'm calling a 
"bare proceduralist" conception of feminist 
philosophy: "There is no particular view, for 
example, of autonomy, of morality, of self, no 
one characterisation of women's activities 
which can be appealed to in any clear way as 
the woman's (or feminist) view. But 1 think 
nevertheless that feminism makes a difference 
to philosophy. The difference it makes is that 
women, in doing philosophy, have often raised 
new problems, problematised issues in new 
ways and moved to the centre questions which 
have been marginalised or seen as unimportant 
or at the periphery;' From Grimshaw, Philo-
sophy and Feminist Thinking (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1986), p. 260. 
2 Naomi Scheman made this point in a letter to 
members of the Committee on the Status of 
Women of the American Philosophical 
Association in 1988, when she and 1 were 
serving on the committee. Her letter was 
partly a response to a letter of mine raising 
questions about whether our charge as a com-
mittee should include the promotion of "fem-
inist philosophy;' 
turned feminists away from fruitful philosophi-
cal work, limiting our collective capacity to 
imagine genuinely novel and transformative 
philosophical strategies. 
1 acknowledge both the difficulty and the 
necessity of clarifying the implications of femi-
nist theory for other kinds of endeavors. It's 
important, therefore, for feminist theorists to 
continue to raise critical challenges to particular 
theories and concepts. But surely this can be done 
without the caricature, without the throwaway 
refutations, in a way that is more respectful of 
philosophical differences. 
Let's continue to argue with each other by all 
means. But let's stop arguing about which view is 
more feminist, and argue instead about which 
view is more likely to be true. Surely we can trust 
the dialectical process of feminists discussing 
these things with other feminists to yield what-
ever "feminist epistemology" we need. 
3 
For discussions of epistemological frameworks 
available to feminists, see Sandra Harding, The 
Science Question in Feminism, (Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1986), especially 
pp. 24-9; Mary Hawkesworth, "Feminist 
Epistemology: A Survey of the Field;' Women 
and Politics 7 (1987), pp. 112-24; and Hilary 
Rose, "Hand, Brain, and Heart: A Feminist 
Epistemology for the Natural Sciences;' Signs 9, 
11 (1983), pp. 73-90. 
4 
See Mary E. Hawkesworth, "Knowers, 
Knowing, Known: Feminist Theory and 
Claims of Truth," Signs 14, 3 (1989), pp. 
533-57. 
5 See, for example, Sandra Harding: "I have 
been arguing for open acknowledgement, 
even enthusiastic appreciation, of certain 
tensions that appear in the feminist cri-
tiques. 1 have been suggesting that these 
reflect valuable alternative social projects 
which are in opposition to the coerciveness 
and regressiveness of modern science. . .. 
[Sltable and coherent theories are not 
always the ones to be most highly desired; 
there are important understandings to be 
gained in seeking the social origins of insta-
bilities and incoherences in our thoughts 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
579 
and practices -
understandings that we 
cannot arrive at if we repress recognition of 
instabilities and tensions in our thought" 
(Science Question in Feminism, pp. 243-4). 
6 See Naomi Scheman, "Othello's Doubt! 
Desdemona's Death: The Engendering of 
Skepticism;' in Power, Gender, Values, ed. 
Judith 
Genova 
(Edmonton, 
Alberta: 
Academic Printing and Publishing, 1987); 
and also Scheman's essay in this volume. See 
also Evelyn Fox Keller, "Cognitive Repression 
in Physics," American Journal of Physics 47 
(1979), pp. 718-21; and "Feminism and 
Science," in Sex and Scientific Inquiry, ed. S. 
Harding and J. O'Barr (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1987), pp. 233-46, 
reprinted in The Philosophy of Science, ed. 
Richard Boyd, Philip Gaspar, and John Trout 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991). 
7 For example, see Catharine A. MacKinnon, 
Towards a Feminist Theory of the State 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1989). 
8 This is not quite right - the ideology of 
'objectivity' is perfectly capable of charging 
those outside the inner circle with partiality, 
and indeed, such charges are also crucial to 
the preservation of the status quo. More on 
this below. 
9 Lorraine Code, "The Impact of Feminism on 
Epistemology;' APA Newsletter on Feminism 
and Philosophy 88, 
2 (March 
1989), 
pp.25-9. 
10 
Lorraine Code, "Experience, Knowledge, 
and Responsibility;' in Feminist Perspectives 
in Philosophy, ed. Morwenna Griffiths and 
Margaret Whitford (Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press, 1988), pp. 189ff. 
11 
Code,"lmpactofFeminismonEpistemology," 
p.25. 
12 
It might be objected that there is a third 
option - that we could criticize those biases 
that are biases against our interests and val-
orize those that promote our interests. But if 
we are in fact left with only this option, then 
we are giving up on the possibility of any 
medium of social change other than power 
politics. This is bad for two reasons: (1) As 
moral and political theory, egoism should be 
repugnant to any person ostensibly con-
cerned with justice and human well-being; 
and (2) as tactics, given current distributions 
of power, it's really stupid. 
13 
I have defended a kind of non-realist con-
ception of truth, but one which maintains 
this gap. See my "Can Verificationists Make 
Mistakes?" American Philosophical Quarterly 
24, 3 (July 1987), pp. 225-36. For a defense 
of a more robustly realist conception of 
truth, see Michael Devitt, Realism and Truth 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1984). (2nd edn, 1997.) 
14 
Code,"lmpactofFeminismonEpistemology;' 
p.25. 
15 
Significantly, these theories are not all 
empiricist, and the theories that are most 
"post-positivist" are the least empiricist of 
all. I'll have much more to say about this in 
what follows. 
16 
See, e.g., Helene Cixous, "The Laugh of the 
Medusa;' tr. Keith Cohen and Paula Cohen, 
Signs 1,4 (1976), pp. 875-93; Luce Irigaray, 
"Is the Subject of Science Sexed?" tr. Carol 
Mastrangelo Bove, Hypatia 2, 3 (Fall 1987), 
pp. 65-87; and Andrea Nye, "The Inequalities 
of Semantic Structure: Linguistics and 
Feminist Philosophy," Metaphilosophy 18, 
3-4 (July/October 1987), pp. 222-40. I must 
say that for the sweepingness of Nye's claims 
regarding "linguistics" and "semantic theory," 
her survey of work in these fields is, to say 
the least, narrow and out-of-date. 
17 
See, e.g., Ruth Ginzberg, "Feminism, Ratio-
nality, and Logic" and "Teaching Feminist 
Logic," APA Newsletter on Feminism and 
Philosophy 88, 2 (March 1989), pp. 34-42 
and 58-65. 
18 
Note that the term "Enlightenment" itself 
does not have any single, precise meaning, 
referring in some contexts to only the phi-
losophers (and philosophes) of eighteenth-
century France, in other contexts to any 
philosopher lying on the trajectory of natu-
ral-rights theory in politics, from Hobbes 
and Locke through Rousseau, and in still 
other contexts to all the canonical philo-
sophical works of the seventeenth and 
eighteenth centuries, up to and including 
Kant. I shall try to use the term "early 
modern philosophy" to denote seventeenth-
century rationalism and empiricism, but 
I may slip up. 

580 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
19 
In Alison Jaggar, Feminist Politics and Human 
Nature (Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Allenheld, 
1983), p. 355. 
20 
In Harding, Science Question in Feminism, 
p.24. 
21 
Jane Flax, "Postmodernism and Gender 
Relations in Feminist Theory," Signs 12, 4 
(Summer 1987), p. 624. 
22 
Ibid., p. 627. 
23 
Never mind Kant, who, apart from this note, 
I'm going to pretty much ignore. Virtually 
nothing that Flax cites as constitutive of the 
Enlightenment legacy can be easily found in 
Kant. He was not a dualist, at least not a 
Cartesian dualist; his opinions regarding the 
possible existence of a mind-independent 
reality were complicated (to say the least), 
but he clearly thought that it would be 
impossible for human beings to gain knowl-
edge of such a world if it did exist; and the 
reading of the Categorical Imperative - how 
does it go? "Treat others as ends-in-them-
selves, never merely as means"? - that has 
Kant coming out as ignorant or neglectful of 
human difference seems to me to be posi-
tively Orwellian. 
24 
Harding is an exception, since she acknowl-
edges Quine, though nothing after Quine. 
Code does allude to there being some 
changes in mainstream epistemology since 
the heyday of positivism, but she says that 
the changes are not of the right nature to 
license the questions she thinks are central to 
feminist epistemology. The only contempo-
rary analytic epistemologist Code ever cites 
in either of her two books is Alvin Goldman, 
whom she does not discuss. 
This is ironic, because Goldman has been 
one of the chief advocates of a version of 
epistemology called reliabilism, that makes 
the actual circumstances of belief production 
an essential part of their justification. See his 
Epistemology and Cognition (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1986). It is 
also terribly unfair. Goldman takes it to be a 
truism that knowledge has a social compo-
nent and that the study of knowledge 
requires consideration of the social situation 
of the knower: "Most knowledge is a cul-
tural product, channeled through language 
and social communication. So how could 
epistemology fail to be intertwined with 
studies of culture and social systems?" I do 
not believe Goldman deserves the oppro-
brium Code heaps upon him. 
Jaggar, too, acknowledges that positivism 
has lost favor, but says nothing about the 
shape of the theories that have succeeded it. 
See Jaggar, Feminist Politics. 
25 
Cognitive essentialism generally gets associ-
ated with another thesis singled out for criti-
cism - namely, dualism, the view that the 
mind is separate from the body and that the 
self is to be identified with the mind. 
Although dualism is not exclusively a ration-
alist view (Locke is standardly classified as a 
dualist), it is most closely associated with 
Descartes, and it is Descartes's a priori argu-
ment for dualism in the Meditations that 
seems to draw the most fire. Cartesian dual-
ism is seen as providing a metaphysical 
rationale for dismissing the relevance of 
material contingencies to the assessment of 
knowledge claims, because it separates the 
knowing subject from the physical body, and 
because it seems to assert the sufficiency of 
disembodied reason for the attainment of 
knowledge. 
In fact, dualism is a red herring. It's an 
uncommon view in the history of philoso-
phy. Many people classically characterized as 
dualists, like Plato, were surely not Cartesian 
dualists. And on top of that, the dualism does 
no work. Being a dualist is neither necessary 
nor sufficient for believing that the human 
essence is composed of cognitive properties. 
26 
Flax, "Postmodernism," p. 626. 
27 
"Individualism" as Jaggar uses it is rather a 
term of art. It has a variety of meanings 
within philosophical discourse, but I don't 
know of any standard use within epistemol-
ogy that matches Jaggar's. In the philosophy 
of mind, the term denotes the view that psy-
chological states can be individuated for 
purposes of scientific psychology, without 
reference to objects or states outside the 
individual. This use of the term has nothing 
to do with debates in political theory about 
such issues as individual rights or individual 
autonomy. A liberal view of the moral/polit-
ical individual can work just as well (or as 
poorly) on an anti-individualist psychology 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
581 
(such as Hilary Putnam's or Tyler Burge's) as 
on an individualist view like Jerry Fodor's. 
28 
See also Naomi Scheman's essay in this 
volume. 
29 
Jaggar, "Postmodernism;' p. 355. 
30 
Ibid. 
31 
See, for example, the excerpts from Notes 
Directed against a Certain Program, III 
Margaret Wilson, ed., The Essential Descartes 
(New York: Mentor Press, 1969). 
32 
Ibid., p. 112. 
33 
Ibid. One passage from one work should, of 
course, not be enough to convince anyone, 
and Descartes is clearly fictionalizing his 
own history to some extent (like who 
doesn't?). I do not have the space here to 
provide a full defense of my interpretation, 
but I invite you to read the Discourse on your 
own. 
34 
A little qualification is necessary here: The 
empiricist's requirement that all concepts be 
reducible to sensory simples does count as a 
substantive restriction on the possible con-
tents of thought, but it's one which is viti-
ated by the reductionist semantic theory 
favored by empiricists, which denies the 
meaningfulness of any term which cannot 
be defined in terms of sensory primitives. 
See the discussion of this point in Jerry 
Fodor, Modularity of Mind: An Essay on 
Faculty Psychology (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 1983). 
Also, the empiricists did allow a kind of 
"bias" in the form of innate standards of 
similarity, which would permit the mind to 
see certain ideas as inherently resembling 
certain others. This innate similarity metric 
was needed to facilitate the operation of 
association, which was the mechanism for 
generating more complex and more abstract 
ideas out of the sensory simples. But the 
effects of a bias such as this were vitiated by 
the fact that associations could also be forged 
by the contiguity of ideas in experience, with 
the result once more that no effective, sub-
stantive limits were placed on the ways in 
which human beings could analyze the data 
presented them by sensory experience. 
35 
David Hume,An Enquiry Concerning Human 
Understanding (Indianapolis: Hackett, 1977), 
p. 30. For a different assessment of Hume's 
potential contributions to a feminist episte-
mology, see Annette Baier's essay in 
L. Antony and C. Witt (eds),AMind of One's 
Own (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1993). 
36 
I have been much chastised by serious schol-
ars of early-twentieth-century analytic phi-
losophy (specifically Warren Goldfarb, Neil 
Tennant, and Philip Kitcher) for here rein-
forcing the myth that logical positivism was 
a uniform "school of thought." I guess I 
should thank them. The view that I am labe-
ling "positivism" is the usual received view of 
the movement, but it may have belonged to 
only some of the more flatfooted and mar-
ginal members of the group (like A. J. Ayer) 
and certainly was not the view of the most 
important philosopher in the movement, 
Rudolf Carnap. 
Still, the version of positivism I am out-
lining is the version that Quine attributed to 
his predecessors, and the version that he was 
reacting against. Moreover, even if Carnap 
was not an externalist in the sense of seeking 
a metaphysical vindication of scientific prac-
tice (as Michael Friedman argues in "The 
Re-evaluation of Logical Positivism;' Journal 
of Philosophy 88, 10 [October 1991], pp. 
505-19), he still was committed to a sharp 
separation between contentful and merely 
analytic statements, which is enough to gen-
erate the kinds of difficulties that I'm claim-
ing beset positivism generally. My thanks to 
Marcia Homiak for calling my attention to 
the Friedman article. 
37 
Here are some of the most important works: 
W. v. 0. Quine, "Two Dogmas of Empiri-
cism;' reprinted in Quine, From a Logical Point 
of View (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1953); Carl G. Hempel, "Problems and 
Changes III the Empiricist Criterion of 
Meaning," Revue Internationale de Philo-
sophie 11 (1950), pp. 41-63, and "Empiricist 
Criteria of Cognitive Significance: Problems 
and Changes," in Hempel, Aspects of Scien-
tific Explanation and Other Essays in the 
Philosophy of Science (New York: Free Press, 
1965); Nelson Goodman, Fact, Fiction, and 
Forecast 
(Cambridge, 
MA: 
Harvard 
University Press, 1955); and Hilary Putnam, 
"What Theories Are Not;' reprinted in 
Putnam, Mathematics, Matter, and Method: 

582 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
Philosophical Papers, Vol. I (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1975). 
38 
Quine and J. S. Ullian catalog these princi-
ples - which they refer to as the "virtues" of 
hypotheses - in an epistemological primer 
called The Web ofBelief(NewYork: Random 
House, 1970). Quine and Ullian employ a 
strikingly Humean strategy in trying to 
explain the epistemological value of the 
virtues. 
39 
W. V. O. Quine, "Epistemology Naturalized;' 
in Quine, Ontological Relativity and Other 
Essays (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1969), pp. 69-90. 
40 
See Noam Chomsky, "Review of B. F. 
Skinner's Verbal Behavior;' Language 35, 1 
(1959), pp. 53-68. 
41 
See Noam Chomsky, "Quine's Empirical 
Assumptions;' in Words and Objections: 
Essays on the Work of W. V. Quine, ed. D. 
Davidson and J. Hintikka (Dordrecht: D. 
Reidel, 1969). See also Quine's response to 
Chomsky in the same volume. 
I discuss the inconsistency between 
Quine's commitment to naturalism and his a 
prioristic rejection of mentalism and nativism 
in linguistics in "Naturalized Epistemology 
and the Study of Language;' in Naturalistic 
Epistemology: A Symposium of Two Decades, 
ed. Abner Shimony and Debra Nails 
(Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1987), pp. 235-57. 
42 
For an extremely helpful account of the 
Chomskian approach to the study of lan-
guage, see David Lightfoot's The Language 
Lottery: Toward a Biology of Grammars 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1984). 
43 
I take this to be an established fact. There's a 
mountainous body of scholarship on this 
issue, much of it the result of feminist con-
cerns about specific ways in which women 
have been excluded from and damaged by 
institutionalized science. The whole area of 
biological determinist theorists provides an 
excellent case study of the ways in which sci-
ence both supports and is distorted by social 
stratification. Genes and Gender II, ed. by 
Ruth Hubbard and Marian Lowe (New York: 
Gordion Press, 1979), is a collection of now 
classic articles critically examining alleged 
biological and ethological evidence for the 
genetic basis of gender differences. For a 
more current analysis of similar research in 
neurophysiology and endocrinology, see 
Helen Longino, Science as Social Knowledge 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1990), ch. 6. Two excellent general discus-
sions of the interactions among politics, eco-
nomics, ideology, and science as exemplified 
by the growth of biological determinist the-
ories are Stephen Jay Gould, The Mismeasure 
of Man (New York: W. W. Norton, 1981); and 
R. C. Lewontin, Steven Rose, and Leon 
J. Kamin, Not in Our Genes (New York: 
Pantheon Books, 1984). 
44 
Evelyn Fox Keller, "Feminism and Science;' 
in Boyd, Gaspar, and Trout, eds, Philosophy 
of Science, p. 281. In this passage, Keller is 
also remarking on the tendency of (what she 
views as) the liberal critiques to focus on the 
"softer" biological and social sciences, and to 
leave alone the "harder" sciences of math 
and physics. 
45 
Carl R. Hempel, Philosophy of Natural Sci-
ence (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 
1966). See especially pp. lO-18. 
46 
There's a good case to be made that scientists 
actually have disincentives to ponder such 
questions. The structure of incentives in 
academia necessitates rapid generation and 
publication of research, and research requires 
securing long-term funding, usually from a 
government agency or a private corporate 
foundation. Scientific research is thus heav-
ily compromised at the outset, whatever the 
ideals and values of the individual scientist. 
For a detailed discussion of the ways in 
which academic and economic pressures 
systematically erode "objectivity" in science, 
see William Broad and Nicholas Wade, 
Betrayers of the Truth: Fraud and Deceit in 
the Halls of Science (New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1982). 
47 
This follows from a general point empha-
sized by Georges Rey in personal conversa-
tion: It's important in general to distinguish 
people's theories of human institutions from 
the actual character of those institutions. 
48 
This despite the fact that the Dragnet theory 
supports a strong context of discovery/ 
context of justification distinction. On emp-
iricist theories, the justification of an 
individual's belief is ultimately a relation 

QUINE AS FEMINIST 
583 
between the belief and the sensory experi-
ence of that individual. Location matters, 
then, because the same belief could be justi-
fied for one individual and unjustified for 
another, precisely because of the differences 
in their experiences. 
49 
This is not to say that there are no puzzling 
issues about moral ideals that are in some 
sense humanly unattainable. One such issue 
arises with respect to the ideals of altruism 
and supererogation, ideals which it would 
be, arguably, unhealthy for human beings to 
fully realize. See Larry Blum, Marcia Homiak, 
Judy Housman, and Naomi Scheman, 
"Altruism and Women's Oppression," in 
Women and Philosophy, ed. Carol C. Gould 
and Marx W. Wartofsky (New York: G. P. 
Putnam, 1980), pp. 222-47. On the question 
of whether it would be good for human 
beings to fully realize any moral ideal, see 
Susan Wolf, "Moral Saints," The Journal of 
Philosophy 79, 8 (August 1982), pp. 419-39. 
50 
Jerry Fodor, Modularity of Mind (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1983); Noam Chomsky, 
Reflections on Language (New York: Random 
House, 
1975); David Marr, 
Vision: 
A 
Computational Investigation Into the Human 
Representation and Processing of Visual 
Information (San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 
1982); Susan Carey, Conceptual Change in 
Childhood (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1985); Elizabeth Spelke, "Perceptual Know-
ledge of Objects in Infancy:' in J. Mehler, 
E. C. T. Walker, and M. Garrett, eds, Per-
spectives on Mental Representations (Hillsdale, 
NY: Erlbaum, 1982); Barbara Landau and Lila 
Gleitman, Language and Experience: Evidence 
from the Blind Child (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1985); Steven 
Pinker, Learnability and Cognition: 
The 
Acquisition of Argument Structure (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1989). 
51 
Thomas S. Kuhn, "The Function of Dogma 
in Scientific Research:' (1963), reprinted in 
Janet A. Kourany, Scientific Knowledge 
(Belmont, CA: Wadsworth, 1987), pp. 
253-65. Quotation is from p. 254. 
52 
This phenomenon affects even as sensitive 
and sophisticated a critic of science as 
Stephen Jay Gould. Responding to creationist 
charges that evolution is "just a theory:' 
Gould insists: "Well, evolution is a theory. It 
is also a fact. And facts and theories are dif-
ferent things, not rungs in a hierarchy of 
increasing certainty. Facts are the world's 
data. Theories are structures of ideas that 
explain and interpret facts. Facts do not go 
away while scientists debate rival theories for 
explaining them .... [H) uman beings evolved 
from apelike ancestors whether they did so 
by Darwin's proposed mechanism or by 
some other, yet to be discovered." Stephen 
Jay Gould, "Evolution as Fact and Theory," 
Hen's Teeth and Horse's Toes (New York: 
W. W. Norton, 1980), pp. 253-62. Quotation 
from p. 254. 
Gould's point, I believe, is that the world 
is as it is independently of our ability to under-
stand it - a position I share. But if facts are 
part of the mind-independent world, they 
cannot also be "the world's data." "Data" is 
the name we give to that part of our theory 
about which we can achieve a high degree of 
interpersonal and intertheoretic agreement; 
however, there can be as much contention 
about "the data" as about "the theory." Gould 
concedes as much in the next paragraph 
when he writes: "Moreover, 'fact' does not 
mean 'absolute certainty.' ... In science, 'fact' 
can only mean 'confirmed to such a degree 
that it would be perverse to withhold provi-
sional assent.''' If that's what "facts" are, then 
they can and do sometimes "go away while 
scientists debate rival theories for explaining 
them." Ibid., p. 255. 
53 
Notice that we don't have to assume here 
that anyone is knowingly telling lies. Clearly, 
in the real world, members of the ruling elite 
do consciously lie, and they do it a lot. But 
here I'm trying to point out that some of the 
mechanisms that can perpetuate oppressive 
structures are epistemically legitimate. 
54 
See Edward Herman and Noam Chomsky, 
Manufacturing Consent (New York: Pantheon, 
1988); Noam Chomsky, Necessary Illusions: 
Thought Control in Democratic Society 
(Boston: South End Press, 1989), esp. ch. 3 
("The Bounds of the Expressible"); and 
Martin A. Lee and Norman Solomon, 
Unreliable Sources: A Guide to Detecting Bias 
in News Media (New York: Carol Publishing 
Group, 1990). 

584 
LOUISE M. ANTONY 
55 
This explains some of what's going on in the 
so-called "debate" about so-called "political 
correctness." Most of what's going on 
involves pure dishonesty and malice, but to 
the extent that there are some intelligent and 
relatively fair-minded people who find 
themselves worrying about such issues as the 
"politicization" of the classroom, or about 
"ideological biases" among college profes-
sors, these people are reacting to the unfa-
miliarity of progressive perspectives. Those 
foundational beliefs that are very common 
within the academy - belief in a (Christian) 
god, in the benignity of American institu-
tions, in the viability of capitalism - gener-
ally go without saying and are thus invisible. 
Our worldviews are unfamiliar, and so must 
be articulated and acknowledged. Precisely 
because we are willing and able to do that, 
while our National Academy of Scholars col-
leagues are not, we become open to the 
charge of being "ideological." 
It's the very fact that there are so few left-
ist, African-American, Hispanic, openly gay, 
feminist, female persons in positions of aca-
demic authority that accounts for all this 
slavish nonsense about our "taking over." 
56 
Lorraine Code, "Credibility: A Double 
Standard," in Feminist Perspectives, ed. Code, 
Mullett, and Overall, pp. 65-6. 
57 
Ibid. 
58 
Ibid., p. 71. 
59 
Ibid., p. 73. 
60 
Ibid., p. 72. 
61 
Ironically, the preference among many femi-
nist theorists for "thin" theories of the self, 
like postmodernist constructivist theories, 
is itself a vestige of an incompletely exor-
cised empiricism in contemporary feminist 
thought. It is a specifically empiricist position 
that the groupings of objects into kinds 
effected by human cognition are not keyed to 
"real essences;' but are rather reflections of 
superficial regularities in experience that 
persist only because of their pragmatic utility. 
62 
We know, for example, that some of the 
built-in rules that make it possible for the 
human visual system to pick out objects 
from their backgrounds - so-called structure 
from motion rules - also make us subject to 
certain specific kinds of visual illusions. See 
A. L. Yuille and S. Ullman, "Computational 
Theories of Low-Level Vision," in Visual 
Cognition and Action, ed. Daniel N. Osherson, 
Stephen M. Kosslyn, and John M. Hollerbach, 
vol. 2 of An Invitation to Cognitive Science, 
ed. Daniel N. Osherson (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press, 1990), pp. 5-39. 
63 
I am here reiterating the arguments Chomsky 
mounted against Herrnstein's apologia for 
Jensen's theory of race and intelligence. See 
Noam Chomsky, "Psychology and Ideology;' 
reprinted in Chomsky, For Reasons of State 
(New York: Random House, 1973), pp. 
318-69; excerpted and reprinted as "The 
Fallacy of Richard Herrnstein's IQ," in The 
IQ Controversy, ed. Ned Block and Gerald 
Dworkin (New York: Random House, 1976), 
pp.285-98. 
64 
See 
Herrnstein's 
reply 
to 
Chomsky, 
"Whatever Happened to Vaudeville?" in 
Block and Dworkin, eds, IQ Controversy, esp. 
pp.307-9. 
65 
These considerations also help defeat the 
charge, hurled against critics of biological 
determinist theories, that we progressives 
are the ones guilty of "politicizing" the debate 
about nature and nurture. The Herrnsteins 
and E. O. Wilsons of this world like to finesse 
the meticulously arrayed empirical criti-
cisms of their work by accusing their critics 
of the most pathetic kind of wishful think-
ing - "Sorry if you don't like what my utterly 
objective and bias-free research has proven 
beyond a shadow of a doubt. You must try to 
be big boys and girls and learn to cope with 
the unpleasant truth." For examples, see 
Herrnstein, 
"Whatever 
Happened 
to 
Vaudeville?" in Block and Dworkin, eds, IQ 
Controversy; and E. o. Wilson, "Academic 
Vigilantism and the Political Significance of 
Sociobiology;' reprinted in The Sociobiology 
Debate, ed. Arthur L. Caplan (New York: 
Harper and Row, 1978), pp. 291-303. 

CHAPTER 42 
There is at Least One A Priori Truth 
Hilary Putnam 
In a number of famous publications (the most 
famous being the celebrated article "Two Dogmas 
of Empiricism", Philosophical Review, 1951) 
Willard van Orman Quine has advanced the 
thesis that there is no such thing as an (absolutely) 
a priori truth. (Usually he speaks of "analyticity" 
rather than apriority; but his discussion clearly 
includes both notions, and somewhere - I don't 
have the reference at the moment - he has explic-
itly said that what he is rejecting is the idea that 
any statement is completely a priori. For a discus-
sion of the different threads in Quine's argu-
ments, see my paper "Two Dogmas Revisited", in 
Contemporary Aspects of Philosophy, ed. Gilbert 
Ryle, Oriel Press, 1977). Apriority is identified by 
Quine with unrevisability. But there are at least 
two possible interpretations of unrevisability: 
(Interpretation One) A behavioral interpretation, 
viz. an unrevisable statement is one we would 
never give up (as a sheer behavioral fact about 
us); and (Interpretation Two) an epistemic inter-
pretation, viz. an unrevisable statement is one we 
would never be rational to give up (perhaps, even 
a statement that it would never be rational to even 
think of giving up). On the first interpretation, 
the claim that we might revise even the laws of 
logic becomes merely the claim that certain phe-
nomena might cause us to give up our belief in 
Originally published 
in 
Erkenntnis 
13 
(1978), 
pp.153-70. 
some of the laws of logic; there would be no claim 
being made that doing so would be rational. 
Rather the notion of rationality itself would have 
gone by the board. 
I don't know if Quine actually intended to take 
so radical a position as this, but, in any case, I 
think that most of his followers understood him 
to be advocating a more moderate doctrine. This 
more moderate doctrine was, in any case, put for-
ward by me, for example, in a paper I titled "It 
Ain't Necessarily So". The moderate doctrine, 
unlike the more radical doctrine, employs the 
notion of rationality. The claim of the moderate 
doctrine is that there are no truths which it would 
never be rational to give up; for every truth or 
putative truth, there are circumstances under 
which it would be rational to accept its denial. 
This position was itself argued for, on the basis of 
an induction from the history of science. It was 
not itself supposed to be an a priori truth. Thus 
the cheap shot, which consists in arguing that the 
anti-apriorist position is self-refuting because if it 
were correct then there would still be one a priori 
truth, namely that there are no a priori truths, 
doesn't work. But the induction from the history 
of science was a somewhat complicated affair. It 
was not a simple Baconian induction; rather, a 
theory was put forward, a theory which was 
intended, among other things, to explain why 
certain statements seem to be a priori. 
I want to emphasize this point. The moderate 
Quinean position tries to "save the appearances". 

586 
HILARY PUTNAM 
It does not deny that there at least appear to be a 
priori truths, it does not deny that certain truths 
have a special status, it tries to explain why that is 
so. More precisely, it says that those truths really 
do have a special status, only the status has been 
misconceived. The key notion here was the notion 
I called "contextual apriority': The idea is that we 
can grant that certain truths, and even, at certain 
times, certain falsehoods, have a special status, 
but that we don't have to concede that that status 
is good old-fashioned apriority. The status these 
truths and falsehoods have, as long as they have it, 
is contextual apriority - apriority relative to the 
body of knowledge. And the thesis that there are 
no a priori truths becomes the thesis that there 
are no absolutely a priori truths. What still seems 
to me to be right about this is the idea that there 
is such a status as contextual apriority, and the 
idea that contextual apriority has sometimes been 
mistaken for absolute apriority, that is, for the 
status that a statement has if indeed it could never 
be rational to revise it. 
There is an important difference between such 
statements as "the leaves always turn in October", 
which can be refuted by just well-confirmed 
observations, and such statements as the state-
ments which comprise non-Euclidean geometry 
as a theory of actual space (or space-time) which 
can only be established when a whole new body 
of theory, not just geometrical theory, but physi-
cal theory and experimental interpretation, is put 
forward. Prior to the development of general rel-
ativity theory, most people, even most scientists, 
could not imagine any experiences that would 
lead them to give up, or that would make it 
rational to give up, Euclidean geometry as a 
theory of actual space; and this is what led to the 
illusion that Euclidean geometry was a priori. 
What I no longer think is that all cases of appar-
ent apriority can be explained in this fashion. 
Even the case of Euclidean vs. non-Euclidean 
geometry involves features that were glossed over 
in my previous account. It is not the case that 
every mathematician regarded non-Euclidean 
geometry as a priori impossible, as a description 
of actual physical space, prior to the development 
of general relativity. Indeed, Lobachevskii always 
regarded the question of which geometry 
describes actual physical space as an empirical 
question. And it isn't just the possibility of giving 
an operational interpretation to non-Euclidean 
geometry that is important, although this was 
naturally stressed by empiricists like Lobachevskii 
but it is also important that one can give a coher-
ent model for a non-Euclidean world within 
Euclidean mathematics. Mathematicians were led 
by a very straightforward analogy to grant the 
conceivability of Euclidean spaces of four and 
even more dimensions. A three-dimensional, 
non-Euclidean world - or at least a world whose 
intrinsic geometry, whose geometry viewed from 
within, is that of a three-dimensional non-
Euclidean world, can be pictured as a curved 
hyper-surface in a four-dimensional Euclidean 
space. Of course, this doesn't explain the possibil-
ity of a non-Euclidean world which is not embed-
ded in a higher-dimensional Euclidean space! 
What I want to do today is to argue that there 
is at least one a priori truth in exactly the sense 
that Quine and I denied; that is, at least one truth 
that it would never be rational to give up. My 
example, not surprisingly, is going to be taken 
from the laws of logic. In the past I have argued 
that the laws of logic are revisable and that, in 
fact, the proper interpretation of quantum 
mechanics requires that we give up the distribu-
tive laws. Nothing that I say today will go against 
this position. It is after all perfectly possible that 
not all the traditional laws of logic are a priori, 
but that only some of them are. Indeed, even if, as 
I think, the notion of apriority has to be revived, 
that does not mean that we should go back to the 
old confident way of using it. To try to under-
stand the epistemology of all oflogic and classical 
mathematics in terms of a single notion of a priori 
truth would be, I think, a serious mistake. The law 
of logic I want to consider is a very weak version 
of the Principle of Contradiction. The Principle 
of Contradiction says that no statement is both 
true and false, or in the notation of propositional 
calculus, - (p. - pl. 
The example of quantum logic suggests one 
way in which the revision of this principle might 
be suggested. Namely, it might be suggested that 
the principle holds only for ordinary statements 
about ordinary macro-observable properties of 
ordinary macro-observable objects, e.g., "the cat 
is on the mat", and it might be suggested that 
there is some class of recherche statements about 
waves and particles or whatnot for which the 
principle fails. Perhaps "the electron is a particle" 
is both true and false, or "the electron is a wave" 

THERE IS AT LEAST ONE A PRIORI TRUTH 
587 
is both true and false. This move might be avoided 
by considering what we may call the Typical 
Principle of Contradiction, that is, the principle 
that ordinary macro-observable statements, ordi-
nary statements about macro-observables, are not 
both true and false, or by considering the principle 
that most statements are not both true and false, or 
some combination of these moves; but I shall 
consider the weakest possible version of the 
Principle of Contradiction, which I shall call the 
Minimal Principle of Contradiction. This is 
simply the principle that not every statement is 
both true and false. The denial of this principle is, 
of course, the claim that every statement is both 
true and false. If every statement is such that 
under some circumstances it might be rational to 
revise it, then under some circumstances it might 
be rational to accept that every statement is both 
true and false. Is this the case? Well, it certainly 
doesn't seem to be the case. And if it is not the 
case, if, indeed, there are no circumstances under 
which it would be rational to give up our belief 
that not every statement is both true and false, then 
there is at least one a priori truth. And one is all 
we need. 
My argument is in this respect like Descartes'. 
I believe that one of the several things that 
Descartes wanted to do with his cogito was to 
establish precisely that there are a priori truths. 
And for the purpose of making this point, one 
needs only one example. Is, then, the statement 
that not every proposition is both true and false 
not an example of an absolutely, unconditionally, 
truly, actually a priori truth? 
Recall that part of the strategy of what I called 
the moderate Quinean position was to save the 
appearances by showing that what we mistake for 
absolute apriority is a status which some proposi-
tions truly have, a status which is truly different 
from ordinary, garden-variety contingency, but 
which is not an absolute apriority. This is the 
status of contextual apriority. Is it possible that 
the Minimal Principle of Contradiction is then 
only a contextually a priori truth which we are 
tempted to mistake for an absolutely a priori 
truth? 
The suggestion would be this: that there is 
some weird physical theory T which we have not 
yet thought of, but which implies the denial of the 
Minimal Principle of Contradiction and that 
someday when some scientist -
some future 
Einstein - invents the theory T and shows us what 
beautiful predictions it leads to, and how much it 
enhances our understanding and control of 
nature to accept the theory T, then we will all be 
converted and by a kind of 'gestalt switch' we will 
go over to accepting the theory T and to denying 
the Minimal Principle of Contradiction. 
But there is an obvious problem with this line. 
The problem is that it's quite obvious what the 
theory T will have to be. If we ever give up the 
Minimal Principle of Contradiction, that is, if we 
ever come to believe that every statement is both 
true and false, then its perfectly obvious what the 
theory T will have to be. The theory T will have to 
be the theory which consists of every statement 
and its negation! That is the theory T will have to 
consist of such statements as "the earth is round': 
"the earth is not round", "two and two are four", 
"two and two are not four", "the moon is made of 
green cheese", "the moon is not made of green 
cheese", "there are quarks", "there are no quarks", 
etc., etc., etc. ... For once we are in the happy 
position of being able to say exactly what the 
'surrounding theory' will have to be if we 
come to revise a particular contextually a priori 
statement. 
Of course, my move here might be challenged. 
One might, for example, suggest that we will give 
up the Minimal Principle of Contradiction and 
the Law of Double Negation at the same time. 
Then we might accept it is not the case that it is not 
the case that every statement is both true and false, 
without accepting that every statement is both 
true and false. However, in that case the statement 
"every statement is both true and false" would 
still have the status of being a priori false, even if 
the statement of which it was the negation isn't a 
priori true. And to concede the existence of such a 
status as a priori falsity is, I think, as much as to 
concede the existence of such a status as a priori 
truth. I assume, therefore, that I am dealing with 
an opponent who maintains not merely that we 
might accept the double negation of the state-
ment that every statement is both true and false, 
but that we might accept that statement itself. 
Again, it might be suggested that we will assert 
"every statement is both true and false", while at 
the same time giving up the Principle of Universal 
Instantiation, which enables us to infer particular 
instances from an all-statement. Then we would 
say the words "every statement is both true and 

588 
HILARY PUTNAM 
false", but for no particular statement would we 
be committed to saying of it that it is both true 
and false. But this would clearly be playing verbal 
games. If I say the words "every statement is both 
true and false", but I don't conclude that "the 
earth is round" is both true and false, or that "two 
and two equals five" is both true and false, then I 
simply don't mean what is normally meant, or 
anything what is like what is normally meant by 
"every statement is both true and false': 
In the case of geometry, when we went over to 
non-Euclidean geometry we didn't change the 
meaning of the words, or at any rate we didn't 
merely change the meaning of the words. We dis-
covered that a state of affairs which we had mis-
takenly regarded as inconceivable is, in fact, 
conceivable and quite probably actual. For 
example, we used to regard it as inconceivable 
that a three dimensional world should be both 
finite and unbounded. We now think it is con-
ceivable and quite probably the case that the 
whole three-dimensional universe is both finite 
and unbounded. The question is whether, in the 
same way, the state of affairs that we now regard 
as being inconceivable, the state of affairs that 
"the earth is round" and at the same time "the 
earth is not round", that "the moon is made of 
green cheese", and at the same time that "the 
moon is not made of green cheese", that "two and 
two are five" and at the same time "two and two 
are not five': and so on, is really conceivable and 
will perhaps someday turn out to obtain. Could it 
be rational to think someday that "the moon is 
made of green cheese", and "the moon is not made 
of green cheese", that "two and two are five", and 
"two and two are not five", that "the earth is 
round", and "the earth is not round", and so on? 
That is our question. And I repeat, if that ever 
happens then we know exactly what the "theory" 
will be that we shall be accepting. It will have to 
consist of every statement and its negation. 
Let me refer to the statement that Euclidean 
geometry is true - the statement we gave up when 
we went over to non-Euclidean physics - as the 
critical statement, and to the theory of the basis of 
which we decided that the critical statement was 
false - the General Theory of Relativity - as the 
Embedding Theory. What I've said so far is that if 
we take the Minimal Principle of Contradiction 
as our critical statement, then we know exactly 
what the Embedding Theory has to be. It has to 
consist of every statement and its negation. But it 
may still be argued that there is a disanalogy 
between accepting non-Euclidean geometry on 
the basis of the General Theory of Relativity and 
accepting the denial of the Minimal Principle of 
Contradiction on the basis of the theory which 
consists of every statement together with its nega-
tion. The disanalogy is that the General Theory of 
Relativity leads to testable predictions, whereas 
the Embedding Theory which consists of every 
statement together with its negation leads to no 
testable predictions. But this is not the case either. 
The Embedding Theory in the latter case leads, 
for example, to the prediction that "my hand has 
five fingers", and to the prediction that "my hand 
has seven fingers': It also leads to the prediction 
that "my hand does not have five fingers", and to 
the prediction that "my hand does not have seven 
fingers': It leads to a lot of predictions! But, it may 
be objected, these are not genuine predictions for 
we don't know what it would be like for them all 
to come true. We can imagine all of the predic-
tions of non -Euclidean physics coming true, even 
if we happen to be Euclidean physicists. But we 
don't know what it would be like for all the pre-
dictions of the theory that consists of every state-
ment together with its negation to come true. I 
think this is right, but I think that this observa-
tion only poses the problem of apriority and does 
not solve it. 
(Takes out box) In this box there is a sheet of 
paper. Suppose I predict that when I open the box 
you will see that the sheet of paper is red, and the 
sheet of paper is not red. Suppose I explain that I 
don't mean that the sheet of paper is red on one 
side and white on the other side, or anything like 
that. When I say that the sheet of paper is red, I 
mean that it's red on both sides - a nice, normal 
dye which doesn't look red from one angle and 
some other color from a different angle, or red to 
some people and a different color to other people, 
or anything like that. And when I say that the 
sheet of paper is red, and the sheet of paper is not 
red, I mean that the statement that "the sheet of 
paper is red" understood as just indicated, is both 
definitely true and definitely false. Now it's quite 
true that in a certain sense we don't know what it 
would be like for that prediction to be verified, 
and that's our reason for denying that it is a genu-
ine prediction about what will be seen when the 
box is opened. But one has to be careful here. 

THERE IS AT LEAST ONE A PRIORI TRUTH 
589 
The kind of inconceivability that is relevant is 
not mere unintuitability. Let me say that we can 
intuit a state of affairs if we can actually visualize 
it. (I want to stick to a notion of intuition that's 
close to perception.) Now, we can predict that 
something will happen which we cannot intuit, 
although we can, in a sense, conceive of it hap-
pening. For example, I might predict that when I 
open the box you will see that the sheet of paper 
is a shade of red that none of you has ever seen. I 
think that you'd all accept that as a perfectly good 
prediction, even though you can't intuit what it 
would be like for that prediction to come true. It's 
enough that we should be sure that that's a pos-
sible state of affairs or at least a state of affairs that 
we could recognize if it turned out to be actual. 
Similarly, if I predict that when I open the box 
you will see that the sheet of paper is a color - and 
I mean now a major color - that you've never seen 
before, I think that that would be a perfectly good 
prediction. It's true that such a prediction would 
upset a certain amount of physical theory, namely 
the physical theory that says that color is deter-
mined by lambda, the wavelength of the light 
reflected from the paper. For if that theory is true, 
and it's also true that we've correctly mapped out 
which lambdas correspond to which colors, and 
which lambdas the human eye is sensitive to, then 
there is no room, in the sense of no room in the 
theory, for another major color. Nevertheless, it 
would be absurd to say that someone who pre-
dicted that there was another major color and 
who claimed to have predicted that when we 
opened the box and looked at the paper we would 
see a major color we hadn't seen before, hadn't 
made a prediction just because we couldn't intuit 
the state of affairs that would obtain ifhis predic-
tion turned out to be correct. 
Actually the situation is more complicated 
than I'm suggesting because, in fact, the physical 
theory that I just mentioned, although it still 
appears in many textbooks, is certainly false, and 
the work of Jerome Letvin and of Irwin Land 
shows that color depends in a very complicated 
way on many factors besides lambda, and as far as 
I know it would not be the case that the discovery 
of a new major color tomorrow would very much 
mess up physical theory - there just isn't a good 
physical theory of color to mess up. For example, 
standard theory doesn't really account for the 
color "brown". But even if the lambda theory were 
not already suspect, I think that the fact remains 
that the prediction of a new major color would 
have to be counted as a prediction, even if we 
knew that verification of that prediction would 
mess up a certain amount of well-established 
theory. 
Now, what do we mean when we say that 
we don't understand what it would be like for the 
prediction, that when I open this box you will see 
that the sheet of paper that it contains is both red 
and not red, to turn out to be true? We mean at 
least that we cannot intuit what it would be like 
for an observational situation to obtain which 
would clearly be describable by saying that the 
sheet of paper is red, in the sense I explained 
before, and also the sheet of paper is not red; but 
we had better mean more than that, otherwise 
this counts as a perfectly good prediction. Just as 
the sheet of paper is a shade of red that you have 
never seen before, and the shade of paper is a 
major color that you have never seen before both 
count as perfectly good predictions. 
On the other hand, it isn't that "the sheet of 
paper is red" and "the sheet of paper is not red" 
is literally unintelligible in the way in which 
"wa'arobi besnork gavagai" is literally unintelli-
gible, although some philosophers have tried to 
assimilate the unintelligibility of contradictions 
to the unintelligibility of what is literally with-
out sense in the language. "This sheet of paper is 
red and this sheet of paper is not red" isn't unin-
telligible at all. It simply asserts what cannot 
possibly be the case. And the reason that when I 
open the box you will see that the sheet of paper is 
red and the sheet of paper is not red does not 
count as a prediction, is that we know - know a 
priori - that it can't possibly turn out to be the 
case. But this remark doesn't explain the phe-
nomenon of a priori knowledge, it only points 
to its existence. 
If what I've said so far is correct, then the 
theory that what is happening, what gives rise to 
the illusion of apriority, is that we mistake one 
status for another-mistake the status of contextual 
apriority for the status of absolute apriority -
doesn't work in this case. That was what was going 
on in the case of non -Euclidean geometry. But to 
explain the special status of the Principle of 
Contradiction, or at least of the Minimal Principle 
of Contradiction, in terms of contextual apriority, 
is a loser. 

590 
HILARY PUTNAM 
At this point there is a rather tough line that 
we might take. We might say that if every state-
ment is both true and false, then in particular the 
statement "my hand has five fingers" (or your 
favorite observation report) is both true and false. 
But I see that my hand has five fingers is true and 
I see that it is not false. So I observe that at least 
one statement is not both true and false, and this 
is enough to verify the Minimal Principle of 
Contradiction. This is a tough line to take because 
it amounts to giving up the search for a special 
status for the minimal Principle of Contradiction. 
It amounts to saying that the Minimal Principle 
of Contradiction is an observation report or is 
grounded upon a number of observation reports. 
But this is dearly wrong. It might turn out that 
there are not five fingers on my hand. For example, 
my hand may have been amputated and what I'm 
looking at may be a plastic substitute (of course 
we'd have to tell some story about why I don't 
realize that I'm not looking at my own hand, but 
that is not impossible, as we all know). But even if 
it turned out that I don't have a hand, or that my 
hand has only four fingers, or seven fingers, or 
whatever, discovering that I was wrong about the 
observation report would not at all shake my faith 
in my belief that that observation report is not 
both true and false. Even if I couldn't discover 
how many fingers there are on my right hand 
(imagine a drunken man looking at his hand), 
this would not shake my faith in my belief that it's 
not both true and false that the number is five. We 
seem to be struck with at least one a priori truth 
-
really, actually, truly a priori, and not just 
contextually a priori. 
If we cannot successfully deny that there are a 
priori truths then it has seemed to many that we 
can give a conventionalist account of how a priori 
truth is possible. According to a typical such 
account, it is simply a rule of language that one 
must not assert both a statement and its negation, 
or to ascend to the meta-language, that one must 
not apply both the predicates "true" and "false" to 
the same statement. Moreover, these rules are 
seen as constituting the meanings of negation 
and of falsity, or as partially constituting the 
meanings of negation and of falsity, respectively. 
Anyone who both asserts a sentence and its syn-
tactic negation other than for special purposes, 
e.g., to call attention to an ambiguity in the situa-
tion, is going against the meaning of the negation 
idiom. Thus if I say "It is raining and it is not 
raining", and I don't mean simply to call attention 
to the fact that the particular situation leaves 
some room for discretion in the application of 
the description "it is raining", or something of 
that kind, then I am going against the meaning 
of the words. And this is why the Principle of 
Contradiction is correct. 
This account has a very fundamental defect 
which seems, strangely, not to have been noticed. 
It explains much too much. The problem with this 
account and with a number of other attempted 
accounts is that if it were correct, it wouldn't 
merely explain the status of the Principle of 
Contradiction in our knowledge, it would explain 
the Principle of Contradiction itself. It wouldn't 
just provide a reason that we know the Principle 
of Contradiction, it would provide a reason that 
the Principle of Contradiction is true. But it is 
easy to see that there cannot be such a reason. The 
Principle of Contradiction is prior to anything 
that might be offered as an explanation for its 
truth. For example, suppose the Principle of 
Contradiction were not true. Suppose that even 
the Minimal Principle of Contradiction were not 
true. Then every statement would be both true 
and false. Then of course it would be true that the 
Principle of Contradiction is true by convention. 
But it would also be true that the Principle of 
Contradiction is not true by convention. It would 
be true that our laying down certain linguistic 
stipulations does not cause the Principle of 
Contradiction to be true. To put it bluntly, you 
can't make the Principle of Contradiction true by 
convention unless it's already true. This objec-
tion, the objection of explaining too much, also 
applies to other historic empiricist attempts, and 
even non-empiricist attempts, to explain the laws 
of logic. For example, that they are the laws of 
thought, or that they arise from relations of our 
ideas. 
Of course one might try a moderate conven-
tionalism. That is, one might try saying that the 
laws of logic, or at least the Principle of 
Contradiction, or at least the Typical Principle of 
Contradiction, or at least the Minimal Principle 
of Contradiction are just true, and one might 
agree that the truth can't sensibly be explained in 
terms of anything else, but one might hold that 
what is a matter of convention is not the truth of 
these laws but their necessity or the rationality of 

THERE IS AT LEAST ONE A PRIORI TRUTH 
591 
believing them. This, however, does not seem very 
appetizing. To take the latter proposal first, if it's 
simply true by convention that it's rational to 
believe the laws of logic and this convention is 
simply the convention constituting the conven-
tional use of the tri-syllabic English word 
"rational", then what we have is the somewhat 
notorious ordinary language solution to Hume's 
problem, only now proposed as the solution to 
the problem of deduction. With respect to the 
former, that is the appeal to ordinary language as 
a solution to Hume's problem, Wesley Salmon 
once remarked that all this amounts to is the 
claim that if you use induction then you have the 
right to apply to yourself the noise "rational", and 
isn't that nice. Professor Strawson replied to 
Salmon by observing that our propensity to make 
inductions need not be thought of as either arbi-
trary on the one hand, nor as conventional on the 
other; it may be natural. I take it that by "natural" 
Strawson meant something like "innate". Now, 
whatever the virtue may be of regarding our pro-
pensity to make inductions as simply an innate 
tendency that we have, it does seem as if in this 
respect deduction is different from induction. To 
say that our faith in the most fundamental princi-
ples of deductive logic, our faith in the Principle 
of Contradiction itself, is simply an innate pro-
pensity and that it has no need of justification 
just because it is an innate propensity, is to oblit-
erate totally the distinction between reason and 
blind faith. Of course, I'm not accusing either 
Peter Strawson or David Hume of making this 
move; they would both restrict their nativist 
account to induction, and not deduction. Nor can 
I accept the view that the necessity of the laws of 
logic, that is the fact that they hold in all possible 
worlds not only in the actual world, the fact that 
even if we accept the laws of logic as true in the 
actual world, we cannot go on and say "but of 
course they might not have been true", or at least 
we cannot say "it might have been that every 
statement was both true and false", is accounted 
for by convention. 
It is true that there are accounts of logical 
truths, notably Quine's, according to which such 
a schema as -(po - p), if valid at all, is ipso facto 
necessary, that is to say there's no difference on 
Quine's account between saying that every 
instance of -(po - p) is true in the actual world, 
and saying that it is necessary that -(po - p); but 
this seems to me to be wrong. For one thing this 
assumes what we may call a Humean account of 
the modalities, that is it assumes that what is true 
in possible worlds is totally determined by what is 
true in the actual world plus our conventions. If 
this is right then there cannot be two possible 
worlds in which the same events take place, but 
which are such that if a certain experiment had 
been performed, which never was performed in 
either world, then different things would have 
happened in the two worlds. Now ask yourself 
this question: Can you imagine two worlds in nei-
ther of which the experiment is performed. The 
experiment just requires too much energy and 
the government won't let the physicist use so 
much energy in one experiment. Exactly the same 
events happen in both worlds but it is the case 
that if the experiment had been performed, if a 
certain particle had been submitted to much, 
much higher energies than were ever concen-
trated in a small space, then in one of the two 
worlds the particle would have split and in the 
other it would not have split? In other words, does 
the totality of facts about what events actually 
take place determine the truth value of all state-
ments of the form "it is possible that p"? To me, at 
least, it seems that the answer is "no", and if the 
answer is "no'; then both Quinean accounts of 
logical necessity and Humean accounts of causal-
ity have to be wrong. But I don't want to discuss 
this here, I simply want to point out that anyone 
who shares my modal-realist intuitions has to 
reject the claim that the necessity of the principles 
of logic is any more a matter of convention than 
their truth is. If anyone is tempted to hold it, the 
form of moderate conventionalism that consists 
in saying that the laws of logic are just true in the 
actual world, but that given that they're true in 
the actual world it's a matter of our convention 
that they're true in all possible worlds seems to me 
quite untenable. 
Incidently, the claim that physical possibility 
statements are translatable into statements about 
what actually happens seems to me in no better 
shape than the claim that statements about mate-
rial objects are translatable into statements about 
sense data; and if physical possibility statements 
are not disguised statements about what actually 
happens then it is hard to see how logical possi-
bility statements can be. There is however an 
account which goes part of the way towards 

592 
HILARY PUTNAM 
explaining the special status of at least some of 
the laws of logic. A version of this account was, I 
believe, offered by Saul Kripke in a seminar at 
Princeton in which he criticized my published 
views on quantum logic; and the root idea of the 
account is to be found already in Aristotle's 
remarks about the laws of logic. 
The idea is that the laws of logic are so central 
to our thinking that they define what a rational 
argument is. This may not show that we could 
never change our mind about the laws of logic, 
that is that no causal process could lead us to 
vocalize or believe different statements; but it does 
show that we could not be brought to change our 
minds by a rational argument. Let me spell this out 
a little. Typical rational arguments either have the 
form of chains of deduction of the familiar "if a, 
then b" form, or they have the form of inferences 
to the best explanation. But the latter sort of 
inductive arguments of the form "if a then b"; "b, 
so probably or plausibly a" also rely on properties 
of the connective "if then", specifically upon modus 
ponens. Both in inductive reasoning and in deduc-
tive reasoning we make use of the fact that our 
language contains a connective which satisfies 
transitivity and modus ponens. This does not show 
that these two rules of inference are separately or 
Note 
This is a first draft of a paper I never finished. I no 
longer agree with the conclusion for a number 
of reasons, but I think the arguments are still of 
interest. One way I would begin to meet some of 
the arguments in this paper is by distinguishing 
two senses of "revise". A statement maybe"revised" 
by negating it - e.g., saying "this is not white", 
where formerly we said "this is white"; or it may 
be revised by challenging a concept it contains. My 
present position - February 18, 1977 - is that 
there are statements that cannot be revised in the 
first way (in this I think the foregoing paper is 
completely right), but that every statement is eli-
gible for revision in the second way. 
The question raised in the last paragraph -
how do we know that a direct observation might 
not in the future contradict the principle of 
Contradiction - assumes that what we now say 
and what is the case are totally independent. (The 
stance I referred to as "metaphysical realism" in my 
Presidential Address to the APA) Even if we grant 
jointly unrevisable; but it does show that if some-
body rejected both of them then we would have 
no way of arguing with him. And indeed, Aristotle 
remarks that if anyone pretends to disbelieve one 
of the laws of logic and undertakes to argue with 
us, we can easily convince him that his own argu-
ment presupposes the very laws of logic that he is 
objecting to. 
Neither Aristotle nor Kripke make the mis-
take, however, of offering this account as an 
account of why the laws of logic are true in the 
first place. All this account says is that part of 
their very special epistemic character is explained 
by what Quine would call their centrality. That is, 
they're presupposed by so much of the activity of 
argument itself that it is no wonder that we cannot 
envisage their being overthrown, or all of them 
being overthrown, by rational argument. But we 
should be clear about what the centrality argu-
ment does not show. It does not show that a puta-
tive law of logic, for instance the Principle of 
Contradiction, could not be overthrown by direct 
observation. Presumably I would give up the 
Principle of Contradiction if I ever had a sense 
datum which was both red and not red, for example. 
And the centrality argument sheds no light on 
how we know that this could never happen. 
that we may in the future say "this sheet of paper 
is white and this sheet of paper is not white", we 
don't have to grant that we might be right. It may 
be that under our present conceptual scheme it is 
mandatory to find some explanation of that future 
utterance under which it is not literally correct. In 
Quine's terminology, it may be that homophonic 
translation (taking the future utterances at "face 
value") is inadmissible in this case. When I wrote 
the foregoing paper, I would have replied: "even if 
we refuse to say now that the future sheet of paper 
might be both red and not red, that doesn't of 
itself make it true that the future sheet of paper 
won't be both red and not red. How do we know 
it doesn't just make us stubborn?" This assumes 
that there is an intelligible distinction within our 
conceptual system between what it is possible to 
conceive of within that system and what is really 
(independently of all conceptual systems) the 
case. This is just what I criticize in the address 
referred to. 

THERE IS AT LEAST ONE A PRIORI TRUTH 
593 
On the other hand, I am not urging that we 
regard all logical and mathematical truth as 
simply the product of our translation-practices 
(let alone of "convention"). I have long urged that 
there is an irreducible factual element in logic 
and mathematics (e.g., the consistency of a set of 
conventions is not itself a convention); which is 
not to deny that there is also a conventional com-
ponent to logic and mathematics. I think it is 
right to say that, within our present conceptual 
scheme, the Minimal Principle of Contradiction 
is so basic that it cannot significantly be 
"explained" at all. But that doesn't make it an 
"absolutely a priori truth", in the sense of an 
absolutely unrevisable 
truth. Mathematical 
Intuitionism, for example, represents one pro-
posal for revising even the Minimal Principle of 
Contradiction - not by saying that it is false, but 
by denying the applicability of the classical con-
cepts of truth and falsity at all. Of course, then 
there would be a new "Minimal Principle of 
Contradiction" -
e.g., "no statement is both 
proved and disproved" (where "proof" is taken 
to be a concept which does not presuppose the 
classical notion of "truth" by the Intuitionists); 
but this is not the Minimal Principle of 
Contradiction. Every statement is subject to 
revision; but not in every way. 
Note to Supersede (Supplement?) the Preceding Note 
Added December 23, 1977 
As I continue to think about these matters, it now 
seems to me that the preceding note does not do 
justice to what was right in the original paper. 
Rather than simply revise it, I have chosen to sup-
plement the original paper-plus-note-which-I-
added-later with yet 
another note for a 
meta-philosophical reason: it seems to me, and it 
has also been remarked by another philosopher I 
respect, that we philosophers are frequently torn 
in just the fashion that I am torn now between 
opposing considerations, but we very infrequently 
show it in print. What we do is let ourselves be 
torn in private until we finally "plonk" for one 
alternative or the other; then the published paper 
only shows what we plonked for, and not the being 
torn. For once, the present paper-plus-potentially-
infinite-series-of-notes will show the "being torn': 
The preceding note tried to rescue what I 
called the "moderate Quinean" position by taking 
the line that "every statement is revisable but not 
in every way". Specifically, a distinction was drawn 
between giving up a statement by accepting its 
negation, and giving up a statement by giving up 
concepts which occur in the statement (as some-
how defective). 
I don't think this works. Consider the state-
ment I used in the original paper to show that 
there exists at least one a priori truth. This was the 
statement: "Not every statement is both true and 
false". In the previous Note, I said we might give 
this up by giving up the classical notions of truth 
and falsity - e.g., by going over to Intuitionist 
logic and metatheory. But surely if we did that we 
wouldn't view it as giving up the concepts of truth 
and falsity; rather we would view it as giving up 
an incorrect analysis of those notions. 
Here it seems Quine has an easy rejoinder. He 
can say "See! It's just as I told you. You can't draw 
a non-arbitrary line between changing the mean-
ing of the words and changing collateral beliefs. 
And for that very reason you can't tell if the 
original statement is still being expressed by the 
sentence 'Not every statement is both true and 
false'. Lacking any meaningful notion of synon-
ymy, that is of statement identity, the question of 
whether some statement (not, sentence!) is 
immune from revision lacks all sense." 
But, as I have argued in the papers cited at the 
beginning, Quine isn't just arguing against the 
notion of synonymy. (If he were, then if linguists 
were to come up with a well-motivated proposal 
for assigning sentences to synonymy classes, 
Quine's work would lose all interest.) Much of 
Quine's argument - specifically, his historical 
argument from the succession of past scientific 
revolutions - was independent of the question of 
whether there is a good criterion for sentence 
synonymy. Quine excited philosophers because 
he put forward a picture of epistemology in which 
there was no room for apriority (miscalled "analy-
ticity" by Quine and his positivist opponents). He 
excited philosophers by putting forward a view of 
epistemology in which "no statement is immune 
from revision" - a very different claim from the 
claim that the question, "Is every statement 
immune from revision?" is meaningless. It is this 
view of epistemology that I am now criticizing. 

594 
HILARY PUTNAM 
Moreover, we can finesse the question of 
whether adopting Intuitionism would or would 
not be to change the meaning of "true" and "false': 
If it is true, as I argued in the preceding Note, that 
we can't give up the critical statement except by 
changing the meaning of "true" and "false" (i.e., 
"giving up the concepts"), then the following 
hypothetical must be absolutely unrevisable: 
If the classical notions of truth and falsity do not 
have to be given up, then not every statement is 
both true and false. 
(In general, as Gareth Evans once remarked to 
me, to say that a statement is revisable, but only in 
a certain way, is to say that a certain conditional is 
unrevisable. ) 
Again, look at the situation the following way: 
Consider the following Rule of Inference (call it 
"the Absolutely Inconsistent Rule"): from any and 
all premise-sets, including the null set of premises, 
to infer every p. The argument of the previous 
paper was that, whatever might be said about eve-
rything being up for revision in the big spiderweb 
(or field of force, or whatever your favorite meta-
phor may be) of beliefs, at least one thing is sure: 
it can never be rational to accept the Absolutely 
Inconsistent Rule. And this seems right. 
Does this mean that we have to go back to the 
idea of fixed unchanging canons of rationality, 
which Quine so persuasively attacked? I don't 
think it does. It seems right to me that we use our 
scientific method to devise a better scientific 
method at every stage. (Reichenbach, who stressed 
this idea in much of his writing, compared this to 
all use of tools. The first crude tools were fash-
ioned with our hands; then we used crude tools to 
fashion more refined tools, and so on.) We started 
with a "method" which evolution has "hard wired 
in' to our brains, and we used that "method" to 
discover (after how many thousand of years?) 
some principles of deduction and induction, 
which, after more thousands of years, have begun 
to be explicitly formalized, at least in part, and to 
be ever more mathematically sophisticated. And 
these principles will undoubtedly guide us in the 
search for still better principles (together with the 
method "hard wired in" to our brains, which we 
still have to fall back on more than we like to 
admit). But the fact that the canons of rationality 
are themselves evolving doesn't mean they don't 
exist (pace Feyerabend, pace Foucault!), nor does 
it mean that, in the course of the evolution, any-
thing whatsoever (including acceptance of the 
Absolutely Inconsistent Rule) 
might occur. 
Evolution, in the domain of instruments, doesn't 
imply total, protean, lack of definite structure. 
But, after all, just how important is it that 
Quine is wrong in his total rejection of the a 
priori? In one way it is not very important. We do 
not have a good theory of rationality, and are 
unlikely to have one in the forseeable future. 
Lacking the "rigid designator" of rationality, the 
theoretical definition which tells us what ration-
ality is in every possible world (as "water is H20" 
tells us what water is in every possible world), it is 
virtually hopeless to show with any semblance of 
good argument that any specific statement is such 
that it would be irrational to ever give it up (apart 
from special examples, such as the one I con-
structed). Nor do we really need a proof that a 
statement is a priori in this sense (rationally unre-
visable) very often. If a statement has the prop-
ertythat we cannot now describe any circumstances 
under which it would be rational to give it up, 
that will surely suffice for most purposes of philo-
sophical argument. But, if it is always dangerous 
to take on the burden of trying to show that a 
statement is absolutely a priori, the foregoing 
reflections show that it is not just dangerous but 
actually wrong to make the quick leap from the 
fact that it is dangerous to claim that any state-
ment is absolutely a priori to the absolute claim 
that there are no a priori truths. 

CHAPTER 43 
Revisability, Reliabilism, and A Priori 
Knowledge 
Albert Casullo 
Proponents of a priori knowledge face two formi-
dable tasks: (1) providing an illuminating charac-
terization of the concept of a priori knowledge; 
and (2) providing cogent reasons for believing 
that some of our knowledge is indeed a priori. 
There have been two general approaches to 
defending the existence of a priori knowledge. 
Some begin by providing a general characteriza-
tion of such knowledge and then show that there 
are plausible examples of knowledge which sat-
isfy the conditions in the characterization. I On 
this approach, the defense of the existence of such 
knowledge depends on the analysis of the concept 
of a priori knowledge. The second approach treats 
these issues independently. In particular, it is 
argued that certain classes of statements, such as 
mathematical statements or necessary statements, 
cannot be known on the basis of experience and, 
hence, are known a priori without any attempt to 
offer a general characterization of a priori 
knowledge. 2 
Recent critics of the a priori fall into two simi-
lar camps. Some attempt to argue against the 
existence of a priori knowledge without presup-
posing any particular analysis of the concept. Paul 
Benacerraf, for example, adopts this approach by 
raising doubts about the existence of the cogni-
tive faculty of intuition which is often invoked by 
Originally published in Philosophy and Pheno-
menological Research 49, 2 (Dec. 1988), pp. 187-213. 
proponents of the a priori as the source of such 
knowledge. 3 The second prominent line of attack, 
which has been forcefully developed by Hilary 
Putnam, begins by analyzing the concept of a 
statement known a priori as one which is ration-
ally unrevisable.4 Peirce's celebrated thesis of fal-
libilism is then invoked in support of the claim 
that no statements are rationally unrevisable. 
Philip Kitcher has extended this line of argument 
by incorporating it within the more general 
framework of reliabilism with devastating 
results.s 
The primary focus of this paper is the second 
line of attack and divides into two parts. The first 
examines the plausibility of the Putnam-Kitcher 
thesis that a priori knowledge entails rational 
unrevisability independently of any general 
account of knowledge. Two versions of this thesis 
are distinguished and it is argued that both should 
be rejected. This result vitiates their general argu-
ment against the existence of a priori knowledge. 
The second part of the paper examines Kitcher's 
attempt to incorporate the unrevisability thesis 
within the more general framework of a psychol-
ogistic account of knowledge. Since reliabilism is 
the leading psychologistic account presently 
available, the implications of reliabilism for issues 
regarding the a priori are explored. It is argued, 
first, that reliabilism does not support the thesis 
that a priori knowledge entails rational unrevisa-
bility and, second, that reliabilism does not offer 
much promise of providing an informative 

596 
ALBERT CASULLO 
characterization of the concept of a priori knowl-
edge. In conclusion, an attempt is made to show 
that reliabilism offers proponents of the a priori 
some resources for defending the existence of such 
knowledge. 
I. Revisability and A Priori Knowledge 
Our primary concern in this part of the paper is 
with the following question: Is there any good 
reason for supposing that a priori knowledge 
entails rational unrevisability? In order to bring 
out this issue more clearly, let us begin by assum-
ing that 
(1) 
If S knows that p, then the statement 
that p is rationally unrevisable6 
is false. For if (1) were true, then 
(2) 
If S knows that p a priori, then the state-
ment that p is rationally unrevisable 
would not be a distinctive thesis regarding the a 
priori but rather a trivial consequence of the 
general concept of knowledge. Furthermore, the 
conjunction of (1) with the doctrine of fallibi-
lism entails the skeptical conclusion that there is 
no knowledge. But proponents of the second line 
of argument have wanted to maintain both (i) 
that science is our paradigm of knowledge; and 
(ii) that it is an essential feature of the scientific 
enterprise that all statements are subject to 
rational revision in light of future evidence. 
Hence, the leading premise of the second line of 
attack, the Unrevisability Thesis, is better cast as 
(UT) If S is justified in believing that p a 
priori then the statement that p is rationally 
unrevisable 
where "justified" is understood to designate a 
degree of justification sufficient for knowledge. 
(UT) is a puzzling claim. Proponents of the 
a priori maintain that a certain type of justifi-
cation exists which is intuitively characterized 
as non-experiential. Since they also maintain 
that there is a priori knowledge, they are com-
mitted to a thesis about the strength of such 
justification. Proponents of the a priori are 
committed to the thesis that such justification is 
sufficient for knowledge. (UT) also entails a 
thesis about the strength of such justification. It 
entails, very roughly, that such justification is 
strong enough to resist any potential future dis-
confirmation. The latter thesis is stronger than 
the former thesis for according to (1) justifica-
tion sufficient for knowledge does not entail 
rational unrevisability. Hence, what is puzzling 
is how the proponent of (UT) moves from the 
uncontroversial premise that a priori justifica-
tion is sufficient for knowledge to the stronger 
conclusion that such justification is unrevisable. 
The problem can be succinctly captured by 
considering the following set of statements: 
(3) 
A priori justification is non experiential 
justification. 
(4) 
The existence of a priori knowledge 
entails that there is nonexperiential jus-
tification sufficient for knowledge. 
(5) 
The general concept of knowledge does 
not require that justification sufficient 
for knowledge entail rational unrevisa-
bility. 
(6) 
It is not the case that if S is justified in 
believing that p a priori then the statement 
that p is rationally unrevisable. 
(3), (4) and (5) are uncontroversial. (6), which is 
the negation of (UT), is consistent with {(3), (4), 
(5)}. This establishes that (UT) is not a conse-
quence of uncontroversial premises regarding a 
priori justification and the degree of justification 
sufficient for knowledge. Therefore, additional 
support is necessary to establish that the concept 
of a priori knowledge entails (UT). 
The primary conclusion of Part I is that no 
additional support is forthcoming and, hence, 
(UT) must be rejected. This conclusion will be 
supported in two ways. First, it will be argued 
that adoption of (UT) leads to some unwanted 
consequences. Second, it will be shown that the 
primary motivation for adopting (UT) rests on 
an untenable principle regarding epistemic justi-
fication. But before we proceed to our more 
detailed examination of (UT), we need to distin-
guish between a strong and weak version of the 
thesis: 

REVISABILITY, RELIABILISM, AND A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
597 
(SUT) If S is justified in believing that p a 
priori then the statement that p is rationally 
unrevisable in light of any future evidence. 
(WUT) If S is justified in believing that p a 
priori then the statement that p is rationally 
unrevisable in light of any future experiential 
evidence. 
Clearly, (WUT) is more plausible than (SUT). 
For suppose that S's belief that p is justified on the 
basis of nonexperiential evidence and it is 
acknowledged that p might be rationally revised 
in light of further nonexperiential evidence. In 
such a case it does not appear plausible to main-
tain that S's justification is not a priori. (WUT) is 
more promising since one can argue that if S's 
belief that p is revised in light of experiential 
evidence then that belief is not independent of 
experience in the requisite sense. 
IA 
Let us begin by examining (SUT) in more detail in 
order to bring out explicitly its consequences. 
Suppose that Mary is a college student who has had 
some training in logic. As a result, she is able to dis-
criminate reliably between valid and invalid ele-
mentary inferences on the basis of reflective 
thought. Today Mary wonders whether "p ::J q" 
entails "-p ::J -q': She reflects upon the statements 
in question and on the basis of this reflection con-
cludes that the former does indeed entail the latter. 
After she assents to this conclusion, a counterexam-
ple occurs to her. The occurrence of the counterex-
ample results in her rejecting her former conclusion 
and coming to believe that "p::J q" entails "-q::J -p': 
The salient features of the example are as follows: 
(a) Mary's initial belief is based on a nonexperiental 
process which is reliable but not infallible; (b) a 
process of the same type leads Mary to conclude 
that the initial belief is mistaken and to arrive at the 
correct conclusion; and (c ) Mary's conclusions as 
stated in (b) are justified beliefs. Now for some 
more controversial claims: (d) Mary's original belief 
that "p::J q" entails "-q::J -p" is also a justified belief; 
and (e) Mary's original belief is justified a priori 
despite having been revised. 
What can be said in favor of (d) and (e)? (d) 
appears to be similar in all relevant respects to the 
following case. Mary sees a sheet of paper on the 
table and on that basis forms the belief that it is 
square. A second closer visual examination reveals 
that two of the sides are slightly longer than the 
other two. On this basis, Mary rejects her former 
belief about the shape of the paper and comes to 
believe that it is rectangular. Since the circum-
stances under which Mary perceived the page 
were normal and Mary is a reliable discriminator 
of shapes, her initial belief is justified. The fact 
that our discriminatory powers sometimes fail us 
does not entail that beliefs based on shape per-
ception are not justified. Furthermore, if such 
beliefs are typically justified, we don't single out 
particular cases as unjustified merely in virtue of 
the fact that they are false. Some other relevant 
difference must be cited such as that the perceiver 
was impaired or the environment was gerryman-
dered. Hence, the routine failure of Mary's other-
wise reliable shape discriminating ability does 
not entail that her belief that the paper is square is 
unjustified despite the fact that it is false. Similarly, 
the routine failure of Mary's otherwise reliable 
ability to discriminate valid inferences does not 
entail that her belief that "p ::J q" entails "CEp ::J 
-q" is unjustified despite the fact that it is false. 
The only question which remains at this point 
is whether Mary's original belief is justified a 
priori or a posteriori. Note that a proponent of 
(SUT) must maintain that the belief is justified a 
posteriori merely in virtue of the fact that it was 
revised. This point can be brought out more 
clearly by introducing the notion of a "self-
correcting process": 
(SCP) A process <1> is self-correcting for S just 
in case, for any false statement p, if <1> produces 
in S the belief that p, then S has available from 
<1> other beliefs which would justify S in believ-
ing that p is false. 
(SUT) entails 
(7) 
If a process <1> is self-correcting for Sand 
there is a false belief that p which <1> justi-
fies for S then <1> does not justify for S the 
belief that p a priori. 
But this is an implausible restriction on the notion 
of a priori justification. For the intuitive basis of 
the distinction between a priori and a posteriori 
justification lies in the distinction between 
experiential and nonexperiential evidence. (7), 

598 
ALBERT CASULLO 
however, is completely insensitive to the central 
question of whether the justificatory process in 
question is experiential or non-experiential. 
Hence, to endorse (7) is to divorce the notion of a 
priori justification from the notion of independ-
ence from experiential evidence. It is more plausi-
ble to reject (7) on the grounds that both Mary's 
original belief as well as the belief which led her to 
revise the original belief were based on nonexpe-
riential evidence. Since experiential evidence 
plays no role either in the original justification or 
in the subsequent revision of Mary's belief, if it is 
justified, it is justified a priori. Once we reject (7), 
(SUT) must also be rejected. 
Our rejection of (SUT) has been based on a 
single case. This case may appear questionable 
since it involves the controversial claim that there 
can be a priori justification for a false belief. In 
order to reinforce our conclusion, let us consider a 
second example which does not involve this claim. 
Suppose Charlie believes that P entails q on the 
basis of a valid proof PI. Since the proof is the 
result of a process of reflective thought, Charlie's 
belief is justified nonexperientially. But now let us 
suppose that (a) there exists a pseudo-proof, P2, 
from P to -q; and (b) if this pseudo-proof were 
brought to Charlie's attention, he would not be 
able to detect any flaws in it or to discount it in any 
other fashion. Given that the pseudo-proof never 
comes to Charlie's attention his belief remains 
justified despite the fact that were it to be brought 
to his attention his justification would be defeated. 
(SUT) entails that Charlie's belief is not justified a 
priori despite the fact that (i) it is justified; (ii) it is 
based on nonexperiential evidence; and (iii) the 
potential defeating evidence, if it were to become 
available to Charlie, would also be based on a 
process of reflective thought. Given that (SUT) 
entails that Charlie's belief is not justified a priori 
despite the fact that experiential evidence plays no 
role in either the original justification for Charlie's 
belief or its possible subsequent defeat, it is evi-
dent that (SUT) divorces the notion of a priori 
justification from the notion of nonexperiential 
justification. Instead, (SUT) bases its claim that 
Charlie's belief is not justified a priori solely on 
the following consideration: 
(8) 
The justification conferred on Charlie's 
belief by the process of reflective thought 
is defeasible 
which is clearly a thesis about the strength of 
the justification conferred on the belief by the 
process of reflective thought. But (8) is not a 
sufficient reason for maintaining that Charlie's 
belief is not justified a priori. For it fails to take 
into account whether the beliefs which are the 
potential defeaters for Charlie's justified belief 
are experiential or nonexperiential. Hence, (SUT) 
must be rejected.? 
(SUT) is implausible because it overlooks the 
fact that revision can take place on the basis of a 
priori considerations. Hence, one cannot argue 
that the justification conferred on a belief by a 
process is not a priori simply on the basis of the 
fact that the process is self-correcting or that the 
justification which it provides is defeasible. A 
similar observation is germane to evaluating the 
claim of Hilary Putnam that the presence of 
quasi-empirical methods in mathematics shows 
that mathematics is not a priori.8 By "quasi-
empirical" methods, Putnam has in mind 
methods that are analogous to the methods of 
the physical sciences except that the singular 
statements which are "generalized by induction", 
used to test "theories': etc., are themselves the 
product of proof or calculation rather than being 
"observation reports" in the usual sense." 
Among the numerous examples of the use of 
quasi-empirical methods in mathematics Putnam 
discusses, Zermelo's introduction of the axiom of 
choice is the most striking. For Zermelo is quite 
explicit in maintaining that his justification for 
this move is "intuitive self evidence" and "neces-
sity for science." 10 By necessity for science, 
Zermelo has in mind the indispensability of the 
axiom for proving certain theorems. So, in effect, 
the justification is akin to the use of the 
hypothetico-deductive 
method 
in 
scientific 
reasoning. What are the implications of Zermelo's 
justification for the issue of the alleged apriority 
of mathematics? 
Suppose that T is a mathematical theory and 
that {pj, ... ,p) is a set of statements belonging to 
T each of whose members is accepted on the basis 
of non experiential evidence - i.e., either intuitive 
self-evidence or deductive proof. Suppose that we 
now introduce Pn + I which we recognize to be 
neither self-evident nor formally derivable from 
T. But from Pn + I we can derive {PI, ... ,p) and, in 

REVISABILITY, RELIABILISM, AND A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
599 
addition, some other principles which are neither 
self-evident nor provable from T but which prove 
fruitful in furthering research in this area of 
mathematics. Putnam regards two features of the 
example as salient: (1) no formal proof exists for 
P 
n +, and (2) theoretical considerations might lead 
to a rejection of Pn+, (1), however, is of little inde-
pendent significance. It appears that Putnam 
stresses (1) because he assumes that if there exists 
a formal proof of Pn + " then Pn + , is rationally 
unrevisable. But this assumption overlooks the 
possibility of misleading evidence. As we saw in 
our earlier example, the fact that Charlie's belief 
that P entails q was based on a valid formal proof 
did not preclude the rational revisability of the 
belief. Once we recognize that formal proof does 
not preclude revisability, (2) does not appear to 
introduce any novel considerations with respect 
to the apriority of mathematics. For the set of 
statements {p" ... ,p.,l is known independently of 
experience. When one confirms Pn t " one derives 
formally the members of the set {p" ... ,Pnl 
Additional confirmation comes from the fact that 
other statements, {Pn + 2'·· ·Pn +), are derivable 
from P n +, taken in conjunction with T which are 
both fruitful and not derivable from T alone. 
Hence, the only mode of justification involved is 
formal proof. Consequently, no novel form of 
justification has been introduced at this point. 
What about the circumstances which would lead 
to a rejection of P n + ,? Given the fruitfulness of P 
n + , 
there seem to be only two circumstances in which 
it would be rejected: (a) ifit is shown that although 
T is consistent, (T & P n + ,) is inconsistent; or (b) 
(T & P 
n +) but not T alone entails some Pi and -Pi 
is independently well-supported. But, in either 
case, the only mode of justification involved is 
formal proof. Consequently, the use of hypo-
thetico-deductive reasoning in mathematics has 
no tendency to show that mathematical knowl-
edge is not a priori." It would do so only if (a) the 
method of proof itself is not a priori; or (b) the 
members of the set {p" ... Pnl which form the 
confirmation base for p n +, are justified 
experientially. 
IE 
At this point let us turn our attention to (WUT). 
(WUT) avoids the primary problem with (SUT) .12 
It distinguishes between revisions based on 
experiential evidence as opposed to revisions 
based on nonexperiential evidence and maintains 
that it is only revision based on experiential evi-
dence that is incompatible with a priori justifica-
tion. Despite the initial plausibility of this claim, I 
believe that it is mistaken. In support of this con-
tention, we will examine a prominent argument 
in support of (WUT). This examination will 
bring to light the principle regarding justification 
which motivates (WUT). An argument against 
this principle will be presented followed by two 
counterexamples to (WUT). 
The most prominent recent proponent of 
(WUT) has been Philip Kitcher. In support of the 
thesis he argues 
We can say that a proposition is unrevisable for a 
person at a time just in case there is no possible 
continuation of that person's experience after that 
time which would make it reasonable for her to 
change her attitude to the proposition. The expli-
cation makes it apparent why one might think 
that propositions which a person knows a priori 
are unrevisable for that person. If you have a 
priori knowledge that p, then you have an a priori 
warrant for a belief that p. Assuming that the war-
rant is available independently of time, then, given 
any continuation of your experience, you would 
have available to you a warrant which would con-
tinue to support belief. Hence, it would never be 
reasonable for you to abandon p in favor of its 
negation. Whatever trickery your experience may 
devise for you, you will always be able to undergo 
a process which will sustain the belief.!' 
The strength of Kitcher's argument in support of 
(WUT) is that it is based on an uncontroversial fea-
ture of alleged a priori warrants, their availability 
independently of time. Thus, if this feature entails 
(WUT) the argument is unassailable. In order to 
assess it more carefully, let us first reconstruct it: 
(1) 
If you have a priori knowledge that p, 
then you have an a priori warrant for 
the belief that p. 
(2) 
If you have an a priori warrant for the 
belief that p, then the warrant is availa-
ble independently of time. 
(3) 
Therefore, if you have an a priori war-
rant for the belief that p, then given any 
continuation of your experience, you 

600 
ALBERT CASULLO 
would have available to you a warrant 
which would continue to support the 
belief that p. 
(4) 
Therefore, if you have a priori knowl-
edge that p, then there is no possible 
continuation of your experience which 
would make it reasonable to abandon 
the belief that p. 
It is crucial to recognize that the phrase "the war-
rant is available independently of time" is ambig-
uous since it can be read in either of the following 
ways: 
(a) 
the process which warrants the belief 
that pat t is available given any continu-
ation of S's experiences; 
(b) 
the warrant which the process confers 
on the belief that p at t is available given 
any continuation of S's experiences. 
If the phrase is taken in sense (b) then (3) fol-
lows from (2) but premise (2) is question-
begging. If (3) is to be derived from some 
independent feature of a priori warrants, the 
phrase must be taken in sense (a). But when 
premise (2) is taken in this sense, the argu-
ment is no longer valid. For if we add the fol-
lowing additional premise which is consistent 
with (2): 
(5) 
Given some continuations of S's experi-
ence, there are other warrants available 
to S which either defeat or override the 
original warrant S had for the belief 
thatp 
the expanded set of premises entails the negation 
of (3). So we cannot conclude from the fact that 
there exists a process which warrants a belief p at 
tl and is available at another time t, that it will 
also warrant pat t,. 
One might respond at this point that our argu-
ment against Kitcher is of little consolation to the 
apriorist. For in granting that the warrant con-
ferred on a belief that p can be defeated or 
overridden by experience we have, ipso facto, con-
ceded that the belief is based at least in part on an 
experiential warrant. This intuition provides the 
strongest motivation for endorsing (WUT). Let 
us begin by noting that this intuition presupposes 
the following symmetry between confirming evi-
dence and disconfirming evidence: 
(ST) If evidence of kind A can defeat or over-
ride the warrant conferred on S's belief that p 
by evidence of kind B, then the belief that p is 
based on evidence of kind A. 
For suppose we begin with the idea that a priori 
justification is nonexperiential justification and 
consider S's belief that p which is justified by non-
experiential evidence at tl. Let us also grant that 
the warrant conferred on p by this nonexperien-
tial evidence can be either defeated or overridden 
by experiential evidence at some later time t,. The 
conclusion that S's belief that p is based in part on 
experiential evidence and, hence, is not justified a 
priori at tl can be reached only if (ST) is 
assumed. 
(ST), however, is not very plausible. Consider, 
for example, our knowledge of our own bodily 
sensations such as pains and itches. At present 
such knowledge is based on introspection. 
Traditionally, it was maintained that introspective 
knowledge is indubitable. One could not have any 
rational grounds for doubting the truth of an 
introspective belief about one's bodily sensations. 
This claim has been challenged by the so-called 
EEG argument l4 The basic idea is that although 
introspection provides at present our only evi-
dence for bodily sensations, neurophysiology may 
evolve to the point where electroencephalograph 
readings will provide an alternative source of evi-
dence. Furthermore, in suitably chosen circum-
stances, 
the 
EEG 
readings 
may override 
introspective evidence. Our purpose here is not 
to evaluate the argument. Suppose we grant 
(6) 
Neurophysiological evidence can defeat 
or override the warrant conferred on a 
belief about one's bodily sensations by 
introspection. 
Clearly, it does not follow that my present justi-
fied belief that I have a mild headache is based on 
neurophysiological evidence. Consequently, (ST) 
must be rejected. 
One might object that the intuition which 
motivates (WUT) does not depend on (ST) and 
offer the following argument in support of this 

REVISABILITY, RELIABILISM, AND A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
601 
contention. IS Suppose that S believes that p on the 
basis of nonexperiential evidence and that the 
warrant which the nonexperiential evidence con-
fers on p can be defeated by some experiential 
evidence. It follows that the nonexperiential evi-
dence can warrant S's belief that p only in the 
absence of the potential defeating evidence. 
Hence, in order for S to be justified in believing 
that p, S must be justified in believing that the 
defeating evidence does not obtain. But such jus-
tification can come only from experience. 
This line of argument presupposes a thesis 
analogous to (ST): 
(ST*) If evidence el can defeat or override the 
warrant conferred on S's belief that p by e2, 
then e2 does not justify S's belief that p unless 
S is justified in believing that -e l . 
(ST*) runs up against a problem similar to that 
faced by (ST). Suppose that we grant that (6) is 
true. It does not follow that my present introspec-
tive belief that I have a mild headache is justified 
only if I have some justified beliefs about my 
present neurophysiological state. Consequently, 
(ST*) must also be rejected. 
Once (ST) is rejected, however, plausible 
counterexamples to (WUT) can be offered. Before 
providing the cases, a word of caution is in order. 
The issue of whether those beliefs traditionally 
alleged to be justified a priori, such as mathemat-
ical and logical beliefs, are rationally revisable in 
light of experiential evidence is controversiaL 
Although I believe that the cases to be presented 
support the claim that such beliefs are revisable in 
light of experiential evidence, the truth of this 
claim is not necessary for our present concerns. 
For our purpose here is to argue that even if it is 
granted that such beliefs are open to experiential 
disconfirmation, it does not follow that they are 
not justified a priori. 
Suppose that Phil is a working logician who 
regularly and consistently arrives at interesting 
results. Phil, however, is bothered by the fact that 
although he is a reliable producer of interesting 
proofs, he is not an infallible producer of such 
proofs. As it turns out, he has a colleague, Maria, 
who has done pioneering work in the neurophysi-
ological basis of cognitive processes. As a radical 
means to self-improvement, Phil asks Maria to 
conduct a study of his efforts at constructing 
proofs in order to see if she can uncover some, 
hopefully reversible, neurophysiological cause for 
his infrequent erroneous proofs. The investiga-
tion reveals that (a) a particular interference pat-
tern is present in Phil's brain when and only when 
he constructs an erroneous proof; (b) whenever 
Phil constructs a proof under the influence of this 
pattern and the pattern is subsequently erradi-
cated by neurophysiological intervention, he is 
able to see the flaw in the original proof and go on 
to correct it. Finally, there is an accepted body of 
neurophysiological theory available which sup-
ports the hypothesis that such a pattern should 
cause cognitive lapses. Now suppose that Phil 
believes that p entails q on the basis of construct-
ing a proof which he carefully scrutinizes and 
finds acceptable. Despite his careful scrutiny, the 
proof is flawed. He later discovers in a subsequent 
meeting with Maria that (a) she had been moni-
toring his brain activity at the time the proof was 
constructed with a remote sensor; (b) the sensor 
indicated that the interference pattern was 
present; and (c) standard tests indicated that all 
of the equipment was functioning properly. Phil 
is still unable to uncover the flaw in the proof on 
his own but nevertheless concludes, on the basis 
of Maria's empirical findings, that there is a flaw 
in his proof that p entails q. 
The salient features of the example are: (a) 
Phil's belief that p entails q was based on a process 
of reflective thought which is, prima facie, a source 
of a priori justification; (b) Phil's belief is justified 
since this process regularly and reliably produces 
correct proofs; and (c) the justification which the 
process of reflective thought conferred on the 
belief was subsequently defeated by the empirical 
evidence indicating that the interference pattern 
was present. (a) is uncontroversial. (b) is more 
controversial since it involves the claim that there 
can be a priori justification for a false belief. This 
claim was defended earlier when we discussed the 
Mary example. Finally, we propose to grant (c) 
for purposes of assessing (WUT). Hence, the only 
remaining question is whether it follows from (a), 
(b), and (c) that (d) Phil's belief that p entails q is 
not justified a priori. Note that the belief is justi-
fied and the process which produced it is a non-
experiential process. This appears sufficient to 
establish that the belief in question is justified a 
priori. A proponent of (WUT) can resist this con-
clusion only by insisting that since experiential 

602 
ALBERT CASULLO 
evidence defeated the justification conferred on 
the belief by the process of reflective thought, the 
belief is based on experiential evidence. But this 
move involves embracing (ST) which we rejected 
earlier. There is no more plausibility in maintain-
ing that Phil's belief that p entails q is based on 
neurophysiological evidence than there is in 
maintaining that his present belief that he has a 
headache is based on such evidence. 
One might balk at this example since, like the 
Mary example of the previous section, it involves 
the claim that there can be a priori justification 
for a false belief. But this feature can easily be 
eliminated, as in the Charlie example, by intro-
ducing misleading evidence. Let us suppose that 
Phil's proof that p entails q is in fact correct but 
that Maria's sensor has malfunctioned, errone-
ously indicating the presence of the interference 
pattern. The standard tests, however, fail to detect 
the malfunction. Finally, let us suppose that were 
Phil to become aware that (a) the sensor had indi-
cated the presence of the interference pattern, 
and (b) the standard tests indicated that the 
sensor was functioning correctly, he would con-
clude that his proof that p entails q is erroneous. 
Nevertheless, since Maria never reveals to Phil her 
observations, his belief remains justified. (WUT) 
entails that Phil's belief is not justified a priori 
despite the fact that (i) it is justified; and (ii) it is 
based on a process of reflective thought. Clearly, 
in order to substantiate the claim that Phil's belief 
is based on experiential evidence, the proponent 
of (WUT) must again appeal to (ST). Since 
(WUT) cannot be defended without appeal to 
(ST), it should be rejected. 
It has been argued that neither (SUT) nor 
(WUT) is plausible. Hence, the concept of a priori 
justification is not tied to the concept of rational 
unrevisability. The most important consequence 
of this result is that it establishes that a very wide-
spread line of argument against the a priori is 
unfounded. One cannot simply adopt Peirce's 
doctrine of fallibilism as an easy stepping stone to 
rejecting the a priori. Instead, attention must be 
focused on the crucial notion of nonexperiential 
evidence. The traditional problem of providing a 
general characterization of such evidence still, 
remains. Our investigation raises two additional 
salient questions which need to be addressed: a) 
the strength of a priori justifications; and b) the 
relationship between a priori and a posteriori 
justifications for the same belief. Further investi-
gation of these issues is more likely to clarify our 
understanding of the a priori than further inves-
tigation of the notion of rational unrevisability. 
II. 
Reliabilism and A Priori Knowledge 
We have found reason to be sceptical about the 
alleged connection between the a priori and the 
rationally unrevisable. Our considerations, how-
ever, have proceeded at a very general level. We 
have considered the concept of a priori knowl-
edge apart from any particular general account of 
knowledge. This raises the possibility that a spe-
cific theory of knowledge might provide some 
support for (UT) that has not emerged in our 
earlier discussion. Our primary purpose here is to 
examine whether (UT) is any more plausible 
when embedded in a reliabilist theory of knowl-
edge. It will be argued that the framework of reli-
abilism actually provides independent reason for 
rejecting (UT) but offers little help in providing a 
positive characterization of a priori knowledge. 
We shall conclude by briefly outlining how relia-
bilism provides some resources for defending the 
existence of a priori knowledge. 
IIA 
Philip Kitcher's recent work attempts to charac-
terize a priori knowledge within the more general 
framework of a psycho logistic analysis of knowl-
edge. The leading idea of such an analysis is that 
what differentiates mere true belief from knowl-
edge is the causal ancestry of the belief in ques-
tion. So we have 
(1) 
X knows that p if and only if p and X's 
belief that p was produced by a process 
which is a warrant for it 
where "warrant" refers to those processes which 
produce beliefs in a manner suitable to justify 
them. 16 In order to complete this account, some 
further information must be provided about 
what types of processes warrant the beliefs they 
produce. Although Kitcher proposes to remain 
neutral on this issue, it is difficult, if not impos-
sible, to assess his account of a priori warrant 
without some general characterization of warrant 

REVISABILITY, RELIABILISM, AND A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
603 
conferring processes. Since Alvin Goldman's ver-
sion of process reliabilism is the most articulated 
psychologistic account presently available, and 
Kitcher endorses it as the best available account, 
we shall adopt it in our critical evaluation of 
Kitcher's analysis of a priori warrant. 
Kitcher approaches the problem of analyzing 
the notion of an a priori warrant by attempting to 
isolate the general characteristics of belief form-
ing processes which have led to their being classi-
fied as a priori. In order to produce knowledge 
which is independent of experience, a process 
must satisfy three conditions: (i) it must be avail-
able independently of experience; (ii) it must 
produce warranted belief independently of expe-
rience; and (iii) it must produce true belief inde-
pendently of experience. These general ideas are 
spelled out more precisely in the following 
account of a priori knowledge: 
(2) 
X knows a priori that p if and only if X 
knows that p and X's belief that p was 
produced by a process which is an a 
priori warrant for it. 
(3) 
a is an a priori warrant for X's belief that 
p if and only if a is a process such that, 
given any life e, sufficient for X for p, 
(a) 
some process of the same type 
could produce in X a belief that p 
(b) 
if a process of the same type were 
to produce in X a belief that p, 
then it would warrant X in believ-
ing that p 
(c) 
if a process of the same type were 
to produce in X a belief that p, 
then p." 
Kitcher goes on to discuss in more detail the 
modal and conditional notions he employs as 
well as making some interesting observations 
about the classification of types of processes. 
Since these issues are not germane to our con-
cerns, we can forego the details. 
Let us proceed by examining individually each 
condition in Kitcher's account. Condition (a) is 
intended to capture the intuitive idea that a priori 
warrants are available independently of experi-
ence. The intuitive idea appears uncontroversial. 
When we turn to Kitcher's technical formulation 
of the idea, however, some difficult questions 
arise. In order to address them directly, let us 
begin with a statement of the condition 
(3a) 
If a is an a priori warrant for X's belief 
that p then a is a process such that, 
given any life e, sufficient for X for p, 
some process of the same type could 
produce in X a belief that p. 
A life is sufficient for X for p just in case X could 
have had that life and gained sufficient under-
standing to believe that pY But what is involved 
in gaining sufficient understanding to believe a 
proposition? 
Kitcher's informal discussion of the Kantian 
process of pure intuition as an example of an 
alleged a priori warrant provides some clarification: 
According to the Kantian story, if our life were to 
enable us to acquire the appropriate concepts ... 
then the appropriate kind of pure intuition 
would be available to us. We could represent a 
triangle to ourselves, inspect it, and so reach the 
same beliefs. 19 
It appears that gaining sufficient understanding 
to believe that p consists in acquiring the concepts 
involved in p. Once one has acquired the requisite 
concepts, one can engage in the further process of 
constructing and inspecting the triangle which 
results in the belief that p. 
The first condition appears to be too strong. 
Consider a belief forming process such as percep-
tion. This process consists of a complex series of 
events internal to the believer which is initiated 
by a retinal stimulation and results in a belief. The 
realization of such a process is nomologically 
dependent upon a large array of neurophysio-
logical features of the believer. For example, 
such a process is not available to a person with a 
severed optic nerve or badly damaged retinas. Let 
us call the complex neurophysiological state of a 
person which is nomologically necessary for a 
process to produce beliefs in that person the 
standing condition for that process. (3a) implausi-
bly requires that a priori processes be independent 
of their standing conditions. 
In order to see this consider the following 
example. Suppose that in the actual world S forms 
the belief that no two sides of a triangle are 

604 
ALBERT CASULLO 
parallel through a process of pure intuition. Let 
us also suppose that there is a single neural condi-
tion, N, of S's brain which is nomically necessary 
in order for S to form and inspect a mental repre-
sentation of a triangle. Now consider a different 
world, W*, whose nomological structure down to 
the neurophysiological level is identical to that of 
the actual world. Let us also suppose that in W* N 
is not a necessary condition for acquiring the con-
cepts involved in the belief that no two sides of a 
triangle are parallel. Finally, suppose that in W* S 
acquires these concepts but lacks N. Hence, in W* 
S has a life sufficient for the belief that no two 
sides of a triangle are parallel yet the process of 
pure intuitions is not available to S. Nevertheless, 
it seems implausible to maintain, solely on the 
basis of this fact, that the process of pure intui-
tion does not provide an a priori warrant in the 
actual world for S's belief that no two sides of a 
triangle are parallel. 
The source of Kitcher's difficulty with condi-
tion (3a) is that he tries to explicate the manner in 
which a priori processes are available independ-
ently of experience in terms of the manner in 
which they depend on experience. The key idea 
involved in the notion of a process being available 
independently of experience is 
(4) 
No experiences other than those neces-
sary to acquire the concepts are neces-
sary for the process to be available. 
Kitcher analyzes this idea along the following 
lines: 
(5) 
A life which includes experiences suffi-
cient to acquire the concepts is sufficient 
for the process to be available. 
But (5) is clearly stronger than (4) since the latter 
is compatible with other conditions, such as neu-
rophysiological conditions, being necessary for the 
availability of the process while (5) is not. Hence, 
(3a) needs to be revised along the following lines 
(3a*) 
If a is an a priori warrant for X's belief 
that p then a is a process such that, 
given any life e, sufficient for X for p, 
no further experiences are necessary 
for some process of the same type to 
produce in X a belief that p. 
(3a*) is not open to the problem faced by (3a) 
since it allows that some nonexperiential condi-
tions might be necessary for the belief in question 
to be produced. 
Let us now turn to Kitcher's second condition 
on a priori warrants. He claims that such processes 
must produce warranted beliefs independently of 
experience. This claim can be put as follows 
(3b) 
If a is an a priori warrant for X's belief 
that p then a is a process such that, 
given any life e, sufficient for X for p, if 
a process of the same type were to pro-
duce in X a belief that p, then it would 
warrant X in believing that p. 
(3b), in effect, places a very strong defeasibility 
condition on a priori warrants. It entails that 
(DC) If a is an a priori warrant for X's belief 
that p then the warrant which a confers on p 
cannot be defeated by any experiences com-
patible with S's acquiring the concepts 
involved in p. 
(DC) is, in effect, a close relative of (WUT). 
This condition should have little plausibility 
for anyone who subscribes to a reliabilist account 
of warrant. For it follows from very general 
requirements of the reliability theory that no 
process can satisfy this condition. Let us begin by 
noting that there are two different ways in which 
the warrant a process a confers on a belief that p 
can be defeated by experience: 
(a) 
experience may provide reason to believe 
that a is not a reliable belief forming 
process; 
(b) 
experience may provide reason to 
believe that p is false. 
I shall refer to experiences of the first sort as indi-
rect defeaters and to experiences of the second 
sort as direct defeaters.2o It is important to recog-
nize that the experiences which are indirect 
defeaters for a belief that p are not typically also 
direct defeaters for that belief and vice-versa. 
Suppose, for example, that I form the belief that 
there is a cup on the desk via perception and the 
results of a neurological examination show that I 
am prone to hallucinations. Although the exam 

REVISABILITY, RELIABILISM, AND A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
605 
results defeat the warrant conferred on my belief 
by the process of perception, they do not provide 
evidence that there is not a cup on the desk. This 
is shown by the fact that no one else would be less 
warranted in believing that there is a cup on the 
desk were they to become aware of the results of 
my neurological examination. 
If we now return to (DC), we can see that there 
is some plausibility to this principle if we consider 
only direct defeaters. For it can be plausibly argued 
that if one has constructed a valid proof for a par-
ticular theorem then the warrant conferred on the 
theorem by the process of constructing the proof 
cannot be defeated by experiences such as the tes-
timony of authorities or the results of a computer 
program. If one has a proof in hand then one is 
warranted in being suspect about the sincerity or 
competence of the alleged authorities and com-
puter programmers. But when we turn to indirect 
defeaters the situation changes radically. First of 
all, it is generally granted by proponents of reliabi-
lism that the warrant which a reliable process con-
fers on S's belief that p is defeated if S has reason 
to believe that the process is not a reliable one. 21 
Secondly, the reliability of any cognitive process is 
a matter which is open to empirical investigation. 
Hence, there is some set of possible experiences 
which would justify us in believing that it is unre-
liable. Here it is crucial to recognize that even if a 
belief forming process is in fact reliable, it does 
not follow that the available evidence will warrant 
us in believing that the process is reliable. We may 
lack the technical sophistication to uncover the 
evidence which would establish the reliability of 
the process and the evidence which we have 
uncovered may point in the other direction. 
Furthermore, it is always possible that our experi-
ences include misleading evidence. Such evidence, 
despite being misleading, would nevertheless 
defeat the warrant conferred on a belief by a reli-
able processY Hence, (DC) requires that for a 
reliable belief forming process ex to confer an a 
priori warrant on S's belief that p, there be no pos-
sible worlds in which S acquires the concepts 
involved in p and also has evidence, perhaps mis-
leading, that ex is not a reliable process. But, on the 
face of it, there appears to be no inconsistency in 
the supposition that such worlds exist. Therefore, 
no process can satisfy (DC). Since no process can 
satisfy (DC) and condition (3b) entails (DC), (3b) 
should also be rejected. 
Even though we have argued that (3b) should 
be rejected, it does appear to be a plausible prin-
ciple. Furthermore, it is widely accepted. Indeed, 
since (3b) is a variant of (WUT), it would be 
accepted by any proponent of (UT). I want to 
suggest, however, that (3b) and (WUT) derive 
whatever plausibility they have from confusing 
two different issues: 
(a) 
the existence of a priori warrants 
and 
(b) 
the strength of a priori warrants. 
In order to substantiate this claim, let us consider an 
analogous situation in the case of a posteriori war-
rants. It is generally granted that introspection is the 
primary source of knowledge of one's psychological 
states. Yet it is also recognized that behavioral evi-
dence warrants beliefs about psychological states. It 
follows that the process of observing one's own 
behavior also warrants beliefs about one's own psy-
chological states. Nevertheless, one rarely utilizes 
perceptual warrants since introspection alone can 
warrant such beliefs. Hence, it is widely held that 
(6) 
Introspection produces warranted be-
liefs independently of perception. 
Some, however, have maintained that the beliefs 
formed by introspection have a special epistemic 
status. Such beliefs are indubitable. Let us put this 
claim as follows 
(7) 
If S's belief that p is formed by a process of 
introspection, then there is no future event 
such that if S were to become justified in 
believing that it occurred, then S would be 
less warranted in believing that p. 
On the other hand, it has been argued in the 
recent literature that if neurophysiology were to 
advance to the point where there is (a) a well sup-
ported theory correlating neurophysiological 
states with psychological states and (b) a means 
of reliably ascertaining the state of person's cen-
tral nervous system, then perceptual evidence 
could provide grounds for rejecting one's intro-
spective beliefs.23 If one grants that the scenario 
described is possible, it follows that 

606 
ALBERT CASULLO 
(8) 
The warrant conferred on a belief by intro-
spection can be defeated by perception. 
(8) is clearly incompatible with (7). If (8) were 
correct, it would follow that the strength of the 
warrant claimed for introspection is exaggerated. 
But is (8) also incompatible with (6)? No. For (6) 
only claims that introspection can warrant a belief 
in the absence of perceptual evidence. (8) does not 
deny this. It tells us that (a) perceptual, as well as 
introspective, evidence is relevant to the justifica-
tion of beliefs about one's experiential states; and 
(b) the warrant conferred on such beliefs by intro-
spection is not strong enough to override all con-
flicting perceptual evidence. These points can be 
made more explicit by analyzing (6) as follows 
(6*) 
If S's belief that p is produced by intro-
spection and S has no beliefs produced 
by any perceptual processes regarding 
either the subject matter of p or the 
process which produced p then S's belief 
that p is warranted by introspection. 
(6*) has the virtue of preserving the central idea 
that introspection, unaided by perception, can 
warrant beliefs without appearing to imply that 
such beliefs are completely immune from percep-
tual disconfirmation. 
The upshot of this discussion is that the intui-
tive idea that 
(9) 
A priori processes produce warranted 
beliefs independently of experience 
should be analyzed in the same fashion as (6) was 
analyzed. (6*) suggests that (3b) be revised as follows 
(3b*) 
If a is an a priori warrant for X's belief 
that p then a is a process such that, 
given any life e, sufficient for X for p 
and in which S has no beliefs pro-
duced by any experiential processes 
regarding either the subject matter of 
p or the process which produced p, if 
a process of the same type were to 
produce in X a belief that p, then it 
would warrant X in believing that p. 
(3b*) implies that a priori processes can warrant 
beliefs in the absence of experiential processes 
without implying that such warrants cannot be 
defeated by experience. 
Let us conclude by considering Kitcher's third 
condition on a priori warrants: 
(3c) 
If a is an a priori warrant for X's belief 
that p then a is a process such that, 
given any life e, sufficient for X for p, if 
a process of the same type were to pro-
duce in X a belief that p, then p. 
(3c) requires of a priori warrants that they, 
have the highest degree of reliability. They 
must not produce any false beliefs. Kitcher 
motivates this strong condition by the following 
consideration: 
to generate knowledge independently of experi-
ence, a priori warrants must produce warranted 
true belief in counterfactual situations where 
experiences are different. 24 
This claim, however, is puzzling. It is uncontro-
versial that knowledge entails truth. But since 
Kitcher is providing an account of a priori war-
rant rather than a priori knowledge, it is not clear 
why he is at all concerned with the requirement of 
truth. On the face of it, the mere fact that a proc-
ess generates some false beliefs does not entail 
that it does not warrant the beliefs that it pro-
duces. There are two possibilities here. Perhaps 
the reliabilist account of warrant requires a strong 
connection with truth. On the other hand, per-
haps it is the notion of an a priori warrant which 
necessitates the connection. Let us explore each 
of these alternatives. 
Does the reliabilist account of warrant require 
that warrant conferring processes never produce 
false beliefs? It appears not. Consider, for exam-
ple, Goldman's account: 
A J-rule system R is right if and only if R permits 
certain (basic) psychological processes, and the 
instantiation of these processes would result in a 
truth ratio of beliefs that meets some specific 
high threshold (greater than .50).25 
Goldman does not fix the threshold value and is 
content to leave his account with this degree of 
vagueness since he maintains that the ordinary 
concept of justification is similarly vague. Hence, 
reliabilism does not in general require that belief 

REVISABILITY, RELIABILISM, AND A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
607 
forming processes be maximally reliable in order 
to produce warranted beliefs. 
If it is granted that reliabilism does not in gen-
eral require that a belief forming process be max-
imally reliable in order to warrant beliefs 
produced by it, is there any reason to suppose 
that a priori processes be maximally reliable? 
Kitcher does not explicitly argue in support of 
this claim but he does endorse an intuition which 
supports it: 
if a person is entitled to ignore empirical informa-
tion about the type of world she inhabits then that 
must be because she has at her disposal a method 
of arriving at belief which guarantees true belief. 
(This intuition can be defended by pointing out 
that if a method which could produce false belief 
were allowed to override experience, then we 
might be blocked from obtaining knowledge 
which we might have otherwise gained.) In my 
analysis, the intuition appears as (3C).26 
This intuition rests on very shaky grounds. The 
existence of a priori warrants does not entitle a 
person to ignore empirical information about the 
world. For such processes may warrant beliefs 
only in the absence of conflicting evidence derived 
from empirical sources. In order to be entitled to 
ignore empirical information about the world, 
one would have to be committed not only to the 
view that a priori warrants exist but also to the 
following thesis regarding the strength of such 
warrants: 
(10) 
The warrant conferred on a belief by an 
a priori process can neither be defeated 
nor overridden by experience. 
But, as we argued earlier, (10) should be rejected. 
Once (10) is rejected then we are in a position to 
recognize that rather than blocking a person from 
obtaining knowledge she might have otherwise 
had via experience, a priori warrants which do 
not guarantee truth provide a person with an 
additional way of obtaining knowledge. Hence, 
we can conclude that (3c) should be revised along 
the following lines: 
(3c*) 
If a is an a priori warrant for X's belief 
that p then a is a process such that, 
given any life e, sufficient for X for p, if 
a process of the same type were to pro-
duce beliefs in X, then a preponder-
ance of those beliefs would be true. 
Although (3c*) does not indicate what constitutes 
a "preponderance" of true beliefs in a life, it does 
make clear that a priori warrants need not guar-
antee truth. 
We are now in a position to summarize our con-
clusions and to draw out their more general impli-
cations. Condition (3a) was rejected because it 
required that a priori processes be independent of 
their standing conditions. (3b) and (3c), on the 
other hand, conflated the existence of a priori war-
rants with the strength of such warrants. Revised 
necessary conditions were proposed to remedy 
these shortcomings. But are our revised necessary 
conditions jointly sufficient for analyzing the notion 
of an a priori warrant? (3c) provides a sufficient 
condition for a process to be a warrant. The burden 
of distinguishing between a priori and a posteriori 
warrants falls on (3a*) and (3b*). (3a*) tells us that 
in the case of a priori warrants, the only experiences 
necessary for producing a belief are those necessary 
for acquiring the requisite concepts. Hence (3a*) 
provides information about the availability of war-
rants but does not provide information about the 
nature of such warrants. This key role is left to (3b*). 
Unfortunately, (3b*) does not appear to be adequate 
for the role. For it simply states in reliabilist jargon 
the traditional idea that a priori warrants produce 
warranted beliefs independently of experience. It 
provides no account of what differentiates experien-
tial warrants from nonexperiential warrants. But, of 
course, this is the chief obstacle to providing an illu-
minating characterization of a priori knowledge. 
For example, it is uncontroversial that knowledge 
based on either memory or perception is not a 
priori. But introspection has proved to be contro-
versial. Some have maintained that there is intro-
spective a priori knowledge of one's psychological 
states while others have denied this. On the other 
hand, proponents of the view that intuition is an a 
priori source of mathematical knowledge often 
maintain that it is a faculty akin to sense perception. 
What remains unclear, however, is the basis for 
maintaining that knowledge based on the former 
but not the latter is a priori. (3b*) is of little use in 
resolving these problems. So, in the end, the route 
through reliabilism has made little progress in 
demarcating the a priori. 

608 
ALBERT CASULLO 
lIB 
It has been argued that reliabilism provides little 
help in elucidating the notion of a priori 
knowledge. In particular, it does not offer much 
illumination regarding the central notion of non-
experiential warrant. Despite this shortcoming, 
reliabilism can be of significant value to a propo-
nent of the a priori. For the account allows one to 
address what have been come to be regarded as 
"standard" objections to the existence of a priori 
knowledge. These objections fall into three broad 
categories: 1) a priori knowledge is incompatible 
with fallibilism; 2) a priori knowledge is at odds 
with the requirements of epistemology natural-
ized; and 3) proponents of the a priori cannot 
offer plausible answers to questions about second 
level justification. 
The doctrine of fallibilism has been presented 
in various different forms. For our purposes let us 
understand fallibilism as the view that we should 
hold every belief, no matter how strongly it is 
supported, in an open minded spirit which 
acknowledges the possibility that future evidence 
may require us to abandon it. A priori knowledge 
is incompatible with the doctrine of fallibilism 
only if one adopts an analysis of the concept of 
the a priori which entails that such knowledge is 
rationally unrevisable. Such an analysis, however, 
should have little attraction for a reliabilist. For, 
as our discussion of Kitcher's principle (3b) indi-
cates, rationally unrevisable beliefs are not even 
possible within a reliabilist framework. In order 
for a belief to be rationally unrevisable it must 
satisfy a strong defeasability constraint such as 
(DC). The process which warrants the belief must 
be such that no possible future evidence could 
defeat the warrant which that process confers on 
the belief in question. But, as we argued above, 
there always exists the possibility of evidence, 
even if it is only misleading evidence, which 
would justify one in believing that a belief form-
ing process is unreliable. Such evidence would 
defeat the warrant which the process confers on 
the beliefs that it produces. Once this point is 
appreciated, it becomes evident that a reliabilist 
who analyzes the concept of a priori knowledge in 
terms of rational unrevisability cannot address 
the issue of the existence of such knowledge in a 
nontrivial fashion. The issue is settled by stipula-
tion. Hence, any reliabilist who wishes to address 
non trivially the issue of the existence of a priori 
knowledge cannot adopt an account of such 
knowledge which is at odds with the doctrine of 
fallibilism. 
The classical formulation of the tension 
between the alleged existence of a priori knowl-
edge and epistemology naturalized is due to Paul 
Benacerraf.27 The question he poses is how proc-
esses such as mathematical intuition can provide 
knowledge of mathematical entities if such enti-
ties are causally inert? Although a number of 
authors have attempted to respond to the ques-
tion by arguing that abstract entities are not caus-
ally inert,2s a reliabilist need not make this move. 
For reliabilism reduces the issue from the level of 
a conceptual problem to a factual issue. Reliabilism 
requires of a warranted belief that it be produced 
by a process that is in fact reliable. Although proc-
esses such as perception, which involve a causal 
relation between the believer and the objects of 
belief, are our present paradigms of reliable belief 
forming processes, it remains a contingent matter 
whether other sorts of belief forming processes 
are reliable. Since warrant requires reliability 
rather than causal connection, the alleged causal 
inertness of the objects of the beliefs formed by 
the process of mathematical intuition is not a 
conceptual bar to such beliefs being warranted. 29 
Hence, if mathematical intuition is in fact a reli-
able belief forming process then the mathemati-
cal beliefs produced by this process are warranted 
(provided, of course, that the warrant conferred 
on those beliefs is not defeated or overridden by 
warrants from other processes). 
Finally, let us turn to those problems which 
we have classified under the category of second 
level justification. It is a distinctive feature of 
reliabilism that in order for a reliable process to 
warrant a belief which it produces in a cognizer, 
the cognizer need not be aware that the belief 
was produced by a particular process, let alone 
that the process is a reliable one. So, in order for 
the process of mathematical intuition to war-
rant one's belief that 2 + 2 = 4, it is not necessary 
that one be aware of the source of the belief. It is 
this feature of reliabilism which is rejected by 
internalists. For example, Laurence BonJour 
maintains that "For a belief to be epistemically 
justified for a particular person requires that this 
person be himself in cognitive possession of such 
a reason."30 But it is precisely this requirement of 

REVISABILITY, RELIABILISM, AND A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
609 
internalist accounts that leads to the problems 
of second-level justification. Suppose that one 
comes to believe that 2 + 2 = 4 on the basis of 
intuiting that 2 + 2 = 4. According to the inter-
nalist, the mere fact that the belief is produced 
by the reliable process of intuition is not suffi-
cient to warrant the belief. One must stand in 
some cognitive relation to the intuition. 
Presumably, one must justifiably believe that 
one intuits that 2 + 2 = 4. Now, of course, the 
appeal to further justificatory beliefs must stop 
at some point if an infinite regress of justifica-
tion is to be avoided. So the question which 
naturally arises is whether the belief that one 
intuits that 2 + 2 = 4 is an appropriate point for 
justification to come to an end. The problem we 
face in addressing this question is that propo-
nents of intuitionism diverge on their views 
regarding our knowledge of the existence of 
intuitions.3l Some, like Godel, seem to view the 
faculty of intuition as something which must be 
posited on theoretical grounds in order to 
explain mathematical knowledge.32 On this view 
one's justification for believing that there are 
mathematical intuitions is indirect. Others, like 
Pollock, seem to think that the existence of such 
intuitions is uncontroversial.33 On this view, one 
can be directly justified in believing that there 
are mathematical intuitions. But now the inter-
nalist is faced with a dilemma. If one's knowl-
edge that one is intuiting that 2 + 2 = 4 is indirect, 
then the justification of mathematical beliefs 
cannot rest solely on intuition. Some account 
must be provided of how one is justified in 
believing that one is having the requisite intui-
tion. And it begins to appear as though only 
those versed in the epistemology of mathemat-
ics will be in a position to provide an answer. 
Hence, the account severely restricts the scope 
of mathematical knowledge. But suppose the 
internalist claims, instead, that one can be 
directly justified in believing that there are mathe-
Notes 
See, for example, Panayot Butchvarov, The 
Concept of Knowledge (Evanston, 1970), 
Part 2; and R. M. Chisholm, Theory of 
Knowledge, 2nd edn (Englewood Cliffs, 
1977), chapter 3. 
matical intuitions. It then becomes difficult to 
explain why other proponents of intuitionism 
do not have this direct access to their intuitions. 
Given that they are favorably disposed toward 
intuitionism, why do they believe that the exist-
ence of intuitions can be justified only indi-
rectly? Reliabilism, however, avoids the dilemma. 
Since cognitive access to the process which 
forms a belief is not a requirement for justifica-
tion, the reliabilist is not forced to embrace 
either option. For if the belief in question is 
formed by the process of intuition and the proc-
ess is a reliable one, it matters not whether the 
subject of the belief recognizes, or can justify the 
belief, that intuition is the operative faculty. 
We have tried to indicate some ways in which 
the resources of reliabilism can be of use to a pro-
ponent of the a priori. The advantages offered by 
reliabilism, however, are realized at the level of 
defending the existence of a priori knowledge 
rather than at the level of characterizing such 
knowledge. In some ways, this result is not sur-
prising. For although reliabilism offers the prom-
ise of advancing epistemology by incorporating 
advances in cognitive science and other relevant 
empirical disciplines, work in these areas is still at 
a sufficiently rudimentary stage that the concep-
tual scheme of folk psychology remains in place. 
Consequently, there is no theoretically informed 
replacement available for our intuitive distinction 
between experiential and nonexperiential belief 
forming processes. On the other hand, the intro-
duction of reliability theories was to a large extent 
motivated by traditional epistemological prob-
lems such as the regress of justification and the 
failure of causal theories to solve the Gettier prob-
lem. These general epistemological problems, 
however, also arise within the more restricted 
domain of the a priori. Consequently, to the 
extent that reliabilism is successful in dealing with 
these general issues, it will be of use to a proponent 
of the a priori. 
2 See, for example, John Pollock, Knowledge and 
Justification (Princeton, 1974), chapter 10; 
Mark 
Steiner, 
Mathematical 
Knowledge 
(Ithaca, 1975), chapter 4; and Jaegwon Kim, 
"Some Reflections on Perception and A Priori 

610 
ALBERT CASULLO 
Knowledge," Philosophical Studies 40 (1981), 
pp.355-62. 
3 Paul Benacerraf, "Mathematical Truth;' 
Journal of Philosophy 70 (1973), pp. 661-79. 
For a further discussion of this issue, see 
Mark Steiner, 
Mathematical 
Knowledge 
(Ithaca, 1975), chapter 4; and W. H. Hart 
"Review of Mathematical Knowledge," Journal 
of Philosophy 74 (1977), pp. 118-29. 
4 For a lucid summary of his anti-apriorism 
position, see Putnam's '''Two Dogmas' 
Revisited." Putnam has 
more recently 
expressed some misgivings about his earlier 
position. These are to be found in "There Is 
At Least One A Priori Truth," and "Analyticity 
and 
Apriority: 
Beyond 
Quine 
and 
Wittgenstein." All three papers are reprinted 
in Putnam's Philosophical Papers, Vol. 3: 
Realism and Reason (Cambridge, 1983). 
5 Philip Kitcher, The Nature of Mathematical 
Knowledge (Oxford, 1983). His analysis of 
the concept of a priori knowledge orginally 
appeared 
m 
"A 
Priori 
Knowledge," 
Philosophical Review 89 (1980), pp. 3-23. 
6 Following Putnam, I shall interpret the 
notion of unrevisability epistemically: "an 
unrevisable statement is one we would never 
be rational to give up ... " (Realism and 
Reason, p. 98). Hence, "the statement that p 
is rationally unrevisable" is shorthand for 
the more cumbersome "s would never be 
justified in rejecting the statement that p". 
7 It is worth noting that two recent propo-
nents of the a priori, John Pollock and Mark 
Steiner, acknowledge that beliefs based on 
intuition are defeasible but, nevertheless, 
maintain that such beliefs are justified a 
priori. See Pollock's discussion of "prima 
facie reasons" in chapter 1 0 of Knowledge 
and Justification and Steiner's discussion of 
"checking procedures" m chapter 4 of 
Mathematical Knowledge. 
Hence, (SUT) 
rules out by stipulation a feature which some 
proponents of the a priori have attempted to 
build into their accounts. 
8 Hilary Putnam, "What Is Mathematical 
Truth?" m Philosophical Papers, Vol. 1: 
Mathematics, Matter and Method, 2nd edn. 
(Cambridge, 1979). 
9 Ibid., p. 62. 
10 
E. Zermelo, "A New Proof of the Possibility 
of a Well Ordering," reprinted in J. van 
Heijenoort (ed.), From Frege to Godel 
(Cambridge, 1967) and quoted in H. Putnam, 
"What Is Mathematical Truth?" 
11 
This argument can be extended to the cases 
of inductive justification that Polya has 
brought to our attention such as Euler's dis-
covery that the sum of the series 1In2 is rr2/6. 
See G. Polya, Induction and Analogy in 
Mathematics (Princeton, 1954). Since the 
statements which confirm the inductive gen-
eralization are known non experientially, 
there is no reason to suppose that the gener-
alization is not known a priori. The 
epistemological significance of inductive 
procedures in mathematics is stressed by 
both Putnam in "What IS Mathematical 
Truth?" 
and 
Steiner 
In 
Mathematical 
Knowledge, chapter 3. 
12 
Aron Edidin has argued, In "A Priori 
Knowledge for Fallibilists," Philosophical 
Studies 46 (1984), pp. 189-97, that (WUT) 
entails (SUT). If this were the case, then no 
additional argument would be required in 
order to reject (WUT). I have argued, how-
ever, in "A Note on Fallibilism and A Priori 
Knowledge" (manuscript), that Edidin's 
argument in support of this claim involves a 
premise which is not available to all propo-
nents of a priori knowledge. Hence, those 
who cannot accept this premise will require 
further argument to reject (WUT). 
l3 
P. Kitcher, "How Kant Almost Wrote 'Two 
Dogmas of Empiricism' and Why He Didn't;' 
Philosophical Topics 12 (1981), p. 222. 
14 
See for example, D. M. Armstrong, "Is 
Introspective 
Knowledge 
Incorrigible?," 
Philosophical Review 72 (J 963), pp. 417-32; 
and K. Parsons, "Mistaking Sensations," 
Philosophical Review 79 (J 970), pp. 201-13. 
15 
This objection is due to an anonymous 
referee. 
16 
Kitcher, The Nature of Mathematical Know-
ledge, p. 17. 
17 
Ibid., p. 24. 
18 
Ibid., p. 22. 
19 
Ibid., p. 23. 
20 
This distinction 
IS analogous to John 
Pollock's distinction between type I and type 

REVISABILITY, RELIABILISM, AND A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
611 
II 
defeaters. 
See 
his 
Knowledge 
and 
Justification, pp. 42-3. 
21 
This point was recognized very early by Alvin 
Goldman in "What Is Justified Belief?" in 
G. Pappas (ed.), Justification and Knowledge 
(Dordrecht, 1979). It led him to move from 
the following straightforward formulation 
of a base-clause principle for justified belief: 
(l) 
If S's believing pat t results from a reli-
able cognitive belief-forming process 
(or set of processes), then S's belief in p 
at t is justified. 
to the more complicated 
(2) 
If S's belief in p at t results from a reli-
able cognitive process, and there is no 
reliable or conditionally reliable proc-
ess available to S which, had it been 
used by S in addition to the process 
actually used, would have resulted in 
S's not believing pat t, then S's belief in 
pat t is justified. 
Note that (2) makes the justification of a 
belief depend not only on the process which 
actually produced the belief but also on 
processes that could and should be employed. 
The basic idea is that the proper use of evi-
dence is a conditionally reliable process. So 
one who has evidence that a belief forming 
process is unreliable and uses that evidence 
will not place credence in beliefs produced 
by that process. Goldman offers a different 
way of handling this problem in Epistemology 
and Cognition (Cambridge, 1986), p. 63. I 
have argued in "Causality, Reliability, and 
Mathematical 
Knowledge" 
(manuscript) 
that the new account cannot handle the 
problem and must be replaced with an 
account in the spirit of (2). 
22 
Laurence BonJour has stressed this point in 
his criticism of reliability theories. See, for 
example, 
The 
Structure 
of Empirical 
Knowledge (Cambridge, 1985), chapter 3. 
23 
See the papers cited in footnote 14. 
24 
Kitcher, 
The 
Nature 
of Mathematical 
Knowledge, p. 24. 
25 
Alvin Goldman, Epistemology and Cognition 
(Cambridge, 1986), p. 106. 
26 
Kitcher, 
The 
Nature 
of Mathematical 
Knowledge, p. 30. 
27 
Paul Benacerraf, "Mathematical Truth," pp. 
671-5. 
28 
Penelope 
Maddy, 
"Perception 
and 
Mathematical 
Intuition," 
Philosophical 
Review 89 (1980), pp. 163-96; and Jaegwon 
Kim, "Some Reflections on Perception and A 
Priori Knowledge." 
29 
Penelope Maddy makes a similar point in 
"Mathematical Epistemology: What is the 
Question?," Monist 67 (1984), pp. 46-55. 
This issue, however, is more complex than 
her paper suggests. Some of these com-
plexities are discussed in detail in my 
"Causality, Reliability, and Mathematical 
Knowledge." 
30 
BonJour, 
The 
Structure 
of Empirical 
Knowledge, p. 32. R. M. Chisholm endorses a 
similar position in Theory of Knowledge, 2nd 
edn, p. 17. 
31 
Kitcher discusses this issue in chapter 3 of 
The Nature of Mathematical Knowledge. 
32 
Kurt Godel, "What is Cantor's Continuum 
Problem?;' reprinted in P. Benacerraf and 
H. Putnam (eds), Philosophy of Mathematics, 
2nd edn (Cambridge, 1983), pp. 483-5. 
33 
Pollock, Knowledge and Justification, pp. 
318-20. 

CHAPTER 44 
A Priori Knowledge and the Scope 
of Philosophy 
George Bealer 
Must philosophy rely substantively on science? If 
philosophy and science conflict, could philosophy 
ever have greater authority? I wish to recommend 
two theses which, though currently unfashion-
able, have been the dominant view historically: 
The Autonomy of Philosophy Among the cen-
tral questions of philosophy! that can be answered 
by one standard theoretical means or another, 
most can in principle be answered by philosoph-
ical investigation and argument without relying 
substantively on the sciences. 
The Authority of Philosophy Insofar as science 
and philosophy purport to answer the same central 
philosophical questions, in most cases the support 
that science could in principle provide for those 
answers is not as strong as that which philosophy 
could in principle provide for its answers. So, 
should there be conflicts, the authority of philoso-
phy in most cases can be greater in principle. 
There are two largely independent defenses of the 
Autonomy and Authority of Philosophy - the 
Argument from Evidence and the Argument from 
Concepts.2 The latter offers an analysis of what it 
is to possess a concept determinately, an analysis 
which, together with the fact that the central 
Originally published in Philosophical Studies 81 (1996), 
pp.121-42. 
concepts of philosophy can be possessed determi-
nately, implies Autonomy and Authority. In this 
paper I will explain and defend (all too briefly, I 
am afraid) the Argument from Evidence: 
(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
Intuitions are evidence. 
Modal reliabilism is the correct explanation 
of why intuitions are evidence. 
Modal reliabilism implies the Autonomy 
and Authority of Philosophy as long as sci-
entific essentialism is no barrier. 
Scientific essentialism is no barrier. 
The Autonomy and Authority of Philosophy 
hold. 
Modal reliabilism, if correct, would provide the 
foundation of a general account of a priori knowl-
edge. That, however, lies beyond the scope of this 
paper. 
1. 
Intuitions are Evidence 
Our Standard Justificatory Procedure. I begin by 
reviewing some plain truths about the procedure 
we standardly use to justify our beliefs and theo-
ries. The first point is that we standardly use vari-
ous items - for example, experiences, observations, 
testimony - as evidence. Now at one time many 
people accepted the doctrine that knowledge is 
justified true belief. But today we have good evi-
dence to the contrary, namely, our intuitions that 

A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
613 
situations like those described in the Gettier lit-
erature are possible and that the relevant people 
in those situations would not know the things at 
issue. This and countless other examples show 
that, according to our standard justificatory pro-
cedure, intuitions are used as evidence (or as rea-
sons). The evidential use of intuitions is 
ubiquitous in philosophy; recall just as few fur-
ther examples: Chisholm's perceptual-relativity 
refutation of phenomenalism, Putnam's perfect-
pretender refutation of behaviorism, all the vari-
ous twin-earth examples, Burge's arthritis 
example, multiple-realizability, etc., etc. Each of 
these involves the evidential use of intuitions 
about certain possibilities and about whether rel-
evant concepts apply to those possibilities. 
Among our various theoretical beliefs, some are 
deemed to have a priori justification. This occurs 
for beliefs arrived at by a procedure that suitably 
approximates the following idealization: (1) can-
vassing intuitions; (2) subjecting those intuitions to 
dialectical critique; (3) constructing theories that 
systematize the surviving intuitions; (4) testing 
those theories against further intuitions; (5) repeat-
ing the process until equilibrium is approached.3 
The method philosophers standardly use to estab-
lish answers to central philosophical questions 
closely resembles this procedure of a priori justifica-
tion. Perhaps the most important difference is that 
philosophers make occasional use of empirical evi-
dence - specifically, we invoke actual "real-life" 
examples and actual examples from (the history of) 
science. In virtually all cases, however, use of such 
examples can be "modalized away."4 That is, such 
examples can, at least in principle, be dropped and 
in their place one can use a priori intuitions affirm-
ing corresponding (not to say identical) possibilities 
which have equivalent philosophical force. (I will 
return to this point in section 4.) 
Phenomenology of Intuitions. My next step is to 
say something about what is meant by intuition 
in this context. We do not mean a magical power 
or inner voice or anything of the sort. For you to 
have an intuition that A is just for it to seem to 
you that A. Here "seems" is understood, not as a 
cautionary or "hedging" term, but in its use as a 
term for a genuine kind of conscious episode. For 
example, when you first consider one of de 
Morgan's laws, often it neither seems to be true 
nor seems to be false; after a moment's reflection, 
however, something happens: it now seems true; 
you suddenly "just see" that it is true. Of course, 
this kind of seeming is intellectual, not sensory or 
introspective (or imaginative). The subject here is 
a priori (or rational) intuition. 
Intuition must be distinguished from belief: 
belief is not a seeming; intuition is. For example, 
there are many mathematical theorems that I 
believe (because I have seen the proofs) but that 
do not seem to me to be true and that do not seem 
to me to be false; I do not have intuitions about 
them either way. Conversely, I have an intuition -
it still seems to me - that the naive comprehen-
sion axiom of set theory is true; this is so despite 
the fact that I do not believe that it is true (because 
I know of the set-theoretical paradoxes).5 This 
case evidently shows that the classical modern 
infallibilist theory of intuition is incorrect. There 
is a rather similar phenomenon in sensory 
(vs. intellectual) seeming. In the Muller-Lyer illu-
sion, it still seems to me that one of the arrows is 
longer than the other; this is so despite the fact 
that I do not believe that it is (because I have 
measured them). In each case, the seeming (intel-
lectual or sensory) persists in spite of the 
countervailing belief. 
This brings up a closely related distinction 
between belief and intuition. Belief is highly 
plastic. Using (false) appeals to authority, cajol-
ing, intimidation, brainwashing, and so forth, 
you can get a person to believe almost anything, 
at least briefly. Not so for intuitions. Although 
there is disagreement about the degree of plas-
ticity of intuitions (some people believe they are 
rather plastic; I do not), it is clear that they are 
inherently far more resistent to such influences 
than beliefs. Intuitions are also distinct from 
judgments, guesses, and hunches. There are sig-
nificant restrictions on the propositions con-
cerning which one can have intuitions; by 
contrast, there are virtually no restrictions on 
the propositions concerning which one can make 
a judgment or a guess or have a hunch. For 
related reasons, intuition is also different from 
common sense. 
(Incidentally, the work of cognitive psycholo-
gists such as Wason, Johnson-Laird, Eleanor Rosh, 
Richard Nisbett, D. Kahneman and A. Tversky 
tells us little about intuition in the restricted use 
of the term relevant here; they have simply not 
been concerned with intuitions in this sense.) 

614 
GEORGE BEALER 
The Argument from Epistemic Norms. Granted 
that our standard justificatory practice presently 
uses intuitions as evidence, why should this move 
radicals who just boldly deny that intuitions really 
are evidence? In "The Incoherence of Empiricism" 
I argued that denying that intuitions have eviden-
tial weight leads one to epistemic self-defeat. The 
purpose of this style of argument is to persuade 
even those under the spell of radicalism. To give a 
feel for this style of argument I will now sketch 
one of three such arguments against radical 
empiricism, the view that only (phenomenal) 
experiences and/or observations have genuine 
evidential weight.6 
Consider an absurd position like visualism, the 
view that countenances only visual experience as 
evidence and that arbitrarily excludes nonvisual 
experiences (tactile, auditory, etc.). How is radical 
empiricism relevantly different? To avoid begging 
the question, radical empiricists must answer 
from within the standard justificatory procedure. 
The question to consider, therefore, is this: when 
one implements the standard justificatory proce-
dure's mechanism of self-criticism, does intui-
tion - in contrast to nonvisual experience - get 
excluded as a source of evidence? 
In relation to "three cs" - consistency, corrobo-
ration, and confirmation - intuition is quite unlike 
spurious sources of evidence such as tea leaves, 
tarot, oracles, the stars, birds, and the like. First, a 
person's concrete-case intuitions are largely con-
sistent with one another. (We confine ourselves to 
concrete-case intuitions, for it is to these that the 
standard justificatory procedure assigns primary 
evidential weight.) To be sure, a given person's 
concrete-case intuitions occasionally appear to be 
inconsistent with one another, but so do our 
observations and even our pure sense experi-
ences. This is hardly enough to throw out obser-
vation and sense experience as sources of evidence. 
Moreover, for each of these sources - including 
intuition - most apparent conflicts can be recon-
ciled by standard rephrasal techniques (for an 
example, see section 4). Second, although differ-
ent people do have conflicting intuitions from 
time to time, there is an impressive corroboration 
by others of one's elementary logical, mathemati-
cal, conceptual, and modal intuitions. The situa-
tion is much the same with observation: different 
people have conflicting observations from time to 
time, but this is hardly enough to throw out 
observation as a source of evidence. Third, unlike 
tea-leaf reading, intuition is seldom, if ever, dis-
confirmed by our experiences and observations. 
The primary reason is that the contents of our 
intuitions - whether conceptual, logical, mathe-
matical, or modal- are by and large independent 
of the contents of our observations and experi-
ences. The one potential exception involves our 
modal intuitions, but virtually no conflicts arise 
there because our intuitions about what experi-
ences and observations are logically (metaphysi-
cally) possible are so liberal. 
There is another kind of conflict, namely, con-
flict between certain theories and certain intuitions 
(e.g., intuitions about simultaneity and Euclidean 
geometry). Do such conflicts overturn intuition as 
a source of evidence? No, for there are analogous 
conflicts between certain theories and certain 
observations (e.g., observations that the sun is 
about the same size as the moon and that it moves 
across the sky). Likewise, experience and testimony 
come into conflict with certain theories. Such con-
flicts are not enough to overturn either of these 
sources of evidence. As a matter of fact, however, 
most of our elementary conceptual, logical, and 
numerical intuitions are not in conflict with, but 
are actually affirmed by, our empirical theories. 
And modal and higher mathematical intuitions, 
while not affirmed by our empirical theories, are 
for the most part not inconsistent with them. 
Moreover, our best comprehensive theory based 
on all standard sources of evidence, including intu-
ition, affirms most of our modal and higher mathe-
matical intuitions. This should be no surprise since 
it begins by including intuitions as evidence. 
If radical empiricists are to try to overthrow 
intuition by means of the standard justificatory 
procedure's mechanism for self-criticism, they 
have only one alternative. They must invoke the 
comprehensive theory that one would formulate 
if one admitted only those sources of evidence 
other than intuition. Characterized more abstractly, 
this method of challenging standard sources of 
evidence goes as follows. One formulates one's 
best comprehensive theory on the basis of the 
standard sources of evidence that one is not chal-
lenging. If the resulting theory deems the omitted 
sources not to be reliable, then they are discounted 
as sources of evidence. 
This method is appropriate in some cases, for 
example, to challenge as a source of evidence the 

A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
615 
hitherto uncritically accepted pronouncements 
of an established political authority (reminiscent 
of the Wizard of Oz). However, there are cases in 
which this method does not work. For example, it 
may not be used by "visualists" to challenge other 
modes of experience (tactile, auditory, etc.) as 
sources of evidence. Neither vision nor touch 
may be used in this way to override the other as a 
source of evidence. To be a source of evidence, 
neither requires affirmation by the best compre-
hensive theory based on other sources of evi-
dence. 
The difference between the political-authority 
case and the visualism case is plain. The political 
authority is intuitively not as basic a source of evi-
dence as the sources of evidence that are being 
used to eliminate it (i.e., experience, observation, 
etc.). By contrast, vision and touch are intuitively 
equally basic sources of evidence. The standard 
justificatory procedure permits us to apply the 
present method against a currently accepted 
source of evidence if and only if intuitively that 
source is not as basic as the sources of evidence 
being used to challenge it.7 
So in the radical empiricists' effort to elimi-
nate intuition as a source of evidence, the stand-
ard justificatory procedure would warrant this 
move only if we had intuitions to the effect that 
intuition is a less basic source of evidence than 
experience and/or observation, one requiring 
auxiliary support from the best comprehensive 
theory based exclusively on these other sources of 
evidence. But when we consider relevant cases, we 
see that we do not have such intuitions. For exam-
ple, suppose a person has an intuition, say, that if 
P then not not P; or (in your favorite Gettier 
example) that the person in question would not 
know; or that a good theory must take into 
account all the evidence; and so forth. Nothing 
more is needed. Intuitively, these intuitions are 
evidentially as basic as evidence gets. They are 
intuitively as basic as experiences, much as tactile 
experiences are intuitively as basic as visual 
experiences. In consequence, the present method 
for challenging a source of evidence cannot be 
used against intuition, any more than it can be used 
against, say, touch or vision.8 
Thus, intuition survives as a genuine source of 
evidence when one applies the standard justifica-
tory procedure's mechanism for self-criticism. We 
have not been able to find a relevant difference 
between radial empiricism, which excludes intuition 
as a source of evidence, and various preposterous 
theories (e.g., visualism) that arbitrarily exclude 
other standard sources of evidence (e.g., touch). 
But, surely, these preposterous theories are not jus-
tified. So radical empiricism is not justified, either. 
There is a way to strengthen this argument. 
Suppose that in our justificatory practices we 
were to make an arbitrary departure from our 
epistemic norms. There would then be prima facie 
reason to doubt that the theories we would for-
mulate by following the non-standard procedure 
are justified. Since radical empiricists make an 
arbitrary departure form our epistemic norms, 
what can they do to overcome this reasonable 
doubt in their own case? They are caught in a fatal 
dilemma. On the one hand, they could invoke 
theories arrived at by following the standard jus-
tificatory procedure, with its inclusion of intui-
tions as evidence. But, by the radical empiricists' 
own standards, these theories are not justified. So 
this avenue is of no help. On the other hand, they 
could invoke theories arrived at by following their 
radical empiricist procedure. But this would be of 
no help, either. For, as we have seen, there is rea-
sonable doubt that, by following that procedure, 
one obtains justified theories. To overcome this 
doubt, one may not invoke the very theories 
about whose justification there is already reason-
able doubt. That would only beg the question. 
Either way, therefore, radical empiricists are 
unable to overcome the reasonable doubt that 
their procedure leads to justified theories. So the 
reasonable doubt stands. 
Our epistemic situation is in this sense 
"hermeneutical": when one makes an arbitrary 
departure from it, reasonable doubts are gener-
ated, and there is in principle no way to overcome 
them. This is the fate of radical empiricism. Only 
the standard justificatory procedure escapes this 
problem: because it conforms to - and, indeed, 
constitutes - the epistemic norm, there is no 
prima facie reason to doubt that the theories it 
yields are justified; so the problem never arises. 
2. 
Explanation of Why Intuitions are 
Evidence 
What explains why intuitions are evidence? In 
"Philosophical Limits of Scientific Essentialism" 

616 
GEORGE BEALER 
I argued that the only adequate explanation is 
some kind of truth-based, or reliabilist, explana-
tion. In Philosophical Limits of Science I develop 
this argument in detail, dealing there with various 
alternative explanations - pragmatist, coheren-
tist, conventionalist, and rule-based (or practice-
based). In the present context, I will assume that 
these arguments are successful and that we must 
turn to a truth-based explanation. 
Reliabilism has been associated with analyses 
of knowledge and justification, analyses which 
most philosophers today reject. Our topic, how-
ever, is not knowledge or justification but rather 
evidence. This difference is salutary, for here 
reliabilism promises to be less problematic. But 
not as a general theory of evidence: sources of 
evidence traditionally classified as derived 
sources are subject to counterexamples much 
like those used against reliabilist theories of jus-
tification. For example, testimony would still 
provide a person with evidence (reasons to 
believe) even if it were really just systematic 
undetectable lying. So reliability is not a neces-
sary condition for something's qualifying as a 
source of evidence. Nor is reliability a sufficient 
condition for something's qualifying as a source 
of evidence: as in the case of justification, such 
things as nomologically reliable clairvoyance, 
telepathy, dreams, hunches, etc. are prima facie 
counterexamples. 
The natural response to these counterexamples 
is to demand only that basic sources of evidence 
be reliable: something is a derived source of evi-
dence relative to a given subject iff it is deemed 
(perhaps unreliably) to have a reliable tie to the 
truth by the best comprehensive theory based on 
the subject's basic sources of evidence." Let us 
suppose that experience and intuition are our 
basic sourceslO and that all other sources are 
derived. The above counterexamples would not 
then fault this analysis of derived sources of evi-
dence. In the case of undetectable lying, testimony 
would now rightly be counted as a source of evi-
dence, for the subject's best comprehensive theory 
based on basic sources (experience and intuition) 
would deem it to have a reliable tie to the truth 
(even if it in fact does not because of the envisaged 
lying). In the case of spurious derived sources 
(reliable clairvoyance, telepathy, dreams, hunches, 
etc.), if one has not affirmed their reliability by 
means of one's best comprehensive theory based 
on one's basic sources, their deliverances would 
rightly not qualify as evidence. 
In this setting, reliabilism is restricted to basic 
sources of evidence: something is a basic source 
of evidence iff it has a certain kind of reliable tie 
to the truth. The fundamental question then con-
cerns the character of this tie. Is it a contingent 
(nomological or causal) tie? Or is it some kind of 
strong necessary tie? 
Contingent Reliabilism. On this account, something 
counts as a basic source of evidence iff there is a 
nomologically necessary, but nevertheless contin-
gent, tie between its deliverances and the truth. 
This account, however, is subject to counterexam-
ples of the sort which faulted the original sufficiency 
condition above (nomologically reliable telepathy, 
clairvoyance, guesses, hunches, etc.). Consider a 
creature who has a capacity for making reliable tel-
epathically generated guesses. Phenomenologically, 
these guesses resemble those which people make in 
blind-sight experiments. The guesses at issue con-
cern necessary truths of some very high degree of 
difficulty. These truths are known to the beings on 
distant planet who have arrived at them by ordi-
nary a priori means (theoretical systematization of 
intuitions, proof of consequences therefrom, etc.). 
These beings have intelligence far exceeding that of 
our creature or anyone else co inhabiting his planet. 
Indeed, the creature and his coinhabitants will 
never be able to establish any of these necessary 
truths (or even assess their consistency) byordi-
nary a priori means. Finally, suppose that the fol-
lowing holds as a matter of nomological necessity: 
the creature guesses that p is true iff p is a necessary 
truth of the indicated kind and the creature is 
trying to make a guess as to whether p is true or 
false. But, plainly, guessing would not qualify as a 
basic source of evidence for the creature, contrary 
to contingent reliabilism. 11 
Modal Reliabilism. Given that contingent reliabi-
lism fails, we are left with modal reliabilism, 
according to which something counts as a basic 
source iff there is some kind of strong modal tie 
between its deliverances and the truth. This thesis 
provides an invitation to search for the weakest 
modal tie to the truth sufficiently rich to explain 
the evidential status of our basic sources of evi-
dence. In this paper I will attemptthis onlyapprox-
imately and only for the case of intuitions. 12 

A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
617 
The explanation of the evidential status of 
intuitions requires a modal tie between intuitions 
and the truth which is strong enough to block 
counterexamples, such as those which beset con-
tingent reliabilism. At the same time, if there is a 
modal tie which does this and which is weaker 
than infallibilism, we should adopt it. This sug-
gests that we make the strong modal tie to the 
truth dialectical and holistic rather than local: 
For suitably good cognitive conditions, it is nec-
essary that, if while in such conditions a subject 
goes through the whole procedure of a priori jus-
tification (described in section 1), then most of 
the propositions derivable from the resulting 
comprehensive theoretical systematization of the 
subject's intuitions would have to be true. 
My hypothesis is that something like this modal 
tie is the sort we are seeking. Of course, this modal 
tie would be vacuous and the associated explana-
tion of the evidential status of intuitions would 
fail if it were not possible for some subjects to be 
in cognitive conditions of the quality indicated. 
This possibility, and the associated modal tie to 
the truth, will be important in what follows next. 
3. 
Derivation of the Authority and 
Autonomy of Philosophy 
It is necessary that the comprehensive theoretical 
systematization of a subject's intuitions in cogni-
tive conditions of the indicated quality is largely 
true (i.e., most of the propositions derivable from 
it are true). No such necessity ever holds for 
science. No matter how good the cognitive condi-
tions, it is always possible that scientific theories 
arrived at in those conditions are largely mis-
taken. Why? For all the standard reasons - unde-
tectably unrepresentative samples, non-simple 
natural laws, distorting perceptual media - not to 
mention too few or malfunctioning sense organs, 
hallucinations, vats, etc. Because of this, a com-
prehensive theoretical systematization of intui-
tions in the indicated cognitive conditions would 
have an in principle greater epistemic authority. 
But the methods by which that theoretical sys-
tematization would have been arrived at are just 
the standard methods of philosophy; they include 
no substantive reliance on science. Now suppose 
that the indicated theoretical systematization of 
intuitions would include answers to most of the 
central questions of philosophy that can be 
answered by one standard theoretical means or 
another. Then, given that the epistemic support 
for this theoretical systematization is greater in 
principle than anything science could achieve in 
support of its theories, the thesis of the Authority 
of Philosophy would hold. 
This argument is based on the supposition 
that the indicated theoretical systematization of 
intuitions would include answers to most of the 
central questions of philosophy which can be 
answered by one standard theoretical means or 
another. This supposition is basically the thesis of 
the Autonomy of Philosophy. The Argument 
from Concepts will provide perhaps the most 
conclusive defense of this thesis. But we are able 
to mount an independent defense right now. 
Consider the intuitions that are the inputs 
when a subject engages in the indicated process. 
They include a wide range of intuitions about 
matters bearing on central questions of philoso-
phy. What level of cognitive conditions would be 
required to insure the strong modal tie - that is, 
to insure that, necessarily, most of the proposi-
tions derivable from the resulting theoretical sys-
tematisation would be true? Presumably, it would 
be a high level. But as cognitive conditions (nota-
bly, attentiveness and intelligence) improve, the 
scope of one's intuitions increases. As a result, at 
the indicted high level of cognitive conditions, 
the scope of the intuitions that would be the 
inputs for the process would be very wide. It is 
extremely plausible that they would have implica-
tions for most central questions of philosophy. 
(In fact, our own intuitions already do.) What, 
then, could prevent the resulting theoretical 
systematization from giving answers to these 
questions? I know of nothing that could. But 
there are two nagging worries, namely, that inevi-
table limitations on intelligence and/or scientific 
essentialism might somehow constitute barriers. 
Consider the worry about limitations on intel-
ligence. Most of the central questions of philoso-
phy do not seem to be the sort of questions 
requiring infinitary intelligence (e.g., for doing 
infinitary proofs, infinitary computations, etc.); 
some finite level (perhaps well beyond ours) 
ought to suffice. (In the Argument from Concepts 
I give a positive theoretical argument which 

618 
GEORGE BEALER 
insures that, no matter how high, the requisite 
level of intelligence must be possible, so this 
finiteness point is not essential.) If this is right, 
the issue comes down to the question of what 
level of finitary intelligence would be required 
(for having a sufficiently wide range of intuitions) 
to yield Autonomy. Is the level of intelligence 
needed to underwrite the Authority of Philosophy 
enough for this? Since the intelligence needed for 
Authority is very high, it seems to me that it ought 
to be enough. But suppose not; suppose some 
higher but nevertheless finite level of intelligence 
is needed. Intuitively, however, for any finite level 
of intelligence, it is possible for some being to be 
that intelligent. So, if there were a barrier to 
Autonomy, it would have to be something other 
than intelligence. Someone might respond that 
this intuition ought not be honored. But on what 
ground? There is no even faintly credible ground 
besides one associated with scientific essential-
ism, namely, that this intuition is really only an 
intuition of the kind of epistemic possibility 
which is so central to the defense of scientific 
essentialism. But this intuition is expressed in 
semantically stable terms, so scientific essential-
ists are committed to accepting it at face value, as 
I will argue in the next section. 
This leaves us with the general scientific essen-
tialist worry. Perhaps, as cognitive conditions 
(intelligence, attentiveness, etc.) improve, the 
scope of intuitions reaches a limit (or even nar-
rows). Questions beyond that limit are scientific 
questions epistemically on a par with the ques-
tion of the chemical composition of water, the 
analysis of heat, etc. In the next section I will 
argue that this is completely mistaken. If the argu-
ment is successful, we will be entitled to conclude 
that there is no barrier to having intuitions of suf-
ficiently wide scope to underwrite the Autonomy 
of Philosophy. 
4. 
Scientific Essentialism is No Barrier 
Scientific essentialism (SE) is the doctrine that 
there are necessities (e.g., that water = H20) that 
are knowable only with the aid of empirical 
science. The arguments supporting SE rely on 
intuitions; without them SE would be unjustified. 
(I defend this claim in detail in "Philosophical 
Limits of Scientific Essentialism".) For example, 
the famous twin-earth intuition concerning 
water, H20, and XYZ. But there is a problem. 
Before the advent of SE, we had a host of anti-SE 
intuitions, for example, the intuition that it could 
have turned out that some samples of water con-
tained no hydrogen. What are we to make of the 
conflict between pro-and anti-SE intuitions? 
Rephrasal Strategies. Proponents of SE have two 
responses. First, they could simply declare that 
anti-SE intuitions are mistaken whereas their 
own pro-SE intuitions are correct. But critics of 
SE could simply meet this response by stating that 
things are the other way around. The result would 
be a stalemate. To avoid it, proponents of SE must 
turn to the second response, according to which 
widespread conflict among our intuitions is only 
an appearance. All, or most, of our intuitions are 
correct. Despite their correctness, however, many 
are misreported. When we rephrase our (appar-
ently) anti-SE intuitions to make them consistent 
with our pro-SE intuitions, we succeed. But when 
we try to rephrase the latter to make them con-
sistent with the former, we fail. Accordingly, the 
stalemate is broken in favor of SE. 
According to Kripke, when we report our pro-
SE intuitions, what we say is strictly and literally 
true, and we are reporting ordinary possibilities. 
But when we report our apparently anti-SE intui-
tions, we confuse ordinary possibility with the 
possibility of a certain kind of epistemic situation 
(see Kripke, pp. 103-4). Consider an example. 
When we say "It could have turned out that some 
samples of water contained no hydrogen", what 
we say is strictly and literally false. The intuition is 
true but incorrectly reported. The correct report 
would be something like this: it is possible for 
there to be a language group which is in an 
epistemic situation qualitatively identical to ours 
but which uses the expressions "water" and/or 
"hydrogen" to mean something other than what 
we do. This possibility is consistent with the SE 
thesis that, necessarily, water = H20. At the same 
time, when anti-scientific-essentialists try to use 
this rephrasal strategy to deflate pro-SE intuitions 
(e.g., the twin-earth intuition), they fail. (This 
matter is discussed at length in my "Mental 
Properties.") This and other examples lead to the 
following general schema for applying the 
rephrasal strategy: rIt could have turned out that A' 
is to be rephrased as r It is possible that a language 

A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
619 
group in an epistemic situation qualitatively iden-
tical to ours would make a true statement by 
asserting r A -, with normal literal intent' . 
Semantic Stability. The rephrasal strategy suggests 
a distinction between semantically stable and 
semantically unstable expressions. An expression is 
semantically stable iff, necessarilly, in any language 
group in an epistemic situation qualitatively iden-
tical to ours, the expression would mean the same 
thing. An expression is semantically unstable iff it 
is possible for it to mean something different in 
some language group whose epistemic situation is 
qualitatively identical to ours. Of course, "qualita-
tively identical epistemic situation" must be 
understood in the intended way. 13 
Presumably an expression is semantically 
unstable iff the external environment makes some 
contribution to its meaning. Natural kind terms 
are paradigmatic - "water", "gold", "heat", "beech", 
"elm", etc. Logical, mathematical, and a great 
many philosophical terms, by contrast, are seman-
tically stable: the external environment makes no 
such contribution. For example, "some", "all", 
"and", "if", "is identical to", "is", "necessarily", "pos-
sibly", «true", «valid", «0", "1", H+", "+", He"; «prop-
erty", "quality", "quantity", "relation", "proposition", 
"state of affairs", "object", "category", etc. It seems 
clear that all these are semantically stable: any 
language group in an epistemic situation qualita-
tively identical to ours would mean what we mean 
by these "formal" expressions. 
How is the list to be continued? My hypothesis 
is that most, if not all, of the central terms of phi-
losophy are semantically stable: "conscious", "sen-
sation", "pleasure", "pain", "emotion", "think", 
"believe", "desire", "decide", "know", "reason", "evi-
dence", "justify", "understand", "explain", "pur-
pose", "good", "fair", "ought". Case by case, each of 
these intuitively is semantically stable. Consider 
"pain", for example. If there were a language 
group in an epistemic situation qualitatively 
identical to ours, they would use "pain" to mean 
pain. "Pain" is a term for a certain felt quality; our 
counterparts in a language group whose epis-
temic situation is qualitatively identical would 
have to be using "pain" for the identical quality. 
Notice that I did not say that all central philo-
sophical terms are semantically stable. It might be 
held that there are uses of "time", "space", "proba-
ble", "cause", and "matter" which are semantically 
unstable. Even if there are, however, there exist 
other uses - seen in expressions like "a kind of 
time", "a kind of space", etc. - which are semanti-
cally stable. These generic uses occur in sentences 
such as "Euclidean space is a possible kind 
of space", "Newtonian time is a possible kind of 
time", etc. which are semantically stable sentences. 
In any language group in an epistemic situation 
qualitatively identical to ours, these sentence 
would mean the same as they mean for us and 
presumably would be true, just as they are for us. 
These generic uses are sufficient, I believe, to 
underwrite a general philosophy of space and 
time, probability, etc. 
With this qualification in mind, we can state 
my hypothesis thus: most of the central terms of 
philosophy are semantically stable or else have 
generic uses which are semantically stable. Case by 
case, intuitions support this hypothesis. To deny it 
would be ad hoc unless accompanied by argument; 
I know of none which is not tendentious or ques-
tion-begging. Unless and until a successful argu-
ment is found, we should accept the hypothesis. 
Limits of Scientific Essentialism. This hypothesis is 
coupled with a second, namely, that scientific 
essentialism holds only for semantically unstable 
expressions. There are several arguments for the 
second hypothesis. The first, which I will now 
sketch, is a generalization on the argument from 
"Mental Properties" and has to do with the way 
one argues for SE in the case of particular expres-
sions. (Another argument is that the most plausi-
ble explanation of certain puzzling patterns in 
our intuitions, including in particular pro- and 
anti -SE intuitions, implies the hypothesis. A third 
is that the analysis of what it is to possess a con-
cept determinately implies the hypothesis. I dis-
cuss these two lines of defense in "Philosophical 
Limits of Scientific Essentialism".) 
Consider how one argues for SE in a particular 
case, for example, the cogent SE argument that, 
necessarily, water = H20. The argument consists 
of two steps. First, pro-SE intuitions supporting 
the identity are elicited: in all known cases, these 
intuitions either are or can be reworked into 
twin-earth style intuitions. Second, it is shown 
that the rephrasal strategy can be used to deflate 
the force of our anti-SE intuitions but that, when 
anti-scientific-essentialists attempt to use it to 
deflate the force of our pro-SE intuitions (i.e., the 

620 
GEORGE BEALER 
intuitions elicited in step one), they fail. Because 
both steps evidently succeed, one may conclude 
that SE holds for "water': 
Now consider some semantically stable term 
t. To show that SE holds for t, one would need 
to go through both steps. The problem is that 
both steps fail for all semantically stable terms t. 
In connection with the first step, consider the 
t-analogue of the twin-earth argument for 
"water". We are to contemplate the possibility of 
another planet (or possible world) macroscopi-
cally like earth but microscopically different. 
We are to consider items here to which t applies, 
and we are then to ask whether, intuitively, t 
would fail to apply to the corresponding items 
on the hypothetical planet (in the possible 
world). The question is outlandish if t is a 
"formal" term, that is, an expression of the fol-
lowing sort: "is identical to", "is", "necessarily", 
"possibly", "true", "property", "quality", "quan-
tity", "relation", "proposition", "state of affairs", 
"substance", "event", "category", etc. For exam-
ple, there are properties here; could there fail to 
be properties there?! 
What about semantically stable expressions 
that are not "formal" but rather "contentful"? 
Consider "conscious", for example. The following 
would be the "conscious" -analogue of the origi-
nal twin-earth argument for "water': Suppose 
that on earth all and only things that are con-
scious have a certain microstructure, say, "Con-
fibers" (which are composed ultimately of 
hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, etc.). Consider a twin 
earth on which our Doppelgangers display"con-
sciousness" -behavior exactly like ours. It turns 
out, however, that, whereas our consciousness -
and our associated "consciousness" -behavior -
co-occurs 
with 
firing 
Con-fibers, 
the 
"consciousness" -behavior of our Doppelgangers 
co-occurs instead with firing Conte-fibers (com-
posed ultimately of X, Y, Z, etc.). Would we say 
that these creatures are conscious? To be sure, we 
would not be certain that they are conscious; 
macroscopic behavioral criteria never entail that 
a mental predicate applies. Nevertheless, it would 
not be counterintuitive to say that they are con-
scious. Note the contrast with water. It would be 
counterintuitive to say that samples of XYZ on 
twin earth are samples of water. This intuition is 
the essential first step of the SE argument 
concerning "water". The analogous intuition 
concerning 
conscious 
is 
simply 
missing! 
Accordingly, the essential first step of the argu-
ment that SE applies to "conscious" cannot even 
get off the ground. 
I come now to the second step in the SE argu-
ment, namely, that anti-SE intuitions can be neu-
tralized by means of the rephrasal strategy. 
My argument against this has two stages. 
First, suppose that the intuitions in ques-
tions are expressed using only semantically 
stable terms. Then they will retain their original 
force even upon rephrasal. Suppose, for exam-
ple, that an intuition is originally reported with 
a sentence rlt is possible that S' conslstmg 
entirely of semantically stable expressions. Then 
(by the definition of semantic stability) any lan-
guage group in an epistemic situation qualita-
tively identical to ours would mean what we 
mean by rs, . Therefore, the rephrasal rIt is pos-
sible for there to be a language group in an epis-
temic situation qualitatively identical to ours 
who would make a true statement by asserting 
rS" 
would imply rIt is possible that S' . So the 
force of the original intuition is not deflated. 
Second, suppose that the intuitions in ques-
tion are "mixed" - that is, expressed with a com-
bination of semantically stable and unstable 
terms. Because of the semantically unstable terms, 
the force of these intuitions shifts upon rephrasal. 
But for the purpose of investigating central philo-
sophical questions, there is a strategy for dealing 
with this. The idea is to find a new intuition with 
the philosophical import of the original but 
expressed entirely in semantically stable terms. To 
do this, we construct an appropriate semantically 
stable "counterpart" for each of the semantically 
unstable terms. In some cases, there may be no 
exact (i.e., necessarily equivalent) counterpart. 
But we can always find a counterpart which is as 
close to the semantically unstable original as is 
philosophically important. To illustrate this strat-
egy, consider the chauvinistic identity-thesis that 
being conscious = having firing Con-fibers. 
A multiple-realizability argument against this 
thesis might invoke the intuition that it is possible 
for something to be conscious and not have Con-
fibers. This intuition is "mixed": even though the 
expressions "something", "have", "not", and "con-
scious" are semantically stable, "Con-fibers" is 
not. (And presumably "Con-fibers" lacks an exact 
semantically stable counterpart, for there is 

A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
621 
evidently no semantically stable way to capture, 
e.g., relevant matters of scale.) The intuition 
therefore would not retain its original force upon 
rephrasal. The philosophical import of the intui-
tion, however, is that it is possible for there to be 
consciousness in the absence of a certain highly 
specific nested complex of inter-related nonmetal 
parts (ultimately hydrogen, oxygen, carbon, etc.). 
We can get as close as we want to this notion using 
expressions from pure mathematics and other 
semantically stable expressions such as "part", 
"relation", "non", and "mental". Even though what 
is "left over" might be of scientific interest, it 
would not be relevant to the philosophical point 
(i.e., refuting the chauvinistic identity thesis). 
Because the new counterpart intuition is expressed 
with semantically stable expressions, it will 
(by the considerations of the previous paragraph) 
retain its original force upon rephrasal. Although 
this is only an illustration, it suggests how, for 
more complicated "mixed" intuitions, we can find 
counterpart intuitions which have the same philo-
sophical import as the originals and which are 
expressible with semantically stable expressions. 
These counterpart intuitions would thus not be 
deflated upon rephrasal. 
These considerations indicate that the second 
step in the SE argument fails even in the case of 
Notes 
Three criteria help to identify the central 
questions of philosophy. They are universal in 
that, regardless of the context (biological, his-
torical, etc.), they would be of significant 
interest to philosophers, in their role as 
philosophers, at least once they had grasped 
the underlying concepts and their interrela-
tions. These questions are general in that they 
do not pertain to this or that individual, spe-
cies, historical event, etc. And they are 
necessary in that they call for answers that 
hold necessarily: it would not be enough to 
know that piety happened to be what 
Euthyphro exhibited; a philosopher wants to 
know what it must be. 
Many philosophical questions of pressing 
importance to humanity lack one or more of 
the three features, I believe, however, that the 
relation between these questions and the 
"mixed" intuitions. The general conclusion, 
therefore, is that both steps in the SE argument 
fail for semantically stable expressions. Hence, 
there is no reason whatsoever to think that SE 
generalizes from semantically unstable expres-
sions to semantically stable expressions and, in 
turn, to think that SE is a barrier to the Autonomy 
and Authority of Philosophy. 
5. 
Concluding Remark 
I have outlined my reasons for accepting the 
four premises of the Argument from Evidence, 
and as we saw, that argument implies Autonomy 
and Authority. It is of course another matter 
whether it is nomologically possible for human 
beings to be in sufficiently good cognitive con-
ditions to achieve the kind of autonomy and 
authority asserted as a mere possibility in these 
two theses. Whether this is nomologically pos-
sible is a question on which I take no stand here. 
My personal belief, however, is that collectively, 
over historical time, undertaking philosophy as 
a civilization-wide project, we can do so closely 
enough to obtain authoritative answers to a 
substantial number of central philosophical 
questions. 
central questions may be understood on anal-
ogy with the distinction between applied 
mathematics and pure mathematics. In most 
if not all cases, the answers to non central 
questions are immediate consequences of 
answers to central questions plus auxiliary 
(usually empirical) propositions having little 
philosophical content in and of themselves. 
2 
Developed in my Philosophical Limits of 
Science, forthcoming. 
3 This procedure resembles the procedure of 
seeking "reflective equilibrium" but differs 
from it crucially. In the latter procedure, an 
equilibrium among all beliefs -
including 
empirical beliefs - is sought. In the a priori 
process, an equilibrium based on a priori 
intuitions is sought. Empirical beliefs - and 
the experiences and observations upon which 
they are based - are sometimes used to raise 

622 
GEORGE BEALER 
and to resolve doubts about the quality of the 
background cognitive conditions (intelli-
gence, etc.). But these empirical resources play 
no role in the procedure of a priori justifica-
tion itself. A priori intuitions - not empirical 
beliefs - constitute the grist for its mill. When 
I speak of not needing to rely substantively on 
empirical science, this is one of the points I 
have in mind. 
As indicated, this procedure is an idealiza-
tion. In real life, various stages are pursued at 
once, and they are performed only partially. 
The results are usually provisional and are 
used as "feedback" to guide subsequent efforts. 
These efforts are typically collective, and the 
results of past efforts - including those of past 
generations - are used liberally. The fact that 
speech and writings are used does not dis-
qualify these collective efforts as a priori, at 
least not according to the central use of "a 
priori" I am employing. Experience and/or 
observation can be used to raise - and also to 
resolve - doubts about the quality of the com-
munication conditions (speaker and author 
sincerity, reliability of the medium of trans-
mission, accuracy of interpretation, etc.). But 
these empirical resources play no role in the 
procedure of the a priori justification itself. 
When I speak of not needing to rely substan-
tively on empirical science, this is another one 
of the points I have in mind. 
4 
For certain phenomenal possibilities (e.g., 
certain Gestalt phenomena), perhaps the 
actual experience is required in order to know 
that that kind of experience is possible. This 
would not upset my main theses, for such use 
of experience would differ markedly from the 
use science makes of experience. When I say 
that philosophy need not rely substantively 
on science, another one of my intentions is to 
allow the use of experience to establish mere 
phenomenal possibilities. Despite this, I will 
sometimes talk as if the method of answering 
central philosophical questions is purely a 
priori. Perhaps this is not quite right, and 
appropriate adjustments might need to be 
made. 
5 I am indebted to George Myro for this exam-
ple and for the point it illustrates, namely, that 
it is possible to have an intuition without 
having the corresponding belief. 
6 Of course, it is the contents of one's experi-
ences and observations that are held to be evi-
dential. Note that there is a more moderate 
empiricism which, like Hume's, deems (the 
contents of) intuitions of relations of ideas -
that is, intuitions of analyticities -
to be 
evidence but which excludes as evidence all 
intuitions of nonanalyticities. This view is 
also self-defeating, but for somewhat different 
reasons. 
7 Someone might think that, rather than con-
sulting intuition on the question of relative 
basicness, one should consult the simplest 
overall theory that takes as its evidence the 
deliverances of all of one's currently accepted 
sources of evidence. But this approach yields 
the wrong results. For example, according to 
it, the political authority, with just a bit of 
cleverness, would be as immune to challenge 
as, say, sense experience. But despite this, it 
would be appropriate to reject the political 
authority as a special source of evidence. The 
way we would do this, according to the stand-
ard procedure, would be to fall back on our 
intuitions about relative basicness. 
8 This diagnosis is not circular: intuitions about 
relative basic ness of candidate sources are not 
being used as evidence here; their use here is a 
prescribed step in the standard procedure of 
self-critique. 
Someone might hold that being intuitively 
basic is necessary but not sufficient for a can-
didate source to withstand critique. For suf-
ficiency, something additional is required, 
namely, that our best explanation of the can-
didate source should entail that its deliver-
ances (tend to) be true. Using this idea, radical 
empiricists might hold that our best explana-
tion of our (reports of) experiences and/or 
observations entail that they (tend to) be true 
but that this is not so for our best explanation 
of our intuitions. From this, the radical 
empiricist might conclude that, although 
experience and/or observation withstand cri-
tique, intuition does not. This, however, is 
question-begging. For advocates of intuitions 
may counter that the best explanation of 
intuition must invoke the analysis of what 
it takes to possess concepts determinately, 
and, according to that analysis, a necessary 
condition of determinate concept possession 

A PRIORI KNOWLEDGE 
623 
is that intuitions involving the concept (tend 
to) be true. Why accept this theory? Well, if 
(certain compelling) intuitions are admitted 
as evidence, its superiority over competing 
theories can be shown. Given this prospect, 
it would be question-begging for radical 
empiricists to reject this style of explanation 
in favor of their own candidate: their candi-
date could be defended only by disregarding 
a significant body of evidence (or at least 
what is counted as evidence according to our 
epistemic norms). 
Is it question-begging for advocates of 
intuitions to invoke intuitions in support of 
this theory of determinate concept posses-
sion? No. It is standard justificatory practice 
to use intuitions evidentially. We are in a dia-
lectical context in which radicals are trying 
to produce a reason for departing from this 
standard practice. No such reason is forth-
coming; instead, radical empiricists only dis-
regard a theory based on all the evidence in 
favor of a theory based on a circumscribed 
body of evidence. The conclusion is that this 
way of trying to undermine the argument in 
the text is unsuccessful. 
9 This account of derived sources should be 
viewed as an idealization. Note that I need 
not commit myself to it; for an alternative 
account, see note 7 in my Replies [in Bealer 
1996a J. What is important is that there be 
some account consistent with a reliabilist 
account of basic sources. 
10 
Might intuition be a derived source? No. First, 
intuitively, intuition is as basic as experience 
(or any source of evidence). Second, as Quine 
has shown us, our best overall purely empiri-
cal theory does not affirm that our modal 
intuitions have a reliable tie to the truth and, 
hence, would not explain their evidential 
status. Within the general explanatory strat-
egy, there is no alternative but no identify 
intuition as a basic source of evidence. (This 
point is developed in greater detail in section 
6, pp. 323-8, of my "Philosophical Limits of 
Scientific Essentialism".) 
11 
An analogous counterexample could be con-
structed around "hardwired" dispositions to 
guess. Of course, by sophisticated maneu-
vers, contingent reliabilists might try to 
avoid these and other problems, but as far as 
I can tell, such efforts do not escape the 
underlying difficulties. 
12 
I will not attempt to state my final general 
analysis; that requires having various pre-
liminaries which emerge in the course of the 
Argument from Concepts, alluded to earlier 
as the second pillar of my argument. In the 
finished version, the modal tie invoked in 
the analysis of evidence is constitutive of 
determinate concept possession. Determinate 
concept possession governs both a priori 
intuitions and "phenomenal intuitions;' and 
insures their tie to the truth. Note that in the 
present proposal I require only that most 
derivable consequences of the indicated a 
priori theory be true. I do not say all, for I do 
not want to rule out unresolvable logical and 
philosophical antinomies. 
13 
As Kripke intended it (p. 103), this expres-
sion must be so understood that the rephrasal 
strategy can be successfully applied to "It 
could have turned out that water had no 
hydrogen in it" but not to "It could have 
turned out that the four color theorem is 
false". Other points of clarification: By saying 
that semantically stable expressions must 
mean the same in the indicated language 
group, I mean that they must make the same 
contribution to the propositions expressed 
by sentences in which they occur. This is 
meant to rule out indexicals as semantically 
stable. Note also that these definitions are 
indexed to our language group. Correspond-
ing absolute notions can be defined. The 
resulting absolute notions mesh neatly with 
the Autonomy and Authority of Philosophy 
since these are modal theses concerning the 
possibility of autonomous, authoritative 
philosophical theories. At a few points my 
discussion will need the absolute notion; it 
should be clear when it is in effect. Note fur-
thermore that by defining semantic stability 
in terms of whole language groups, rather 
than particular individuals, Burge-like phe-
nomena would not by themselves render an 
expression semantically unstable; semantic 
instability has to do with the effects of the 
external environment. Of course, it is an 
expression in one of its senses that is semanti-
cally stable or unstable: there could be an 
ambiguous expression which is stable in one 

624 
GEORGE BEALER 
of its senses and unstable in another. Note 
finally that the notion of semantic stability 
applies to expressions; there is a correspond-
References 
Bealer, G.: 1987, "Philosophical limits of scientific 
essentialism", Philosophical Perspectives 
1 
(Ridgeview, Atascadero), pp. 289-365. 
Bealer, G.: 1992, "The incoherence of empiricism", 
The Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume 
66, pp. 99-138. 
Bealer, G.: 1994, "Mental properties", The Journal 
of Philosophy 91, pp. 185-208. 
Bealer, G.: 1996a, "A Priori Knowledge: Replies to 
William Lycan and Ernest Sosa," Philosophical 
Studies 81, 2-3, pp. 163-74. 
ing object-language notion of a semantically 
stable concept. In a finished formulation this 
object-language notion might be preferable. 
Bealer, G.: 1996b, "On the possibility of philo-
sophical knowledge", Philosophical Perspectives 
10 (Basil Blackwell, Oxford). 
Bealer, G.: (forthcoming), Philosophical Limits of 
Science. 
Hirsch, E.: 1986, "Metaphysical necessity and 
conceptual 
truth", 
Midwest 
Studies 
In 
Philosophy II, pp. 243-56. 
Kripke, S.: 1980, Naming and Necessity (Harvard, 
Cambridge). 

CHAPTER 45 
Normativityand 
Epistemic Intuitions 
Jonathan M. Weinberg, Shaun Nichols, 
and Stephen Stich 
1. 
Introduction 
In this paper we propose to argue for two claims. 
The first is that a sizeable group of epistemologi-
cal projects - a group which includes much of 
what has been done in epistemology in the ana-
lytic tradition - would be seriously undermined 
if one or more of a cluster of empirical hypothe-
ses about epistemic intuitions turns out to be 
true. The basis for this claim will be set out in 
Section 2. The second claim is that, while the jury 
is still out, there is now a substantial body of evi-
dence suggesting that some of those empirical 
hypotheses are true. Much of this evidence derives 
from an ongoing series of experimental studies of 
epistemic intuitions that we have been conduct-
ing. A preliminary report on these studies will be 
presented in Section 3. In light of these studies, 
we think it is incumbent on those who pursue the 
epistemological projects in question to either 
explain why the truth of the hypotheses does not 
undermine their projects, or to say why, in light of 
the evidence we will present, they nonetheless 
assume that the hypotheses are false. In Section 4, 
which is devoted to Objections and Replies, we'll 
consider some of the ways in which defenders of 
the projects we are criticizing might reply to our 
challenge. Our goal, in all of this, is not to offer a 
Originally published in Philosophical Topics 29, 1 and 2 
(2001), pp. 429-60. 
conclusive argument demonstrating that the epis-
temological projects we will be criticizing are 
untenable. Rather, our aim is to shift the burden 
of argument. For far too long, epistemologists 
who rely heavily on epistemic intuitions have 
proceeded as though they could simply ignore the 
empirical hypotheses we will set out. We will be 
well satisfied if we succeed in making a plausible 
case for the claim that this approach is no longer 
acceptable. 
To start, it will be useful to sketch a brief - and 
perhaps somewhat idiosyncratic - taxonomy of 
epistemological projects. With the aid of this tax-
onomy we will try to "locate in philosophical 
space" (as Wilfrid Sellars used to say) those epis-
temological projects which, we maintain, are 
threatened by the evidence we will present. There 
are at least four distinct, though related, projects 
that have occupied the attention of epistemolo-
gists. Following Richard Samuels, 1 we'll call them 
the Normative Project, the Descriptive Project, 
the Evaluative Project and the Ameliorative 
Project. 
The Normative Project, which we're inclined 
to think is the most philosophically central of the 
four, attempts to establish norms to guide our 
epistemic efforts. Some of these norms may be 
explicitly regulative, specifying which ways of 
going about the quest for knowledge should be 
pursued and which should not. This articulation 
of regulative norms is one of the more venerable 
of philosophical undertakings, going back at least 

626 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
to Descartes's Regulae and evident in the work of 
Mill, Popper and many other important figures 
in the history of philosophy; and it continues in 
philosophy today. For example, when Alvin 
Goldman chastises internalism for being unable 
to provide us with "Doxastic Decision Principles," 
he is challenging the ability of internalism to pull 
its weight in this aspect of the Normative Project. 2 
The Normative Project also aims to articulate 
what might be called valuational norms, which 
attempt to answer questions like: What is our 
epistemic good? and How should we prefer to 
structure our doxastic lives? One may not be able 
to generate regulative principles from the answers 
provided; rather, the answers tell us at what target 
the regulative principles should aim. 
The Descriptive Project can have a variety of 
targets, the two most common being epistemic 
concepts and epistemic language. When concepts 
are the target, the goal is to describe (or "analyze") 
the epistemic concepts that some group of people 
actually invoke. When pursued by epistemolo-
gists (rather than linguists or anthropologists), 
the group in question is typically characterized 
rather vaguely by using the first person plural. 
They are "our" concepts, the ones that "we" use. 
Work in this tradition has led to a large literature 
attempting to analyze concepts like knowledge, 
justification, warrant, and rationality.3 When lan-
guage is the focus of the Descriptive project, the 
goal is to describe the way some group of people 
use epistemic language or to analyze the meaning 
of their epistemic terms. Here again, the group is 
almost invariably "us': 
Many epistemologists think that there are 
important links between the Normative and 
Descriptive Projects. Indeed, we suspect that these 
(putative) links go a long way toward explaining 
why philosophers think the Descriptive Project is 
so important. In epistemology, knowledge is "the 
good stuff" and to call a belief an instance of 
knowledge is to pay it one of the highest compli-
ments an epistemologist can bestow.4 Thus terms 
like "knowledge;' "justification," "warrant", etc. 
and the concepts they express are themselves 
plausibly regarded as implicitly normative. 
Moreover, many philosophers hold that sentences 
invoking epistemic terms have explicitly norma-
tive consequences. So, for example, "S's belief that 
p is an instance of knowledge" might plausibly be 
taken to entail "Ceteris paribus, S ought to believe 
that p" or perhaps "Ceteris paribus, it is a good 
thing for S to believe that p.'" For reasons that will 
emerge, we are more than a bit skeptical about the 
alleged links between the Descriptive and 
Normative Projects. For the time being, however, 
we will leave the claim that the two projects are 
connected unchallenged. 
The Evaluative Project tries to assess how well 
or poorly people's actual belief forming practices 
accord with the norms specified in the Normative 
Project. To do this, of course, another sort of 
descriptive effort is required. Before we can say 
how well or poorly people are doing at the busi-
ness of belief formation and revision, we have to 
say in some detail how they actually go about the 
process of belief formation and revision. 6 The 
Ameliorative Project presupposes that we don't 
all come out with the highest possible score in the 
assessment produced by the Evaluative Project, 
and asks how we can improve the way we go 
about the business of belief formation. In this 
paper our primary focus will be on the Normative 
Project and on versions of the Descriptive Project 
which assume that the Descriptive and Normative 
Projects are linked in something like the way 
sketched above. 
2. 
Intuition Driven Romanticism and 
The Normativity Problem 
2.1 
Epistemic romanticism and intuition 
driven romanticism 
A central question that the Normative Project 
tries to answer is: How ought we to go about the 
business of belief formation and revision? How 
are we to go about finding an answer to this 
question? And once an answer has been pro-
posed, how are we to assess it? If two theorists 
offer different answers, how can we determine 
which one is better? Philosophers who have pur-
sued the Normative Project have used a variety 
of methods or strategies. In this section we want 
to begin by describing one very influential 
family of strategies. 
The family we have in mind belongs to a larger 
group of strategies which (just to be provocative) 
we propose to call Epistemic Romanticism. One 
central idea of 19th-century Romanticism was 
that our real selves, the essence of our identity, is 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
627 
implanted within us, and that to discover who we 
really are we need but let that real identity emerge. 
Epistemic Romanticism assumes something 
rather similar about epistemic norms. According 
to Epistemic Romanticism, knowledge of the cor-
rect epistemic norms (or information that can 
lead to knowledge of the correct norms) is 
implanted within us in some way, and with the 
proper process of self-exploration we can dis-
cover them. As we read him, Plato was an early 
exponent of this kind of Romanticism about mat-
ters normative (and about much else besides). So 
Epistemic Platonism might be another (perhaps 
equally provocative) label for this group of strate-
gies for discovering or testing epistemic norms. 
There are various ways in which the basic idea 
of Epistemic Romanticism can be elaborated. The 
family of strategies that we want to focus on all 
accord a central role to what we will call epistemic 
intuitions. Thus we will call this family of strate-
gies Intuition Driven Romanticism (or IDR). As 
we use the notion, an epistemic intuition is simply 
a spontaneous judgment about the epistemic 
properties of some specific case - a judgment for 
which the person making the judgment may be 
able to offer no plausible justification. To count as 
an Intuition Driven Romantic strategy for discov-
ering or testing epistemic norms, the following 
three conditions must be satisfied: 
(i) 
The strategy must take epistemic intui-
tions as data or input. (It can also exploit 
various other sorts of data.) 
(ii) 
It must produce, as output, explicitly or 
implicitly normative claims or principles 
about matters epistemic. Explicitly nor-
mative claims include regulative claims 
about how we ought to go about the busi-
ness of belief formation, claims about the 
relative merits of various strategies for 
belief formation, and evaluative claims 
about the merits of various epistemic 
situations. Implicitly normative claims 
include claims to the effect that one or 
another process of belief formation leads 
to justified beliefs or to real knowledge or 
that a doxastic structure of a certain kind 
amounts to real knowledge. 
(iii) 
The output of the strategy must depend, 
in part, on the epistemic intuitions it takes 
as input. If provided with significantly 
different intuitions, the strategy must 
yield significantly different output.7 
Perhaps the most familiar examples of 
Intuition Driven Romanticism are various ver-
sions of the reflective equilibrium strategy in 
which (to paraphrase Goodman slightly) "a [nor-
mative] rule is amended if it yields an inference 
we are [intuitively] unwilling to accept [and] an 
inference is rejected if it violates a [normative] 
rule we are [intuitively] unwilling to amend."" In 
a much discussed paper called "Can Human 
Irrationality Be Experimentally Demonstrated;' 
L. J. Cohen proposes a variation on Goodman's 
strategy as a way of determining what counts as 
rational or normatively appropriate reasoning.9 It 
is of some importance to note that there are many 
ways in which the general idea of a reflective equi-
librium process can be spelled out. Some philoso-
phers, including Cohen, advocate a "narrow" 
reflective equilibrium strategy. Others advocate a 
"wide" reflective equilibrium strategy. And both 
of these alternatives can be elaborated in various 
ways.lO Moreover, the details are often quite 
important since different versions of the reflective 
equilibrium strategy may yield different outputs, 
even when provided with exactly the same input. 
Another example of the IDR strategy can be 
found in Alvin Goldman's important and influ-
ential book, Epistemology and Cognition (1986). 
A central goal of epistemology, Goldman argues, 
is to develop a theory that will specify which of 
our beliefs are epistemically justified and which 
are not, and a fundamental step in constructing 
such a theory will be to articulate a system of 
rules or principles evaluating the justificatory 
status of beliefs. These rules, which Goldman calls 
J-rules, will specify permissible ways in which 
cognitive agents may go about the business of 
forming or updating their beliefs. They "permit 
or prohibit beliefs, directly or indirectly, as a func-
tion of some states, relations, or processes of the 
cognizer."11 But, of course, different theorists may 
urge different and incompatible sets of J -rules. So 
in order to decide whether a proposed system of 
J-rules is correct, we must appeal to a higher 
criterion - Goldman calls it "a criterion of right-
ness" - which will specify a "set of conditions that 
are necessary and sufficient for a set of J-rules to 
be right."12 But now the theoretical disputes 
emerge at a higher level, for different theorists 

628 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
have suggested very different criteria of rightness. 
Indeed, as Goldman notes, an illuminating tax-
onomy of epistemological theories can be gener-
ated by classifying them on the basis of the sort of 
criterion of rightness they endorse. So how are we 
to go about deciding among these various criteria 
of rightness? The answer, Goldman maintains, 
is that the correct criterion of rightness is the one 
that comports with the conception of justifica-
tion that is "embraced by everyday thought and 
language."13 To test a criterion, we consider the 
judgments it would entail about specific cases, 
and we test these judgments against our "pretheo-
retic intuition." "A criterion is supported to the 
extent that implied judgments accord with such 
intuitions and weakened to the extent that they 
do not:' 14, 15 
The examples we have mentioned so far are 
hardly the only examples of Intuition Driven 
Romanticism. Indeed, we think a plausible case 
can be made that a fair amount of what goes on in 
normative epistemology can be classified as 
Intuition Driven Romanticism. Moreover, to the 
extent that it is assumed to have normative impli-
cations, much of what has been written in descrip-
tive epistemology in recent decades also counts as 
Intuition Driven Romanticism. For example, just 
about all of the vast literature that arose in 
response to Gettier's classic paper uses intuitions 
about specific cases to test proposed analyses of 
the concept of knowledge. 16 
For many purposes, the details of an IDR 
strategy - the specific ways in which it draws 
inferences from intuitions and other data - will 
be of enormous importance. But since our goal is 
to raise a problem for all IDR strategies, the exact 
details of how they work will play no role in our 
argument. Thus, for our purposes, an IDR strat-
egy can be viewed as a "black box" which takes 
intuitions (and perhaps other data) as input and 
produces implicitly or explicitly normative claims 
as output. The challenge we are about to raise is, 
we claim, a problem for IDR accounts no matter 
what goes on within the black box. 
2.2 
The normativity problem 
Reflective equilibrium strategies and other 
Intuition Driven Romantic strategies all yield as 
outputs claims that putatively have normative 
force. These outputs tell us how people ought to 
go about forming and revising their beliefs, which 
belief forming strategies yield genuinely justified 
beliefs, which beliefs are warranted, which count 
as real knowledge rather than mere opinion, etc. 
But there is a problem lurking here - we'll call it 
the Normativity Problem: What reason is there to 
think that the output of one or another of these 
Intuition Driven Romantic strategies has real (as 
opposed to putative) normative force? Why 
should we care about the normative pronounce-
ments produced by these strategies? Why should 
we try to do what these outputs claim we ought to 
do in matters epistemic? Why, in short, should we 
take any of this stuff seriously? 
We don't think that there is any good solution 
to the Normativity Problem for Intuition Driven 
Romanticism or indeed for any other version of 
Romanticism in epistemology. And because there 
is no solution to the Normativity Problem, we 
think that the entire tradition of Epistemic 
Romanticism has been a very bad idea. These, 
obviously, are very big claims and this is not the 
place to mount a detailed argument for all of 
them. We do, however, want to rehearse one con-
sideration, first raised in Stich's book, The 
Fragmentation of Reason. 1? We think it lends some 
plausibility to the claim that satisfying solutions 
to the Normativity Problem for Intuition Driven 
Romanticism are going to be hard to find. It will 
also help to motivate the empirical studies we will 
recount in the section to follow. 
What Stich noted is that the following situa-
tion seems perfectly possible. There might be a 
group of people who reason and form beliefs in 
ways that are significantly different from the way 
we do. Moreover, these people might also have 
epistemic intuitions that are significantly differ-
ent from ours. More specifically, they might have 
epistemic intuitions which, when plugged into 
your favorite Intuition Driven Romantic black 
box yield the conclusion that their strategies of 
reasoning and belief formation lead to epistemic 
states that are rational (or justified, or of the sort 
that yield genuine knowledge - pick your favorite 
normative epistemic notion here). If this is right, 
then it looks like the IDR strategy for answering 
normative epistemic questions might sanction 
any of a wide variety of regulative and valuational 
norms. And that sounds like bad news for an 
advocate of the IDR strategy, since the strategy 
doesn't tell us what we really want to know. It 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
629 
doesn't tell us how we should go about the busi-
ness of forming and revising our beliefs. One 
might, of course, insist that the normative princi-
ples that should be followed are the ones that are 
generated when we put our intuitions into the 
IDR black box. But it is less than obvious (to put 
it mildly) how this move could be defended. Why 
should we privilege our intuitions rather than the 
intuitions of some other group? 
One objection that was occasionally raised 
in response to this challenge focused on the fact 
that the groups conjured in Stich's argument 
are just philosophical fictions. 18 While it may 
well be logically possible that there are groups 
of people whose reasoning patterns and epis-
temic intuitions differ systematically from our 
own, there is no reason to suppose that it is 
nomologically or psychologically possible. And 
without some reason to think that such people 
are psychologically possible, the objection con-
tinued, the thought experiment does not poses 
a problem that the defender of the IDR strategy 
needs to take seriously. We are far from con-
vinced by this objection, though we are pre-
pared to concede that the use of nomologically 
or psychologically impossible cases in norma-
tive epistemology raises some deep and difficult 
issues. Thus, for argument's sake, we are pre-
pared to concede that a plausible case might be 
made for privileging normative claims based on 
actual intuitions over normative claims based 
on intuitions that are merely logically possible. 
But what if the people imagined in the thought 
experiment are not just logically possible, but 
psychologically possible? Indeed, what if they are 
not merely psychologically possible but real- and 
to all appearances normal and flourishing? 
Under those circumstances, we maintain, it is 
hard to see how advocates of an IDR strategy 
can maintain that their intuitions have any spe-
cial standing or that the normative principles 
these intuitions generate when plugged into 
their favorite IDR black box should be privi-
leged over the normative principles that would 
be generated if we plugged the other people's 
intuitions into the same IDR black box. In the 
section to follow we will argue that these "what 
ifs" are not just "what ifs." There really are 
people - normal, flourishing people - whose 
epistemic intuition are systematically different 
from "ours". 
3. 
Cultural Variation in Epistemic 
Intuitions 
3.1 
Nisbett and Haidt: Some suggestive 
evidence 
Our suspicion that people like those imagined in 
Stich's thought experiment might actually exist 
was first provoked by the results of two recent 
research programs in psychology. In one of these, 
Richard Nisbett and his collaborators have shown 
that there are large and systematic differences 
between East Asians and Westerners19 on a long 
list of basic cognitive processes including percep-
tion, attention and memory. These groups also 
differ in the way they go about describing, pre-
dicting and explaining events, in the way they cat-
egorize objects and in the way they revise beliefs 
in the face of new arguments and evidence. This 
work makes it very plausible that the first part of 
Stich's thought experiment is more than just a 
logical possibility. There really are people whose 
reasoning and belief forming strategies are very 
different from ours. Indeed, there are over a billion 
of them! 
Though space does not permit us to offer a 
detailed account of the differences that Nisbett 
and his colleagues found, a few brief notes will be 
useful in motivating the studies we will describe 
later is this section. According to Nisbett and his 
colleagues, the differences "can be loosely grouped 
together under the heading of holistic vs. analytic 
thought." Holistic thought, which predominates 
among East Asians, is characterized as "involving 
an orientation to the context or field as a whole, 
including attention to relationships between a 
focal object and the field, and a preference for 
explaining and predicting events on the basis of 
such relationships." Analytic thought, the prevail-
ing pattern among Westerners, is characterized as 
"involving detachment of the object from its con-
text, a tendency to focus on attributes of the 
object in order to assign it to categories, and a 
preference for using rules about the categories to 
explain and predict the object's behavior."2o One 
concomitant of East Asian holistic thought is the 
tendency to focus on chronological rather than 
causal patterns in describing and recalling events. 
Westerners, by contrast, focus on causal patterns 
in these tasksY Westerners also have a stronger 
sense of agency and independence, while East 

630 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
Asians have a much stronger commitment to 
social harmony. In East Asian society, the indi-
vidual feels "very much a part of a large and 
complex social organism ... where behavioral pre-
scriptions must be followed and role obligations 
adhered to scrupulously:'22 
The second research program that led us to 
suspect there might actually be people like those 
in Stich's thought experiment was the work 
Jonathan Haidt and his collaboratorsY These 
investigators were interested in exploring the 
extent to which moral intuitions about events in 
which no one is harmed track judgments about 
disgust in people from different cultural and 
socioeconomic groups. For their study they con-
structed a set of brief stories about victimless 
activities that were intended to trigger the emo-
tion of disgust. They presented these stories to 
subjects using a structured interview technique 
designed to determine whether the subjects 
found the activities described to be disgusting 
and also to elicit the subjects' moral intuitions 
about the activities. As an illustration, here is a 
story describing actions which people in all the 
groups studied found (not surprisingly) to be 
quite disgusting: 
A man goes to the supermarket once a week and 
buys a dead chicken. But before cooking the 
chicken, he has sexual intercourse with it. Then 
he cooks it and eats it. 
The interviews were administered to both high 
and low socioeconomic status (SES) subjects in 
Philadelphia (USA) and in two cities in Brazil. 
Perhaps the most surprising finding in this study 
was that there are large differences in moral intu-
itions between social classes. Indeed, in most 
cases the difference between social classes was sig-
nificantly greater than the difference between 
Brazilian and American subjects of the same SES. 
Of course we haven't yet told you what the differ-
ences in moral intuitions were, though you should 
be able to predict them by noting your own moral 
intuitions. (Hint: If you are reading this article, 
you count as high-SES.) Not to keep you in sus-
pense, low SES subjects tend to think that the 
man who has sex with the chicken is doing some-
thing that is seriously morally wrong; high SES 
subjects don't. Much the same pattern was found 
with the other scenarios used in the study. 
3.2 
Four hypotheses 
For our purposes, Haidt's work, like Nisbett's, is 
only suggestive. Nisbett gives us reason to think 
that people in different cultural groups exploit 
very different belief forming strategies. Haidt's 
work demonstrates that people in different SES 
groups have systematically different moral intui-
tions. Neither investigator explored the possibil-
ity that there might be differences in epistemic 
intuitions in different groups. However, the 
results they reported were enough to convince us 
that the following pair of hypotheses might be 
true, and that it was worth the effort to find out: 
Hypothesis 1: Epistemic intuitions vary from 
culture to culture. 
Hypothesis 2: Epistemic intuitions vary from 
one socioeconomic group to another. 
To these two experimentally inspired hypotheses 
we added two more that were suggested by anec-
dotal rather than experimental evidence. It has 
often seemed to us that students' epistemic intui-
tions change as they take more philosophy 
courses, and we have often suspected that we and 
our colleagues were, in effect, teaching neophyte 
philosophers to have intuitions that are in line 
with those of more senior members of the profes-
sion. Or perhaps we are not modifying intuitions 
at all but simply weeding out students whose 
intuitions are not mainstream. If either of these is 
the case, then the intuitions that "we" use in our 
philosophical work are not those of the man and 
woman in the street, but those of a highly trained 
and self-selecting community. These speculations 
led to: 
Hypothesis 3: Epistemic intuitions vary as a 
function of how many philosophy courses a 
person has had. 
It also sometimes seems that the order in which 
cases are presented to people can have substantial 
effects on people's epistemic intuitions. This 
hunch is reinforced by some intriguing work on 
neural networks suggesting that a variety oflearn-
ing strategies may be "path dependent."24 If this 
hunch is correct, the pattern of intuitions that 
people offer on a series of cases might well differ 
systematically as a function of the order in which 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
631 
the cases are presented. This suggested our fourth 
hypothesis: 
Hypothesis 4: Epistemic intuitions depend, in 
part, on the order in which cases are presented. 
Moreover, it might well be the case that some of 
the results of order effects are very hard to 
modify.25 
If anyone of these four hypotheses turns out 
to be true then, we maintain, it will pose a serious 
problem for the advocate of Intuition Driven 
Romanticism. If all of them are true, then it is 
hard to believe that any plausible case can be 
made for the claim that the normative pronounce-
ments of Intuition Driven Romanticism have real 
normative force - that they are norms that we (or 
anyone else) should take seriously. 
3.3 
Some experiments exploring cultural 
variation in epistemic intuitions 
Are any of these hypotheses true? To try to find 
out we have been conducting a series of experi-
ments designed to test Hypotheses 1 and 2. While 
the results we have so far are preliminary, they are 
sufficient, we think, to at least shift the burden of 
argument well over in the direction of the 
defender ofIDR strategies. What our results show, 
we believe, is that the advocates of IDR can no 
longer simply ignore these hypotheses or dismiss 
them as implausible, for there is a growing body 
of evidence which suggests that they might well 
be true. 
In designing our experiments, we were guided 
by three rather different considerations. First, we 
wanted our intuition probes - the cases that we 
would ask subjects to judge - to be similar to cases 
that have actually been used in the recent litera-
ture in epistemology. Second, since the findings 
reported by Nisbett and his colleagues all focused 
on differences between East Asians (henceforth 
EAs) and European Americans (henceforth Ws, 
for "Westerners"), we decided that would be the 
obvious place to look first for differences in epis-
temic intuitions. Third, since Nisbett and his col-
leagues argue that W s are significantly more 
individualistic than EAs, who tend to be much 
more interdependent and "collectivist" and thus 
much more concerned about community har-
mony and consensus, we tried to construct some 
intuition probes that would tap into this differ-
ence. Would individualistic Ws, perhaps, be more 
inclined to attribute knowledge to people whose 
beliefs are reliably formed by processes that no 
one else in their community shares. The answer, it 
seems, is yes. 
3.3.1 
Truetemp cases 
An issue of great moment in recent analytic 
epistemology is the internalism/externalism 
debate. Internalism, with respect to some epis-
temically evaluative property, is the view that 
only factors within an agent's introspective 
grasp can be relevant to whether the agent's 
beliefs have that property. Components of an 
agent's doxastic situation available to introspec-
tion are internalistically kosher; other factors 
beyond the scope of introspection, such as the 
reliability of the psychological mechanisms that 
actually produced the belief, are epistemically 
external to the agent. Inspired by Lehrer (1990), 
we included in our surveys a number of cases 
designed 
to 
explore 
externalistlinternalist 
dimensions of our subjects' intuitions. Here is 
one of the questions we presented to our sub-
jects, all of whom were undergraduates at 
Rutgers University.26 
One day Charles is suddenly knocked out by a 
falling rock, and his brain becomes re-wired so 
that he is always absolutely right whenever he 
estimates the temperature where he is. Charles is 
completely unaware that his brain has been 
altered in this way. A few weeks later, this brain 
re-wiring leads him to believe that it is 71 degrees 
in his room. Apart from his estimation, he has no 
other reasons to think that it is 71 degrees. In 
fact, it is at that time 71 degrees in his room. 
Does Charles really know that it was 71 degrees 
in the room, or does he only believe it? 
REALLY KNOWS 
ONLY BELIEVES 
Although Charles' belief is produced by a reliable 
mechanism, it is stipulated that he is completely 
unaware of this reliability. So his reliability is 
epistemically external. Therefore, to the extent 
that a subject population is unwilling to attribute 
knowledge in this case, we have evidence that the 
group's "folk epistemology" may be internalist. 
We found that while both groups were more likely 
to deny knowledge, EA subjects were much more 

632 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
lO 
o 
Figure 45.1 
Individualistic Truetemp Case 
likely to deny knowledge than were their W class-
mates. The results are shown in Figure 45.1.27 
After finding this highly significant difference, 
we began tinkering with the text to see if we could 
construct other "Truetemp" cases in which the 
difference between the two groups would disap-
pear. Our first thought was to replace the rock 
with some socially sanctioned intervention. The 
text we used was as follows: 
One day John is suddenly knocked out by a team 
of well-meaning scientists sent by the elders of 
his community, and his brain is re-wired so that 
he is always absolutely right whenever he esti-
mates the temperature where he is. John is com-
pletely unaware that his brain has been altered in 
this way. A few weeks later, this brain re-wiring 
leads him to believe that it is 71 degrees in his 
room. Apart from his estimation, he has no other 
reasons to think that it is 71 degrees. In fact, it is 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
lO 
o 
Western 
Figure 45.2 Truetemp: The Elders Version 
IZl Really knows 
D Only believes 
at that time 71 degrees in his room. Does John 
really know that it was 71 degrees in the room, or 
does he only believe it? 
REALLY KNOWS 
ONLY BELIEVES 
As we had predicted, the highly significant differ-
ence between the two groups disappeared. The 
results are shown in Figure 45.2. 
Encouraged by this finding we constructed yet 
another version of the "Truetemp" case in which 
the mechanism that reliably leads to a true belief 
is not unique to a single individual, but rather is 
shared by everyone else in the community. The 
intuition probe read as follows: 
The Faluki are a large but tight knit community 
living on a remote island. One day, a radioactive 
meteor strikes the island and has one significant 
effect on the Faluki - it changes the chemical 
East Asian 
CJ Really knows 
D Only believes 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
633 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
~ Really knows 
D Only believes 
O~~~~ 
.. 
~~--~ 
Western 
East Asian 
Figure 45.3 
Community Wide Truetemp Case ("Faluki") 
make-up of their brains so that they are always 
absolutely right whenever they estimate the tem-
perature. The Faluki are completely unaware 
that their brains have been altered in this way. 
Kal is a member of the Faluki community. A few 
weeks after the meteor strike, while Kal is walk-
ing along the beach, the changes in his brain lead 
him to believe that it is 71 degrees where he is. 
Apart from his estimation, he has no other rea-
sons to think that it is 71 degrees. In fact, it is at 
that time exactly 71 degrees where Kal is. Does 
Kal really know that it is 71 degrees, or does he 
only believe it? 
REALLY KNOWS 
ONLY BELIEVES 
As predicted, on this case too there was no 
significant difference between Ws & EAs. (See 
Figure 45.3.) 
Intriguingly, though the difference is not sta-
tistically significant, the percentage of EAs who 
answered "Really Knows" in this case was greater 
than the percentage of W s who gave that answer, 
reversing the pattern in the individualistic "hit by 
a rock" case. Figure 45.4, which is a comparison 
of the three Truetemp cases, illustrates the way in 
which the large difference between W sand EAs in 
the Individualistic version disappears in the 
Elders version and looks to be reversing direction 
in the Faluki version. 
~y 
knows D Only believes I 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
100 
80 
60 
40 
20 
0 
Western 
East Asian 
Individualistic Version 
1~~~~L--''''_L~--:-:-•• 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 o 
Elder Version 
Figure 45.4 Comparison of Truetemp Cases 
Faluki Version 

634 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
o 
Figure 45.5 Gettier Case: Western & East Asian 
3.3.2 
Gettier cases 
A category of examples that has loomed large in 
the recent epistemology literature are "Gettier 
cases;' in which a person has good (though, as it 
happens, false, or only accidentally true, or in 
some other way warrant-deprived) evidence for a 
belief which is true. These cases are, of course, by 
their very construction in many ways quite similar 
to unproblematic cases in which a person has 
good and true evidence for a true belief. As 
Norenzayan and Nisbett have shown, EAs are 
more inclined than Ws to make categorical judg-
ments on the basis of similarity. Ws, on the other 
hand, are more disposed to focus on causation in 
describing the world and classifying things.28 In a 
large class of Gettier cases, the evidence that causes 
the target to form a belief turns out to be false. 
This suggest that EAs might be much less inclined 
than Ws to withhold the attribution of knowledge 
in Gettier cases. And, indeed, they are. 
The intuition probe we used to explore cultural 
differences on Gettier cases was the following: 
Bob has a friend, Jill, who has driven a Buick for 
many years. Bob therefore thinks that Jill drives 
an American car. He is not aware, however, that 
her Buick has recently been stolen, and he is also 
not aware that Jill has replaced it with a Pontiac, 
which is a different kind of American car. Does 
Bob really know that Jill drives an American car, 
or does he only believe it? 
REALLY KNOWS 
ONLY BELIEVES 
The striking finding in this case is that a large 
majority of Ws give the standard answer in the 
I2:l Really knows 
o Only believes 
philosophical literature, viz. "Only Believes." But 
amongst EAs this pattern is actually reversed! A 
majority of EAs say that Bob really knows. The 
results are shown in Figure 45.5. 
3.3.3 
Evidence from another ethnic group 
The experiments we have reported thus far were 
done in lower division classes and large lectures at 
Rutgers. Since Rutgers is the State University of 
New Jersey and New Jersey is home to many 
people of Indian, Pakistani, and Bangladeshi 
descent, in the course of the experiments we col-
lected lots of data about these people's intuitions. 
Initially we simply set these data aside since we 
had no theoretical basis for expecting that the 
epistemic intuitions of people from the Indian 
sub-continent (hereafter SCs) would be system-
atically different from the epistemic intuitions of 
Westerners. But, after finding the extraordinary 
differences between Ws and EAs on the Gettier 
case, we thought it might be interesting to analyze 
the SC data as well. We were right. It turns out 
that the epistemic intuitions of SCs are even more 
different from the intuitions ofWs than the intu-
itions of EAs are. The SC results on the Gettier 
case are shown in Figure 45.6. If these results are 
robust, then it seems that what counts as knowl-
edge on the banks of the Ganges does not count 
as knowledge on the banks of the Mississippi! 
There were two additional intuition probes that 
we used in our initial experiments which did not 
yield statistically significant differences between 
Ws and EAs. But when we analyzed the SC data, it 
turned out that there were significant differences 
between Ws and SCs. The text for one of these 
probes, the Cancer Conspiracy case, was as follows: 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
635 
80 
70 
~ Really knows 
--------------j D Only believes 
Figure 45.6 Gettier Case: Western & Indian 
It's clear that smoking cigarettes increases the like-
lihood of getting cancer. However, there is now a 
great deal of evidence that just using nicotine by 
itself without smoking (for instance, by taking a 
nicotine pill) does not increase the likelihood of 
getting cancer. Jim knows about this evidence and 
as a result, he believes that using nicotine does not 
increase the likelihood of getting cancer. It is pos-
sible that the tobacco companies dishonestly 
made up and publicized this evidence that using 
nicotine does not increase the likelihood of cancer, 
and that the evidence is really false and mislead-
ing. Now, the tobacco companies did not actually 
make up this evidence, but Jim is not aware of this 
fact. Does Jim really know that using nicotine 
doesn't increase the likelihood of getting cancer, 
or does he only believe it? 
REALLY KNOWS 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
ONLY BELIEVES 
The results are shown in Figure 45.7. 
The other probe that produced significant dif-
ferences is a version of Dretske's Zebra-in-Zoo 
case (Dretske, 1970): 
Mike is a young man visiting the zoo with his son, 
and when they come to the zebra cage, Mike points 
to the animal and says, "that's a zebra:' Mike is 
right - it is a zebra. However, as the older people in 
his community know, there are lots of ways that 
people can be tricked into believing things that 
aren't true. Indeed, the older people in the com-
munity know that it's possible that zoo authorities 
could cleverly disguise mules to look just like 
zebras, and people viewing the animals would not 
be able to tell the difference. If the animal that 
Mike called a zebra had really been such a cleverly 
painted mule, Mike still would have thought that it 
~ Really knows 
D Only believes 
Western 
Indian sub-continent 
Figure 45.7 Conspiracy Case 

636 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
70 
60 
50 
El Really knows 
o Only believes 
Western 
Indian sub-continent 
Figure 45.8 Zebra Case: Western & Indian 
was a zebra. Does Mike really know that the animal 
is a zebra, or does he only believe that it is? 
REALLY KNOWS 
ONLY BELIEVES 
The results are shown in Figure 45.8. 
What's going on in these last two cases? Why 
do SCs and Ws have different epistemic intuitions 
about them. The answer, to be quite frank, is that 
we are not sure how to explain these results. But, 
of course, for our polemical purposes, an explana-
tory hypothesis is not really essential. The mere fact 
that Ws, EAs and SCs have different epistemic intu-
itions is enough to make it plausible that IDR strat-
egies which take these intuitions as inputs would 
yield significantly different normative pronounce-
ments as output. And this, we think, puts the ball 
squarely in the court of the defenders ofIDR strat-
egies. They must either argue that intuitive differ-
ences of the sort we've found would not lead to 
diverging normative claims, or they must argue 
that the outputs of an IDR strategy are genuinely 
normative despite the fact that they are different 
for different cultures. Nor is this the end of the bad 
news for those who advocate IDR strategies. 
3.3.4 
Epistemic intuitions and 
socioeconomic status 
Encouraged by our findings in these cross-cul-
tural studies, we have begun to explore the possi-
bility that epistemic intuitions might also be 
sensitive to the socioeconomic status of the people 
offering the intuitions. And while our findings 
here are also quite preliminary, the apparent 
answer is that SES does indeed have a major 
impact on subjects' epistemic intuitions. 
Following Haidt (and much other research in 
social psychology) we used years of education to dis-
tinguish low and high SES groups. In the studies we 
will recount in this section, subjects were classified as 
low SES if they reported that they had never attended 
college. Subjects who reported that they had one or 
more years of college were coded as high SES. All the 
subjects were adults; they were approached near 
various commercial venues in downtown New 
Brunswick, New Jersey, and (since folks approached 
on the street tend to be rather less compliant than 
university undergraduates in classrooms) they were 
offered McDonald's gift certificates worth a few dol-
lars if they agreed to participate in our study. 
Interestingly, the two intuition probes for 
which we found significant SES differences both 
required the subjects to assess the importance of 
possible states of affairs that do not actually 
obtain. Here is the first probe, which is similar to 
the Dretske-type case discussed above: 
Pat is at the zoo with his son, and when they 
come to the zebra cage, Pat points to the animal 
and says, "that's a zebra." Pat is right - it is a zebra. 
However, given the distance the spectators are 
from the cage, Pat would not be able to tell the 
difference between a real zebra and a mule that is 
cleverly disguised to look like a zebra. And if the 
animal had really been a cleverly disguised mule, 
Pat still would have thought that it was a zebra. 
Does Pat really know that the animal is a zebra, 
or does he only believe that it is? 
REALLY KNOWS 
ONLY BELIEVES 
The results are shown in Figure 45.9. 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
637 
90 
80 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
~ Really knows 
D Only believes 
O~~~--~~~~.., 
LowSES 
Figure 45.9 
Zebra Case: Low & High SES 
The second probe that produced significant 
(indeed enormous) differences between our two 
SES groups was the Cancer Conspiracy case that 
also generated differences between Western sub-
jects and subjects from the Indian sub-continent. 
The results are shown in Figure 45.10. (For the 
text see 3.3.3.) 
Why are the intuitions in these two SES groups 
so different? Here again we do not have a well 
worked out theoretical framework of the sort that 
Nisbett and his colleagues have provided for the 
W vs. EA differences. So any answer we offer is 
only a speculation. One hypothesis is that one of 
the many factors that subjects are sensitive to in 
forming epistemic intuitions of this sort is the 
extent to which possible but non-actual states of 
affairs are relevant. Another possibility is that 
high SES subjects accept much weaker knowledge-
defeaters than low SES subjects because low SES 
90 
80 
70 
60 
LowSES 
Figure 45.10 
Cancer Conspiracy Case 
subjects have lower mInImum standards for 
knowledge. More research is needed to determine 
whether either of these conjectures is correct. But 
whatever the explanation turns out to be, the data 
we've reported look to be yet another serious 
embarrassment for the advocates of IDR. As in 
the case of cultural difference, they must either 
argue that these intuitive differences, when 
plugged into an IDR black box, would not lead to 
different normative conclusions, or they must 
bite the bullet and argue that diverging normative 
claims are genuinely normative, and thus that the 
sorts of doxastic states that ought to be pursued 
by relatively rich and well educated people are 
significantly different from the sorts of doxastic 
states that poor and less well educated folks 
should seek. We don't pretend to have an argu-
ment showing that neither of these options is 
defensible. But we certainly don't envy the 
High SES 
~ Really knows 
D Only believes 

638 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
predicament of the IDR advocate who has to opt 
for one or the other. 
4. 
Objections and Replies 
In this section we propose to assemble some objec-
tions to the case against IDR that we've set out in 
the preceding sections along with our replies. 
4.1 
What's so bad about epistemic relativism? 
Objection: 
Suppose we're right. Suppose that epistemic intui-
tions do differ in different ethnic and SES groups, 
and that because of this IDR strategies will gener-
ate different normative conclusions depending on 
which group uses them. Why, the critic asks, should 
this be considered a problem for IDR advocates? At 
most it shows that different epistemic norms apply 
to different groups, and thus that epistemic relativ-
ism is true. But why, exactly, is that a problem? 
What's so bad about epistemic relativism? "Indeed;' 
we imagine the critic ending with an ad hominem 
flourish, "one of the authors of this paper has pub-
lished a book that defends epistemic relativism."29 
Reply: 
We certainly have no argument that could show 
that all forms of epistemic relativism are unac-
ceptable, and the one avowed relativist among us 
is still prepared to defend some forms of relativ-
ism. But if we are right about epistemic intuitions, 
then the version of relativism to which IDR strate-
gies lead would entail that the epistemic norms 
appropriate for the rich are quite different from 
the epistemic norms appropriate for the poor, and 
that the epistemic norms appropriate for white 
people are different from the norms appropriate 
for people of color.30 And that we take to be quite 
a preposterous result. The fact that IDR strategies 
lead to this result is, we think, a very strong reason 
to think that there is something very wrong with 
those strategies. Of course, a defender of an IDR 
strategy might simply bite the bullet, and insist 
that the strategy he or she advocates is the right 
one for uncovering genuine epistemic norms, 
despite the fact that it leads to a relativistic conse-
quence that many find implausible. But the IDR 
advocate who responds to our data in this way 
surely must offer some argument for the claim 
that the preferred IDR strategy produces genuine 
epistemic norms. And we know of no arguments 
along these lines that are even remotely plausible. 
4.2 
There are several senses of "knowledge" 
Objection: 
The next objection begins with the observation 
that epistemologists have long been aware that 
the word "knows" has more than one meaning in 
ordinary discourse. Sometimes when people say 
that they "know" that something is the case, what 
they mean is that they have a strong sense of sub-
jective certainty. So, for example, someone at a 
horse race might give voice to a strong hunch by 
saying: "I just know that Ivory Armchair is going 
to win." And even after Lab Bench comes in first, 
this colloquial sense of "know" still permits them 
to say, "Drat! I just knew that Ivory Armchair was 
going to win." At other times, though, when 
people use "know" and "knowledge" the sense 
they have in mind is the one that is of interest to 
epistemologists. The problem with our results, 
this objection maintains, is that we did nothing to 
ensure that when subjects answered "Really 
Know" rather than "Only Believe" the sense of 
"know" that they had in mind was the one of 
philosophical interest rather then the subjective 
certainty sense. "So," the critic concludes, "for all 
you know, your subjects might have been offering 
you philosophically uninteresting judgments 
about people's sense of subjective certainty." 
Reply: 
It is certainly possible that some of our subjects were 
interpreting the "Really Know" option as a question 
about subjective certainty. But there is reason to 
think that this did not have a major impact on our 
findings. For all of our subject groups (W, EA and SC 
in the ethnic studies and high and low SES in the SES 
study) we included a question designed to uncover 
any systematic differences in our subjects' inclina-
tion to treat mere subjective certainty as knowledge. 
The question we used was the following: 
Dave likes to playa game with flipping a coin. He 
sometimes gets a "special feeling" that the next flip 
will come out heads. When he gets this "special 
feeling': he is right about half the time, and wrong 
about half the time. Just before the next flip, Dave 
gets that "special feeling': and the feeling leads 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
639 
him to believe that the coin will land heads. He 
flips the coin, and it does land heads. Did Dave 
really know that the coin was going to land heads, 
or did he only believe it? 
REALLY KNOWS 
ONLY BELIEVES 
As shown in Figure 45.11, there was no difference at 
all between the high and low SES groups on this 
question; in both groups almost none of our subjects 
judged that this was a case of knowledge. The results 
in the ethnic studies were basically the same.3! 
This might be a good place to elaborate a bit 
on what we are and are not claiming about epis-
temic intuitions and the psychological mecha-
nisms or "knowledge structures" that may 
subserve them. For polemical purposes we have 
been emphasizing the diversity of epistemic intu-
itions in different ethnic and SES groups, since 
these quite different intuitions, when plugged 
into an IDR black box will generate different nor-
mative claims. But we certainly do not mean to 
suggest that epistemic intuitions are completely 
malleable or that there are no constraints on the 
sorts of epistemic intuitions that might be found 
in different social groups. Indeed, the fact that 
subjects from all the groups we studied agreed in 
not classifying beliefs based on "special feelings" 
as knowledge suggests that there may well be a 
universal core to "folk epistemology." Whether 
this conjecture is true and, if it is, how this 
common core is best characterized, are questions 
that will require a great deal more research. 
Obviously, these are not issues that can be settled 
from the philosopher's armchair. 
70 
60 
50 
40 
30 
20 
10 
O~-~-.....J"~ 
LowSES 
Figure 45.11 
"Special Feeling" Case 
4.3 
The effect size we've found is small and 
philosophically uninteresting 
Objection: 
If it were the case that virtually all Ws judged 
various cases in one way and virtually all EAs or 
SCs judged the same cases in a different way, that 
might be genuine cause for concern among epis-
temologists. But that's not at all what you have 
found. Rather, what you've shown is merely that 
in various cases there is a 20% or 30% difference 
in the judgments offered by subjects in various 
groups. So, for example, a majority in all of your 
groups withhold knowledge attributions in all the 
Truetemp cases that were designed to test the 
degree to which subjects' intuitions reflected epis-
temic internalism. Since the majority in all groups 
agree, we can conclude that the correct account of 
epistemic norms is internalist. So it is far from 
clear why epistemologists should find the sort of 
cultural diversity you've found to be at all 
troubling, or even interesting. 
Reply: 
Here we have two replies. First, the sizes of the 
statistically significant group differences that 
we've reported are quite comparable with the 
size of the differences that Nisbett, Haidt and 
other social psychologists take to show impor-
tant differences between groups. The second 
reply is more important. While in some cases 
what we've been reporting are just the brute 
facts that intuitions in different groups differ, in 
other cases what we've found is considerably 
more interesting. The differences between W s 
~ Really knows 
D Only believes 

640 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
and EAs look to be both systematic and 
explainable. EAs and Ws appear to be sensitive to 
different features of the situation, different epis-
ternic vectors, as we will call them. EAs are much 
more sensitive to communitarian factors, while 
Ws respond to more individualistic ones. 
Moreover, Nisbett and his colleagues have given 
us good reason to think that these kinds of differ-
ences can be traced to deep and important differ-
ences in EA and W cognition. And we have no 
reason to think that equally important differ-
ences could not be found for SCs. Our data also 
suggests that both high and low SES Westerners 
stress the individualistic and non-communitar-
ian vector, since there was no difference between 
high and low SES groups on questions designed 
to emphasize this vector. What separates high 
and low SES subjects is some quite different 
vector - sensitivity to mere possibilities, perhaps. 
What our studies point to, then, is more than just 
divergent epistemic intuitions across groups; the 
studies point to divergent epistemic concerns -
concerns which appear to differ along a variety of 
dimensions. It is plausible to suppose that these 
differences would significantly affect the output 
of just about any IDR process. 
4.4 
We are looking at the wrong sort of 
intuitions; the right sort are accom-
panied by a clear sense of necessity 
Objection: 
The central idea of this objection is that our 
experiments are simply not designed to evoke 
the right sort of intuitions - the sort that the 
IDR process really requires. What we are col-
lecting in our experiments are unfiltered spon-
taneous judgments about a variety of cases. But 
what is really needed, this objection maintains, 
are data about quite a different kind of intui-
tions. The right sort of intuitions are those that 
have modal import and are accompanied by a 
clear sense of necessity. They are the kind of 
intuitions that we have when confronted with 
principles like: If p, then not-not-p. Unless you 
show cultural or SES diversity in these sorts of 
intuitions, this objection continues, you have 
not shown anything that an IDR advocate needs 
to be concerned about, since you have not shown 
that the right sort of intuitions are not 
universal. 32 
Reply: 
It is true that the sorts of intuitions that our 
experiments collect are not the sorts that some 
IDR theorists would exploit. However, our find-
ings do raise serious questions about the sugges-
tion that intuitions which come with a clear sense 
of necessity and modal import - strong intuitions, 
as we propose to call them - are anything close to 
universal. Many epistemologists would no doubt 
insist that their own intuitions about many cases 
are strong intuitions. Simple Gettier case intui-
tions are a good example. Indeed, if these intui-
tions, which led a generation of epistemologists 
to seek something better than the traditional jus-
tified true belief analysis of knowledge, are not 
strong intuitions, then it is hard to believe that 
there are enough strong intuitions around to gen-
erate epistemic norms of any interest. But if 
philosophers' intuitions on simple Gettier cases 
are strong intuitions, then our data indicate that 
strong intuitions are far from universal. For, while 
our experiments cannot distinguish strong from 
weak intuitions, they do indicate that almost 30% 
of W subjects do not have either strong or weak 
intuitions that agree with those of most philoso-
phers, since almost 30% of these subjects claim 
that, in our standard Gettier scenario, Bob really 
knows that Jill drives an American car. Among EA 
subjects, over 50% of subjects have the intuition 
(weak or strong) that Bob really knows, and 
among SC subjects the number is over 60! It may 
well be that upper middle class, Westerners who 
have had a few years of graduate training in ana-
lytic philosophy do indeed all have strong, modal-
ity-linked intuitions about Gettier cases. But since 
most of the world's population apparently does 
not share these intuitions, it is hard to see why we 
should think that these intuitions tell us anything 
at all about the modal structure of reality, or 
about epistemic norms or indeed about anything 
else of philosophical interest. 
4.5 
We are looking at the wrong sort of 
intuitions; the right sort require at least 
a modicum of reflection 
Objection: 
We have also heard a rather different objection 
about the type of intuitions examined in our 
study.33 The proper input intuitions for the IDR 
strategy, the critics maintain, are not "first -off" 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
641 
intuitions - which may be really little better than 
mere guesses. Rather, IDR requires what might be 
called minimally reflective intuitions - intuitions 
resulting from some modicum of attention, con-
sideration, and above all reflection on the partic-
ulars of the case at hand as well as one's other 
theoretical commitments. We have, this objection 
continues, done nothing to show that such mini-
mally reflective intuitions would exhibit the sort of 
diversity we have been reporting, and until we 
show something along those lines, the IDR theorist 
need not worry. 
Reply: 
This objection is right as far as it goes, since we 
have not (yet) examined intuitions produced 
under conditions of explicit reflection. But the 
objection really does not go very far, and certainly 
not far enough to allow IDR theorists to rest easy. 
First of all, many of our subjects clearly did reflect 
at least minimally before answering, as evidenced 
in the many survey forms on which the subjects 
wrote brief explanatory comments after their 
answers. Moreover, as we stressed in Reply 4.2, it 
is not just that we found group differences in 
epistemic intuition; much more interestingly, 
Western and East Asian subjects' intuitions seem 
to respond to quite different epistemic vectors. It 
is extremely likely that such differences in sensi-
tivities would be recapitulated - or even strength-
ened - in any reflective process. If EA subjects 
have an inclination to take into account factors 
involving community beliefs, practices, and tra-
ditions, and W subjects do not have such an incli-
nation, then we see no reason to expect that such 
vectors will not be differentially present under 
conditions of explicit reflection. IDR theorists 
who want to make use of any purported differ-
ence between first-off and minimally reflective 
intuitions had better go get some data showing 
that such differences would point in the direction 
they would want. 
4.6 
We are looking at the wrong sort of 
intuitions; the right sort are those that 
emerge after an extended period of 
discussion and reflection 
Objection: 
The last objection we'll consider was proposed 
(though not, we suspect, endorsed) by Philip 
Kitcher. What IDR strategies need, this objection 
maintains, is neither first-off intuitions nor even 
minimally reflective intuitions, but rather the 
sorts of intuitions that people develop after a 
lengthy period of reflection and discussion - the 
sort of reflection and discussion that philosophy 
traditionally encourages. Kitcher suggested that 
they be called Austinian intuitions. Your experi-
ments, the objection insists, do nothing to show 
that Austinian intuitions would exhibit the sort of 
cultural diversity you've found in first-off intui-
tions, or, indeed, that they would show any sig-
nificant diversity at all. When sensible people 
reflect and reason together, there is every reason to 
suppose that they will ultimately reach a meeting 
of the minds. 
Reply: 
We certainly concede that we have not shown 
that Austinian intuitions would not ultimately 
converge. However, to echo the theme of our pre-
vious reply, in the absence of any evidence we 
don't think there is any reason to suppose that 
the sorts of marked cultural differences in sensi-
tivity to epistemic vectors that our experiments 
have demonstrated would simply disappear after 
reflection and discussion. Moreover, even if these 
cultural differences do dissipate after extended 
reflection, it might well be the case that they 
would be replaced by the sorts of order effects 
suggested in our Hypothesis 4. If that hypothesis 
is correct, then the Austinian intuitions on which 
a group of reflective people would converge 
would depend, in part, on the order in which 
examples and arguments happened to be intro-
duced. And different groups might well converge 
on quite different sets of Austinian intuitions 
which then proved quite impervious to change. 
Experiments demonstrating the sort of path 
dependence that we suggest in Hypothesis 4 are 
much harder to design than experiments demon-
strating cultural differences in initial intuitions. 
In the next stage of our ongoing empirical 
research on intuitions, we hope to run a series of 
experiments that will indicate the extent to which 
the evolution of people's intuitions is indeed a 
function of the order in which examples and coun-
ter-examples are encountered. Neither those 
experiments nor any of the evidence we've cited in 
this paper will suffice to demonstrate thatAustinian 
intuitions or IDR processes that propose to use 

642 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
them will fail to converge. But, to end with the 
theme with which we began, our goal has not 
been to establish that !DR strategies will lead to 
very different (putatively) normative conclu-
sions, but simply to make it plausible that they 
might. The assumption that they won't is an 
empirical assumption; it is not an assumption 
that can be made without argument. 
Our data indicate that when epistemologists 
advert to "our" intuitions when attempting to 
characterize epistemic concepts or draw norma-
tive conclusions, they are engaged in a culturally 
local endeavor - what we might think of as ethno-
epistemology. Indeed, in our studies, some of the 
Notes 
1 Samuels (in preparation). 
2 
Goldman (1980). 
3 The literature on conceptual analysis in epis-
temology is vast. For an elite selection, see the 
essays assembled in Sosa (1994). 
4 
This is a view with a venerable history. In 
Plato's Protagoras, Socrates says that "knowl-
edge is a noble and commanding thing," and 
Protagoras, not to be out done, replies that 
"wisdom and knowledge are the highest of 
human things." (1892/1937, p. 352) 
5 
Perhaps the most important advocate of 
extracting normative principles from analyses 
of our epistemic terms is Roderick Chisolm 
(1977). This approach is shared in projects as 
otherwise dissimilar as BonJour (1985) and 
Pollock and Cruz (1999). 
6 
For further discussion of the Evaluative Project, 
see Samuels, Stich and Tremoulet (1999); 
Samuels, Stich and Bishop (2002); Samuels, 
Stich and Faucher (2004). These papers are 
available on the web site of the Rutgers 
University Research Group on Evolution and 
Higher Cognition: http://ruccs.rutgers.edu/ 
ArchiveFolder/ResearchO/020Group/research. 
html. 
7 Note that as we've characterized them, epis-
temic intuitions are spontaneous judgments 
about specific cases. Some strategies for discov-
ering or testing epistemic norms also take 
intuitions about general epistemic or inferen-
tial principles as input. These will count as 
Intuition Driven Romantic strategies provided 
most influential thought experiments of 20th-
century epistemology elicited different intuitions 
in different cultures. In light of this, Intuition 
Driven Romanticism seems a rather bizarre way 
to determine the correct epistemic norms. For it 
is difficult to see why a process that relies heavily 
on epistemic intuitions that are local to one's own 
cultural and socioeconomic group would lead to 
genuinely normative conclusions. Pending a 
detailed response to this problem, we think that 
the best reaction to the High-SES, Western phi-
losophy professor who tries to draw normative 
conclusions from the facts about "our" intuitions 
is to ask: What do you mean "we"? 
that the output is suitably sensitive to the 
intuitions about specific cases that are 
included in the input. 
8 Goodman (1965), p. 66. 
9 Cohen, L. (1981). For a useful discussion of 
the debate that Cohen's paper provoked, see 
Stein (1996), Ch. 5. 
10 
See, for example, Elgin, C. (1996), Chapter 
IV, and Stein (1996), Chs 5 and 7. 
11 
Goldman (1986), p. 60. 
12 
Goldman (1986), p. 64. 
l3 
Goldman, (1986), p. 58. 
14 
Goldman (1986), p. 66. 
15 
In an insightful commentary on this paper, 
presented at the Conference in Honor of Alvin 
Goldman, Joel Pust notes that in his recent 
work Goldman (1992, 1999,Goldman and Pust 
1998) has offered a rather different account of 
how epistemic intuitions are to be used: 
Very roughly, Goldman's more recent view 
treats the targets of philosophical analysis as 
concepts in the psychological sense of "con-
cept;' concrete mental representations caus-
ally implicated in the production of 
philosophical intuitions. On this new view, 
intuitions serve primarily as reliable evidence 
concerning the intuitors internal psychologi-
cal mechanisms .... Especially interesting in 
the context of [the Weinberg, Nichols and 
Stich paper 1 is the fact that Goldman explic-
itly disavows the common assumption of 
"great uniformity in epistemic subjects" 
judgments about cases, noting that this 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
643 
assumption may result from the fact that phi-
losophers come from a "fairly homogeneous 
subculture:' (Goldman 1992, p. 160). 
This new psychologistic account makes it 
easier to explain why intuitions are reliable evi-
dence of some sort. However, this reliability is 
gained by deflating the evidential pretensions of 
intuitions so that they are no longer treated as 
relevant to the non-linguistic or non-psychologi-
cal question which is the central concern of the 
Normative Project: "What makes a belief epis-
temically justified?" While Goldman's approach 
solves a problem about the reliability of intui-
tions by telling us that the fact that people have 
certain intuitions is a reliable indicator of their 
psychological constitution, it does not resolve 
the problem which motivated Stich's argument 
since that problem was whether we are justified 
in treating the content of our epistemic intui-
tions as a reliable guide to the nature of justified 
belief. So, while Goldman's use of intuitions in 
his new project seems to me largely immune to 
[the criticisms in the paper by Weinberg, 
Nichols and Stich], this is because that project 
has aspirations quite different from those of tra-
ditional analytic epistemology. 
16 
Gettier, E. (1963). For a review of literature 
during the first two decades after Gettier's 
paper appeared, see Shope, (1983). For more 
recent work in this tradition, see Plantinga 
(1993a) and (1993b) as well as the follow-up 
collection of papers in Kvanvig (1996). 
17 
Stich (1990), Sec. 4.6. 
18 
Cf. Pollock and Cruz (1999), p. 150. 
19 
The East Asian subjects were Chinese, Japanese 
and Korean. Some of the experiments were 
conducted in Asia, others used East Asian stu-
dents studying in the United States or first and 
second generation East Asian immigrants to 
the United States. The Western subjects were 
Americans of European ancestry. 
20 
Nisbett et al. (2001), MS, p. II. 
21 
Nisbett (personal communication). Watanabe, 
M. (1999), Abstract. See also Watanabe (1998). 
22 
Nisbett et al. (2001), MS, pp. 4-5. 
23 
Haidt, J., Koller, S. and Dias. M. (1993). We 
are grateful to Christopher Knapp for bring-
ing Haidt's work to our attention. 
24 
See Clark,A. (1997), pp. 204-7. 
25 
Nisbett and Ross's work on "belief persever-
ance" shows that, sometimes at least, once a 
belief is formed, it can be surprisingly imper-
vious to change. See, for example, Nisbett 
and Ross (1980), Ch. 8. 
26 
In classifying subjects as East Asian or 
Western, we relied on the same ethnic iden-
tification questionnaire that Nisbett and his 
colleagues had used. We are grateful to 
Professor Nisbett for providing us with a 
copy of the questionnaire and for much 
helpful advice on its use. 
27 
The numerical data for all the experiments 
reported in this paper are assembled in the 
Appendix. 
28 
Norenzayan, Nisbett, Smith, and Kim (1999). 
29 
Stich (1990). See especially Ch. 6. 
30 
Though there is very little evidence on the 
point, we don't think the differences we've 
found are innate. Rather, we suspect, they 
are the product of deep differences in 
culture. 
31 
Another possible interpretation of "Really 
Knows" in our intuition probes would 
invoke what Ernest Sosa has termed merely 
"animal" or "servo-mechanical" knowledge. 
(Sosa, 1991, p. 95) We sometimes say that a 
dog knows that it's about to be fed, or that 
the thermostat knows the temperature in 
the room. But we philosophers are hunting 
different game -
fully normative game 
which, the critic maintains, these surveys 
might not capture. However, if our subjects 
had this notion in mind, one would predict 
that they would overwhelmingly attribute 
such knowledge in the Truetemp cases, 
since the protagonists in each of the stories 
clearly has a reliable, thermostat-like infor-
mation-registering capacity. Yet they did 
not do so - in none of the Truetemp cases 
did a majority of subjects opt for "Really 
Knows': So this rival gloss on "knows" will 
not help the IDR theorist to explain our 
data away. 
32 
See, for example, Bealer (1999) who insists 
that "the work of cognitive psychologists 
such as Wason, Johnson-Laird, Nisbett, 
Kahneman and Tversky tells us little about 
intuitions in our [philosophical] sense" 
(p.31). 
33 
This objection was offered by Henry 
Jackman, 
Ram 
Neta, 
and 
Jonathan 
Schaffer. 

644 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
References 
Austin, J. L. (1964). Sense and Sensibilia. London: 
Oxford University Press. 
Bealer, G. (1999). ''A Theory of the A Priori," 
Philosophical Perspectives l3, Epistemology, 
pp.29-55. 
BonJour, L. (1985). The Structure of Empirical 
Knowledge (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univer-
sity Press). 
Cha, J.-H. and K. Nam (1985). ''A Test of Kelley's 
Cube Theory of Attribution: A Cross-Cultural 
Replication of McArthur's Study." Korean 
Social Science Journal 12, pp. 151-80. 
Chisolm, R. 
(1977). Theory of Knowledge 
(Englewood-Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall). 
Clark, A. (1997). Being There: Putting Brain, Body 
and World Together Again (Cambridge, MA: 
MIT Press). 
Cohen, L. (1981). "Can human irrationality be 
experimentally demonstrated?;' Behavioral 
and Brain Sciences 4, pp. 317-70. 
Dretske, F. (1970). "Epistemic Operators;' Journal 
of Philosophy 67(24), pp. 1007-23. Reprinted 
in Dretske, F. (2000) Perception, Knowledge, 
and Belief (Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge 
University Press). 
Elgin, C. (1996). Considered Judgment (Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press). 
Feldman, R. and E. Conee (1985). "Evidentialism;' 
Philosophical Studies 48, pp. 15-34. 
Gettier, E. (1963). "Is Justified True Belief 
Knowledge?;' Analysis 23, pp. 121-3. 
Goldman, A. (1980). "The Internalist Conception 
of Justification;' in P. A. French, T. E. Uehling, 
and H. K. Wettstein (eds) Midwest Studies in 
Philosophy, V: Epistemology, (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press). 
Goldman, A. (1986). Epistemology and Cognition 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 
Goldman, A. (1992). "Epistemic Folkways and 
Scientific Epistemology;' in A. Goldman, 
Liaisons: Philosophy Meets the Cognitive and 
Social Sciences (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press). 
Goldman, A. (1999). "A Priori Warrant and 
Naturalistic Epistemology," in James Tomberlin 
(ed.), Philosophical Perspectives (a supplement 
to Nous) l3, 1999. 
Goldman, A. and J. Pust (1998). "Philosophical 
Theory 
and 
Intuitional 
Evidence;' 
III 
M. DePaul and W. Ramsey (eds), Rethinking 
Intuition (Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield). 
Goodman, N. (1965). Fact, Fiction and Forecast 
(Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill). 
Haidt, J., S. Koller and M. Dias (1993). "Affect, 
Culture and Morality," Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology 65,4, pp. 6l3-28. 
Jackson, F. (1998). From Metaphysics to Ethics: 
A Defence of Conceptual Analysis (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press). 
Klein, P. (1999). "Human Knowledge and the 
Infinite Regress of Reasons," Philosophical 
Perspectives, l3, Epistemology, pp. 297-325. 
Kvanvig, J. ed. (1996). Warrant in Contemporary 
Epistemology: Essays in Honor of Plantinga's 
Theory of Knowledge (Lanham, MD: Rowman 
& Littlefield). 
Lehrer, K. ( 1990). Theory of Knowledge (Boulder, CO 
and London: Westview Press and Routledge). 
Lehrer, K. (1997). Self-Trust: A Study of Reason, 
Knowledge, and Autonomy (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press). 
Morris, M., R. Nisbett and K. Peng (1995). "Causal 
understanding across domains and cultures," 
in D. Sperber, D. Pre mack, and A. J. Premack 
(eds), Causal Cognition: A Multidisciplinary 
Debate (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Nisbett, R., K. Peng, 1. Choi and A. Norenzayan 
(2001). "Culture and Systems of Thought: 
Holistic vs. Analytic Cognition;' Psychological 
Review 108, pp. 291-310. 
Nisbett, R. and L. Ross (1980). Human Inference: 
Strategies and Shortcomings of Social Judgment 
(Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall). 
Norenzayan, A., R. E. Nisbett, E. E. Smith and 
B. J. Kim (1999). Rules vs. Similarity as a Basis 
for Reasoning and Judgment in East and West 
(Ann Arbor: University of Michigan). 
Plantinga, A. (1993a). Warrant: The Current 
Debate (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Plantinga, A. (1993b). Warrant and Proper 
Function (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Plato (189211937). The Dialogues of Plato, trans-
lated by B. Jowett. New York: Random 
House. 
Pollock, J. and J. Cruz (1999). Contemporary 
Theories of Knowledge (Lanham, MA: Rowman 
& Littlefield). 

NORMATIVITY AND EPISTEMIC INTUITIONS 
645 
Samuels, R. (in preparation). "Naturalism and 
Normativity." 
Samuels, R., S. Stich and M. Bishop (2002). 
"Ending the Rationality Wars: How to Make 
DisputesAbout Human Rationality Disappear;' 
in Renee Elio, (ed.), Common Sense, Reasoning 
and 
Rationality, 
Vancouver 
Studies 
in 
Cognitive Science, vol. 11 (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press). 
Samuels, R, S. Stich and L. Faucher (2004). 
"Reasoning and Rationality;' in I. Niiniluoto, 
M. Sintonen, and J. Wolenski (eds) Handbook 
of Epistemology (Dordrecht: Kluwer). 
Samuels, R., S. Stich and P. Tremoulet (1999). 
"Rethinking Rationality: FromBleakImplications 
to Darwinian Modules;' in E. LePore and 
Z. Pylyshyn (eds) What Is Cognitive Science? 
(Oxford: Blackwell), pp. 74-120. 
Shope, R. (1983). The Analysis of Knowing 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press). 
Appendix 
The Fisher Exact test was used to calculate statis-
tical significance between groups. 
Individualistic Truetemp Case (Figure 45.1) 
Western 
East Asian 
Really knows 
61 
3 
The p-exact = 0.020114 
Elders Truetemp Case (Figure 45.2) 
Western 
East Asian 
Really knows 
77 
5 
The p-exact = 0.131784 
Only believes 
128 
22 
Only believes 
140 
15 
Community Wide Truetemp Case (Figure 45.3) 
Western 
East Asian 
Really knows 
2 
10 
The p-exact = 0.252681 
Only believes 
8 
21 
Sosa, 
E. 
(1991). 
Knowledge in 
Perspective 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Sosa, E. ed. (1994). Knowledge and Justification 
(Brookfield, 
VT: 
International 
Research 
Library of Philosophy, Dartmouth Publishing 
Company Limited). 
Stein, E. (1996). Without Good Reason: The 
Rationality Debate in Philosophy and Cognitive 
Science (Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Stich, S. (1990). The Fragmentation of Reason 
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press). 
Watanabe, M. (1998). "Styles of Reasoning in 
Japan and the United States: Logic of Education 
in Two Cultures;' paper presented at the 
American Sociological Association Annual 
Meeting, San Francisco, August, 1998. 
Watanabe, M. (1999). "Styles of Reasoning in 
Japan and the United States: Logic of Education 
in Two Cultures;' unpublished PhD thesis, 
Columbia University. 
Gettier Case: Western & East Asian (Figure 45.5) 
Really knows 
Only believes 
Western 
East Asian 
17 
13 
The p-exact = 0.006414 
Gettier Case: Western & Indian (Figure 45.6) 
49 
10 
Really knows 
Only believes 
Western 
Indian subcontinental 
The p-exact = 0.002407 
17 
14 
Cancer Conspiracy Case: Western & Indian 
(Figure 45.7) 
49 
9 
Really knows 
Only believes 
Western 
Indian subcontinental 
The p-exact = 0.025014 
7 
7 
59 
16 

646 
WEINBERG, NICHOLS, AND STICH 
Zebra-in-Zoo Case: Western & Indian (Figure 45.8) 
Really knows 
Only believes 
Western 
Indian subcontinental 
The p-exact = 0.049898 
19 
12 
43 
12 
Zebra-in-Zoo Case: Low & High SES (Figure 45.9) 
Really knows 
LowSES 
High SES 
The p-exact = 0.038246 
8 
4 
Only believes 
16 
30 
Cancer Conspiracy Case: Low & High SES 
(Figure 45.10) 
LowSES 
High SES 
Really knows 
12 
6 
The p-exact = 0.006778 
Only believes 
12 
29 
Special Feeling Case: Low & High SES (Figure 45.1 1) 
Really knows 
LowSES 
High SES 
The p-exact = 0.294004 
3 
3 
Only believes 
32 
21 
Special Feeling Case: Western & East Asian (no figure) 
Western 
East Asian 
Really knows 
2 
o 
The p-exact = 0.780051 
Only believes 
59 
8 

CHAPTER 46 
Investigating Knowledge Itself 
Hilary Kornblith 
NOT SO long ago, philosophy was widely under-
stood to consist in an investigation of our con-
cepts. There were books with titles such as The 
Concept of Mind;l The Concept of a Person;2 The 
Concept of Law;3 The Concept of Evidence;4 and 
The Concept of Knowledge. 5 The idea that philoso-
phy consists in, or, at a minimum, must begin 
with an understanding and investigation of our 
concepts is, I believe, both natural and very attrac-
tive. It is also, I believe, deeply mistaken. On my 
view, the subject matter of ethics is the right and 
the good, not our concepts of them. The subject 
matter of philosophy of mind is the mind itself, 
not our concept of it. And the subject matter of 
epistemology is knowledge itself, not our concept 
of knowledge. In this book, I attempt to explain 
what knowledge is. 
My insistence that epistemology should not 
concern itself with our concept of knowledge 
requires that I depart, in important ways, from 
some common practices. I will not, for the most 
part, be comparing my account of knowledge 
with my intuitions about various imaginary cases; 
I will not be considering whether we would be 
inclined to say that someone does or does not 
have knowledge in various circumstances. I do 
not believe that our intuitions, or our inclinations 
to say various things, should carry a great deal of 
Originally published in H. Kornblith, Knowledge and its 
Place in Nature (Oxford: Clarendon, 2002), pp. 1-27. 
weight in philosophical matters. But if we aban-
don these traditional philosophical tools, then 
how are we to proceed? How are we to go about 
investigating knowledge itself, rather than our 
concept of knowledge? Indeed, what could it even 
mean to suggest that there is such a thing as 
knowledge itself apart from our concept of it? 
In this chapter, I focus on issues of method. 
Conceptual analysis, the use of imaginary exam-
ples and counterexamples, and appeals to intui-
tion are the stock-in-trade of many philosophers. 
Indeed, George Bealer6 has described the appeal 
to intuitions as part of "the standard justificatory 
procedure" in philosophy, and, as a simple socio-
logical matter, I believe that Bealer is right; appeals 
to intuition are standard procedure. More than 
this, Bealer detects the use of this standard proce-
dure in philosophers who otherwise differ on a 
wide range of issues; even philosophers who favor 
a naturalistic epistemology, Bealer argues, make 
use of appeals to intuition.? This is a special prob-
lem for naturalists, as Bealer sees it, because natu-
ralists are committed to an epistemology that 
makes no room for appeals to intuition. So much 
the worse, Bealer argues, for naturalism. The very 
practice of philosophy is incompatible with a 
naturalistic epistemology. 
Now the kind of epistemology I favor, and the 
kind I will argue for here, is a form of naturalism, 
and Bealer's argument is thus directly relevant to 
the conduct of this enquiry. If Bealer is right, a 
naturalistic epistemology is self-undermining. 

648 
HILARY KORNBLITH 
Bealer is not the only one to have made this sort 
of argument. Similar arguments have been made 
by Laurence BonJour,8 Frank Jackson,9 Mark 
Kaplan,lo and Harvey Siegel. I I 
Naturalistic 
epistemology, on this view, proclaims allegiance 
to a theory that is fundamentally at odds with the 
philosophical practice of its adherents. A natu-
ralistic epistemology is thereby shown to be 
untenable. 
The clarity and force with which Bealer and 
others have presented this argument requires that 
it be given a fair hearing. A naturalistic episte-
mology has far greater resources, I will argue, 
than these philosophers have given it credit for. In 
the course of responding to this argument, I hope 
to explain how it is that philosophical theorizing 
may flourish while assigning a significantly 
smaller role to appeals to intuition than do the 
critics of naturalism. And in providing an account 
of philosophical theory construction from a nat-
uralistic point of view, I hope to explain how it is 
that one may reasonably hope to give an account 
of knowledge itself, and not just the concept of 
knowledge. 
1 Appeals to Intuition: The Phenomenon 
First, let us get clear about the phenomenon. 
Although any characterization of the phenome-
non will be highly contentious, there is no diffi-
culty in giving examples of the practice at issue. 
We will thus do our best to pin down the practice 
by way of examples, examples of what we hereby 
dub "appeals to intuition"; later we may address 
the question of what it is these examples are 
examples of. 
There are substantial bodies of literature in 
philosophy that are driven in large part by frankly 
acknowledged appeals to intuition and are moti-
vated by a desire to formulate accounts that 
square with those intuitions. Thus, in episte-
mology, there is the literature on the analyses of 
knowledge and justification, and especially 
would-be solutions to the Gettier problem. 
Imaginary cases are described, involving Brown 
and his travels in Spain; Nogot, Havit, and their 
vehicles; Tom Grabit and his kleptomaniacal pro-
clivities at the library; gypsy lawyers; Norman the 
clairvoyant; barn fa~ades in the countryside; and 
a host of others. In each of the cases described, 
there is a good deal of agreement about whether, 
under the described conditions, a subject knows, 
or is justified in believing, something to be the 
case. Intuitions about these cases are then used to 
clarify the conditions under which various epis-
temic notions rightly apply. No empirical investi-
gation is called for, it seems. Each of us can just 
tell, immediately and without investigation of any 
kind, whether the case described involves knowl-
edge, or justified belief, or neither. 
But epistemologists are not the only ones to 
use this method. In philosophy oflanguage, there 
is the literature on the Gricean account of mean-
ing, replete with subjects and their self-referential 
intentions, including the American soldier who 
hopes to convince his Italian captors that he is 
German by uttering the one German sentence he 
knows, "Kennst du das Land wo die Zitronen 
bluhen?"; not to mention a character who intends 
to clear a room with his rendition of "Moon Over 
Miami", at least in part, of course, in virtue of his 
audience recognizing that very intention. Here 
we have quite clear intuitions about when it is 
that a subject means something by an utterance, 
and when a subject merely means to achieve a 
certain effect without meaning anything by the 
utterance at all. There is also the literature on 
the causal or historical theory of reference, with the 
cases of Godel, Schmidt, and the goings-on on 
Twin Earth. 
There is the literature on personal identity, 
with its cases of brain transplantation, memory 
loss, and duplication. And there is the literature in 
moral philosophy involving children who amuse 
themselves by pouring gasoline on cats and 
igniting them; the woman who wakes up one 
morning to find herself an essential part of the 
life-support system for an ailing violinist; and a 
very large number of people unaccountably loi-
tering on trolley tracks. 
This method of appeal to intuitions about 
cases has been used in every area of philosophy, 
and it has often been used with subtlety and 
sophistication. There are those - and I count 
myself among them - who believe that there are 
substantial limitations to this method, and that 
some of these bodies of literature have diverted 
attention from more important issues. Even we, 
however, must acknowledge not only that the 
method of appeal to intuitions plays an impor-
tant role in actual philosophical practice, but also 

INVESTIGATING KNOWLEDGE ITSELF 
649 
that it has been used to achieve some substantial 
insights in a wide range of fields. We need an 
account of how it is that this method may achieve 
such results. 
2 
Bealer's Account of Intuition and the 
Standard Justificatory Procedure 
Now George Bealer offers us precisely such an 
account, and he uses this account to argue that 
naturalism12 is self-defeating. In order to see how 
Bealer's argument proceeds, we must begin with 
his characterization of the phenomenon. 
Bealer describes what he calls "the standard 
justificatory procedure" (pp. 164-7). As Bealer 
notes, "we standardly use various items - for 
example, experiences, observations, testimony -
as prima facie evidence for things, such as beliefs 
and theories" (p. 164). After describing a typical 
Gettier example, Bealer notes that intuitions as 
well count as prima facie evidence. But what are 
intuitions? According to Bealer, "When we speak 
of intuition, we mean 'a priori intuition'" 
(p.165). 
Although use of the term "intuition" varies 
widely among philosophers, Bealer is careful to 
make his use of the term clear. "Intuition", 
Bealer tells us, "must ... be distinguished from 
common sense ... common sense is an amalga-
mation of various widely shared, more or less 
useful empirical beliefs, practical wisdom, a 
priori intuitions, and physical intuitions. 
Common sense certainly cannot be identified 
with a priori intuition" (p. 167). This distinction, 
Bealer tells us, is "obvious once [it] is pointed 
out" (ibid.). 
Once this account of the standard justificatory 
procedure is in place, with its reliance on intui-
tion in Bealer's sense,13 the route to an indictment 
of naturalism is clear. Naturalists subscribe to a 
principle of empiricism: "A person's experiences 
and/or observations comprise the person's prima 
facie evidence" (p. 163). This rules out intuition 
as a legitimate source of evidence, and thus flies 
in the face of the standard justificatory procedure. 
Naturalists themselves make use of intuitions; 
they too subscribe, in practice, to the standard 
justificatory procedure. So naturalistic theory is 
belied by naturalistic practice. Indeed, if consist-
ently followed in practice, Bealer argues, natural-
istic theory would not only rule out philosophy 
generally as illegitimate, but, given the role intui-
tion plays in "following rules and procedures - for 
example, rules of inference" (p. 167), a consistent 
naturalist would have little room left for legiti-
mate belief of any sort at all. 
Bealer argues that some naturalists face an 
additional problem as well. Those who wish to 
make use of, rather than eliminate, epistemic ter-
minology will find, Bealer argues, that their 
theory is at odds with their practice in yet another 
way. What Bealer calls "the principle of natural-
ism" holds that "the natural sciences ... constitute 
the simplest comprehensive theory that explains 
all, or most, of a person's experiences and/or 
observations" (p. 163). Naturalists also endorse 
what Bealer calls "the principle of holism": 
"A theory is justified ... for a person if and only if 
it is, or belongs to, the simplest comprehensive 
theory that explains all, or most, of the person's 
prima facie evidence" (ibid.). When these two 
principles are added to the principle of empiri-
cism, which limits our source of prima-facie evi-
dence to observation, naturalists are forced to 
eschew all epistemic terminology, because "the 
familiar terms 'justified; 'simplest; 'theory; 
'explain; and 'prima facie evidence' ... do not 
belong to the primitive vocabulary of the simplest 
regimented formulation of the natural sciences" 
(p. 180). Not only is naturalistic theory at odds 
with naturalistic practice, but the very terms in 
which naturalistic theory is formulated, Bealer 
argues, are disallowed as illegitimate by that very 
theory. Naturalism is thus found to be self-
defeating twice over. 
There is more to naturalism, I believe, than is 
to be found in Bealer's account of it. There is 
room within a naturalistic epistemology for the 
practice of appeals to intuition, suitably under-
stood, and also for the use of epistemic termi-
nology. What I wish to do is explain how the 
naturalist may accommodate these phenomena. 
Much of what I say will be familiar; the story I 
have to tell, I believe, is at least implicit in the 
work of a number of investigators working 
within the naturalistic tradition. 14 But in 
squarely addressing these charges against natu-
ralistic epistemology, we may not only put them 
to rest, but we may also lay the foundation for 
a deeper understanding of proper method in 
philosophical theorizing. 

650 
HILARY KORNBLITH 
3 A Naturalistic Account of Appeals 
to Intuition 
Naturalists and their opponents have divergent 
views about how philosophy ought to be prac-
ticed. At the same time, however, there is a great 
deal more agreement in actual practice than there 
is in theory about that practice. I do not believe 
that these differences are insignificant, and later 
in this chapter I will want to say something about 
what those differences are and why they matter. 
But for now, I want to focus on the areas of 
agreement in practice between naturalists and 
anti-naturalists, and I will assume that the char-
acterization Bealer gives of the standard justifica-
tory procedure accurately characterizes that 
common practice. That is, I will assume, with 
Bealer, that philosophers of all sorts assign prima-
facie weight to experience, observation, testi-
mony, and intuition, although I will not assume, 
with Bealer, that intuition here comes down to 
"a priori intuition". Instead, I will take intuition to 
be pinned down by the paradigmatic examples of 
it given above in sect. 1. 
How should naturalists regard the standard 
justificatory procedure? The first thing to say 
about the intuitions to which philosophers appeal 
is that they are not idiosyncratic; they are widely 
shared, and - to a first approximation-must be 
so, if they are to do any philosophical work. Some 
philosophers will say, ''I'm just trying to figure out 
what I should believe; I'm just trying to get my 
own intuitions into reflective equilibrium:' But 
even philosophers who say this sort of thing must 
recognize that wholly idiosyncratic intuitions 
should play no role even in figuring out what they 
themselves ought to believe. If I attempt to offer a 
philosophical account of knowledge by drawing 
on my intuitions, and it should turn out that cru-
cial intuitions upon which my account relies are 
had by no one but me, then this will not only dra-
matically reduce the interest of my account for 
others; it ought, as well, reduce the interest of my 
account for me. If my intuitions are wildly idio-
syncratic, then most likely the project of accom-
modating them is no longer one that is engaged 
with the phenomenon others are attempting to 
characterize. Unless I can show that others have 
been somehow misled, what I ought to conclude is 
that I am probably the one who has been misled, 
and I ought to focus my attention on correcting 
my own errors, rather than taking my intuitive 
judgments at face value. The intuitions of the 
majority are not definitive, but they do carry sub-
stantial epistemic weight, at least in comparison 
with the intuitions of any single individual, even 
oneself. 
Why is it that the intuitions of the majority 
carry such weight? It is not, of course, that we 
merely wish to be engaged in the project, whatever 
it may be, that other philosophers are engaged in. 
This would make philosophy into a shallow enter-
prise, a kind of intellectual imitation game in 
which the participants seek to engage one another 
in what they are doing, without any regard for 
what that might be. Instead, we must be assuming 
that disagreement with the majority is some evi-
dence of error, and now the question is how that 
error should be characterized. 
Now it is at this point that many philosophers 
will be tempted to bring in talk of concepts and 
conceptual analysis: in appealing to our intui-
tions, it will be said, we come to understand the 
boundaries of our shared concepts. But I don't 
think this way of seeing things is illuminating. 
By bringing in talk of concepts at this point in an 
epistemological investigation, we only succeed in 
changing the subject: instead of talking about 
knowledge, we end up talking about our concept 
of knowledge. 
As I see it, epistemologists should be trying to 
understand what knowledge is. There is a robust 
phenomenon of human knowledge, and a presup-
position of the field of epistemology is that cases 
of knowledge have a good deal of theoretical unity 
to them; they are not merely some gerrymandered 
kind, united by nothing more than our willingness 
to regard them as a kind. More than this, if episte-
mology is to be as worthy of our attention as most 
epistemologists believe, and if knowledge is to be 
as worthy of our pursuit, then certain deflationary 
accounts of knowledge had better turn out to be 
mistaken. What I have in mind here is those social 
constructivist accounts which, while granting a 
substantial theoretical unity to cases of knowledge, 
see that unity as residing in the social role that 
knowledge plays. Knowledge, on this kind of view, 
is merely a vehicle of power. Knowledge may well 
play some such social role, but its ability to play 
such a role, if I am right, is explained by a deeper 
fact, and it is this deeper fact about knowledge that 
gives it its theoretical unity. IS 

INVESTIGATING KNOWLEDGE ITSELF 
651 
Now one of the jobs of epistemology, as I see 
it, is to come to an understanding of this natural 
phenomenon, human knowledge. Understanding 
what knowledge is, if the project turns out as I 
expect it will, will also, simultaneously, help to 
explain why knowledge is worthy of pursuit. 
When we appeal to our intuitions about knowl-
edge, we make salient certain instances of the 
phenomenon that need to be accounted for, and 
that these are genuine instances of knowledge is 
simply obvious, at least if our examples are well 
chosen. What we are doing, as I see it, is much like 
the rock collector who gathers samples of some 
interesting kind of stone for the purpose of fig-
uring out what it is that the samples have in 
common. We begin, often enough, with obvious 
cases, even if we do not yet understand what it is 
that provides the theoretical unity to the kind we 
wish to examine. Understanding what that theo-
retical unity is is the object of our study, and it is 
to be found by careful examination of the phe-
nomenon, that is, something outside of us, not 
our concept of the phenomenon, something 
inside of us. In short, I see the investigation of 
knowledge, and philosophical investigation gen-
erally, on the model of investigations of natural 
kinds. 
This point is quite important, for what it 
means is that a good deal of the work involved in 
defining the subject matter under investigation 
is actually done by the world itself rather than 
the investigator. The subject matter of the rock 
collector's investigation is the natural kind, what-
ever it may be, which (most of) the samples 
picked out are members of; but the investigator 
need not be in a position to characterize the 
essential features of that kind. The investigator's 
concept of that kind, therefore, because it may be 
quite incomplete or inaccurate, need not itself do 
very much of the work of defining the subject 
matter under study. 
This is contrary, of course, to what defenders 
of conceptual analysis claim. Frank Jackson, for 
example, nicely lays out the traditional view about 
the importance of concepts in defining subject 
matter. 
The role of intuitions about possible cases so dis-
tinctive of conceptual analysis is precisely to 
make explicit our implicit folk theory and, in 
particular, to make explicit which properties are 
really central to [the subject matter under study]. 
For surely it is possible to change the subject, and 
how else could one do it other than by abandon-
ing what is most central to defining one's sub-
ject? Would a better way of changing the subject 
be to abandon what is less central?16 
But surely a central point in favor of the causal or 
historical theory of reference is the observation 
that reference may remain stable even in the face 
of substantial changes in belief. It is not that sub-
ject matter is changed, as Jackson rhetorically 
suggests, by changing less central rather than 
more central defining features, for what is central 
or peripheral to our concept plays little role in 
defining subject matter in the first place. Rather, 
subject matter is defined by way of connections 
with real kinds in the world, and what we regard 
as central or defining features does not determine 
the reference of our terms. 
When philosophical investigation is viewed on 
the model of the investigation of natural kinds, 
the method of appeal to intuitions is, I believe, 
easily accommodated within a naturalistic frame-
work. The examples that prompt our intuitions 
are merely obvious cases of the phenomenon 
under study. That they are obvious, and thus 
uncontroversial, is shown by the wide agreement 
that these examples command. This may give the 
resulting judgments the appearance of a priority, 
especially in light of the hypothetical manner in 
which the examples are typically presented. But 
on the account I favor, these judgments are no 
more a priori than the rock collector's judgment 
that if he were to find a rock meeting certain 
conditions, it would (or would not) count as a 
sample of a given kind. 17 All such judgments, 
however obvious, are a posteriori, and we may 
view the appeal to intuition in philosophical cases 
in a similar manner.18 
What should we say about the rock collector's 
judgments at early stages of investigation, i.e. 
prior to any deep theoretical understanding of 
the features that make his samples samples of a 
given kind? Such judgments are, of course, corri-
gible, and they will change with the progress of 
theory. What seemed to be a clear case of a given 
kind in the absence of theoretical understanding 
may come to be a paradigm case of some different 
kind once the phenomena are better understood. 
At the same time, it would be a mistake to see 

652 
HILARY KORNBLITH 
these initial naive judgments as wholly independent 
of background theory. Our rock collector is naive, 
but he is not a tabula rasa. Background knowl-
edge will playa substantial role in determining a 
first-pass categorization of samples. Judgments 
about which features of the rocks are even deemed 
relevant in classification - hardness, for example, 
but not size perhaps - are themselves theory-
mediated, although the operation of theory here 
is unselfconscious and is better revealed by pat-
terns of salience than it is by overt appeal to prin-
ciple. The extent to which naive investigators 
agree in their classifications is not evidence that 
these judgments somehow bypass background 
empirical belief, but rather that background 
theory may be widely shared. 
So too, I want to say, with appeals to intuition 
in philosophy. These judgments are corrigible 
and theory-mediated. The extent of agreement 
among subjects on intuitive judgments is to be 
explained by common knowledge, or at least 
common belief, and the ways in which such back-
ground belief will inevitably influence intuitive 
judgment, although unavailable to introspection, 
are none the less quite real. 
Indeed, I want to push this analogy consider-
ably further. The judgments of rock collectors at 
early stages of investigation are substantially infe-
rior, epistemically speaking, to those at later 
stages, when theoretical understanding is further 
advanced. We should not say that initial judg-
ments are of no evidential value, for were this the 
case progress in theory would be impossible. Our 
untutored judgment must have some purchase 
on the phenomenon under investigation; but, 
that said, it must also be acknowledged that judg-
ment guided by accurate background theory is far 
superior to the intuitions of the naive. Intuition 
must be taken seriously in the absence of substan-
tial theoretical understanding, but once such 
theoretical understanding begins to take shape, 
prior intuitive judgments carry little weight 
unless they have been endorsed by the progress 
of theory. The greater one's theoretical under-
standing, the less weight one may assign to untu-
tored judgment. 
All this applies equally well to the case of 
appeals to intuition in philosophy. We sometimes 
hear philosophers speak of some intuitions as 
"merely" driven by theory, and thus to be ignored. 
While it is certainly true that judgments driven by 
bad theories are not to be taken seriously, the 
solution is not to try to return to some pure state 
of theory-independent judgment, before the fall, 
as it were; rather the solution is to get a better 
theory. Intuition in the absence of theory does 
not count for nothing, especially if no credible 
theory is available. But this is not to award high 
marks to intuitive judgment before the arrival of 
successful theory, let alone after, when the initially 
low value of such judgment drops still lower. 
Now if this account is correct, why do philoso-
phers spend so much time scrutinizing their intu-
itions, that is, looking inward, if, on my view, what 
they are really interested in is external phenom-
ena? I have two things to say about this. First, if 
I am asked a question about rocks, for example, 
one way to answer the question is to ask myself 
what I believe the answer is. Although I am asked 
a question about rocks, I answer it by enquiring 
into what I believe. This is a perfectly reasonable 
thing to do if I have good reason to think that my 
current beliefs are accurate, or if I do not have 
access to a better source of information. By look-
ing inward, I answer a question about an external 
phenomenon. This, to my mind, is what we do 
when we consult our intuitions. 
At the same time, however, I do not think that 
this can be the whole story here, and this is where 
the difference between the practice of naturalists 
and that of anti-naturalists comes into play. If my 
account is correct, then what we ought to be 
doing is not just consulting the beliefs we already 
have, but more directly examining the external 
phenomena; only then would appeals to intuition 
be given what, on my view, is their proper weight. 
Thus, appeal to intuition early on in philosophi-
cal investigation should give way to more straight-
forwardly empirical investigations of external 
phenomena. This is, to my mind, just what we see 
in the practice of naturalistically minded philoso-
phers. Just a few decades ago, the philosophical 
practice of naturalistically minded epistemolo-
gists, for example, was almost indistinguishable 
from that of their more traditionally minded 
colleagues. Examples and counterexamples were 
used to motivate various accounts of knowledge 
and justification, and the progress of these 
accounts was shepherded along by a succession of 
appeals to intuition. This was, by my lights, a 
good thing to do at that stage of the investigation. 
Important insights were gained, which, given the 

INVESTIGATING KNOWLEDGE ITSELF 
653 
absence of available explicitly articulated theory, 
could not have been gained by any other means. 
But now, as theory has progressed, more straight-
forwardly empirical investigation should be called 
upon; and this, of course, is just what we see. 
There is work on the psychology of inference, 
concept formation, cognitive development, and 
so on. Similarly, at the social level there is work on 
the distribution of cognitive effort, and, more 
generally, the social structures of science that 
underwrite and make scientific knowledge possi-
ble. As theory has advanced here, raw appeals to 
intuition have declined. Just look at the difference 
between early papers by Fred Dretske and Alvin 
Goldman, for example, and their more recent 
work. Similar results may be found by looking at 
naturalistically minded work in philosophy of 
mind, and even in ethics, where work in cognitive 
science and anthropology have been shaping the 
work of contemporary naturalists. The difference 
in methodology between naturalists and their 
more traditional colleagues has, to my mind, been 
paying substantial dividends for those willing to 
draw on empirical work. But even those who dis-
agree with me here will have to agree that natural-
istic methodology is now importantly different 
from that of other philosophers, even if not very 
long ago it would have been difficult to separate 
the naturalists from the non-naturalists by 
looking at their methods. 
From a naturalistic perspective, there are sub-
stantial advantages to looking outward at the 
phenomena under investigation rather than 
inward at our intuitions about them. Most obvi-
ously, since it is some external phenomenon that 
we are interested in, we should approach it by the 
most direct means possible, rather than the more 
indirect approach of looking at what we currently 
believe about it. Aside from being indirect, the 
approach of examining our intuitions clearly robs 
us of the best available source of correctives for 
current mistakes. Moreover, the appeal to imagi-
nable cases and what we are inclined to say about 
them is both overly narrow and overly broad in 
its focus. It is overly narrow because serious 
empirical investigation of a phenomenon will 
often reveal possibilities which we would not, and 
sometimes could not, have imagined before. It is 
overly broad because many imaginable cases are 
not genuine possibilities and need not be 
accounted for by our theories. We might be able 
to imagine a rock with a certain combination of 
color, hardness, malleability, and so on, and such 
a rock, were it to exist, might be difficult or impos-
sible to fit into our current taxonomy. But this 
raises no problem at all for our taxonomic princi-
ples if the imagined combination of properties is 
nomologically impossible. On the naturalistic 
view, the same may be said for testing our philo-
sophical views against merely imaginable cases. 
The suggestion that our intuitions about 
knowledge might actually be mistaken in the ways 
in which our intuitions about, say, gold can be 
will strike some philosophers as implausible. It is 
important, however, to realize that our intuitions 
about knowledge are, in important ways, histori-
cally conditioned. Descartes's idea that knowledge 
required certainty was surely a product of his 
view that things firm and lasting in the sciences 
could only be achieved if scientific claims could 
be given an absolute guarantee. As it turned out, 
Descartes was wrong about this. In ways Descartes 
could never have anticipated, the sciences have 
gone on to achieve levels of ever-increasing 
explanatory and predictive success coupled with 
technological applications crucially dependent 
upon the approximate truth of their theoretical 
claims. These successes, producing things "firm 
and lasting in the sciences", of just the sort 
Descartes hoped to achieve, did not depend in 
any way on the sort of certainty Descartes took to 
be a prerequisite for knowledge. The view that 
knowledge requires certainty is no longer widely 
held; it is an intuition that very few people have 
any more. In retrospect, this change in people's 
intuitions about the relationship between knowl-
edge and certainty can be seen as a byproduct of 
the ways in which scientific success has actually 
been achieved. It is now just obvious to almost 
everyone that knowledge is possible without cer-
tainty. But it would be a mistake to see this reali-
zation as a matter of a priori insight into the 
nature of knowledge. Properly understood, it is, 
however indirectly, a claim empirically justified 
by the manner in which knowledge has in fact 
been gained. 
Now all of this would make little difference if 
our intuitions responded to relevant empirical 
evidence in a timely fashion. Consulting our intu-
itions would be just as accurate as looking directly 
at the relevant phenomena if only our intuitions 
were suitably responsive to appropriate evidence. 

654 
HILARY KORNBLITH 
But there is no reason to think that our intuitions 
are suitably responsive to available evidence. 
Changing a society's intuitions about a particular 
subject matter takes a good deal of time. It is one 
thing for the scientific community to make an 
important discovery; quite another for that dis-
covery to become common knowledge. It takes 
still longer before our whole conception of a phe-
nomenon comes to seem so obvious that we can 
no longer even remember what it was like to con-
ceive of it in another way. But if we take the long 
historical view, this is exactly what happens with 
our intuitions when important discoveries are 
made. If we wish to understand a phenomenon 
accurately, we thus cannot merely seek to eluci-
date our current intuitive conception of it; we 
must examine the phenomenon itself. And this 
applies as much to understanding the nature of 
knowledge as it does to understanding the nature 
of gold. 
One might seek a middle ground here. Alvin 
Goldman has suggested that there is room both 
for conceptual analysis of our folk epistemolo-
gical concepts as well as a more scientific episte-
mology that would develop epistemological 
concepts that depart in important ways from our 
folk notions. But why, on this view, do the folk 
notions take on any epistemological import at all, 
especially in light of the fact that they are bound 
to build in, as Goldman himself points out, false 
presuppositions? On Goldman's view, there must 
be substantial continuity between the folk notions 
and the more scientific ones if there is to be such 
a thing as epistemology at all. Without such con-
tinuity, Goldman argues, we are just changing 
the subject. Now I have already argued that 
this account of what is involved in changing the 
subject, an account that Goldman shares with 
Jackson, is not correct. Continuity of concept is 
merely one way to mark commonality of subject 
matter; causal theorists of reference have another 
(and to my mind, better) account. Goldman does 
not consider the possibility of such an account in 
the case of knowledge, since he regards it as 
simply obvious that knowledge is not a natural 
kind. "Whatever one thinks about justice or con-
sciousness as possible natural kinds, it is dubious 
that knowledge or justificational status are natural 
kinds."l9 ... 
Although I do not agree with Goldman that 
there must inevitably be the degree of continuity 
he requires between our folk concepts and those 
of a properly scientific epistemology, I do not 
wish to exaggerate my disagreement with him 
either. After all, the account of knowledge I 
endorse is, in the end, a reliability account very 
similar to the one Goldman himself offers. Even 
if, however, we should discover that there is a tre-
mendous amount of continuity between our folk 
epistemological notions and those of a proper 
scientific epistemology, it remains to be shown 
why our folk epistemological notions are of epis-
temological interest in their own right. Why 
should our folk epistemological notions be of any 
more interest to epistemologists than our folk 
chemical notions are to chemists? 
Goldman responds to this challenge: "even if 
one rejects the plea for continuity, a description 
of our epistemic folkways is in order. How would 
one know what to criticize, or what needs to be 
transcended, in the absence of such a description? 
So a first mission of epistemology is to describe 
our folkways."2o But if knowledge truly is a natu-
ral kind, then this sort of response is inadequate. 
We would hardly think that the chemist's first job 
is an elucidation of folk chemical notions (espe-
cially if this required extraordinary effort by the 
entire community of chemists over a period of 
millennia) so that we would know what chemical 
views need to be transcended. In the case of 
chemistry, we can simply skip straight to the 
project of understanding the real chemical kinds 
as they exist in nature. My suggestion here is that 
we should take seriously the possibility that a 
similar strategy might be equally fruitful in 
epistemology. 
I do not mean to suggest that on the natura-
listic view we will ever be able wholly to avoid 
appealing to our intuitions. I do think that appeals 
to intuition will continue to playa role in the 
development of philosophical views, even as 
theory progresses. I noted earlier that the actual 
practice of naturalistically minded philosophers 
has changed with the progress of theory so that 
now there is a good deal more empirical exami-
nation of various phenomena rather than an 
exclusive reliance on appeals to intuition. But this 
does not mean that appeals to intuition simply 
drop out of the picture. Thus, for example, in 
philosophy of mind not so many years ago there 
was a good deal of discussion about whether 
creatures who failed to exhibit certain sorts of 

INVESTIGATING KNOWLEDGE ITSELF 
655 
characteristic behavior might nevertheless be in 
pain. These discussions did not involve much of a 
look at the empirical literature on pain; instead, 
they relied exclusively on appeals to intuitionY 
Now, although work in philosophy of mind 
involves a great deal of examination of the empir-
ical literature, we still see appeals to intuition 
playing a role, although the intuitions are about 
more esoteric matters. For example, there is dis-
cussion of what magnetosomes represent, whether 
it be the presence of certain sorts of magnetic fields 
or, instead, the presence of anaerobic conditions. 
The intuitions that naturalists currently 
appeal to, intuitions about matters far more eso-
teric than what is known about Brown in 
Barcelona, present clear cases of theory-
mediated judgment, judgment which is rightly 
influenced by a large body of background belief. 
At the same time, these judgments are phenom-
enologically basic; their inferential heritage is 
not introspectively available. More than this, 
these judgments are typically far less well inte-
grated with our best available theories, and thus 
not nearly so well justified,22 as our more explic-
itly theory-guided judgments. As the scope of 
our theories expands, the use of such weakly 
founded judgments is a necessary stepping stone 
to better theory. The use of intuitive judgment 
does not disappear at any stage of theorizing. 
Instead, old intuitions give way to well-inte-
grated theoretical judgments, and, in addition, 
to new intuitions about matters not yet fully 
captured in explicit theory. 
We may thus respond to the first of Bealer's 
objections to naturalism by pointing out that 
appeals to intuition do not require some non-
natural faculty or a priori judgment of any sort. 
Bealer's argument gets off on the wrong foot by 
assuming that intuitions are a priori; more than 
this, Bealer says, the distinction between common-
sense empirical judgment and intuition is "obvi-
ous" (p. 165). Obvious it may be to those opposed 
to naturalism, but the appeal to a priority is, of 
course, contentious in this context. Bealer is right 
to think that naturalists owe us an explanation of 
their practice of appealing to intuition, especially 
in light of their rejection of the a priori. At the 
same time, I hope I have shown that this explana-
tion is one that naturalists may easily provide. 
The practice of appealing to intuition has no 
non-natural ingredients. 
4 
Naturalism and Rules of Inference 
Bealer argues that naturalists are not only unable 
to account for their own philosophical practice, 
but that naturalistic scruples leave little room for 
legitimate belief about any subject, since "fol-
lowing rules and procedures - for example, rules 
of inference" (p. 167) requires an acknowledge-
ment of the force of a priori intuition. And 
Laurence BonJour comments, "the practice of 
even those who most explicitly reject the idea of 
substantive a priori justification inevitably 
involves tacit appeal to insights and modes of 
reasoning that can only be understood as a priori 
in character, if they are justified at all."23 As 
BonJour points out, this leaves naturalists in an 
unenviable position: "we see that the repudiation 
of all a priori justification is apparently tanta-
mount to the repudiation of argument or rea-
soning generally, thus amounting in effect to 
intellectual suicide."24 But naturalists do not see 
the following of rules and procedures, in partic-
ular, the role of rules of inference, in the way in 
which Bealer and BonJour do. 
Naturalists, of course, make inferences, and 
they need to account for the legitimacy of this 
practice, at least in those cases in which it is legiti-
mate. The legitimacy of an inference, on the natu-
ralist view, is dependent upon its reliability: reliable 
inferential practices are epistemically legitimate; 
those which are unreliable are not. We must thus 
engage in a project of self-examination, in which 
we scrutinize our own epistemic practice. We wish 
to examine the inferential rules that underlie our 
practice of belief acquisition, and to the extent that 
we find unreliable inference patterns at work, we 
need to re-examine and modify our own practice. 
The empirical work involved in understanding our 
inferential habits is well underway, as is the assess-
ment of its epistemological importance. 
Reliability is the naturalist's standard here. 
Meeting a priori standards is simply irrelevant. 
Rules of inference that tend to produce true 
beliefs in the kinds of environments that human 
beings occupy may fail to live up to a priori stand-
ards of cogency, but they are none the worse for 
that. By the same token, rules of inference that do 
meet a priori standards may be unworkable in 
practice or hopelessly mired in problems of com-
putational complexity. These kinds of problems 
are not in any way ameliorated if the rules do 

656 
HILARY KORNBLITH 
meet a priori standards of cogency. A priori 
standards thus drop out of the picture entirely as 
simply irrelevant to proper epistemic practice. 
They fail to bear on the conduct of enquiry.25 
A naturalistic account of proper belief acquisi-
tion thus does not need to appeal to a priori intu-
ition of appropriate principles of inference. 
Recognition of appropriate inferential patterns is 
an empirical affair for the naturalist. More than 
this, justified belief, on at least one widely held 
naturalistic account, is a matter of reliable belief 
production and does not itself require recogni-
tion of that reliability. Naturalistic scruples about 
appropriate belief production thus leave room for 
a great deal of knowledge. 
5 
Naturalism and Epistemic 
Terminology 
Let me turn then to the last of Bealer's charges 
against naturalism, that in eschewing a priori 
intuition, naturalism leaves no room for epis-
temic terminology. This charge too, I believe, falls 
short of its mark. While the account naturalists 
give of epistemic terminology is anything but 
uncontroversial, it should not be controversial 
that naturalists have an account of that termi-
nologythat satisfies their own epistemic standards. 
The suggestion that naturalism is self-defeating is 
thus turned aside. 
Epistemology, according to naturalism, inves-
tigates a certain natural phenomenon, namely, 
knowledge, and the term "knowledge" and other 
epistemic idioms gain their reference in much the 
same way that natural-kind terms do. Now sup-
posing that terms like "knowledge" gain their 
reference in this way is not without its presuppo-
sitions, as I pointed out earlier. The phenomenon 
we call knowledge must have a certain degree of 
theoretical unity if reference is to be secured. 
Were we to discover that there is no more 
theoretical unity to the various items we call 
knowledge than there is to the set consisting of 
ships and shoes and sealing wax, then a pre-
supposition of the introduction of the term would 
be undermined, and the view that there is no such 
thing as knowledge would be sustained. But natu-
ralists, and indeed, most non-naturalists, do not 
think that such a possibility is at all likely.26 
Indeed, almost all epistemologists believe that 
there is a great deal of unity to the phenomenon 
of human knowledge. If there is indeed such a 
unity, one goal of epistemology is to say what it 
consists in. And of course if it should turn out 
there is no such unity, then one goal of epistemol-
ogy would be to make that fact plain. 
The investigation of the phenomenon of 
knowledge, on the naturalist's view, is an empiri-
cal investigation, and the legitimacy of epistemic 
terminology depends on its properly latching on 
to genuine, theoretically unified kinds. That is all 
that naturalistic scruples require. Because episte-
mology thus conceived is a wholly empirical 
investigation, naturalists have nothing here to 
apologize for. Their terminology earns its keep in 
just the way that chemical or biological or physical 
terminology earns its keep: it must be part of a 
successful empirical theory. The fact that terms 
such as "knowledge" are not part of physics or 
chemistry does not show that they are not natu-
ralistically acceptable. Rather, the question for 
naturalists is whether knowledge turns out to be a 
theoretically unified phenomenon, and this gives 
every appearance of being a legitimate and tracta-
ble empirical question. 
Some will say that this enterprise, because it is 
descriptive, fails to engage the normative dimen-
sion of epistemological theorizing. They will 
argue that it is only by removing knowledge from 
the empirical realm, and making it the object of a 
priori investigation, that its normative character 
may emerge .... [F] or now it is possible to say some-
thing brief that will go some distance toward 
responding to this challenge. The empirical inves-
tigation of knowledge may well reveal a phenom-
enon worthy of our pursuit. Surely such a 
suggestion does not require a degree of optimism 
ungrounded in fact. But this is all the normativity 
that our epistemic notions require. We should not 
suppose that the investigation of knowledge must 
be non-empirical if we are to be able to explain 
why knowledge is worth havingY 
Epistemic terminology, and, indeed, philo-
sophical terminology in general, must be 
grounded in the world if it is to be naturalistically 
legitimate. This does not require that such termi-
nology appear in our physical theories, for natu-
ralists need not accept any sort of reductionism. 
Once we regard epistemology as the investigation 
of a certain natural phenomenon, we clear the 
way for distinctively epistemic terminology. 

INVESTIGATING KNOWLEDGE ITSELF 
657 
Naturalism would only threaten to eliminate 
epistemic terminology as illegitimate if there 
were no prospect of discovering theoretically 
unified epistemic phenomena. But there is little 
reason, I believe, to think that this is currently a 
genuine possibility. Moreover, if there were 
reason to worry on this account, it would spell 
the demise not only of naturalistic epistemology, 
but epistemology generally. Bealer's final objec-
tion, that naturalists are not entitled to the very 
epistemic terminology they make use of, thus 
ultimately fails. 
6 
The Autonomy of Philosophy 
I want to close this chapter by addressing one fur-
ther issue, a concern that, I believe, motivates 
Bealer's attack on naturalism, and this has to do 
with the autonomy of philosophy. In a lengthy 
attack28 on the kind of scientific essentialism I 
favor, Bealer begins by suggesting that naturalism 
raises the possibility that science will somehow 
"eclipse" philosophy. Naturalism threatens the 
autonomy of philosophical enquiry, Bealer argues, 
and it is thus only by rejecting naturalism that we 
may make room for a distinctively philosophical 
enterprise. BonJour has a similar conception of 
philosophical endeavors: "philosophy is a priori if 
it is anything (or at least if it is anything intellec-
tually respectable)".29 But then the naturalistic 
rejection of the a priori results immediately in a 
repudiation of philosophy itsel£ As Bealer and 
BonJour see it, if naturalism is right, we should all 
give up doing philosophy and take up science 
instead. 
Now I myself have a high regard for philo-
sophy. Although I am a naturalist, I do not believe 
that philosophy must be eliminated. Naturalists 
do not regard philosophy as illegitimate, nor do 
they see it as in any way threatened by the progress 
of science. At the same time, we do not wish to 
grant philosophy the degree of autonomy that 
Bealer, BonJour, and other opponents of natural-
ism would favor. There are important issues here, 
and it is worth making clear just where natural-
ism stands on them. 
Questions about knowledge and justification, 
questions about theory and evidence, are, to my 
mind, legitimate questions, and they are ones in 
which philosophy has a special stake. The questions 
that philosophers wish to ask about these topics 
are different from those addressed by historians, 
sociologists, and psychologists, but no less 
important or intellectually respectable. If the 
autonomy of a discipline consists in its dealing 
with a distinctive set of questions, or in approach-
ing certain phenomena with a distinctive set of 
concerns, then philosophy is surely an autono-
mous discipline. There is no danger that these 
questions and concerns will somehow be co-opted 
by other disciplines. 
When Bealer raises the issue of philosophy's 
autonomy, however, he has in mind something 
quite different from this. For Bealer, the auton-
omy of philosophy is identified with the claim 
that philosophical knowledge is a priori, entirely 
independent of anything the empirical sciences 
have to offer. Now this, of course, is a claim any 
naturalist will want to reject. On the naturalist's 
view, philosophical questions are continuous 
with the empirical sciences. Work in the empiri-
cal sciences is deeply relevant to philosophical 
questions, and our philosophical theories are 
constrained and guided by results in other disci-
plines. It is worth noting that the special sciences 
are not autonomous in anything like Bealer's 
sense, i.e. they are not wholly independent of 
work in other disciplines. Work in biology is not 
wholly independent of chemistry; sociology is 
not wholly independent of psychology; and so on. 
But the loss of this sort of autonomy does not rob 
these disciplines of their legitimacy, nor does it 
threaten the special sciences with the loss of their 
distinctive subject matter. Biologists need not fear 
that their field will be taken away from them by 
chemists once it is recognized that chemistry is 
relevant to biological concerns. 
So too with philosophy. In recognizing that 
philosophy is continuous with the sciences, we need 
not fear that philosophy will thereby be "eclipsed" by 
science. The constraints that science presents for 
philosophical theorizing should be welcomed, 
for philosophical theorizing unconstrained by empir-
ical fact loses its connection with the very phenom-
ena which we, as philosophers, seek to understand. 
Philosophy is an autonomous discipline, in the sense 
that it addresses a distinctive set of questions and 
concerns, and in this respect it is no more nor less 
autonomous than physics or chemistry or biology. 
This is surely all the autonomy we should want. It is, 
in any case, all the autonomy that we may have. 

658 
HILARY KORNBLITH 
7 
Conclusion 
Bealer's multi-count indictment of naturalism is 
not supported by the facts. We can make perfectly 
good sense of a thoroughly empirical philosophy, 
one that does not assign either the weight or the 
Notes 
Gilbert Ryle, The Concept of Mind (Barnes & 
Noble, 1949). 
2 A.I. Ayer, The Concept of a Person and Other 
Essays (Macmillan, 1964). 
3 H. L. A. Hart, The Concept of Law (Oxford 
University Press, 1961). 
4 Peter Achinstein, The Concept of Evidence 
(Oxford University Press, 1983). 
5 PanayotButchvarov, The Concept of Knowledge 
(Northwestern University Press, 1970). 
6 See George Bealer, "The Philosophical Limits 
of Scientific Essentialism': Philosophical Per-
spectives,l (1987), pp. 289-365; "The Inco-
herence of Empiricism", in S. Wagner and 
R. Warner (eds), Naturalism: A Critical 
Appraisal (Notre Dame University Press, 
1993), pp. 163-96; and "Intuition and the 
Autonomy of Philosophy", in M. DePaul 
and W. Ramsey (eds), Rethinking Intuition: 
The Psychology of Intuition and Its Role in 
Philosophical Inquiry (Rowman & Littlefield, 
1998), pp. 201-39. Page numbers in 
parentheses refer to "The Incoherence of 
Empiricism". 
7 See also Frank Jackson, From Metaphysics to 
Ethics: A Defense of Conceptual Analysis 
(Oxford University Press, 1998), p. vii: "And, 
as you might expect, if I am right about our 
need for it, conceptual analysis is very widely 
practiced - though not under the name of 
conceptual analysis. There is a lot of 'closet' 
conceptual analysis going on." 
8 Laurence BonJour, "Against Naturalistic 
Epistemology", 
Midwest 
Studies 
In 
Philosophy, 19 (1994), pp. 283-300, and In 
Defense 
of Pure 
Reason 
(Cambridge 
University Press, 1998). 
9 Frank Jackson, From Metaphysics to Ethics. 
10 
Mark Kaplan, "Epistemology Denatured", 
Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 19 (1994), pp. 
350-65. 
provenance to intuition that Bealer and others do. 
Epistemology is fully naturalized when it regards 
knowledge as a natural phenomenon, an object of 
study with a substantial degree of theoretical 
unity to it. ... 
11 
Harvey Siegel, "Empirical Psychology, Natur-
alized Epistemology and First Philosophy': 
Philosophy of Science, 51 (1984), pp. 667-76. 
12 
Bealer has argued against a number of different 
targets, including naturalism, scientific essen-
tialism, and empiricism. There are, of course, 
numerous versions of each of these views, and 
one may consistently subscribe to more than 
one of them. Indeed, the view I favor, and that I 
defend here, may rightly be described as falling 
under each of these three headings. It is for this 
reason that I feel called upon to answer Bealer's 
attacks on all these positions. 
l3 
I don't mean to suggest that Bealer's usage here 
is idiosyncratic; it isn't. Compare, for example, 
BonJour's notion of intuition: "judgments and 
convictions that, though considered and reflec-
tive, are not arrived at via an explicit discursive 
process and thus are (hopefully) uncontami-
nated by theoretical or dialectical considera-
tions" (In Defense of Pure Reason, p. 102). 
14 
For example, Michael Devitt remarks, in a 
footnote to his "The Methodology of 
Naturalistic Semantics:' Journal of Philosophy, 
91 (1994), pp. 545-72: "The naturalist does 
not deny 'armchair' intuitions a role in phi-
losophy but denies that their role has to be 
seen as a priori: the intuitions reflect an empir-
ically based expertise at identification" (564n. 
27). Devitt refers there to Bealer's work. The 
present chapter may be seen as an attempt to 
expand on this remark of Devitt's. After com-
pleting a draft of this chapter, my attention 
was drawn to the work of Terry Horgan which 
has many points of contact with the views 
expressed here. See Horgan's "The Austere 
Ideology of Folk Psychology': Mind and 
Language, 8 (1993), pp. 282-97, and Terence 
Horgan and George Graham, "Southern 
Fundamentalism and the End of Philosophy", 
Philosophical Issues, 5 (1994), pp. 219--47. 

INVESTIGATING KNOWLEDGE ITSELF 
659 
Finally, see also Richard Boyd's "How to Be a 
Moral Realist': in Geoffrey Sayre-McCord 
(ed.), Essays on Moral Realism, esp. pp. 192-3. 
15 
I have discussed this point at greater length 
in "A Conservative Approach to Social 
Epistemology", in 
Fred 
Schmitt 
(ed.), 
Socializing 
Epistemology 
(Rowman 
& 
Littlefield, 1994), pp. 93-110, and in 
"Naturalistic Epistemology and Its Critics", 
Philosophical Topics, 23 (1995), pp. 237-55. 
16 
Jackson, From Metaphysics to Ethics, p. 38. 
17 
What of the claim that something is a natu-
ral kind? Is that too known empirically? I 
believe that it is. Consider, again, the case of 
gold. What caught our attention and resulted 
in the introduction of the term, let us sup-
pose, was a collection of salient features such 
as the color, reflectance pattern, malleability, 
and so on of a number of samples of rock. It 
was an empirical discovery that these consti-
tuted a natural kind, i.e. that these samples 
were not, from a theoretical perspective, 
merely heterogeneous, but rather that they 
shared some deep, underlying properties 
responsible for the more superficial proper-
ties that initially attracted our attention. The 
same is true of natural-kind terms generally. 
While a person introducing a term may well 
believe, at the time the term is introduced, 
that the referent of the term is a natural kind, 
subsequent investigation may reveal that this 
belief is false. By the same token, a term may 
be introduced for a property that is, in fact, a 
natural kind, without the person introducing 
the term recognizing that fact. 
18 
Here I simply take for granted a causal or 
historical account of the reference of natu-
ral-kind terms. While the details of such a 
theory remain to be established, the general 
outline is, I believe, perfectly clear in the 
foundational work of Kripke and Putnam. 
The following points should be agreed upon 
by all sides: (1) The initial samples that 
prompt the introduction of a natural-kind 
term need not all be members of the kind in 
order for reference to occur; (2) The most 
central beliefs about a kind held by early 
investigators may turn out to be false with-
out thereby undermining reference. These 
points are not so much argued in the text as 
taken for granted. What I do argue is that 
reference to knowledge may work in pre-
cisely the same way as reference to, for 
example, gold, and that there are no prob-
lems specific to the case of knowledge 
beyond those already addressed in the work 
on more paradigmatic natural kinds. 
19 
Goldman, "Psychology and Philosophical 
Analysis", in Liaisons: Philosophy Meets the 
Cognitive and Social Sciences (MIT Press, 
1992), p. 144. 
20 
Goldman, "Epistemic Folkways and Scientific 
Epistemology", ibid., p. 156. 
21 
For a valuable discussion of the state of the 
art on this issue, see Colin Allen, "Animal 
Pain", manuscript. 
22 
I do not mean to be diverging here from a 
reliabilist account of justification. Rather, 
I mean only to be pointing out that allowing 
one's judgments to be influenced by accurate 
theory tends to be a source of increased reli-
ability. 
23 
BonJour, In Defense of Pure Reason, p. ix. 
24 
Ibid., p. 5. 
25 
It is thus particularly ironic that Mark Kaplan 
both criticizes naturalistic epistemology as 
irrelevant to the conduct of enquiry and simul-
taneously defends the importance of a priori 
standards of cogent argument. See Kaplan, 
"Epistemology Denatured': pp. 350--65. 
26 
But see Michael Williams, Unnatural Doubts: 
Epistemological Realism and the Basis of 
Skepticism (Princeton University Press, 1996). 
27 
Nor is it clear why a non-empirical investiga-
tion, if such were possible, would go any dis-
tance at all toward addressing the normativity 
issue. Much of the criticism of naturalism on 
this score has been, I believe, entirely beside 
the point. While it is correctly pointed out 
that it is hard to see how an empirical inves-
tigation could address our normative con-
cerns, critics of naturalism take this to count 
in favor of some sort of a priori investigation. 
But neither is it clear how an a priori investi-
gation could address those concerns. The 
appropriate conclusion, I believe, is that we 
simply don't currently see how normative 
concerns can be addressed at all. This does 
not count for or against any particular view. 
28 
Bealer, "The 
Philosophical 
Limits 
of 
Scientific Essentialism': 
29 
BonJour, In Defense of Pure Reason, p. ix. 


PART VIII 
Knowledge and Context 


Introduction 
Consider the basic form of the skeptical argument as formulated by Keith DeRose, 
with "H" standing in for some sentence describing a skeptical hypothesis and "0" for 
a sentence describing an ordinary state of affairs: 
I don't know that not-H. 
2 IfI don't know that not-H, then I don't know that O. So, 
C I don't know that O. 
In reply to the skeptic, the contextualist refuses to deny either of the premises and 
indeed does not deny the conclusion. This is the concession. Yet the skeptic is charged 
with the error of not seeing the implications of the context-sensitivity of knowledge 
claims, of supposing that knowledge claims are false in all contexts, even in ordinary 
contexts quite apart from any skeptical challenge. The truth of the matter, says the con-
textualist, is that the skeptic's dialectical challenge raises the standards for truly attrib-
uting knowledge. Still, in many ordinary contexts, lower standards are in place, allowing 
premise (1) to be false and thus allowing many ordinary knowledge attributions to be 
true. (Compare to Gail Stine's piece in Part IV of this volume.) 
This is the contextualist reply to the skeptic, in broad outline. As is pointed out 
effectively by DeRose, putting flesh on the bones of this view requires describing the 
mechanisms by which the standards for truly ascribing knowledge are raised and low-
ered. The task of providing such descriptions, of course, introduces a danger of gener-
ating incorrect predictions regarding the truth-values of knowledge claims in various 
hypothetical situations. In his contribution, Stewart Cohen argues that this is the sort 
of difficulty that undermines David Lewis's recent contextualist account. 
Keith DeRose takes as his starting point Robert Nozick's insight that knowledge is 
importantly connected to sensitivity. (See Nozick's selection in Part IV of this volume.) 
Why am I unable to know my lottery ticket is a loser regardless of how large the lot-
tery pool is - unable, that is, until I hear the official announcements of the winner? 
The probability that my ticket is a loser given that it is one of a million (or more) is 
much greater than the probability that the announcer is telling the truth. Nozick 

664 
INTRODUCTION 
answers: before but not after you hear the announcement your belief is insensitive; 
had your ticket not been a loser, you would have still believed it was. 
Nonetheless, DeRose shies away from the pure sensitivity account because it fails to 
rule out, and even licenses, what he calls "abominable conjunctions." These are con-
junctions of the form "I know that p, but I don't know that not -q," where p entails not-
q. "Straight" solutions to the skeptical problem, which give up (2) in the argument 
opening this section, are forced to admit the truth of the abominable "I know that 0, 
but I don't know that not-H." These fly in the face of our intuitions and should be 
regarded as false in every context. DeRose is therefore constrained not to locate the 
source of the context-dependence in the conditional premise, (2). He locates the source, 
instead, in the assertion of (1) itself. The effect of denying knowledge is to require 
thereafter a stronger epistemic position for knowledge than was required before. It is 
this notion of strength of epistemic position that receives an account in terms of sensitiv-
ity. We judge relative strength of epistemic positions when we judge the truth-values of 
conditionals of the form "If I know that p, then I know that q" e.g., "If I know that 1 own 
a cat, then 1 know that 1 own an animal," as well as those of their converses. What guides 
us in judging such conditionals true or false, moreover, are facts about the distance 
from actuality (if any) that would be required for the belief/fact link to be broken. 
Thus, a cat-owner S's epistemic position with respect to "I know I own an animal" will 
be stronger than his epistemic position with respect to "I know I own a cat," since one 
would have to look farther from actuality to find a possible world in which S believes 
falsely that he has a cat than one would to find a world in which S believes falsely that 
he has an animal. Sensitivity then enters as a limit to which the standards for strength 
of epistemic position can be raised. This is precisely the contextual feature that the 
skeptic exploits. By claiming that one lacks knowledge, say, that one is not a brain in a 
vat, the skeptic raises the contextual standards so high as to require sensitivity to the 
truth of the proposition that one is not a brain in a vat. But once the sphere of relevant 
worlds is so far extended, one's belief that one has hands will not match the facts across 
all the worlds. One's epistemic position with respect to one's belief that one has hands, 
after all, is not as strong as it is with respect to one's belief that one is not a brain in a 
vat. (This is a noteworthy claim in light of the fact that Dretske, Nozick, and others 
insist that while we may know that we have hands, we certainly do not know that we are 
not brains in vats.) 
David Lewis's contextualism takes off from the intuitive infallibilist claim that one 
knows that p just in case one's evidence eliminates all possibilities in which not-po This 
does not lead to skepticism (in all contexts), however, because the scope of "all" is taken 
to be contextually restricted. Thus, Lewis adds to this biconditional, soto voce, " - Psst! -
except for those possibilities that we are properly ignoring." A significant portion of 
Lewis's paper is then devoted to listing rules that determine at least partially what can 
and cannot be properly ignored. Corresponding to the traditional triad of require-
ments for knowledge - truth, belief, and justification - we encounter a pair of rules: the 
actuality and the belief rules. If a possibility is actual it cannot properly be ignored. This 
rule thus guarantees that only what is true is known. If it is, or ought to be, believed by 
the subject to be actual, it cannot be properly ignored. This rule doesn't guarantee that 
only what is believed and justified can be knowledge, but it does make belief and justi-
fication relevant to whether one knows (e.g., if one believes or is justified in believing 
that what one sees is a painted mule, then one doesn't know that what one sees is a 

PART VIII 
zebra). Prominent among the other rules listed are the rules of resemblance and atten-
tion. The rule of resemblance states that if a possibility saliently resembles another 
possibility, then if one cannot be properly ignored, neither can the other. The rule of 
attention states that if a possibility is attended to, it cannot be properly ignored. This 
framework is then applied to three kinds of problem: skepticism, the lottery problem, 
and the Gettier problem. The application to skepticism appeals to the rule of attention. 
To truly claim that S knows that p after the mention of the appropriate skeptical pos-
sibility, S's evidence would have to eliminate the skeptical possibility attended to, which 
it will not do. For the lottery and Gettier cases, the rules of actuality and resemblance 
do the required work. Since the possibility in which S has the winning ticket is saliently 
similar to actuality (whatever actuality may be), the possibility of having a winner is 
not properly ignored. Thus, the knowledge attribution will be false. Similarly, since the 
possibility in which neither Nogot nor Havit owns a Ford saliently resembles actuality, 
it is not properly ignored. Here, too, the knowledge attribution will be false. 
Stewart Cohen argues that Lewis's rules wrongly assimilate the Gettier problem to 
the lottery problem and skepticism. The salient-resemblance requirement is appropri-
ate in regard to the latter two problems, but not the former. To establish this, Cohen 
first distinguishes between speaker-sensitive and subject-sensitive rules for properly 
ignoring possibilities, noting that the rule of salient resemblance is both speaker- and 
subject-sensitive. He then examines the consequences. Suppose S sees a sheep-shaped 
rock on a hill, and taking the rock to be a sheep, comes to believe that there is a sheep 
on the hill. As it turns out, there is in fact a sheep behind the rock, out of S's view. Now 
an attributor who knows all these facts will find the possibility that S sees a sheep-
shaped rock on a sheepless hill salient, but one who views the scene from a different 
angle may not realize that S is in fact seeing a rock. The second attributor will not find 
salient the possibility just mentioned, nor any other possibility like it. In fact, then, the 
second attributor can truly attribute knowledge to S. Since facts about salience vary 
from attributor to attributor, facts about whether it's true to say of someone in a Gettier 
case that she has knowledge, too, will vary. 
Cohen argues that this result is implausible in the face of our stable disposition to 
deny knowledge to subjects in Gettier cases. A contextualist theory should appeal to 
speaker-sensitive rules only when our intuitions vacillate. We do vacillate about the 
truth of skeptical claims and about the truth of knowledge attributions in certain lottery 
cases, such as that of Lewis's Poor Bill: "Pity poor Bill! He squanders all his spare cash on 
the pokies, the races, and the lottery. He will be a wage slave all his days. We know he will 
never be rich. But if he wins the lottery (if he wins big), then he will be rich." We don't 
vacillate about Gettier cases. 
The contextualist takes certain intuitively non-epistemic or non-truth-conductive 
factors, e.g., salience of possibilities of error or the cost of being wrong, to make a dif-
ference to the truth-conditions of knowledge-attributions. But most contextualists do 
not take such pragmatic factors to make a difference to whether anyone knows. It is 
perhaps part of the appeal of contextualism that it is consistent with what Jason Stanley 
dubs 'intellectualism.' Intellectualism claims that the differences between true belief 
and knowledge have to do strictly with matters of theoretical rationality and never 
practical rationality. Stanley argues that the alleged context-sensitivity of 'knows' has 
no parallel among the class of uncontroversial context-sensitive expressions. Therefore, 
the most reasonable hypothesis is that knowledge attributions are not context-sensitive 
665 

666 
INTRODUCTION 
in any distinctively epistemological way (they may of course inherit any context-sen-
sitivity involved in tense or vagueness). If this is right, then the contextualist's exam-
ples instead show that the intellectualist assumption is false. Knowledge is not a purely 
epistemic notion: pragmatic factors - and in particular facts about the costs of being 
wrong - are relevant to whether one knows. 
Stanley argues against intellectualism on the basis of the intuitions we have in response 
to certain contextualist examples. Jeremy Fantl and Matthew McGrath argue for a simi-
lar conclusion on the basis of certain epistemic principles. The first and most crucial 
step in their argument is that if you know that p and you know that if p then act A is best, 
then you know that act A is best, and so you are rational to do A. This step involves an 
application of a closure principle together with a principle connecting knowledge to 
action: if you know that A is best, you are rational to do A. If these two principles are 
accepted, they claim, the argument can be strengthened to deliver a pragmatic condition 
on justification: S is justified in believing that p only if S is rational to act (and prefer) as 
if p. But what a subject is rational to do depends crucially on her practical situation: 
what S wants or values, what options are available to S, etc. Therefore, holding fixed a 
subject's evidence for a proposition p, we can vary her practical situation in such a way 
as to falsify the evidentialist thesis according to which two subjects with the same evi-
dence for p will either both be justified in believing that p or neither will be. 
A third sort of argument for a practical role in knowledge is provided by John 
Hawthorne. Suppose you have a ticket in a very large lottery with a very large payout 
(such that the expected utility of keeping your ticket is greater than a penny). You are 
offered a penny. If you knew your ticket would lose, you could reason like this: "My 
ticket will lose. Therefore, if I keep it, I will get nothing. If I sell it, I'll get a penny. 
Therefore, I should sell it." Hawthorne thinks this sort of reasoning is "intuitively awful." 
But how to explain its awfulness? Best, he thinks, to introduce what he calls "The 
Practical Environment Constraint," according to which knowledge is the norm of prac-
tical reasoning, i.e., one can legitimately use p in practical reasoning (if and) only if one 
knows that p. The intuitive awfulness of the above reasoning indicates that you do not 
know the premise that your ticket will lose. However, it seems that by varying a subject's 
practical situation in certain ways - e.g., by varying how much she has at stake in being 
right about p - we can vary whether the subject can legitimately use p in practical rea-
soning. Thus, it appears that Hawthorne, like Fantl and McGrath, would be sympa-
thetic to what Stanley calls anti-intellectualism. 
Hawthorne dubs his favored position 'sensitive moderate invariantism' and claims 
that, suitably elaborated, it allows us to satisfy the bulk of the constraints on a checklist 
of constraints we want any theory of knowledge to meet. Among these are a Moorean 
anti-skeptical constraint, an epistemic closure requirement, a need to respect a dis-
quotational schema for 'knows,' and an Epistemic Possibility Constraint - that knowl-
edge requires that there be no epistemic possibility of error. In particular, sensitive 
moderate invariantism is preferable to contextualism in its performance on this score-
card. It offers the best hope for respecting the intuitive links between knowledge, 
assertion, and practical reasoning. 
The first six selections in this section advocate either contextualism about knowledge-
attributions - according to which the truth of knowledge-attributions shifts with the 
attributor's context - or sensitive invariantism about knowledge attributions - according 
to which the truth of knowledge-attributions shifts only with the subject's context. John 

PART VIII 
MacFarlane begins his critique of both sorts of views with a helpful taxonomy of stand-
ard views about the apparent shiftiness of knowledge attributions: strict invariantism 
(no semantic variability of epistemic standards), sensitive invariantism (variability 
depending on the subject's circumstance or circumstance of evaluation), and contextual-
ism (variability depending on the context of use). Our use of 'knows' seems to belie all 
three views. As against strict invariantism, we seem to employ different epistemic stand-
ards in different contexts. Yet, as against sensitive invariantism, in any fixed context of 
use, it appears we employ one and the same epistemic standard, not different standards 
for subjects in different sorts of situations. As against contextualism, we seem to treat 
second-order claims about whether a knowledge-attribution is true no differently than 
we treat the first-order question of whether a subject knows. 
MacFarlane argues that there is a neglected fourth view which fits all the data: assess-
ment relativism. The main components of MacFarlane's final view are: (1) 'knows' 
expresses the same relation K in all contexts of use (contrary to contextualism), 
(2) whether K holds between a subject and a proposition is independent of the subject's 
non-epistemic circumstances (contrary to sensitive invariantism), but (3) things stand 
in K only relative to an epistemic standard determined by the context of assessment. 
These three features lead to the following truth-conditions (this is a rough approxima-
tion): "s knows that p" is true relative to CA iff S bears K to p relative to the epistemic 
standard determined by CA. So consider the "stolen car" case, in which we begin by 
asserting "I know where my car is," and then later retract this, saying "I guess I don't 
know where my car is." According to MacFarlane, in our retraction we are denying the 
very proposition we asserted earlier, and yet we are right to do so in both cases, just 
as - assuming, with orthodoxy, that propositions are true relative to times - we are 
right to first assert and later deny the same proposition in saying "I am hungry" at tl 
and then saying "I am not hungry" at t2. 
Further Reading 
667 
Annis, David, "A Contextualist Theory ofEpistemic 
Justification;' American Philosophical Quarterly 
15 (1978), pp. 213-19. 
--, "Knowledge, Speaker, and Subject;' Philoso-
phical Quarterly 55 (2005), pp. 199-212. 
Austin, J. L., "Other Minds," inAustin, Philosophical 
Papers, 3rd edn (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1979), pp. 76-116. 
Brown, Jessica, "Adapt or Die: The Death of 
Invariantism?," The Philosophical Quarterly 55 
(2005), pp. 263-85. 
Cohen Stewart, "How to be a Fallibilist;' Philo-
sophical Perspectives 2 (1988), pp. 81-123. 
--, "Skepticism and Everyday Knowledge 
Attributions;' in Roth and Ross (eds.), 
Doubting: 
Contemporary 
Perspectives 
on 
Skepticism 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic 
Publishers, 1990), pp. 161-9. 
--, "Contextualism, Skepticism and the 
Structure of Reasons," Philosophical Perspec-
tives 13 (1999), pp. 57-89. 
DeRose, Keith, "Contextualism and Knowledge 
Attributions;'PhilosophyandPhenomenological 
Research 52 (1992), pp. 913-29. 
--, "Contextual ism: An Explanation and 
Defense," in The Blackwell Guide to Epistemo-
logy (Oxford: Blackwell, 1999), pp. 187-206. 
--, "Contextualism Defended: Comments on 
Richard 
Feldman's 
'Skeptical 
Problems, 
Contextualist Solutions;" Philosophical Studies 
103 (2001), pp. 87-98. 
--, "Knowledge, Assertion, and Context," The 
Philosophical Review Ill, No.2 (2002), pp. 
167-203. 
--, "The Ordinary Language Basis for 
Contextualism, and the New Invariantism," 
The Philosophical Quarterly 55 (2005), pp. 
172-98. 

668 
INTRODUCTION 
Dretske, Fred, "The Pragmatic Dimension of 
Knowledge," Philosophical Studies 40 (1981), 
pp.363-78. 
Fantl, Jeremy and Matthew McGrath, "Knowledge 
and the Purely Epistemic: In Favor of Pragmatic 
Encroachment;' Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research (forthcoming). 
Feldman, Richard, "Skeptical Problems, Con-
textualist Solutions," Philosophical Studies 103 
(2001), pp. 61-85. 
Fogelin, Robert, Pyrrhonian Reflections on 
Knowledge and Justification (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1997). 
Hambourger, Robert, "Justified Assertion and the 
Relativity of Knowledge," Philosophical Studies 
51 (1987), pp. 241-69. 
Hawthorne, John, Knowledge and Lotteries 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2004). 
Lewis, David, "Scorekeeping in a Language Game," 
Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 (1979), pp. 
339-59, esp. Example 6, "Relative Modality;' 
pp.354-5. 
MacFarlane, John, "Knowledge Laundering: 
Testimony 
and 
Sensitive 
Invariantism," 
Analysis 65 (2005), pp. 132-38. 
Neta, Ram, "Contextualism and the Problem of 
the External World," Philosophy and Pheno-
menological Research 66 (2003), pp. 1-31. 
Schaffer, Jonathan, "From Contextualism to 
Contrastivism," Philosophical Studies 
119 
(2004), pp. 73-103. 
--, "The Irrelevance of the Subject: Against 
Subject -Sensitive Invariantism," Philosophical 
Studies 127 (2006), pp. 87-107. 
Schiffer, Stephen, "Contextualist Solutions to 
Scepticism;' Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society 96 (1996), pp. 249-61. 
Sosa, Ernest, "Chisholm's Epistemology and 
Epistemic Internalism;' in Lewis Hahn (ed.), 
The Philosophy of Roderick Chisholm (Chicago: 
Open Court, 1997), pp. 267-87. 
--, "Contextualism and Skepticism;' Philoso-
phical Issues 10 (1999), pp. 94-107. 
Stanley, Jason, Knowledge and Practical Interests 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005). 
Unger, Peter, Philosophical Relativity (Minnea-
polis: University of Minnesota Press, 1984). 
--, "The Cone Model of Knowledge;' 
Philosophical Topics 14 (1986), pp. 125-78. 
Weatherson, Brian, "Can we do without Pragmatic 
Encroachment?," Philosophical Perspectives 19 
(2005), pp. 417-43. 
Williamson, Timothy, "Contextualism, Subject-
Sensitive Invariantism, and Knowledge of 
Knowledge;' Philosophical Quarterly 55 (2005), 
pp.213-35. 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig, On Certainty (New York: 
Harper and Row, 1972). 

CHAPTER 47 
Solving the Skeptical Problem 
Keith DeRose 
1 The Puzzle of Skeptical Hypotheses 
Many of the most celebrated, intriguing, and 
powerful skeptical arguments proceed by means 
of skeptical hypotheses. Brutally pared to their 
barest essentials, they are roughly of the following 
form, where "0" is a proposition about the exter-
nal world one would ordinarily think one knows 
(e.g., I have hands!) and "H" is a suitably chosen 
skeptical hypothesis (e.g., I am a bodiless brain in 
a vat who has been electrochemically stimulated 
to have precisely those sensory experiences I've 
had, henceforth a "BIV"2): 
The Argument from Ignorance (AI)3 
1. 
I don't know that not-H. 
2. 
If I don't know that not-H, then I don't 
know that o. So, 
C. 
I don't know that 0. 4 
Setting aside the distracting side issues that imme-
diately threaten from all directions, and keeping AI 
in this stark, uncomplicated form, I will, in what 
follows, present and defend, at least in broad out-
line, the correct solution to the puzzle AI confronts 
us with. And AI does present us with a puzzle, 
because, for reasons we'll investigate in later sec-
tions, each of its premises is initially plausible, 
Originally published in The Philosophical Review 104, 1 
(I995),pp. 1-7, 17-52. 
when H is well chosen. For however improbable 
or even bizarre it may seem to suppose that I am 
a BIV, it also seems that I don't know that I'm not 
one. How could I know such a thing? And it also 
seems that if, for all I know, I am a BIV, then I 
don't know that I have hands. How could I know 
that I have hands if, for all I know, I'm bodiless 
(and therefore handless)? But, at the same time, it 
initially seems that I do know that I have hands. 
So two plausible premises yield a conclusion 
whose negation we also find plausible. So some-
thing plausible has to go. But what? And equally 
importantly, how? 
To be sure, the premises are only plausible, not 
compelling. Thus, we will always have recourse to 
the Moorean reaction to this argument: Declare 
that it is more certain that one knows that one has 
hands than it is that either of the premises of the 
argument is true (much less that their conjunc-
tion is true), and therefore reject one of those 
premises, rather than accept the conclusion. But 
also available is the skeptical reaction, which is to 
accept the conclusion. 
But we should hope for a better treatment of 
the argument than simply choosing which of the 
three individually plausible propositions - the 
two premises and the negation of the conclusion -
seems least certain and rejecting it on the grounds 
that the other two are true. In seeking a solution to 
this puzzle, we should seek an explanation of how 
we fell into this skeptical trap in the first place, and 
not settle for making a simple choice among three 

670 
KEITH DEROSE 
distasteful ways out of the trap. We must explain 
how two premises that together yield a conclusion 
we find so incredible can themselves seem so plau-
sible to us. Only with such an explanation in place 
can we proceed with confidence and with under-
standing to free ourselves from the trap. 
Many of those working on AI in recent years 
seem to have understood this.5 And I have good 
news to report: Substantial progress towards 
finally solving this skeptical puzzle has been made 
along two quite different fronts. The bad news is 
that, as I shall argue, neither approach has solved 
the puzzle. But the culminating good news is that, 
as I will also argue, the new solution I present 
here, which incorporates important aspects of 
each of the two approaches, can finally solve this 
perennially thorny philosophical problem. While 
more details and precision will be called for in the 
resulting solution than I will provide, there will 
be enough meat on the bones to make it plausible 
that the fully articulated solution lies in the direc-
tion I point to here. 
In sections 2-4 of this paper, I explore the 
contextualist approach to the problem of skepti-
cism, and show why it has thus far fallen short of 
solving the puzzle. In sections 3-7, I turn to 
Robert Nozick's attempt to solve our puzzle. 
Since the shortcomings of Nozick's treatment of 
knowledge and skepticism have been, at least to 
my satisfaction, duly demonstrated by others, it 
will not be my purpose here to rehearse those 
shortcomings, but rather to explore and expand 
upon the substantial insight that remains intact 
in Nozick's account. In sections 8-14, I present 
and defend my own contextualist solution, which 
I argue is the best solution to our puzzle. Since, as 
I argue in sections 12-14, the skeptic's own solu-
tion, according to which we accept AI's conclu-
sion, is among the solutions inferior to the one I 
present, AI does not successfully support that 
conclusion. 
2 
Contextualist Solutions: The 
Basic Strategy 
Suppose a speaker A (for "attributor") says, "S 
knows that P," of a subject S's true belief that P. 
According to contextualist theories of knowledge 
attributions, how strong an epistemic position S 
must be in with respect to P for 1I:s assertion to be 
true can vary according to features of 1I:s conver-
sational context.6 
Contextualist theories of knowledge attribu-
tions have almost invariably been developed with 
an eye toward providing some kind of answer to 
philosophical skepticism. For skeptical arguments 
like AI threaten to show, not only that we fail to 
meet very high requirements for knowledge of 
interest only to misguided philosophers seeking 
absolute certainty, but that we don't meet even 
the truth conditions of ordinary, out-on-the-
street knowledge attributions. They thus threaten 
to establish the startling result that we never, or 
almost never, truthfully ascribe knowledge to 
ourselves or to other mere mortals. 
But, according to contextualists, the skeptic, in 
presenting her argument, manipulates the seman-
tic standards for knowledge, thereby creating a 
context in which she can truthfully say that we 
know nothing or very little.7 Once the standards 
have been so raised, we correctly sense that we 
only could falsely claim to know such things as 
that we have hands. Why then are we puzzled? 
Why don't we simply accept the skeptic's conclu-
sion and henceforth refrain from ascribing such 
knowledge to ourselves or others? Because, the 
contextualist continues, we also realize this: As 
soon as we find ourselves in more ordinary con-
versational contexts, it will not only be true for us 
to claim to know the very things that the skeptic 
now denies we know, but it will also be wrong for 
us to deny that we know these things. But then, 
isn't the skeptic's present denial equally false? And 
wouldn't it be equally true for us now, in the skep-
tic's presence, to claim to know? 
What we fail to realize, according to the contex-
tualist solution, is that the skeptic's present denials 
that we know various things are perfectly compat-
ible with our ordinary claims to know those very 
propositions. Once we realize this, we can see how 
both the skeptic's denials of knowledge and our 
ordinary attributions of knowledge can be correct. 
Thus, it is hoped, our ordinary claims to know 
can be safeguarded from the apparently powerful 
attack of the skeptic, while, at the same time, the 
persuasiveness of the skeptical argument is 
explained. For the fact that the skeptic can invoke 
very high standards that we don't live up to has no 
tendency to show that we don't satisfy the more 
relaxed standards that are in place in more ordi-
nary conversations and debates. 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
671 
Three important points about contextualist 
strategies as described above should be made 
before I move on. First, this type of strategy will 
leave untouched the timid skeptic who purports 
by AI merely to be establishing the weak claim 
that in some (perhaps "high" or "philosophical") 
sense (perhaps induced by the presentation of AI) 
we don't know the relevant 0, while not even 
purporting to establish the bold thesis that our 
ordinary claims to know that same proposition 
are false. Whether such a timid skeptical stance is 
of any interest is a topic for another paper. The 
contextualist strategy is important because AI 
initially seems to threaten the truth of our ordi-
nary claims - it threatens to boldly show that 
we've been wrong all along in thinking and saying 
that we know this and that. For it doesn't seem as 
if it's just in some "high" or "philosophical" sense 
that AI's premises are true: They seem true in the 
ordinary sense of "know." In fact, one is initially 
tempted to say that there's no good sense in which 
I know that I'm not a BIV or in which I can know 
I have hands if I don't know that I'm not a BIV. 
How (and whether) to avoid the bold skeptical 
result is puzzle enough. 
Second, in presenting the contextualist strat-
egy, I have above assumed a skeptic-friendly ver-
sion of contextualism - one according to which 
the philosophical skeptic can (fairly easily), and 
does, succeed in raising the standards for knowl-
edge in such a way as to make her denials of 
knowledge true. Some contextualists may think 
that it's not so easy to so raise the standards for 
knowledge, and that a determined opponent of 
the skeptic can, by not letting the skeptic get away 
with raising them, keep the standards low. But the 
important point is to identify the mechanism by 
which the skeptic at least threatens to raise the 
standards for knowledge. Whether the skeptic 
actually succeeds against a determined opponent 
in so raising the standards is of little importance. 
To safeguard ordinary claims to know while at the 
same time explaining the persuasiveness of the 
skeptical arguments (which is the goal of his strat-
egy), the contextualist can provisionally assume a 
skeptic-friendly version of contextualism, leaving 
it as an open question whether and under which 
conditions the skeptic actually succeeds at raising 
the standards. The contextualist's ultimate point 
will then be this: To the extent that the skeptic does 
succeed, she does so only by raising the standards 
for knowledge, and so the success of her argument 
has no tendency to show that our ordinary claims 
to know are in any way defective. 
Third, AI can be puzzling even when one is 
not in the presence of a skeptic who is presenting 
it. The argument has about the same degree of 
intuitive appeal when one is just considering it by 
oneself, without anybody's saying anything. But 
the contextualist explanation, as described above, 
involves the standards for knowledge being 
changed by what's being said in a conversation.8 
For the most part, I will frame the contextualist 
explanation in terms of such conversational rules, 
largely because that's what been done by my con-
textualist predecessors, with whom I want to 
make contact. But we must realize that the result-
ing solution will have to be generalized to explain 
why the argument can be so appealing even when 
one is considering it in solitude, with nothing 
being said. The basic idea of the generalization 
will take either or both of the following two 
forms. First, it can be maintained that there is a 
rule for the changing of the standards for knowl-
edge that governs the truth conditions of our 
thoughts regarding what is and is not known that 
mirrors the rule for the truth conditions of what 
is said regarding knowledge. In that case, an ana-
logue of the contextualist solution can be given 
for thought, according to which the premises and 
conclusion of AI are truly thought, but my true 
thought that, say, I don't know that I have hands, 
had when in the grip of AI, will be compatible 
with my thought, made in another context, that I 
do know that very thing. Second, our judgment 
regarding whether something can or cannot be 
truly asserted (under appropriate conditions) 
might be held to affect our judgment regarding 
whether it's true or false, even when we make this 
judgment in solitude, with nothing being said at 
all. That the premises of AI could be truly asserted, 
then, makes them (at least) seem true even when 
they're just being thought. 
My own solution will employ the basic con-
textualist strategy explained in this section. But, 
as should be apparent already, we haven't 
explained the persuasiveness of AI, and thus 
haven't solved our puzzle, if we haven't located 
and explained the conversational rule or mecha-
nism by which the skeptic raises (or threatens to 
raise) the standards for knowledge. And here 
contextualists have had little to offer. 

672 
KEITH DEROSE 
3 
The Subjunctive Conditionals 
Account (SCA) of the Plausibility of 
AI's First Premise 
The main stumbling block of other contextualist 
solutions has been a failure to explain what it is 
about skeptical hypotheses that makes it so plau-
sible to suppose that we don't know that they're 
false. This point of weakness in the contextualist 
solutions is the particular point of strength of 
Nozick's treatment of AI in his Philosophical 
Explanations (1981). In this and the following 
three sections I'll present and defend the 
Subjunctive Conditionals Account (SCA) of the 
plausibility of AI's first premise, which I've 
abstracted from Nozick's account of knowledge 
and skepticism. 
According to SCA, the problem with my belief 
that I'm not a BIV - and I do have such a belief, as 
do most of us - is that I would have this belief 
(that I'm not a BIV) even if it were false (even if I 
were one). It is this that makes it hard to claim to 
know that I'm not a BIV. For, according to SCA, 
we have a very strong general, though not excep-
tionless, inclination to think that we don't know 
that P when we think that our belief that P is a 
belief we would hold even if P were false. Let's say 
that S's belief that P is insensitive ifS would believe 
that P if P were false. SCA's generalization can 
then be restated as follows: We tend to judge that 
S doesn't know that P when we think S's belief 
that P is insensitive. 
As is well worth noting, this general inclina-
tion explains the operation of nonphilosophical 
skeptical hypotheses that are far less radical than 
the BIV hypothesis or even the painted mule 
hypothesis. Just so, it serves to explain why, even 
though I feel inclined to say that I know the Bulls 
won their game last night because I read the result 
in a single newspaper, I still feel strongly pulled 
toward admitting the (mildly) skeptical claim 
that I don't know that the paper isn't mistaken 
about which team won: I realize that my belief 
that the paper isn't mistaken is a belief I would 
hold even if it were false (even if the paper were 
mistaken). 
Indeed, after encountering a couple of 
instances of AI with different skeptical hypothe-
ses plugged into the "H" slot (for example, the 
BIV, the painted mules, and the mistaken paper 
hypotheses), one develops a sense of what makes 
for an effective skeptical hypothesis and, thus, an 
ability to construct convincing instances of AI 
oneself. To make AI's second premise convincing, 
it is usually sufficient (though not necessary) that 
H be incompatible with O. But what about the 
first premise? To make it convincing, we instinc-
tively look for a hypothesis that elicits in the lis-
tener both the belief that the hypothesis doesn't 
obtain and an acknowledgement that this belief is 
one she would hold even if the hypothesis did 
obtain. 
Upon hearing the hypothesis, typically one 
can't help but projecting oneself into it. How 
would things seem to me if that situation 
obtained? Well, pretty much (or sometimes 
exactly) as they actually seem to me. And, so, what 
would I believe if such a "strange" situation 
obtained? Pretty much (or exactly) what I actu-
ally believe. For example, and in particular, if I 
were a BIV, I would believe every bit as firmly as I 
actually do that I wasn't one. But if this belief is 
one I would hold even if it were false, how can I be 
in a position to tell that, or discern that, or know 
that, it's true? 
As I've just hinted, a similar explanation, in 
terms of subjunctive conditionals, can explain the 
plausibility of the other ways we feel inclined to 
describe our seemingly limited epistemic position 
vis-a-vis effective skeptical hypotheses. Consider 
especially the description involving "ruling out." 
In a normal zoo setting, most of us would take 
ourselves to know that the animals in the zebra 
cage are zebras. From this, it seems, we should be 
able to infer that they're not cleverly painted 
mules, since zebras aren't mules. So why are we 
reluctant to count our seeing the zebras and per-
forming this inference as a case of ruling out the 
painted mule hypothesis? Because, the explana-
tion goes, even after performing the inference, it 
still seems we would believe the observed animals 
weren't painted mules if they were precisely that. 
Why does it seem we can't tell that they're not 
painted mules? Because we would believe they 
weren't even if they were. Ditto for why we seem-
ingly can't discern that they're not and why it 
seems we can't distinguish their being cleverly 
painted mules from their not being such, etc. 
Also worth noting is the usefulness of SCA in 
explaining our reluctance to ascribe knowledge in 
certain lottery situations. Even where the odds of 
your being a loser are astronomically high (there 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
673 
are 20 million tickets, only one of which is a 
winner, and you have but one ticket), it can seem 
that you don't know that you're a loser of a fair 
lottery if the winner hasn't yet been announced. 
SeA accounts for this seeming: Your belief that 
you're a loser is one you would hold even if you 
were the winner. 
SeA is a powerful explanation. But there are 
problems. As I suggested above, there are excep-
tions to the general inclination to which seA 
appeals: There are cases in which it seems to us 
that some S does know that P even though we 
judge that S would believe that P even if P were 
false. Some of these exceptions will be quickly 
discussed in sections 4 and 5 below. The first 
and main point to make regarding such excep-
tions, of course, is that this very general inclina-
tion needn't be exceptionless to perform the 
explanatory role seA assigns it. In section 6 we 
will see strong grounds for endorsing SeA as 
being at least on the right track despite the 
exceptions to the generalization to which it 
appeals. But these exceptions are still worth 
examining, for they will indicate certain impor-
tant directions in which SeA can be improved, 
even though we won't be in a position to make 
seA ideally precise here. 
4 SeA, Grandmothers, and Methods 
First, then, consider a case discussed by Nozick: 
A grandmother sees her grandson is well when 
he comes to visit; but if he were sick or dead, 
others would tell her he was well to spare her 
upset. Yet this does not mean she doesn't know 
he is well (or at least ambulatory) when she sees 
him. (1981, p. 179) 
Here, it seems, the grandmother knows her 
grandson is well, though it can seem that she 
doesn't satisfy the third condition of a prelimi-
nary form of Nozick's analysis of S knows that P, 
which is: 
(3) If P weren't true, S wouldn't believe that p. 
Nozick's response is to relativize this third condi-
tion to the method by which S has come to believe 
that P, yielding: 
(3) 
If P weren't true and S were to use M to 
arrive at a belief whether (or not) p, 
then S wouldn't believe, via M, that p 
(179), 
where "M' is the method by which S has come to 
believe that P.9 
Unlike Nozick, I'm not presenting an analysis 
of propositional knowledge. But his grandmother 
case also seems to be an exception to the general 
inclination SeA appeals to: Here we're not at all 
inclined to think the grandmother doesn't know 
her grandson is well, even though it can seem that 
if he weren't well, she would still believe he was. 
The generalization seA utilizes says that we tend 
to judge that S doesn't know where S does not sat-
isfy Nozick's third condition for knowledge. One 
possibility here is to follow Nozick very closely by 
modifying that generalization so that it refers to 
Nozick's modified, rather than his original, third 
condition, and thus, like Nozick, explicitly relativ-
izing our account to the method by which S 
believes that P. 
Often, though, context takes care of this for us. 
Even to one aware of the likelihood that the 
grandmother's family would have kept her in the 
dark about her grandson's condition were he not 
well, it can seem that even Nozick's initial formu-
lation of the third condition for knowledge is met 
by the grandmother. On one way of evaluating 
that simple conditional, it seems that if the grand-
son were not well, the grandmother would not 
believe he was well. After all, she's looking right at 
him! The standard possible-worlds semantics for 
counterfactual conditionals can illuminate what's 
going on here. When one searches for the possible 
worlds most similar to the actual world in which 
the grandson is not well, the respects in which the 
possible worlds are to resemble the actual world is 
a highly context -sensitive matter. Especially where 
the context focuses one's attention on the grand-
mother and her cognitive and recognitional abili-
ties, one can place heavy weight upon similarity 
with respect to the method she is using to arrive 
at her belief, and then it can seem that in the clos-
est world in which the grandson is not well, she's 
looking right at him and seeing that he's not well, 
and so does not believe he is well. On this way of 
evaluating the conditional, the grandmother does 
satisfy even the initial formulation of Nozick's 
third condition, and she's no counter-example 

674 
KEITH DEROSE 
to the generalization utilized by SCA. But, in 
evaluating that simple conditional, one can also 
stress other similarities, particularly ones involv-
ing the propensities and plans of the various 
family members (or whatever facts ground the 
judgment that if her grandson weren't well, the 
grandmother would be effectively lied to), to 
reach the verdict that if he were not well, she 
would believe that he was well. 
We can sharpen SCA by specifying that we 
tend to judge that S doesn't know when she fails 
to satisfy Nozick's initial formulation of (3), 
where (3) is evaluated in such a way that heavy 
emphasis is put upon similarity with respect to 
the method of belief formation utilized by S, or, 
following Nozick, we can insert a specification of 
the method into the antecedent of (3).10 But in 
neither case is this to make a very precise modifi-
cation; rather, it merely indicates the direction in 
which a more precise account might lie, for any 
such use of the notion of methods of belief forma-
tion in our account invites a host of questions 
(many of which Nozick wrestles with) involving 
how such methods are to be specified and indi-
viduated. 
5 
SeA and Some Skeptical Hypotheses 
That Don't Work 
Certain instances of AI aren't very persuasive. The 
first premise of the argument can be quite uncon-
vincing despite the fact that SCA predicts that 
we'd find it plausible. Suppose, for instance, that 
in an attempt to show by AI that I don't know I 
have hands, a skeptic utilizes, instead of the BIV 
hypothesis, the following simple H: I falsely 
believe that I have hands. The resulting instance 
of AI seems to pack little or no more punch than 
a simple skeptic's unsupported claim that I don't 
know I have hands. It's at the first premise that 
this ill-fated instance of AI fizzles. But my belief 
that I don't falsely believe that I have hands is 
insensitive: If this belief were false (if! did falsely 
believe that I have hands) I would still believe it 
was true (I'd still believe that I don't falsely believe 
that I have hands). Likewise insensitive is my 
belief that the following hypothesis is false: I'm an 
intelligent dog who's always incorrectly thinking 
that I have hands. If this belief of mine were false 
(if I were such a deluded intelligent dog) I'd still 
believe it was true (I'd still believe that I wasn't 
such a creature). So SCA, as it has so far been for-
mulated, predicts that it will seem to us that the 
above beliefs don't amount to knowledge and that 
we'll find plausible the first premise of AI that 
results when the above hypotheses are used. But 
in fact these instances of AI's first premise are far 
from convincing. As opposed to the BIV hypoth-
esis, it seems that one does know that the deluded 
dog hypothesis and the simple false belief hypo-
thesis are false. 
Again, the main point to make here is that 
SCA's generalization needn't be exceptionless 
to be explanatory. While a more precisely 
Chisholmed refinement of SCA might not have 
the negations of these ineffective H's as instances 
of those propositions it says we tend to judge we 
don't know, I'll here just make a preliminary 
observation as to what might be going wrong. 
Part of the problem with these "hypotheses" is 
that they don't give us much of an idea of how I 
come to have the false belief they assign to me. 
Hypotheses are supposed to explain; skeptical 
hypotheses should explain how we might come to 
believe something despite its being false. The first 
of these hypotheses simply stipulates that I'm 
wrong about my having hands, without indicat-
ing how I came to be so sadly mistaken. The 
second adds to the first that I'm a dog, which adds 
little to our understanding of how my mistake 
about having hands came about. By contrast, 
when we encounter effective skeptical hypotheses, 
we have some understanding of how (if H is true) 
we have come to falsely believe that o. If either of 
our ineffective hypotheses is filled in so as to make 
it clear to us how I came to falsely believe I have 
hands, it becomes effective. 
SCA's generalization was this: We tend to judge 
that S doesn't know that P when we think that S's 
belief that P is insensitive (when we think that S 
would believe P even if P were false). The limita-
tion of SCA's generalization that's suggested by 
these cases is this: We don't so judge ourselves 
ignorant of P where not-P implies something we 
take ourselves to know to be false, without pro-
viding an explanation of how we came to falsely 
believe this thing we think we know. Thus, I falsely 
believe that I have hands implies that I don't have 
hands. Since I do take myself to know that I have 
hands (this belief isn't insensitive), and since the 
above italicized proposition doesn't explain how I 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
675 
went wrong with respect to my having hands, I'll 
judge that I do know that proposition to be false. 
But this again is just a preliminary statement, and 
there's room for a lot more refinement here. What 
we need now is some assurance that we're headed 
in the right direction. 
6 SCA Confirmed 
Such assurance is to be found by considering 
what it would take to make it seem to us that we 
do know skeptical hypotheses to be false. 
But let's first reconsider the lottery case. As 
noted above in section 3, we are puzzling reluc-
tant to claim knowledge in certain lottery situa-
tions. The explanation provided by SeA for this 
phenomenon is intuitively appealing: It does 
seem that the fact that we would believe that we 
were losers even if we were winners is largely 
what's behind our judgment that we don't know 
we're losers. SeA receives further powerful sup-
port when we consider the grounds that do seem 
to us sufficient for knowledge of one's being a 
loser. In the lottery situation, even a very minute 
chance of being wrong seems to deprive one of 
knowledge. But if we're going to worry about 
even such minute chances of error, then why does 
it seem that you do know you're a loser after the 
winning number has been announced on the radio 
and you've compared the numbers on your ticket 
with the sadly different numbers announced? 
After all, radio announcements can be in error; 
what you're hearing may not be a real radio 
announcement but the voice of a friend who's 
rigged up a practical joke; you might be suffering 
from some weird momentary visual illusion and 
misreading the numbers on your ticket; and so 
forth. All very remote possibilities, to be sure. But, 
since we're already countenancing even the most 
minute chances of error, why don't these possi-
bilities rob us of knowledge even after the 
announcement has been made and heard? 
SeA's explanation of why we don't think we 
know before the announcement is made is that we 
at that time judge that if we weren't losers, we'd 
still believe that we were. Note that once you've 
heard the announcement of the winning num-
bers and compared them with the numbers on 
your ticket, it no longer seems that if you had been 
the winner, you'd believe you were a loser. Rather, 
we judge that in that case you'd now believe you 
were the winner or would at least be suspending 
judgment as you frantically double-checked the 
match. It's very impressive that the very occur-
rence that would suffice to make it seem to us that 
you do know you're a loser (the radio announce-
ment) also reverses our judgment regarding the 
truth of the conditional appealed to in SeA to 
explain why it seems to us that you don't know 
before the announcement is made. The occur-
rence which gets us to judge that we know here 
also removes what seA posits as the block to our 
judging that we know. This is an indication that 
seA has correctly identified the block. 
SeA similarly provides a very intuitively 
appealing explanation for why it seems to us that 
we don't know that skeptical hypotheses are false, 
as was also noted in section 3. It again receives 
powerful further confirmation as we look to cases 
in which one seemingly does know that a skepti-
cal hypothesis doesn't obtain (cases in which 
skeptical hypotheses that are ordinarily effective 
fail to be effective). The boastful zoologist I have 
introduced elsewhere [who invokes his extensive 
knowledge of zebra and mule anatomy 1, it seems, 
knows that the animals in the zebra cage are not 
cleverly painted mules, while I, it seems, do not. 
But the very anatomical knowledge that seem-
ingly enables him to know they're not painted 
mules also has the consequence that if the ani-
mals were cleverly painted mules, the zoologist, 
unlike me, would not believe that they weren't. 
And although I don't seem to know they're not 
painted mules simply by looking at them, I could, 
it seems, get to know this if I undertook some 
special investigation - perhaps, as has been sug-
gested in the literature (Stine 1976, p. 252), one 
involving paint remover. Which special investiga-
tions would do the trick (and under which cir-
cumstances would they)? A survey of various 
scenarios yields an impressive correlation: The 
investigations that would seemingly allow me to 
know that the animals aren't painted mules would 
also affect our judgment as to the truth value of 
the subjunctive conditional so critical to SeA. 
Once I have completed the investigation, it seems 
that I, like the zoologist, would not believe that 
the animals weren't painted mules if in fact they 
were. Likewise, by checking appropriately inde-
pendent sources, I could get myself into a posi-
tion in which I seemingly would know that the 

676 
KEITH DEROSE 
newspaper isn't mistaken about whether the Bulls 
won last night. But the checks that would seem-
ingly allow this knowledge would also make it 
seem that if the paper were mistaken, I would not 
believe it wasn't. Again and again, SeA posits a 
certain block to our judging that we know, and 
the changes that would clear the way for our judg-
ing that we know also remove this block. This 
makes it difficult not to believe that seA is at least 
roughly correct. 
In the case of the BIV hypothesis, it's hard to 
test seA in this way, for it's difficult to imagine a 
situation in which it seems a subject does know 
that she's not a BIY. But this only confirms seA: 
While it's difficult to imagine a situation in which 
one seems to know that one's not a BIV, it's like-
wise difficult to imagine circumstances in which 
the block SeA posits is removed. It's difficult, that 
is, to imagine a situation in which someone 
believes they're not a ElV but in which the condi-
tional If 5 were a BIV, then 5 would believe she 
wasn't a BIV isn't true. For, as the BIV hypothesis 
is formulated, one's brain is electrochemically 
stimulated so that one has precisely those sensory 
experiences one actually has had. But wouldn't 
one then have formed precisely those beliefs that 
one actually has formed, including the belief that 
one's not a ElV? 
It seems that this explanation, SeA, for the 
plausibility of AI's first premise must be (at least 
roughly) correct and, therefore, that it points to 
part of the solution to our puzzle. 
Indeed, some readers will wonder why I have 
claimed only that our general tendency not to 
count insensitive beliefs as instances of knowl-
edge explains that premise's plausibility and have 
stopped short of accepting sensitivity as a neces-
sary condition for knowledge ll and therefore 
simply endorsing that first premise as true. But 
while we've just seen strong grounds for simply 
accepting AI's first premise, there are also strong 
grounds for accepting AI's second premise and 
for accepting the denial of its conclusion. We have 
to stop short somewhere; we can't simply accept 
all three members of this triad as true. To solve 
this puzzle, I'll claim that AI's first premise, while 
not simply true, is true according to unusually 
high standards for knowledge. But, I'll argue, my 
solution explains why that premise seems true 
and, more generally, why sensitivity seems neces-
sary for knowledge. If my solution provides the 
best explanation for how all three members of 
our puzzling triad seem true, that will be good 
reason for stopping short where my solution tells 
us to, rather than where one of its inferior rivals -
bold skepticism, for example - tells us to. 
7 Nozick's Own Solution and the 
Abominable Conjunction 
Nozick's own treatment of AI, from which seA 
was abstracted, fails. This treatment is based on 
Nozick's account of knowledge as true, sensitive 
belief, where, very roughly, one's true belief that 
P is sensitive to the truth value of P if one would 
not have believed that P if P had been false. l2 
Thus, Nozick's treatment of AI involves accept-
ing the skeptic's first premise. But, at the same 
time, and much more unfortunately, it also 
involves denying the second. You don't know that 
you're not a ElV, Nozick claims, because any 
belief you might have to this effect is insensitive: 
You would have held this belief even if it were 
false (even if you were a BIV). By contrast, Nozick 
claims, your belief that you have hands is a sensi-
tive belief: If it were false - if you didn't have 
hands - you would not hold it. So you do know 
you have hands even though you don't know that 
you're not a BIY. The skeptic's mistake - the 
second premise - is supposing that you can know 
you have hands only if you also know that you're 
not a BIV. 
Or so Nozick claims. This is not the place for a 
general evaluation of Nozick's analysis of propo-
sitional knowledge, so let us confine ourselves to 
the results of this analysis as applied to the beliefs 
in question in AI. Here Nozick's account does 
very well in issuing the intuitively correct verdict 
for the relevant particular judgments regarding 
what is known and what is not. Most of us would 
judge that we do know such things as that we have 
hands, and this is Nozick's verdict. And, when a 
skeptical hypothesis is well chosen, it does seem 
quite plausible to most of us that we don't know 
that it doesn't obtain. But there are three relevant 
issues to our puzzle: Is the first premise of AI 
true? Is the second premise true? Is the conclu-
sion true? And it's easy to endorse the intuitively 
correct answer to two out of the three questions if 
you're willing to take the implausible stand on the 
remaining one. 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
677 
Nozick takes his implausible stand on the issue 
of the second premise, denying it in the face of its 
evident intuitive appealY Accepting his treat-
ment involves embracing the abominable con-
junction that while you don't know you're not a 
bodiless (and handless!) BIV, still, you know you 
have hands. Thus, while his account does quite 
well on the relevant particular intuitions regard-
ing what is and isn't known, it yields an intuitively 
bizarre result on the comparative judgment the 
second premise embodies. 14 
As promised, I won't here rehearse the power-
ful objections to Nozick's analysis of proposi-
tional knowledge that have been put forward, 15 
but, assuming that this analysis isn't independ-
ently convincing before we turn to the problem of 
skeptical hypotheses, 16 we're left with little reason 
to follow Nozick in choosing to take an implausi-
ble stand precisely where he has rather than 
someplace else. 
This leaves us in a bind. For, as we saw in sec-
tions 3 and 6 above, SCA is quite powerful. That 
explanation is that we realize that any belief we 
might have to the effect that an (effective) skepti-
cal hypothesis doesn't obtain is insensitive, and 
we're inclined to think that insensitive beliefs 
don't constitute knowledge. How can we appro-
priate that explanation without following Nozick 
in having to implausibly deny the second premise 
of AI and embrace the abominable conjunction? 
8 Strength of Epistemic Position and AI's 
Second Premise 
Here's how: by incorporating SCA into a contex-
tualist solution to our puzzle that avoids such a 
fumbling of AI's second premise. Indeed, I pro-
pose a very strong endorsement of that second 
premise. 
Recall that according to contextualist theories 
of knowledge attributions, how strong a subject's 
epistemic position must be to make true a speak-
er's attribution of knowledge to that subject is a 
flexible matter that can vary according to features 
of the speaker's conversational context. Central to 
contextualism, then, is the notion of (relative) 
strength of epistemic position. In presenting and 
defending contextualism, I've found that most 
listeners feel that they understand pretty well 
what's meant when I claim, for instance, that 
sometimes the standards for knowledge are higher 
than usual, or that in some conversational situa-
tions one's epistemic position must be stronger 
than in others to count as knowing. But it would 
be good to clarify this important notion of 
strength of epistemic position as best we can by, 
for instance, supplying an intuitive test for when 
one epistemic position is stronger than another. 
The best such device is that of comparative condi-
tionals. One can have a variety of grounds for 
assenting to conditionals like If Mugsy is tall, then 
Wilt is tall, and If Wilt is not tall, then Mugsy is not 
tall. But one very good basis for assenting to these 
conditionals is the comparative knowledge that 
Wilt is at least as tall as Mugsy. Likewise, where S 
is a putative subject of knowledge, P is a true 
proposition that S believes, and A and B are situ-
ations in which S is found, we can have similarly 
comparative grounds for assenting to condition-
als of the form If S knows that P in A, then S knows 
that P in B. In such a case, the comparative 
grounds for our assent is our realization that S is 
in at least as strong an epistemic position with 
respect to P in situation B as he is in with respect 
to that same proposition in situation A, and this 
comparative conditional serves as a good intui-
tive test for that comparative fact: It brings that 
fact to light. 
So, for instance, to borrow some examples 
from Alvin Goldman (1976), let Henry be our 
subject, and let What Henry is seeing is a barn be 
the thing Henry putatively knows. Both in situa-
tion F (for "fakes") and in situation N ("no 
fakes"), Henry is driving through the countryside 
and, having no reason to think there's anything 
unusual going on, very firmly believes, and takes 
himself to know, that the object he's seeing is a 
barn. And indeed, in both cases, it is a barn. But in 
F, unbeknownst to him, Henry is in an area that is 
filled with very convincing fake barns - papier-
mache barn fac;:ades. In fact, we may suppose that 
Henry has just been fooled more than twenty 
times by such fakes, although he's now looking at 
the only actual barn for miles around, and so this 
time truly believes that what he's seeing is a barn. 
N is exactly like F, except that there are no fakes in 
the area - the things Henry has taken to be barns 
have all actually been barns. With regard to these 
examples, the conditional If Henry knows in F, 
then he knows in N seems to get the comparison 
right, indicating that Henry's in at least as strong 

678 
KEITH DEROSE 
an epistemic position in situation N as he is in 
situation F. The evident failure of If Henry knows 
in N, then he knows in F to get the comparison 
right shows that Henry's not in as strong a posi-
tion to know in F as in N. Together, these results 
indicate that Henry's in a stronger epistemic posi-
tion in N than in F. 
As is important to our discussion of AI's second 
premise, comparative conditionals can similarly 
be used to test the relative strength of epistemic 
position of a single subject with respect to different 
propositions that subject believes in the same situa-
tion: Thus, the intuitive correctness of If S knows 
that P, then S knows that Q and If S doesn't know 
that Q then S doesn't know that P can indicate that 
S is in at least as strong an epistemic position with 
respect to Q as she's in with respect to P.17 
Sometimes no clear verdict results when we 
attempt to evaluate a conditional in this compar-
ative way, for the good reason that it's unclear 
how the two epistemic positions we're evaluating 
compare with one another. Thus, if we compare a 
situation in which Henry has a good look at the 
barn but in which there are a couple of fake barns 
several miles away that Henry hasn't encountered 
with a situation in which there are no fakes at all 
in Henry's vicinity but in which he doesn't have 
quite as good a look at the barn, the relevant con-
ditionals can be difficult to evaluate. But, in many 
instances, some of the relevant conditionals are 
clearly true on comparative grounds. 
Such is the case with instances of AI's second 
premise, where the skeptical hypothesis is well 
chosen. They seem true and are true, I suggest, for 
just this comparative reason: As we realize, we are 
in at least as good a position to know that the 
hypothesis is false as we're in to know the targeted 
piece of presumed ordinary knowledge. 18 Let's look 
briefly at some instances. Recall the following epis-
temologically perplexing pairs of propositions: 
not-H 
I'm not a BIV. 
Those animals 
aren't just cleverly 
painted mules. 
o 
I have hands. 
Those animals are zebras. 
The paper isn't 
The Bulls won last night. 
mistaken about 
whether the Bulls 
won last night. 
Given natural background assumptions, we can 
sense that the following comparative fact holds 
for each of the above pairs: I am in no better a 
position to know that 0 than I am in to know that 
not-H. This comparative fact is revealed in each 
case by the highly plausible conditional that is 
AI's second premise: If I don't know that not-H, 
then I don't know that O. Closely tied to that 
comparative fact in each case is the related and 
intuitively compelling realization that it would be 
no wiser to bet one's immortal soul on O's being 
true than to bet it on not-Hs being true. 
I propose then to accept the relevant condi-
tional with respect to each of the above pairs, and 
to accept other convincing instances of AI's 
second premise. Indeed, these conditionals are 
true regardless of how high or low the standards for 
knowledge are set. Just as the comparative fact that 
Wilt is at least as tall as Mugsy has the result that 
the conditional If Wilt is not tall, then Mugsy is not 
tall will be true regardless of how high or low the 
standards for tallness are set so the comparative 
fact that I'm in at least as strong an epistemic 
position with respect to not-H as I'm in with 
respect to 0 will result in If I don't know that not-
H, then I don't know that 0 being true regardless 
of how high or low the standards for knowledge 
are set. Thus, we will never have to follow Nozick 
in accepting the abominable conjunction: that 
conjunction is false at any epistemic standard. 
With that ringing endorsement of AI's second 
premise anchored firmly in place, we can return 
to the first premise, hoping to incorporate SCA 
into a contextualist account of that premise's 
plausibility. 
9 
Strength and Sensitivity 
As has become very apparent, two notions that 
are central to my attempt to solve our puzzle are, 
on the one hand, the Nozickean notion of the 
sensitivity of beliefs and, on the other, the notion 
of strength of epistemic position. While both 
notions stand in need of a good deal of sharpen-
ing and explanation (only some of which they'll 
receive here), we've already obtained interesting 
results applying them to the epistemologically 
perplexing pairs of propositions displayed above. 
In each case, one's belief in 0 is sensitive, while 
one's belief in not-H is insensitive. Yet, at the 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
679 
same time, one is in at least as strong an epis-
temic position with respect to not-H as one is in 
with respect to O. 
For each of the second and third pairs of prop-
ositions, one could gather further evidence, 
strengthen one's epistemic position with respect 
to both not-H and 0, and make even one's belief 
that not-H sensitive. But even before this further 
evidence is gathered, one's belief that 0 is already 
sensitive, despite the fact that one is in no stronger 
an epistemic position with respect to this 0 than 
one is in with respect to not-H. (With respect to 
the first pair of propositions, it is difficult to 
imagine a situation in which one is in such a 
strong position with respect to one's not being a 
ElV that this belief is sensitive.) 
This leads us to an important insight regard-
ing skeptical hypotheses: One's epistemic posi-
tion with respect to propositions to the effect that 
skeptical hypotheses don't hold must be stronger 
than it is with respect to other, more ordinary 
propositions (e.g., our above Os) if belief in such 
propositions is to be sensitive. 
An explanation of our two central notions in 
terms of possible worlds will provide a partial and 
quite rough-and-ready, but still somewhat 
enlightening, picture of how this situation can 
arise. An important component of being in a 
strong epistemic position with respect to P is to 
have one's belief as to whether P is true match the 
fact of the matter as to whether P is true, not only 
in the actual world, but also at the worlds suffi-
ciently close to the actual world. That is, one's 
belief should not only be true, but should be non-
accidentally true, where this requires one's belief 
as to whether P is true to match the fact of the 
matter at nearby worlds. The further away one 
can get from the actual world, while still having it 
be the case that one's belief matches the fact at 
worlds that far away and closer, the stronger a 
position one is in with respect to P. (Recalling the 
results of section 4, we should remember either to 
restrict our attention solely to those worlds in 
which the subject uses the same method of belief-
formation she uses in the actual world, or to 
weigh similarity with respect to the subject's 
method very heavily in determining the closeness 
of possible worlds to the actual world.) If the 
truth-tracking of one's belief as to whether P 
extends far enough from actuality to reach the 
closest not -P worlds, then one doesn't believe that 
P in those closest not-P worlds, and one's belief 
that P is sensitive. But how far from actuality 
must truth-tracking reach - how strong an epis-
temic position must one be in - to make one's 
belief that P sensitive? That, of course, depends 
on how distant from actuality the closest not-P 
worlds are. 
Consider my belief that I have hands. I believe 
this at the actual world, and it's true. What's more, 
in the other nearby worlds in which I have hands, 
I believe that I do. There are also, at least in my 
own case, some alarmingly close worlds in which 
I don't have hands. These include worlds in which 
I lost my hands years ago while working on my 
uncle's garbage truck. In the closest of these not-P 
worlds, I'm now fully aware of the fact that I'm 
handless, and my belief as to whether I have hands 
matches the fact of the matter. My belief as to 
whether I have hands doesn't match the fact in 
various worlds in which I'm a BIV, of course, but 
these are very distant. While there are closer 
worlds in which the match fails, it seems that in a 
fairly wide range of worlds surrounding the actual 
world, my belief as to whether I have hands does 
a good job of matching the fact of the matter. 
Thus, I'm in a pretty strong epistemic position 
with respect to that matter. 
Now let Pbe I'm nota ElV. Where not-P (here, 
I am a ElV) is quite remote, one can be in a quite 
strong epistemic position with respect to P merely 
by believing that P in all the nearby worlds. As I 
do believe this P in such nearby worlds, I'm in a 
pretty strong epistemic position with respect to 
this P. This can occur, and in my case, does occur, 
even though one's belief as to whether P doesn't 
match the fact of the matter in the closest not-P 
worlds: Since even the closest of the not -P worlds 
are quite distant, one's belief as to whether P 
needn't match the fact of the matter that far from 
the actual world for one to be in a quite strong 
position with respect to P. 
But for one's belief that P to be sensitive, one 
must not believe that P in the closest not -P worlds. 
Since skeptical hypotheses tend to fasten on 
somewhat remote (and sometimes very remote) 
possibilities, then, one can be in a relatively (and 
sometimes a very) strong position with respect to 
beliefs to the effect that they don't obtain (since 
one's belief as to whether they obtain matches the 
fact of the matter over a wide range of worlds 
closest to the actual world), while these beliefs 

680 
KEITH DEROSE 
remain insensitive (since one would still believe 
that the hypotheses didn't obtain in the closest 
worlds in which they do obtain). By contrast, 
where P is such that there are both P and not-P 
worlds very close to the actual world, one's belief 
that P must be sensitive (one must not believe 
that P in the closest not-P worlds) in order for 
one to be in even a minimally strong epistemic 
position with respect to P, and, conversely, one 
needn't be in a very strong position for one's 
belief to be sensitive. 
10 
The Rule of Sensitivity and the 
Beginnings of a New Contextualist 
Solution 
The important insight regarding skeptical 
hypotheses - that one's epistemic position with 
respect to propositions to the effect that skeptical 
hypotheses don't hold must be stronger than it is 
with respect to other propositions before beliefs 
in such propositions can be sensitive - suggests a 
new contextualist account of how, in presenting 
AI, the skeptic raises the standards for knowledge. 
Let's call the conversational rule this new account 
posits as the mechanism by which the skeptic 
raises the standards for knowledge the "Rule of 
Sensitivity." Although a more general formula-
tion of this rule is desirable, I will here state it in 
such a way that it applies only to attributions (and 
denials) of knowledge, since such applications are 
what's needed to address the present puzzle. 19 So 
limited, our rule is simply this: When it is asserted 
that some subject S knows (or does not know) 
some proposition P, the standards for knowledge 
(the standards for how good an epistemic posi-
tion one must be in to count as knowing) tend to 
be raised, if need be, to such a level as to require 
S's belief in that particular P to be sensitive for it 
to count as knowledge. Where the P involved is to 
the effect that a skeptical hypothesis does not 
obtain, then this rule dictates that the standards 
will be raised to a quite high level, for, as we've 
seen, one must be in a stronger epistemic position 
with respect to a proposition stating that a skepti-
cal hypothesis is false - relative to other, more 
ordinary, propositions - before a belief in such a 
proposition can be sensitive. 
A story in terms of possible worlds again 
provides a rough-and-ready, but still perhaps 
enlightening, picture of how the Rule of 
Sensitivity operates. Context, I've said, deter-
mines how strong an epistemic position one 
must be in to count as knowing. Picture this 
requirement as a contextually determined sphere 
of possible worlds, centered on the actual world, 
within which a subject's belief as to whether P is 
true must match the fact of the matter in order 
for the subject to count as knowing. (Given the 
results of section 4, we must again remember 
either to restrict our attention solely to those 
worlds in which the subject uses the same method 
of belief formation she uses in the actual world, 
or to weigh similarity with respect to the subject's 
method very heavily in determining the closeness 
of possible worlds to the actual world.) Call this 
sphere the sphere of epistemically relevant 
worlds. As the standards for knowledge go up, the 
sphere of epistemically relevant worlds becomes 
larger - the truth-tracking of one's belief must 
extend further from actuality for one to count as 
knowing. Given this picture, the Rule of 
Sensitivity can be formulated as follows: When 
it's asserted that S knows (or doesn't know) that 
P, then, if necessary, enlarge the sphere of epis-
temically relevant worlds so that it at least 
includes the closest worlds in which P is false. 
A powerful solution to our puzzle results when 
we follow the basic contextualist strategy (see sec-
tion 2) and utilize this Rule of Sensitivity to 
explain how the standards for knowledge are 
raised by the skeptic's presentation of AI. While 
many noteworthy features and virtues of this 
solution are best explained by comparing it with 
the other proposed solutions to our puzzle, as I'll 
do in following sections, the basic idea of the 
present solution is this. In utilizing AI to attack 
our putative knowledge of 0, the skeptic instinc-
tively chooses her skeptical hypothesis, H, so that 
it will have these two features: (1) We will be in at 
least as strong a position to know that not-H as 
we're in to know that 0, but (2) Any belief we 
might have to the effect that not-H will be an 
insensitive belief (a belief we would hold even if 
not-H were false - that is, even if H were true). 
Given feature (2), the skeptic's assertion that we 
don't know that not -H, by the Rule of Sensitivity, 
drives the standards for knowledge up to such a 
point as to make that assertion true. By the Rule 
of Sensitivity, recall, the standards for knowledge 
are raised to such a level as to require our belief 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
681 
that not-H to be sensitive before it can count as 
knowledge. Since our belief that not -H isn't sensi-
tive (feature (2) ), the standards are driven up to 
such a level that we don't count as knowing that 
not-H. And since we're in no stronger an epis-
temic position with respect to 0 than we're in 
with respect to not-H (feature (1)), then, at the 
high standards put in place by the skeptic's asser-
tion of AI's first premise, we also fail to know that 
o. At these high standards, the skeptic truthfully 
asserts her second premise (which, recall, is also 
true at lower standards), and then truthfully 
asserts AI's conclusion that we don't know that 
0.20 This accounts for the persuasiveness of AI. 
But since, on this account, the skeptic gets to 
truthfully state her conclusion only by raising the 
standards for knowledge, AI doesn't threaten the 
truth of our ordinary claims to know the very Os 
our knowledge of which the skeptic attacks. For 
the fact that the skeptic can install very high 
standards that we don't live up to has no tendency 
to show that we don't satisfy the more relaxed 
standards that are in place in more ordinary con-
versations and debates. 
11 
Our New Contextualist Solution 
Clarified and Compared with the 
Straightforward Solution 
The puzzle of skeptical hypotheses, recall, con-
cerns the premises of AI together with the nega-
tion of its conclusion: 
1. I don't know that not-H. 
2. If I don't know that not-H, then I 
don't know that o. 
not-G. I do know that o. 
A solution to the puzzle must, of course, issue a ver-
dict as to the truth of each of these three, but it must 
also explain why we find all of them plausible. 
Let's be clear about what our present contex-
tualist solution has to say about each of these. 
Our verdict regarding (2) is that it's true regard-
less of what epistemic standard it's evaluated at, 
so its plausibility is easily accounted for. But this, 
combined with a similarly enthusiastic endorse-
ment of (1), would land us in bold skepticism. We 
avoid that fate by endorsing (1) as true, not at all 
standards, but only at the unusually inflated 
standards conducive to skepticism. Thus, on our 
solution, we do know, for instance, that we're not 
BIV s, according to ordinary low standards for 
knowledge. But, though (1) is false when evalu-
ated according to those ordinary low standards, 
we're able to explain its plausibility, as we've seen, 
by means of the fact that the high standards at 
which (1) is true are precisely the standards that 
an assertion or denial of it put into play. Since 
attempts to assert (1) are bound to result in truth, 
and attempts to deny it are destined to produce 
falsehood,2! it's no surprise that we find it so 
plausible. 
But what of (not-C)? On the present solution, 
claims to know ordinary propositions are true 
according to ordinary low standards but false 
according to the highly inflated standards that, by 
the Rule of Sensitivity, are put in place by the 
assertion of (1). (Not-C) seems plausible because 
it's true when evaluated at the standards most 
normally applied to it. But, it will be asked, why 
do we find these claims to know plausible even 
when we're in a context in which the skeptic has 
raised the standards to such a level that these 
claims are false? A little caution is in order here. 
It's controversial just how intuitively correct (not-
C) does seem to us in such a context. Most of us 
feel some ambivalence. Such ambivalence is to be 
expected whenever we're dealing with a puzzle 
consisting of mutually inconsistent propositions, 
all of which are individually plausible. For when 
the propositions are considered together, one will 
have this good reason for doubting each of them: 
that the others seem true. And it's difficult to dis-
tinguish the doubt of (not-C) that arises from 
this very general source (that its falsehood follows 
from other things one finds plausible) from that 
which arises from the fact that the standards are 
high. At any rate, the very strong pull that (not-C) 
continues to exert on (at least most of) us even 
when the standards are high is explained in the 
manner outlined in section 2: Even while we're in 
a context governed by high standards at which we 
don't count as knowing that 0, we at the same 
time realize that as soon as we find ourselves in 
more ordinary conversational contexts, it will not 
only be true for us to claim to know these very Os 
that the skeptic now denies we know, but it will 
also be wrong for us to deny that we know these 
things. It's easy, then, to think that the skeptic's 
present denial must be equally false and that it 

682 
KEITH DEROSE 
would be equally true for us now, in the skeptic's 
presence, to claim to know that O. 
The verdicts the present solution issues regard-
ing the truth values of the members of the triad 
are complicated by the fact that ours is a contex-
tualist solution. Only (2) receives the same verdict 
regardless of what the epistemic standards are; 
the truth values of (1) and (not-C) vary with con-
text. It's just this variance that our solution so 
essentially relies on in explaining how we fall into 
our puzzling conflict of intuitions. Noncon-
textualist (henceforth, "straightforward") solu-
tions, on the other hand, must choose one of the 
members of this triad to deny, claiming this loser 
to be false according to the invariant epistemic 
standards that govern all attributions and denials 
of knowledge: The "Moorean" solution in this 
way denies (1),22 the "Nozickean" (2), and the 
"Bold Skeptical" solution thus denies (not-C), 
accepting that we speak falsely whenever, even in 
ordinary, nonphilosophical discussions, we claim 
to know the 0 in question. 
From the perspective of our present contextu-
alist solution, each of these straightforward solu-
tions results in part, of course, from a failure to 
see the truth of contextualism. But which straight-
forward solution an invariantist confusedly 
adopts will depend on the standards that domi-
nate her evaluation of our beliefs in 0 and in not-
H. If her evaluation is dominated by the relatively 
low standards that govern our ordinary, out-on-
the-street talk of knowledge, she will end up a 
Moorean. If she evaluates the beliefs in question 
according to the high standards that are put into 
place by the skeptic's presentation of AI, bold 
skepticism is the result. The Nozickean solution 
ensues from evaluating each belief according to 
the standards that would most often be used in 
evaluating that belief. For reasons we've seen, a 
claim to know (or an admission that one doesn't 
know) that a skeptical hypothesis is false will, by 
the Rule of Sensitivity, tend to invite a very high 
reading, at which the admission is true and the 
claim is false. But a claim to know that 0 doesn't 
so demand a high reading. From the present per-
spective, the Nozickean is reacting to the fact that 
one can usually truthfully claim that one does 
know that 0 and can usually truthfully claim not 
to know that not-H. What the Nozickean misses 
is how difficult it is to make these two claims 
together: once you have admitted that you don't 
know that not-H, it seems the reverse of intui-
tively correct to claim to know that 0, at least 
until the conversational air is cleared. 
To succeed, a straightforward solution must 
explain what leads our intuitions astray with 
respect to the unlucky member of the triad which 
that solution denies. Otherwise, we'll have little 
reason for denying just that member of the triad. 
Nozick himself provides no such explanation 
with respect to (2), parenthetically leaving this 
vital task to "further exploration;'23 and other 
Nozickeans, if any there be, have not, to the best 
of my knowledge, progressed any farther along 
this front. Mooreans, to the best of my knowl-
edge, have fared no better in explaining why we're 
so reluctant to claim the status of knowledge for 
our insensitive beliefs. It's the defenders of bold 
skepticism who've made the most progress here. 
In the remaining sections, I'll explain why our 
contextualist solution is superior to that of the 
bold skeptic. 
12 
Bold Skepticism and the Warranted 
Assertability Maneuver 
Almost of all of the time, it seems to almost all 
of us that we do know the Os that the skeptic 
claims we don't know. According to the bold 
skeptic, whenever we say or think that we know 
these things, we say or think something false. 
The bold skeptic thus implicates us, speakers of 
English, in systematic and widespread falsehood 
in our use, in speech and in thought, of our very 
common word "know." Equally paradoxically, 
the bold skeptic holds that we're speaking the 
truth whenever we say that someone doesn't 
know these Os, even though it seems to most of 
us that we'd then be saying something quite 
false. What leads us astray? Peter Unger and 
Barry Stroud have suggested on behalf of bold 
skepticism that although we don't know these 
Os, it's often useful for us to claim that we do 
know them, and we are therefore often war-
ranted or justified in making such claims. What 
then leads us astray is this: We mistake this 
useful! justified/warran ted assertability ofknowl-
edge ascriptions for truth.24 On the other side of 
the coin, presumably, we're mistaking the useless/ 
unwarranted/unjustified assertability of denials 
of knowledge for falsehood. 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
683 
Two 
serious problems emerge for 
the 
bold skeptic at this point. The first is that such 
"warranted assertability maneuvers" could be 
attempted by advocates of the other solutions as 
well. Warranted assertability indeed can be mis-
taken for truth, and unwarranted assertability 
for falsehood, but this by itself does not favor 
the bold skeptic's solution over the other 
straightforward 
approaches. 
Each 
of the 
straightforward approaches denies a member of 
the triad constituting our puzzle, and each it 
seems could claim that the reason this loser 
they've chosen seems true, though it's in fact 
false, is that we're often warranted in asserting 
it, and we mistake this warranted assertability 
for truth. Thus, the Moorean, for instance, could 
claim that although we do indeed know that H is 
false, we're not warranted in claiming that we 
know this (though this claim would be true), 
but are rather warranted in saying that we don't 
know (though this latter is false). Simply attrib-
uting apparent truth to warranted assertability 
is a game almost any party to this dispute can 
fairly easily play.25 That this line of thought 
would eventually work out any better for the 
bold skeptic than for his opponents would take 
some showing. 26 
It's at (1) that the skeptic has his best hope of 
gaining an advantage over my solution, for that 
premise indeed does seem true, and, unlike the 
skeptic, I've stopped short of fully endorsing it, 
making do with an explanation of its plausibility. 
But the skeptic's other problem lurks here. 
Usually, while solving a philosophical puzzle con-
sisting of a set of individually plausible but mutu-
ally inconsistent claims, one only has to explain 
(away) the plausibility of those members of the 
set one denies, and one is relieved of the burden 
of explaining the plausibility of those members 
that one endorses, their truth and our ability to 
recognize that truth being explanation enough of 
their apparent truth. But truth does not suffice to 
explain apparent truth where one makes us out to 
be absolutely horrible judges of truths of the kind 
in question. Thus, the skeptic's second big prob-
lem is that, because he holds that we're subject to 
constant and radical error as to the scope of our 
knowledge, consistently thinking we know things 
when we don't, the skeptic, although he thinks (1) 
is true, owes us an explanation for its plausibility. 
Given that our habit of mistaking our ignorance 
for knowledge is so pervasive, why doesn't it seem 
to us here that we know what, in fact, we don't -
that these skeptical hypotheses are false? Why 
does our lack of knowledge, which we're so per-
vasively blind to, shine through so clearly to us 
just where the issue is whether we know a skepti-
cal hypothesis to be false? 
The skeptic's initial answer will certainly be 
that we're not warranted in claiming to know that 
skeptical hypotheses don't obtain, and thus can't 
mistake warranted assertability for truth here. 
But then, to see why skeptical hypotheses are 
effective, we must be told why we're not war-
ranted in claiming to know that skeptical hypoth-
eses are false, given that, according to the skeptic, 
we are warranted in claiming to know all manner 
of other things that in fact we don't know. And 
here skeptics have little to offer. But if the results 
of sections 3 and 6 above are correct, the answer 
must involve the lack of sensitivity enjoyed by 
our beliefs that skeptical hypotheses don't obtain. 
The skeptic's use of seA will take this form: 
Although we know nothing (or very little), it's 
when our beliefs are insensitive that we're not 
even warranted in asserting that we know and we 
therefore recognize our lack of knowledge. But 
the skeptic must now also address AI's second 
premise, making sure his endorsement of seA is 
made in such a way as to account for our intui-
tions here. Indeed, whether or not he buys into 
SeA, the skeptic faces this question: If, as he 
claims, we're usually under the delusion that we 
know that 0, but we customarily recognize that 
we don't know that not-H, why aren't we happy 
to conjoin this error with that insight and 
embrace the abominable conjunction? 
This may look like a difficult question, but 
the skeptic has a ready answer. His problem is 
that the warranted assertability maneuver by 
itself didn't really solve our puzzle, but rather re-
introduced it in a new form. And the only way 
I've seen to incorporate SeA into a treatment of 
AI that also handles the other pieces of our 
puzzle is to employ the idea that contextually 
sensitive epistemic standards govern our use of 
"know;' and to posit the Rule of Sensitivity as the 
mechanism by which the AI skeptic drives those 
standards up, as I've advocated here. But wise 
invariantists typically accept that contextually var-
ying standards govern our use of ascriptions and 
denials of knowledge. The sensible invariantist 

684 
KEITH DEROSE 
will admit that, of course, what passes for 
knowledge in some contexts won't so pass in 
others. Being an invariantist, he'll deny that the 
truth conditions of knowledge attributions vary 
in the way the contextualist claims they do. But the 
clever invariantist will maintain that the varying 
epistemic standards that the contextualist sup-
poses govern the truth conditions of these sen-
tences in fact govern their conditions of warranted 
assertability.27 
This allows the bold skeptic to mimic any 
contextualist solution, and in particular the 
solution I'm advocating here, by means of a 
simple twist. With respect to my solution, the 
bold skeptic can maintain that the Rule of 
Sensitivity is a rule for the raising of the epis-
temic standards governing our use of sentences 
ascribing knowledge to subjects, alright, but 
insist that it governs the warranted assertability 
conditions of these sentences, rather than their 
truth conditions, which, he'll maintain, remain 
constant at a level beyond the reach of mere 
mortals to satisfy. The warranted assertability 
maneuver can then be employed: We mistake 
warranted assertability for truth (and unwar-
ranted assertability for falsehood). Thus, since 
we're never warranted in claiming to know that 
skeptical hypotheses don't obtain (due to the 
operation of the twisted Rule of Sensitivity), 
we're led to judge (correctly) that such claims to 
knowledge would be false. And since AI's second 
premise is always warranted, we judge (again 
correctly) that this premise is true. But since a 
claim to know some 0 is usually warranted, due 
to the low standards for warranted assertability 
that would ordinarily be applied to such a claim, 
we judge (incorrectly) that we know this o. 
Thus, my solution, like other contextualist solu-
tions, can be easily adapted to suit the purposes 
of the bold skeptic. The result is a theory parallel 
to my own contextualist solution, which differs 
in its semantics of "know": According to this 
parallel invariantist theory, the context-sensitive 
varying epistemic standards we've discovered 
govern the warranted assertability conditions of 
attributions and denials of knowledge, rather 
than their truth conditions, which are held to be 
invariant. 28 How shall we rationally decide 
between a contextualist solution, and in particu-
lar the one I'm here defending, and the bold 
skeptic's analogue of it?29 
13 
Bold Skepticism and Systematic 
Falsehood 
Like its contextualist relatives, our new solution is 
designed largely with the goal in mind of credit-
ing most of our attributions of knowledge with 
truth. And no wonder. We in general take it as a 
strike against a theory of a common term of a 
natural language that it involves the speakers of 
that language in systematic and widespread false-
hood in their use of that term. Let's borrow an 
example and suppose, for instance, that a crazed 
philosopher claimed that there are no physicians, 
because, in addition to holding a medical degree, 
a necessary condition for being a physician is that 
one be able to cure any conceivable illness. 3o On 
what grounds should we reject this bizarre con-
jecture in favor of a more traditional and less 
demanding account of what it is to be a physi-
cian? Our language certainly could have been 
such that S's having the ability to cure any con-
ceivable illness was a truth condition of "s is a 
physician" (although the word "physician" would 
not have been very useful in that case). In virtue 
of what is our language in fact such that the 
strange theory is not true of it? I'm of course not 
in a position to give a complete answer to this 
question, but it's eminently reasonable to suppose 
that such facts as these, regarding our use, in 
thought and in speech, of the term "physician" are 
involved: that we take to be physicians many 
licensed practitioners of medicine who don't sat-
isfy the demanding requirement alleged; that we 
seriously describe these people as being physi-
cians; that we don't deny that these people are 
physicians; etc. It's no doubt largely in virtue of 
such facts as these that the traditional view, rather 
than the conjecture of our crazed philosopher, is 
true of our language. (The correctness of the tra-
ditional view largely consists in such facts.) And 
these facts also provide us with our best reasons or 
evidence for accepting the traditional, rather than 
the strange, hypothesis regarding the semantics of 
"physician:' In this case, that the peculiar theory 
implicates us in systematic and widespread false-
hood in our speech and thought involving "physi-
cians" is a (constitutive and evidential) strike 
against the theory that proves quite decisive. 
If our crazed philosopher tried to account for 
the above facts regarding our use of the term 
"physician" via the quick and easy conjecture that 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
685 
the less demanding requirements that are more 
traditionally assigned to "physician," while they 
don't accurately specify the truth conditions of 
sentences involving that term, do articulate these 
sentences' warranted assertability conditions, we 
should not, on the basis of this maneuver, sus-
pend our judgment against his contention. That 
his theory involves us in systematic falsehood 
continues to constitute a strike against it, and in 
the absence of quite weighty counterbalancing 
considerations that favor the strange theory over 
the traditional one, this strike remains decisive. 
Of course, the problem with this hopeless 
non-starter of a theory is that there don't seem to 
be any such counterbalancing considerations in 
its favor. By contrast, bold skepticism can appear 
to be supported by skeptical arguments like AI. 
Though the bold skeptic's resolution of our 
puzzle involves us in systematic falsehood because 
of its unwavering acceptance of AI's conclusion, 
it at the same time can seem to make sense of 
other pieces of the puzzle (that we're inclined to 
say that we don't know that skeptical hypotheses 
are false and to say that we don't know various 
ordinary things if we don't know these hypothe-
ses to be false), making the warranted assertabil-
ity maneuver seem more motivated here than it 
is in the hands of our imagined crazed philoso-
pher. But, as we saw in the previous section, this 
appearance is deceptive. Bold skepticism, by 
itself, does not explain the plausibility of AI's 
premises. To help the skeptic solve the puzzle, 
I've had to ascribe to him an analogue of our new 
solution.3! But once we see that the skeptical 
puzzle can be solved just as well without the bold 
skeptic's systematic falsehood, we're left with no 
reason for paying that high price for a solution.32 
Indeed, since the bold skeptical solution and our 
new contextualist solution under consideration 
closely parallel each other, there's not much dif-
ference in how they solve the puzzle. That the 
bold skeptical resolution involves us in system-
atic falsehood is one of the few differences to be 
found here, and it's a weighty consideration 
against that resolution. And, with there being 
little room for weighty compensating advantages 
for this resolution over the contextualist's (given 
how similar they are in other respects), this con-
sideration proves decisive. So, as with the crazed 
philosopher's theory of "physician," the bold 
skeptic's resolution of AI should be rejected 
because it involves us in systematic and wide-
spread falsehood in our use of a common term of 
our language. 
14 
Begging the Question Against the 
Skeptic? 
If skeptics are allowed to play King of the 
Mountain - they start off on top (never mind 
how they got there) and it's the anti-skeptics' job 
to knock them off - displacing them can be a very 
difficult task. How difficult depends on several 
factors, one of which is what premises the anti-
skeptic is allowed to appeal to in an argument 
designed to dethrone the skeptic. If the skeptic 
won't allow any premises to be available, then, as 
Thomas Reid noted, "It would be impossible by 
argument to beat him out of this stronghold; and 
he must even be left to enjoy his scepticism" 
(1895, p. 447).33 If, to make the game a bit more 
interesting, a slim range of claims is allowed to 
pass inspection and be available for use in the 
anti-skeptical campaign, then (as Reid again rec-
ognized) it's often difficult to say what, if any-
thing, of importance would follow from the fact 
that the skeptic can or cannot be knocked from 
his perch by arguments from premises of that 
particular type. 
I have little interest in playing King of the 
Mountain. But skeptical arguments like AI 
threaten to show that the skeptic needn't just play 
this game, but can gain the top of the mountain -
that starting from our own beliefs and intuitions, 
he can give us better reasons for accepting his 
skepticism than we have for rejecting it. I've here 
argued that the bold skeptic cannot win this 
battle - that of providing the best resolution of 
our puzzling conflict of intuitions. Although AI's 
premises are initially plausible, the best resolu-
tion for the conflict of intuitions generated by AI 
is not that of the bold skeptic. 
Along the way, I've been assuming certain 
things that we believe but that the skeptic claims 
we can't know, thereby perhaps raising the con-
cern that I'm begging the question against the 
skeptic. For instance, in claiming that my belief 
that I have hands is sensitive, I betray my convic-
tion that I'm not a BIV, either in the actual world 
or in any nearby worlds. Indeed, I'm ready to 
admit to the skeptic that ifI am a BIV, then I don't 

686 
KEITH DEROSE 
know I have hands, according to any standards 
for knowledge. But, of course, as I firmly believe, 
I'm not a BIV. 
Is it legitimate for me to use this conviction in 
a debate against the skeptic? Not if we're playing 
King of the Mountain. But if the skeptic is mar-
shalling deeply felt intuitions of ours in an 
attempt to give us good reasons for accepting his 
skepticism, it's legitimate to point out that other 
of our beliefs militate against his position, and 
ask why we should give credence to just those that 
favor him. And if we can further show that those 
Notes 
I choose this ° partly for its historical con-
nections to Descartes's First Meditation, and 
also because I think it is an exemplary case of 
something we ordinarily think we know. But 
while we would ordinarily think we know this 
0, we'd seldom have occasion to say that we 
know it, because cases in which such a claim 
to knowledge would be conversationally in 
order are quite rare. (Exception: A teacher 
begins an epistemology lecture by matter-of-
factly listing various things she knows, and 
that any plausible theory of knowledge should 
make her come out to know. In the course of 
this listing, she says, "And I know that I have 
hands.") For this and various related reasons, 
some might not like my choice of 0. Such 
readers are invited to supply their own favorite 
exemplary cases of things we know as the 
skeptic's target. 
2 Those who think that Hilary Putnam may 
have already disarmed BIV-inspired skepti-
cism should understand the BIV hypothesis 
to be the hypothesis that one's brain has been 
recently envatted after many years of normal 
embodiment. For even if Putnam is right in 
claiming that the content of the beliefs of the 
BIV s of his scenario is such that these BIV s 
aren't massively deceived, it seems that 
recently envatted BIV s are so deceived. 
3 AI takes its name primarily from its first 
premise. But since one of AI's best formula-
tions (to which I hereby refer readers seeking 
a good version of AI that has not been so bru-
tally pared) is in chapter 1 of Peter Unger's 
book Ignorance: A Case for Skepticism (1975), 
beliefs that seem to favor his solution can be 
accommodated in our solution better than he can 
accommodate those of our beliefs that are hostile 
to him, the best conclusion we can draw is that 
we're not ordinarily mistaken when we claim or 
ascribe knowledge, despite the bold skeptic's 
attempt to show that we are. Instead, the main 
insights to be drawn from a study of AI involve 
the context-sensitivity of attributions of knowl-
edge, and the role that the Rule of Sensitivity plays 
in changing the epistemic standards that govern 
these attributions. 
it is in more than one sense that it is an argu-
ment "from ignorance." 
4 
I actually haven't pared AI to its barest essen-
tials. It could be further pared to a one--
premise argument: I don't know that not-H; 
so, I don't know that 0. The second, "bridge" 
premise has been added to facilitate my treat-
ment of the argument, nicely dividing those 
issues that impact on the acceptability of the 
first premise from those germane to the 
second. 
AI is the first and great argument by skep-
tical hypothesis. And the second, like unto it, 
is The Argument from Possibility (AP), which 
like AI, takes its name from its first premise, 
and which has this form: 
1. It is possible that Hinu' 
2. If it is possible that Hinu' then it is possible 
that not-Oind' So, 
3. It is possible that not-ainu' 
4. If it is possible that not-ainu' then I don't 
know that 0. So, 
C. I don't know that 0. 
(The subscript "ind" indicates that what 
occurs in the scope of "It is possible that" is to 
be kept in the indicative mood, so that the 
possibility expressed will be an epistemic one. 
The "bridge" premises, 2 and 4, can be omit-
ted.) In this paper I address only AI, but let 
me quickly indicate how AP should be han-
dled. Premise 4, which initially strikes many as 
AP's weakest link, is actually correct (DeRose 
1991, section G). Thus, the AP skeptic must be 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
687 
stopped before she reaches step 3. Fortunately, 
the treatment of AI that I present in this 
paper can be generalized to handle the initial 
phase (steps 1-3) of AP as well. This treat-
ment of AP is left here as an exercise for the 
reader, but is explained in chapter 3, espe-
cially section K, of my 1990. 
5 This is especially true of Stewart Cohen, to 
whom I'm indebted for his general setup of 
the puzzle as a conflict of intuitions, a satis-
factory solution of which requires an expla-
nation of why the puzzle arises. See Cohen 
1988, pp. 93-4. 
6 For a bit more on the nature of contextualist 
theories, see my 1992. The notion of (com-
parative) strength of epistemic position, 
central to my characterization of contextual-
ism, will be explicated below in sections 8 
and 9. 
For exemplary contextualist treatments 
of the problem of skepticism, see especially 
Unger 1986 and Cohen 1988. 
7 This is at least so according to skeptic-friendly 
versions of contextualist solutions, as will be 
explained later in this section. 
8 Thanks to Richard Grandy and to Peter 
Unger for pressing this point. 
9 Precisely, what Nozick does is this: He ana-
lyzes the technical locution "s knows, via 
method M, that p:' and then in turn analyzes 
the relation of S's knowing that p in terms of 
this technical locution. The revised third 
condition I've displayed is part of Nozick's 
attempt to analyze the technical locution. 
10 
These are not identical modifications. On 
the first option, similarity with respect to 
method is weighted heavily, but can be 
outweighed by other factors. Thus, even so 
evaluated, the most similar world(s) in 
which the antecedent of the original (3) 
are true may be worlds that diverge from 
the actual world with respect to the method 
by which S came to believe that P. By con-
trast, on the second option, since the 
method by which S believes that P becomes 
part of the antecedent of the conditional 
we're evaluating (the modified (3)), the 
closest possible world(s) in which that 
antecedent is true cannot be worlds that 
diverge from the actual world with respect 
to method. 
11 
Or, given the exceptions to the general ten-
dency that we've discussed in sections 4 and 
5, why I haven't accepted that some properly 
Chisholmed refinement of the sensitivity 
requirement (which has as instances of it 
convincing instances of AI's first premise) is 
necessary for knowledge. 
12 
Though this statement of Nozick's account 
of knowledge is rough, that will not affect 
my treatment, which would apply equally 
well to Nozick's full account. I've skipped 
entirely Nozick's fourth condition for knowl-
edge, but I believe this fourth condition to 
be redundant, anyway: It automatically holds 
whenever true belief is present. Also, as I've 
already noted, Nozick takes account of the 
method of belief formation in his final ver-
sion of the third condition. The same thing 
happens with the fourth. 
13 
At pp. 205-6 Nozick admits this appeal, and 
later he writes, "Thus, if our notion of 
knowledge was as strong as we naturally tend 
to think (namely, closed under known logi-
cal implication) then the skeptic would be 
right. (But why do we naturally think this? 
Further exploration and explanation is 
needed of the intuitive roots of the natural 
assumption that knowledge is closed under 
known logical implication)" (p. 242). 
Nozick is quite hard on anti-skeptics who 
choose rather to deny the first premise; he 
writes: "The skeptic asserts we do not know 
his possibilities don't obtain, and he is right. 
Attempts to avoid skepticism by claiming 
we do know these things are bound to fail. 
The skeptic's possibilities make us uneasy 
because, as we deeply realize, we do not know 
they don't obtain; it is not surprising that 
attempts to show we do know these things 
leave us suspicious, strike us even as bad 
faith" (p. 201). But similar remarks could be 
made about Nozick. As Nozick himself 
admits, the second premise has its own intu-
itive appeal. So why not say that what we 
"deeply realize" is that if you don't know that 
you're not a BIV, then you don't know you 
have hands, and that the skeptic is right 
about this? Nozick's denial of the second 
premise leaves me about as "suspicious" as 
does a denial of the first, and though Nozick's 
denial doesn't strike me as an instance of bad 

688 
KEITH DEROSE 
faith, denials of the first premise seem no 
better candidates for that charge. 
14 
What are Nozick's grounds for rejecting the 
second premise? Nozick notes that the 
premise is an instance of a very general prin-
ciple to the effect that knowledge is closed 
under known implication (see note 18, 
below). After admitting that the closure 
principle seems true (pp. 205-6), Nozick 
claims that it's wrong, and his reasons for 
this claim are made entirely from within his 
analysis of knowledge: Given his analysis 
knowledge won't be closed (see especially 
pp. 206-8). So Nozick is relying on his analy-
sis to show us that the second premise is false 
despite its intuitive appeal. And indeed, 
Nozick has developed and defended his 
analysis of knowledge (in part I of chapter 3) 
before he applies it to the issue of skepticism 
(in part 2). 
15 
Unfortunately, what is perhaps the most 
powerful attack on Nozick's theory of know 1-
edge, made by Saul Kripke in lectures, circa 
1985, has not, to the best of my knowledge, 
found its way into print. For those interested 
in critical literature on Nozick, a good place 
to start is with Forbes 1984 and several of the 
essays in Luper-Foy 1987. For still further 
reading, Luper-Foy 1987 contains an excel-
lent bibliography. 
16 
As remarked in note 14, Nozick depends 
heavily on the independent plausibility of 
this analysis to provide the momentum for 
his treatment of AI. 
17 
And, of course, such conditionals can be 
used to make all manner of other compari-
sons: comparative strength of the epistemic 
positions of two different subjects with 
respect to the same proposition or with 
respect to different propositions, the strength 
of the epistemic position of a subject with 
respect to one proposition in one situation 
as compared with that same subject's epis-
temic position with respect to a different 
proposition in a different situation, etc. 
18 
As is well known, instances of AI's second 
premise are often instances of the principle 
that knowledge is closed under known logi-
cal implication: Kp & K (p entails q) ~ Kq. 
(In the next paragraph I explain why this 
is not always the case, at least when the 
closure principle isn't strengthened as there 
described.) As is also well known, there are 
exceptions to the principle so formulated, 
and it might take a lot of tinkering to get it 
exactly right. But, as Nozick, the arch denier 
of closure, puts it, "We would be ill-advised, 
however, to quibble over the details of P [the 
principle that knowledge is closed under 
known logical implication]. Although these 
details are difficult to get straight, it will con-
tinue to appear that something like P is cor-
rect" (1981, p. 205). Nozick goes on to claim 
that this appearance is deceiving. I believe 
that something like P is correct, but that 
doesn't compete with my present account of 
AI's second premise: When a conditional is 
an instance of the properly formulated clo-
sure principle, the relevant comparative fact 
involving strength of epistemic position 
holds. See Brueckner 1985 for arguments 
that the denial of knowledge closure princi-
ples "is not a fruitful anti-skeptical project" 
(p.112). 
While restrictions will have to be put on 
the closure principle that will weaken it in 
certain respects, there may be other respects 
in which it can be strengthened. Some 
instances of AI's second premise are convinc-
ing even though H is compatible with O. For 
instance, the BIV hypothesis seems to under-
mine my putative knowledge of I'm in 
Houston as well as of I have hands, but, of 
course, that I'm a bodiless BIV is compatible 
with my being in Houston. Perhaps if S is to 
knowthatP, then S must know that not-Q for 
any Q (but here restrictions must be added) 
such that if Q were true, S would not know 
that P. Thus, the range of Qs that must be 
known not to obtain may be broadened so as 
to include not only propositions that are 
incompatible with P, but also others such that 
if they were the case, then S wouldn't know 
that P. Those Qs that are incompatible with P 
itself will then be seen as special cases of those 
that are at odds with S's knowing that P. Barry 
Stroud discusses a stronger closure principle 
such as this in his 1984 (pp. 25-30). 
19 
Introducing a skeptical hypothesis into a 
conversation in any number of ways other 
than in attributions and denials of knowl-
edge can seem to raise the standards for 

SOLVING THE SKEPTICAL PROBLEM 
689 
knowledge. For instance, instead of arguing, 
"You don't know that the paper isn't mis-
taken about the result of last night's game; 
therefore, you don't know that the Bulls 
won;' a skeptic may urge, "Consider this 
proposition: The newspaper is mistaken 
about who won the game. Now, keeping that 
proposition clearly in mind, answer me this: 
Do you really know that the Bulls won?" Of 
course, not just any mention of a skeptical 
hypothesis seems to trigger the mechanism 
for raising the standards of knowledge I'm 
about to articulate. 
20 
Again, I'm here assuming a skeptic-friendly 
version of contextualism. See the second 
important point made at the end of section 2. 
21 
But for cases in which it seems one can truth-
fully say "s knows that not-H;' despite the 
fact that S's belief that not-H is insensitive, 
see chapter 3, section J ("Low-Strength 
Claims to Know that Skeptical Hypotheses 
Do Not Obtain") of my 1990. In such cases, 
given certain features of the conversational 
situation, the Rule of Sensitivity does not 
operate. These consitute exceptions to the 
rule that one cannot truthfully call an insen-
sitive belief knowledge. As I explain there, I 
welcome these exceptions, and would actu-
ally be a bit worried if there weren't such 
exceptions. For it's a feature of my treatment 
of AI that we do know skeptical hypotheses 
to be false according to low epistemic stand-
ards. I would find it a bit embarrassing if we 
could never claim to have such knowledge by 
means of simple knowledge attributions, 
and I'm reassured by the result that in spe-
cial conversational circumstances, it seems 
we can truthfully claim to know that not-H, 
despite the fact that our belief that not-H is 
insensitive. 
22 
This 
IS called the "Moorean" solution 
because Moore responded in this way to the 
dream argument. It's far from certain that 
Moore would have so responded to other 
instances of AI that utilize different skeptical 
hypotheses. 
23 
See the first paragraph of note l3, above. 
24 
This is the basic line Unger takes in his 
defense of bold skepticism in his 1975; see 
especially pp. 50-4. Stroud, though not him-
self advocating bold skepticism, does seek to 
defend the bold skeptic along these lines in 
ch. 2 of his 1984; see especially pp. 55-82. 
25 
By contrast, our new contextualist solution 
attributes the apparent truth of (1) to (1)'s 
truth (and not just its warranted assertabil-
ity) at the very standards its assertion 
invokes. 
26 
For my own part, for reasons I can't go into 
here, I think the resulting Moorean posi-
tion would be slightly more defensible; 
thus, if I had to reject contextualism and 
adopt a straightforward solution, I'd be a 
Moorean. 
27 
Stroud thus claims that on the skeptic's con-
ception of our practices, we operate under 
certain "practical constraints" (1984, p. 75) 
in our everyday uses of "know", and asserts 
that our standards for saying we know vary 
from case to case (pp. 65-6). Thus, on the 
skeptic's conception, the standards for 
ascribing knowledge that we employ in eve-
ryday use depend upon our "aims and inter-
ests at the moment" (p. 65). According to 
contextualism, these varying standards 
reflect a corresponding variation in the truth 
conditions for attributions of knowledge. 
But on Stroud's skeptic's conception, when 
we ascribe knowledge in everyday situations, 
we are typically saying something literally 
false, although "the exigencies of action" jus-
tify these false attributions. The best explo-
ration of this type of idea is provided by 
Unger in his 1984. 
28 
Going back to the bold skeptic's first prob-
lem, note that all this maneuvering can be 
mimicked by the Moorean, who can also 
hold that a Rule of Sensitivity governs the 
warranted assertability conditions of know 1-
edge ascriptions. Like the bold skeptic, the 
Moorean can hold that the truth conditions 
of such attributions of knowledge remain 
invariant, but in the Moorean's hands, these 
constant epistemic standards will be meetably 
low. 
29 
Readers of Unger's 1984 will see the strong 
influence of that excellent book on my pro-
cedure here, though I come to very different 
conclusions than he does in that work. (But 
see his more recent 1986.) 
30 
See Stroud (1984, p. 40), who in turn bor-
rowed the example from elsewhere. 

690 
KEITH DEROSE 
31 
Of course, skeptics are free to refuse this help 
and propose other solutions. Like practically 
any claim to have provided the best explana-
tion of something, my claim here is hostage 
to the possible future development of a 
better explanation coming along. 
32 
Well, little reason. In his 1984, as part of his 
case for his relativist conclusion that there's 
no fact of the matter as to whether contextu-
alism or skeptical invariantism is correct, 
Unger tries to balance this relative disadvan-
tage of skeptical invariantism against contex-
tualism's relative disadvantage that it does not 
make the truth conditions of knowledge 
attributions appropriately independent from 
the current intents and interests of those who 
happen to be speaking on a given occasion (p. 
37). In part 3 of my 1992, I argue that contex-
tualism can handle the most serious conse-
quences one might suspect would follow 
from this lack of independence. Whatever 
References 
Brueckner, Anthony I., 1985. "Skepticism and 
Epistemic Closure," Philosophical Topics 13, 
pp.89-117. 
--, 1986. "Review of Unger, Philosophical 
Relativity;' Journal of Philosophy 83, pp. 509-17. 
Cohen, Stewart, 1988. "How to Be a Fallibilist;' 
Philosophical Perspectives 2, pp. 91-123. 
DeRose, Keith, 1989. "Reid's Anti-Sensationalism 
and His Realism," Philosophical Review 98, pp. 
313-48. 
--, 1990. "Knowledge, Epistemic Possibility, 
and Scepticism;' PhD diss., University of 
California, Los Angeles. 
--, 1991. "Epistemic Possibilities;' Philosophical 
Review 100, pp. 581-605. 
--, 1992. "Contextualism and Knowledge 
Attributions," PhilosophyandPhenomenological 
Research 52, pp. 913-29. 
Forbes, Graeme. 1984. "Nozick on Scepticism," 
Philosophical Quarterly 34, pp. 43-52. 
Goldman, Alvin I. 1976. "Discrimination and 
Perceptual Knowledge;' Journal of Philosophy 
73, pp. 771-91. 
independence concerns might remain with 
contextualism seem quite swamped by the 
cost of the bold skeptic's solution, which, as 
I've here argued, is quite high indeed. 
In his review of Unger 1984, Brueckner, 
relating the advantages of invariantism, 
writes, "In particular, speakers' intuitions 
concerning the correct use of'know' seem to 
conform to the closure principle for knowl-
edge asserted by the invariantist yet denied 
by the contextualist" (1986, p. 512). If invari-
antism, but not contextualism, upheld clo-
sure, I would take this to be a very important 
advantage for invariantism - perhaps even 
weighty enough to make the contest between 
the two theories interesting. But, as I've 
argued, contextualism need not, and, prop-
erly developed, does not, take an implausible 
stand on the issue of closure. (See section 8 
and especially note 18, above.) 
33 
I discuss this in section II.B of my 1989. 
Luper-Foy, Stephen (ed.), 1987. The Possibility of 
Knowledge: Nozick and his Critics (Totowa, NJ: 
Rowman and Littlefield). 
N ozick, Robert, 1981. Philosophical Explanations 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 
Reid, Thomas, 1895. The Works of Thomas Reid, 
8th edn, ed. William Hamilton (Edinburgh: 
James Thin). 
Stine, Gail c., 1976. "Skepticism, Relevant Alterna-
tives' and Deductive Closure," Philosophical 
Studies 29, pp. 249-61. 
Stroud, Barry, 1984. The Significance of Philoso-
phical Scepticism (Oxford: Oxford University 
Press). 
Unger, Peter, 1975. Ignorance: A Case for Scepti-
cism (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
--, 1984. Philosophical Relativity (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press). 
--, 1986. "The Cone Model of Knowledge," 
Philosophical Topics 14, pp. 125-78. 

CHAPTER 48 
Elusive Knowledge 
David Lewis 
We know a lot. I know what food penguins eat. 
I know that phones used to ring, but nowadays 
squeal, when someone calls up. I know that 
Essendon won the 1993 Grand Final. I know that 
here is a hand, and here is another. 
We have all sorts of everyday knowledge, and 
we have it in abundance. To doubt that would be 
absurd. At any rate, to doubt it in any serious and 
lasting way would be absurd; and even philosoph-
ical and temporary doubt, under the influence of 
argument, is more than a little peculiar. It is a 
Moorean fact that we know a lot. It is one of those 
things that we know better than we know the 
premises of any philosophical argument to the 
contrary. 
Besides knowing a lot that is everyday and 
trite, I myself think that we know a lot that is 
interesting and esoteric and controversial. We 
know a lot about things unseen: tiny particles and 
pervasive fields, not to mention one another's 
underwear. Sometimes we even know what an 
author meant by his writings. But on these ques-
tions, let us agree to disagree peacefully with the 
champions of "post-knowledgeism': The most 
trite and ordinary parts of our knowledge will be 
problem enough. 
For no sooner do we engage in epistemology -
the systematic philosophical examination of 
Originally published in Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy 74, 4 (1996), pp. 549-67. 
knowledge - than we meet a compelling argu-
ment that we know next to nothing. The sceptical 
argument is nothing new or fancy. It is just this: 
it seems as if knowledge must be by definition 
infallible. If you claim that S knows that P, and yet 
you grant that S cannot eliminate a certain pos-
sibility in which not -P, it certainly seems as if you 
have granted that S does not after all know that P. 
To speak of fallible knowledge, of knowledge 
despite un eliminated possibilities of error, just 
sounds contradictory. 
Blind Freddy can see where this will lead. Let 
your paranoid fantasies rip - CIA plots, halluci-
nogens in the tap water, conspiracies to deceive, 
old Nick himself - and soon you find that uneli-
minated possibilities of error are everywhere. 
Those possibilities of error are far-fetched, of 
course, but possibilities all the same. They bite 
into even our most everyday knowledge. We never 
have infallible knowledge. 
Never - well, hardly ever. Some say we have 
infallible knowledge of a few simple, axiomatic 
necessary truths; and of our own present experi-
ence. They say that I simply cannot be wrong 
that a part of a part of something is itself a part 
of that thing; or that it seems to me now (as I sit 
here at the keyboard) exactly as if I am hearing 
clicking noises on top of a steady whirring. 
Some say so. Others deny it. No matter; let it be 
granted, at least for the sake of the argument. It 
is not nearly enough. If we have only that much 
infallible knowledge, yet knowledge is by 

692 
DAVID LEWIS 
definition infallible, then we have very little 
knowledge indeed - not the abundant everyday 
knowledge we thought we had. That is still 
absurd. 
So we know a lot; knowledge must be infalli-
ble; yet we have fallible knowledge or none 
(or next to none). We are caught between the rock 
of fallibilism and the whirlpool of scepticism. 
Both are mad! 
Yet fallibilism is the less intrusive madness. It 
demands less frequent corrections of what we 
want to say. So, if forced to choose, I choose falli-
bilism. (And so say all of us.) We can get used to 
it, and some of us have done. No joy there - we 
know that people can get used to the most crazy 
philosophical sayings imaginable. If you are a 
contented fallibilist, I implore you to be honest, 
be naive, hear it afresh. "He knows, yet he has not 
eliminated all possibilities of error." Even if you've 
numbed your ears, doesn't this overt, explicit 
fallibilism still sound wrong? 
Better fallibilism than scepticism; but it would be 
better still to dodge the choice. I think we can. We 
will be alarmingly close to the rock, and also alarm-
ingly close to the whirlpool, but if we steer with 
care, we can - just barely - escape them both. 
Maybe epistemology is the culprit. Maybe this 
extraordinary pastime robs us of our knowledge. 
Maybe we do know a lot in daily life; but maybe 
when we look hard at our knowledge, it goes away. 
But only when we look at it harder than the sane 
ever do in daily life; only when we let our para-
noid fantasies rip. That is when we are forced to 
admit that there always are uneliminated possi-
bilities of error, so that we have fallible knowledge 
or none. 
Much that we say is context-dependent, in 
simple ways or subtle ways. Simple: "it's evening" 
is truly said when, and only when, it is said in the 
evening. Subtle: it could well be true, and not just 
by luck, that Essendon played rottenly, the 
Easybeats played brilliantly, yet Essendon won. 
Different contexts evoke different standards of 
evaluation. Talking about the Easybeats we apply 
lax standards, else we could scarcely distinguish 
their better days from their worse ones. In talking 
about Essendon, no such laxity is required. 
Essendon won because play that is rotten by 
demanding standards suffices to beat play that is 
brilliant by lax standards. 
Maybe ascnptlOns of knowledge are subtly 
context-dependent, and may be epistemology is a 
context that makes them go false. Then episte-
mology would be an investigation that destroys 
its own subject matter. If so, the sceptical argu-
ment might be flawless, when we engage in epis-
temology - and only then! 1 
If you start from the ancient idea that justifi-
cation is the mark that distinguishes knowledge 
from mere opinion (even true opinion), then you 
well might conclude that ascriptions of knowl-
edge are context-dependent because standards 
for adequate justification are context-dependent. 
As follows: opinion, even if true, deserves the 
name of knowledge only if it is adequately sup-
ported by reasons; to deserve that name in the 
especially demanding context of epistemology, 
the arguments from supporting reasons must be 
especially watertight; but the special standards of 
justification that this special context demands 
never can be met (well, hardly ever). In the strict 
context of epistemology we know nothing, yet in 
laxer contexts we know a lot. 
But I myself cannot subscribe to this account 
of the context -dependence of knowledge, because 
I question its starting point. I don't agree that the 
mark of knowledge is justification.2 First, because 
justification is not sufficient: your true opinion 
that you will lose the lottery isn't knowledge, 
whatever the odds. Suppose you know that it is a 
fair lottery with one winning ticket and many 
losing tickets, and you know how many losing 
tickets there are. The greater the number oflosing 
tickets, the better is your justification for believ-
ing you will lose. Yet there is no number great 
enough to transform your fallible opinion into 
knowledge - after all, you just might win. No jus-
tification is good enough - or none short of a 
watertight deductive argument, and all but the 
sceptics will agree that this is too much to 
demand.3 
Second, because justification is not always 
necessary. What (non-circular) argument sup-
ports our reliance on perception, on memory, 
and on testimony?4 And yet we do gain knowl-
edge by these means. And sometimes, far from 
having supporting arguments, we don't even 
know how we know. We once had evidence, drew 
conclusions, and thereby gained knowledge; now 
we have forgotten our reasons, yet still we retain 
our knowledge. Or we know the name that goes 

ELUSIVE KNOWLEDGE 
693 
with the face, or the sex of the chicken, by relying 
on subtle visual cues, without knowing what 
those cues may be. 
The link between knowledge and justification 
must be broken. But if we break that link, then it 
is not - or not entirely, or not exactly - by raising 
the standards of justification that epistemology 
destroys knowledge. I need some different story. 
To that end, I propose to take the infallibility of 
knowledge as my starting point.s Must infallibilist 
epistemology end in scepticism? Not quite. Wait 
and see. Anyway, here is the definition. Subject S 
knows proposition P iff P holds in every possibil-
ity left uneliminated by S's evidence; equivalently, 
iff S's evidence eliminates every possibility in 
which not-Po 
The definition is short, the commentary upon it 
is longer. In the first place, there is the proposition, 
P. What I choose to call "propositions" are indi-
viduated coarsely, by necessary equivalence. For 
instance, there is only one necessary proposition. It 
holds in every possibility; hence in every possibility 
left uneliminated by S's evidence, no matter who S 
may be and no matter what his evidence may be. So 
the necessary proposition is known always and eve-
rywhere. Yet this known proposition may go unrec-
ognised when presented in impenetrable linguistic 
disguise, say as the proposition that every even 
number is the sum of two primes. Likewise, the 
known proposition that I have two hands may go 
unrecognised when presented as the proposition 
that the number of my hands is the least number n 
such that every even number is the sum of n primes. 
(Or if you doubt the necessary existence of num-
bers, switch to an example involving equivalence 
by logic alone.) These problems of disguise shall 
not concern us here. Our topic is modal, not hyper-
intensional, epistemology.6 
Next, there are the possibilities. We needn't 
enter here into the question whether these are 
concreta, abstract constructions, or abstract sim-
ples. Further, we needn't decide whether they 
must always be maximally specific possibilities, or 
whether they need only be specific enough for the 
purpose at hand. A possibility will be specific 
enough if it cannot be split into sub-cases in such 
a way that anything we have said about possibili-
ties, or anything we are going to say before we are 
done, applies to some sub-cases and not to others. 
For instance, it should never happen that 
proposition P holds in some but not all sub-cases; 
or that some but not all sub-cases are eliminated 
by S's evidence. 
But we do need to stipulate that they are not 
just possibilities as to how the whole world is; 
they also include possibilities as to which part of 
the world is oneself, and as to when it now is. We 
need these possibilities de se et nunc because the 
propositions that may be known include proposi-
tions de se et nunc.7 Not only do I know that there 
are hands in this world somewhere and some-
when. I know that I have hands, or anyway I have 
them now. Such propositions aren't just made 
true or made false by the whole world once and 
for all. They are true for some of us and not for 
others, or true at some times and not others, 
or both. 
Further, we cannot limit ourselves to "real" 
possibilities that conform to the actual laws of 
nature, and maybe also to actual past history. For 
propositions about laws and history are contin-
gent, and mayor may not be known. 
Neither can we limit ourselves to "epistemic" 
possibilities for S - possibilities that S does not 
know not to obtain. That would drain our defini-
tion of content. Assume only that knowledge is 
closed under strict implication. (We shall con-
sider the merits of this assumption later.) 
Remember that we are not distinguishing between 
equivalent propositions. Then knowledge of a 
conjunction is equivalent to knowledge of every 
conjunct. P is the conjunction of all propositions 
not-W, where W is a possibility in which not-Po 
That suffices to yield an equivalence: S knows that 
P iff, for every possibility W in which not-P, S 
knows that not -W. Contraposing and cancelling a 
double negation: iff every possibility which S does 
not know not to obtain is one in which P. For 
short: iff P holds throughout S's epistemic possi-
bilities. Yet to get this far, we need no substantive 
definition of knowledge at all! To turn this into a 
substantive definition, in fact the very definition 
we gave before, we need to say one more thing: S's 
epistemic possibilities are just those possibilities 
that are un eliminated by S's evidence. 
So, next, we need to say what it means for a 
possibility to be eliminated or not. Here I say that 
the un eliminated possibilities are those in which 
the subject's entire perceptual experience and 
memory are just as they actually are. There is one 
possibility that actually obtains (for the subject 

694 
DAVID LEWIS 
and at the time in question); call it actuality. Then 
a possibility W is uneliminated iff the subject's 
perceptual experience and memory in Wexactly 
match his perceptual experience and memory in 
actuality. (If you want to include other alleged 
forms of basic evidence, such as the evidence of 
our extrasensory faculties, or an innate disposi-
tion to believe in God, be my guest. If they exist, 
they should be included. If not, no harm done if 
we have included them conditionally.) 
Note well that we do not need the "pure sense-
datum language" and the "incorrigible protocol 
statements" that for so long bedevilled founda-
tionalist epistemology. It matters not at all 
whether there are words to capture the subject's 
perceptual and memory evidence, nothing more 
and nothing less. If there are such words, it 
matters not at all whether the subject can hit 
upon them. The given does not consist of basic 
axioms to serve as premises in subsequent argu-
ments. Rather, it consists of a match between pos-
sibilities. 
When perceptual experience E (or memory) 
eliminates a possibility W, that is not because the 
propositional content of the experience contlicts 
with W. (Not even if it is the narrow content.) 
The propositional content of our experience 
could, after all, be false. Rather, it is the existence 
of the experience that contlicts with W: W is a 
possibility in which the subject is not having 
experience E. Else we would need to tell some 
fishy story of how the experience has some sort of 
infallible, ineffable, purely phenomenal proposi-
tional content ... Who needs that? Let E have 
propositional content P. Suppose even - some-
thing I take to be an open question - that E is, in 
some sense, fully characterized by P. Then I say 
that E eliminates W iff W is a possibility in which 
the subject's experience or memory has content 
different from P. I do not say that E eliminates W 
iff W is a possibility in which P is false. 
Maybe not every kind of sense perception 
yields experience; maybe, for instance, the kinaes-
thetic sense yields not its own distinctive sort of 
sense-experience but only spontaneous judge-
ments about the position of one's limbs. If this is 
true, then the thing to say is that kinaesthetic evi-
dence eliminates all possibilities except those that 
exactly resemble actuality with respect to the sub-
ject's spontaneous kinaesthetic judgments. In 
saying this, we would treat kinaesthetic evidence 
more on the model of memory than on the model 
of more typical senses. 
Finally, we must attend to the word "every". 
What does it mean to say that every possibility in 
which not-P is eliminated? An idiom of quantifi-
cation, like "every", is normally restricted to some 
limited domain. If I say that every glass is empty, 
so it's time for another round, doubtless I and my 
audience are ignoring most of all the glasses there 
are in the whole wide world throughout all of 
time. They are outside the domain. They are irrel-
evant to the truth of what was said. 
Likewise, if I say that every uneliminated pos-
sibility is one in which P, or words to that effect, I 
am doubtless ignoring some of all the unelimi-
nated alternative possibilities that there are. They 
are outside the domain, they are irrelevant to the 
truth of what was said. 
But, of course, I am not entitled to ignore just 
any possibility I please. Else true ascriptions of 
knowledge, whether to myself or to others, would 
be cheap indeed. I may properly ignore some 
uneliminated possibilities; I may not properly 
ignore others. Our definition of knowledge 
requires a satta voce proviso. S knows that P iff 
S's evidence eliminates every possibility in which 
not-P - Psst! - except for those possibilities that 
we are properly ignoring. 
Unger suggests an instructive parallel.' Just as 
P is known iff there are no uneliminated possi-
bilities of error, so likewise a surface is flat iff there 
are no bumps on it. We must add the proviso: 
Psst! - except for those bumps that we are prop-
erly ignoring. Else we will conclude, absurdly, that 
nothing is tlat. (Simplify by ignoring departures 
from tlatness that consist of gentle curvature.) 
We can restate the definition. Say that we pre-
suppose proposition Q iff we ignore all possibili-
ties in which not-Q. To close the circle: we ignore 
just those possibilities that falsify our presupposi-
tions. Proper presupposition corresponds, of 
course, to proper ignoring. Then S knows that P 
iff S's evidence eliminates every possibility in 
which not-P - Psst! - except for those possibilities 
that contlict with our proper presuppositions." 
The rest of (modal) epistemology examines 
the satta voce proviso. It asks: what may we prop-
erly presuppose in our ascriptions of knowledge? 
Which of all the uneliminated alternative possi-
bilities may not properly be ignored? Which ones 
are the "relevant alternatives"? - relevant, that is, 

ELUSIVE KNOWLEDGE 
695 
to what the subject does and doesn't know?!O In 
reply, we can list several rules. II We begin with 
three prohibitions: rules to tell us what possibili-
ties we may not properly ignore. 
First, there is the Rule of Actuality. The possibility 
that actually obtains is never properly ignored; 
actuality is always a relevant alternative; nothing 
false may properly be presupposed. It follows that 
only what is true is known, wherefore we did not 
have to include truth in our definition of knowl-
edge. The rule is "externalist" - the subject himself 
may not be able to tell what is properly ignored. 
In judging which of his ignorings are proper, 
hence what he knows, we judge his success in 
knowing - not how well he tried. 
When the Rule of Actuality tells us that actuality 
may never be properly ignored, we can ask: whose 
actuality? Ours, when we ascribe knowledge or 
ignorance to others? Or the subject's? In simple 
cases, the question is silly. (In fact, it sounds like the 
sort of pernicious nonsense we would expect from 
someone who mixes up what is true with what is 
believed.) There is just one actual world, we the 
ascribers live in that world, the subject lives there 
too, so the subject's actuality is the same as ours. 
But there are other cases, less simple, in which 
the question makes perfect sense and needs an 
answer. Someone mayor may not know who he 
is; someone mayor may not know what time it is. 
Therefore I insisted that the propositions that 
may be known must include propositions de se et 
nunc; and likewise that the possibilities that may 
be eliminated or ignored must include possibili-
ties de se et nunc. Now we have a good sense in 
which the subject's actuality may be different 
from ours. I ask today what Fred knew yesterday. 
In particular, did he then know who he was? Did 
he know what day it was? Fred's actuality is the 
possibility de se et nunc of being Fred on 
September 19th at such -and -such possible world; 
whereas my actuality is the possibility de se et 
nunc of being David on September 20th at such-
and-such world. So far as the world goes, there is 
no difference: Fred and I are worldmates, his 
actual world is the same as mine. But when we 
build subject and time into the possibilities de se 
et nunc, then his actuality yesterday does indeed 
differ from mine today. 
What is more, we sometimes have occasion to 
ascribe knowledge to those who are off at other 
possible worlds. I didn't read the newspaper yesterday. 
What would I have known if! had read it? More than 
I do in fact know. (More and less: I do in fact know 
that I left the newspaper unread, but if I had read it, 
I would not have known that I had left it unread.) 
I-who-did-not-read-the-newspaper am here at this 
world, ascribing knowledge and ignorance. The 
subject to whom I am ascribing that knowledge 
and ignorance, namely I -as-I-would -have-been -if-
I-had-read-the-newspaper, is at a different world. 
The worlds differ in respect at least of a reading of 
the newspaper. Thus the ascriber's actual world is 
not the same as the subject's. (I myself think that 
the ascriber and the subject are two different 
people: the subject is the ascriber's otherworldly 
counterpart. But even if you think the subject and 
the ascriber are the same identical person, you 
must still grant that this person's actuality qua sub-
ject differs from his actuality qua ascriber.) 
Or suppose we ask modal questions about the 
subject: what must he have known, what might he 
have known? Again we are considering the sub-
ject as he is not here, but off at other possible 
worlds. Likewise if we ask questions about knowl-
edge of knowledge: what does he (or what do we) 
know that he knows? 
So the question "whose actuality?" is not a silly 
question after all. And when the question matters, 
as it does in the cases just considered, the right 
answer is that it is the subject's actuality, not the 
ascriber's, that never can be properly ignored. 
Next, there is the Rule of Belief A possibility that 
the subject believes to obtain is not properly 
ignored, whether or not he is right to so believe. 
Neither is one that he ought to believe to obtain -
one that evidence and arguments justify him in 
believing - whether or not he does so believe. 
That is rough. Since belief admits of degree, 
and since some possibilities are more specific 
than others, we ought to reformulate the rule in 
terms of degree of belief, compared to a standard 
set by the un specificity of the possibility in ques-
tion. A possibility may not be properly ignored if 
the subject gives it, or ought to give it, a degree of 
belief that is sufficiently high, and high not just 
because the possibility in question is unspecific. 
How high is "sufficiently high"? That may 
depend on how much is at stake. When error 
would be especially disastrous, few possibilities 
may be properly ignored. Then even quite a low 

696 
DAVID LEWIS 
degree of belief may be "sufficiently high" to bring 
the Rule of Belief into play. The jurors know that 
the accused is guilty only if his guilt has been 
proved beyond reasonable doubt. 12 
Yet even when the stakes are high, some pos-
sibilities still may be properly ignored. Disastrous 
though it would be to convict an innocent man, 
still the jurors may properly ignore the possibility 
that it was the dog, marvellously well-trained, 
that fired the fatal shot. And, unless they are 
ignoring other alternatives more relevant than 
that, they may rightly be said to know that the 
accused is guilty as charged. Yet if there had been 
reason to give the dog hypothesis a slightly less 
negligible degree of belief - if the world's greatest 
dog-trainer had been the victim's mortal enemy-
then the alternative would be relevant after all. 
This is the only place where belief and justi-
fication enter my story. As already noted, I allow 
justified true belief without knowledge, as in the 
case of your belief that you will lose the lottery. 
I allow knowledge without justification, in the 
cases of face recognition and chicken sexing. 
I even allow knowledge without belief, as in the 
case of the timid student who knows the answer 
but has no confidence that he has it right, and so 
does not believe what he knows. 13 Therefore any 
proposed converse to the Rule of Belief should 
be rejected. A possibility that the subject does 
not believe to a sufficient degree, and ought not 
to believe to a sufficient degree, may neverthe-
less be a relevant alternative and not properly 
ignored. 
Next, there is the Rule of Resemblance. Suppose 
one possibility saliently resembles another. 
Then if one of them may not be properly 
ignored, neither may the other. (Or rather, we 
should say that if one of them may not properly 
be ignored in virtue of rules other than this rule, 
then neither may the other. Else nothing could 
be properly ignored; because enough little steps 
of resemblance can take us from anywhere to 
anywhere.) Or suppose one possibility saliently 
resembles two or more others, one in one 
respect and another in another, and suppose 
that each of these may not properly be ignored 
(in virtue of rules other than this rule). Then 
these resemblances may have an additive effect, 
doing more together than anyone of them 
would separately. 
We must apply the Rule of Resemblance with 
care. Actuality is a possibility uneliminated by 
the subject's evidence. Any other possibility W 
that is likewise uneliminated by the subject's 
evidence thereby resembles actuality in one 
salient respect: namely, in respect of the sub-
ject's evidence. That will be so even if W is in 
other respects very dissimilar to actuality - even 
if, for instance, it is a possibility in which the 
subject is radically deceived by a demon. Plainly, 
we dare not apply the Rules of Actuality and 
Resemblance to conclude that any such W is a 
relevant alternative - that would be capitula-
tion to scepticism. The Rule of Resemblance 
was never meant to apply to this resemblance! 
We seem to have an ad hoc exception to the 
Rule, though one that makes good sense in view 
of the function of attributions of knowledge. 
What would be better, though, would be to find 
a way to reformulate the Rule so as to get the 
needed exception without ad hocery. I do not 
know how to do this. 
It is the Rule of Resemblance that explains why 
you do not know that you will lose the lottery, 
no matter what the odds are against you and no 
matter how sure you should therefore be that you 
will lose. For every ticket, there is the possibility 
that it will win. These possibilities are saliently 
similar to one another: so either everyone of 
them may be properly ignored, or else none may. 
But one of them may not properly be ignored: the 
one that actually obtains. 
The Rule of Resemblance also is the rule that 
solves the Gettier problems: other cases of justi-
fied true belief that are not knowledge. 14 
(1) I think that Nogot owns a Ford, because I 
have seen him driving one; but unbeknownst to 
me he does not own the Ford he drives, or any 
other Ford. Unbeknownst to me, Havit does own 
a Ford, though I have no reason to think so 
because he never drives it, and in fact I have often 
seen him taking the tram. My justified true belief 
is that one of the two owns a Ford. But I do not 
know it; I am right by accident. Diagnosis: I do 
not know, because I have not eliminated the pos-
sibility that Nogot drives a Ford he does not own 
whereas Havit neither drives nor owns a car. This 
possibility may not properly be ignored. Because, 
first, actuality may not properly be ignored; and, 
second, this possibility saliently resembles actu-
ality. It resembles actuality perfectly so far as 

ELUSIVE KNOWLEDGE 
697 
Nogot is concerned; and it resembles actuality 
well so far as Havit is concerned, since it matches 
actuality both with respect to Havit's carless 
habits and with respect to the general correlation 
between carless habits and carlessness. In addi-
tion, this possibility saliently resembles a third 
possibility: one in which Nogot drives a Ford he 
owns while Havit neither drives nor owns a car. 
This third possibility may not properly be 
ignored, because of the degree to which it is 
believed. This time, the resemblance is perfect so 
far as Havit is concerned, rather good so far as 
Nogot is concerned. 
(2) The stopped clock is right twice a day. It 
says 4:39, as it has done for weeks. I look at it at 
4:39; by luck I pick up a true belief. I have ignored 
the uneliminated possibility that I looked at it at 
4:22 while it was stopped saying 4:39. That pos-
sibility was not properly ignored. It resembles 
actuality perfectly so far as the stopped clock 
goes. 
(3) Unbeknownst to me, I am travelling in the 
land of the bogus barns; but my eye falls on one 
of the few real ones. I don't know that I am seeing 
a barn, because I may not properly ignore the 
possibility that I am seeing yet another of the 
abundant bogus barns. This possibility saliently 
resembles actuality in respect of the abundance of 
bogus barns, and the scarcity of real ones, herea-
bouts. 
(4) Donald is in San Francisco, just as I have 
every reason to think he is. But, bent on decep-
tion, he is writing me letters and having them 
posted to me by his accomplice in Italy. If I had 
seen the phoney letters, with their Italian stamps 
and post-marks, I would have concluded that 
Donald was in Italy. Luckily, I have not yet seen 
any of them. I ignore the uneliminated possibility 
that Donald has gone to Italy and is sending me 
letters from there. But this possibility is not prop-
erly ignored, because it resembles actuality both 
with respect to the fact that the letters are coming 
to me from Italy and with respect to the fact that 
those letters come, ultimately, from Donald. So I 
don't know that Donald is in San Francisco. 
Next, there is the Rule of Reliability. This time, we 
have a presumptive rule about what may be prop-
erly ignored; and it is by means of this rule that 
we capture what is right about causal or reliabilist 
theories of knowing. Consider processes whereby 
information is transmitted to us: perception, 
memory, and testimony. These processes are fairly 
reliable. 15 Within limits, we are entitled to take 
them for granted. We may properly presuppose 
that they work without a glitch in the case under 
consideration. Defeasibly - very de feasibly! - a 
possibility in which they fail may properly be 
ignored. 
My visual experience, for instance, depends 
causally on the scene before my eyes, and what I 
believe about the scene before my eyes depends in 
turn on my visual experience. Each dependence 
covers a wide and varied range of alternatives. 16 
Of course, it is possible to hallucinate - even to 
hallucinate in such a way that all my perceptual 
experience and memory would be just as they 
actually are. That possibility never can be elimi-
nated. But it can be ignored. And if it is properly 
ignored - as it mostly is - then vision gives me 
knowledge. Sometimes, though, the possibility of 
hallucination is not properly ignored; for some-
times we really do hallucinate. The Rule of 
Reliability may be defeated by the Rule of Actuality. 
Or it may be defeated by the Rules of Actuality 
and of Resemblance working together, in a Gettier 
problem: if I am not hallucinating, but unbe-
knownst to me I live in a world where people 
mostly do hallucinate and I myself have only nar-
rowly escaped, then the un eliminated possibility 
of hallucination is too close to actuality to be 
properly ignored. 
We do not, of course, presuppose that nowhere 
ever is there a failure of, say, vision. The general 
presupposition that vision is reliable consists, 
rather, of a standing disposition to presuppose, 
concerning whatever particular case may be 
under consideration, that we have no failure in 
that case. 
In similar fashion, we have two permissive 
Rules of Method. We are entitled to presuppose -
again, very defeasibly - that a sample is represent-
ative; and that the best explanation of our 
evidence is the true explanation. That is, we are 
entitled properly to ignore possible failures in 
these two standard methods of non-deductive 
inference. Again, the general rule consists of a 
standing disposition to presuppose reliability in 
whatever particular case may come before us. 
Yet another permissive rule is the Rule of 
Conservatism. Suppose that those around us 

698 
DAVID LEWIS 
normally do ignore certain possibilities, and it is 
common knowledge that they do. (They do, they 
expect each other to, they expect each other to 
expect each other to ... ) Then - again, very defea-
sibly! - these generally ignored possibilities may 
properly be ignored. We are permitted, defeasibly, 
to adopt the usual and mutually expected presup-
positions of those around us. 
(It is unclear whether we need all four of these 
permissive rules. Some might be subsumed under 
others. Perhaps our habits of treating samples as 
representative, and of inferring to the best expla-
nation, might count as normally reliable processes 
of transmission of information. Or perhaps we 
might subsume the Rule of Reliability under the 
Rule of Conservatism, on the ground that the reli-
able processes whereby we gain knowledge are 
familiar, are generally relied upon, and so are gen-
erally presupposed to be normally reliable. Then 
the only extra work done by the Rule of Reliability 
would be to cover less familiar - and merely hypo-
thetical? - reliable processes, such as processes 
that relied on extrasensory faculties. Likewise, 
mutatis mutandis, we might subsume the Rules of 
Method under the Rule of Conservatism. Or we 
might instead think to subsume the Rule of 
Conservatism under the Rule of Reliability, on the 
ground that what is generally presupposed tends 
for the most part to be true, and the reliable proc-
esses whereby this is so are covered already by the 
Rule of Reliability. Better redundancy than incom-
pleteness, though. So, leaving the question of 
redundancy open, I list all four rules.) 
Our final rule is the Rule of Attention. But it is 
more a triviality than a rule. When we say that a 
possibility is properly ignored, we mean exactly 
that; we do not mean that it could have been prop-
erlyignored.Accordingly, a possibility not ignored 
at all is ipso facto not properly ignored. What is 
and what is not being ignored is a feature of the 
particular conversational context. No matter how 
far-fetched a certain possibility may be, no matter 
how properly we might have ignored it in some 
other context, if in this context we are not in fact 
ignoring it but attending to it, then for us now it 
is a relevant alternative. It is in the contextually 
determined domain. If it is an un eliminated pos-
sibility in which not-P, then it will do as a coun-
ter-example to the claim that P holds in every 
possibility left uneliminated by S's evidence. That 
is, it will do as a counter-example to the claim 
that S knows that P. 
Do some epistemology. Let your fantasies rip. 
Find uneliminated possibilities of error every-
where. Now that you are attending to them, just as 
I told you to, you are no longer ignoring them, 
properly or otherwise. So you have landed in a 
context with an enormously rich domain of 
potential counter-examples to ascriptions of 
knowledge. In such an extraordinary context, with 
such a rich domain, it never can happen (well, 
hardly ever) that an ascription of knowledge is 
true. Not an ascription of knowledge to yourself 
(either to your present self or to your earlier self, 
untainted by epistemology); and not an ascription 
of knowledge to others. That is how epistemology 
destroys knowledge. But it does so only temporar-
ily. The pastime of epistemology does not plunge 
us forevermore into its special context. We can 
still do a lot of proper ignoring, a lot of knowing, 
and a lot of true ascribing of knowledge to our-
selves and others, the rest of the time. 
What is epistemology all about? The episte-
mology we've just been doing, at any rate, soon 
became an investigation of the ignoring of possi-
bilities. But to investigate the ignoring of them 
was ipso facto not to ignore them. Unless this 
investigation of ours was an altogether atypical 
sample of epistemology, it will be inevitable that 
epistemology must destroy knowledge. That is 
how knowledge is elusive. Examine it, and 
straightway it vanishes. 
Is resistance useless? If you bring some hitherto 
ignored possibility to our attention, then straight-
way we are not ignoring it at all, so a fortiori we 
are not properly ignoring it. How can this altera-
tion of our conversational state be undone? If you 
are persistent, perhaps it cannot be undone - at 
least not so long as you are around. Even if we go 
off and play backgammon, and afterward start 
our conversation afresh, you might turn up and 
call our attention to it all over again. 
But maybe you called attention to the hitherto 
ignored possibility by mistake. You only suggested 
that we ought to suspect the butler because you 
mistakenly thought him to have a criminal record. 
Now that you know he does not - that was the pre-
vious butler - you wish you had not mentioned 
him at all. You know as well as we do that contin-
ued attention to the possibility you brought up 

ELUSIVE KNOWLEDGE 
699 
impedes our shared conversational purposes. 
Indeed, it may be common knowledge between 
you and us that we would all prefer it if this pos-
sibility could be dismissed from our attention. In 
that case we might quickly strike a tacit agree-
ment to speak just as if we were ignoring it; and 
after just a little of that, doubtless it really would 
be ignored. 
Sometimes our conversational purposes are 
not altogether shared, and it is a matter of conflict 
whether attention to some far-fetched possibility 
would advance them or impede them. What if 
some far-fetched possibility is called to our atten-
tion not by a sceptical philosopher, but by counsel 
for the defence? We of the jury may wish to ignore 
it, and wish it had not been mentioned. If we 
ignored it now, we would bend the rules of coop-
erative conversation; but we may have good 
reason to do exactly that. (After all, what matters 
most to us as jurors is not whether we can truly be 
said to know; what really matters is what we 
should believe to what degree, and whether or not 
we should vote to convict.) We would ignore the 
far-fetched possibility if we could - but can we? 
Perhaps at first our attempted ignoring would be 
make-believe ignoring, or self-deceptive ignor-
ing; later, perhaps, it might ripen into genuine 
ignoring. But in the meantime, do we know? 
There may be no definite answer. We are bending 
the rules, and our practices of context-dependent 
attributions of knowledge were made for contexts 
with the rules unbent. 
If you are still a contented fallibilist, despite my 
plea to hear the sceptical argument afresh, you 
will probably be discontented with the Rule of 
Attention. You will begrudge the sceptic even his 
very temporary victory. You will claim the right to 
resist his argument not only in everyday contexts, 
but even in those peculiar contexts in which he (or 
some other epistemologist) busily calls your atten-
tion to far-fetched possibilities of error. Further, 
you will claim the right to resist without having to 
bend any rules of cooperative conversation. I said 
that the Rule of Attention was a triviality: that 
which is not ignored at all is not properly ignored. 
But the Rule was trivial only because of how I had 
already chosen to state the satta voce proviso. So 
you, the contented fallibilist, will think it ought to 
have been stated differently. Thus, perhaps: "Psst! 
- except for those possibilities we could properly 
have ignored:' And then you will insist that those 
far-fetched possibilities of error that we attend to 
at the behest of the sceptic are nevertheless possi-
bilities we could properly have ignored. You will 
say that no amount of attention can, by itself, turn 
them into relevant alternatives. 
If you say this, we have reached a standoff. 
I started with a puzzle: how can it be, when his 
conclusion is so silly, that the sceptic's argument 
is so irresistible? My Rule of Attention, and the 
version of the proviso that made that Rule trivial, 
were built to explain how the sceptic manages to 
sway us - why his argument seems irresistible, 
however temporarily. If you continue to find it 
eminently resistible in all contexts, you have no 
need of any such explanation. We just disagree 
about the explanandum phenomenon. 
I say S knows that P iff P holds in every possibility 
left un eliminated by S's evidence - Psst! - except 
for those possibilities that we are properly ignor-
ing. "We" means: the speaker and hearers of a 
given context; that is, those of us who are discuss-
ing S's knowledge together. It is our ignorings, 
not S's own ignorings, that matter to what we can 
truly say about S's knowledge. When we are talk-
ing about our own knowledge or ignorance, as 
epistemologists so often do, this is a distinction 
without a difference. But what if we are talking 
about someone else? 
Suppose we are detectives; the crucial question 
for our solution of the crime is whether S already 
knew, when he bought the gun, that he was vul-
nerable to blackmail. We conclude that he did. We 
ignore various far-fetched possibilities, as hard-
headed detectives should. But S does not ignore 
them. S is by profession a sceptical epistemolo-
gist. He never ignores much of anything. If it is 
our own ignorings that matter to the truth of our 
conclusion, we may well be right that S already 
knew. But if it is S's ignorings that matter, then we 
are wrong, because S never knew much of any-
thing. I say we may well be right; so it is our own 
ignorings that matter, not S's. 
But suppose instead that we are epistemolo-
gists considering what S knows. If we are well-
informed about S (or if we are considering a 
well-enough specified hypothetical case), then if 
S attends to a certain possibility, we attend to S's 
attending to it. But to attend to S's attending to it 
is ipso facto to attend to it ourselves. In that case, 
unlike the case of the detectives, the possibilities 

700 
DAVID LEWIS 
we are properly ignoring must be among the 
possibilities that S himself ignores. We may 
ignore fewer possibilities than S does, but not 
more. 
Even if S himself is neither sceptical nor an 
epistemologist, he may yet be clever at thinking up 
far-fetched possibilities that are uneliminated by 
his evidence. Then again, we well-informed epis-
temologists who ask what S knows will have to 
attend to the possibilities that S thinks up. Even if 
S's idle cleverness does not lead S himself to draw 
sceptical conclusions, it nevertheless limits the 
knowledge that we can truly ascribe to him when 
attentive to his state of mind. More simply: his 
cleverness limits his knowledge. He would have 
known more, had he been less imaginative. 17 
Do I claim you can know P just by presupposing 
it?! Do I claim you can know that a possibility W 
does not obtain just by ignoring it? Is that not what 
my analysis implies, provided that the presuppos-
ing and the ignoring are proper? Well, yes. And yet 
I do not claim it. Or rather, I do not claim it for any 
specified P or W. I have to grant, in general, that 
knowledge just by presupposing and ignoring 
is knowledge; but it is an especially elusive sort of 
knowledge, and consequently it is an unclaimable 
sort of knowledge. You do not even have to prac-
tise epistemology to make it vanish. Simply men-
tioning any particular case of this knowledge, aloud 
or even in silent thought, is a way to attend to the 
hitherto ignored possibility, and thereby render it 
no longer ignored, and thereby create a context in 
which it is no longer true to ascribe the knowledge 
in question to yourself or others. So, just as we 
should think, presuppositions alone are not a basis 
on which to claim knowledge. 
In general, when S knows that P some of the pos-
sibilities in which not-P are eliminated by S's evi-
dence and others of them are properly ignored. 
There are some that can be eliminated, but cannot 
properly be ignored. For instance, when I look 
around the study without seeing Possum the cat, 
I thereby eliminate various possibilities in which 
Possum is in the study; but had those possibilities 
not been eliminated, they could not properly have 
been ignored. And there are other possibilities 
that never can be eliminated, but can properly be 
ignored. For instance, the possibility that Possum 
is on the desk but has been made invisible by a 
deceiving demon falls normally into this class 
(though not when I attend to it in the special con-
text of epistemology). 
There is a third class: not-P possibilities that 
might either be eliminated or ignored. Take the 
far-fetched possibility that Possum has somehow 
managed to get into a closed drawer of the desk -
maybe he jumped in when it was open, then I 
closed it without noticing him. That possibility 
could be eliminated by opening the drawer and 
making a thorough examination. But if unelimi-
nated, it may nevertheless be ignored, and in 
many contexts that ignoring would be proper. If I 
look all around the study, but without checking 
the closed drawers of the desk, I may truly be said 
to know that Possum is not in the study - or at 
any rate, there are many contexts in which that 
may truly be said. But if I did check all the closed 
drawers, then I would know better that Possum is 
not in the study. My knowledge would be better 
in the second case because it would rest more on 
the elimination of not-P possibilities, less on the 
ignoring of them. 18• 19 
Better knowledge is more stable knowledge: it 
stands more chance of surviving a shift of atten-
tion in which we begin to attend to some of the 
possibilities formerly ignored. If, in our new 
shifted context, we ask what knowledge we may 
truly ascribe to our earlier selves, we may find 
that only the better knowledge of our earlier 
selves still deserves the name. And yet, if our 
former ignorings were proper at the time, even 
the worse knowledge of our earlier selves could 
truly have been called knowledge in the former 
context. 
Never - well, hardly ever - does our knowledge 
rest entirely on elimination and not at all on ignor-
ing. So hardly ever is it quite as good as we might 
wish. To that extent, the lesson of scepticism is 
right - and right permanently, not just in the 
temporary and special context of epistemology.20 
What is it all for? Why have a notion of knowl-
edge that works in the way I described? (Not a 
compulsory question. Enough to observe that we 
do have it.) But I venture the guess that it is one of 
the messy short-cuts -like satisficing, like having 
indeterminate degrees of belief - that we resort to 
because we are not smart enough to live up to 
really high, perfectly Bayesian, standards of 
rationality. You cannot maintain a record of 

ELUSIVE KNOWLEDGE 
701 
exactly which possibilities you have eliminated so 
far, much as you might like to. It is easier to keep 
track of which possibilities you have eliminated if 
you - Psst! - ignore many of all the possibilities 
there are. And besides, it is easier to list some of 
the propositions that are true in all the unelimi-
nated, unignored possibilities than it is to find 
propositions that are true in all and only the 
uneliminated, unignored possibilities. 
If you doubt that the word "know" bears any 
real load in science or in metaphysics, I partly 
agree. The serious business of science has to do 
not with knowledge per se; but rather, with the 
elimination of possibilities through the evidence 
of perception, memory, etc., and with the changes 
that one's belief system would (or might or 
should) undergo under the impact of such elimi-
nations. Ascriptions of knowledge to yourself or 
others are a very sloppy way of conveying very 
incomplete information about the elimination of 
possibilities. It is as if you had said: 
The possibilities eliminated, whatever else they 
may also include, at least include all the not-P 
possibilities; or anyway, all of those except for 
some we are presumably prepared to ignore just 
at the moment. 
The only excuse for giving information about what 
really matters in such a sloppy way is that at least it 
is easy and quick! But it is easy and quick; whereas 
giving full and precise information about which 
possibilities have been eliminated seems to be 
extremely difficult, as witness the futile search for a 
"pure observation language". If I am right about 
how ascriptions of knowledge work, they are a 
handy but humble approximation. They may yet 
be indispensable in practice, in the same way that 
other handy and humble approximations are. 
If we analyse knowledge as a modality, as we have 
done, we cannot escape the conclusion that 
knowledge is closed under (strict) implicationY 
Dretske has denied that knowledge is closed 
under implication; further, he has diagnosed clo-
sure as the fallacy that drives arguments for scep-
ticism. As follows: the proposition that I have 
hands implies that I am not a handless being, and 
a fortiori that I am not a handless being deceived 
by a demon into thinking that I have hands. So, by 
the closure principle, the proposition that I know 
I have hands implies that I know that I am not 
handless and deceived. But I don't know that I am 
not handless and deceived - for how can I elimi-
nate that possibility? So, by modus tollens, I don't 
know that I have hands. Dretske's advice is to 
resist scepticism by denying closure. He says that 
although having hands does imply not being hand-
less and deceived, yet knowing that I have hands 
does not imply knowing that I am not handless 
and deceived. I do know the former, I do not 
know the latterY 
What Dretske says is close to right, but not 
quite. Knowledge is closed under implication. 
Knowing that I have hands does imply knowing 
that I am not handless and deceived. Implication 
preserves truth - that is, it preserves truth in any 
given, fixed context. But if we switch contexts 
midway, all bets are off. I say (1) pigs fly; (2) what 
I just said had fewer than three syllables (true); 
(3) what I just said had fewer than four syllables 
(false). So "less than three" does not imply "less 
than four"? No! The context switched midway, 
the semantic value of the context-dependent 
phrase "what I just said" switched with it. Likewise 
in the sceptical argument the context switched 
midway, and the semantic value of the context-
dependent word "know" switched with it. The 
premise "I know that I have hands" was true in its 
everyday context, where the possibility of deceiv-
ing demons was properly ignored. The mention 
of that very possibility switched the context 
midway. The conclusion "I know that I am not 
handless and deceived" was false in its context, 
because that was a context in which the possibil-
ity of deceiving demons was being mentioned, 
hence was not being ignored, hence was not being 
properly ignored. Dretske gets the phenomenon 
right, and I think he gets the diagnosis of scepti-
cism right; it is just that he misclassifies what he 
sees. He thinks it is a phenomenon of logic, when 
really it is a phenomenon of pragmatics. Closure, 
rightly understood, survives the test. If we evalu-
ate the conclusion for truth not with respect to 
the context in which it was uttered, but instead 
with respect to the different context in which the 
premise was uttered, then truth is preserved. And 
if, per impossible, the conclusion could have been 
said in the same unchanged context as the 
premise, truth would have been preserved. 
A problem due to Saul Kripke turns upon the 
closure of knowledge under implication. P implies 

702 
DAVID LEWIS 
that any evidence against P is misleading. So, by 
closure, whenever you know that P, you know 
that any evidence against P is misleading. And if 
you know that evidence is misleading, you should 
pay it no heed. Whenever we know - and we know 
a lot, remember - we should not heed any evi-
dence tending to suggest that we are wrong. But 
that is absurd. Shall we dodge the conclusion by 
denying closure? I think not. Again, I diagnose a 
change of context. At first, it was stipulated that S 
knew, whence it followed that S was properly 
ignoring all possibilities of error. But as the story 
continues, it turns out that there is evidence on 
offer that points to some particular possibility of 
error. Then, by the Rule of Attention, that possi-
bility is no longer properly ignored, either by S 
himself or by we who are telling the story of S. 
The advent of that evidence destroys S's knowl-
edge, and thereby destroys S's licence to ignore 
the evidence lest he be misled. 
There is another reason, different from 
Dretske's, why we might doubt closure. Suppose 
two or more premises jointly imply a conclusion. 
Might not someone who is compartmentalized 
in his thinking - as we all are? - know each of the 
premises but fail to bring them together in a 
single compartment? Then might he not fail to 
know the conclusion? Yes; and I would not like 
to plead idealization-of-rationality as an excuse 
for ignoring such cases. But I suggest that we 
might take not the whole compartmentalized 
thinker, but rather each of his several overlapping 
compartments, as our "subjects". That would be 
the obvious remedy if his compartmentalization 
amounted to a case of multiple personality dis-
order; but maybe it is right for milder cases 
as well.23 
A compartmentalized thinker who indulges in 
epistemology can destroy his knowledge, yet retain 
it as well. Imagine two epistemologists on a bush-
walk. As they walk, they talk. They mention all 
manner of far-fetched possibilities of error. By 
attending to these normally ignored possibilities 
they destroy the knowledge they normally possess. 
Yet all the while they know where they are and 
where they are going! How so? The compartment 
in charge of philosophical talk attends to far-
fetched possibilities of error. The compartment in 
charge of navigation does not. One compartment 
loses its knowledge, the other retains its knowledge. 
And what does the entire compartmentalized 
thinker know? Not an altogether felicitous ques-
tion. But if we need an answer, I suppose the best 
thing to say is that S knows that P iff anyone of S's 
compartments knows that P. Then we can say what 
we would offhand want to say: yes, our philosophi-
cal bushwalkers still know their whereabouts. 
Context-dependence is not limited to the ignoring 
and non-ignoring of far-fetched possibilities. Here 
is another case. Pity poor Bill! He squanders all his 
spare cash on the pokies, the races, and the lottery. 
He will be a wage slave all his days. We know he 
will never be rich. But if he wins the lottery (if he 
wins big), then he will be rich. Contrapositively: 
his never being rich, plus other things we know, 
imply that he will lose. So, by closure, if we know 
that he will never be rich, we know that he will 
lose. But when we discussed the case before, we 
concluded that we cannot know that he will lose. 
All the possibilities in which Bill loses and some-
one else wins saliently resemble the possibility in 
which Bill wins and the others lose; one of those 
possibilities is actual; so by the Rules of Actuality 
and of Resemblance, we may not properly ignore 
the possibility that Bill wins. But there is a loop-
hole: the resemblance was required to be salient. 
Salience, as well as ignoring, may vary between 
contexts. Before, when I was explaining how the 
Rule of Resemblance applied to lotteries, I saw to it 
that the resemblance between the many possibili-
ties associated with the many tickets was suffi-
ciently salient. But this time, when we were busy 
pitying poor Bill for his habits and not for his luck, 
the resemblance of the many possibilities was not so 
salient. At that point, the possibility of Bill's win-
ning was properly ignored; so then it was true to 
say that we knew he would never be rich. Afterward 
I switched the context. I mentioned the possibility 
that Bill might win, wherefore that possibility was 
no longer properly ignored. (Maybe there were 
two separate reasons why it was no longer properly 
ignored, because maybe I also made the resem-
blance between the many possibilities more sali-
ent.) It was true at first that we knew that Bill 
would never be rich. And at that point it was also 
true that we knew he would lose - but that was 
only true so long as it remained unsaid! (And 
maybe unthought as well.) Later, after the change 
in context, it was no longer true that we knew he 
would lose. At that point, it was also no longer true 
that we knew he would never be rich. 

ELUSIVE KNOWLEDGE 
703 
But wait. Don't you smell a rat? Haven't I, by my 
own lights, been saying what cannot be said? (Or 
whistled either.) If the story I told was true, how 
have I managed to tell it? In trendyspeak, is there 
not a problem of reflexivity? Does not my story 
deconstruct itself? 
I said: S knows that P iff S's evidence eliminates 
every possibility in which not -P - Psst! - except for 
those possibilities that we are properly ignoring. 
That "psst" marks an attempt to do the impossible -
to mention that which remains unmentioned. 
I am sure you managed to make believe that I had 
succeeded. But I could not have done. 
And I said that when we do epistemology, 
and we attend to the proper ignoring of possi-
bilities, we make knowledge vanish. First we do 
know, then we do not. But I had been doing epis-
temology when I said that. The uneliminated 
possibilities were not being ignored - not just 
then. So by what right did I say even that we used 
to know?24 
In trying to thread a course between the 
rock of fallibilism and the whirlpool of scepti-
cism, it may well seem as if I have fallen victim 
to both at once. For do I not say that there are 
all those un eliminated possibilities of error? Yet 
do I not claim that we know a lot? Yet do I not 
claim that knowledge is, by definition, infallible 
knowledge? 
Notes 
The suggestion that ascriptions of knowledge 
go false in the context of epistemology is to be 
found in Barry Stroud, "Understanding 
Human Knowledge in General", in Marjorie 
Clay and Keith Lehrer (eds), Knowledge and 
Skepticism (Boulder: Westview Press, 1989); 
and in Stephen Hetherington, "Lacking 
Knowledge and Justification by Theorising 
About Them" (lecture at the University of 
New South Wales, August 1992). Neither of 
them tells the story just as I do, however it 
may be that their versions do not conflict with 
mille. 
2 Unless, like some, we simply define "justifica-
tion" as "whatever it takes to turn true opin-
ion into knowledge" regardless of whether 
what it takes turns out to involve argument 
from supporting reasons. 
I did claim all three things. But not all at 
once! Or if I did claim them all at once, that was 
an expository shortcut, to be taken with a pinch 
of salt. To get my message across, I bent the 
rules. If I tried to whistle what cannot be said, 
what of it? I relied on the cardinal principle of 
pragmatics, which overrides everyone of the 
rules I mentioned: interpret the message to 
make it make sense - to make it consistent, and 
sensible to say. 
When you have context-dependence, ineffa-
bility can be trite and unmysterious. Hush! 
[moment of silence 1 I might have liked to say, just 
then, "All of us are silent". It was true. But I could 
not have said it truly, or whistled it either. For by 
saying it aloud, or by whistling, I would have ren-
dered it false. 
I could have said my say fair and square, bend-
ing no rules. It would have been tiresome, but it 
could have been done. The secret would have 
been to resort to "semantic ascent': I could have 
taken great care to distinguish between (1) the 
language I use when I talk about knowledge, or 
whatever, and (2) the second language that I use 
to talk about the semantic and pragmatic work-
ings of the first language. If you want to hear my 
story told that way, you probably know enough to 
do the job for yourself. If you can, then my 
informal presentation has been good enough. 
3 The problem of the lottery was introduced in 
Henry Kyburg, Probability and the Logic of 
Rational Belief (Middletown, CT: Wesleyan 
University Press, 1961), and in Carl Hempel, 
"Deductive-Nomological 
vs. 
Statistical 
Explanation", in Herbert Feigl and Grover 
Maxwell (eds), Minnesota Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, vol. II (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1962). It has 
been much discussed since, as a problem both 
about knowledge and about our everyday, 
non-quantitative concept of belief. 
4 
The case of testimony is less discussed than 
the others; but see C. A. J. Coady, Testimony: 
A Philosophical Study (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1992), pp. 79-129. 
5 I follow Peter Unger, Ignorance: A Case for 
Skepticism (New York: Oxford University 

704 
DAVID LEWIS 
Press, 1975). But I shall not let him lead me 
into scepticism. 
6 
See Robert Stalnaker, Inquiry (Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1984), pp. 59-99. 
7 
See my "Attitudes De Dicto and De Se", The 
Philosophical Review 88 (1979), pp. 513-43; 
and R. M. Chisholm, "The Indirect Reflexive", 
in C. Diamond and J. Teichman (eds), 
Intention and Intentionality: Essays in Honour 
of G. E. M. Anscombe (Brighton: Harvester, 
1979). 
8 
Peter Unger, Ignorance, chapter II. I discuss 
the case, and briefly foreshadow the present 
paper, in my "Scorekeeping in a Language 
Game", Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 
(1979), pp. 339-59, esp. pp. 353-5. 
9 
See Robert Stalnaker, "Presuppositions", 
Journal of Philosophical Logic 2 (1973), pp. 
447-57; and "Pragmatic Presuppositions", in 
Milton Munitz and Peter Unger (eds), 
Semantics and Philosophy (New York: New 
York University Press, 1974). See also my 
"Scorekeeping in a Language Game". 
The definition restated in terms of 
presupposition resembles the treatment of 
knowledge 
in 
Kenneth 
S. 
Ferguson, 
Philosophical Scepticism (Cornell University 
doctoral dissertation, 1980). 
10 
See Fred Dretske, "Epistemic Operators", The 
Journal of Philosophy 67 (1970), pp. 1007-22, 
and 
"The 
Pragmatic 
Dimension 
of 
Knowledge", Philosophical Studies 40 (1981), 
pp. 363-78; Alvin Goldman, "Discrimination 
and Perceptual Knowledge", The Journal of 
Philosophy 73 (1976), pp. 771-91; G. C. Stine, 
"Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives, and 
Deductive Closure", Philosophical Studies 29 
(1976), pp. 249-61; and Stewart Cohen, 
"How to be A Fallibilist", Philosophical 
Perspectives 2 (1988), pp. 91-123. 
11 
Some of them, but only some, taken from 
the authors just cited. 
12 
Instead of complicating the Rule of Belief as 
I have just done, I might equivalently have 
introduced a separate Rule of High Stakes 
saying that when error would be especially 
disastrous, few possibilities are properly 
ignored. 
13 
A. D. Woozley, "Knowing and Not Knowing", 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 53 
(1953), 
pp. 
151-72; 
Colin 
Radford, 
"Knowledge -
By Examples", Analysis 27 
(1966), pp. 1-11. 
14 
See Edmund Gettier, "Is Justified True Belief 
Knowledge?", this vol., ch. 15. Diagnoses 
have varied widely. The four examples below 
come from: (1) Keith Lehrer and Thomas 
Paxson Jr., "Knowledge: Undefeated True 
Belief", The Journal of Philosophy 66 (1969), 
pp. 225-37; (2) Bertrand Russell, Human 
Knowledge: Its Scope and Limits (London: 
Allen and Unwin, 1948), p. 154; (3) Alvin 
Goldman, "Discrimination and Perceptual 
Knowledge"; (4) Gilbert Harman, Thought 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1973),p.143. 
Though the lottery problem is another 
case of justified true belief without knowl-
edge, it is not normally counted among the 
Gettier problems. It is interesting to find that 
it yields to the same remedy. 
15 
See Alvin Goldman, "A Causal Theory of 
Knowing", The Journal of Philosophy 64 
(1967), pp. 357-72; D. M. Armstrong, Belief, 
Truth 
and 
Knowledge 
(Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1973). 
16 
See 
my "Veridical 
Hallucination 
and 
Prosthetic Vision", Australasian Journal of 
Philosophy 58 (1980), pp. 239-49. John 
Bigelow has proposed to model knowledge-
delivering processes generally on those found 
III VISIOn. 
17 
See Catherine Elgin, "The Epistemic Efficacy 
of Stupidity': Synthese 74 (1988), pp. 297-311. 
The "efficacy" takes many forms; some to do 
with knowledge (under various rival analy-
ses), some to do with justified belief. See also 
Michael 
Williams, 
Unnatural 
Doubts: 
Epistemological Realism and the Basis of 
Scepticism (Oxford: Blackwell, 1991), pp. 
352-5, on the instability of knowledge under 
reflection. 
18 
Mixed cases are possible: Fred properly 
ignores the possibility WI which Ted elimi-
nates; however Ted properly ignores the 
possibility W2 which Fred eliminates. Ted 
has looked in all the desk drawers but not 
the file drawers, whereas Fred has checked 
the file drawers but not the desk. Fred's 
knowledge that Possum is not in the study 
is better in one way, Ted's is better in 
another. 

ELUSIVE KNOWLEDGE 
705 
19 
To say truly that X is known, I must be prop-
erly ignoring any un eliminated possibilities 
in which not-X; whereas to say truly that Y is 
better known than X, I must be attending to 
some such possibilities. So I cannot say both 
in a single context. If I say "X is known, but Y 
is better known", the context changes in mid-
sentence: some previously ignored possibili-
ties must stop being ignored. That can happen 
easily. Saying it the other way around -
"y is better known than X, but even X is 
known" - is harder, because we must sud-
denly start to ignore previously unignored 
possibilities. That cannot be done, really; but 
we could bend the rules and make believe we 
had done it, and no doubt we would be 
understood well enough. Saying "X is flat, 
but Y is flatter" (that is, "X has no bumps at 
all, but Y has even fewer or smaller bumps") 
is a parallel case. And again, "y is flatter, but 
even X is flat" sounds clearly worse - but not 
altogether hopeless. 
20 
Thanks here to Stephen Hetherington. While 
his own views about better and worse knowl-
edge are situated within an analysis of 
knowledge quite unlike mine, they withstand 
transplantation. 
21 
A proof-theoretic version of this closure 
principle is common to all "normal" modal 
logics: if the logic validates an inference from 
zero or more premises to a conclusion, then 
also it validates the inference obtained by 
prefixing the necessity operator to each 
premise and to the conclusion. Further, this 
rule is all we need to take us from classical 
sentential logic to the least normal modal 
logic. See Brian Chellas, Modal Logic: An 
Introduction 
(Cambridge: 
Cambridge 
University Press, 1980), p. 114. 
22 
See Dretske, "Epistemic Operators". 
23 
See Stalnaker, Inquiry, pp. 79-99. 
24 
Worse still: by what right can I even say that we 
used to be in a position to say truly that 
we knew? Then, we were in a context where we 
properly ignored certain uneliminated pos-
sibilities of error. Now, we are in a context 
where we no longer ignore them. If now I 
comment retrospectively upon the truth of 
what was said then, which context governs: 
the context now or the context then? I doubt 
there is any general answer, apart from the 
usual principle that we should interpret what 
is said so as to make the message make 
sense. 

CHAPTER 49 
Contextualist Solutions to 
Epistemological Problems: Scepticism, 
Gettier, and the Lottery 
Stewart Cohen 
Among the many problems discussed in the epis-
temological literature, three that figure promi-
nently are scepticism, the Gettier problem, and the 
lottery. In a recent paper, David Lewis proposes a 
theory of knowledge designed to solve all three 
problems. l Each, argues Lewis, can be handled by 
appealing to certain mechanisms of context-sensi-
tivity - what he calls "rules of relevance". 
While others, myself among them, have pro-
posed contextualist solutions to the problems of 
scepticism and the lottery, Lewis proposes to 
extend his contextualist approach to the Gettier 
problem.2 I will argue that in so doing, Lewis's 
contextualism overreaches - an appeal to con-
text-sensitivity cannot solve the Gettier problem. 
The difference in this respect, between the Gettier 
problem, on the one hand, and scepticism and the 
lottery, on the other, will provide some insight 
into what motivates a contextualist treatment of 
an epistemological problem. 
I Contextualism 
While various kinds of epistemological theories 
have been called contextualist, I am here con-
cerned with theories according to which the 
truth-value of a knowledge ascription is sensitive 
Originally published in Australasian Journal of Phi-
losophy 76, 2 (1998), pp. 289-306. 
to certain facts about the speaker and hearers of 
the context. Accordingly, for a particular subject 
S, and proposition P, one speaker could truly say 
"S knows P" while at the same time another 
speaker in a different context truly says, "s does 
not know P': 
This way of viewing knowledge ascriptions is 
similar to a natural way of viewing flatness ascrip-
tions.3 On this view, the truth-value of a flatness 
ascription is sensitive to context. For some par-
ticular X, one speaker could truly say "X is flat" 
while at the same time, a speaker in another con-
text could truly say "X is not flat". For example, a 
group of (western) Coloradans may truly say that 
a particular road is flat while, at the same time in 
a different context, a group of Kansans with 
stricter standards may truly deny that the same 
road is flat. 
We can think of the context-sensitivity of 
knowledge ascriptions in this way: For each con-
text of ascription, there is a standard for how 
strong one's epistemic position with respect to a 
proposition P must be in order for one to know 
P: Where two contexts differ with respect to this 
standard, a speaker in one context may truly say 
"s knows p", while a speaker in the other truly 
says "S does not know P". To complete the account, 
we need to specify how the standard for epistemic 
strength gets determined for each context. (More 
about this later.) 
There are various ways of analysing this notion 
of the strength of one's epistemic position. One 

CONTEXTUALIST SOLUTIONS TO EPISTEMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS 
707 
could think of it as determined, at least in part, by 
the strength of one's reasons or justification for 
believing P. On this view, the context-sensitivity 
of knowledge ascriptions derives from the con-
text -sensitivity of standards for justification. 
Consider again the analogy with flatness. We 
can think of a surface as being flat to varying 
degrees and we can also think of a surface as being 
flat simplici!er. What is the standard for how flat a 
surface must be to count as flat simpliciter? In dif-
ferent contexts, there can be different standards. 
Typically, when the topic of conversation is, e.g., 
roads, there will be a much stricter standard in 
contexts where the speaker and hearers are 
Kansans than when the speaker and hearers are 
Coloradans. 
Analogously, we can think of a belief as being 
justified to various degrees and we can think of a 
belief as being justified simpliciter. On many 
views, being justified simpliciter is a necessary 
condition for a belief to be an instance of knowl-
edge.s What is the standard for how justified a 
belief must be to count as justified simpliciter? For 
the contextualist view, in different contexts, there 
can be different standards. 
Because Lewis thinks justification is not a 
component of knowledge, he rejects this account 
of the context-sensitivity of knowledge ascrip-
tions.6 To understand Lewis's account, consider 
another analogy with flatness ascriptions. We 
could view flatness ascriptions as involving a kind 
of implicit quantification: X is flat iff X has no 
bumps.? We could then view the context as 
restricting the domain of quantification. In the 
Coloradans context, small hills do not count as 
bumps whereas in the Kansans context, they do. 
For Lewis, knowledge ascriptions as well 
involve a kind of implicit quantification: 
5 knows P iff 5's evidence eliminates every pos-
sibility in which not-P - Psst! - except for those 
possibilities that we are properly ignoring. 
(p.554)8 
Which possibilities can we properly ignore, i.e., 
what is the domain of "every" in the definition? 
That is determined by the context. 50 on Lewis's 
view, the context determines how strong one's 
epistemic position must be with respect to P, i.e., 
the range of not-P possibilities one's evidence 
must eliminate, in order to know P.9 
Which facts about the context determine 
which possibilities count - which possibilities 
must be eliminated and which can be properly 
ignored? Here Lewis provides a list of rules. In the 
language of relevant alternative theories, the rules 
tell us which alternatives are relevant - "relevant, 
that is, to what the subject does and doesn't know" 
(p.554). 
For our purposes, it is important to see that 
for some of the rules, what can be properly 
ignored depends on facts about the speaker and 
hearers of the context. As an example, we can 
consider the Rule of Attention. According to Lewis, 
if we are attending to a possibility, we are not 
properly ignoring it, for the simple reason that we 
are not ignoring it. 50 any possibility we are 
attending to is relevant in that very context. And 
as Lewis notes, 
"We" [in the above definition 1 means: the speaker 
and hearers of a given context; that is, those of us 
who are discussing 5's knowledge together. It is 
our ignorings not 5's own ignorings, that matter 
to what we can truly say about 5's knowledge. 
(p.561) 
50 any possibility the speakers and hearers of a 
context are attending to is relevant in that very 
context. 
Now just as there can be differences between 
what the speaker and hearers ignore, and what 
the subject ignores, so there can be differences 
between what the speaker and hearers of one con-
text ignore and what the speaker and hearers of 
another context ignore. It follows that a possibil-
ity relevant in one context of ascription, may not 
be relevant in another. So on Lewis's view, a sen-
tence ascribing knowledge to a particular subject 
at a particular time, can be true in the mouth of a 
speaker in one context and false in the mouth of 
another speaker in a distinct context. 
II 
Scepticism 
Contextualists argue that by appealing to context-
sensitivity we can provide a satisfactory response 
to sceptical arguments. One strength of the con-
textualist approach is that it can account for the 
truth of our everyday knowledge ascriptions 
while still explaining the force of sceptical 

708 
STEWART COHEN 
arguments. The basic idea is this: the sceptic's 
appeal to hypotheses (involving brains-in-a-vat, 
evil demons, etc.) creates a context where the 
standards for knowledge, i.e., the standards for 
how strong an epistemic position one must be in 
in order to know, are stricter than the standards 
that govern typical everyday contexts. In those 
"sceptical" contexts, we fail to know anything. So 
the contextualist concedes that there is some truth 
to scepticism. But a contextualist can limit the 
damage in a crucial way. For it remains true that 
we know many things in the typical everyday 
contexts where the standards are 10wer.1O In this 
way, the contextualist can explain the appeal of 
sceptical arguments while preserving the truth of 
our everyday knowledge ascriptions. 
As we have seen, particular contextualist theo-
ries may differ with respect to how they conceive 
of the strength of one's epistemic position. They 
can also differ with respect to the mechanism that 
brings about the contextual shifts in the stand-
ards. On Lewis's version, the sceptic raises the 
standards for knowledge ascriptions by expand-
ing the range of alternatives that must be elimi-
nated. The sceptic brings this about by calling our 
attention to sceptical possibilities, thereby making 
them relevant (by the Rule of Attention). In those 
very contexts where we are attending to sceptical 
possibilities, we in fact fail to know many of the 
things we ordinarily take ourselves to know. 
But sceptical possibilities are not relevant in 
every context. Most importantly, they are not rel-
evant in everyday contexts, where we are not 
attending to sceptical possibilities. In those con-
texts, the standards for what must be eliminated 
are lower. So in these contexts, we can truly say of 
ourselves and others, that we know. 
My aim, in this paper, is not to dispute Lewis's 
contextualist treatment of scepticism. I have 
defended a similar approachY Rather I will take 
issue with Lewis's application of his contextual-
ism to the Gettier problem, and his assimilation 
of the Gettier problem to the lottery problem. 
Lewis suggests that the lottery is a special case of 
the Gettier problem and argues that both can be 
solved by the same contextualist rule. Though I 
endorse a contextualist treatment of the lottery 
problem, I will argue that contextual ism can shed 
no light on the Gettier problem. I argue that the 
lottery problem is of a piece with scepticism, not 
the Gettier problem. 
III 
The Gettier Problem and the Lottery 
The Gettier problem is (at least) to give a general 
account of why it is that certain cases of justified 
true belief fall short of knowledge. The lottery 
problem is to explain why it is (or perhaps merely 
seems) that no matter how great the number of 
tickets in a lottery, i.e., no matter how great the 
odds are you will lose, you nonetheless fail to know 
you will lose. 12 We can sharpen the lottery problem 
by nothing that, without knowing anything about 
the number of tickets, you can come to know you 
lose the lottery by reading the results of the draw-
ing in the newspaper. This is puzzling because by 
simply increasing the number of tickets, we can 
make the odds of your losing conditional on the 
number of tickets, greater than the odds of your 
losing conditional on the newspaper report. 
To solve these problems, Lewis appeals to two 
rules of relevance - the Rule of Actuality and the 
Rule of Resemblance. The Rule of Actuality states 
that "the possibility that actually obtains is never 
properly ignored" (p. 554); The Rule of 
Resemblance states that if "one possibility sali-
ently resembles another [, tlhen if one of them 
may not be properly ignored, neither may the 
other" (p. 556). 
Now consider Lewis's application of these 
rules to a standard Gettier case: 
The stopped clock is right twice a day. It says 
4:39, as it has done for weeks. I look at it at 4:39; 
by luck I pick up a true belief. I've ignored the 
uneliminated possibility that I looked at it at 4:22 
while it was stopped saying 4:39. That possibility 
was not properly ignored. It resembles actuality 
perfectly so far as the stopped clock goes. 
(p.557) 
By the Rule of Actuality, he cannot ignore the 
possibility that he looked, at 4:39, at the clock 
while it was stopped saying 4:39. And that possi-
bility resembles - well enough - the possibility 
that he was looking at the clock at 4:22, while it 
was stopped saying 4:39. So, by the Rule of 
Resemblance, he cannot properly ignore this 
latter possibility either. Since this possibility is not 
eliminated by his evidence, he fails to know the 
time is 4:39. 
Lewis wants to assimilate the lottery problem 
to the Gettier problem. He notes that though the 

CONTEXTUALIST SOLUTIONS TO EPISTEMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS 
709 
lottery problem is a case of justified, true, belief 
that is not knowledge, it is not normally treated as 
a Gettier case. Yet, as he further notes, on his view 
it yields to the same treatment: 
For every ticket, there is the possibility that it will 
win. These possibilities are saliently similar to 
one another; so either everyone of them may be 
properly ignored, or else none may. But one of 
them may not properly be ignored; the one that 
actually obtains. (p. 557) 
So I cannot, by the Rules of Actuality and 
Resemblance, ignore the possibility, for any ticket, 
that it wins. In particular, I cannot ignore the pos-
sibility that my ticket wins. Since my evidence 
does not eliminate that possibility, I fail to know 
my ticket loses. 
Is the lottery a kind of Gettier case? It is, of 
course, if by "Gettier case" we mean "a case of jus-
tified true belief that is not knowledge". But the 
more interesting issue is whether Lewis is correct 
in claiming that the lottery yields to the same 
solution as the standard Gettier cases. I will argue 
that it does not. While the lottery problem is fun-
damentally a problem of context-sensitivity, the 
Gettier problem is not. 
IV 
Two Kinds of Rules and the Status of 
the Rule of Resemblance 
We can begin by examining a distinction between 
two kinds of rules for proper ignoring (rules of 
relevance) in Lewis's account. Some of Lewis's 
rules dictate that what can be properly ignored 
depends on facts about the speaker and hearers of 
the context. We saw this in the case of the Rule of 
Attention: what the speaker and hearers of the 
context are attending to affects what can be 
properly ignored. 
But others of Lewis's rules are not like this. 
The Rule of Actuality says that the actual world is 
never properly ignored. But the rule does not 
refer to the actuality of the speaker of the context. 
Rather, Lewis insists, it is the actuality of the sub-
i-ect that is never properly ignored (p. 555). This 
distinction will matter only in cases where we are 
considering whether subjects know in worlds 
other than our own. But this is precisely what we 
are doing when we give our intuitive responses to 
merely possible cases, e.g., when we are consider-
ing the standard Gettier cases. So in those cases, 
the Rule of Actuality dictates that the subject's 
actuality cannot be ignored. 
The Rule of Actuality does the work the truth 
condition does in traditional analyses of knowl-
edge. It captures our intuition that you can not 
know P, if P is false. For our purposes, the impor-
tant thing to note is that the operation of the Rule 
of Actuality does not depend on who the speakers 
and hearers of the context are. 
Let us call rules of relevance whose operation 
depends on facts about the speaker (and hearers) 
of the context, "speaker-sensitive", and call rules 
of relevance whose operation depends on facts 
about the subject, "subject-sensitive". (As we shall 
see, a rule may be both subject-sensitive and 
speaker-sensitive.) Any theory that involves 
speaker-sensitive rules is contextualist in the sense 
I am concerned with. 
Which kind of rule is the Rule of Resemblance? 
Consider its application to the lottery. Suppose 
we are considering whether S knows his ticket 
loses. The possibility that S's ticket wins resem-
bles actuality not because of anything pertaining 
to us, the speakers (and hearers) of the context. 
Rather the resemblance exists because of facts 
about S, the subject of the knowledge ascription. 
It depends on the fact that he holds a ticket in a 
fair lottery. This means that the Rule of 
Resemblance is subject-sensitive. 
But there is more to the story. The Rule of 
Resemblance says that a possibility that saliently 
resembles actuality (or any possibility that is rel-
evant by some rule other than Resemblance) 
cannot be properly ignored. The need for this 
qualification arises in connection with a variation 
of the lottery problem discussed by Lewis: 13 
Pity poor Bill! - He squanders all his spare cash 
on the pokies, the races, and the lottery. He'll be 
a wage slave all his days. We know he'll never be 
rich. (p. 565) 
As Lewis suggests, intuitively, we know poor Bill 
will never get rich. But, intuitively, we do not 
know he loses the lottery. The problem is that his 
never getting rich, plus other things we know, 
entails that he loses the lottery. So if we do not 
know poor Bill loses the lottery, how can we know 
he'll never be rich?14 

710 
STEWART COHEN 
On Lewis's account, the Rules of Actuality and 
Resemblance determine that we fail to know poor 
Bill loses the lottery. "But there is a loophole", 
according to Lewis, 
... the resemblance was required to be salient. 
Salience as well as ignoring, may vary between 
contexts. Before, when I was explaining how the 
Rule of Resemblance applied to the lotteries, I 
saw to it that the resemblance between the many 
possibilities associated with the many tickets was 
sufficiently salient. But this time, when we were 
busy pitying poor Bill for his habits and not for 
his luck, the resemblance of the many possibili-
ties was not so salient. At that point, the possibil-
ity of Bill's winning was properly ignored; so 
then it was true to say that we knew he'd never be 
rich. Afterward, I switched the context. I men-
tioned the possibility that Bill might win, where-
fore that possibility was no longer properly 
ignored: .. It was true at first that we knew that 
Bill would never be rich. And at that point it was 
also true that we knew he'd lose - but that was 
only true so long as it remained unsaid. Later 
after the change in context, it was no longer true 
that we knew he'd lose. At that point, it was also 
no longer true that we knew he'd never be rich. 
(pp.565-6) 
So in contexts where the lottery resemblances are 
not salient to us, we can properly ignore the pos-
sibility that poor Bill's ticket wins. And so in those 
contexts, we can know poor Bill will never get 
rich and that he will not win the lottery. But in 
contexts where the resemblances are salient, we 
can not properly ignore the possibility that Bill's 
ticket wins and so we do not know either of these 
things. IS 
When Lewis says the resemblances are required 
to be salient, does he mean "salient to the subject 
of the ascription", or "salient to the speaker ascrib-
ing knowledge"? In the case of poor Bill, this is a 
distinction without a difference. The way Lewis 
describes it, we are both ascribers and subjects. 
The issue for us is - What do we know about Bill? 
But when subject and speaker are distinct, we can 
see that Lewis must require that the resemblances 
be salient to the speaker (and hearers) of the con-
text. Consider again how he applies the Rule of 
Resemblance to the Gettier cases. There the 
resemblances that undermine knowledge are not 
salient to the subject. Recall the subject S who by 
luck happens to be staring at a stopped clock at 
the very time, 4:39, displayed on the clock. 
According to Lewis, S fails to know the time 
because the possibility that he is looking at the 
clock at 4:22 while it is stopped saying 4:39, cannot 
be properly ignored. This possibility cannot be 
properly ignored because it resembles perfectly, 
as far as the stopped clock goes, the possibility 
that actually obtains. But this resemblance is not 
salient for S. If it were, this would not be a Gettier 
case since S would not even be justified in believ-
ing what the clock says. The resemblance is salient 
for those of us who know S is in a Gettier situa-
tion, viz., the speaker and hearers of the context. 
That is why we cannot ignore the possibility that 
the time is 4:22, with the clock stopped saying 
4:39. And this explains why we cannot ascribe 
knowledge to S. 
Because of the salience qualification, the Rule 
of Resemblance is speaker-sensitive. (We have 
seen that it is also subject-sensitive). This means 
that features of the context of ascription - facts 
concerning what resemblances are salient to the 
speaker (and hearers) - will determine which 
possibilities cannot, by this rule, be properly 
ignored. This aspect of the Rule of Resemblance, 
I shall argue, leads to a serious difficulty for 
Lewis's treatment of the Gettier problem. 
V 
The Rule of Resemblance and 
Scepticism 
Before returning to Lewis's treatment of the 
Gettier problem, I want to digress to show how 
the speaker-sensitivity of the Rule of Resemblance 
provides a way out of a problem Lewis raises for 
the application of this rule. "We must apply the 
Rule of Resemblance with care", notes Lewis. 
Actuality is a possibility uneliminated by the sub-
ject's evidence. Any other possibility W that is 
likewise uneliminated by the subject's evidence 
thereby resembles actuality in one salient respect: 
namely, in respect of the subject's evidence. That 
will be so even if W is in other respects very dis-
similar to actuality - even if, for instance, it is a 
possibility in which the subject is radically 
deceived by a demon. Plainly, we dare not apply 
the Rules of Actuality and Resemblance to con-
clude that any such W is a relevant alternative -
that would be capitulation to scepticism. (p. 556) 

CONTEXTUALIST SOLUTIONS TO EPISTEMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS 
711 
In response to this problem, Lewis makes an ad 
hoc stipulation that resemblances in respect of the 
subject's evidence alone do not count: 
The Rule of Resemblance was never meant to 
apply to this resemblance! We seem to have an ad 
hoc exception to the Rule, though one that makes 
good sense in view of the function of attribu-
tions of knowledge. What would be better, 
though, would be to find a way to reformulate 
the Rule so as to get the needed exception with-
out ad hocery. I do not know how to do this. 
(pp.556-7) 
But there is a way for Lewis to avoid this sceptical 
problem without resorting to ad 
hocery. 
Possibilities that resemble actuality in respect of 
the subject's evidence are not, by the Rule of 
Resemblance, automatically relevant; they must 
saliently resemble actuality. That is the whole 
point of the Poor Bill case. But then scepticism 
does not threaten - that is, it does not threaten 
any more than a defender of context-sensitivity 
readily concedes. In normal, everyday contexts, 
where it is not salient that sceptical possibilities 
resemble actuality (in respect of the subject's evi-
dence), those possibilities will not be relevant. Of 
course, the sceptic can make the resemblances 
salient to us and in that new context, the sceptical 
alternatives will be relevant. But this much the contex-
tualist grants to the sceptic. This is how the con-
textualist 
explains 
the 
force 
of sceptical 
arguments. So in effect, Lewis is forced into his 
ad hoc restriction because he here treats the Rule 
of Resemblance as if it were merely subject -sensi-
tive. But the rule's speaker-sensitivity enables us 
to avoid the threat of scepticism without resorting 
to ad hocery. 
VI 
The Gettier Problem and Speaker-
Sensitivity 
Because the Rule of Resemblance is speaker-sen-
sitive, it can both handle the Poor Bill variation of 
the lottery and avoid the threat of scepticism. But 
this very aspect of the rule undermines its appli-
cability to the Gettier cases. Recall that according 
to Lewis's strategy for handling the Gettier cases, 
the subject fails to know P because there is an 
uneliminated not-P possibility that resembles 
actuality.16 But again, this by itself is not sufficient 
for the Rule of Resemblance to dictate that the 
not-P possibility cannot be properly ignored; the 
resemblance must be salient. The problem for 
Lewis is that there is nothing to guarantee that 
the resemblance will be salient. In some contexts the 
resemblance will be salient, but in others it will 
not. And in those contexts where the resemblance 
is not salient, the not-P possibility will be prop-
erly ignored and the subject will know. 17 
Surely this consequence of Lewis's theory is 
incorrect. To focus our intuitions, let's consider a 
particular Gettier case: 
S sees what appears to be a sheep on the hill. But 
what S actually sees is a rock that looks, from that 
distance, to be a sheep. It happens though, that 
behind the rock, out of S's view, is a sheep. 
In this case, the subject S has a justified true belief 
that there is a sheep on the hill, but S does not 
know there is a sheep on the hill. 18 Why according 
to Lewis's account does S fail to know there is a 
sheep on the hill? Following Lewis's treatment of 
the stopped clock case, we can say that the possi-
bility that there is no sheep on the hill but only a 
rock that looks like a sheep, resembles actuality. It 
resembles actuality perfectly with respect to the 
sheep-shaped rock. Thus by the Rules of 
Resemblance and Actuality, this possibility cannot 
be properly ignored. 
Now consider A, standing next to S, who is 
unaware that S sees only a rock. The resemblance 
between the possibility that S sees a rock that 
looks like a sheep and actuality is not salient for 
A. A is not aware that S is in a Gettier situation of 
any kind. So according to Lewis's view, in ~s con-
text of ascription, the possibility that S sees merely 
a sheep-shaped rock can be properly ignored. 
Thus on Lewis's view, A truly ascribes knowledge 
to S. A can truly say "s knows there is a sheep on 
the hill". 19 
This strikes me as a strongly counterintuitive 
result. Surely it is very strange to suppose that 
there is any context of ascription in which one 
can truly say of S that he knows there is a sheep 
on the hill. The sentence, "s knows there is a sheep 
on the hill" looks false (at that world and time), 
regardless of who happens to be uttering it. 
Consider again S's situation. S mistakenly thinks 
the rock he is seeing is a sheep. Surely S cannot in 

712 
STEWART COHEN 
this way come to know there is a sheep on the hill, 
even if by luck, there happens to be a sheep on the 
hill hidden from view behind the rock. But again, 
if the resemblance relations that otherwise falsify 
ascriptions of knowledge are not salient in !\s 
context, Lewis must hold that !\s ascription of 
knowledge to 5 is true.20 
Does Lewis have a way to respond to this prob-
lem? One strategy he might adopt here is to bite 
the bullet and say that in !\s context, !\s ascrip-
tion of knowledge to 5 is correct - and perhaps 
this would not be so difficult a bullet for him to 
bite. For as a contextualist, he can appeal to 
speaker-sensitivity to explain away the intuition 
that A cannot truly ascribe knowledge to 5. He 
can hold that our own context, at which knowl-
edge cannot be truly ascribed to 5, runs interfer-
ence on our evaluation of what A says in his 
context. We confuse what can be properly ignored 
by us in our context of ascription with what can 
be properly ignored by A in his context of 
ascription. 50 the fact that we cannot truly say 5 
knows there is a sheep on the hill prevents us 
from seeing that A can truly say 5 knows there is a 
sheep on the hill. 
There would be nothing ad hoc about Lewis 
explaining away our intuition in this way. On the 
contrary, we could view it as a natural extension 
of the contextualist treatment of both the lottery 
and scepticism. A contextualist treatment of these 
problems must explain away certain of our intui-
tions as resulting from our confusing distinct 
contexts of ascription. The contextualist, while 
holding that our everyday knowledge ascriptions 
are correct, must acknowledge that when we are 
in the grips of a sceptical argument, those ascrip-
tions seem mistaken. But, according to the con-
textualist, this intuition is misleading. It results 
from our confusing what we can truly say in the 
sceptical context we are in as we consider scepti-
cal arguments, with what we can truly say in 
everyday contexts.21 
And the same considerations apply to the Poor 
Bill variation of the lottery. We can truly ascribe 
knowledge that Bill loses the lottery (and that he 
will never get rich) in contexts where the resem-
blances that otherwise undermine knowledge are 
not salient. Nonetheless, in contexts where the 
resemblances are salient, it seems wrong to say 
that in other contexts where the resemblances are 
not salient, we can truly ascribe knowledge that 
Bill loses the lottery. Here again the contextualist 
must say that this intuition is misleading. It results 
from our confusing what can truly be said in our 
own context where the resemblances are salient, 
with what can truly be said in those contexts 
where the resemblances are not salient. 
Now consider again our intuition that !\s 
ascription to 5 of knowledge that there is a sheep 
on the hill is mistaken. In the very same way, 
Lewis can explain away our intuition as resulting 
from our confusing what can be truly ascribed in 
our own context where the relevant resemblance 
is salient with what can be truly ascribed in !\s 
context, where the resemblance is not salient. This 
general strategy is central to the general contextu-
alist view he is defending. 
Of course, some may find contextualism to be 
implausible in general. For those who take this 
view, the application of this strategy to the Gettier 
case would be just another example of the kind of 
implausible line the theory takes in the cases of 
scepticism and the lottery. But I, as a proponent 
of a contextualist treatment of scepticism and the 
lottery, do not want to endorse this position. 5till, 
I find it very implausible that we can truly ascribe 
knowledge in the Gettier case in any context. 
Thus, I will argue that this kind of contextualist 
approach, even if correct in the cases of scepticism 
and the lottery, cannot be extended to the Gettier 
problem. 
VII 
The Scope of Speaker-Sensitivity 
On Le'Nis's view, the Rule of Resemblance is cen-
tral to solving the Gettier problem. We can think 
of this rule as corresponding, roughly, to the 
Gettier or fourth condition in a standard analysis 
of knowledge. As we noted earlier, the Rule of 
Actuality corresponds to the truth condition. 
Now consider Lewis's Rule of Belief 
A possibility that the subject believes to obtain is 
not properly ignored, whether or not he is right 
to so believe. Neither is one that he ought to believe 
to obtain - one that evidence and arguments jus-
tify him in believing - whether or not he does so 
believe. [my emphasis] (p. 555) 
The second part of this rule corresponds roughly 
to some of the phenomena that motivate the 

CONTEXTUALIST SOLUTIONS TO EPISTEMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS 
713 
justification condition in a standard analysis of 
knowledge. 
So each of the Rules of Actuality, Belief, and 
Resemblance corresponds to some element in a 
traditional analysis of knowledge. But on Lewis's 
view, there is an asymmetry in the way these rules 
are applied. This asymmetry results from the fact 
that of the three, only the Rule of Resemblance is 
speaker-sensitive. Note that the Rule of Belief, like 
the Rule of Actuality, is only subject-sensitive. 
According to this rule, we cannot ignore a possi-
bility the subject believes, or merely ought to 
believe, to obtain. 
Compare three cases. SI is looking at a sheep-
shaped rock that happens to have a sheep behind 
it. S2 is actually looking at a sheep under normal 
conditions, though he has evidence that justifies 
him in believing he is in fact looking at a sheep-
shaped rock on a sheep less hill. S3 is in fact look-
ing at sheep-shaped rock on a sheepless hill. All 
three subjects believe there is a sheep on the hill. 
But none of these subjects knows there is a sheep 
on the hill. From the standpoint of traditional 
analyses of knowledge, SI fails to know because 
though he has a justified true belief that there is a 
sheep on the hill, he is in a Gettier situation. 
S2 fails to know because his evidence justifies him 
in believing that, despite the appearances, there is 
no sheep on the hill;making his belief that there 
is a sheep on the hill unjustified. And S3 fails to 
know because his belief that there is a sheep on 
the hill is false. 
On Lewis's view, in each case, the failure of the 
subject to know there is a sheep on the hill is 
explained by the rules of relevance. We cannot 
truly ascribe knowledge to any of them, because 
in each case we may not properly ignore the pos-
sibility that there is only a sheep-shaped rock on 
the hill. SI is in a situation where that possibility 
saliently (for us) resembles actuality. So by the 
Rules of Resemblance and Actuality, we cannot 
properly ignore it. S2 ought to believe that possi-
bility obtains. So by the Rule of Belief, we cannot 
properly ignore it. And for S3' that possibility is 
actual. So, by the Rule of Actuality, we cannot 
properly ignore it. 
The rules of relevance deliver the same result 
for what we, in our context, can truly say about 
each subject: In each case, we are correct in deny-
ing that the subject knows there is a sheep on the 
hill. But suppose we consider whether it is correct 
to ascribe knowledge to these subjects in certain 
contexts of ascription other than our own. 
Consider speaker A who is not aware that SI is in 
a Gettier situation; A thinks SI is, in fact, looking 
at a sheep. Nor is A aware that S2 has evidence that 
justifies him in believing that there is no sheep on 
the hill. Nor is A aware that S3 merely seems to see 
a sheep. Given only what is salient in ks context, 
all three subjects appear to be in the same epis-
temic situation, viz., looking at a sheep under 
normal conditions. This leads A to say all three 
subjects know there is a sheep on the hill. 
Are ks ascriptions of knowledge to SI' S2' and 
S3' true? (We can assume hearers with the same 
information as A.) Consider first ks ascription of 
knowledge to SI. Though the possibility that SI 
sees a rock with no sheep behind it resembles 
actuality (SI'S actuality), that resemblance is not 
salient for A. So, as we noted in section VI, as far 
as the Rule of Resemblance goes, A can properly 
ignore that possibility. Thus A can truly ascribe 
knowledge to SI. 
But matters are different for ks ascriptions to 
S2 and S3· S2 ought to believe he sees a rock that 
looks like a sheep. So by the Rule of Belief, A may 
not properly ignore that possibility. Though it is 
not salient in ks context that S2 ought to believe 
he sees merely a rock, the Rule of Belief does not 
require that it be salient. Thus A cannot truly 
ascribe knowledge to S2. 
Analogously, in the case of S3. A may not 
ignore the possibility that S3 sees merely a sheep-
shaped rock. For that possibility is actual and so 
by the Rule of Actuality. A cannot properly ignore 
it. Though it is not salient in ks context that this 
possibility is actual, the Rule of Actuality does not 
require that it be salient. Thus A cannot truly 
ascribe knowledge to S3. 
Why should there be this asymmetry between 
knowledge ascriptions to SI' on the one hand, 
and knowledge ascriptions to S2 and S3' on the 
other? The asymmetry results from the fact that 
the Rule of Resemblance is speaker-sensitive 
whereas the rules of Belief and Actuality are not. 
Because of this, the truth-value of knowledge 
ascriptions to SI can vary with the speaker whereas 
the truth-value of knowledge ascriptions to S2 
and S3 cannot. This seems right for S2 and S3. 
Intuitively, neither S2 nor S3 knows there is a sheep 
on the hill, regardless of what is salient to the 
speaker (and hearers) of the context - S2' because 

714 
STEWART COHEN 
his evidence justifies him in believing there is no 
sheep on the hill and 53 because his belief that 
there is a sheep on the hill is false. Our intuitions 
here provide a basis for thinking it is part of the 
fixed (across contexts) truth conditions for "5 
knows P" that P is true and that 5's evidence does 
not justify him in believing not-Po If so, then we 
have a rationale for holding that knowledge 
ascriptions to 52 and 53 are false (at those worlds 
and times), regardless of who is making the 
ascription. But analogously, our intuitions pro-
vide the same kind of rationale for taking it as 
part of the fixed truth conditions for "5 knows P" 
that 5 is not in the kind of Gettier situation 51 is 
in. Intuitively, because of his situation, 51 fails to 
know he sees a sheep, regardless of what is salient 
to the speaker of the context. Thus we have equally 
good reason to hold that, contrary to what Lewis's 
theory entails, knowledge ascriptions to 51 are 
false, regardless of who is making them. This sug-
gests that in order for the Rule of Resemblance to 
solve the Gettier problem, it should be construed 
as speaker-insensitive. This would require that 
the salience qualification be eliminated.22 
Of course an asymmetry can be eliminated 
from either direction. 5uppose we do have as 
good a rationale for holding that 51 fails to know, 
irrespective of the speaker, as we do for holding 
that 52 and 53 fail to know, irrespective of the 
speaker. We could still reject that rationale for all 
three cases. After all, we saw in section IV how 
Lewis could employ a contextualist strategy to 
reject the rationale in the case of 51' This strategy 
seeks to explain away the intuition that 51 fails to 
know in contexts like 1\s as resulting from a con-
fusion of contexts. We confuse contexts like 1\s, 
where the resemblance between actuality and the 
possibility at which there is only a sheep-shaped 
rock, is not salient, with contexts like our own 
where this resemblance is salient. 5ince in our 
context, 51 fails to know, we mistakenly think 51 
fails to know in 1\s context as well. 
Now we could, in the same way, seek to explain 
away our intuition that 52 and 53 fail to know 
regardless of the speaker. We could do this by 
construing the Rules of Belief and Actuality as 
speaker-sensitive, on the model of the Rule of 
Resemblance. Viewed in this way, the Rule of 
Belief would say that a possibility that the subject 
saliently believes, or saliently ought to believe, to 
obtain cannot be properly ignored. And the Rule 
of Actuality would say that when a possibility is 
saliently actual, it cannot be properly ignored. On , 
this view, when we consider whether 52 knows, we 
cannot properly ignore the possibility that there 
is only a sheep-shaped rock on the hill. In our 
context, it is salient that 52 ought to believe this 
possibility obtains. Nor can we ignore this possi-
bility when we consider whether 53 knows. In our 
context, it is salient that this possibility is actual 
(for 5J But in 1\s context, neither of these facts is 
salient. 50, in each case, A can properly ignore this 
possibility. 50 construing the rules in this way 
would allow that A could truly say that each of 52 
and 53 knows there is a sheep on the hill. Our 
intuition that A, in his context, falsely ascribes 
knowledge to both 52 and 53 results from our con-
fusing our own context with 1\s. This strategy 
strikes me as no less plausible in the cases of 52 
and 53 than in the case of 51' 
50 there are two options for eliminating the 
asymmetry between the way Lewis's theory han-
dles the case of 51 and the way his theory handles 
the cases of 52 and 53' We could eliminate the sali-
ence qualification from the Rule of Resemblance 
thereby making it speaker-insensitive. Or we 
could add a salience qualification to the Rules of 
Belief and Actuality thereby making them 
speaker-sensitive. Is there any reason to prefer 
one option to the other? I think that the best 
explanation for our intuition that A is mistaken 
in ascribing knowledge to all three subjects is that 
even relative to A's context, each of them in fact 
fails to know - 51 because he is looking at a sheep-
shaped rock with a sheep behind it, 52 because his 
evidence justifies him in believing there is no 
sheep, and 53 because he is looking at a hill with 
no sheep on it. A mistakenly ascribes knowledge 
to each of them for the simple reason that he is 
unaware, in each case, of the knowledge-defeat-
ing circumstance. 50, I would hold that none of 
the three rules is speaker-sensitive, that all three 
subjects, 51_3, fail to know there is a sheep on the 
hill, regardless of what is salient to the speaker. 
But how do I reconcile taking this view for 
these cases with my defence of the contextualist 
approach to scepticism (and the Poor Bill varia-
tion of the lottery)? If what I say is the correct 
explanation for our intuition that A is mistaken 
in ascribing knowledge to 51' 52' and 53' why 
should we not say the same thing about our scep-
tical intuitions toward our everyday knowledge 

CONTEXTUALIST SOLUTIONS TO EPISTEMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS 
715 
ascriptions? As we have noted, when in the grips 
of a sceptical argument, we feel the strong intui-
tive pull of saying that our knowledge ascriptions 
are mistaken, even those we make in everyday 
contexts. But here the contextualist denies that 
our sceptical intuitions indicate that our everyday 
knowledge ascriptions are mistaken - that scepti-
cal possibilities are relevant even in contexts 
where they are not salient to us. Rather the con-
textualist appeals to speaker-sensitivity to explain 
away those intuitions as resulting from a confusion 
of contexts. 
So on what basis do I claim that we should 
invoke speaker-sensitivity to explain away our 
sceptical intuitions toward our everyday knowl-
edge ascriptions, but not our "sceptical" intui-
tions toward ascriptions of knowledge to SI' S" 
and S/ If we take these latter intuitions at face 
value, as indicating that I\s ascriptions of knowl-
edge to SI' S2' and S3 are mistaken even in I\s con-
text, why not take our sceptical intuitions at face 
value, as indicating that our everyday knowledge 
ascriptions are false, even in everyday contexts? 
This would mean viewing sceptical possibilities as 
relevant to any knowledge ascription regardless 
of what is salient to the speaker. Then, just as we 
explain I\s mistaken ascriptions of knowledge to 
SI_3 as resulting from I\s ignorance of certain fea-
tures of the subject's epistemic situation, so the 
sceptic could explain why we have been mistak-
enly ascribing knowledge to ourselves in everyday 
contexts as resulting from our ignorance (prior to 
our initiation to sceptical arguments) of certain 
facts concerning our epistemic situation, viz., that 
our evidence does not eliminate sceptical 
possibilities. 
As it turns out, there is an important differ-
ence between our sceptical intuitions and our 
intuitions about SI_3 - a difference that provides a 
rationale for appealing to speaker-sensitivity in 
the explanation of our sceptical intuitions, but 
not in the explanation of our intuitions toward 
knowledge ascriptions to SH' Consider first our 
sceptical intuitions. Strong as they sometimes 
may be, they conflict with other strong intuitions 
we have, viz., our common sense intuitions 
concerning what we know. As Lewis notes: 
We have all sorts of everyday knowledge, and we 
have it in abundance. To doubt that would be 
absurd. At any rate, to doubt in any serious and 
lasting way would be absurd; and even philo-
sophical and temporary doubt, under the influ-
ence of argument, is more than a little peculiar. 
(p.549) 
Of course, Lewis does not mean to be denying 
that there is any problem of scepticism. He 
acknowledges that, when considering sceptical 
arguments, we often feel a strong pull toward 
saying that our knowledge ascriptions are false. 
His theory is designed, in part, to explain these 
intuitions. It's just that these sceptical intuitions 
are not stable. We also find, while still engaged in 
philosophical reflection, that we have a tendency 
to shift to a perspective from which that conclu-
sion is difficult to accept - "How could it be that I 
fail to know I have a hand? ... Surely I know that!" 
But then I can again be overcome by the pull of 
the sceptical arguments and begin to doubt that I 
do know anything - even that I have hands. But 
this time around, the sceptical intuition is no 
more stable than before. This kind of vacillation 
is a fairly robust feature of our intuitions about 
scepticism. When we think about scepticism, we 
find ourselves pulled in inconsistent directions -
we find ourselves shifting back and forth between 
thinking we fail to know and thinking that this 
conclusion is absurd. 
This contrasts starkly with our intuitions 
toward ascriptions of knowledge to SI_3' SI is 
looking at a sheep-shaped rock that happens to 
have a sheep behind it. Here we have a strong and 
stable intuition that SI does not know there is a 
sheep on the hill. In no way does it seem "absurd" 
or "more than a little peculiar" to deny that SI 
knows there is a sheep on the hill. We deny une-
quivocally that SI knows. Even if previously, 
because of our ignorance of S/s situation, we 
were inclined to say he knows there is a sheep on 
the hill, once we learn that he actually sees only a 
rock, we would not be inclined, in the least, to say 
he knows. We would not find ourselves vacillating 
between saying that SI does not know and saying 
that he does. 
Similarly we have a strong and stable intuition 
about ascriptions of knowledge to S2 and S3' 
Intuitively each fails to know there is a sheep on the 
hill, S2 because his evidence justifies him in believ-
ing there is no sheep on the hill, and S3 he is looking 
at a sheepless hill. In neither case do we find our 
intuitions pulled in opposing directionsY 

716 
STEWART COHEN 
But again, this kind of stability is lacking in the 
intuitions we have in contexts where we are con-
sidering sceptical arguments; these intuitions are 
notoriously unstable. Thus while nothing stands 
in the way of taking our intuitions toward S'_3 at 
face value, taking our sceptical intuitions at face 
value is problematic. 
Here then is the opening for the contextualist 
to explain away our sceptical intuitions toward 
our everyday knowledge ascriptions by appealing 
to speaker-sensitivity. According to the contextu-
alist, when we are in a sceptical frame of mind, we 
are in a context where sceptical possibilities are 
relevant. But again we are of two minds. We can 
also find it compelling that we know many things. 
This is because even though in our own context, 
sceptical possibilities are relevant, we can still 
evaluate knowledge ascriptions relative to other 
contexts where sceptical possibilities are not rele-
vant. So even when a sentence ascribing knowl-
edge is false in our own mouths, we can still 
evaluate it as true in the mouths of others (or our 
own mouths in other contexts). Thus, the insta-
bility of our intuitions toward our everyday 
knowledge ascriptions results from our alterna-
tively evaluating them relative to our current 
sceptical contexts and other non-sceptical 
contexts. 24 
A similar phenomenon occurs in the Poor Bill 
version of the lottery. It seems intuitive to say we 
know he will never get rich. Yet we also find it 
intuitive that we do not know he will lose the lot-
tery. But these intuitions take us in opposing 
directions. We know he'll never get rich only if we 
know he'll lose the lottery. Thus we find ourselves 
vacillating between thinking we know he'll never 
get rich and so that he'll lose the lottery, and 
thinking we know neither of these things. The 
contextualist holds that our opposing intuitions 
result from our evaluating these knowledge 
ascriptions relative to different contexts. In some 
contexts, we know he'll never get rich (and that 
he'll lose the lottery). In others, we fail to know 
that he'll never get rich (and that he'll lose the 
lottery). 
Of course an appeal to speaker-sensitivity is 
not the only way to explain the instability of our 
intuitions. There are various sceptical explana-
tions, as well, e.g., ones that appeal to force of 
habit. Which explanation is the best is not an 
issue we need confront in this paper. '5 The point 
is that an appeal to speaker-sensitivity has at least 
some initial plausibility as an explanation for why 
our intuitions are unstable. This provides a moti-
vation for appealing to speaker-sensitivity in our 
treatment of scepticism and the lottery. Where no 
such instability exists, as with our intuitions 
toward J\s knowledge ascriptions to S'_3' this 
motivation for appealing to speaker-sensitivity is 
absent. In these cases there is nothing for an 
appeal to speaker-sensitivity to explain. This 
makes it much more plausible to take at face-
value our strong intuition that I\s ascriptions of 
knowledge to S'_3 are simply mistaken. 
VIII 
The Gettier Problem, the Lottery, 
and the Rule of Resemblance 
I have been arguing that it is considerably more 
plausible to appeal to speaker-sensitivity for 
knowledge ascriptions when our intuitions 
regarding them are unstable. As it turns out, 
Lewis's analysis is consonant with this view inso-
far as scepticism, the Poor Bill version of the lot-
tery, and J\s ascriptions of knowledge to S2 and S3 
are concerned. In the cases of scepticism and poor 
Bill, where our intuitions are unstable, the opera-
tive rules of relevance - the Rule of Attention and 
the Rule of Resemblance - are speaker-sensitive. 
This allows the truth-value of knowledge ascrip-
tions to vary in ways that explain the instability of 
our intuitions. In the cases of S, and S3' where 
our intuitions are stable, the operative rules of 
relevance - the Rule of Belief and the Rule of 
Actuality - are not speaker-sensitive. This pre-
vents the truth-value of the knowledge ascription 
from shifting with the context, thus explaining 
the stability of our intuitions. 
But as we have seen, Lewis's analysis diverges 
from this view in the (Gettier) case of S,. Here, 
even though our intuitions are stable, the operative 
rule of relevance - the Rule of Resemblance - is 
speaker-sensitive. If the argument of the previous 
section is correct, Lewis is mistaken in trying to 
handle this case with a speaker-sensitive rule. 
More generally, it is problematic to use a speaker-
sensitive rule of relevance to solve the Gettier 
problem. There is no reason not to view the sub-
ject's failure to know in these Gettier cases as fixed 
across contexts of ascription - as holding regard-
less of who the speaker is. 

CONTEXTUALIST SOLUTIONS TO EPISTEMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS 
717 
So any rule that solves the Gettier problem 
must be speaker-insensitive. Thus, for the Rule of 
Resemblance to solve the Gettier problem, the 
salience qualification must be eliminated. But this 
would raise two problems. First, without the sali-
ence qualification, the sceptical consequences of 
the rule return. Recall that sceptical possibilities 
resemble actuality perfectly with respect to the 
subject's evidence. So, as Lewis notes, the Rule of 
Resemblance would seem to entail that sceptical 
possibilities are relevant, i.e., that they cannot be 
properly ignored. I argued in section V that, 
because of the salience qualification, the Rule of 
Resemblance can avoid this consequence. For in 
everyday contexts, the resemblances between 
sceptical possibilities and actuality are not salient. 
Without the salience qualification, this response 
is no longer available. 
Lewis's own response to this difficulty was to 
make an ad hoc stipulation that these resem-
blances do not count. But this is really to concede 
that the rule does not solve the problem. Solving 
the Gettier problem requires either further revi-
sion of the Rule of Resemblance or perhaps a 
different rule altogether. 
A second problem for eliminating the salience 
qualification from the Rule of Resemblance is 
that doing so would render the rule unable to 
handle the poor Bill variation of the lottery prob-
lem. For it would rule out our knowing of some-
one that he loses the lottery, in any context of 
ascription. But then it rules out our knowing, in 
any context of ascription, anything that entails of 
someone that he loses the 10ttery.26 But it does 
Notes 
[10] All Lewis page references are to this 
paper. 
2 
For other contextualist accounts, see Unger 
[12], [13], Cohen [2], [3], [4], and DeRose [5]. 
3 
See [9], [13], [6]. I would argue for this kind 
of contextualism for many predicates, e.g., 
"happy", "tall", "old", "rich" ... 
4 
I argue for such a view in [2]. There I talk 
about how strong our epistemic position 
must be with respect to alternatives to P in 
order for us to know P. Also see DeRose [5]. 
5 So for a belief to be justified simpliciter, it 
must be justified to the minimum degree 
seem that we can know many things that entail 
that a certain person loses the lottery. For exam-
ple, we can know, in some contexts anyway, that 
poor Bill will never get richY The whole point of 
the salience qualification was to make the rule 
speaker-sensitive thereby allowing knowledge in 
some contexts that a certain person loses the 
lottery. 
These two problems for the unqualified Rule 
of Resemblance show that resemblance is too per-
vasive a phenomenon to be appealed to in an 
unrestricted way. As we have seen, a natural move 
is to invoke speaker-sensitivity and restrict the 
rule by salience. But this very feature of the rule 
makes it incapable of solving the Gettier 
problemY 
We can now see that there is good reason to 
reject Lewis's assimilation of the lottery to the 
Gettier problem. Lewis notes that though the lot-
tery seems to be a case of justified, true, belief that 
is not knowledge, it is not normally counted as a 
Gettier case. But according to Lewis, it can be 
solved by the same rule he invokes to handle the 
traditional Gettier cases, viz., the Rule of 
Resemblance. We have just seen that this claim is 
doubtful. The lottery (given the poor Bill varia-
tion) requires speaker-sensitivity whereas the 
Gettier problem requires speaker-insensitivity. 
The contextualist, as we have seen, invokes 
speaker-sensitivity to solve the problem of scepti-
cism. The fact that an adequate treatment of the 
lottery requires an appeal to speaker-sensitivity as 
well suggests that the lottery has more in common 
with scepticism than with the Gettier problem. 
necessary for knowledge. I do not claim that 
this is the only notion of justification 
simpliciter. 
6 
Lewis does not subscribe to this account of 
context-sensitivity because he holds that jus-
tification is neither necessary nor sufficient 
for a true belief to be knowledge. But I do not 
find his reasons for this view to be very 
convincing. 
Justification is not necessary for knowledge, 
according to Lewis, because no "argument 
supports our reliance on perception, on 
memory, and on testimony. Yet we do gain 

718 
STEWART COHEN 
knowledge by these means" (p. 551). But most 
accounts of justification for perception, 
memory, and testimony do not require our 
having anything like a supporting argument. 
Here, Lewis seems to rely on an overly restric-
tive conception of justification. 
Justification is not sufficient for a true 
belief to be knowledge, according to Lewis, 
because in a lottery, one does not know one 
loses regardless of the number of tickets. Yet 
the greater the number of tickets, the greater 
one's justification (p. 551). This argument is 
somewhat puzzling. Since Gettier, few epis-
temologists think of justification as suffi-
cient for a true belief to be knowledge. And 
Lewis suggests that the lottery is a kind of 
Gettier case. (I argue against this in section 
VIII). More importantly, Lewis ultimately 
allows that one can know, in certain con-
texts, that one loses the lottery. But then I see 
no reason why we should not say that in 
those contexts, one's justification is sufficient 
for one to know. 
As we shall see, for Lewis, knowing P is a 
matter of one's evidence eliminating some 
alternatives to P and one's being able to prop-
erly Ignore the rest of the alternatives. 
Certainly one's evidence eliminating alterna-
tives is a component of justification as it is 
construed by many epistemologists. Moreover, 
whether or not one can properly ignore cer-
tain alternatives turns out to depend on one's 
evidence. This IS true for the Rule of 
Resemblance and the Rule of Belief. So, 
though he denies it, I think it is fair to say 
Lewis's analysis of knowledge involves stand-
ards for justification - as many epistemolo-
gists think of justification, anyway. 
7 
Dretske [6], Unger [13]. 
8 
Lewis says, " ... a possibility W is un eliminated 
iff the subject's perceptual experience and 
memory in W exactly match his perceptual 
experience and memory in actuality" (p. 553). 
9 
On Lewis's view, the extent to which one's 
evidence eliminates possibilities is only part 
of what constitutes the strength of one's 
epistemic position. Some of the conditions 
that determine whether or not one can prop-
erly ignore a not-P possibility can be viewed 
as contributing to the strength of one's 
epistemic position, as well. This holds, in 
particular, for the rule of resemblance and 
the rule of belief. 
10 
For stylistic reasons, following Lewis, I will 
not always be careful about formulating the 
contextualist thesis metalinguistically. So 
instead of saying that a sentence containing 
the knowledge predicate can be true in one 
context and false in the other, I will say that 
whether we know can vary across contexts. 
Strictly speaking, though, the metalinguistic 
formulation should be used. 
11 
See [2]. On my version of contextualism, the 
standard governs justification and the mech-
anism is a Rule of Salience which is very 
similar, and perhaps equivalent to, Lewis's 
Rule of Attention. On DeRose's version in 
[5], the standard governs what he calls "truth 
tracking" and the mechanism is the Rule of 
Sensitivity. 
12 
There are, of course, other problems involv-
ing lotteries, see [10]. 
13 
Gilbert Harman discusses a case like this 
in [7]. 
14 
Lewis endorses the principle that knowledge 
is closed under strict implication (p. 564). A 
weaker principle says that knowledge IS 
closed under known implication. Either way, 
the problem of poor Bill arises. I defend the 
closure principle in [2]. 
15 
In Lewis's discussion, he notes that the pos-
sibility that poor Bill wins is also made rele-
vant by the Rule of Attention, since Lewis 
mentions that possibility. 
16 
In some Gettier cases, the explanation 
appeals to the Rule of Resemblance working 
in conjunction with some other rule. See 
p.557. 
17 
The possibility will be properly ignored, at 
least so far as the Rule of Resemblance goes. 
And Lewis says the Rule of Resemblance 
explains why the subject fails to know in a 
Gettier situation. Moreover, none of Lewis's 
other rules seem applicable. 
18 
This example is taken from Chisholm [1]. 
Nothing I say hinges on using this case rather 
than the stopped clock case. I use the former 
only because, by my lights, the intuition that 
the subject fails to know in this case is even 
more vivid than in the latter. 
19 
We might be able to construe salience in a way 
that results in the resemblance being salient. 

CONTEXTUALIST SOLUTIONS TO EPISTEMOLOGICAL PROBLEMS 
719 
Let's say the resemblance is strongly salient if 
it is salient that the possibility resembles 
actuality, and the resemblance is weakly sali-
ent if the features in virtue of which the pos-
sibility resembles actuality are salient. A 
possibility can be weakly salient without 
being strongly salient. Consider the feature 
in virtue of which the possibility that S sees a 
sheep-shaped rock with no sheep behind it 
resembles actuality, viz., the sheep-shaped 
rock. If A himself is looking at the sheep-
shaped rock (thinking that it is a sheep), 
then the resemblance is weakly salient for A 
but not strongly salient. But of course, noth-
ing guarantees that in Gettier cases, the rel-
evant resemblances will be even weakly 
salient. A may not be looking at the sheep-
shaped rock. 
As another example, consider the bogus 
barn case. The possibility that S sees a bogus 
barn resembles actuality in virtue of the 
abundance of bogus barns in the vicinity of 
the actual barn. But this need not be salient 
to someone ascribing knowledge to S. 
Moreover, if we formulate the rule of resem-
blance in terms of weak salience, then the 
sceptical implications of the rule return. For 
the features in virtue of which, e.g., the 
brain-in-a-vat hypothesis resembles actual-
ity are salient in everyday contexts. So these 
possibilities will (weakly) saliently resemble 
actuality in those contexts. 
20 
Given what he says in footnote 24, Lewis 
would hold that there is no general answer to 
whether we can say in the object language 
that A is in a position to truly say S knows. 
Of course we can avoid whatever problem 
there may be here if we, as Lewis suggests at 
the end of the paper, ascend semantically, 
i.e., describe the case metalinguistically. 
21 
I take this line in [2], [3], and [4]. 
22 
We would then need a different rule to 
handle the Poor Bill version of the lottery. 
More about this in section VIII. 
23 
It may be that if we later forget that e.g., S3 is 
looking at a sheep less hill, we will then find it 
intuitive that he knows. This is also true of 
scepticism - if we forget about sceptical pos-
sibilities we will find it intuitive that we know. 
But once it is pointed out to us that S3 is seeing 
only a sheep-shaped rock, we will again think, 
unequivocally, that we made a mistake. Our 
sceptical intuitions are not like that. 
24 
It also may be that our vacillations toward 
our knowledge ascriptions indicate that 
through subtle changes in ourselves as speak-
ers and hearers, changes in our intentions, 
focus, purposes, etc. we bring about shifts in 
the set of relevant possibilities, i.e., we our-
selves shift contexts. Sometimes we can indi-
cate such a shift in our intentions and 
purposes by speaking in a certain tone of 
voice: "C'mon, you know you're not a brain-
in-a-vat!" If this is correct, we would have to 
treat the rule of attention as defeasible. See 
Lewis's discussion of bending the rules of 
co-operative conversation, p. 560. 
25 
I defend the contextualist explanation over 
sceptical explanations in [4]. 
26 
This assumes the deductive closure principle. 
See my footnote 14. 
27 
An example given by Harman in [7] is per-
haps even more compelling. We can know S 
will be in New York tomorrow, even though 
ifhe wins the lottery he will be in New Jersey 
instead, collecting his winnings, i.e., even 
though knowing S will be in New York 
involves knowing S will lose the lottery. 
28 
I argue in [2] that both scepticism and the 
lottery can be handled by appealing to the 
same rule - a rule of salience. Though space 
considerations preclude a full discussion 
here, it may be that even on Lewis's view 
both problems can be solved by the same 
rule. According to Lewis, both problems 
result from speaker-sensitivity. And though 
on Lewis's view, both are handled by speaker-
sensitive rules, each is handled by a different 
rule - skepticism, by the Rule of Attention, 
and the lottery, by the Rule of Resemblance. 
But it is not clear why Lewis needs to appeal 
to the Rule of Resemblance to solve the lot-
tery problem. For it looks as if any possibility 
relevant by the Rule of Resemblance will also 
be relevant by the Rule of Attention. 
Recall that for a possibility W to become 
relevant by the Rule of Resemblance, two 
conditions must be met. First, W must resem-
be actuality (or some other possibility rele-
vant by some other rule). And second, the 
resemblance between Wand actuality must 
be salient in the context. But if the resemblance 

720 
STEWART COHEN 
between Wand actuality is salient in the con-
text, then W itself is salient in that context. 
For example, because it is a fair lottery, the 
possibility that my ticket wins (as well as the 
possibility for every other losing ticket, that it 
wins) resembles the possibility that (the win-
ning ticket) Twins with respect to the set-up 
of the lottery. Now if it is salient that the pos-
sibility that my ticket wins resembles the pos-
sibility that T wins, then trivially the 
possibility that my ticket wins (along with the 
possibility that Twins) is salient as well. More 
generally, if possibilities saliently resemble 
one another in a context, then those possibili-
ties themselves are salient in that context. 
References 
1. Roderick Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge, 2nd 
edn (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1977). 
2. Stewart Cohen, "How to be a Fallibilisf; 
Philosophical Perspectives 2 (1988), pp. 581-605. 
3. Stewart Cohen, "Skepticism, Relevance, and 
Relativity", in Dretske and his Critics (Oxford: 
Basil Blackwell, 1991), pp. 17-37. 
4. Stewart Cohen, "Skepticism and Everyday 
Knowledge 
Attributions'; 
III 
Doubting 
(Dordrecht: Kluwer, 1990), pp. 161-70. 
5. Keith DeRose, "Solving the Sceptical Problem", 
this vol., ch. 47. 
6. Fred Dretske, "The Pragmatic Dimension of 
Knowledge", Philosophical Studies 40 (1981), 
pp.363-78. 
7. Gilbert 
Harman, 
Thought 
(Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1974). 
Does it follow that if possibilities saliently 
resemble one another in a context, then 
those possibilities are being attended to in 
that context? What exactly is the relation-
ship between salience and attention? These 
issues are too large to explore here. Suffice 
it to say that for Lewis, salience is a kind of 
psychological notion closely related to 
attention. Though something can be salient 
without actually being attended to - think 
of the cartoon character, Mr Magoo - it is 
not clear why this difference should matter 
for whether an alternative is relevant in a 
context. 
8. Henry Kyburg, "Conjunctivitis", in Induction, 
Acceptance, and Rational Belief (Dordrecht: 
Reidel, 1970), pp. 55-82. 
9. David Lewis, "Scorekeeping in a Language 
Game",Journal of Philosophical Logic 8 (1979), 
pp.339-59. 
10. David Lewis, "Elusive Knowledge", this vol., 
ch.48. 
11. Gail Stine, "Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives, 
and Deductive Closure", Philosophical Studies 
29 (1976), pp. 249-6l. 
12. Peter Unger, "The Cone Model of Knowl-
edge", Philosophical Topics 14 (1986), pp. 
125-78. 
13. Peter Unger, Philosophical Relativity (Min-
neapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1984). 

CHAPTER 50 
Knowledge and Practical Interest, 
Selections 
Jason Stanley 
Introduction 
A central part of epistemology, as traditionally 
conceived, consists of the study of the factors in 
virtue of which someone's true belief is an instance 
of knowledge. The factors that have been proposed 
in epistemology are typically ones that are truth-
conducive, in the sense that their existence makes 
the belief more likely to be true, either objectively 
or from the point of view of the subject. Much of 
epistemology has been devoted to debates between 
advocates of differing truth-conducive factors. 
For example, epistemic internalists have argued 
that the additional truth-conducive factors are 
other beliefs. Epistemic externalists have argued 
that the relevant truth-conducive factors include 
the fact that the belief is the product of a reliable 
belief-forming mechanism. All of these debates 
are between theorists who hold that only truth-
conducive factors are relevant to the question of 
what makes it the case that someone's true belief 
is an instance of knowledge. 
It is no surprise that epistemologists have 
widely shared the assumption that the additional 
factors that make a true belief into knowledge are 
uniformly truth conducive (either objectively or 
from the point of view of the subject). The 
Originally published in J. Stanley, Knowledge and 
Practical Interest (New York: Oxford University Press, 
2005), pp. 1-15,47-73. 
differences between true belief and knowledge are 
matters that fall within the purview of theoretical 
rationality, which many philosophers hold to be 
guided solely by the normative purpose of discov-
ering the truth. My purpose in this book is to 
challenge this conception of knowledge. I will 
argue that the factors that make true belief into 
knowledge include elements from practical 
rationality. One consequence of my arguments is 
that the distinction between practical and theo-
retical rationality is less clear than one might 
wish. 
Someone's practical investment in the truth or 
falsity of her belief is completely irrelevant to 
truth conduciveness in any sense. From the tradi-
tional perspective, then, when someone has a true 
belief, whether thai: belief is genuine knowledge is 
independent of the costs of being wrong. My aim is 
to provide a systematic case against this thesis. 
I join several recent authors in arguing that our 
practical interests have epistemic significance. 1 
There are cases in which two people are similarly 
situated, but one has knowledge, whereas the 
other does not, because one has greater practical 
investment in the truth or falsity of her beliefs. 
What makes true belief into knowledge is not 
entirely an epistemic matter. 
This conclusion is bound to sound somewhat 
paradoxical, because there are two senses in which 
epistemologists are prone to use the term "epis-
temic". On one use of "epistemic", it denotes 
truth-conducive factors, in the broad sense in 

722 
JASON STANLEY 
which I have sketched above. On the other under-
standing of "epistemic", it has to do with factors 
relevant to whether a true belief is knowledge. 
The thesis of this book is that, contrary to episte-
mological orthodoxy, these two usages of the 
term do not coincide. Using "epistemic" in the 
first of these ways, then, the thesis of the book is 
that what makes true belief into knowledge is not 
entirely an epistemic matter. 
The book is short, because many of the ele-
ments of my argument have already been set in 
place by those with different goals. In particular, 
contextualists about knowledge ascriptions have 
discovered many of the examples that suggest that 
whether a true belief is knowledge depends not just 
upon truth-conducive features of a situation, but 
on what is practically at stake.2 However, contextu-
alists generally share the widely held assumption 
that knowledge is not a matter of practical inter-
ests. So they have used these examples, together 
with the assumption, to argue for the thesis that a 
predicate such as "knows that penguins waddle" 
denotes different knowledge properties on differ-
ent occasions of use. Each of the resulting semantic 
contents is a property, possession of which does 
not depend upon practical interests. But which such 
property is denoted by a knowledge-attributing 
predicate depends upon practical factors, such as 
how much is at stake. In this way, the contextualist 
can explain the examples without violating the 
commonly shared assumption that knowledge is 
not a matter of practical interests. 
Contextualists have generally been interested 
in establishing the context-sensitivity of knowl-
edge ascriptions in order to use the insight in the 
resolution of various traditional philosophical 
problems, such as explaining away the persuasive 
force of skeptical arguments. They have tended 
not to consider explicitly the assumption that 
what makes true belief into knowledge is purely a 
matter of truth-conducive factors, in the sense 
described above. But the interest of the examples 
they have employed to argue for the context-
sensitivity of knowledge ascriptions is precisely 
that, when taken at face value, they do suggest the 
falsity of this assumption. Once we see that 
knowledge ascriptions are not context -sensitive 
in any distinctively epistemological way, we are 
led by such examples to reject the common assump-
tion that knowledge (to put it tendentiously) is a 
purely epistemic notion. 
Here are the examples I will focus upon; they 
have largely been made famous by others. 
Low Stakes. Hannah and her wife Sarah are driv-
ing home on a Friday afternoon. They plan to 
stop at the bank on the way home to deposit their 
paychecks. It is not important that they do so, as 
they have no impending bills. But as they drive 
past the bank, they notice that the lines inside are 
very long, as they often are on Friday afternoons. 
Realizing that it isn't very important that their 
paychecks are deposited right away, Hannah says, 
"I know the bank will be open tomorrow, since I 
was there just two weeks ago on Saturday morn-
ing. So we can deposit our paychecks tomorrow 
morning:' 
High Stakes. Hannah and her wife Sarah are driv-
ing home on a Friday afternoon. They plan to 
stop at the bank on the way home to deposit their 
paychecks. Since they have an impending bill 
coming due, and very little in their account, it is 
very important that they deposit their paychecks 
by Saturday. Hannah notes that she was at the 
bank two weeks before on a Saturday morning, 
and it was open. But, as Sarah points out, banks 
do change their hours. Hannah says, "I guess 
you're right. I don't know that the bank will be 
open tomorrow." 
Low Attributor-High Subject Stakes. Hannah and 
her wife Sarah are driving home on a Friday 
afternoon. They plan to stop at the bank on the 
way home to deposit their paychecks. Since they 
have an impending bill coming due, and very 
little in their account, it is very important that 
they deposit their paychecks by Saturday. Two 
weeks earlier, on a Saturday, Hannah went to the 
bank, where Jill saw her. Sarah points out to 
Hannah that banks do change their hours. 
Hannah utters, "That's a good point. I guess I 
don't really know that the bank will be open on 
Saturday." Coincidentally, Jill is thinking of going 
to the bank on Saturday, just for fun, to see if she 
meets Hannah there. Nothing is at stake for Jill, 
and she knows nothing of Hannah's situation. 
Wondering whether Hannah will be there, Jill 
utters to a friend, "Well, Hannah was at the bank 
two weeks ago on a Saturday. So she knows the 
bank will be open on Saturday." 
Ignorant High Stakes. Hannah and her wife Sarah 
are driving home on a Friday afternoon. They 
plan to stop at the bank on the way home to 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
723 
deposit their paychecks. Since they have an 
impending bill coming due, and very little in 
their account, it is very important that they 
deposit their paychecks by Saturday. But neither 
Hannah nor Sarah is aware of the impending bill, 
nor of the paucity of available funds. Looking at 
the lines, Hannah says to Sarah, "I know the bank 
will be open tomorrow, since 1 was there just two 
weeks ago on Saturday morning. So we can 
deposit our paychecks tomorrow morning." 
High Attributor-Low Subject Stakes. Hannah and 
her wife Sarah are driving home on a Friday 
afternoon. They plan to stop at the bank on the 
way home to deposit their paychecks. Since they 
have an impending bill coming due, and very 
little in their account, it is very important that 
they deposit their paychecks by Saturday. Hannah 
calls up Bill on her cell phone, and asks Bill 
whether the bank will be open on Saturday. Bill 
replies by telling Hannah, "Well, 1 was there two 
weeks ago on a Saturday, and it was open:' After 
reporting the discussion to Sarah, Hannah con-
cludes that, since banks do occasionally change 
their hours, "Bill doesn't really know that the 
bank will be open on Saturday". 
Suppose that, in all five situations, the bank 
will be open on Saturday. Here, I take it, are the 
intuitive reactions we have about these cases. In 
Low Stakes, our reaction is that Hannah is right: 
her utterance of "I know the bank will be open" 
is true. In High Stakes, our reaction is that 
Hannah is also right. Her utterance of "I don't 
know that the bank will be open" is true. In Low 
Attributor-High Subject Stakes, our intuition is 
that Jill's utterance of "she knows the bank will 
be open on Saturday" is false. In Ignorant High 
Stakes, our reaction is that Hannah's utterance 
of "I know the bank will be open tomorrow" is 
false. In High Attributor-Low Subject Stakes, 
our reaction is that Hannah's utterance of "Bill 
doesn't really know that the bank will be open 
on Saturday" is true. 
The practical facts about a situation are facts 
about the costs of being right or wrong about 
one's beliefs. All five cases involve people with the 
same non-practical basis for the belief the bank 
will be open the next morning (in the first four, 
Hannah, and in the fifth, Bill). But the facts as to 
whether the relevant attributor can truly ascribe 
the predicate "knows that the bank will be open" 
to the relevant subject vary. Furthermore, the 
facts vary in accord with the importance to some 
person - either the knowledge attributor or the 
putative knower - of the bank's being open. This 
provides a prima facie case for the thesis that 
knowledge is not just a matter of non-practical 
facts, but is also a matter of how much is at stake. 
I will call the thesis that knowledge does not 
depend upon practical facts intellectualism. 3 
Intellectualism is a wide orthodoxy. So conser-
vatism demands the exploration of alternative 
paths. For example, one might attempt to 
explain away the force of the intuitions behind 
these scenarios, by arguing that, when someone 
recognize that the costs of being wrong are par-
ticularly high, his or her confidence is shaken. 
The result of having one's confidence shaken is 
either to reduce one's degree of belief below the 
threshold required for knowledge or to defeat 
the evidence one has for one's belief in some 
other manner. This explanation provides an 
elegant account of the second scenario, where 
Hannah's awareness of the costs of being wrong 
undermines her confidence in her belief.4 
However, this line of defense falters when one 
considers Ignorant High Stakes. In this case, 
Hannah's confidence that the bank will be open is 
not shaken, because she is ignorant of the poten-
tial costs of not depositing her check. So the 
defender of this line of defense would have to 
adopt the position that Hannah does not know 
that the bank will be open in the second scenario, 
but does know that the bank will be open in the 
fourth scenario. And this is an odd position. After 
all, Hannah is more knowledgeable about her 
situation in the second scenario than she is in the 
fourth scenario. It does not seem correct that 
adding a little ignorance increases knowledge. In 
short, if Hannah does not know in the second 
scenario, it seems she also does not know in the 
fourth scenario. If so, then appealing to loss of 
confidence does not help in evading the conse-
quence that practical interests can have epistemic 
consequences. 
This line of defense also does not account for 
our intuitions concerning High Attributor-Low 
Subject Stakes. We may suppose that Bill's confi-
dence that the bank will be open is not affected by 
Hannah and Sarah's situation. So the account 
does not provide an explanation of our intuition 
that Hannah and Sarah are correct to deny 

724 
JASON STANLEY 
knowledge to Bill. So some other explanation is 
required. 
Another strategy that proponents of intellec-
tualism commonly appeal to in the face of these 
examples is to argue that in certain cases our 
responses are sensitive not to whether the subject 
knows, but to whether the subject knows that she 
knows. According to advocates of this strategy, 
Hannah knows that the bank will be open in Low 
Stakes, High Stakes, and Ignorant High Stakes, 
and Bill knows that the bank will be open in High 
Attributor-Low Subject Stakes. Our judgments to 
the contrary in the latter three cases are to be 
explained by the fact that the relevant subjects do 
not know that they know in any of these cases. 
According to this line of reasoning, knowing that 
one knows that p requires having more evidence 
for p than knowing that p. When we are aware 
that the stakes are particularly high for a subject, 
we tend to require not just that the subject knows 
the propositions upon which she bases her 
actions, but that she knows that she knows those 
propositions. Our awareness of the raised stakes 
for Hannah in High Stakes leads us to think that 
she needs to know that she knows that the bank 
will be open, and not merely know that the bank 
will be open. Since she does not face a potentially 
hazardous predicament in Low Stakes, we are not 
led to make the error of thinking that she does 
not know that the bank will be open. 
I am inclined to reject the KK thesis that 
knowing that p entails knowing that one knows 
that p. But I have difficulty seeing how the falsity 
of that thesis can be brought to bear to explain 
away these intuitions. First, the proponent of this 
way of rejecting our intuitions about these cases 
must explain why the fact that an agent does not 
know that she knows that p would lead us to deny 
that the agent knows that p. This requires an 
entirely independent explanation. Secondly, the 
proponent of this response must give some good 
reason to believe that in each case in which some-
one in a "low-stakes" situation (such as Hannah 
in Low Stakes) seems to know that p, whereas 
someone with comparable evidence in a "high-
stakes" situation does not seem to know that p, 
the person in the low-stakes situation does not 
know that she knows that p. 
I am skeptical that a good justification for the 
second claim can be provided. Most ordinary 
assertions of knowledge are made on such a basis 
that we can envisage someone in a higher-stakes 
situation (often a much higher-stakes situation), 
whom we would not think of as possessing that 
knowledge, given similar evidence. The propo-
nent of this response would have to argue that, in 
all such cases, the person in the low-stakes situa-
tion knows that p, but does not know that she 
knows that p. This leads to widespread failure of 
knowledge of knowledge. It is one thing to deny 
that knowledge entails knowing that one knows, 
but it is quite another to license such a wholesale 
denial of knowledge of knowledge.s 
A third reaction one might have when con-
fronted by these cases is to explain them away as 
various types of framing effects, of the sort famil-
iar from recent psychological studies of rational-
ity. It has been established that our judgments 
about the rationality of various inferences are 
highly dependent upon idiosyncratic facts about 
how the background situation is described. It 
would be unwise to put very much weight upon 
this evidence in claims about the nature of ration-
ality. Similarly, one might think that the intui-
tions we have in the above cases are also due to 
psychological framing effects. If so, they are 
unlikely to be helpful in inquiry into the nature of 
the knowledge relation. 
However, the above cases reveal intuitions that 
are not analogous to the framing effects we see in 
ordinary speakers' judgments about rationality. 
The latter sort of judgment does not follow a dis-
cernible pattern that reflects any plausible general 
claim about rationality. In contrast, the intuitions 
we have in the above cases are just the intuitions 
we would expect to have, if certain antecedently 
plausible conceptual connections between knowl-
edge and practical reasoning were true. As other 
anti -intellectuals have argued (Fantl and McGrath 
2002, and especially Hawthorne 2004), it is 
immensely plausible to take knowledge to be con-
stitutively connected to action, in the sense that 
one should act only on what one knows." For vari-
ous theoretical reasons, this immensely plausible 
claim has not traditionally been accepted by those 
studying practical reasoning. But rejecting this 
claim devalues the role of knowledge in our ordi-
nary conceptual scheme. 
A standard use of knowledge attributions is to 
justify action. When I am asked why I went to the 
store on the left, rather than the store on the right, 
I will respond by saying that I knew that the store 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
725 
on the left had the newspaper I wanted, but I did 
not know whether the store on the right did. 
When my wife asks me why I turned left rather 
than going straight, I reply that I knew that it was 
the shortest direction to the restaurant. When it 
turns out that it was not a way to go to the restau-
rant at all, my wife will point out that I only 
believed that it was the shortest way to the restau-
rant. To say that an action is only based on a belief 
is to criticize that action for not living up to an 
expected norm; to say that an action is based on 
knowledge is to declare that the action has met 
the expected norm. 
The fact that knowledge is thus connected to 
action is obscured by several points. First, asser-
tion is also conceptually connected to knowledge; 
asserting that p implicates that one knows that p. 
So, in defending an action based upon one's 
knowledge that p, it is enough simply to assert 
that p. Secondly, in certain special circumstances, 
we do occasionally act on our knowledge that 
there is a chance that p, rather than our knowl-
edge that p.7 For example, there are lotteries in 
which it is rational for me to buy a ticket, even 
though I do not know that I will win; when 
pressed to defend my purchase, I will respond 
that there is a chance I will win. But this is just to 
say that there are certain types of action that I 
perform on the basis of beliefs about chances. In 
order for these actions to be acceptable, such 
beliefs must still constitute knowledge. 
The intuitions we have in the above cases are 
best explained by appeal to our commitment to 
the principle that one should act only upon what 
one knows. For example, in High Stakes, we think 
it is mistaken for Hannah to act on her belief that 
the bank will be open on Saturday, and wait until 
Saturday to go there. The obvious reason why 
Hannah should not wait until Saturday to go to 
the bank is that she does not know that the bank 
will be open. The same is true for Ignorant High 
Stakes. Indeed, the intuitions in virtually all of the 
above cases are exactly the ones we would expect 
to have if it is true that knowledge is connected to 
action in the above sense." The intuitions there-
fore provide powerful intuitive evidence for an 
antecedently plausible principle concerning the 
relation between knowledge and action. 
It is odd to assert instances of the schema "P, 
but I don't know that P" (Moore's Paradox). 
The oddity of asserting instances of Moore's 
Paradox is often taken to be strong evidence for 
the intuitive connection between assertion and 
knowledge (e.g. Williamson 2000, pp. 253-5), 
that one ought only to assert what one knows. It is, 
highly unlikely that the oddity of Moore's 
Paradox is due to a psychological framing effect. 
For a similar reason, the reactions we have to 
virtually all of the cases I have discussed are not 
random noise. They are rather natural reflec-
tions of the conceptual connections between 
knowledge and action, of our intuitive adher-
ence to the principle that one should act only 
upon what one knows. 
So there is no easy intellectualist strategy for 
explaining away the intuitions. This leaves the 
intellectual with the following quandary. If the 
thesis that one's knowledge of one of one's true 
beliefs depends only upon non-practical facts is 
correct, then it cannot both be the case that (for 
example) Hannah knows that the bank will be 
open in Low Stakes, and does not know that the 
bank is open in the other three relevant situa-
tions. For, by stipulation, the non-practical facts 
for Hannah are the same in all of these cases, and 
she even has the same degree of confidence in her 
belief (at least in Low Stakes and Ignorant High 
Stakes). So, either the thesis must be rejected, or 
some other natural assumption. 
Here are the options available to one who 
wishes to preserve the independence of knowl-
edge from practical facts: 
(a) 
One can challenge the claim that these are 
the intuitions we have in these cases. 
(b) 
One can reject the semantic significance of 
one of the intuitions. For example, one 
could deny semantic significance to the 
intuition that the proposition semantically 
expressed by Hannah's utterance in Low 
Stakes is true. Alternatively, one could deny 
semantic significance to the intuition that 
the proposition semantically expressed 
by Hannah's utterance in High Stakes is 
true (or reject the semantic significance 
of either of the intuitions in the other 
two cases). 
(c) 
One can deny that the proposition expressed 
by Hannah's utterance in Low Stakes is really 
the denial of the proposition expressed by 
Hannah's utterance in High Stakes (and make 
similar maneuvers for the other two cases). 

726 
JASON STANLEY 
Though I certainly do not take all of the intui-
tions we have in the above cases as indefeasible, I 
will not discuss except in passing the first of these 
options. The role of these intuitions is not akin to 
the role of observational data for a scientific 
theory. The intuitions are instead intended to 
reveal the powerful intuitive sway of the thesis 
that knowledge is the basis for action. Someone 
who denies that we have many of these intuitions 
is denying the pull of the link between knowledge 
to action. But the value of knowledge is explicable 
in part by its links to action; it is for this reason 
that skepticism threatens agency. Those who deny 
these intuitions are in effect maintaining that 
some other notion, such as appropriately confi-
dent belief, is intuitively the genuinely valuable 
one. It is because I find this reaction so implausi-
ble that I will not seriously consider rejecting 
these intuitions. Nevertheless, while my central 
interest is to evaluate accounts that make as much 
sense of these intuitions as possible, the central 
claims of this book hold, even if some of the 
above intuitions are less robust than others. I will 
leave it to the reader to decide which arguments 
in the book are strengthened or weakened by her 
particular pattern of intuitions. 
As far as the second of these options is con-
cerned, the most obvious way to develop it is to 
appeal to a certain view about the relation between 
semantics and pragmatics. According to this view, 
our intuitions about what is said by utterances of 
sentences are not in general reliable guides to the 
semantic contents of sentences in context, even 
relative to perfectly clear hypothetical circum-
stances like the ones described above. On this 
view, our intuitions about what is said by a sen-
tence are often influenced by pragmatic, post-
semantic content conveyed by the act of asserting 
that sentence. 
For example, one might argue that we are 
wrong to think that Hannah's utterance in Low 
Stakes expresses a true proposition, because 
"know" expresses a relation that holds between a 
person and only a very few select propositions, 
those for which (say) she has deductive valid 
arguments from a priori premises. But knowledge 
ascriptions may pragmatically convey that the 
subject stands in some epistemically looser rela-
tion with the proposition. One could then 
"explain" the mistaken intuition on the hypothe-
sis that we often confuse what an assertion of a 
sentence pragmatically conveys with the semantic 
content of that sentence relative to a context. 
Giving pragmatic explanations of apparently 
semantic intuitions is a standard maneuver in 
philosophy. While this strategy is certainly occa-
sionally called for, it must be applied with great 
circumspection. For example, DeRose (1999) 
considers a crazed theorist who defends the view 
that "bachelor" just expresses the property of 
being a man. This theorist holds that the intuition 
that "is a bachelor" cannot be truly predicated of 
a married man has no semantic significance; it is 
due rather to (say) pragmatic felicity conditions 
governing the use of the term "bachelor". DeRose's 
point in considering such examples is that the 
tendency philosophers have to give pragmatic 
rather than semantic explanations of apparently 
semantic intuitions threatens to undermine the 
whole enterprise of giving semantic explanations. 
As he writes (1999, p. 198), concerning pragmatic 
explanations of speakers' apparently semantic 
intuitions about the cases that motivate his 
favored view: 
It's an instance of a general scheme that, if 
allowed, could be used to far too easily explain 
away the counterexamples marshaled against any 
theory about the truth-conditions of sentence 
forms in natural language. Whenever you face an 
apparent counterexample - where your theory 
says that what seems false is true, or when it says 
that what seems true is false - you can very easily 
just ascribe the apparent truth (falsehood) to the 
warranted (unwarranted) assert ability of the 
sentence in the circumstances problematic to 
your theory. If we allow such maneuvers, we'll 
completely lose our ability to profitably test the-
ories against examples. 
By undermining the data for semantic theory, this 
kind of strategy threatens to undermine the 
semantic project. 
Of course, there are cases in which it is legiti-
mate to provide pragmatic explanations of appar-
ent semantic intuitions. Again, to borrow an 
example from DeRose (1999, pp. 196ff.), if some-
one clearly knows that p, it seems extremely odd 
to say that p is epistemically possible for that 
person. But there is a clear explanation from 
Gricean principles for the oddity in question. 
There is a general conversational principle to the 
effect that one should always assert the most 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
727 
informative proposition one is in a position to 
assert. If x asserts "It is possible that p", then x 
implicates, via this maxim, "I do not know that p". 
Our sense that such an assertion is odd, or seems 
false, is due to the fact that x is implicating some-
thing known to be false. The problem with many 
pragmatic explanations of apparently semantic 
intuitions is that there is no such clear explana-
tion from general conversational principles. 
Denying the semantic significance of appar-
ently semantic intuitions is a significant cost, one 
that we should be reluctant to bear in the absence 
of a clear explanation of these intuitions from 
general conversational principles. Since I am not 
aware of such an explanation, I think that the 
most fruitful way to pursue preserving intellectu-
alism is by appeal to the third option. And this 
leads us to the thesis of contextualism. 
[ ... J 
Knowledge Ascriptions and 
Context -Sensitivity 
I have argued that knowledge ascriptions are not 
intuitively gradable. There are two morals to the 
discussion. First, if one is a contextualist, one 
should avoid adopting a version of contextualism 
that 
makes 
knowledge 
semantically 
scalar. 
Secondly, the contextualist thesis about knowledge 
ascriptions is not supportable by appeal to an ana-
logy to gradable expressions. In this section, I will 
argue that the alleged context -sensitivity of know-
ledge ascriptions has no other parallel among the 
class of un controversial context-sensitive expres-
sions. During the course of these arguments, we 
will also see that some of the alleged theoretical 
benefits of contextualism are illusory. The way I 
will support this final thesis is by arguing that, if 
knowledge ascriptions are context -sensitive, then 
we would expect them to behave in ways that run 
counter to the contextualist's claims. 
Contextualists have generally chosen to imple-
ment their claims semantically via the view that 
the verb "know" is an indexical: 
Thus the theory I wish to defend construes 
"knowledge" as an indexical. As such, one speaker 
may attribute knowledge to a subject while 
another speaker denies knowledge to that subject, 
without contradiction. (Cohen 1988, p. 97) 
Citing this passage, DeRose (1992, pp. 920-1) 
writes: 
This lack of contradiction is the key to the sense 
in which the knowledge attributor and the 
knowledge denier mean something different by 
"know". It is similar to the sense in which two 
people who think they are in the same rooni but 
are in fact in different rooms talking to each 
other over an intercom mean something differ-
ent by "this room" when one claims, "Frank is 
not in this room" and the other insists, "Frank is 
in this room - I can see him!" There is an impor-
tant sense in which both do mean the same thing 
by "this room", in which they are using the phrase 
in the same sense. But there is also an important 
sense in which they do not mean the same thing 
by the phrase; this is the sense by which we can 
explain the lack of contradiction between what 
the two people are saying. To use David Kaplan's 
terminology, the phrase is being used with the 
same character, but with different content. 
Similarly, in [a bank case 1 ... when, in the face of 
my wife's doubt, I admit that I don't know that 
the bank will be open on Saturday, I don't con-
tradict an earlier claim to know that I might have 
made before the doubt was raised and before the 
issue was so important because, in an important 
sense, I don't mean the same thing by "know" as 
I meant in the earlier claim: While "know" is 
being used with the same character, it is not being 
used with the same content. Or so the contextual-
ist will claim. 
Similarly, Lewis (1996, p. 564) writes: 
in the skeptical argument the context switched 
midway, and the semantic-value of the context-
dependent word "know" switched with it. 
So, Cohen, DeRose, and Lewis have all imple-
mented their contextualist claims via the view 
that the verb "know" is an indexical in Kaplan's 
sense, having different semantic values relative to 
different contexts. 9 In recent years, however, some 
contextualists have moved beyond the model of 
contextualism that treats the word "know" itself 
as an indexical expression, like "here" or "now" 
(e.g. Schaffer 2004; Ludlow 2005). My purpose in 
this section is to provide some empirical 
arguments to show that, if instances of "know 
that p" are context-sensitive in a distinctively 
epistemological way, their context -sensitivity is 

728 
JASON STANLEY 
not "detectable" by means that would detect the 
context-sensitivity of a range of other expres-
sions. Some of the arguments I provide below 
suggest that the indexical model of "know" is not 
correct. But I will not confine myself to consider-
ing only the indexical model of "know': Instead, I 
seek to show disanalogies between knowledge 
ascriptions and a wide variety of context -sensitive 
constructions. 
At the outset, I should confess to some skepti-
cism about the existence of a single property that 
all context-sensitive expressions have, and all 
non -context -sensitive expressions lack (other 
than the property of context-sensitivity). The 
attempts that I am aware of for establishing such 
tests fail rather dramatically at their intended 
task. It is instructive to look at one test recently 
proposed by Herman Cappelen and Ernie 
Lepore, which they call The Collective Description 
Test. According to Cappelen and Lepore (2005, 
pp.99): 
If for a range of true utterances of the form "A 
v-s" and "B v-s" we obviously can describe what 
they have in common by using "v" (i.e. by using 
"A and B v"), then that's evidence in favor of 
the view that "v" in these different utterances has 
the same semantic content, and hence, is not 
context -sensitive. 
Cappelen and Lepore use the Collective 
Description Test to argue that a range of appar-
ently context-sensitive constructions are not 
after all context-sensitive. For example, they use 
it to argue that "is tall" is not context-sensitive. 
Suppose that John utters "Jill is tall" and Bill 
utters "Mary is tall". One can conclude from the 
two premises they provide that "Both Jill and 
Mary are tall". By the collective description test, 
then, "is tall" is not context-sensitive. Similarly, 
suppose John utters "Jill knows that penguins 
waddle", and Bill utters "Mary knows that pen-
guins waddle". One can conclude from the two 
premises they provide that Jill and Mary know 
that penguins waddle, and hence, if the 
Collective Description Test is reliable, that 
"knows that penguins waddle" is not context-
sensitive. 
Consider two sisters, Jill and Mary. John 
utters "Jill loves her mother" and Bill utters "Mary 
loves her mother". One can conclude from the 
two premises offered that "Each sister loves her 
mother." Since one can describe what Jill and 
Mary have in common by the verb phrase "loves 
her mother", it follows that Cappelen and 
Lepore's test falsely predicts that "loves her 
mother" is not context-sensitive. Similarly, sup-
pose Jill utters "I love my mother" and Mary 
utters "I love my mother". Jill and Mary can 
now conclude in unison, "We love our mothers". 
Cappelen and Lepore's test appears falsely to 
predict that "loves my mother" is not context-
sensitive. 10 
Cappelen and Lepore might understandably 
respond by arguing that "loves her mother" in 
John and Bill's utterance is not context-sensitive, 
but is rather a case of controlled anaphora, where 
"her" is bound (by some higher operator, e.g. a 
lambda operator associated with the verb phrase). 
They could also give the same response for "love 
my mother", in Jill and Mary's utterances of "I 
love my mother". But this claim, though well 
motivated, is not open to Cappelen and Lepore. 
For then their opponents can give the very same 
response to defuse Cappelen and Lepore's applica-
tion of the Collective Description Test to their 
favored examples. 
For example, one of their targets is the view, 
espoused in Ludlow (1989) and Stanley (2000; 
2002), that predicative uses of adjectives, such as 
"is tall", are associated with comparison class var-
iables. But, if Cappel en and Lepore are allowed to 
give the above response to defend their test, advo-
cates of such a view could give the exact same 
response to explain why one can, from utterances 
of "Jill is tall" and "Mary is tall" draw the conclu-
sion "Both Jill and Mary are tall". I I 
So, either Cappelen and Lepore's test fails as a 
test of context -sensitivity, or it cannot be 
employed against their intended targets. I think it 
is no accident that their test fails. I doubt that 
there is one test that perspicuously divides all 
context-sensitive terms into one category, and all 
non-context-sensitive terms into another cate-
gory. There are too many different classes of con-
text-sensitive expressions. But what I am in a 
position to provide is a good inductive case that 
knowledge ascriptions are not context-sensitive 
in a distinctively epistemological way, as the con-
textualist would have it. In the realm of the 
empirical, a good inductive case is all we can 
expect. 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
729 
There are a few tests that detect the context-
sensitivity of a range of context -sensitive expressions 
that do not detect the alleged context-sensitivity of 
instances of "know that p': These tests involve 
speech-act reports and propositional anaphora.1t 
would be a mistake to place excessive weight upon 
these tests. For the context -sensitivity of certain 
constructions that are clearly context -sensitive is 
also not detectable by these tests. I include these 
tests, not because "passing" them is a necessary 
condition for context-sensitivity, but because 
they are one part of the larger inductive argument 
that instances of "knows that p" are not context-
sensitive. I will then try to motivate a more gen-
eral property of context-sensitive expressions, 
and conclude by arguing that instances of "know 
that p" lack this more general property. 
Here is the first kind of argument. Suppose A 
and B are at the zoo. A is a non-philosopher, and 
B is a philosophy professor, trying to explain what 
epistemology is to A. B asks A to give her an 
example of a proposition that A takes herself to 
know, in response to which B will explain how to 
give a skeptical undermining of A's knowledge. 
Here is a discourse in this situation that should, if 
"know" is like a core indexical such as ''1'', "here", 
and "now", sound perfectly reasonable (certainly, 
according to the contextualist, every statement in 
the discourse is true): 
zoo 
A. 
(looking at a zebra in a normal zoo). I know 
that is a zebra. 
B. 
But can you rule out its being a cleverly 
painted mule? 
A. 
I guess I can't rule that out. 
B. 
So you admit that you don't know that's a 
zebra, and so you were wrong earlier? 
A. 
I didn't say I did. I wasn't considering the 
possibility that it could be a cleverly painted 
mule. 
A's final utterance, according to the contextual-
ist's semantics, is perfectly true. But this seems a 
very strange result. It is extremely difficult to 
make sense of A's denial except as a lie. But instead 
the contextualist predicts that it is clearly true. 
The behavior of "know" in this kind of dis-
course contrasts with some other dearly context-
sensItIve 
expressions. 
For 
example, 
modal 
expressions are context-sensitive. In the first 
instance, there are what some philosophers have 
thought of as different "senses" of possibility, such 
as physical possibility, logical possibility, epis-
temic possibility, and metaphysical possibility. 12 
But, even fixing upon one sense of modality, there 
are different readings of a modal term such as 
"could", depending upon the context of use. For 
example, where "could" is interpreted as physical 
possibility, one might mean physical possibility in 
a more or less restricted sense. Suppose A is in a 
conversation with a group of people talking about 
innovations in flight that have not been marketed 
to the public. B overhears ks comment, without 
knowing the background conversation: 
TECHNOLOGY 
A. 
It's possible to fly from London to New York 
City in 30 minutes. 
B. 
That's absurd! No flights available to the 
public today would allow you to do that. It's 
not possible to fly from London to New York 
City in 30 minutes. 
A. 
I didn't say it was. I wasn't talking about 
what's possible given what is available to the 
public, but rather what is possible given all 
existing technology. 
In contrast to the last line of zoo, ks final com-
ment in TECHNOLOGY seems perfectly appropriate, 
and indeed true. The worry for the contextualist is 
that the discourse in zoo should be as plausible 
and coherent as the discourse in TECHNOLOGY. But 
it clearly is not. This is a good minimal pair that 
shows that the alleged context-sensitivity of 
instances of "know that p" is considerably less 
accessible to us than the context-sensitivity of 
modals. This should lead us to doubt models 
according to which the context-sensitivity of 
"know" is modeled upon the context -sensitivity of 
modal expressions. 
One should be clear about the strategy here. 
I am not arguing, as others have, that the infelicity 
of a discourse such as zoo by itself undermines 
contextualism. By providing the contrasting min-
imal pair zoo and TECHNOLOGY, my purpose is 
just to reveal differences between some uncontro-
versial context-sensitive expressions, such as 
modals, with instances of "know that p". The con-
trast between zoo and TECHNOLOGY is not an 
anti-contextualist silver bullet, but rather one 
piece of the overall inductive argument for the 

730 
JASON STANLEY 
thesis that the only evidence for the context-
sensitivity of instances of "know that p" is the 
cases discussed in the Introduction. 
Contextualism also makes some strange pre-
dictions about propositional anaphora. Consider 
the following discourses: 
(1) 
If I have hands, then I know that I have 
hands. But come to think of it, I might 
be a brain in a vat, in which case I would 
believe I have hands, but wouldn't. Now 
that I'm considering such a skeptical 
possibility seriously, even if I have hands, 
I don't know that I do. But what I said 
earlier is still true. 13 
According to the contextualist semantics, there 
should be a clearly true reading of all the sen-
tences in these two discourses. But they are very 
difficult to grasp. In particular, the only interpre-
tation for the expression "what I said" in the final 
sentence is the proposition whose truth is being 
denied in the previous sentence. 14 
The case is again markedly different with 
uncontroversial context -sensitive expressions, 
such as genuine indexicals: 
(2) 
It is raining here. Had I been inside, what 
I said still would have been true. But now 
that I am in fact inside, it is not raining 
here. 
When informed of the facts, there is a clear reading 
of all of the sentences in (2) where they are true. 
So, certain tests that detect the context -sensi-
tivity of modal expressions and obvious indexi-
cals are blind to the alleged context-sensitivity of 
instances of "knows that p". Mark Richard (2004, 
p. 236) presses the worry, in response to the above 
arguments, that these tests are also blind to the 
context-sensitivity of obvious context-sensitive 
constructions, such as those involving compara-
tive adjectives. Commenting on my contrast 
between zoo and TECHNOLOGY, Richard writes: 
The following dialogue is exactly as bizarre ... 
A. 
He is rich. 
B. 
He can't afford a house on the Vineyard. 
A. 
I see your point. 
B. 
SO you admit you were wrong when you said 
he was rich. 
A. 
I said no such thing. 
agree with Richard that the above 
considerations may very well not be infallible 
indicators of context-sensitivity. But I disagree 
with Richard's particular example. I do think that 
the tests are successful in detecting the context-
sensitivity of constructions involving gradable 
adjectives. For Richard's exchange with "rich" is 
simply not parallel to zoo and TECHNOLOGY. In 
the cases of zoo and TECHNOLOGY, background 
context is provided to make 1\s final assertion 
more palatable. For example, in the case of zoo, A 
adds to "I didn't say I did", the helpful explanation 
"I wasn't considering the possibility that it could 
be a cleverly painted mule': In the case of TECH-
NOLOGY, A adds to "I didn't say it was", the helpful 
explanation "I wasn't talking about what's possi-
ble given what is available to the public, but rather 
what is possible given all existing technology". 
The additional background context rescues the 
felicity of 1\s assertion in TECHNOLOGY, but does 
nothing to rescue the felicity of 1\s assertion in 
zoo. Adding similar background context to 
Richard's "rich" dialogue rescues the felicity of 1\s 
final assertion: 
RICH 
A. 
He is rich. 
B. 
He can't afford a house on the Vineyard. 
A. 
I see your point. 
B. 
SO you admit you were wrong when you said 
he was rich. 
A. 
I didn't say that. I wasn't considering that 
level of wealth. 
Perhaps the background context in RICH does 
not make 1\s assertion "I didn't say that" as 
smooth as 1\s assertion "I didn't say it was" in 
TECHNOLOGY. But RICH is still far more similar to 
TECHNOLOGY than it is to zoo. In zoo, 1\s final 
assertion is wellnigh incoherent to the ordinary 
speaker, whereas RICH is perfectly coherent to 
everyone. 
So, I do not think that Richard has succeeded 
in undermining these tests as reliable indicators 
of context-sensitivity. Nevertheless, I am pre-
pared to admit that the above tests are not per-
fectly reliable indicators, for the simple reason 
that I doubt that there are any perfectly reliable 
indicators of context-sensitivity. The next piece 
of my inductive argument against the contextu-
alist is not such a test for context-sensitivity, 
but rather a generalization about the nature of 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
731 
semantic context-sensitivity. I am not certain 
whether this generalization is true. But it seems 
both empirically well confirmed, and motivated 
by general considerations about the nature of 
semantic context-sensitivity. And, if it is a true 
generalization, it provides further evidence against 
contextualism as a position in epistemology. 
In the first instance, it is individual words that 
are context-sensitive, not sentences or discourses. 
For example, the semantic context-sensitivity of 
the sentence "I am human" is traceable to the 
semantically context-sensitive word "I". Similarly, 
the semantic context -sensitivity of "She is tired" 
is traceable to the word "She", which is context-
sensitive, and the present tense. In some construc-
tions, the semantic context -sensitivity is traceable 
to an unpronounced element in the syntactic 
structure of a sentence. For example, the semantic 
context-sensitivity of "John is tall" may be trace-
able to an unpronounced element in the syntactic 
structure of the predicate "is tall", say a compari-
son class variable associated with the adjective 
"tall" (see Stanley 2000). But in these instances, 
too, context-sensitivity is traceable to an individ-
ual element in the sentence uttered, albeit one 
that is not pronounced. 
This suggests the following generalization. 
Since semantic context-sensitivity is traceable to 
an individual element, multiple occurrences of 
that element in a discourse should be able to take 
on differing values. In the case of an utterance 
such as "This is larger than this", where two differ-
ent objects are pointed to by the person uttering 
the sentence, this feature is obviously confirmed. 
But it is present in a broader range of 
constructions. 
For example, suppose John, who is very small 
for his age, identifies with small things. He has a 
picture on the wall in his bedroom of an elephant 
fighting off a much larger elephant. He also has a 
framed tiny butterfly on his wall. When he is 
asked why he has both things hung up, he says: 
(3) 
That butterfly is small, and that elephant 
is small. 
John in fact also has a fondness for flat things. On 
his wall is a picture of a field in Kansas, and on his 
desk is a rock. When asked why he has both, he 
replies: 
(4) 
That field is flat, and this rock is flat. 
Now imagine a picture of a butterfly that is 
surrounded by much smaller butterflies; it is 
huge for a butterfly. It is next to a picture of an 
elephant that is surrounded by much larger ele-
phants. The following is a good description of 
the situation: 
(5) 
That butterfly is large, but that elephant 
isn't large. IS 
There are different possible explanations of 
why the two different occurrences of "large" in 
(5) express different semantics values. For exam-
ple, one might argue that the comparison class 
property for the first occurrence of "large" is 
determined linguistically by the noun "butterfly", 
and the second occurrence of "large" is deter-
mined linguistically by the noun "elephant" (see 
Ludlow 1989). Alternatively, one might think that 
"large" is associated with different comparison 
class properties by free contextual assignment, in 
much the same way that unbound pronouns such 
as "he" and "she" have their denotations deter-
mined in context. The generalization is independ-
ent of either of these explanations. For the 
generalization is that, in the case of any context-
sensitive expression, different occurrences of that 
expression can receive different values within a 
discourse by whatever mechanism, be it binding 
or contextual supplementation. And that is what 
we have seen to be the case for comparative 
adjectives. 
It is worth expending a little more space on 
this example, since the proper interpretation of 
comparative adjectives is a vexed matter. In other 
work (Stanley 2002), I have argued for the follow-
ing account of predicative uses of comparative 
adjectives. The syntactic structure of a predicate 
such as "is tall" or "is smart" contains a variable 
position, which can be either bound or free. When 
it is free, its value, relative to a context, is a com-
parison class property. Comparison class proper-
ties can be determined by the head noun, as in a 
reading of "That butterfly is large", where it 
expresses the proposition that the butterfly in 
question is a large butterfly. Comparison class 
properties can also be determined by assorted 
extralinguistic factors. 
Comparison class properties do not need to be 
kind properties. Though she would not construe 
them this way, Graff (2000) provides examples in 
which the comparison class for "is old" can either 

732 
JASON STANLEY 
be the property of being a dog, or be the property 
of being an old dog (suppose we are confronted 
with a 20-year-old dog; compared with several 
14-year-old dogs, the 20-year-old dog is old, i.e. 
old for an old dog). Another example Graff (2000, 
p. 67) provides is as follows: 
it can be appropriate for me to say, when I see my 
young nephew for the first time in months at a 
family gathering, "Derek, you're so tall': It can be 
appropriate for me to say this even though I 
know that my nephew has always been and still is 
short for his age. What I am saying is that he has 
significantly more height than I expected him to 
have, given what his height was the last time I saw 
him. 
In this example, the comparison class property 
is the property of being a height that Delia 
expected her nephew to be. What Graff says, in 
uttering "Derek, you're so tall", is that Derek is 
tall relative to the height that Graff expected her 
nephew to be. l6 
So, on the theory of gradable adjectives that I 
favor, they are associated with variables for com-
parison class properties. Examples such as (3 )-( 5) 
show that different occurrences of the same 
gradable adjective within a sentence can be asso-
ciated with different comparison class properties. 
But the point that different occurrences of the 
same gradable adjective can be associated with 
different standards can be made on other accounts 
of gradable adjectives. For example, if one holds 
that gradable adjectives are associated with 
degrees on a scale, then examples such as (3)-(5) 
show that different occurrences of the same 
gradable adjective can be associated with differ-
ent degrees on the relevant scaleY 
This sort of shift is present in a variety of con-
text -sensitive expressions other than gradable 
adjectives. For example, we see this behavior with 
demonstratives, context -sensitive determiners, 
and quantified noun phrases. For the first, as we 
have already seen, there is the example: 
(6) 
That is larger than that. 
For the second, consider: 
(7) 
In Atlanta, there are many serial killers 
but not many unemployed men. 
In this case, the contextual determinants for the 
denotation of "many" change within a clause. The 
first occurrence of "many" denotes a more dis-
tinct determiner meaning than the second occur-
rence of "many", since (7) may be true even 
though there are many more unemployed men 
than serial killers. The same phenomenon occurs 
with quantified expressions, as (8) can express the 
proposition that every sailor on one ship waved 
to every sailor on another (Stanley and Williamson 
1995, p. 294): 
(8) 
Every sailor waved to every sailor. 
It is no surprise that different occurrences of one 
and the same context -sensitive expression can 
have different values within the same discourse. 
For context-sensitivity is linked not to the dis-
course, but to a particular context-sensitive term. 
So what one is speaking about when one speaks 
of the "standard of tallness" relevant for evaluat-
ing a particular use of "is tall" is simply the degree 
of tallness that is associated with the expression 
"tall" by whatever semantic mechanism one 
exploits. 
Let us see how this point applies to the version 
of contextual ism advocated in Lewis (1996). 
According to Lewis, the semantics of the word 
"know" invokes universal quantification over 
possibilities. Lewis then exploits facts about natu-
rallanguage universal quantification to motivate 
contextualism about "know": 
Finally, we must attend to the word "every". What 
does it mean to say that every possibility in 
which not-P is eliminated? An idiom of quanti-
fication, like "every", is normally restricted to 
some limited domain. If I say that every glass is 
empty, so it's time for another round, doubtless 
I and my audience are ignoring most of all the 
glasses there are in the whole wide world 
throughout all of time. They are outside the 
domain. They are irrelevant to the truth of what 
was said. 
Likewise, if I say that every uneliminated 
possibility is one in which P, or words to that 
effect, I am doubtless ignoring some of all the 
uneliminated alternative possibilities that there 
are. They are outside the domain. They are irrel-
evant to the truth of what was said. (Lewis 1996, 
p.553) 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
733 
So, Lewis deduces contextualism about "know" 
first, from the claim that "know" involves univer-
sal quantification over possibilities, and secondly, 
from the fact that natural language quantification 
is typically restricted. But (as (8) demonstrated) it 
is a well-established fact that different occur-
rences of the same quantified expression within a 
discourse can be associated with different domains 
(Soames 1986, p. 357; Stanley and Williamson 
1995, p. 294; Stanley and Szabo 2000, p. 249). 
Lewis's contextualism flows in part from facts 
about natural language quantification. So, two 
different occurrences of "know" within the same 
discourse should be able to be associated with dif-
ferent sets of possibilities (say, a set including 
quite remote possibilities, and a set including 
only quite close possibilities). 
Distinct occurrences of the same context-
sensitive term can have different interpretations 
within a discourse. We should therefore expect 
distinct occurrences of the instances of "know that 
p" to allow for the possibility of distinct interpreta-
tions within a discourse. But this opens the con-
textualist up to a number of objections that she 
does not otherwise face. Furthermore, if this is so, 
some of what contextualists say about the virtues 
of their theories over other theories falls by the 
wayside. I will substantiate these points in turn. 
If instances of "know that p" behave like com-
parative adjectives, quantifier phrases, context-
sensitive determiners, or modals, then we would 
expect it to be smoothly acceptable to associate 
different standards of knowledge with different 
occurrences of the "know that p", just as we asso-
ciate different degrees of height with different 
occurrences of the predicate "is tall". So, if contex-
tualism were true, we should expect the following 
to be fine: 
(9) 
If there is an external world, many normal 
non-philosophers know that there is, but, 
by contrast, no epistemologists know 
that there is. 
If "know that there is an external world" could be 
associated with different standards, then one would 
expect an utterance of (9) to be felicitous and true, 
just as utterances of (3)-(8) are. For "is large" 
means one thing when predicated of a butterfly, 
and quite another when predicated of an elephant. 
Similarly, "many" means one thing when it occurs 
with "unemployed men", and quite another when 
it occurs with "serial killers". So, if "know that 
there is an external world" is context-sensitive in a 
similar manner, one would naturally expect it to 
have different contents when predicated of non-
epistemologists and epistemologists. l8 
In responding to various objections, contextu-
alists have exploited the view that distinct occur-
rences of "know" within a discourse must be 
associated with the same standard. For example, 
this view is at work in the solution contextualists 
have provided to puzzles like the "Now You Know 
it, Now You Don't" concern (Yourgrau 1983; 
DeRose 1992; 2000). This concern is that the con-
textualist semantics would allow for discourses 
such as: 
KNOWLEDGE SHIFT 
A. 
If that is a zebra, I know it is a zebra. 
B. 
But can you rule out its being merely a clev-
erly painted mule? 
A. 
No, I can't. 
B. 
SO you admit you didn't know it was a 
zebra? 
A. 
If that is a zebra, then I knew it was a zebra. 
But now, after your question, even if it is a 
zebra, I don't know it is a zebra. l9 
DeRose (1992, p. 925) writes in response to a sim-
ilar objection (similar because not in conditional 
form): 
How shall the contextualist respond? The objec-
tion ... is based upon a mistake. The contextualist 
believes that certain aspects of the context of an 
attribution or denial of knowledge attribution 
affect its content. ... If in the context of the con-
versation the possibility of painted mules has been 
mentioned, and if the mere mention of this pos-
sibility has an effect on the conditions under which 
someone can be truly said to "know': then any use 
of "know" (or its past tense) is so affected, even a 
use in which one describes one's past condition. 
This response presupposes that distinct occur-
rences of "know" within a discourse must all be 
associated with the same standard. But the analo-
gous claim is incorrect for un controversial 
context-sensitive expressions. 
Consider, for example, a gradable adjective 
such as "tall': The parallel claim for "tall" to 

734 
JASON STANLEY 
DeRose's claim about "know" would be that 
merely mentioning, for example, basketball play-
ers would so affect the conditions under which 
someone can be truly said to be "tall", that any use 
of "tall" is so affected, even a use in which one 
describes one's past condition. But this is clearly 
false for "tall", as the following discourse suggests. 
Suppose that A was the tallest member of his 
seventh-grade class. But A didn't grow over the 
summer, and most of his classmates did. B is the 
eighth-grade teacher: 
TALLNESS SHIFT 
B. 
OK, A, you're average height, so you sit in the 
middle. 
A. 
But last year, 1 was tall and 1 got used to sit-
ting in the back. 
In the case of a predicate such as "is tall", one can 
clearly shift the standard governing it from a 
higher standard to a lower past standard. If the 
expression "know that p" is context-sensitive, one 
should expect the very same behavior. That is, 
one should expect KNOWLEDGE SHIFT to be felici-
tous. DeRose's account of the infelicity of KNOWL-
EDGE SHIFT therefore presupposes that "know" 
must be associated with the same standards 
throughout a discourse. 
Shifting to Lewis's restricted quantification 
model of contextualism does not help to substan-
tiate the contextualist's claim that raising a possi-
bility to salience affects all future uses of "know': 
The parallel claim for quantification would be 
that once one introduces a domain of a certain 
size, a future use of a quantifier within that dis-
course cannot be understood to be restricted to a 
subset of that domain. 20 But this claim is quite 
clearly false: 
QUANTIFIER SHIFT 
A. 
Every Van Gogh painting is in the Dutch 
National Museum. 
B. 
That's a change. When 1 visited last year, 1 
saw every Van Gogh painting, and some were 
definitely missing. 
The domain for the first occurrence of the quan-
tifier phrase "every Van Gogh painting" is (if you 
like) maximally large. But we can, with no diffi-
culty at all, understand the domain for the second 
occurrence to be a subset of this domain, restricted 
to last year's collection in the Dutch National 
MuseumY Lewis (1983, p. 247) claims that "the 
boundary readily shifts outward if what is said 
requires it, but does not so readily shift inward if 
what is said requires that". This claim, so impor-
tant to his account of skepticism, is clearly false 
for domain restriction, the model upon which his 
account of "know" is based. 
DeRose (1992) also appeals to a direct analogy 
between the indexical "here" and "know" to 
defend his claim concerning the pragmatics of 
<'know": 
Knowledge claims, then, can be compared to other 
sentences containing other context -sensitive words, 
like "here". One hour ago, 1 was in my office. 
Suppose I truly said, "I am here". Now 1 am in the 
word processing room. How can 1 truly say where 
1 was an hour ago? 1 cannot truly say, "I was here'; 
because 1 wasn't here; 1 was there. The meaning 
of "here" is fixed by the relevant contextual fac-
tors (in this case, my location) of the utterance, 
not by my location at the time being talked 
about. 
The values of core indexicals, unlike most other 
context-sensitive expressions, are sometimes held 
to be fixed by facts about the context of utterance 
that are independent of speaker intentions (e.g. 
Wettstein (1984) on "pure indexicals"). So, for 
example, the value of "here" is fixed (in part) by 
the place of utterance, and the value of"I" is fixed 
by the person who utters it. Perhaps then, by ana-
logy, the standard of knowledge (unlike the stand-
ard of tallness) is fixed by a fact about the context 
of utterance that is independent of the intentions 
of the person making the knowledge ascription. 
The analogy is of little help to the contextual-
ist. First, as we have already demonstrated, the 
analogy between "know" and core indexicals is 
poor. The context-sensitivity of core indexicals is 
easily demonstrable by a variety of tests, none of 
which detects the context -sensitivity of knowledge 
ascriptions. Secondly, the fact that the analogy is 
poor is problematic for the contextualist, since 
arguably core indexicals are the only expressions 
whose values are fixed (to some degree) inde-
pendently of the intentions of the speaker. Third, 
it is not a semantic fact about core indexicals that 
they generally have the same denotation within 
a short discourse. It is rather a consequence 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
735 
of mundane physical facts about humans. 
Different occurrences of "here" within a discourse 
tend to have the same denotation, because most 
of our conversations occur while remaining in 
the same location. 22 Different occurrences of "I" 
within a single sentence tend to have the same 
denotation, because speakers rarely change mid-
sentence. There is no reason to think that analo-
gous mundane physical facts determine the same 
standard of knowledge throughout a discourse. 
Once one abandons the contextualist claim 
that distinct occurrences of instances of "know 
that p" in a single discourse must be associated 
with the same standards, the contextualist is open 
to the objection that, by contextualist lights, infe-
licitous discourses such as KNOWLEDGE SHIFT 
should be acceptable. On my view, this is not a 
terrible concession. For the contextualist has no 
response to the infelicity of very similar dis-
courses, such as ( 1), even assuming her model of 
context-sensitivity to be correct. But the situa-
tion is worse for the contextualist. If the model of 
context-sensitivity assumed by the contextualist 
is wrong, some of what contextualists say about 
the virtues of their theories over other theories is 
vitiated. 
If different occurrences of instances of "knows 
that p" can be associated with different epistemic 
standards within a discourse, some of the para-
digm sentences the infelicity of which suppos-
edly motivates their accounts over rival accounts 
turn out to be felicitous and potentially true by 
contextualist lights. For example, if we have simi-
lar behavior to many other context-sensitive 
expressions, one would expect the following to be 
felicitous: 
(10) 
Bill knows that he has hands, but Bill 
does not know that he is not a bodiless 
brain in a vat. 
(11) 
Bill does not know that he is not a bod-
iless brain in a vat, but Bill knows he 
has hands. 
As we have seen above, DeRose takes the persist-
ent infelicity of utterances of the sentences in (10) 
and (11) to undermine alternative accounts on 
the grounds that they allow for acceptable utter-
ances of these sentences. But, if instances of 
"knows that p" are context-sensitive, then one 
would expect there to be contexts in which the 
sentences in (10) and (11) could be felicitously 
uttered. Someone who uttered sentence (10) 
would intend "knows that he has hands" to be 
associated with lower standards, and "know that 
he is not a bodiless brain in a vat" to be associated 
with higher standards. Someone uttering sen-
tence (11) would be lowering standards across a 
conjunction. 
With other context-sensitive expressions, we 
do find constructions analogous to those in (10) 
and (11) that can be felicitously uttered. For 
instance, consider again: 
(7) 
In Atlanta, there are many serial killers 
but not many unemployed men. 
"Many" is analogous to the indexical contextual-
ist's view that "know" is itself a context-sensitive 
term, which denotes different relations relative to 
different contexts of use. But in (7),_ the two 
semantic values of "many" are different, despite 
the fact that they occur within the same clause. 
The occurrence of the expression "serial killer" 
leads us to interpret the first occurrence of "many" 
in one way, whereas the occurrence of the expres-
sion "unemployed men" leads us to interpret the 
second occurrence in another way. Similarly, if 
the contextualist were right, one might wonder 
why the occurrence of "he has hands" should not 
lead us to interpret the relevant occurrences of 
"know" in one way (as denoting low-standards 
knowledge relations), while the occurrence of "he 
is not a bodiless brain in a vat" leads us to inter-
pret the other occurrences of "know" in (10) and 
(11) in another way (as denoting high -standards 
knowledge relations). 
According to the versions of contextualism 
developed in Schaffer (2004) and Ludlow (2005), 
instances of the predicate "know that p" are 
context-sensitive, because there is an epistemo-
logically significant context-sensitive element 
associated with "know" in the predicate (though 
the lexical item "know" is not context-sensitive). 
But consider: 
(12) 
That mountain is tall for Michigan, but 
not tall for Colorado. 
In (12), we find that different occurrences of the 
same adjective can be associated with different 
values for their contextually sensitive parameters 

736 
JASON STANLEY 
within the same clause. So we would expect 
different occurrences of "know" to be able to be 
associated with distinct values for their associated 
contextually sensitive parameters within the same 
clause. 
The contextualist might respond that the 
reason that (12) can be felicitously uttered is that 
we have devices that make explicit the compari-
son class properties for gradable adjectives, as in 
"for Michigan" and "for Colorado". Perhaps the 
infelicity of uttering the sentences in (10) and 
(11) is due to the inability we have to articulate 
the shifting standards associated with our knowl-
edge claims, and when we cannot articulate the 
shift, extralinguistic context cannot do the task of 
shifting the standards for us. 
This line of enquiry does not advance the 
contextualist's cause very far. For if there is no 
way to articulate the changing standards, as there 
is in the case of comparison class properties for 
gradable adjectives (or quantifier domains for 
quantifiers), that should simply raise more worry 
about the contextualist's thesis that epistemic 
vocabulary is context-sensitive in the way she 
describes. For with other context-sensitive con-
structions, we do find ways to articulate what is 
sometimes provided by context. If the epistemic 
_ standards cannot be smoothly linguistically 
articulated, that should lead us to worry that they 
are not there. 
A perhaps more promising path for the con-
textualist to pursue is the one urged by Peter 
Ludlow (2005). Ludlow calls attention in his 
paper to the presence of standards operators in 
epistemic talk, as in examples such as: 
(13) 
John doesn't know that water is liquid 
by the standards of chemistry. 
(14) 
Copernicus didn't know that the sun 
was the center of the solar system by 
today's standards of knowledge. 
Ludlow takes expressions such as "by the stand-
ards of chemistry" and "by today's standards of 
knowledge" to play an analogous function to the 
expressions "for Michigan" and "for Colorado", 
which articulate comparison class properties. 
Such expressions make explicit the standard of 
knowledge relative to which an ascription of 
knowledge is true or false. 
Contextual ism is the thesis that knowledge 
ascriptions are context-sensitive in an epistemo-
logically distinctive way. Ludlow takes the pres-
ence of expressions in English such as "by the 
standards of chemistry" or "by today's standards 
of knowledge" to show that unembellished knowl-
edge ascriptions, ones that do not contain explicit 
standards operators, nevertheless contain an 
unpronounced position for epistemic standards. 
That is, Ludlow takes the existence of such expres-
sions to show that, in a sentence such as "John 
knows that he has hands", there is an unpro-
nounced position in the verb phrase "knows that 
he has hands" that, relative to a context, receives 
an epistemic standard as a value. That is how 
Ludlow proposes to derive contextualism from 
the felicity and potential truth of sentences such 
as (13) and (14). 
Ludlow is indisputably correct in his observa-
tion that people regularly utter sentences such as 
(13) and (14). However, the phenomenon he dis-
cusses is not specifically epistemic in character. 
Expressions such as "by loose standards", "by 
strict standards", and "by the standards of chem-
istry" regularly occur appended to sentences that 
contain no epistemic vocabulary at all (cf. Lewis 
1981, p. 84): 
(15) 
By strict standards, France is not hex-
agonal. 
(16) 
By loose standards, this table is square. 
(17) 
By the standards of chemistry, what is 
in the Hudson River isn't water. 
Expressions such as "by strict standards", "by 
loose standards" and "by the standards of chem-
istry" cannot be used to derive a conclusion 
about specifically epistemic context-sensitivity. 
The pattern of usage of these expressions is 
considerably more general in character. It has 
something to do with the phenomenon that is 
called loose use. 
Even abstracting from the fact that (as I will 
argue [later 1) appeal to loose use is not of help to 
the contextualist, there are other objections to 
Ludlow's proposed inference. If Ludlow takes 
the felicity and potential truth of sentences such 
as (13) and (14) to license the postulation of 
epistemic standards variables in unembellished 
knowledge ascriptions, then, by parity of reason-
ing, he needs to take the felicity and potential 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
737 
truth of sentences such as (15)-(17) as licensing 
the postulation of various kinds of standards 
positions in sentences such as "this is water", "this 
is square", and "this is hexagonal". Indeed, there 
are more than just considerations from parity of 
reasoning at work here, since one can conjoin 
knowledge attributions and non-epistemic state-
ments in the scope of expressions such as "by the 
standards of chemistry", as in: 
(18) 
By the standards of chemistry, what is 
in the Hudson River isn't water, and 
John doesn't know that water is liquid. 
(19) 
By loose standards, this table is square 
and John knows that water is a liquid. 
Since there is only one occurrence of a standards 
expression in (18) and (19), its effect on the 
embedded non-epistemic sentence must be the 
same as its effect on the epistemic sentence. If it 
binds a standards parameter in the epistemic sen-
tence, it binds a standards parameter in the non-
epistemic sentence. It follows that, if one takes the 
felicity and potential truth of (13) and (14) to 
license the postulation of epistemic standards 
variables, one would need standards positions in 
the syntax for virtually every predication. This is 
deeply implausible. Furthermore, the conclusion, 
even if it were plausible, is of no help to the theo-
rist who wishes to establish that knowledge 
ascriptions have a specifically epistemological kind 
of context-sensitivity. So the contextualist should 
certainly reject Ludlow's positionY 
Ludlow's view that knowledge ascriptions 
contain an implicit reference to standards cannot 
be pressed into service to rescue the contextual-
ist from the charge that knowledge ascriptions 
behave quite differently from other context-
sensitive expressions. Contextualists do in gen-
eral claim that there are special rules governing 
the context-sensitivity of instances of "know 
Notes 
See Fantl and McGrath (2002) and Hawthorne 
(2004: ch. 4). 
2 In particular, most of the examples have been 
discovered by Stewart Cohen and Keith 
DeRose. 
3 Thanks to Earl Conee for suggesting this term. 
that p': In particular, once a skeptical possibility 
has been raised, they say, that has ramifications 
for the evaluation of future uses of instances of 
"know that p" within that discourse. But there are 
two worries for this strategy. First, it leaves the 
oddity of (10) unexplained. Secondly, as I have 
emphasized, it stipulates a certain pragmatic con-
straint about the context-sensitivity of instances 
of "know that p" that has no parallel with prag-
matic principles governing the interpretations of 
other context-sensitive expressions. Thus, these 
kinds of claims about how raising skeptical sce-
narios change the discourse look like stipulations 
to save the theory from having similar uncom-
fortable consequences as rival theories. 
I have argued that the contextualist needs 
knowledge ascriptions to have very different 
properties from familiar context-sensitive con-
structions. These arguments leave open the pos-
sibility that the alleged context-sensitivity of 
instances of "know that p" could be modeled on 
the context-sensitivity of some other kind of 
expression, one that does not allow for standard 
shifts within a clause, and is undetectable by the 
above tests involving propositional anaphora and 
assertion reports.24 
A complete case against the contextualist would 
involve canvassing every kind of context-sensitive 
expression, and showing some clear disanalogy 
between the behaviors of expressions of that kind 
and instances of "know that p': This is obviously a 
task that cannot be accomplished here. However, 
the above arguments are not thereby rendered idle. 
Before such a task is undertaken, one might think 
that there are surely some context -sensitive expres-
sions that behave like knowledge ascriptions. But 
the above discussions show that there is no famil-
iar kind of context-sensitivity upon which to base 
the alleged context -sensitivity of knowledge ascrip-
tions. The burden of proof is therefore on the con-
textualist to produce one. 
4 
Jon Kvanvig (on the blog Certain Doubts) 
suggested this as an account of these sorts of 
cases. 
5 Here is another point against the knowledge 
of knowledge maneuver, due to unpublished 
work by Kripke. Suppose that Hannah, in the 

738 
JASON STANLEY 
low-stakes bank case, knows that the bank 
will be open. Suppose Bill has the same 
evidence as Hannah, and is also in a low-
stakes situation. Then Bill can felicitously 
and truly utter the sentence "I know that 
Hannah knows that the bank will be open". It 
seems bizarre to hold, as the advocate of this 
maneuver must, that Bill knows that Hannah 
knows that the bank will be open, but 
Hannah does not know that Hannah knows 
that the bank will be open, despite the fact 
that they have the same evidence that the 
bank will be open. 
6 John Hawthorne (2004, p. 30) puts the prin-
ciple as "one ought only to use that which 
one knows as a premise in one's delibera-
tions", which is a good way to elucidate the 
relevant sense of "act on': Hawthorne writes, 
concerning this principle: "There are com-
plications that call for ceteris paribus style 
qualifications. In a situation where I have no 
clue what is going on, I may take certain 
things for granted in order to prevent paral-
ysis, especially when I need to act quickly." 
But ceteris paribus style qualifications are 
needed only insofar as they are needed in all 
normative claims. A similar point holds for 
the knowledge rule for assertion, discussed 
below. 
7 Thanks to Jim Pryor for discussion here. 
8 I say "virtually all the cases", because the one 
intuition that remains mysterious from this 
perspective is the intuition we have in High 
Attributor-Low Subject Stakes. It is fine for 
the person in Low Stakes to act on his or her 
belief that the bank will be open. 
9 DeRose provides a reason for contextualists 
to advocate an indexical treatment of "know". 
According to him, so doing allows the con-
textualist to respond to the charge that she is 
committed to the truth of utterances of sen-
tences such as "I don't know that I have 
hands, but I used to know that I have hands." 
(cf. DeRose 1992, pp. 924-8; 2000). I chal-
lenge DeRose's arguments below. 
10 
One cannot complain that "love their 
mother" is not the same verb phrase as "loves 
my mother" (because "their" is plural case 
and "my" is singular case). For in some of 
Cappelen and Lepore's target examples, we 
find the exact same situation. For example, 
"know that penguins waddle" is plural, in 
"Jill and Mary know that penguins waddle", 
whereas "knows that penguins waddle" is 
singular, in "Jill knows that penguins waddle". 
But Cappelen and Lepore still infer from the 
fact that one can collect with "know that 
penguins waddle", to the conclusion that 
"knows that penguins waddle" is not con-
text -sensitive. 
11 
For example, in Stanley (2002), I argue that 
predicative uses of adjectives, such as "is 
tall", have the syntactic structure "is tallf(i)". 
In these representations, "I' denotes a func-
tion from objects to comparison classes, 
whose value is supplied by context, and "i" 
denotes an individual, relative to a context. 
Both "I' and "i" can be bound by higher 
operators. So an utterance of the sentence 
"Jill is tall" is really of the form "Jill 1 is tall 
f( i) ", and an utterance of the sentence "Mary 
is tall" is really of the form "MarY1 is tall 
g(i)." On the envisaged response from 
Cappelen and Lepore, variables inside a 
verb phrase can be bound by operators 
attaching to the Verb Phrase (this is what 
they would have to say to defend the view 
that "her" and "my" are instances of bound 
anaphora). So, the reason one could con-
clude "Both Jill and Mary are tall" from an 
utterance of "Jill is tall" and "Mary is tall" is 
because it is of the form "Both Jill and Mary 
Ax (are tall h(x))", where the value of "h", 
relative to the envisaged context, is a func-
tion that takes Jill onto fOill), and takes 
Mary onto g(Mary). 
12 
The degree to which this marks genuine 
ambiguity or a kind of indexicality is subject 
to dispute; see Kratzer (1977). 
13 
The reason I have placed the initial sentence 
in conditional form is that, if the initial sen-
tence was just "I know that I have hands", 
the contextualist could explain the infelicity 
of the final utterance by appeal to the 
knowledge account of assertion. Let us use 
"know-1" for the lower-standards knowl-
edge relation and "know-H" for the higher-
standards knowledge relation. Suppose that 
the initial sentence were just "I know that I 
have hands': Asserting that one's previous 
claim to know-L that one has hands is still 
true clearly entails that one has hands. By the 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
739 
knowledge account of assertion (the norm 
for assertion is knowledge), I could assert in 
the higher standard's context that my previ-
ous knowledge claim is still true only if I 
know-H that I know-L that I have hands. But 
this requires that I know-H that I have hands 
(by an uncontroversial application of single-
premise epistemic closure). But, by stipula-
tion, I do not know-H that I have hands. So 
a contextualist could explain the infelicity of 
the final utterance by appeal to the knowl-
edge account of assertion. By placing the 
original sentence in conditional form, I have 
blocked this maneuver. 
14 
DeRose appears to concede the point that, 
on his view, a metalinguistic version of this 
discourse is fine. Speaking of just such a case, 
DeRose (1992, p. 925) writes: "[ one 1 can say, 
'My previous knowledge claim was true; just 
as one can say, 'My previous location claim 
was true.' Or so I believe. But saying these 
things would have a point only if one were 
interested in the truth-value of the earlier 
claim, rather than in the question of whether 
in the present contextually determined sense 
one knew and knows, or didn't and doesn't."; 
But it does not seem that semantic ascent 
helps here. 
15 
It is worth mentioning that one can felici-
tously assign different standards to different 
occurrences of the same adjective, even when 
predicated of the same object; consider: "In 
Michigan, that mountain is tall, but in 
Colorado, it would not be tall': 
16 
I am using Graff's examples for a purpose 
she explicitly repudiates, since Graff her-
self (2000, p. 55) thinks that "it is not the 
case that variation of the standards in use 
for a vague expression is always attributa-
ble to some comparison class". However, 
Graff assumes that comparison classes 
must be kinds of some type, an assumption 
I reject. 
17 
On my favored account of predicate uses of 
gradable adjectives (such as "John is tall" or 
"Mary is rich"), the degree on the scale is 
determined by the comparison class prop-
erty. Many people have argued that the 
degree on the scale is not so determined (e.g. 
Richard 2004), but I am not convinced by 
these arguments. 
18 
Again, it is irrelevant whether the mecha-
nism that would so affect the interpretation 
of the two distinct occurrences of "know" is 
due to a parameter associated with "know" 
being controlled by the noun phrases "many 
normal non-philosophers" and "no episte-
mologists", or due rather to a shift in free 
contextual assignment initiated by the use of 
these noun phrases. 
19 
Again, I have placed this discourse in condi-
tional form to avoid appeal to the knowledge 
account of assertion in explaining the infe-
licity of asserting in a higher-standards con-
text that one's previous knowledge claim is 
true. 
20 
This is, in essence, the parallel pragmatic 
principle to Lewis's "Rule of Attention" 
(1996, pp. 559 ff.) for quantifier domain 
restriction. 
21 
Of course, many Van Gogh paintings are 
housed in the Van Gogh museum in 
Amsterdam. 
22 
There is a commercial for McDonald's that 
shows a woman driving with her children, 
which begins with the children requesting. 
"Can we go to McDonald's now?", which is 
answered in the negative. Every subsequent 
few seconds, the children make their request 
again, taking advantage of the fact that "now" 
can change its denotation over a discourse. 
23 
There are a number of other reasons to ques-
tion the inference Ludlow draws. First, there 
are similar inferences that are clearly invalid 
(a "bad-company" objection). From the 
truth of "according to John, chocolate is 
made of gold", we cannot conclude that the 
unembellished sentence "chocolate is made 
of gold" contains a reference to persons. It is 
similarly unclear what legitimates Ludlow's 
inference. More theoretically, on a very natu-
ral construal of these operators, they are 
adjuncts and not arguments. If so, they are 
only optionally present, and not present 
when 
phonologically 
un articulated. 
In 
response, Ludlow rejects the argument-
adjunct distinction. He argues that many 
expressions that we think of as adjuncts 
really mark positions that are linguistically 
active, even when unpronounced. Ludlow 
suggests e.g. that there is a position for an 
instrument (such as "with a knife") in a 

740 
JASON STANLEY 
sentence such as "John cut the salami". On 
this view, even when this position is not 
explicitly articulated (as it is in "John cut the 
salami with a knife") its value may be con-
textually supplied. But there is no position 
for instruments in "John cut the salami" that 
can be contextually supplied (see Stanley 
(2005)). If Bill utters "John cut the salami 
with a knife", Frank can deny his assertion by 
uttering "No he didn't; he cut it with a 
spoon". But if Bill utters only "John cut the 
salami", no matter what information is sali-
ent in extralinguistic context, it is never felic-
itous to follow his assertion with "No he 
didn't; he cut it with a spoon". So Ludlow's 
argument that "with a knife" is present even 
when unpronounced fails. 
References 
Cohen, Stewart (1988). "How to Be a Fallibilist", 
in 
J. 
Tomberlin 
(ed.), 
Epistemology 
(Philosophical Perspectives, 2, Atascadero, CA: 
Ridgeview), pp. 91-123. 
DeRose, Keith 
(1992). "Contextualism and 
Knowledge Attributions", 
Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research, 52/4, pp. 913-29. 
-- (1999). "Contextualism: An Explanation 
and Defense", in J. Greco and E. Sosa (eds), The 
Blackwell Guide to Epistemology (Oxford: 
Blackwell), pp. 187-205. 
-- (2000). "Now You Know It, Now You Don't", 
Proceedings of the Twentieth World Congress of 
Philosophy, v. Epistemology (Bowling Green, 
OH: Philosophy Documentation Center), pp. 
91-106. 
-- (2002). "Assertion, Knowledge, and Context", 
Philosophical Review, Ill, pp. 167-203. 
Fantl, Jeremy and McGrath, Matthew (2002). 
"Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification", 
Philosophical Review, 11111, pp. 67-94. 
Graff, Delia (2000). "Shifting Sands: An Interest-
Relative Theory of Vagueness" Philosophical 
Topics, 2811, pp. 45-8l. 
Hawthorne, John (2004). Knowledge and Lotteries 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Kratzer, Angelika (1977). "What 'Must' and 'Can' 
Must 
and Can Mean", 
Linguistics 
and 
Philosophy, 1, pp. 337-55. 
24 
Barbara Partee (p.c.) pointed out to me that 
the relational term "enemy" does not easily 
allow for shifts in interpretation within a 
clause. An utterance of the sentence "John is 
an enemy and Bill is an enemy, but they are 
not enemies of the same person" is decidedly 
odd. Similarly, though one can switch from 
the "can" of physical possibility to the "can" 
of permissibility within a clause (as in "John 
can lift the table that Mary says he can"), it is 
harder to switch the domain of modals such 
as "can", fixing a sense of possibility. But I 
have provided other arguments to distin-
guish these expressions from knowledge 
ascriptions. The examples from proposi-
tional anaphora, and examples such as TECH-
NoLoGy' were so intended. 
Lewis, David (1983). "Scorekeeping in a Language 
Game", in Lewis, Philosophical Papers (New 
York: Oxford University Press), i, pp. 233-49. 
--(1996). "Elusive Knowledge", Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy, 74, pp. 549-67. 
Ludlow, Peter (1989). "Implicit Comparison 
Classes", Linguistics and Philosophy, 12, pp. 
519-33. 
--(2005). "Contextualism and the 
New 
Linguistic Turn in Epistemology", in G. Preyer 
and G.Peters (eds), Contextualism in Philosophy, 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Richard, Mark (2004). "Contextualism and 
Relativism", Philosophical Studies, 11911-2, pp. 
215-4l. 
Schaffer, Jonathan (2004). "From Contextualism 
to 
Contrastivism", 
Philosophical 
Studies, 
11911-2, pp. 73-103. 
Soames, Scott (1986). "Incomplete Definite 
Descriptions", Notre Dame Journal of Formal 
Logic, pp. 349-75. 
--(2000). "Context and Logical 
Form", 
Linguistics and Philosophy, 23/4, pp. 391-434. 
--(2002). "Nominal Restriction': in G. Peters 
and G. Preyer, Logical Form and Language 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press), pp. 365-88. 
--(2005). "Semantics in Context", in Gerhard 
Preyer and G. Peter (eds), Contextualism 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 

KNOWLEDGE AND PRACTICAL INTEREST, SELECTIONS 
741 
--and Szabo, Z. (2000). "On Quantifier 
Domain Restriction", Mind and Language, 15, 
pp.219-6l. 
--and Williamson, T. (1995). "Quantifiers and 
Context-Dependence", Analysis, 55, pp. 291-5. 
Williamson, Timothy (2000). Knowledge and its 
Limits (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Yourgrau, Palle (1983). "Knowledge and Relevant 
Alternatives", Synthese, 55, pp. 175-90. 

CHAPTER 51 
Evidence, Pragmatics, 
and Justification 
Jeremy Fantl and Matthew McGrath 
Train Case 1. You're at Back Bay Station in Boston 
preparing to take the commuter rail to 
Providence. You're going to see friends. It will be 
a relaxing vacation. You've been in a rather boring 
conversation with a guy standing beside you. He, 
too, is going to visit friends in Providence. As the 
train rolls into the station, you continue the con-
versation by asking, "Does this train make all 
those little stops, in Foxboro, Attleboro, etc?" It 
doesn't matter much to you whether the train is 
the "Express" or not, though you'd mildly prefer 
it was. He answers, "Yeah, this one makes all those 
little stops. They told me when I bought the 
ticket." Nothing about him seems particularly 
untrustworthy. You believe what he says. 
Intuitively, in Train Case 1, you have good enough 
evidence to know that the train stops in Foxboro. 
You are epistemically justified in believing that 
proposition. I 
Train Case 2. You absolutely need to be in 
Foxboro, the sooner the better. Your career 
depends on it. You've got tickets for a south-
bound train that leaves in two hours and gets 
into Foxboro in the nick of time. You overhear a 
conversation like that in Train Case 1 concerning 
the train that just rolled into the station and 
leaves in 15 minutes. You think, "That guy's 
Originally published in The Philosophical Review Ill, 1 
(Jan. 2002), pp. 67-94. 
information might be wrong. What's it to him 
whether the train stops in Foxboro? Maybe the 
ticket-seller misunderstood his question. Maybe 
he misunderstood the answer. Who knows when 
he bought the ticket? I don't want to be wrong 
about this. I'd better go check it out myself." 
Intuitively, in Train Case 2, you do not have good 
enough evidence to know that the train stops in 
Foxboro. You are not justified in believing that 
proposition. When so much is at stake, a stranger's 
casual word isn't good enough. You should check 
further.2 
Suppose these intuitions are correct: you are 
justified in Train Case 1 but not in Train Case 2. 
What follows is that epistemic justification is not 
simply a matter of the evidence one has. You have 
the same evidence in each case. But in one case 
you are justified; in the other you are not. So, if 
these intuitions are correct, a proposition's justifi-
cation does not supervene on one's evidence for 
or against it; that is, evidentialism is false. 3 
Evidentialism. For any two subjects Sand S', nec-
essarily, if Sand S' have the same evidence fori 
against p, then S is justified in believing that p iff 
S' is, too. 
How surprising this conclusion is depends 
on how broad a notion of evidence is employed. 
Under an internalist conception of evidence, the 
falsity of evidentialism is of some interest, but 

EVIDENCE, PRAGMATICS, AND JUSTIFICATION 
743 
might only reveal the weaknesses of internalism, 
and similarly for externalist versions of eviden-
tialism. The term "evidence," however, is not a 
technical term requiring a stipulated meaning. 
In considering the Train Cases, we use "evi-
dence" to mean what it ordinarily does. That is 
to say, we employ a broad intuitive concept of 
evidence, which internalists and externalists 
might analyze in different ways. It is difficult to 
say much that is helpful about the ordinary con-
cept of evidence without taking up a particular 
theory. But it ought to be common ground 
between theories of evidence that having a lot at 
stake in whether p is true does not, by itself, pro-
vide evidence for or against p. Evidence for p 
ought to raise the probability of p's truth (in 
some appropriate sense of "probability"). But 
having a lot at stake in whether p is true doesn't 
affect its probability, except in rare cases in 
which one possesses special background infor-
mation. For this reason, it seems that all candi-
date theories of evidence ought to allow that 
you have the same evidence in the Train Cases. 
So if the intuitions about the Train Cases are 
correct, then even when "evidence" is under-
stood as expressing the broad intuitive notion, 
evidentialism is false. The conclusion that evi-
dentialism, so understood, is false, is therefore 
surprising. If it is false, we suspect many forms 
of reliabilism, virtue theory, and deontologism 
are false as well. 
We reject evidential ism, but we feel that the 
above argument is not enough to do the job. 
The intuitions in the Train Cases, though ulti-
mately correct, are not strong enough to count as 
data in a decisive argument against evidentialism. 
Evidentialism is not so easily refuted. 
Denying evidentialism seems tantamount to 
denying the undeniable distinction between epis-
temic and pragmatic justification. We usually dis-
tinguish the two by noting that the former has a 
special relationship to truth-acquisition and 
falsehood-avoidance that the latter lacks. Put one 
way, pragmatic justification has to do with all of 
our goals, while epistemic justification has to do 
only with our special truth-related goals. 
Consequently, if evidence for p, construed 
broadly, just is a matter of what serves our truth-
related goals in respect of p, then epistemic justi-
fication will be a matter of evidence and nothing 
more. 
Because of its apparent connection with this 
distinction, evidentialism is not defeated simply 
by noting that we often take (and ought to take) 
non-evidential considerations into account 
before forming or acting on a belief. Richard 
Rudner, for example, claims that "[hlow sure we 
need to be before we accept a hypothesis will 
depend on how serious a mistake would be" 
(1953, p. 2). This might seem to require that jus-
tification be at least partly a pragmatic matter. 
But one could accept Rudner's claim without 
giving up evidentialism, if one distinguishes, as 
Richard Foley (2000) does, between a notion of 
responsible belief and a notion of epistemically 
rational belief. The latter, for Foley, is the episte-
mologically central notion, the notion that foun-
dationalists, coherentists, and reliabilists dispute. 
It is an idealized notion, concerned with a "very 
specific goal, that of now having accurate and 
comprehensive beliefs" (p. 181). But as examples 
such as the Train Cases make clear, "in reality all 
of us have many goals" (p. 181). The notion of 
responsible belief takes account of these other 
goals. One responsibly believes that p, according 
to Foley, if one has an epistemically rational 
belief that one's procedures with respect to p 
have been acceptable given the limitations on 
one's time and capacities and given all one's goals 
(p. 183). The evidential standards for responsi-
be belief"slide up or down with the significance 
of the issue" (p. 185); not so, for epistemically 
rational belief. For Foley, the subjects in the 
Train Cases are alike with respect to epistemic 
rationality (either both or neither would be 
epistemically rational to believe that p), and 
so presumably with respect to epistemic justifi-
cation as well, but they differ with respect to 
responsibility. 
If Foley is right, evidentialism is consistent 
with Rudner's claim that whether we ought to 
accept a hypothesis depends at least partly on 
how much is at stake, as long as the "ought" is one 
of responsibility, not epistemic rationality. So, it 
seems that evidentialists need not take intuitions 
about cases like the Train Cases as decisive against 
their view. They can respond by arguing that the 
intuitions at work, though real, are misdescribed. 
This is Foley's strategy, and the strategy of Keith 
Lehrer as well, who suggests that, properly con-
strued, the intuitions reveal conversational rather 
than semantic constraints:4 

744 
JEREMY FANTL AND MATTHEW MCGRATH 
When the context is one in which a great deal 
hinges on whether or not p is true, one should be 
cautious about giving one's word or authority for 
the truth of p. Consequently, it might be inap-
propriate to say, "I know that p," in such contexts 
even though one does know that p. (2000, p. 33) 
In light of these sorts of evidentialist responses, 
one cannot refute evidentialism by a simple 
appeal to the Train Cases. But this is not our plan. 
Rather, we aim tOJ:)royide a theoretical basis for 
rejecting· evidentialism by detending a "prag-
matic" necessary condition on epistemic justifica-
tion. If our proposed condition is necessary for 
justification, it becomes reasonable to see the 
intuitions at work in cases like the Train Cases as 
intuitions about justification, rather than conver-
sational dynamics or responsible belief. This is 
because our necessary condition, if correct, 
explains how differences in pragmatic factors - in 
facts about preferences - can make a difference to 
justification. Thus, we do not merely refute 
evidentialism. We show that, why, and how a 
subject's pragmatic situation may affect her justi-
fication. 
We are not alone in rejecting views that fail to 
give pragmatic factors an epistemic role. In a 
recent book, David Owens offers the following 
argument against evidentialism. 
[My case against evidentialisml can be made 
simply by asking: how are you going to tell us, in 
purely evidential terms, what level of evidence is 
needed to justify belief? Unless this question can 
be answered, evidentialism (internalist and 
externalist) must be abandoned. (2000, p. 26) 
Something in addition to evidence must "com-
plete" the justification. "How:' he asks, "could this 
something be anything other than the (perceived) 
needs and interests of the believer?" (p. 26). 
We join Owens in rejecting evidentialism, but 
we will not be making use of his argument. 
Though he does seem correct that the evidentialist 
does not provide us with a way to determine how 
much evidence is required for justification, we 
don't seem much closer to solving this problem 
after Owens's argument. We're told that our needs 
and interests are relevant. But we're not told how 
they bear on the evidence required for justifica-
tion. What we're missing, even after Owens's 
argument, is a non-arbitrary rule telling us that in 
such and such a pragmatic situation (specified in 
terms of needs and interests), such and such an 
amount of evidence is required for justification. 
In the absence of such a rule, the question of what 
level of evidence, given such-and-such stakes, is 
required for justification seems no less urgent for 
the opponent of evidentialism than the question 
of what level of evidence is required for justifica-
tion is for the evidentialist. Therefore, because of 
evidentialism's initial plausibility, plus its resil-
ience in the face of apparent counterexamples, 
until a better argument comes along, evidentialism 
has the upper hand. 
This article is divided into three parts. In the 
first, we argue for a pragmatic necessary condi-
tion on epistemic justification that predicts and 
explains the intuitions we have about the Train 
Cases and their ilk. In the second, we apply our 
account to test cases, thereby showing how it 
avoids some of the pitfalls of other accounts that 
give pragmatics a role in epistemic justification. 
In the third, we consider an objection to our argu-
ment against evidentialism. 
1. 
A Pragmatic Condition on Epistemic 
Justification 
How might pragmatic factors affect whether, 
given one's evidence, one is justified in believing 
something? Let us begin with the more intuitive 
concept, knowledge. 
If you know that p, then it shouldn't be a prob-
lem to act as if p. If it is a problem to act as if p, 
you can explain why by saying that you don't 
know that p. Suppose you are faced with some 
decision - do A or do B - where which of these is 
better depends on whether p. You know that if p, 
A is the thing to do, but that if not-p, B is. To say 
in one breath, "I know that p" and in the next 
breath, "But I'd better do B anyway, even though I 
know that A is the thing to do if p" seems incoher-
ent. If you really know that p, and you know that 
if p, A is the thing to do, then it's hard to see how 
you could fail to know that A is the thing to do in 
fact. But then you ought to do A. 
This seems to work both from the first-person 
and third-person perspectives. If S knows that p, 
then it shouldn't be a problem for S to act as if p. 
If it is a problem for S to act as if p, we can explain 
why by saying that S doesn't know that p. Suppose 

EVIDENCE, PRAGMATICS, AND JUSTIFICATION 
745 
S is faced with the above choice situation. S knows 
that if p, A is the thing to do, but that if not-p, B 
is. To say in one breath, "s knows that p" and in 
the next breath, "But S had better do B anyway, 
even though S knows that A is the thing to do if p" 
seems incoherent. If S really knows that p, and S 
knows that if p, A is the thing to do, then it's hard 
to see how S could fail to know that A is the thing 
to do in fact. But then S ought to do A. 
This reasoning can be generalized into a two-
part argument. The first part is a general closure 
argument: 
(1) 
S knows that p. 
(2) 
S knows that if p, then A is the thing 
to do. 
Therefore, 
(3) 
S knows that A is the thing to do. 
Depending on how "the thing to do" is inter-
preted, different conclusions follow from (3). 
But if "the thing to do" is interpreted in terms of 
what would be the best thing one can do in light 
of all one's goals, then something quite interest-
ing follows. We can add a second part to our 
argument relating knowledge to rationality of 
action: 5 
(3) 
S knows that A is the best thing she can 
do (in light of all her goals). 
Therefore, 
(4) 
S is rational to do A. 
Combining the two parts into a whole, and inter-
preting "the thing to do" as "the best thing one 
can do (in light of all ones goals)" we arrive at: 
(1') 
S knows that p. 
(2') 
S knows that if p, then A is the best thing 
she can do. 
Therefore, 
(3') 
S is rational to do A. 
We can express our commitment to this argu-
ment in the form of a principle: 
S knows that p only if, for any act A, if S knows 
that if p, then A is the best thing she can do, 
then S is rational to do A. 
We think this is a good start. But there is an even 
stronger sense in which pragmatic factors have 
epistemic relevance. We can strengthen the prin-
ciple in no fewer than four ways. 
First, there is no need to restrict the original 
closure argument either to acts or to judgments 
of what is best. If you know that p, and you know 
that if p then A is better for you than B, then you 
know that A is better for you than B. Consequently, 
it's rational for you to prefer A to B.6 Here, A and 
B may be any states of affairs, where acts can be 
treated as merely one kind of state of affairs.7 
Thus, we may strengthen the consequent of our 
principle to reach: 
S knows that p only if, for any states of affairs 
A and B, if S knows that if p, then A is better 
for her than B, then S is rational to prefer 
A to B." 
Second, we may strengthen our principle to 
apply to cases in which, although one has good 
reason, one neither knows nor is justified in 
believing that one state of affairs will be better 
for her than another. We often have good evi-
dence for thinking one state of affairs will be 
better for us than another, while lacking evi-
dence good enough for knowledge. Suppose 
you're playing the card game Hearts. You've got 
both the ace and the two of diamonds. It is early 
in the game. You don't know - and aren't justi-
fied in believing - that if diamonds are led, it 
will be better to play the ace than the two. After 
all, you might well get stuck with the queen of 
spades if a fellow player has no diamonds. But it 
seems wiser, given that diamonds are led, to get 
rid of your ace than to waste your two (since it's 
pretty likely everyone has at least one diamond). 
In our terms: you are rational to prefer playing 
the ace to playing the two, given that diamonds 
are led. That is, you are rational to prefer the 
state of affairs in which diamonds are led and 
you play the ace to the state of affairs in which 
diamonds are led and you play the two. Now 
suppose you come to know that diamonds are 
being led; the person to your right leads the five 
of diamonds. What should you prefer: playing 

746 
JEREMY FANTL AND MATTHEW MCGRATH 
your ace or playing your two? Surely, you should 
prefer playing your ace. If you know that dia-
monds are led, and you are rational to prefer 
playing your ace to playing your two, given that 
diamonds are led, then you must be rational to 
prefer playing your ace to playing your two in 
fact. More generally, if you know that p, and if 
you are rational to prefer one state of affairs to 
another, given p, then you will be rational to 
prefer that state of affairs to the other in fact. 
Thus, we may improve upon our argument 
(1')-(3') as follows: 
(1") 
S knows that p. 
(2") 
S is rational to prefer A to B, given p. 
Therefore, 
(3") 
S is rational to prefer A to B in fact. 
Correspondingly, our necessary condition on 
knowledge becomes: 
S knows that p only if, for any states of 
affairs A and B, if S is rational to prefer A to 
B, given p, then S is rational to prefer A to B, 
in fact, 
where S is rational to prefer A to B, given p is 
equivalent to S is rational to prefer A&p to B&p.9 
Third, we can strengthen our principle by 
making it a requirement on justification, not 
simply on knowledge. So modified, (1")-(3") 
becomes 
(1"') 
S is justified in believing that p. 
(2/11) 
S is rational to prefer A to B, given p. 
Therefore, 
(3/11) 
S is rational to prefer A to B in fact. 
Suppose that a subject, S, is justified in believing 
that p, but does not know that p. Suppose further 
that S is rational to prefer A to B, given p. Compare 
S to a second subject, S', who has the same evi-
dence and fundamental preferences as S but who 
knows that p. S' is rational to prefer A to B. What 
one is rational to prefer is determined by one's 
evidence and fundamental preferences. Since S 
and S' have the same evidence and fundamental 
preferences, they will be rational to prefer the 
same states of affairs. Thus, S, too, is rational to 
prefer A to B. Whatever it is rational for a knower 
to prefer is also rational for an otherwise identi-
cal subject who is merely justified in believing to 
prefer. Therefore, if (1")-( 3") is valid, so is 
(1"')-(3"'). 
We can therefore strengthen our principle 
thus: 
S is justified in believing that p only if, for any 
states of affairs A and B, if S is rational to prefer 
A to B, given p, then S is rational to prefer A to 
B in fact. 
Now for the final strengthening. As it stands, 
the consequent of our principle is simply a con-
ditional, rather than a biconditional. That is, our 
principle leaves open whether being justified in 
believing that p ensures that for states of affairs 
A and B, if S is rational to prefer A to B in fact, 
then S is rational to prefer A to B, given p. We 
now argue this issue should be closed. Assume 
you're justified in believing that the train goes to 
Foxboro (p). And assume that you are, in fact, 
rational to prefer boarding (B) the train to wait-
ing (W) for the next train. Could it turn out that 
you are not rational to prefer B to W, given p? 
No. There are two ways you might fail to be 
rational to prefer B to W, given p. First, you could 
be rational to be indifferent between Band W, 
given p. In this case, since you would be justified 
in believing that p, then it seems that you would 
be rational to be indifferent between Band W in 
fact, which, by hypothesis, you are not. Second, 
you could be rational to prefer W to B, given p. 
Again, since you would be justified in believing 
that p, it seems that you would be rational to 
prefer W to B in fact, which, by hypothesis, you 
are not. Thus, we can strengthen our principle 
by making its consequent a biconditional: for 
any states of affairs A and B, S is rational to prefer 
A to B, given p, iff S is rational to prefer A to B, in 
fact.lO When you satisfy this condition with 
respect to p, we will say that you are rational to 
prefer as if p. We express our principle compactly 
as a pragmatic necessary condition on epistemic 
justification: 
(PC) S is justified in believing that p only if S 
is rational to prefer as if p. 

EVIDENCE, PRAGMATICS, AND JUSTIFICATION 
747 
Our view relates epistemic justification to rational 
preferences generally, and not merely to rational 
preferences about how to act. However, PC does 
entail a condition relating epistemic justification 
to acts and, in particular, to the act( s) that it is 
rational for S to do, given p. II 
S is justified in believing that p only if, for all 
acts A, S is rational to do A, given p, iff S is 
rational to do A, in fact. 
We may think of the consequent of this principle 
as making precise the intuitive notion of acting as 
if p. Thus, the principle may be formulated more 
simply as: 
(PCA) S is justified in believing that p only if S 
is rational to act as if p. 12 
Two clarifications are in order. First, we have 
arrived at (PC) by converting an argument pat-
tern ((1"')-(3"')) into a principleY Our argu-
ment for (PC), then, is one and the same as our 
argument for the validity of the corresponding 
argument pattern. Our argument for the latter is 
based on a series of strengthenings of our original 
argument, (1')-(3'), which is the combination of 
two arguments, a closure argument (1)-(3) and 
an argument linking knowledge to rational action 
(3)-(4). Thus, our argument for (PC) does not 
appeal to intuitions about particular cases, such 
as the Train Cases. We are not proposing a condi-
tion for justification and then seeing if it fares 
well by the method of example and counterexam-
ple, but rather providing a theoretical argument 
for a condition on justification. 
Second, it might seem that we are imposing an 
unduly severe restriction on justification and 
therefore knowledge. There will be some cases in 
which in order to have knowledge, one will need 
to have absolute certainty, or something close to 
it. 14 These will be cases in which something of 
great importance hinges on whether a belief is 
true. 15 Doesn't this make the requirements for 
knowledge too demanding? Can't we have knowl-
edge without absolute certainty? 
We can. Nor does our view entail otherwise. 
After all, in Train Case 1, our view is consistent 
with the claim that you know that the train is 
going to Foxboro, even though you have only the 
evidence of casual testimony. There are many 
cases - in fact, most cases are like this - in which 
we have knowledge without having a strong form 
of certainty. Requiring certainty in these cases 
would be otiose. Our account requires certainty 
for knowledge only in cases in which certainty is 
important - its importance consisting in the fact 
that it is required for being rational to prefer and 
act as if the relevant proposition is true. This 
should give the skeptic no consolation. 
2. 
Illustrations and Test Cases 
We can illustrate our view by applying it to the 
original Train Cases. 16 In Train Case 1, you don't 
much care about whether the train will stop in 
Foxboro. In Train Case 2, it is desperately impor-
tant to you that it will. 
Suppose that, in each Train Case, the same two 
options are available to you. You can inquire fur-
ther to make sure that the train really will stop in 
Foxboro. Or you can board the train without 
inquiring further. PC entails that you are justified 
in believing that the train will stop in Foxboro 
only if you are rational to prefer as if the train will 
stop in Foxboro. In Train Case 1, what you are 
rational to prefer, given that the train will stop in 
Foxboro, is boarding the train. You are rational to 
prefer this to inquiring, since the latter will involve 
some cost to you, and you don't much care if the 
train will stop in Foxboro. You are also rational to 
prefer this in fact, for the very same reason. What 
it is rational for you to prefer, given that the train 
will stop in Foxboro, is also what you are rational 
to prefer in fact. That is, you are rational to prefer 
as if the train will stop in Foxboro. So PC is satis-
fied and you may have enough evidence for justi-
fication. 
In Train Case 2, on the other hand, you are not 
rational to prefer as if p. For, in fact, you are 
not rational to prefer boarding the train to inquir-
ing further. It is extremely important to you that 
the train will stop in Foxboro. If you board it, and 
it will not stop in Foxboro, things will go very 
badly for you. You need to inquire further to make 
sure that the train will stop in Foxboro. In fact, 
you are rational to prefer inquiring to boarding. 
Given that the train will stop in Foxboro, on the 
other hand, you are rational to prefer boarding to 
inquiring, since boarding will get you to Foxboro, 
and inquiring further involves a small cost to you. 

748 
JEREMY FANTL AND MATTHEW MCGRATH 
Therefore, what you are rational to prefer, given 
that the train will stop in Foxboro, is not what 
you are rational to prefer in fact. That is, you are 
not rational to prefer as if the train will stop in 
Foxboro. So, PC is not satisfied. You are not justi-
fied in believing (and, hence, do not know) that 
the train will stop in Foxboro. 
Let us see how our view handles some further 
cases. These cases will show how our account dif-
fers from, and improves upon, other accounts 
that find an epistemic role for pragmatic factors. 
The first class of cases concerns the relation 
between justification and the costs/benefits of 
inquiry. Since our account provides only a neces-
sary condition, the test cases for our account will 
be ones in which a subject has excellent evidence 
for a proposition but the cost of further inquiry is 
prohibitively high. 
Case of the Time-Consuming Call. You're at home. 
You're taking the train to New York tomorrow. 
You have a distinct recollection from making 
your reservation by phone that your train leaves 
at 5 pm. You are not worried about being wrong. 
You have good evidence, and in any case, if you 
miss the 5 pm, you'd take the 7 pm. Calling up 
Amtrak again would mean waiting on the phone 
for 35 minutes or so. 
Intuitively, it seems that the cost of inquiring fur-
ther doesn't have a bearing on whether you are 
justified in this case. You don't need to inquire 
further in order to be justified. Our account con-
firms this. What you are rational to prefer, given 
that the train leaves at 5 pm is what you are 
rational to prefer in fact. You are rational to prefer 
not inquiring to inquiring, both in fact, and given 
that your train leaves at 5 pm. Similarly, for other 
states of affairs. 
However, you might still think that the costs/ 
benefits of inquiry are of special concern in deter-
mining whether one is justified. Our view does 
give the costs/benefits of inquiry a somewhat spe-
cial role, since it will often be the case that inquiry 
will, with little cost, raise the probability that p to 
a level at which it will be rational to prefer as if p. 
But, our view, you might think, does not give 
one's rational preferences for further inquiry as 
critical a role as they deserve. You might even 
think that, any time it is rational to inquire fur-
ther, one must lack justification. This seems to be 
the view of D. S. Clarke Jr., who posits the follow-
ing principle: "(BC) S rationally believes in p rela-
tive to e only if S believes the cost to him of 
acquiring additional evidence e' is greater than 
what S believes to be the cost of p's being mis-
taken" (1985, p. 460). 
This sort of view gives the costs/benefits of 
inquiry too prominent a place in determining 
justification. Suppose I offer to reward you hand-
somely for inquiring further about whether today 
is Tuesday (or whatever day of the week it is). You 
have plenty of evidence that it is Tuesday, but you 
haven't been dwelling on the fact too much, and 
nothing much hinges on which day of the week it 
is. Now there are no costs of inquiry whatsoever, 
only benefits, and great ones. Thus, the believed 
cost of inquiry to you is less than the believed 
cost of being mistaken. So, on Clarke's view, you 
are not rational (and therefore, presumably, not 
justified) in believing, no matter how much evi-
dence you have. This seems wrong. On our view, 
what is rational to prefer, given p, is the same as 
what is rational to prefer in fact. You are rational 
to prefer inquiring in both cases. Therefore, our 
view, as articulated in PC, does not preclude you 
from being justified in believing that it's 
Tuesday. 17 
The second class of cases concerns the costs/ 
benefits of believing a certain proposition. Since 
our account provides only a necessary condition 
for justification, the test cases are ones in which 
there is a high cost to believing something for 
which you have excellent evidence. We will dis-
cuss two such cases. The first is the: 
Case of the Threat not to Believe. Suppose you are 
threatened not to believe that George W. Bush is 
president. If you continue believing it, you will 
suffer great pain. 
Intuitively, although you ought to try to get 
yourself to give up the belief that Bush is presi-
dent, you are justified in believing it. Our account 
accommodates this intuition. What you are 
rational to prefer, given that Bush is president, is 
what you are rational to prefer in fact: you are 
rational to prefer not believing that Bush is presi-
dent to believing he is. One might even say: you 
ought not to believe that Bush is president. This 
"ought," however, is the "ought" of rational pref-
erability, not epistemic justification. 

EVIDENCE, PRAGMATICS, AND JUSTIFICATION 
749 
Robert Nozick gives us a more realistic case in 
this class: 
Case of the Miserable Belief It would be extremely 
hard for you to go on if you believed your son 
was guilty of the crime of which he is accused. 
The belief would result in intense misery and 
pain, whether or not he is in fact guilty. You have 
good evidence that he is guilty. 
Intuitively, you are not justified in thinking 
your son is innocent, since all the evidence is 
against it. Are you justified in thinking he is 
guilty? Let us ask what our account implies. Is 
what you are rational to prefer given that your 
son is guilty the same as what you are rational to 
prefer in fact? It seems so. Even given that your 
son is guilty, you are rational to prefer not believ-
ing he is guilty to believing he is guilty. And this is 
what you are rational to prefer in fact. This seems 
to hold for all states of affairs. Our account there-
fore leaves open the possibility that you are justi-
fied in believing that your son is guilty. Here we 
differ from Nozick, who claims that the rule below 
expresses a constraint on rational belief (and so 
presumably on justified belief): 
Rule 2: Believe (an admissible)l" h only if the 
expected utility of believing h is not less than the 
expected utility of having no belief about h. 
(1993, p. 86) 
This seems to yield unacceptable results. Indeed it 
seems that no matter how much evidence you 
have that your son is guilty, you are not rational 
to believe he is, given Rule 2. He could be staring 
you in the face, confessing the crime to you, and 
explaining precisely how he did it. You might even 
have caught him in the act. So long as believing he 
is guilty is so crushing, you are not rational to 
believe, and so not justified. 19 
As the last two cases show, our view does not 
surrender the distinction between epistemic and 
pragmatic justification. If our view is correct, 
then epistemic justification for p requires the 
rationality of preferring as if p. But this does not 
mean that epistemic justification for p requires 
pragmatic justification for believing p. As we have 
seen, one can be rational to prefer not believing 
that Bush is president, even though one is rational 
to prefer as if Bush is president, and one can be 
rational to prefer not believing that one's son is 
guilty, even though one is rational to prefer as if 
he is. These are not isolated cases. Often there are 
costs to believing that p even when one is rational 
to prefer as if p. When those costs are high, you 
may not be pragmatically justified in believing 
that p (so believing won't best serve your general 
goals), and yet you may still be epistemically 
justified. 
We noted earlier that acceptance of the epis-
temiclpragmatic justification distinction appears 
to commit one to evidentialism. How else to dis-
tinguish epistemic justification than by its taking 
into account only one's truth-related goals? And 
if it takes into account only one's truth-related 
goals, it seems it must be solely a matter of evi-
dence. We can now see that this reasoning is falla-
cious. Epistemic justification can take into 
account our non-truth-related goals and still be 
distinguished from pragmatic justification. 
3. 
The Argument against Evidentialism 
If our account is correct, that is, if PC states a 
pragmatic necessary condition on epistemic jus-
tification, then evidential ism must be false. If PC 
is true, then there could be two subjects, identical 
with respect to their evidence for/against p, one 
of whom should act (and generally prefer) as if p 
and one of whom should not. Train Cases 1 and 2 
involve two such subjects. 
This argument is too quick. Outright rejection 
of PC is implausible, as we hope to have made 
clear in previous sections. However, the eviden-
tialist has another alternative. We will formulate a 
more careful approach in our response to this 
alternative. 
Suppose an evidentialist reasons as follows: "I 
do accept your closure arguments and all the var-
iations on them. This leads me to accept Pc. 
However, I do not think that PC conflicts with my 
main evidentialist thesis that a proposition's justi-
fication supervenes on evidence for that proposi-
tion. All PC commits us to is the claim that if a 
subject is justified in believing that p, then she 
had better be rational to prefer as if p. But we can 
simply set the standard of evidence required for 
justification high enough to avoid pairs of sub-
jects that have the same evidence but are such 
that one is rational to prefer as if p while the other 

750 
JEREMY FANTL AND MATTHEW MCGRATH 
is not. Two people with the same evidence fori 
against a proposition p will thus not differ in jus-
tification for p. In Train Case 1 you wouldn't 
count as justified, but that's not so hard to 
accept." 
This response seems to commit the evidential-
ist to a kind of pragmatic condition on justifica-
tion, namely: 
(EPC) S is justified in believing that p only if 
anyone with S's evidence for p, no matter what 
the stakes, would be rational to prefer as if p. 
EPC isn't merely a way for the evidentialist to 
embrace PC; it's the only way. For suppose evi-
dentialism and PC are true, but EPC is false. Then 
there is a case in which a subject S is justified in 
believing that p, but it's not true that anyone with 
S's evidence would be rational to prefer as if p. 
Thus, there must be some subject S' in a further 
case, who has the same evidence as S, but for 
whom the stakes are different, and who therefore 
isn't rational to prefer as if p. If evidentialism is 
true then, since Sand S' have the same evidence 
for/against p, and S is justified, so is S'. But then, 
PC is violated: S' is justified, but it is not rational 
for S' to prefer as if p. 
For the evidentialist, then, a lot turns on the 
acceptability of EPC. We want to make several 
claims about this principle. First, given that EPC 
itself proposes a pragmatic condition on epis-
temic justification, the truth of EPC would sup-
port our general claim that there is a pragmatic 
element in epistemic justification, even if it would 
not support our claim against evidentialism. 
Second, we agree that it might be useful to put a 
common label to a kind of epistemic status - a 
kind of "justification" - subject to EPC. If you 
know that you have justification satisfying EPC, 
then you know that you are safe in preferring -
and, hence, acting - as if p, and will be safe so long 
as your evidence regarding p remains unchanged, 
no matter what happens to your fundamental 
preferences. Third, though, we think that PC is 
true of the justification required for knowledge, 
while EPC is not. EPC is too strong. It doesn't 
allow for many cases of justification based on 
induction, testimony, memory, rational intuition, 
and perhaps even direct perception. In many 
cases in which we are justified in believing a prop-
osition p we would not be rational to prefer as if 
p, were the stakes radically higher. Train Cases 1 
and 2 are meant to be instances of this general 
fact. But there are many other examples. 
(Bayesians have an arsenal; see Kaplan 1996, 
pp. 102-3.) In an ordinary case, when the stakes 
are low - you're sitting in your front room relax-
ing - you are justified in believing, on the basis of 
memory and induction, that your car is parked in 
your driveway. But if you were to have this same 
evidence concerning the where-abouts of your 
car when your action would save or jeopardize 
lives depending on whether your car was there or 
not, and you had time to check before acting, you 
ought to go check. Similar examples can be con-
structed for your normally low-stakes justified 
beliefs such as: the local post office is open until 
noon on Saturdays, your cousin lives in San Diego, 
you have a Tuesday-Thursday schedule next semes-
ter, the Yankees won the World Series two years ago. 
Maybe even your evidence for I have hands isn't 
sufficient for justification however high the stakes 
may be. 2u 
Note that evidentialists cannot avoid this con-
clusion by accepting contextualism. To combine 
contextualism with evidentialism is to hold that, 
if subjects Sand S' have the same evidence, then 
within any fixed speaker context "s is justified" 
and "S' is justified" have the same truth value, 
although across speaker contexts, these sentences 
can have different truth values. So, a contextualist 
might claim that, despite the fact that the subjects 
in the Train Cases have the same evidence, when 
we discuss Train Case 1, we correctly attribute 
"justified" to the subject, but when we discuss 
Train Case 2, we correctly attribute "unjustified" 
to the subject. Our speaker context switches. 
Understanding the Train Cases in this way, 
however, commits one to a broader contextual-
ism - not merely a contextualism about justifica-
tion but a contextualism about rational 
preference. Here is why. Since contextualist evi-
dentialists, like all evidentialists, must accept 
EPC, they must maintain that if"ln Train Case 1, 
you are justified in believing that the train stops 
in Foxboro" is true in a given speaker context, 
then so is "In Train Case 2, you are rational to 
prefer as if the train stops in Foxboro." But, of 
course, as soon as we think about the latter, we 
judge it false. So, to save intuitions, while resist-
ing skepticism, the contextualist must hold that 
"rational to prefer as if" is context-sensitive. 

EVIDENCE, PRAGMATICS, AND JUSTIFICATION 
751 
Recall that we defined "5 is rational to prefer as if 
p" to mean "For any states of affairs A and B, S is 
rational to prefer A to B, given p, iff S is rational to 
prefer A to B, in fact." Thus, the contextualist must 
hold that the relation "is rational to prefer x to y;' 
too, is context-sensitive. There seems little merit 
to this theory. Intuitively, we do not vacillate 
about whether the subject in Train Case 2 is 
rational to prefer checking further to immedi-
ately boarding. We stably judge the subject 
rational to prefer checking further. The best 
explanation for our stable judgments about cases 
like this is that "rational to prefer x to y" expresses, 
across speaker contexts, a single relation that 
holds in virtue of the subject's evidence and fun-
damental preferences. 
Furthermore, there is a fundamental difficulty 
for contextualism about rational preference. 
Contextualists about justification claim that what 
varies from context to context is not what degree 
of evidence a subject has, but whether that degree 
of evidence is enough for justification. What 
varies, that is, is the threshold for justification. 
The same holds good for contextualism about 
flatness, emptiness, tallness, etc. When it comes to 
rational preference, however, the question of a 
threshold does not arise. Rational preference is 
purely relational. Whether 5 is rational to prefer A 
to B is simply a matter of the relative positions of 
A and B in 5's rational preference ordering, not a 
matter of meeting a threshold of "rational 
preferability." 
If contextualism about rational preference is 
unacceptable, then "In Train Case 2, you are 
rational to prefer as if the train stops in Foxboro" 
will be false in all contexts. 50 if EPC is true in all 
contexts, it follows that the statement "In Train 
Case 1, you are justified in believing that the train 
stops in Foxboro" will have to be false in all con-
texts, too. Thus, the evidentialist cannot avoid 
skepticism by accepting contextualism. 
Given that EPC is too strong, and given the 
truth of PC, it follows that evidentialism is 
false. 
4. 
Conclusion 
Our argument against evidentialism can be sum-
marized succintly. First, we argued for a prag-
matic condition on epistemic justification. 
(PC) 5 is justified in believing that p only if it 
is rational for 5 to prefer as if p. 
(Recall that it is rational for S to prefer as if p 
abbreviates for any states of affairs A and B, S is 
rational to prefer A to B, given p, iff S is rational to 
prefer A to B, in fact.) We then showed that, if PC 
is true, then evidentialism could be true only if a 
strong pragmatic condition on justification holds, 
namely: 
(EPC) 5 is justified in believing that p only if 
anyone with 5's evidence, no matter what the 
stakes, would be rational to prefer as if p. 
But, as we saw, EPC is too strong. It does not 
square with intuitions that one can be justified on 
the basis of a stranger's testimony about direc-
tions, train routes, etc., or on the basis of induc-
tion that one's cousin lives in 5an Diego, etc. Our 
conclusion: evidentialism is false. 
Given that PC is correct and EPC is not, we 
have not only shown that differences in what's at 
stake for subjects can affect justification, we've 
shown how. Consider Owens's argument against 
evidentialism (discussed at the end of section 1, 
above). The key premise of his argument is that 
the evidentialist cannot simply set a threshold, 
since any threshold would be arbitrary. There is 
something wrong with the evidentialist's simply 
saying, "If you have this much evidence, your 
belief is justified." Owens suggests we need to 
appeal to pragmatic factors to secure a non-arbi-
trary threshold. Yet it seems no less arbitrary for 
Owens simply to say, "When the stakes are this 
high, then when you have this much evidence, 
your belief is justified." Why do these stakes 
require this amount of evidence, rather than some 
other amount? Owens does not answer this ques-
tion. Not so in our case. It is clear how stakes play 
a role in the amount of evidence required for jus-
tification. We require at least as much evidence as 
is needed to make it rational to prefer as if the 
proposition in question is true. And this require-
ment is not arbitrary, as it would be if adopted by 
those who subscribe to Owens's argument. It is a 
direct result of theoretical arguments based on 
essential features (for example, closure) of know 1-
edge and justification. 
Epistemic justification isn't purely a matter of 
evidence. A subject is justified in believing 

752 
JEREMY FANTL AND MATTHEW MCGRATH 
something just in case she has evidence that is 
good enough for her to know. But what is "good 
enough" will not itself be a matter of evidence. 
Owens is correct in this at least. One subject (S) 
might have better evidence than another (S') 
along a purely evidential dimension of evaluation 
even while S isn't justified but S' is. Suppose 
Nozick's credibility values provide such a purely 
evidential dimension of evaluation of proposi-
tions. Here is Nozick: 
Let us imagine a network that incorporates a 
weighting of many factors - including Bayesian 
probabilities, explanatory value (as represented 
by the Causalized Bayesian formula). Popperian 
methodological maxims, and an assessment of 
undercuttings - and feeds forward to result in a 
credibility value for a statement h. View this as an 
ideal assessment that duly weights all of the 
reasons for and against h. (1993, p. 84) 
Our conclusion, reformulated in terms of credibil-
ity values, is that no specific credibility value is both 
necessary and sufficient for justification, independ-
ently of all pragmatic factors. There is a credibility 
value sufficient for justification, namely, whatever 
credibility value satisfies EPC. And presumably 
there is a credibility value necessary for justifica-
tion, that is, a credibility value that all justified 
propositions must exceed in credibility: the credi-
bility value zero. But there is no such thing as a 
pragmatics-independent credibility value threshold 
for justification. For S to be justified in believing a 
proposition p, p's credibility value for S must exceed 
a threshold, but the threshold is determined in part 
by relevant features of S's pragmatic situation. 
Appendix I 
In cases in which one has no reason to believe that how one acts will causally affect whether p is true, 
our closure arguments are unproblematic. There are, however, cases in which one does have such 
reason. In these cases, argument (1')-(3') seems subject to a peculiar logical difficulty. Consider the 
following train case: You need to get to Foxboro. But you know that the train conductor is your sworn 
enemy and will bypass Foxboro if you board the train (and that is the only way he will thwart your 
aims). You also know that, if you do not board the train, the conductor will definitely take the train to 
Foxboro. You decide, therefore, not to board the train. The following modus ponens argument would 
then be available to you: 
(1) The train will go to Foxboro. 
(II) If the train will go to Foxboro, then taking the train is the best thing for me to do. 
Therefore, 
(III) 
Taking the train is the best thing for me to do. 
However, (III) seems not to be true in your case, even though (1) and (II) are (if you stick with your 
decision not to take the train). After all, if you take the train, it won't end up going to Foxboro. If it is 
questionable whether modus ponens fails in this cases, then a fortiori it is also questionable whether our 
closure argument (1')-(3') fails here. You know that (1) is true (given your decision and its efficacy), and 
you know that (II) is true, but it does not seem that you know that (III) is true. We need to restrict our 
closure arguments (1')-(3') to secure the unquestionable validity of the embedded instances of modus 
ponens. Moreover, it seems that, since we are closing knowledge under modus ponens, we must require 
that the relevant subject S have no reason to think that the validity of the embedded modus ponens 
argument is questionable. Restricting S/p/A combinations in our closure argument (1')-(3') so that S 
has no reason to believe that whether she does A will causally affect whether p is true serves our purpose 
adequately. We use a similar restriction for S/p/AIB combinations in our closure arguments and princi-
ples that involve comparisons between states of affairs. 
It should be noted that the logical difficulties that we have mentioned raise questions about the valid-
ity of argument forms other than simple modus ponens. Consider the notorious Henry V argument 

EVIDENCE, PRAGMATICS, AND JUSTIFICATION 
753 
(paraphrased from Shakespeare's account of Henry's speech to his badly outnumbered troops on the eve 
of battle): 
(i) 
Either we will win or we will lose. 
(ii) 
If we will win, it is better for us to be outnumbered (since there will be greater glory, etc.). 
(iii) 
If we will lose, it is better for us to be outnumbered (since at least we will avoid shame). 
Therefore, 
(iv) 
It is better for us to be outnumbered. 
(i)-(iii) seem true, but (iv) false. This seems to be a counterexample to the argument schema: 
Either p or q. 
If p, then A is better than B. 
If q, then A is better than B. 
Therefore, 
A is better than B. 
which is apparently valid insofar as it is subsumed under disjunction elimination. 
Problems disappear here, as with (I)-(III) above, provided we impose a restriction about causal 
influence - provided, in particular, we require that whether A, as opposed to B, obtains will not causally 
affect whether p, as opposed to q, is true. (To say that the arguments seem wrong when and only when 
there exist such causal connections is not to answer the logical questions, Are arguments (i)-(iv) and 
(I)-(III) really invalid? Are modus ponens and disjunction elimination invalid?)2! 
Appendix II 
Our condition on justification is supported by intuitions about the closure of knowledge under 
modus ponens. It is incumbent upon us, then, to show that our condition itself has this closure 
property.22 For suppose our condition isn't closed under modus ponens. The worry would arise 
whether the truth of our account would undermine its support. Although the failure of closure for 
a necessary condition on justification doesn't entail the failure of closure for justification (and 
therefore knowledge), all the same, it would be cause for concern. We would need to appeal to 
further elements of the concept of justification in order to show how justification could have the 
closure property even though a necessary condition of it didn't. 
We therefore seek to show that our condition is closed under modus ponens, or in other words, that 
the following argument is validY 
(1 III') 
S is rational to prefer as if p. 
(2"") 
S is rational to prefer as if (p~q). 
Therefore, 
(3'111) 
S is rational to prefer as if q. 
Our proof uses the following definitions: 
D 1: S is rational to prefer X to Y, given p = d,f S is rational to prefer X&p to Y&p. 

754 
JEREMY FANTL AND MATTHEW MCGRATH 
D2: S is rational to prefer as if p = def for any states of affairs X and Y, S is rational to prefer X to Y, 
given p, iff S is rational to prefer X to Y, in fact. 
1. 
S is rational to prefer as if p. 
2. 
S is rational to prefer as if (p~q). 
3. 
S is rational to prefer A to B. 
4. 
S is rational to prefer A to B, given p. 
5. 
S is rational to prefer A&p to B&p. 
6. 
S is rational to prefer A&q&p to B&q&p. 
7. 
S is rational to prefer A&q to B&q, given p. 
8. 
S is rational to prefer A&q to B&q 
9. 
S is rational to prefer A to B, given q. 
10. 
If S is rational to prefer A to B then, S is 
rational to prefer A to B, given q. 
11. 
S is rational to prefer A to B, given q. 
12. 
S is rational to prefer A&q to B&q. 
13. 
S is rational to prefer A&q to B&q, given p. 
14. 
S is rational to prefer A&q&p to B&q&p. 
15. 
S is rational to prefer A&p to B&p. 
16. 
S is rational to prefer A to B, given p. 
17. 
S is rational to prefer A to B. 
18. 
If S is rational to prefer A to B, given q, then 
S is rational to prefer A to B. 
19. 
S is rational to prefer A to B, given q, iff 
S is rational to prefer A to B. 
20. 
S is rational to prefer as if q. 
We offer the following justifications for steps 6 and 15. 
Justification for 6: 
5.1 
S is rational to prefer A&p to B&p, given (p~q). 
5.2 
S is rational to prefer A&P&(p~q) to B&P&(p~q). 
5.3 
A&q&p&(p~q) = A&p&(p~q) and 
B&q&p&(p~q) = B&p&(p~q). 
5.4 
S is rational to prefer A&q&p&(p~q) 
to B&q&p&(p~q). 
5.5 
S is rational to prefer A&q&p to B&q&p, 
given (p~q). 
6. 
S is rational to prefer A&q&p to B&q&p. 
Justification for 15: 
14.1 
S is rational to prefer A&q&p to B&q&p, 
given (p~q). 
14.2 
S is rational to prefer A&q&p&(p~q) 
to B&q&p&(p~q) 
14.3 
A&q&p&(p~q) = A&p&(p~q) and 
B&q&p&(p~q) = B&P&(p~q). 
14.4 
S is rational to prefer A&p&(p~q) 
to B&P&(p~q). 
Assumption 
Assumption 
Assumption for Conditional Proof 
1,3,D2 
4,Dl 
See subproof below 
6,Dl 
1,7,D2 
8,Dl 
3,9 
Assumption for Conditional Proof 
11,Dl 
1,12,D2 
13,Dl 
See subproof below 
15,Dl 
1,16,D2 
11,17 
10,18 
19,D2 
2,5,D2 
5,I,Dl 
Statements of Proposition Identity 
5.2,5.3 
5.4,Dl 
2,5.5,D2 
2,14,D2 
14,I,Dl 
Statements of Proposition Identity 
14.2, 14.3 

EVIDENCE, PRAGMATICS, AND JUSTIFICATION 
755 
14.5 
S is rational to prefer A&p to B&p, 
given (p~q). 
15. 
S is rational to prefer A&p to B&p. 
14.4,Dl 
14.5,D2 
Steps 5.3 and 14.3 are inessential. If the relevant propositions aren't identical, then they are trivi-
ally equivalent, in which case it is rational to be indifferent between them. This is enough to secure 
5.4 and 14.4. 
Notes 
We use "s is justified in believing that p 
throughout the paper, in a standard way, to 
mean that S has good enough evidence to 
know that p. On our usage, you might have 
good undefeated evidence for p (have a good 
bit of "justification" for believing that p) and 
yet not be justified simpliciter, owing to the 
fact that your evidence isn't good enough for 
knowledge. Thus, at least on one standard 
intuition, before the lottery winner is 
announced, you aren't justified (in our sense) 
in believing that your ticket is a loser, even 
though you may have substantial justification 
on the basis of probabilistic reasoning. (The 
lottery case was never construed as a Gettier 
case - that is, as a case in which one had justi-
fied true belief but failed to know.) 
What is it for evidence to be good enough 
for knowledge? To say that S's evidence is 
good enough to know that p isn't to say that 
S's having that evidence entails S's knowing 
that p. It is to say that, if S fails to know, it is 
not for S's lack of evidence. We take this con-
dition not to be vacuous, since we assume that 
one cannot know without evidence. 
2 This pair of cases is modeled after Stewart 
Cohen's airport case. In Cohen's case, it is not 
entirely clear that the two subjects share the 
same evidence. Our pair of cases ensures this. 
Cf. (Cohen 1999, p. 58). However, our cases 
inherit the ambiguity of planes or trains 
"stopping" at such and such places. Is the 
proposition This train stops in Foxboro equiv-
alent to the proposition This train (type) is 
scheduled to make a stop in Foxboro as part of 
its normal route? Or is it, rather, equivalent to 
This train (token) will stop in Foxboro? This 
ambiguity does not seem to affect intuitions 
about justification. Intuitively, in cases like 
Train Case 1, one is justified in believing both 
such propositions, while in Train Case 2, one 
is justified in believing neither. 
3 
For a defense of evidentialism, see Feldman 
and Conee 1985. They write: 
What we call evidentialism is the view that the 
epistemic justification of a belief is determined 
by the quality of the believer's evidence for that 
belief. (p. 15) 
David Owens defines a broader notion of 
evidentialism: "Evidentialism is the doctrine 
that epistemic norms invoke only evidential 
considerations" (2000, p. 24). 
4 
See also Rysiew 200!. 
5 To avoid making controversial commitments 
about certain peculiar cases, we here-after 
restrict S/pl A combinations in our closure 
arguments and principles so that S has no 
reason to believe that whether she does A will 
causally affect whether p is true. See Appendix 1 
for discussion of the peculiar cases. 
6 
One might object as follows. Couldn't you 
know that A is better for you than B and yet 
not be rational to prefer A to B, because some-
one is standing nearby (make this being a 
demon, if necessary) who will kill you iff you 
prefer A to B? It would seem, then, that you 
ought not to prefer A to B. 
In response, we want to extend a distinc-
tion of Nozick's (1993. p. 70) to apply in the 
domain of rational preference. He distin-
guishes between p being the rational thing to 
believe and believing p being the rational thing 
to 
do. We 
distinguish, correspondingly, 
between A being rationally preferable to Band 
preferring A to B being the rational thing to do. 
There is a clear sense in which, in the objec-
tor's example above. A is rationally preferable 
to B for S (since, in light of S's evidence and 

756 
JEREMY FANTL AND MATTHEW MCGRATH 
basic preferences. A can be expected to have 
better results), though preferring A over B 
might not be the rational thing for S to do. See 
also Heil 1983, p. 758. When we say "S is 
rational to prefer A to B," we mean ''A is 
rationally preferable to B, for S': 
7 For acts as states of affairs (as "propositions") 
see Jeffrey 1983, pp. 83-4. Hereafter we assume 
that an act (A) is rational for S just in case A is 
available to S and there is no available com-
petitor B such that it is rational for S to prefer 
doing B to doing A. On this definition, if two 
or more acts are tied for best, both are 
rational. 
8 Two restrictions are needed here. First, we 
strengthen our earlier restriction on S/pl A 
combinations. Our proposal bears only on 
S/pl AlB combinations that are such that S has 
no reason to believe that whether A as opposed 
to B obtains will causally affect whether p is 
true. 
Second, the inference 
(1 *) 
S knows that p 
(2*) 
S knows that if p, then A is better for 
her than B. 
Therefore, 
(3*) 
S knows that A is better for her than B. 
Therefore, 
(4 *) 
S is rational to prefer A to B. 
is valid only when restricted to instances in 
which premises (1 *) and (2*), if true, would 
still be true were S to face the choice of 
whether to make A true or make B true. To 
have a handier expression, we may formulate 
the restriction thus: the premises (1 *) and (2*) 
must be robust (to borrow a term from Roy 
Sorensen (1988)) with respect to the choice 
situation Make A true or Make B true. The 
need for this restriction can be seen as follows. 
Suppose (1 *) and (2*) (and so (3*) ) are true 
in a particular case. Why think that (4*) must be 
true as well? (4*) is true, we may assume, only 
if S would be rational to prefer making A true 
to making B true when faced with the choice. 
Now if (1 *) and (2*) are robust with respect 
to the choice situation in question, then we 
can see that S would be rational to prefer 
making A true when faced with the choice: if 
you're in a choice situation with respect to A 
and B, and you know that A is the better of the 
two, then clearly you should choose A over B. 
However, suppose the robustness restriction 
is unsatisfied. Suppose, that is, that although 
(1 *) and (2*) are true, they wouldn't both be 
true were S faced with the choice situation. 
Then there would be no guarantee that (3*) is 
true - that is, no guarantee that S would still 
know, in the choice situation, that A is better for 
her than B - and so no guarantee that S would 
be rational to choose A over B. Thus, the mere 
truth of (1 *) and (2*) does not guarantee the 
truth of (4*). To derive (4*), we need the 
assurance that both premises are robust with 
respect to the AlB choice situation. 
Some philosophers and decision theorists 
might have reservations about the assump-
tion that if a person is rational to prefer a state 
of affairs A to a state of affairs B, then the 
person would be rational to prefer making A 
true to making B true when faced with the 
choice. A standard alternative to this approach 
is Jeffrey's "good news" approach, under 
which you are rational to prefer A to B iff you 
would welcome the news that A is true more 
than you would welcome the news that B is 
true (1983, p. 82-3). All the same, we need a 
similar restriction on (1*)-(4*) in this deci-
sion-theoretic setting. Suppose that, were you 
to get the news that A is true, not both of (1 *) 
and (2*) would be true. Then there would be 
no guarantee that you would still know that A 
is better for you than B, and so no guarantee 
that you wouldn't wish the news had been B 
instead. But if we impose the restriction that 
(1 *) and (2*) be robust with respect to your 
learning the news that A is true (or that B is 
true), then the conclusion is obtained: were 
you to learn that A is true, you wouldn't wish 
the news had been B instead. 
For each of the remaining strengthenings 
of our original argument (1)-(4), we hereby 
impose a corresponding robustness restric-
tion. We require that the premises of each 
such argument be robust with respect to the 
choice situation Make A true or Make B true 
(or alternatively with respect to your learning 

EVIDENCE, PRAGMATICS, AND JUSTIFICATION 
757 
the news that A (or that B)). (When such 
arguments are converted into principles, our 
restriction requires the robustness of the 
antecedent of the embedded conditional 
with respect to the AlB choice situation.) 
The second restriction is not covered by 
the first. Even if one lacks a reason for think-
ing that whether A or B obtains will causally 
affect whether p is true, it doesn't follow that 
if one knows both that p and that if p, then A 
is better than B, then one's knowledge would 
survive being faced with the AlB choice situ-
ation. If, as we shall argue, knowledge 
depends on stakes, then we should expect to 
find cases in which one knows that p even 
though, were one in a high-stakes choice 
situation, one would not know that p. 
9 Here, as in note 6, one might object in the 
following way. Suppose A would bring great 
joy to you, B misery, and you know as much. 
Suppose also you know that p. These suppo-
sitions, moreover, are jointly consistent with 
your knowing that there is a demon nearby 
who is prepared to kill you iff you prefer A to 
B. In this case, you know that p, you're 
rational to prefer A to B, given p, but you're 
not rational to prefer A to B, in fact. 
Our response here is similar to our earlier 
response in note 6. We distinguish the ques-
tion of whether A is rationally preferable to 
B from that of whether having a preference 
for A over B is the rational thing to do. This 
distinction becomes especially plain if we 
think of rational preferability in terms of 
expected utility. A could have a higher 
expected utility than B, even though prefer-
ring A to B might have a lower expected util-
ity than being indifferent or having the 
opposite 
preference 
(and 
vICe 
versa). 
Assuming, in addition, that the rationality of 
acts is judged by expected utility, we would 
have the following situation: A is rationally 
preferable to B for S, but preferring A to B is 
not the rational thing to do. 
As before, we use "s is rational to prefer 
A to B" to mean that A is rationally preferable 
to B for S. 
10 
Given that the preference-or-indifference 
relation is both transitive and connected, 
our revised principle implies that, in order 
for you to be justified in believing that p, the 
preference ordering it is rational for you to 
have, given p, must be the same as the prefer-
ence ordering it is rational for you to have in 
fact. 
11 
A is rational for S to do, given p iff A is avail-
able to S and there is no state of affairs of the 
form B&p, where B is an available competi-
tor to A, that S is rational to prefer to A&p. 
12 
In a brief discussion, Christopher Hookway 
seems to endorse something in the neigh-
borhood of PCA. He writes: 
[The fact that beliefs are among the antecedents 
of action J may help to explain our standards of 
cognitive evaluation. For example, our under-
standing of the amount of evidence we require in 
support of an hypothesis before we can describe it 
as justified may reflect the degree of support that 
is required before we can feel that we are acting 
responsibly when we act upon it. This promises to 
explain some of the relativities involved in our 
concept of justified belief; the greater the disaster 
if our actions fail to achieve their purpose, the 
more evidence we require before we regard the 
belief as properly justified: the greater the risks 
attaching to inaction, the readier we are to act on 
limited evidence. (1990, p. 139) 
We think that Hookway's speculation is 
correct. Our argument for (PCA) can be 
thought of as a way of showing how essential 
features of justification bear out Hookway's 
speculation. 
There is also a Bayesian account of belief 
analogous in some respects to PCA. Mark 
Kaplan calls it "The Contextualized Act 
View." Under this view, "you count as believ-
ing that P in a given context just if you are 
disposed in that context to act as if P is true" 
(1996, p. 105 n. 101). See Nozick 1993, 
pp. 93-100 for such a view. Our proposal 
differs from this one in two important ways. 
First, ours presents a condition, not on belief, 
but on justification in believing. Second, 
ours requires that you be rational to prefer as 
if p is true (and consequently to act as if pis 
true), rather than that you be disposed to act 
as if p is true. 
13 
To be exact, we have converted at once two 
argument patterns into a principle. These 
are (1''')-(3''') and the argument pattern 

758 
JEREMY FANTL AND MATTHEW MCGRATH 
which uses (1"') and (3"') as premises, and 
(2''') as the conclusion. 
14 
Here, we mean epistemic, rather than psy-
chological, certainty. We have absolute epis-
temic certainty for p only if we have the 
highest possible degree of justification for 
p - perhaps something akin to infallibility. 
15 
Here is an example: The World is at Stake. 
Suppose somehow the desirability matrix for 
your sole available options doing A and 
doing B were as follows: 
DoA 
DoB 
p 
small gain 
smaller gain 
not-p 
o 
And suppose somehow you were justified 
in believing that whether you do A as 
opposed to B would not causally affect 
whether p is true. You'd be only a little better 
off doing A than B if P is true, but you'd be 
infinitely worse off doing A than B if not -p is 
true. Our account entails that if the proba-
bility of p is less than 1 for you - if P does not 
have the highest certainty for you - then you 
will not be epistemically justified in believ-
ing that p. Suppose p is the proposition that 
you have hands. Each of us believes he has 
the strongest form of certainty for p. If we 
were somehow certain we were faced with 
the choice between doing A (say, trying to 
make a fist) or B (not trying to make a fist), 
and that the desirability matrix were as it is 
above, we think we would be rational to do 
A. But the probability of I have hands might 
be less than 1 for someone else (S). S would 
therefore not be rational to try to make a fist. 
Therefore, by an application of PC, S would 
not be justified in believing that she has 
hands. We find this result correct. 
16 
Note that in each Train Case, our two restric-
tions delineated in note 8 are satisfied. In 
neither Case 1 nor Case 2 is it the case that 
whether A (boarding) or B (inquiring) 
References 
Clarke, D. S., Jr. 1985. "Ignoring Available 
Evidence." Southern Journal of Philosophy 22, 
pp.453-67. 
Cohen, Stewart. 1999. "Contextualism, Skepticism, 
and the Structure of Reasons:' In Philosophical 
obtains is causally related to whether p (the 
train will stop in Foxboro) is true. Nor is it 
the case, in either Train Case, that actually 
being faced with the choice situation (board 
or inquire) would change what you know 
(or are justified in believing). You are faced 
with the choice situation. 
17 
For another account that treats justification 
as related to the costs/benefits of inquiry, see 
Owens 2000, 25-7. 
18 
An admissible h is a proposition that has a 
higher credibility value than any of its con-
traries (this is Rule 1) and has a "high 
enough" credibility value (this is Rule 3). See 
Nozick 1993, pp. 85-93. 
19 
Nozick means "rational" in an epistemic 
sense, since his rules are meant to be rules 
about when a proposition that p is the rational 
thing to believe rather than when believing p 
is the rational thing to do. For more on this 
distinction, see Nozick 1993, p. 70. 
20 
See note 15. 
21 
Plausibly, If p, then A is better than B is 
equivalent to A&p is better than B&p. If this 
is right, the Henry V argument is equivalent 
to a dominance argument. Its flaws, then, 
would receive ready diagnosis. However, 
such an equivalence would not imply that 
the argument's steps (ii) and (iii) weren't 
genuine conditionals. That is to say, the 
problem with disjunction elimination would 
not disappear. Similarly, the problem with 
modus ponens exemplified in (I)-(IIl) 
would not disappear if the constituent con-
ditional were treated as equivalent to One's 
doing A&p is better than any other state of 
affairs of the form One's doing B&p, where B is 
an available competitor to A. 
22 
We extend special thanks to Robert Howell 
for making us recognize the need for this 
demonstration. 
23 
Here as before we impose our restriction on 
SIp/AlB combinations. 
Perspectives, ed. J. Tomberlin, pp. 57-89. 
Cambridge: Blackwell. 
Feldman, Richard, and Earl Conee. 1985. 
"Evidentialism." Philosophical Studies 48, pp. 
15-34. 

EVIDENCE, PRAGMATICS, AND JUSTIFICATION 
759 
Foley, Richard. 2000. "Epistemically Rational 
Belief and Responsible Belief." In Proceedings of 
the Twentieth World Congress of Philosophy, ed. 
R. Cobb-Stevens, pp. 181-8. Bowling Green. 
OH: Philosophy Documentation Center. 
Heil, John, 1983. "Believing What One Ought:' 
Journal of Philosophy 80, pp. 752-65. 
Hookway, Christopher. 1990. Scepticism. London: 
Routledge. 
Jeffrey, Richard, 1983. The Logic of Decision. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Kaplan, Mark. 1996. Decision Theory as Philosophy. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Lehrer, Keith. 2000. "Sensitivity, Indiscernibility 
and Knowledge." In Philosophical Issues, ed. 
Ernest So sa and Enrique Villanueva, pp. 33-7. 
Boston: Blackwell. 
Nozick, Robert. 1993. The Nature of Rationality. 
Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Owens, David. 2000. Reason without Freedom: 
The Problem ofEpistemic Normativity. London: 
Routledge. 
Rudner, Richard. 1953. "The Scientist Qua 
Scientist Makes Value Judgments." Philosophy 
of Science 20, pp. 1-6. 
Rysiew, Patrick. 2001. "The Context-Sensitivity 
of Knowledge Attributions." Nous 35, pp. 
477-514. 
Sorensen, 
Roy. 
1988. 
"Dogmatism, 
Junk 
Knowledge, and Conditionals." Philosophical 
Quarterly 38, pp. 433-54. 

CHAPTER 52 
Sensitive Moderate Invariantism 
John Hawthorne 
1 From Ascriber-Dependence to Subject-
Dependence 
The contextualist invited us to suppose that var-
iations in the ascriber can affect the truth value 
of knowledge ascriptions even if we hold fixed 
the subject of the ascription. Thus, on her 
account, the relation expressed by the verb 
"know" on an occasion of use will depend upon, 
inter alia, what is salient to the ascriber and 
perhaps also upon what the interests of the 
ascriber are; upon whether there is a good deal at 
stake for the ascriber that turns on the truth 
value of the proposition that figures in the 
knowledge ascription; and so on. It is this 
ascriber-dependence that forces the thesis of con-
text-dependence. For it forces the conclusion 
that two ascribers may be looking at a single sub-
ject at the same time and one truly say"He knows 
that p", another "He doesn't know that p". 
Contradiction is avoided by claiming that the 
verb "know" expresses different relations in the 
mouths of each ascriber. 
It is worth inquiring whether there really are 
pressing grounds for 
admitting ascriber-
dependence. For suppose instead that the kinds 
of factors that the contextualist adverts to as 
making for ascriber-dependence -
attention, 
Originally published in J. Hawthorne, Knowledge and 
Lotteries (Oxford: Clarendon, 2004), pp. 157-91. 
interests, stakes, and so on - had bearing on 
the truth of knowledge claims only insofar as 
they were the attention, interests, stakes, and 
so on of the subject.' Then the relevance of 
attention, interests, and stakes to the truth of 
knowledge ascriptions would not, in itself, 
force the thesis of semantic context-depend-
ence. Here is the picture. Restricting ourselves 
to extensional matters, the verb "know" picks 
out the same ordered triples of subject, time, 
and proposition in the mouths of any ascriber. 
However, whether a particular subject-time-
proposition triple is included in the extension 
of "know" depends not merely upon the kinds of 
factors traditionally adverted to in accounts of 
knowledge - whether the subject believes the 
proposition, whether that proposition is true, 
whether the subject has good evidence, whether 
the subject is using a reliable method, and so 
on - but also upon the kinds of factors that in 
the contextualist's hands make for ascriber-
dependence. These factors will thus include 
(some or all of) the attention, interests, and 
stakes of that subject at that time. In what fol-
lows, I wish to explore this picture - call it "sen-
sitive moderate invariantism" - in a preliminary 
way, indicating how it may help with our puz-
zles. 2 I shall describe two sorts of mechanisms 
that arguably bear on the truth of knowledge 
claims, ones that are akin to contextualist 
machinery, except that they are conceived of as 
making for subject-sensitivity.' 

SENSITIVE MODERATE INVARIANTISM 
761 
2 
Salience4 
A contextualist challenge 
Our contextualist claimed that if a kind of mis-
take is salient to the ascriber, then there is a default 
presumption that it is relevant to the knowledge 
ascription. Let us transform this into a claim 
about subjects. In its strongest form, a subject-
sensitive salience constraint might take the fol-
lowing form: If S thinks that p, but a certain 
counterpossibility is salient to S, then S does not 
know that p. A weaker version would insert "cete-
ris paribus" into the consequent. I do not propose 
to quibble over these details just now. 
Let us begin with a thought experiment raised 
by Stewart Cohen in support of contextual ism 
and briefly adverted to earlier. On the basis of a 
printed itinerary, Smith believes that a certain 
flight has a layover in Chicago. John and Mary 
observe Smith consulting the itinerary, and hear 
him assert that he knows that the flight stops in 
Chicago. But it matters a great deal to John and 
Mary whether or not the flight will stop there. 
Worried that the itinerary contains a misprint or 
has been recently changed, they decide to check 
further. Let us accept Cohen's contention that 
they are prudent to do so. 
One diagnosis of the case that Cohen consid-
ers is that the claim "Smith knows that the flight 
stops in Chicago" is straightforwardly true. But 
against this he complains: 
Yet if Smith knows on the basis of the itinerary 
that the flight stops in Chicago, what should they 
have said? "Okay, Smith knows that the flight 
stops in Chicago, but still, we need to check fur-
ther." To my ear, it is hard to make sense of that 
claim. Moreover, if what is printed in the itiner-
ary is a good enough reason for Smith to know, 
then it is a good enough reason for John and 
Mary to know. Thus John and Mary should have 
said, "Okay, we know the plane stops in Chicago, 
but still, we need to check further." Again, it is 
hard to make sense of such a claim. (1999, 
pp.58-9), 
Let us look at the case through the lens of a 
subject-sensitive salience rule. Clearly, certain 
counterpossibilities to the proposition that the 
flight stops in Chicago are salient to John and 
Mary but not to Smith. Assume that Smith knows 
the proposition. It might still be the case that John 
and Mary do not know it on account of the fact 
that certain possibilities are salient to them. So 
from the assumption that Smith knows, it hardly 
follows, pace Cohen, that John and Mary should 
have said "Okay, we know ... ". But isn't the first 
segment of Cohen's complaint still pertinent? 
Doesn't this view imply that John and Mary ought 
to say "Okay, Smith knows that the flight stops in 
Chicago, but still, we need to check further", or, 
worse still, that they ought to say "Smith knows 
and we don't"? It does not. If we cling to the idea 
that knowledge is the norm of assertion, then if 
John and Mary are to properly assert "Smith 
knows that the flight stops in Chicago", they will 
have to know that Smith knows that the flight 
stops in Chicago. Since knowledge is factive, they 
will then have to know (or at least be in a position 
to know by simple deduction) that the flight stops 
in Chicago. But, by hypothesis, they do not know 
that the flight stops in Chicago (since certain 
counterpossibilities are salient to them). A similar 
diagnosis accounts for the prudence of their 
checking further: Since they do not know that the 
flight stops in Chicago, they are not in a position 
to use "The flight stops in Chicago" as a premise 
in their practical deliberations. So Cohen's sug-
gestion that the case provides something like a 
proof that contextualism is the only serious 
option to skepticism can be challenged. 
Anxiety-provoking inferences 
Let us now consider our puzzles directly. When 
we deploy parity reasoning, certain counterpos-
sibilities to lottery propositions and to those ordi-
nary propositions that entail lottery propositions 
become salient. According to the current perspec-
tive, this will place us in a position where we know 
neither the relevant lottery propositions, nor the 
ordinary propositions that entail them. Thus, 
once the possibility of his winning the lottery 
becomes salient to someone (remember - salience 
is not mere attention), then that person knows 
neither that he will lose the lottery nor that he 
will not be able to afford an African safari. Does 
this make trouble for closure? It does not. Suppose 
someone knows at t] that he will not be able to 
afford an African safari in the near future. Single-
Premise Closure says that if he performs a com-
petent deduction, thereby believing at some later 

762 
JOHN HAWTHORNE 
time, t2, that he will not win the lottery, retaining 
all aleng his knowledge that he will not be able to 
afford an African safari, then that person knows 
at t2 that he will lose the lottery. But if the coun-
terpossibility of winning the lottery becomes sali-
ent to him sometime during the reasoning 
process, then knowledge of the relevant premise 
gets destroyed. In that case, Single-Premise 
Closure does not entail that the person knows he 
will lose the lottery, even if the latter can be 
deduced from something that he currently 
believes. 
Generalizing, we can say that certain infer-
ences are what we might call anxiety-provoking 
for certain subjects. In certain settings, as a 
matter of psychological fact, certain kinds of 
counterpossibilities are made salient to us. And 
in these circumstances, the current brand of 
sensitive invariantism predicts that performing 
the relevant inference will destroy kno~led~eof 
the premises, rather than producing knowledge 
of the conclusion.6 Insofar as someoneKnows 
an ordinary proposition, but finds the inference 
to some entailed lottery proposition anxiety-
provoking in this sense, that person will know the 
premise but be incapable of coming to know the 
conclusion. 
This is not to say, of course, that anyone who 
believes a lottery proposition is such that certain 
counterpossibilities will be salient. It is open to 
the proponent of this position to allow that in 
certain contexts, one can know a lottery proposi-
tion. (Perhaps these include some of those set-
tings described earlier, where people are happy to 
assert a lottery proposition, and are untroubled 
by counterpossibilities.) 7 
Suppose that thinking about lotteries makes a 
certain counter-possibility to the African safari 
proposition salient. Should I now say "Up to five 
minutes ago, I knew I wouldn't have enough 
money to go on an African safari, but not any 
more"? The points raised against Cohen apply 
with equal force here. If at the later time I don't 
know the ordinary proposition, then I cannot 
assert that I used to know it, since knowledge is 
the norm of assertion. To properly assert that 
one used to know that p, one needs to know p 
now. The sentence "I used to know that I would 
not be able to afford to go on an African safari" 
may in fact be true, but it is not proper for me to 
assert it. 
Note that it is extremely intuitive to suppose 
that someone who is in the midst of parity rea-
soning about a lottery proposition is not in a 
position to assert that proposition; and that he 
does not at that point know the lottery proposi-
tion would seem to be a natural and compelling 
explanation for this normative datum. Our cur-
rent version of moderate invariantism, unlike 
simple moderate invariantism (with or without 
Harman's refinements) can embrace this expla-
nation with open arms. It also seems clear that in 
the context of a conversation where some coun-
terpossibility to a lottery proposition has been 
made salient, one is in no position to assert an 
ordinary proposition that entails it; and it seems 
that the obvious explanation is that one does not 
at that point know that the ordinary proposition 
is true. Once again, this explanation can be 
endorsed by the current view. 
Pessimism and projection 
This is not to say, of course, that there are no 
counterintuitive consequences to this version of 
sensitive invariantism. As far as I can see, every 
candidate story about our puzzle has counterin-
tuitive results. This is no exception. 
There is one way that all moderate invariant-
isms will depart from ordinary practice. Once we 
have gotten ourselves into the frame of mind of 
thinking "I do not in fact know whether or not I'll 
be able to afford the safari", as we frequently do 
when we use parity reasoning, we are not only 
unwilling to say "However I used to know that"; 
we are positively willing to say "I never did know 
that': And, if pressed, we are willing, moreover, to 
say that "I was mistaken in thinking that I did 
know that". But moderate invariantism allows 
that ordinary people do know all sorts of ordi-
nary propositions - so it is inevitable that any 
form of moderate invariantism will be commit-
ted to saying that reflection on lottery proposi-
tions induces an excessively skeptical frame of 
mind. The moderate invariantist holds that we 
often do know things of the form "That table will 
be there for a while", and, correlatively, that the 
cast of mind I get in when I use parity reasoning 
drawn from quantum mechanics (one in which I 
say that no one knows what the future will bring) 
is a cast of mind in which I am excessively pessi-
mistic about what people know. The contextualist, 

SENSITIVE MODERATE INVARIANTISM 
763 
of course, is not so committed: she can maintain 
that in the so-called "pessimistic" frame of mind, 
our standards are high, and so we are exactly right 
to say "No one knows things like that". For the 
contextualist, the mistake arises only when we go 
to say to ourselves "So ordinary people are wildly 
mistaken in their knowledge ascriptions".8 
Despite this departure from ordinary practice, 
subject-sensitive moderate invariantism has the 
beginnings of an explanation about why we are 
sometimes excessively pessimistic in our attribu-
tions of knowledge. After all, on such a view, when 
certain counterpossibilities are salient to us, it is 
perfectly correct to say of ourselves that we do not 
know the relevant propositions. What we need to 
account for in addition is our tendency to over-
project our own lack of knowledge to others. In so 
doing, we mighthelpfullyappeal to the psychological 
literature on heuristics and biases. 
Psychologists in that tradition emphasize the 
role played by the "availability" heuristic as a dis-
torting influence on our judgments of risk: in 
many cases, our estimation of the likelihood of an 
event is affected by the case with which we can 
recall or imagine it. 9 So, for example, when a cer-
tain scenario is made vivid, the perceived risk of 
that scenario may rise dramatically. In this regard, 
it is a widely documented phenomenon that "a 
recent disaster or a vivid film" may, as Slovic, 
Fischhoff, and Lichtenstein emphasize, "seriously 
distort risk judgments" as, for example, when 
"Recently experienced floods appear to set an 
upward bound to the size of loss with which 
managers believe they ought to be concerned."l0 
They go on to note that a "particularly important 
implication of the availability heuristic is that dis-
cussion of a low-probability hazard may increase 
its memorability and imaginability and hence its 
perceived riskiness" (1982, p. 465).11 Applied to 
the issue at hand, the availability heuristic may 
help to explain our tendency to skeptical overpro-
jection. When certain non-knowledge-destroying 
counterpossibilities are made salient, we overesti-
mate their real danger; as a result, we may find 
ourselves inclined to deny knowledge to others in 
cases where there is in fact no real danger of 
error.12 
Whatever our favorite conjectures about the 
psychological mechanisms at work (I do not wish 
to speculate further here), one thing seems clear 
and very important: we do have some tendency to 
suppose that, as more and more possibilities of 
error become salient to us, we are reaching an 
ever more enlightened perspective. Thus when we 
consider someone who is not alive to these pos-
sibilities, we have a tendency to let our (puta-
tively) more enlightened perspective trump his. 13 
This tendency, when left unchecked, leads to 
skepticism. And even if we are convinced that 
skepticism is not correct, it is far from clear that 
we are capable of fully eradicating our tendency 
to find it compelling. Given this unhappy circum-
stance, it seems likely that our cognitive relation-
ship to a nonskeptical semantics will always be a 
complicated one (as the last few thousand years 
of epistemology would seem to confirm).14 
Note that the picture we have been consider-
ing yields a rather different picture of conversa-
tional dynamics than the one embraced by 
contextualists. Suppose I voice a set of knowledge 
ascriptions. As the conversation unfolds, counter-
possibilities are made salient by my interlocutor, 
so that I come to give voice to a new, apparently 
conflicting and more skeptical set of knowledge 
ascriptions. Here are three candidate descriptions 
of the conversational dynamics. (a) Semantic 
accommodation. IS I begin by assigning one 
semantic value to "know", but as time proceeds, I 
shift to a new semantic assignment in order that 
my ways of talking line up better with that of my 
interlocutor(s). (b) Testimonial accommodation. 
My interlocutor represents himself as knowing 
that I might be wrong. I am in general disposed to 
trust my interlocutors, so I come to believe that I 
might be wrong about this or that and bring my 
beliefs about what is known into line with these 
newly formed beliefs about epistemic modality. 
(c) Availability. My interloctutor paints an 
extremely vivid picture of certain kinds of error. I 
come to believe that I might be wrong, not 
because I trust the interlocutor, but because my 
tendency to make use of the availability heuristic 
lies beyond my conscious control. 
The contextualist uses (a) to explain the con-
versational dynamics. It is far from clear that this 
is preferable to an explanation that proceeds by 
way (inter alia) of one or both of (b) and (c). 
Residual costs 
Let me now turn to examining the costs of the cur-
rent approach. I have earlier indicated some ways 

764 
JOHN HAWTHORNE 
in which a moderate invariantism that exploits 
salience may have an edge over simple moderate 
invariantism. This is not to deny that there are, 
intuitively speaking, special oddities to the former 
view. We don't normally embrace thoughts along 
the lines of "Just maybe, the only thing stopping 
me knowing is that I am worrying too much". 
Nor, having come to know p, do we embrace 
thoughts of the form "If I had been less anxious 
back then, more committed to p, less worried 
about alternatives, I would have known p back 
then': Nor, having got worried about p, do we 
think to ourselves "If p is true then I knew p before 
I got worried".16 But on the current view, such 
thoughts are often warranted.17,18 We may also 
note that insofar as the sensitive moderate invari-
antist 
embraces 
the 
Epistemic 
Possibility 
Constraint, he will likely find it difficult to accom-
modate van Fraassen's somewhat appealing 
Reflection Principle, which tells us that expected 
epistemic probability should equal current epis-
temic probability. Suppose that certain counter-
possibilities are currently salient and hence my 
epistemic probability that p is merely .8. Suppose 
I know that after I dine and play backgammon, 
such possibilities will no longer be salient to me. 
Of course I do not now know that I will know p 
then, since I do not know p now. But, from the 
current perspective, I may well be highly confi-
dent that if p is true, I will know it at that point. 
For I may think that if p is true, the only thing 
stopping me from knowing it now is, crudely, 
anxiety. In short it may be that I assign roughly 
.8 to the proposition that my epistemic proba-
bility will be 1 post-backgammon. If p is false, I 
will still expect to have some non-zero epistemic 
probability of p post-backgammon: after all, 
conditional on p being false, it may well be quite 
unlikely that at that time I will be in a position 
to know that it is. So my expected epistemic 
probability will outstrip my current epistemic 
probability. I leave it to readers to judge for them-
selves whether such a violation of Reflection is 
altogether disastrous. 
Note finally that one may complain that the 
kind of view that we are considering is unfair to 
thinking people: the philosopher who worries 
about being a brain in a vat, etc., will know less 
than the dullard who doesn't. The worry is 
finessed by the contextualist, who can claim that 
it turns on a conflation of use and mention. Not 
so for the sensitive moderate invariantist. One 
can certainly soften the blow by pointing out that 
the philosopher is not in a position to assert that 
the dullard knows something he does not. 
Moreover, intuitions about rather similar cases 
often deviate from the ones maintained by the 
objector. Consider the "thinking person" who 
worries that his memory is deceiving him and 
that he has forgotten to turn the stove off. Is it so 
strained to suppose that, owing to self-induced 
anxiety, he no longer knows that he has turned 
the stove off? Consider, meanwhile, the "dullard" 
who does not suffer from such anxiety. Is it so 
strained to suppose that he retains knowledge of 
having turned off the stove?l9 The case against 
the view we are considering is certainly far from 
one-sided. 
Another vexed issue is this: To what extent 
does salience of counterpossibility, anxiety, and 
so on, merely render one's knowledge temporar-
ily unavailable for practical and theoretical rea-
soning (as opposed to destroying it)?20 After all, it 
is not so strained to describe many of the cases 
under consideration as ones where one merely 
has anxiety-induced reluctance to put what one 
knows to work in one's cognitive labors. When is 
knowledge rendered inert owing to a (perhaps 
irrational) unwillingness to put something that 
one knows to use? When instead is it destroyed? I 
shall not attempt to resolve these questions here. 
3 
What is Salience? 
I turn now to an issue that has been largely sup-
pressed but that is nevertheless extremely impor-
tant. What is it for the possibility of error to be 
salient anyway? ... [I]t is not helpful in this con-
text to identify the salience of error with the mere 
entertaining of an error-describing proposition. 
It is plausible that salient counterpossibility 
of error is a certain kind of intellectual seeming. 
Some proposition seems to be true. (That is not 
to say I automatically believe it: we do not doxas-
tic ally endorse all intellectual seemings.) But 
what proposition is it that seems to be true when 
the possibility of error by some subject S is sali-
ent? Not some proposition of metaphysical 
modality, to the effect there is some metaphysi-
cally possible world where an error is made. 
Rather, I would suggest, it is a claim of epistemic 

SENSITIVE MODERATE INVARIANTISM 
765 
possibility that is tied to the epistemic subject. 
The content of the intellectual seeming associ-
ated with the salient possibility of error is basi-
cally this: For all the subject knows, p! There is 
now nothing puzzling whatsoever about the 
claim that the salience of the possibility of error 
induces retraction of a knowledge claim. This is 
just a special case of the claim that its intellectu-
ally seeming that p induces us to retract proposi-
tions that are incompatible with p.21 (Notice that 
on this construal, contextualist proposals about 
salience as the mechanism whereby semantic 
shifts occur are fairly uninformative: they 
amount to the proposal that, other things being 
equal, if a negated knowledge ascription seems 
true, it is true.) 
With this conception of salience in place, we 
can refine on our earlier discussion by distin-
guishing three different ways in which one might 
try to explicate the knowledge-undermining role 
of salience. 22 
(i) The Belief Removal Model. First, salience 
might destroy knowledge that p by destroying 
belief that p. It seems to one that it might be that 
not-p (where the "might" is here one of epistemic 
modality). This in turn induces one to stop believ-
ing that p, which, if knowledge requires belief, 
entails that one now does not know that p. So 
long as knowledge requires belief, there is no 
doubt that knowledge can be destroyed in this 
way; the question is whether belief is extinguished 
in the cases that we are considering, and thus 
whether this mechanism is the one that explains 
the veridicality (assuming for now they are veridi-
cal) of many ordinary claims of the form "I do 
not know whether or not I will win the lottery': 
On the face of it, this is not so plausible, since 
there seems to be a perfectly reasonable sense of 
"belief" in which one believes one will lose a lot-
tery even when the possibility of error is salient in 
the relevant sense. 
There is a variant on the current proposal that 
is worth considering. Suppose that an especially 
strong kind of conviction - something like being 
sure23 - is a condition for knowledge. 24 One might 
think that insofar as the possibility of a certain 
kind of error is salient, this erases the kind of flat-
out conviction required for knowledge. If all that 
were right, it would be natural to suppose that it 
explains why knowledge is absent in cases where 
the possibility of error is salient. 25 
(ii) The Evidential Model. 26 Its seeming to me 
perceptually that p provides me with evidence for 
pY Similarly, if it seems to me that I might be 
wrong (in the sense explained) then, plausibly, 
that very seeming provides me with evidence that 
I might be wrong, and thus evidence that I do not 
know that p. Perhaps, even if I knew that p, the 
seeming provides evidence that destroys knowl-
edge.2s Here is the rough and ready principle at 
work: 
Defeat. If, at t, I get evidence that I do not 
know that p, and I have no effective means for 
rebutting that evidence, then I do not know 
that pat t. 
(This of course must be distinguished from a 
weaker principle according to which, when I get 
evidence that I do not know that p, and cannot 
"rebut" it, then I do not know that I know 
that p.29) 
The Defeat Principle, as stated, does not strike 
me as particularly plausible. 3D Suppose a student 
is presented with an argument to the effect that 
he knows nothing and cannot rebut that argu-
ment. Is it really plausible that at that time, he 
does not know anything? If someone on a train 
presents me with Zeno's arguments that motion 
is impossible and, while not knowing how to 
answer them, I choose to ignore them, do I then 
not know that I am moving? When the possibility 
that I have left the cooker on becomes salient and 
yet I ignore it, shaking off the anxiety without 
trying to justify this to myself, is my knowledge 
really disturbed? The answer in all three cases 
seems to be "No"; it seems that one can know p 
while having nothing very useful to say about cer-
tain counterconsiderations that one recognizes as 
having some evidential force. 31 
While offering a somewhat elegant diagnosis 
of our puzzles, it remains unclear whether any 
model of knowledge in the vicinity of Defeat will 
fit well with our intuitions about cases. But it 
remains true that there are plenty of cases where 
we think knowledge is destroyed by excellent 
counterevidence. Given that an intellectual seem-
ing that one does not know p is at least some evi-
dence that one does not know p, we should not 
dismiss entirely the idea that salience destroys 
knowledge by providing counterevidence. I shall 
not pursue the matter further here. 

766 
JOHN HAWTHORNE 
(iii) Authority. It may be suggested that our 
negative verdicts about knowledge in our own 
case are decisive on account of a constitutive first-
person authority. If I believe of myself that I do 
not know, then, automatically as it were, I do not 
know. On this model, the relevant intellectual 
seeming (that it might be that not-p) requires 
doxastic endorsement to destroy knowledge, but 
once that endorsement occurs, loss of knowledge 
inevitably follows. It might be suggested that this 
is a case of a more general phenomenon where 
our first-person negative verdicts have authority: 
If one thinks one isn't happy, one isn't happy, if 
one thinks one doesn't believe that p, one doesn't. 
And so on. The claimed constitutive authority for 
first-person verdicts does not seem at all plausible 
to me, and especially so in the knowledge case. 
(Consider the simple case of someone who 
believes that he doesn't know what the answer to 
a question is and yet quickly discovers that he has 
known the answer all along.) Perhaps the relevant 
authority claim can be weakened enough to make 
it plausible without rendering it utterly vacuous.32 
I shall not, however, pursue the authority idea 
further here. 
4 
Practical Environment 
I earlier introduced the sensitive moderate invari-
antist as one who claimed that the extension of 
"know" "depends not merely upon the kinds 
of factors traditionally adverted to in accounts of 
knowledge - whether the subject believes the 
proposition, whether that proposition is true, 
whether the subject has good evidence, whether 
the subject is using a reliable method, and so on -
but also upon the kinds of factors that in the con-
textualist's hands make for ascriber-dependence': 
Our discussion of salience has not proved to be a 
particularly promising way of making good on 
that view. For it may well be that the most prom-
ising version of a subject-dependent version of 
the thesis that salience destroys knowledge pro-
ceeds via that idea that salience destroys belief 
(or whatever kind of conviction is required for 
knowledge). This idea hardly takes us beyond 
the factors traditionally adverted to in accounts 
of knowledge, given the centrality of the belief 
condition to standard accounts. From this per-
spective, the only mistake made by the simple 
moderate invariantist is to suppose that belief of 
the suitable type is invariably present in the puzzle 
cases we have been considering. 
More importantly still, I do not think it plau-
sible to suppose that an appeal to salience will, at 
least by itself, resolve our puzzles. Here is one way 
to make this especially clear. Suppose someone is 
dogmatic. When he infers lottery propositions, 
counterpossibilities are not salient to him (on any 
of our candidate glosses of "salience"). He infers 
that he will lose the lottery on the basis of some 
ordinary proposition and does not worry about 
alternatives. He then uses the conclusion of that 
inference as a basis for his assertoric and delibera-
tive practices. Surely there is something out of 
line with such a dogmatist. But the account so far 
provides us with no resources for explaining why. 
The sensitive moderate invariantist should con-
cede the limitations of the salience framework. 
There is an analogy to be drawn here with the 
contextualist. Lewis is aware that the truth of a 
knowledge ascription has to depend not merely 
on what an ascriber is ignoring, but also on what 
he ought to be ignoring. Likewise in the case of 
subject-sensitive knowledge ascriptions: whether 
a subject knows some proposition depends not 
merely on which counterpossibilities he does 
ignore, but also on what he should ignore, and the 
problem with the dogmatist is that he ignores 
things he should not. But what is to be said, at 
least in a preliminary way, about the matter of 
which counterpossibilities ought to be ignored by 
a subject? Here I turn to the second kind of mech-
anism that I wish to discuss. 
When introducing the connection between 
knowledge and practical reasoning, we noted a 
case where a lottery proposition serves as a 
premise for a manifestly bad piece of practical 
reasoning, and where it seems quite obvious that 
the explanation for why the practical reasoning is 
bad is that one does not know the premise to be 
true. Recall, then, the following case of an intui-
tively awful piece of practical reasoning: 
(i) 
You are offered a cent for a lottery ticket 
that cost a dollar, in a 10,000 ticket lottery 
with a $5,000 first prize and reason as 
follows: 
I will lose the lottery. 
If I keep the ticket I will get nothing. 

SENSITIVE MODERATE INVARIANTISM 
767 
If I sell the ticket, I will get a cent. 
So I ought to sell the ticket. 
It is important to notice that one can easily con-
struct analogous cases where it is an ordinary 
proposition and not a lottery proposition which 
figures as the key premise. Thus consider the fol-
lowing: 
(ij) 
You are offered a lottery ticket in the 
above lottery for the price of a penny 
and reason as follows: 
I will not have enough money to go on 
an African safari this year. 
So, if I buy the lottery ticket I will lose. 
So I should not buy the lottery ticket. 
Or again: 
(iii) 
You are offered life insurance and reason: 
I will be going to Blackpool next year. 
So I won't die beforehand. 
So I ought to wait until next year before 
buying life insurance.33,34 
Two points of clarification. First, consider the 
following reasoning: 
(iv) 
Someone dares you to eat poisonous 
toadstools and you reason as follows: 
I will be going to Blackpool next year. 
So ifI take the $10,000 dare to eat those 
poisonous toadstools they won't 
kill me. 
So I ought to take the dare. 
Someone who reasons as (iv) describes is using 
the belief that she is going to Blackpool in a way 
that makes it likely to be false. By contrast, some-
one who, say, turns down lottery tickets on the 
basis described in (ii) is not using the African 
safari belief in a way that is likely to render it false. 
Indeed, in some sense it makes the belief more 
likely to be true if one uses it as a basis for turning 
down lottery tickets. 
Second, our sense that these instances of prac-
tical reasoning are bad has nothing to do with 
assuming that certain counterpossibilities are sali-
ent to the reasoner. If the reasoner is so dogmatic 
as to ignore such counterpossibilities in these 
practical settings, that hardly makes us think 
better of the reasoning. 
In these deliberative settings, then, it is intui-
tive to suppose that the practical reasoning is 
flawed and that this is because the premise -
whether it is an ordinary proposition or a lottery 
proposition - is not known.35 How can we respect 
this intuition without embracing skepticism? 
Only by allowing what we might call "practical 
environment" to make a difference to what one 
knows. We now have before us the outlines of a 
second mechanism that may be introduced by the 
sensitive moderate invariantist. The basic idea is 
clear enough. Insofar as it is unacceptable - and 
not merely because the content of the belief is 
irrelevant to the issues at hand - to use a belief 
that p as a premise in practical reasoning on a cer-
tain occasion, the belief is not a piece of knowl-
edge at that time. Thus when offered a penny for 
my lottery ticket, it would be unacceptable to use 
the premise that I will lose the lottery as my 
grounds for making such a sale. So on that occa-
sion I do not know that I will lose. Meanwhile, 
when you are offered life insurance, it would be 
unacceptable for you to use your belief that you 
are going to Blackpool as grounds for refusal.36 So 
on that occasion you do not know that you are 
going to Blackpool. 
Allowing such a mechanism will make knowl-
edge come and go with ease.37 One is offered a 
lottery ticket. At that point one doesn't know that 
one will be unable to afford a trip to Mauritius. 
One buys the ticket, forgets about the lottery, and 
goes to the bookstore. One chooses the "local 
destination guide" over the much more expen-
sive "worldwide guide", reasoning from the 
premise "I won't be able to afford to go to an 
exotic destination". At that point you do know 
that you will be unable to afford a trip to 
Mauritius. Someone comes and offers you a 
penny for the lottery ticket. At that point you 
don't know. And so on. 38,39,40 
Of course it is very tempting to give the 
following explanation: the difference between the 
bookstore decision and the other decisions is that 
in the bookstore case the chance for the subject 
that he will win is small enough so as to be irrel-
evant to the practical issues at hand: he can safely 
disregard the small epistemic chance that he 
would win. Tempting indeed, But if there is always 

768 
JOHN HAWTHORNE 
a chance for the subject that he will win, then -
assuming the Epistemic Possibility Constraint -
one never knows one will lose. Skepticism 
triumphs. If we are to avoid yielding to skepti-
cism, then we must either adumbrate a notion of 
epistemic chance that is not tied to knowledge in 
the way that the Epistemic Possibility Constraint 
describes, or else resist the gloss just given, insist-
ing that, when in the bookstore, there is no epis-
temic chance for you that you will be able to 
afford a trip to Mauritius. 
There are thus two ways to develop the practi-
cal environment constraint. One approach gives 
up the Epistemic Possibility Constraint, allowing 
that knowledge that p is compatible with a small 
epistemic chance that not-p. There is a natural 
way to spell out the practical environment con-
straint on such a picture: if there is a small epis-
temic chance that not-p, one knows p only if one 
is in a practical environment where the difference 
between a small epistemic chance that not-p and 
zero epistemic chance that not-p is irrelevant to 
the matters at hand. A second option is one that 
cleaves to the Epistemic Possibility Constraint: 
when one knows p, there is zero epistemic chance 
that not-p. In that case, glosses of the practical 
environment idea in terms of epistemic chance 
will be circular and uninformative. Instead, one 
will consider the question of what kinds of prac-
tical reasoning we ought and oughtn't to engage 
in as sufficiently fundamental to be intractable in 
terms of a prior notion of epistemic probability. 
One's goal, in that case, will not be to offer an 
analysis of knowledge in terms of epistemic prob-
ability and decision-making. Rather it will be to 
insist that, contra the simple moderate invarian-
tist, changes in deliberative environment can 
make a difference to whether one knows a given 
proposition. One will learn to live with a circle: In 
a deliberative environment where one ought to 
use p as a premise, one knows p. When one knows 
p, the epistemic chance for not-p is zero. When 
the epistemic chance of not-p is nonzero, one 
shouldn't use p as a premise in practical reasoning. 
Why should this circle require a more basic 
anchor?41 
It is worth drawing attention to a theme that is 
by now familiar. One advantage of this version of 
sensitive moderate invariantism over (standard) 
contextualism is clear enough: suppose S uses "I 
will be in Blackpool next year" as a premise in 
(illegitimate) practical reasoning. An ascriber, 
unaware of the practical reasoning to which that 
premise is being put, asserts "S knows that he will 
be in Blackpool next year': By standard contextu-
alist lights, that ascription is true. Further, if the 
ascriber says "If S is now acting on the premise 
that he will be in Blackpool next year, he is acting 
on the basis of something he knows to be true", 
she will have said something true. The reason for 
this is that the practical environment of the sub-
ject is not given any constitutive role to play in the 
truth conditions for knowledge ascriptions. The 
connection between good practical reasoning and 
the truth of knowledge ascriptions has been lost. 
Not so for our sensitive moderate invariantist. 
Meanwhile, considerations of practical envi-
ronment provide one clue as to why we may be 
overly pessimistic in our knowledge ascriptions. 
When we claim that no one can know that he or 
she will lose the lottery, part of what is going on is 
that we realize that no one is in a position, in 
advance of the lottery draw, to acceptably sell a 
lottery ticket for miminal return. We sense well 
enough that in that kind of deliberative setting, 
the cognitive division into subcases typified by 
parity reasoning is recommended, and that brute 
reliance on a lottery proposition in one's deliber-
ations is out of the question. And it is extremely 
natural to think that if anyone did know that he 
was going to lose the lottery in advance of the 
draw, that person would be in a position to rea-
sonably sell the ticket whatever the sale price. If 
the practical environment idea is right, then that 
line of thought, while very natural, is flawed: if 
knowledge is destroyed by certain practical envi-
ronments, any thought that knowledge will bring 
with it the capacity to perform certain cogent 
pieces of reasoning in those environments will be 
incorrect. For those will count among some of 
the very environments in which such knowledge 
would be destroyed." 
We now have the beginnings of a diagnosis for 
our epistemological puzzlement. We underesti-
mate the contribution of practical environment 
to the truth of knowledge ascriptions. The picture 
just given is compatible with the idea that most 
ordinary knowledge claims come out true. But 
when we reflect as philosophers, it does not occur 
to us that issues about practical environment may 
be relevant to the truth of those ordinary ascrip-
tions. We are insensitive, and attempt to evaluate 

SENSITIVE MODERATE INVARIANTISM 
769 
knowledge ascriptions out of context. In particu-
lar, we fail to consider the deliberative context of 
the subject.43 No wonder we get confused.44 
5 
Practical Reasoning and Misleading 
Evidence45 
... [AJ puzzle associated with Saul Kripke ... uses 
Single-Premise Closure to generate the odd-
sounding result that if I know that p, I can know 
that all future evidence against p will be mislead-
ing. [Elsewhere (Hawthorne 2004, p. 71)J I ... 
endorse a solution to that puzzle that relies on 
treating that knowledge as "junk knowledge". 
But there is a residual puzzle concerning prac-
tical reasoning. Suppose I am offered a pill that 
will make me ignore future evidence against p. If 
I know that p, it would seem that I can reason as 
follows: All future evidence against p will be mis-
leading. So I would do well to ignore it. So I 
should take the pill. 
But there is, intuitively, something wrong with 
this exercise of practical reasoning. Contrast two 
cases. (i) A pill has been developed that immu-
nizes takers against propaganda against p. The pill 
gives the brain special powers - that of recogniz-
ing misleading counter-evidence to p. I know that 
p and to protect my knowledge, I take the pill. (ii) 
A pill has been developed that immunizes takers 
against all evidence against p. I know that p and 
reason that all evidence against p is misleading. 
On that basis, I reason that the effect of the pill 
will be to immunize me against propaganda 
against p. I take the pill. 
Intuitively, the pill-taker in case (i) is acting 
acceptably - but not the pill-taker in case (ii). 
How is this to be explained? Accept the frame-
work described in the last section and, at least 
schematically, a solution is ready at hand: in the 
practical environment described by case (ii), one 
does not know that p. Consider the reasoning: "p. 
But the pill will cause me to ignore all evidence 
against p. So all evidence that the pill will cause 
me to ignore will be misleading evidence. So 
(unless the pill has no other untoward effects) it 
would be a good thing for me to take the pill". 
Intuitively, this would be an acceptable piece of 
practical reasoning if the premise was known. 
Intuitively, the reasoning is unacceptable. The 
"practical environment" framework has the 
advantage of respecting both intuitions. 
6 
Multi-Premise Closure 
Do these reflections help to salvage Multi-
Premise Closure (MPC)? The path is still a diffi-
cult one. Let us grant that all sorts of ordinary 
propositions can be known in the appropriate 
practical environments and with appropriate 
salience requirements satisfied. MPC suggests 
that on those occasions, if one competently 
deduces long conjunctions of those ordinary 
propositions, one can come to know those long 
conjunctions. After all, why should the mere 
activity of conjunction introduction destroy 
knowledge of the conjuncts?46 
There are at least two objections that we ought 
to consider. First, there is the objection based on 
what might be called the Preface Intuition: for 
almost any long conjunction of empirical beliefs 
that one might have, one is in a position to know 
on inductive grounds that the conjunction is 
likely to be false. For the moderate invariantist, 
MPC does not sit well with the Preface Intuition. 
For if MPC is correct, one can come to know 
some long conjunction p. If the Preface Intuition 
is correct, one can come to know that p is proba-
bly false. But it seems altogether bizarre to sup-
pose that one can come to know both that p and 
that p is probably false. The Preface Intuition 
has to be explained away. Second, we can make 
special trouble for MPC via certain lottery-style 
cases. Suppose it is allowed that in the appropri-
ate practical setting, I can know that Amelia will 
never get rich and know that Bartholomew 
will never get rich and so on, for 5,000 friends, 
each of whom has a ticket in a 5,001 ticket lottery 
where only ticket #7 is owned by a nonfriend. 
Assume MPC and I will be able to know a con-
junction that will be true only if #7 wins. But isn't 
it outrageous to suppose that anyone can know 
such a thing in advance of the lottery draw? Better, 
it seems, to endorse the skeptical hypothesis that 
no one ever really knows any of the conjuncts. 
How, then, could the moderate invariantist 
hold onto MPC? A first step will be to maintain 
the Epistemic Possibility Constraint. For if knowl-
edge is compatible with small epistemic chances 
of mistake, there is no prospect whatever of MPC 

770 
JOHN HAWTHORNE 
being correct, since small epistemic chances add 
up. As for the twin arguments of the last para-
graph, the best hope, I think, is to lean heavily on 
the idea of practical environment. In those set-
tings where we intuitively think of putting long 
conjunctions to work - where some practical 
issue at hand turns on the whole long conjunc-
tion - knowledge is destroyed. So in any setting 
where the long conjunction is of practical rele-
vance, we do know that it is probably false. It is 
only when our knowledge is idle that we know 
long conjunctions through MPC. And so the 
intuition that we know all such long conjunctions 
to be probably false (where "probably" is being 
used as an epistemic modal) is an understandable 
overprojection from practical casesY A parallel 
diagnosis is offered for the second case, though 
here the pill is even harder to swallow. In any cir-
cumstance where we imagine the conjunction of 
"loser" beliefs being put to work (say, as a basis 
for spending a lot on lottery ticket #7), knowledge 
of the conjunction is destroyed. But in cases 
where it is idle, we do have such knowledge. 
But it is not clear that an appeal to practical 
environment can do all the work. Begin with a 
thought that drives Preface intuitions: knowledge 
is destroyed when someone is given excellent evi-
dence against p, even if the evidence turns out to 
be misleading. This does not turn on whether the 
recipient of the evidence is responsive to it. If 
someone ignores the evidence and carries on 
believing the relevant proposition, knowledge is 
still destroyed. Return to the APA case of Chapter 1, 
in the version where someone comes in and 
announces "I'm not going to tell you who, but 
one of the people on the list has just died". 
Suppose I hear that and ignore it, even though I 
have every reason to trust the informant (who is 
in fact speaking falsely on this occasion). I deduce 
and come to believe the long conjunction that 
says of 150 on the list that they will be at the APA. 
Given that excellent counterevidence (misleading 
or not) destroys knowledge, I do not know the 
conjunction. But what of my knowledge of the 
conjuncts? It seems something of a stretch to sup-
pose that my knowledge of each individual con-
junct is destroyed, especially in the case at hand, 
where my conviction is intact. Consider, similarly, 
a case where someone shows me a list of 1,000 
propositions, each of which I in fact know, and 
gives me misleading evidence that one item on the 
list is false (without telling me which). Assuming 
that my conviction in each of the 1,000 proposi-
tions remains intact, it seems farfetched to sup-
pose that my knowledge of each is destroyed. But 
my knowledge of the conjunction is certainly 
destroyed. Allow that I might have come to believe 
the conjunction by deduction from the conjuncts, 
and we seem to have a counterexample to MPC. 
Suppose one were to treat MPC as an analytic 
girder. What is one to say here? I can think of 
only one promising strategy, borrowing from 
discussions of vagueness: the news that destroys 
the knowledge of the conjunction renders it 
determinate that one does not know all of the 
conjuncts, but for each conjunct, it is indetermi-
nate whether the news destroys knowledge of 
that conjunct (where "determinate" and "inde-
terminate" are to be understood in accord with 
one's favorite theory of vagueness). This cluster 
of claims, note, is compatible (given standard 
logics of determinacy) with the further claim 
that it is determinate that I know nearly all of the 
conjuncts. MPC is retained without wholesale 
skeptical concession. 48,49,50 
For anyone drawn to such a line, a further 
embarrassment lies in wait, one that relies on the 
idea that small risks add up to big risks, using this 
time the concept of objective chance in place of 
epistemic chance. Suppose, as nonskeptics, we 
allow that knowing p is compatible with there 
being a small objective chance that not-po IfMPC 
is correct, then since small objective chances add 
up to large objective chances, we shall have to 
allow for truths of the form "S knows that p and 
it is overwhelmingly objectively likely that not-
p"! Suppose, to illustrate, there are 210,000,000 coin-
flippers ft .,. fn• Each is poised to flip a fair coin a 
million times. I consider each coin-flipper in 
turn and form the belief that he will not toss 
heads a million times in a row. In fact, things are 
such that none of the coin -flippers will toss heads 
a million times in a row. Assuming MPC and my 
knowledge of each premise ... I can know a con-
junction that claims of each coin-flipper that she 
will not flip heads a million times in a row. While 
in any particular case, it would be very surprising 
that a coin-flipper toss a million heads, it is, by 
contrast, both objectively unlikely and intuitively 
quite remarkable that none of the coin-flippers 
tosses heads a million times in a row - certainly 
not the kind of thing that one can know. 5l 

SENSITIVE MODERATE INVARIANTISM 
771 
Whatever one says, certain deeply held intui-
tions will have to yield: I shall not adjudicate here 
whether, all things considered, it is MPC that 
should be relinquished. 
7 Scorecard 
Sensitive moderate invariantism has a fairly 
promising scorecard. It respects the Moorean 
Constraint and Single-Premise Closure. It offers 
the best hope yet for respecting the intuitive links 
between knowledge, assertion, and practical rea-
soning. And it offers some prospect for maintain-
ing Multi-Premise Closure. As a species of 
invariantism, it can respect the disquotational 
schema for "knows". As we have seen, it can also 
be developed in a way that respects the Epistemic 
Possibility Constraint. We should acknowledge, 
though, that if developed so as to respect the 
Epistemic Possibility Constraint, it will have a 
hard time with the Objective Chance Principle. 
For assume both the Epistemic Possibility 
Constraint and the Objective Chance Principle. 
Then, supposing we know there are small objec-
tive chances of pretty much any description of the 
future, we will not know ordinary propositions 
about the future. 
The Objective Chance Principle is not the only 
sticking point for the sensitive moderate invari-
antist. We have, along the way, noted a range of 
intuitive oddities that such a view will yield - and 
there will no doubt be many more that I have not 
brought to the fore. 
8 Concluding Remarks 
Closing reflections 
It is striking that the puzzles with which we are 
struggling do not disturb us very much in ordi-
nary life. Why is this? After all, as we have seen, 
ordinary common sense delivers apparently 
inconsistent 
verdicts 
across 
conversational 
contexts. Why does this not bother us? In broad 
outline, the answer is obvious enough. When we 
find ourselves in one practical environment, we 
do not look back to what we said in very different 
practical environments for guidance in forming 
our current epistemic verdicts. When offered life 
insurance, I do not feel the force of my earlier 
claims to know things about my own future. It's 
not that I look back on those claims and evaluate 
them as incorrect; it's that I am so constituted as 
to simply ignore them. And this tendency is even 
more striking in the reverse case. When I say that 
I do know p although my earlier self, concerned 
with life insurance, claimed not to know p (or 
some q entailed by p), it's not that I evaluate my 
previous self as having been overcautious - I 
simply ignore him. 
What I have been trying to do in the current 
work is to achieve some kind of unified semantic 
perspective on knowledge claims made in myriad 
settings: Which apparent inconsistencies are gen-
uine? Which knowledge ascriptions are actually 
correct? This attempt to take in the gamut of 
knowledge ascriptions in one sweep, as it were, is 
precisely what we don't do in ordinary life. This 
is why the puzzlement that grips us here eludes us 
(for the most part) there. The smooth function-
ing of ordinary epistemic discourse in a person's 
life, despite apparent diachronic inconsistencies, 
is indeed a striking fact. But it is not one that by 
itself solves our puzzles, nor one that unmasks 
them as mere pseudo-puzzles. 
So which of the views presented here is the 
right one? Some readers, faced with the range of 
competitors, will be inclined to think that there is 
no fact of the matter as to which is correct, 
embracing some kind of noncognitivism that 
denies statements of knowledge any truth value. 
They will perhaps, insist that the concept of 
knowledge is incoherent52 
-
strictly speaking, 
tokenings of the verb "know" are deprived of an 
extension. Such a reaction would be unwise. 
Careful investigation will reveal analogous com-
plexities and tensions for many or most of the 
concepts belonging to the manifest image: 
repeated solace in noncognitivism will almost 
certainly result in cognitive suicide. And it does 
not seem that there is special reason for noncog-
nitivism in the case of "know': 
So which view is correct? Our question does 
not by any means reduce to: "Contextualism: for 
or against?" For recall that even if contextualism 
is true, it may not provide the key to our puzzles. 
My best guess, indeed, is that it is not the key. Put 
a gun to my head and I will opt for a treatment of 
the puzzles built around the materials of the 
"Practical Environment" section above. But I am 

772 
JOHN HAWTHORNE 
far from confident that this is the correct way to 
proceed. There is then the further question as to 
whether to embed those ideas within an invarian-
tist semantical framework for "know"53. Here, 
though more tentatively still, I would opt for 
invariantism over contextualism. 
My own opinions should not matter much at 
this stage, however. I prefer to think of these pages 
as forming a helpful basis for the reader to con-
duct her own investigation of the puzzles at hand. 
To think it vital that I embrace some particular 
view would be to seriously misunderstand the 
nature of the philosophical enterprise. 
A concluding parable 
Let me close with a story. 
Once upon a time there was a tribe that shared 
deeply conflicting tendencies. On the one hand, 
whenever they reflected on the many ways that 
people can and do make mistakes, they found 
skeptical thoughts altogether natural and com-
pelling. Such moments of reflection seemed to 
provide great enlightenment. And during such 
moments, it seemed utterly manifest how little 
people know. On the other hand, the people in 
the tribe endowed the concept of knowledge with 
great normative significance. It provided the 
normative framework for the giving and 
requesting of information, and also for practical 
deliberation. 
Now the members of the tribe, like everyone 
else, had to speak and act. Given these exigencies, 
even the reflective ones regularly found them-
selves drawing lines between what is known and 
what isn't known, lines that corresponded hardly 
at all to the one they propounded in their skepti-
cal moments. Even within this realm, there was 
instability: as interests and purposes shifted, so 
too did their sense of the line between what is 
known and what is not known. But rarely, if ever, 
did a near-global skepticism seem very compel-
ling in the practical realm. 
A dispute broke out among the tribespeople. 
One group called themselves the Theoreticians. 
They took the reflective moments very seriously. 
"How could you not take those moments seri-
ously?" they argued. "Anyone who takes the time 
to think hard about it, secluded in their study, will 
find skepticism utterly natura!!" And they were 
right: this tribe was indeed so constituted that, 
when so secluded, skepticism was an utterly natu-
ral thought. Another group formed that called 
themselves the Practicians. They were insistent on 
the normative significance of knowledge. "It is a 
condition of deliberating and of asserting", they 
argued, "that one treats certain propositions as 
known, others not. Isn't it quite obvious that we 
generally act and deliberate just as we ought to? 
Concede this normative point, and the view of 
the Theoreticians is unsustainable. Given the con-
nections between knowledge and normativity, it 
makes no sense to say that we assert and act as we 
ought but know next to nothing." 
Debate raged. Theoreticians divided into 
global and near-global skeptics. Practicians dis-
cussed how the facts of knowledge were to be 
conceived given shifting practical environments 
in the life of a tribesperson. But the clash between 
the Practicians and the Theoreticians remained 
the most visible. And secretly, each felt very 
uneasy. The Practicians felt uneasy because, when 
secluded in their studies, they themselves felt the 
very natural compulsions that the Theoreticians 
had given voice to. In those moments they felt 
alienated from their own intellects, given the 
deliverances that their intellects were apt to press 
upon them. In those moments, they had to con-
centrate extremely hard on their favorite norma-
tive arguments, rehearsing them as a kind of 
mantra in order to stop the compulsions towards 
skepticism 
from 
overwhelming them. The 
Theoreticians felt uneasy too. They detected 
hidden claims to know in their own thoughts of 
understanding, insight, and enlightenment. And 
they too felt the need to talk and act and, just as 
the Practicians predicted, lapsed into nonskeptical 
thoughts and speeches when those exigencies took 
hold. When speaking about the Theoretical posi-
tion itself, they found themselves with especially 
peculiar conflicting pressures. The need to speak 
induced tendencies to extend their sense of what 
is known to include their own speeches, but the 
content of the speeches reinforced their tendency 
to a skeptical point of view. Some of them lapsed 
into silence, as certain of their Ancient precursors 
had done. 
The Practicians and Theoreticians searched 
for some common ground. "You will at least 
agree," contended the Theoreticians, "that you 
don't know which is correct, the Practical or the 
Theoretical vantage point." But the Practicians 

SENSITIVE MODERATE INVARIANTISM 
773 
felt that this was already to prejudice matters in 
favor of the Theoretician. "If the voice of the 
Practician is to be heard on the matter of what we 
know, it is also to be heard on the matter of what we 
know we know. The practical perspective encour-
ages us to think that any tribesperson knows that 
any other tribesperson knows quite a lot. And if he 
knows this about any other tribesperson, surely he 
knows the same about himself:' The attempt to find 
reconciliation at the second level was a failure. Both 
the Practicians and Theoreticians remained uneas-
ilyattached to their respective positions. 
Other groups sprang up. One group - a sort of 
epistemological cult - claimed not to find skepti-
cal thoughts compelling, not even in quiet 
moments. "You just haven't analyzed 'knowledge' 
carefully enough," they said. "Once you do, your 
intellect will no longer be gripped by skepticism, 
not even in the study." Neither the Practicians nor 
the Theoreticians believed them. Nor, in their 
heart of hearts, did the members of the group 
itself. The group disbanded, remembered as a his-
torical curiosity. Another group, the Variantists, 
came along. "You've all been speaking past one 
another," they said. "When you Theoreticians say 
'know' you are talking about one thing. When 
you Practicians say 'know' you are talking about 
another." This greatly disturbed both the 
Theoreticians and the Practicians. The one piece 
of common ground they had enjoyed was a tacit 
recognition that they had not be talking past one 
another. 
Both attacked the Variantists, though for dif-
ferent reasons. The Theoreticians could not 
reconcile Variant ism with their own sense of 
Notes 
Cohen (1998) is clear about the distinction 
between rules of relevance that are "speaker-
sensitive" and those that are "subject-sensi-
tive" - indeed I have borrowed the terminology 
of sensitivity from him - but doesn't explore 
the possibility of transforming the speaker-
sensitive rules offered by the contextualist 
into subject-sensitive rules. 
2 There are likely to be principled limits to what 
can be said here. The verb "know" is a lexical 
and conceptual primitive for which no tradi-
tional analysis is likely (though that is not to 
enlightenment vis-a-vis those other tribespeople 
caught up in the rough and tumble of life. The 
Practicians, meanwhile, could not reconcile 
Variantism with the normative lie of the land. But 
the Variantists remained. And everyone continued 
to feel uneasy. When in the study, the Practicians 
continued to feel the natural compulsions 
described by the Theoreticians. And when speak-
ing and acting, the Theoreticians continued to feel 
the natural compulsions described by the 
Practicians. The Variantists continued to struggle 
to reconcile their Variantism with both these com-
pulsions, and with their own natural compulsion 
to see everyone as talking about the same thing. 
Debates continued. Conflicting tendencies 
remained. Each side offered its own explanation 
of how, despite these inner conflicts, buildings got 
built and books got written. But each group told 
a different story, narrated from an opinionated 
vantage point. (When reading this history of the 
tribe, Theoreticians complained that it had been 
written by a Practician, what with its talk of seeing 
that this, and recognizing that that.) Each group 
mused about what God would do when he came 
across a tribe with such conflicting tendencies. 
"How would God interpret 'know' in our 
mouths?" they wondered. "When would God say 
'know' was used to express truths, when false-
hoods?" Each quickly realized that no neutral 
perspective was possible on this question either. 
Its answer turned on the very questions they were 
debating. Debates raged on. The strands of the 
tribe's conflicting natures alternately took hold. 
Each camp remained uneasy. 
Perhaps that tribe is very much like us. 
deny that interesting necessary conditions on 
knowledge may be discovered). Moreover, any 
temptation to use the notion of probability in 
exploring our current subject will likely be 
unhelpful or circular insofar as we keep to the 
Epistemic Possibility Constraint. More gener-
ally, it is confused to think that a relatively 
manageable theory of the detailed semantic 
workings of our language is cognitively avail-
able to us. 
3 Mechanisms for what? For the contextualist, 
the candidate mechanisms are mechanisms 

774 
JOHN HAWTHORNE 
for shifting the semantic value for "know". 
For the sensitive moderate invariantist, the 
candidate mechanisms are mechanisms for 
making knowledge come and go. 
4 Conversations with Stewart Cohen were 
particularly helpful in writing this section. 
5 Similar issues are raised by DeRose's "Bank 
Cases" (see DeRose 1992). 
6 Note that in the American Model Penal Code 
the risk that salience may affect matters is 
somewhat averted by stipulatively defining 
"known" as "practically certain" (seeAmerican 
Law Institute, Model Penal Code, 2.02 
(2)(b )(ii) ). The role of the concept of know 1-
edge in legal settings is well worth extensive 
investigation. 
7 The same may be true of brain in a vat hypoth-
eses. The preacher who asserts "We are beings 
whose lives make a difference to each other. 
We are not the beings of the Matrix, isolated in 
pods from one another, who merely imagine 
that we are making a difference to each other's 
lives" may well be one who entertains the brain 
in a vat hypothesis without it thereby standing 
as a salient counterpossibility. 
8 Note also that if we were to discover that 
someone had sold a lottery ticket, and had 
asserted "I know it will lose", then we have a 
very strong intuition not merely that it is 
correct for us to say "He didn't know that" 
but, moreover, that he himself said some-
thing false. Standard contextualism does a 
good job at accommodating the first intui-
tion, but has to explain the second one away 
by appeal to semantic blindness. 
9 Similar suggestions are canvassed by Vogel 
(1990, p. 52). I do not at all intend that avail-
ability take up all the explanatory burden 
(nor, I presume, did Vogel). 
10 
Kates, quoted III Slovic, Fischhoff, and 
Lichtenstein (1982, p. 465). 
11 
See also Johnson, Hershy, and Meszaros 
(2000), who found that people were willing 
to pay more for flight insurance that pro-
vided life insurance in case of terrorism than 
for flight insurance that provided that same 
amount of life insurance in case of death 
"for any reason", remarking that "events 
associated with 'terrorism' ... would be more 
vivid and available than events suggested by 
the inclusive phrase 'any reason'" (p. 228). 
12 
For related discussion, see Vogel (1990). This 
kind of diagnosis will seem particularly nat-
ural to those who are happy to insist on a 
conceptual tie between the concept of know 1-
edge and such concepts as being safe from 
error and being in danger of error. (See 
Williamson 2000; Sosa 2000.) 
l3 We of course have something of this ten-
dency with "flat", "disgusting", "empty", and 
"solid", but it is far less entrenched in these 
cases ... The relevant similarity and differ-
ences certainly deserve further investiga-
tion. 
14 
I have heard similar thoughts voiced in 
conversation by Stewart Cohen, Richard 
Fumerton, and Timothy Williamson. 
15 
See Lewis (1983). 
16 
Stewart Cohen, Troy Cross, and Cian Dorr 
all pressed this point III conversation. 
Suppose I'm a contestant in a spelling bee. I 
do know the spelling of the word before I'm 
asked, but under pressure my confidence 
wilts. I might well think with respect to the 
spelling about which I'm now unsure that, if 
it's right, I knew it when I was more confi-
dent of it than I now am. By contrast, when I 
muse about lottery success, I'm not inclined 
to say that when, in the past, I was sure I 
would never get rich this year, I knew that 
I wouldn't. A natural picture is that in the 
spelling bee case, one is merely worried that 
one does not and never did know, but in the 
lottery case, once parity reasoning kicks in, 
one positively thinks one does not know and 
never did. (Thanks to Jonathan Vogel here.) 
17 
In On Certainty Wittgenstein writes "When 
we say we know that such and such, we mean 
that any reasonable person in our position 
would also know it, that it would be a piece 
of unreason to doubt it" (1969, p. 325). If the 
salience of a counterpossibility does not 
manifest unreason but does destroy knowl-
edge, then it would seem that the sensitive 
moderate invariantist would have to dispute 
this albeit natural thought. 
18 
Another worry, raised by Stewart Cohen, 
merits further consideration: If the current 
approach is correct, then in order to know 
that S now knows that p, I would have to be 
in a position to know whether or not some 
counterpossibility to p is now salient to S. 

SENSITIVE MODERATE INVARIANTISM 
775 
But do I really have to be able to do the latter 
in order to know propositions of the former 
sort? If S thinks about skeptical alternatives 
from time to time, but is not now doing so, 
am I now precluded from knowing that S 
knows some humdrum proposition on 
account of the fact that I am in no position 
to know whether now is one of the times 
when S happens to be entertaining skeptical 
possibilities? 
19 
Suppose, by analogy, there were an oracle 
who could resolve skeptical doubts. The phi-
losopher goes running to the oracle to find 
out if the world was created, complete with 
pseudo-memories, five minutes earlier. Is it 
really so strange to suppose that the philoso-
pher, before arriving at the oracle, does not 
know he has been around for a while even 
though the dullard does know? (Informants 
varied wildly in their reactions to such 
cases.) 
20 
I am grateful for discussions with Adam 
Sennet here. 
21 
There is also a success sense of "salience", 
which will require that the intellectual seem-
ing be veridical. 
22 
Conversations with and comments from Jim 
Pryor were helpful here. 
23 
Cf.Ayer(l956). 
24 
As a further variant on the current theme, 
one might consider Williamson's (2002) dis-
tinction between outright belief and high 
subjective probability. Perhaps some case 
could be made that outright belief is often 
destroyed by the salient possibility of error 
even though subjective confidence is not. 
25 
Insofar as one defends this kind of view, 
one has to confront the fact that we are 
often willing to ascribe knowledge to some-
one even when they vacillate or hesitate in 
consciously endorsing the proposition that 
they are claimed to know. In response, it 
might be suggested that we do often adopt 
a tiered conception of the human mind, 
allowing that there may be an underlying 
certainty, complete conviction in a propo-
sition, below the surface of conscious inde-
cision. Radford (1966) describes a librarian 
who has never made a mistake about the 
location of a book but who dithers about 
her answer, hesitating, unsure. It may be 
argued that it is only because we suppose 
utter conviction at some level that we are 
willing to ascribe knowledge. If we learned 
that no matter how deeply we go into the 
librarian's psyche, we find nothing more 
than credence slightly above .5 in all the 
correct answers that she had given, that 
may well shake our willingness to ascribe 
knowledge. On the other hand, if one thinks 
that knowledge requires being sure (at 
some level), then one will be somewhat 
hard pressed to make sense of such locu-
tions from daily life as "know with some 
confidence", "know with some reasonable 
certainty", "know with reasonable confi-
dence", "know with reasonable certainty" 
(where it seems, for example, that if S 
knows with reasonable confidence that p, 
then S knows that p). Philosophers rarely 
use such locutions but ordinary people do. 
I shall not explore the issue further here. (I 
am grateful to Peter Ludlow for discussion 
on these points.) 
26 
I am particularly grateful to Jim Pryor here. 
27 
At least assuming that I know that that is 
how things seem to me. 
28 
Epistemologists often distinguish different 
kinds of "defeaters" for a belief that p. 
Sometimes one gets evidence that is directly 
suggestive of the falsity of p, and this in turn 
destroys knowledge that p. Sometimes, 
instead, one gets evidence that one's relevant 
epistemic mechanisms are inadequate, and 
this in turn destroys knowledge that p. 
Presumably, if the salience of error (in the 
sense given) is a defeater for my knowing 
that p, it is a defeater of the second sort 
(though of the first sort with respect to my 
knowing that I know that p). 
29 
For the record, I don't even find the weaker 
principle very plausible (unless knowing p 
automatically counts as "rebuttal", which 
is hardly the intended meaning of the 
principle). 
30 
Again, I assume that "rebutting" is not to be 
read in such a way that knowing p automati-
cally counts as a rebuttal of evidence against p. 
31 
Of course if knowledge delivers probability 
1, then one has to be careful. If! know p and 
q is purported evidence against p, then the 
conditional evidential probability of not-p 

776 
JOHN HAWTHORNE 
on q will be zero. In what sense then is q evi-
dence against p? This is just a special case of 
the problem of "old evidence" familiar in 
discussions of Bayesian epistemology. I shall 
not undertake to examine solutions to that 
problem here. 
32 
Though I doubt it. 
33 
Of course, if the belief about a Blackpool 
vacation is true, then the life insurance will 
not come in handy. But this is beside the 
point. Such a belief, whether true or not, 
should not be used in practical reasoning of 
that sort. I assume that the reader shares that 
intuition very strongly, at least on one very 
obvious reading of "should". (There may be 
a reading of "should" where this is not so. 
When all the evidence suggests that the 
Cadillac is behind door A and I later find 
that it is behind door B, I might later say "I 
should have taken B", and perhaps there is a 
reading on which that is true.) 
34 
Supposing the quantum-mechanical chance 
of a desk evolving into a desk fa<;:ade in the 
next two seconds is a trillion to one. Ten 
trillion people are each offered a bet such 
that one person (drawn at random from the 
pool of 10 trillion people) gets a cent if the 
desk in front of the bet-taker isn't a fa<;:ade 
and everyone in the pool loses a dollar if it 
is. If every person in the pool takes the bet 
and one loses, should we say that all but the 
latter were epistemically laudable for taking 
the bet? 
35 
Of course, the reasoning also manifests ten-
dencies that would be likely to get the rea-
soner into trouble in other situations, and 
reveals a flaw in the reasoner in that way too. 
But this additional observation does not 
seem to lessen our confidence that the 
premise is not known in this situation. 
36 
This should be distinguished from a differ-
ent phenomenon, namely one where the 
offering of a bet straightforwardly provides 
one with relevant evidence for or against a 
proposition. When I claim to be healthy and 
my doctor says "Let's make a wager on that", 
the offer of a bet obviously gives me evidence 
against my good health. Not so when I am 
offered life insurance. Indeed, if anything, 
that is a sign of good health - if I had seemed 
to be at death's door, the insurance agent 
might well have been less willing to provide 
the insurance. 
37 
It is also worth reflecting on the fact that for 
pretty much any proposition of which we 
are convinced, we will be inclined to accept a 
bet against it given the right odds and reckon 
ourselves perfectly rational in doing so. (For 
example, I would happily bet a penny against 
a billion dollars on not having being born in 
England, and on the falsity of the law of 
noncontradiction.) In exploring these issues 
further, we should consider whether knowl-
edge of any proposition can be destroyed by 
environments in which a suitable bet is 
offered. One option, of course, is to think 
that the sketched connection between 
knowledge and practical reasoning is only 
roughly correct, where this might still allow 
it to do work along the lines sketched in the 
body of the text. Readers are welcome to 
explore such middle ground. 
38 
Note that in such a setting I might make 
comparative likelihood assessments of pairs 
of propositions that I would ordinarily say I 
know to be false: ''I'm more likely to go on an 
African safari than on the QE II since even if 
I won the lottery, there's the problem that 
my wife gets seasick ... " (Thanks to Richard 
Fumerton here.) 
39 
Of course there will be lots of indeterminacy 
besetting questions about when, exactly, 
knowledge comes and goes, and, more gen-
erally, about the cutoff between the practical 
environments that destroy knowledge and 
those that do not. One should here deploy 
one's favorite theory of vagueness. 
40 
As Timothy Williamson pointed out to me, 
this picture makes for some intuitively odd 
counterfactuals. There will be cases where 
someone does not know that p, but we can 
assert "If the stakes had been lower, he would 
have known that p" or "If he hadn't been 
offered a penny for his lottery ticket, he 
would have known that p"; and so on. There 
is no denying the intuitive cost. The ques-
tion is whether, all things considered, it is a 
price worth paying. (Consider, in this con-
nection, the following counterfactual, said 
of a person looking at a barn in fake barn 
country: "If there hadn't been those fake 
barns nearby, he would have known that he 

SENSITIVE MODERATE INVARIANTISM 
777 
was looking at a barn': Hear it afresh and 
you will certainly find this counterfactual 
odd as well.) Note also that contextualism 
will, for its part, likely make for the truth of 
such odd-sounding indicative conditionals 
as "If my stakes are low, he knows, but if 
they are not, he does not". 
41 
I should note in passing that while the prac-
tical environment constraint might be com-
bined with a salience constraint of the sort 
described in the previous section, it need not 
be. Those that are un convinced of, say, the 
destructive powers of salient counterpossi-
bilities as such might still reckon practical 
environment a source of subject-sensitivity. 
42 
The reader may note some analogy here to the 
topic of "junk knowledge'; discussed earlier. 
43 
Shades of pragmatism? I leave pursuit of 
such analogies to others. 
44 
Be that as it may, there is no avoiding the 
intuitive cost of this kind of view. As Stewart 
Cohen urged in conversation, it seems that 
the view will have to allow that I can truly say 
"I know that I won't be able to afford an 
African safari but you don't know that you 
won't", simply on account of the fact that you 
are right now being offered a lottery ticket 
and I am not (I have already bought mine). 
Can I even know that to be true? (If so, we 
cannot mollify the objector by claiming that 
the relevant truth is unassertable.) Perhaps 
attending to your environment will raise the 
possibility of my winning a lottery prize to 
salience. But what if I am dogmatic? (Recall 
that mere attention to a possibility should 
_not be enough to destroy knowledge.) 
Another possibility: If we are not sufficiently 
discriminating to be able to gauge whether a 
contextualist or subject -sensitive treatment is 
true in these cases, then even if the subject-
sensitive account is right, we are unable to 
know that it is right and hence unable to 
know that "know" applies to us in those cases 
which turn on the difference between rival 
accounts. So perhaps I am unable to know 
that I know in Cohen's case, owing to my lack 
of discriminatory abilities with regard to the 
concept of knowledge. I leave it to others to 
explore these matters further. 
45 
I am grateful for discussions with Stewart 
Cohen and Ram Neta here. 
46 
Those who think of knowledge in terms of 
safety - freedom from error in close worlds 
(see Williamson 2000; Sosa 2000) - can sup-
plement all this with the simple logical con-
sideration that if there are no close worlds 
where one makes a mistake about p and no 
close worlds where one makes a mistake about 
q then there are no close worlds where one 
deduces the conjunction from the conjuncts 
and is mistaken about the conjunction. 
47 
Think back to the faulty intuitions generated 
by cases of "junk knowledge". 
48 
If knowledge of some of the conjuncts was 
much safer than others, one might refine the 
proposal by allowing that the safer knowl-
edge was unimpugned: it is determinate that 
knowledge of some conjunct is destroyed 
and determinate that it is not one of the safer 
pieces of knowledge. 
49 
One interesting issue is whether one should 
treat the case differently when the conjunc-
tion is not believed on the basis of deduction 
from the conjuncts. Might one make a case 
here that no knowledge of the individual con-
juncts is destroyed? Perhaps so, if the only 
reason in the original case for claiming that it 
is determinate that one's knowledge of some 
conjunct is destroyed is that one was determined 
to treat MPC as a fixed point, a "penumbral 
connection" (in Fine's 1975 sense). 
50 
Assuming that indeterminate propositions 
cannot be known, this approach would lead 
one to suppose that in the cases we are con-
sidering, one cannot, for any conjunct, know 
that one knows it. But that would seem to be 
a happy consequence of the approach. 
SlOne might try the indeterminacy-based sal-
vage here too. Hold MPC fixed and add the 
rule that when it is objectively likely that the 
conjunction is false, it is determinate that 
one does not know one of the conjuncts, 
though indeterminate which conjunct is 
not known. 
52 
Consider Chomsky's (1980) remark "In fact, 
it is not at all clear that the ordinary concept 
of "knowledge" is even coherent, nor would 
it be particularly important if it were shown 
not to be" (p. 82). 
53 
It is easy enough to see how some of those 
materials might be integrated into a contex-
tualist framework. For example, as Jonathan 

778 
JOHN HAWTHORNE 
Schaffer pointed out in correspondence, one 
might happily add something like the fol-
lowing rule to Lewis's laundry list - The Rule 
of Praxis: possibilities which ought not to be 
ignored in any practical reasoning under-
taken by the subject are relevant - and then 
make heavy appeal to that rule in the face of 
References 
Ayer, G. J. (1956), The Problem of Knowledge 
(London: Macmillan). 
Chomsky, Noam (1980),Rules andRepresentations 
(New York: Columbia University Press). 
Cohen, Stewart (1998), "Contextualist Solutions 
to Epistemological Problems: Skepticism, 
Gettier, and the Lottery", Australasian Journal 
of Philosophy 76, pp. 289-306. 
-- (1999), "Contextualism, Skepticism, and the 
Structure of Reasons", Philosophical Perspectives 
l3, pp. 57-89. 
DeRose, Keith 
(1992), "Contextualism and 
Knowledge Attributions", Philosophy and phe-
nomenological Research 52, pp. 913-29. 
Fine, Kit (1975), "Vagueness, Truth and Logic", 
Synthese 30, pp. 265-300. 
Hawthorne, John (2004), Knowledge and Lotteries 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Johnson, E., Hershey, J., Meszaros, J., and 
Kunreuther, H. (2000), "Framing, Probability 
Distortions, and Insurance Decisions'; in 
Kahneman, Daniel, and Tversky, Amos, Choices, 
Values and Frames (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press). 
our puzzle. (Note though that the rule intui-
tively requires a context-invariant "ought".) 
A solution to the puzzles might, for example, 
blend an ascriber-sensitivity grounded in 
salience with a subject-sensitivity grounded 
in praxis. I do not wish to endorse a fusion of 
that kind here. Nor do I wish to rule it out. 
Lewis, David (1983), "Scorekeeping in a Language 
Game", in Lewis, Philosophical Papers, vol. I 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Radford, Colin 
(1966), "Knowledge -
by 
Examples", Analysis 27, pp. 1-11. 
Slovic, Paul, Fischhoff, Baruch and Lichtenstein, 
Sarah (1982) ,"Fact Versus Fears: Understanding 
Perceived Risk", in Kahneman, Daniel et aI., 
Judgment under Uncertainty: Heuristics and 
Biases (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press). 
Sosa, Ernest (2000), "Skepticism and Contextua-
lism", Philosophical Issues 1 0, pp. 1-18. 
Vogel, Jonathan (1990), ''Are there Counter-
examples to the Closure Principle?", in M. Roth 
and G. Ross (eds), Doubting: Contemporary 
Perspectives 
on 
Skepticism 
(Dordrecht: 
Kluwer). 
Williamson, Timothy (2000), Knowledge and its 
Limits (Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1969), On Certainty 
(Oxford: Blackwell). 

CHAPTER 53 
The Assessment 
Sensitivity of Knowledge 
Attributions 
John MacFarlane 
Recent years have seen an explosion of interest in 
the semantics of knowledge-attributing sentences, 
not just among epistemologists but among phi-
losophers of language seeking a general under-
standing oflinguistic context sensitivity. Despite all 
this critical attention, however, we are as far from 
consensus as ever. If we have learned anything, it is 
that each of the standard views - invariantism, 
contextualism, and sensitive invariantism - has its 
Achilles' heel: a residuum of facts about our use 
of knowledge attributions that it can explain only 
with special pleading. This is not surprising if, as 
I will argue, there is a grain of truth in each of 
these views. 
In this paper, I propose a semantics for "know" 
that combines the explanatory virtues of contex-
tualism and invariantism. Like the contextualist, I 
take the extension of "know" to be sensitive to 
contextually determined epistemic standards. But 
where the contextualist takes the relevant stand-
ards to be those in play at the context of use, I take 
them to be those in play at the context of assess-
ment: the context in which one is assessing a par-
ticular use of a sentence for truth or falsity. Thus, 
I can agree with the invariantist that "know" is 
not sensitive to the epistemic standards in play at 
the context of use, while still acknowledging a 
Originally published in T. S. Gendler and J. O'Leary-
Hawthorne (eds), Oxford Studies in Epistemology, vol. 1 
(Oxford: Clarendon, 2005). 
kind of contextual sensitivity to epistemic stand-
ards. The proposed semantics for "know" is con-
textualist along one dimension (contexts of 
assessment) and invariantist along another (con-
texts of use). I 
In the first part of the paper, I motivate my 
proposal by considering three facts about our use 
of "know" (§2) that collectively cause trouble for 
all of the standard views about the semantics of 
"know" (taxonomized in §l). I argue that the 
usual attempts to explain away the anomalies by 
appeal to pragmatics or to speaker error are 
unpersuasive (§3). In §4, I show how standard 
semantic frameworks must be modified to make 
room for my "relativist" semantics, and I show 
how the proposed semantics makes sense of the 
features of our use of "know" that proved puz-
zling on the standard views. Finally, in §5, I 
respond to worries about the coherence of rela-
tivist semantics by describing the role assessment-
relative truth plays in a normative account of 
assertion. 
1 ATaxonomy 
For our purposes, the standard views about the 
semantics of "know" can be divided into three 
main classes. Strict invariantists hold that "know" 
is associated with a fixed epistemic standard, in 
much the same way as "six feet apart" is associ-
ated with a fixed standard of distance. A person 

780 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
and a fact satisfy "x knows y" just in case the per-
son's epistemic position with respect to the fact is 
strong enough to meet this fixed epistemic stand-
ard. Sensitive invariantists allow the epistemic 
standard to vary with the subject and the circum-
stances of evaluation (in the sense of Kaplan 1989), 
in much the same way as the standard of distance 
expressed by "as far apart as Mars and Jupiter" 
varies with the circumstances (for instance, the 
time) of evaluation. And contextualists allow the 
epistemic standard to vary with the context of use, 
like the standard of distance expressed by "as far 
apart as my two hands are right now." The differ-
ences are summed up in Figure 53.l. 
This is of course only one way of carving up 
the range of positions that have been taken, and it 
lumps together positions that may seem very dif-
ferent, even from a semantic point of view. 2 The 
advantage of this taxonomy is that it will allow us 
to see in a perspicuous way what is wrong with all 
of the views it encompasses. Because a "formal" 
taxonomy will be enough for our purposes, I leave 
it completely open here what an epistemic posi-
tion is, how an epistemic standard might be spec-
ified, and what features determine which 
epistemic standard is relevant in a given context 
or circumstance. In particular, although I will 
sometimes talk of "high" and "low" standards, I 
wish to leave it open whether standards vary on a 
linear scale - from "low" to "high" - or in a more 
complex and qualitative way, as on "relevant alter-
natives" theories. Different views in each of our 
formal categories will cash out these notions in 
different ways. The arguments that follow abstract 
from these details. 
The differences between contextualism and 
sensitive invariantism tend to be obscured when 
we consider first-person, present-tense knowl-
edge attributions. For in these cases the epis-
temic standards in play at the context of use will 
coincide with those in play for the subject at the 
circumstances of evaluation. To see the differ-
ences, we need to vary the context of use while 
keeping the circumstances of evaluation con-
stant - say, by considering "On Tuesday, Joe 
knew that whales are mammals" as uttered by 
Sally on Wednesday and by Fred on Thursday-
and vary the circumstances of evaluation while 
keeping the context of use constant - say, by 
considering both "On Tuesday, Joe knew that 
whales are mammals" and "On Wednesday, Joe 
knew that whales are mammals" as uttered by 
Fred on Thursday. Contextualism predicts that 
the epistemic standard one must meet in order 
to count as "knowing" should shift as we shift 
the context of use (even if the circumstances of 
evaluation are kept fixed), while sensitive invari-
antism predicts that it should shift as we shift 
the circumstances of evaluation (even if the 
context of use is kept fixed). Thus we may aptly 
describe a contextualist semantics for "know" as 
use-variable and a sensitive invariantist seman-
tics as circumstance-variable. Standard versions 
of contextualism are circumstance-invariant, and 
Is "know" 
standards-sensitive? 
No 
Strict Invariantism 
use-invariant, 
circumstance-invariant 
Sensitive Invariantism 
use-invariant, 
circumstance-variable 
Yes 
Figure 53.1 
Standard taxonomy of positions on the semantics of "know" 
Contextualism 
use-invariable, 
circumstance-invariant 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
781 
standard versions of sensitive invariantism are 
use-invariant - though of course one might also 
have a hybrid view that was both use-variable 
and circumstance-variable. Strict invariantism is 
both use-invariant and circumstance-invariant. 
2 Some Facts about Our Use of "Know" 
I now want to look at three facts about our use of 
knowledge attributions that have figured promi-
nently in discussions of the semantics of "know." 
2.1 
Variability of standards 
Normally, I am perfectly happy to say that I know 
that my car is parked in my driveway. I will say 
this even when I'm at work, several miles away. 
But if someone asks me how I know that my car 
has not been stolen (and driven away), I will 
admit that I do not know this. And then I will 
have to concede that I do not know that my car is 
in my driveway: after all, if I knew this, then I 
would be able to deduce, and so come to know, 
that it has not been stolen. 
How should we think of my shift from claim-
ing to know to denying that I know? It doesn't 
seem right to describe me as having learned some-
thing, or as correcting a mistake. If I have learned 
something, what exactly have I learned? It's not as 
if I was unaware of the existence of car thieves 
when I made my original knowledge claim. 
Besides, the next day I will go right back to saying 
that I know that my car is in my driveway. Am I so 
dense as never to learn from my mistakes? 
Nor does it seem right to say that when I 
claimed to know, I didn't mean it literally. I would 
have said the same thing in a forum where non-
literal speech is discouraged, like a courtroom. 
And I would have said the same thing if I had 
been instructed to say just what I meant, without 
exaggeration, artifice, or innuendo. Indeed, I 
would have said the same thing in a crowd of 
epistemologists, so it was not just a matter of 
"speaking with the vulgar." 
Perhaps my mistake lies in conceding that I 
don't know that the car is in the driveway. Perhaps 
the fact that I cannot rule out auto theft is actu-
ally irrelevant to whether I know. But what, then, 
should I say when the possibility is floated? Should 
I ignore it or dismiss it as irrelevant? That might 
be the right response to certain far-fetched 
sceptical worries - say, "how do you know that 
the matter in your car has not spontaneously 
reorganized to form a giant lizard?" - but it hardly 
seems appropriate in response to a perfectly mun-
dane worry about thieves. Should I say "Although 
I know that the car is in my driveway, there's 
always a chance that it has been stolen and is not 
in my driveway"? This sounds close to contradic-
tory. Or should I say "Since I know that the car is 
in my driveway, I know that it hasn't been stolen"? 
That too seems wrong. I am not in a position to 
know that the car has not been stolen. If I am 
making a mistake, it is not one that ordinary 
speakers recognize as a mistake. 
IfI was speaking literally both times and didn't 
make a mistake, then presumably the standards I 
must meet in order to count as "knowing" must 
have changed. I met the laxer standards that were 
in play at the time of my first knowledge claim, 
but not the stricter ones that came into play after 
the mention of car thieves. 
Examples like this can easily be multiplied. 
They form the basis of standard arguments for 
contextualism and sensitive invariantism. 
2.2 
Embedded occurrences of "know" 
Temporal and modal operators shift the circum-
stances of evaluation. But we seem to use the 
same epistemic standard in evaluating "know" 
when it is embedded in the scope of temporal or 
modal operators as we do when it occurs unem-
bedded. We don't seem to mix different standards 
at a single context of use, even when we're consid-
ering putative knowers in very different circum-
stances. 
To take up the example from the last section, 
when I concede that I don't know that my car is 
parked in the driveway, I won't insist that I did 
know this two minutes ago, before the bother-
some question raised the standards. I will say that 
I did not know it then either. In deciding whether 
I knew it then, I use the standards in play now, not 
the standards that were in play then. 
Relatedly, we do not say things like "Before the 
possibility that he might win the lottery became 
relevant, John knew that he would not be able to 
afford health insurance, but now he does not 
know this (though he still believes it):' or "John 
knows that he won't be able to afford health 

782 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
insurance, but if he were discussing the possibil-
ity that he might win the lottery, he would not 
know this." If the judge asks Doris whether she 
knew on January 13 that her car was in the drive-
way, it would be positively bizarre for her to answer 
"I don't know: I can't remember whether I was 
worried about car thieves that day" or "Remind 
me: what epistemic standards were in play at that 
time?" All this suggests that at any given context of 
use, we hold the standards that one must meet in 
order to count as "knowing" constant over all 
circumstances of evaluation. Observations such 
as these form the basis of standard arguments 
against sensitive invariantism.3 
2.3 
Truth ascriptions and retraction 
When standards have been raised, I will say not 
only that I don't know that my car is in my drive-
way, and that I didn't know this earlier, but that my 
earlier assertion of "I know that my car is in the 
driveway" was false. 4 In part, this is because we tend 
to report knowledge claims homophonically, 
even when they were made in very different epis-
temic contexts.s Thus, I will report myself as having 
asserted that I knew that my car was in the drive-
way. Since I now take myself not to have known 
this, I must reckon my earlier assertion false. 
I won't just say that it was false; I will treat it as 
false. If challenged, I will retract my earlier claim, 
rather than reformulating it in a way that shows it 
to be consistent with my current claim - for 
example, by saying, "What I asserted was merely 
that I met the standard for 'knowing' that was in 
place when I was making the claim."6 I will have 
correlative expectations about when others ought 
to retract their knowledge claims. If yesterday 
Sally asserted "I know that the bus will be on 
time;' and today she admits that she didn't know 
yesterday that the bus would be on time, I will 
expect her to retract her earlier assertion. I will 
find it exceedingly bizarre if she replies by saying 
that her assertion was true, even if she adds "by 
the standards that were in place yesterday." 
In these respects "know" functions very differ-
ently from ordinary indexicals like "here" and 
from other expressions generally regarded as 
context-sensitive, like "flat" and "tall."7 Suppose 
I'm on a moving train. At 3:30 we pass some big 
factories and tenement houses, and I say "It's very 
urban here:' By 3:31 we have passed into suburbs, 
and I say "It's not very urban here." I won't retract 
my earlier claim. If it is challenged, I'll say: "When 
I said a minute ago 'It's very urban here,' what I 
said was true, and I stand by that, even though it's 
not very urban here:' To avoid confusion, I may 
reformulate my earlier claim: "What I asserted 
was that it was very urban where we were a 
minute ago." Similarly, if I find myself in a scien-
tific context where tiny bumps and ridges are 
important, I might assert "The table is not flat," 
but I would not regard this as any reason to with-
draw my assertion, made earlier in an everyday 
context, of "The table is flat." If pressed, I would 
say: "I only committed myself to the table's being 
flat by everyday standards." 
If we are correct in ascribing truth and falsity 
to our earlier knowledge claims in light of present 
standards, and retracting or standing by them 
accordingly, then it seems that we do not take the 
epistemic standards one must meet in order to 
count as "knowing" to vary across contexts of use. 
This fact forms the basis of standard arguments 
against contextual ism. 
3 Assessing the Standard Views 
Let's assemble the upshots of these observations. 
The apparent variability of standards suggests that 
the truth of sentences containing "know" depends 
somehow on varying epistemic standards. That 
would rule out strict invariantism. The facts 
about embedded occurrences suggest that the 
semantics of "know" is circumstance-invariant. 
That would rule out sensitive invariantism. And 
the facts about truth ascriptions and retraction 
suggest that the semantics of "know" is use-
invariant. That would rule out contextualism. 
Taken at face value, then, our three facts about use 
seem to rule out all three standard views about 
the semantics of "know." 
What should we conclude? I think we have 
three basic options: 
1. We can argue that one of our three facts about 
use is a misleading guide to the semantics of 
"know;' either 
(a) 
because it can be explained pragmati-
cally, in terms of our broader communi-
cative purposes, or 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
783 
(b) 
because it can be attributed to system-
atic and widespread error on the part of 
ordinary speakers. 
2. We can argue that our practice in using 
"know" is so confused and incoherent that 
knowledge-attributing sentences cannot be 
assigned definite truth conditions. Instead of 
doing semantics, we can advocate reform, 
perhaps through the introduction of new, 
unconfused terms of epistemic assessment. 
3. We can try to make conceptual space for a 
semantics for "know" that is use-invariant and 
circumstance-invariant, but still somehow 
sensitive to changing epistemic standards. 
My aim in this paper is to explore the last of these 
options, which I will take up in §4, below. But first 
I want to say a bit about why I find the other 
options unpromising. 
3.1 
Pragmatic explanations of the data 
One of the most important lessons of philosophy 
of language in the 1960s was that the connection 
between meaning and use is indirect.8 Even if we 
restrict ourselves to sincere, knowledgeable 
informants, the most we can discern directly from 
their use of sentences are the conditions in which 
they find it reasonable to use these sentences to 
make assertions. And these are not the same as 
the truth conditions. It is often reasonable to 
make assertions using sentences one knows to be 
literally false - not just because it is sometimes 
reasonable to lie, but because it is often reasona-
ble to engage in hyperbole, harmless simplication, 
irony, and metaphor. Conversely, it is often rea-
sonable to refrain from asserting something that 
is true, germane to the topic, and potentially 
informative. For example, one might refrain from 
asserting that Harvard has one of the fifty largest 
university libraries in the world - though this is 
true - because doing so would encourage certain 
audiences to infer that Harvard is closer to 
number fifty than to number one. 
Thus the facts about use catalogued in the pre-
vious section do not by themselves rule out any 
proposal about the semantics of "know." These 
facts may tell us something about when people 
find it reasonable to use certain sentences con-
taining "know" to make assertions, but they do 
not directly tell us anything about the truth-
conditions of these sentences. To get from use 
to truth-conditions, we must rule out the possi-
bility that it is reasonable to use these sentences 
despite their falsity, or to refrain from using 
them despite their truth. I know of no fully gen-
eral way of doing this: all we can do is examine 
putative explanations one by one and show how 
they fail. Because we will consider the possibility 
of speaker error in §3.2, we will assume in this 
section that speakers are under no relevant sub-
stantive or semantic misapprehensions: when 
they utter false sentences, they know that they are 
false, and when they refrain from uttering true 
sentences, they know that they are true. 
3.1.1 
Variability of standards 
The variability data is primarily a problem for 
strict invariantists. Strict invariantists come in 
two varieties. Sceptical invariantists hold that the 
fixed epistemic standards are very stringent, per-
haps so stringent that human beings never meet 
them (at least with respect to empirical facts). 
Moderate invariantists hold that the standards are 
meetably lax. The two kinds of invariantists face 
different challenges in giving a pragmatic expla-
nation of the variability data, so I will consider 
them separately. 
(A) FIXED HIGH STANDARDS 
If standards are fixed and high, we need to explain 
why speakers should so frequently find it reason-
able to claim to know things they are fully aware 
they don't know. (Remember, we are saving the 
possibility that speakers are unaware of their own 
ignorance for later.) One possible explanation is 
that they are trying not to mislead others who do 
not realize that the standards for knowledge are 
very high, and who would conclude from a denial 
of knowledge that the speaker was in a much 
poorer epistemic position than is actually the 
case. But this explanation applies only to the dis-
course of an enlightened sceptic talking to the 
unenlightened masses - surely a very special case. 
To explain the masses' own low-standards attri-
butions of knowledge, an error theory would be 
needed. 
Another possibility is that speakers are prone 
to hyperbole. Just as I might say "I could eat a 
horse!" instead of saying, more accurately, "I 
could eat ten pancakes and a four-egg omelette," 

784 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
so I might say that I know my car is in my drive-
way instead of saying merely that I have pretty 
good reason to believe this. If this kind of hyper-
bole were systematic and widespread, it might 
explain why we often claim to know things even 
when our grounds fall short of being conclusive.9 
But I find the prospects of such an explanation 
dim. Hyperbole must be deliberate: if I really 
believed that I could eat a horse, I would not be 
exaggerating in saying that I could. However, 
ordinary speakers don't seem to regard their ordi-
nary knowledge claims as exaggerations. Nor do 
they mark any distinction between what they lit-
erally know and what they only hyperbolically 
"know." When their knowledge claims are chal-
lenged, they don't say "I was speaking hyperboli-
cally;' the way I would if you replied to my 
horse-eating boast by saying, "Not even a grizzly 
bear can consume an entire horse in one sitting." 
In defense of the hyperbole view, Jonathan 
Schaffer notes that hyperbole can be "non-
obvious;' particularly when it is highly formulaic 
(forthcoming, n. 3). We are so accustomed to the 
trope "I'm dying of thirst" that we no longer pause 
to consider its literal significance; instead, we 
jump directly to the intended meaning. Schaffer 
concludes that "the fact that 'I know that I have 
hands' is not obviously hyperbolic is no objec-
tion." But my point is not about obviousness. 
Even if speakers do not realize at first that in 
saying ''I'm dying of thirst" they are speaking 
hyperbolically, they will immediately concede this 
when it is pointed out to them. "Of course I'm not 
literally dying," they will say, "and I never meant 
to suggest that I was." In contrast, those who say "I 
know that I have hands" will not, in general, con-
cede that they were speaking hyperbolically, even 
when confronted with sceptical counterpossibili-
ties. No one reacts to the sceptic by saying, "I 
never meant to suggest that I literally knew that I 
had hands!" 
A third approach would appeal to the incon-
venience of adding all the pedantic hedges and 
qualifications that would be needed to make our 
ordinary knowledge claims strictly true. As long 
as no one is likely to be misled, it may be more 
efficient to assert (falsely) that one knows that p 
than to assert (truly, but cumbersomely) that one 
knows that probably p, unless of course q; or that 
one has ruled out possibilities X, Y, and Z, but not 
W. For the same reason, one might say "My tank 
holds 15 gallons" when it really holds 14.5. As the 
potential misleadingness of unqualified and 
strictly false knowledge claims varies with the 
conversational context, so does our willingness to 
make them. 
Like the hyperbole view, however, this 
approach fails to explain how we actually react 
when our ordinary knowledge claims are chal-
lenged. If I say "My tank holds 15 gallons" and 
someone calls me on it - "But the manual says it 
holds 14.5!" - I will say, "I was speaking loosely: 
what I meant was that it holds about 15 gallons." 
But if I say "I know that my car is in my driveway" 
and someone calls me on it - "How can you rule 
out the possibility that it has been stolen?" - I will 
not say, "I was speaking loosely: what I meant was 
that I know that my car is most likely in my drive-
way," or "What I meant was that I know that my 
car is in my driveway, provided it has not been 
stolen or moved in some other abnormal way." In 
this respect I believe I am representative of ordi-
nary speakers: otherwise, sceptical arguments 
would be greeted with shrugs, not surprise. 
(B) FIXED LOW STANDARDS 
If standards are fixed and low, then what needs 
explaining is why we sometimes deny that people 
know, even when they clearly meet these stand-
ards. Patrick Rysiew has suggested that we some-
times deny that we know because we do not want 
to implicate that we can rule out certain salient 
but irrelevant counterpossibilities.!O In asserting 
that p, one ordinarily represents oneself as know-
ing that p. If I make this implicit knowledge claim 
explicit by saying "I know that my car is parked in 
my driveway," my choice of words will be noticed. 
My hearers may well wonder why 1 did not simply 
say "My car is parked in my driveway," and they 
may assume I meant to imply that I could rule out 
the conversationally salient possibility that my car 
had been stolen. Even if I do not need to rule out 
this possibility in order to count as knowing, I do 
not want to be taken to be implying that I can rule 
it out. So, Rysiew argues, I have reason to disavow 
knowledge. 
This is an ingenious explanation, but it fails on 
two counts. First, although worries about mis-
leading implicatures may be good reasons to 
refrain from asserting something, they aren't 
good reasons to assert its negation. Before Cal has 
played any games, I will refrain from asserting 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
785 
(truly) that Cal has won all of its games so far this 
season, because my doing so would misleadingly 
imply that Cal has played at least one game 
already. But these considerations do not give me 
any reason to assert that Cal has not won all of its 
games so far this season. Similarly, even if Rysiew's 
story can explain why it would be rational for me 
to refrain from saying that I know, it cannot 
explain why I should say that I don't know. 
Second, even if Rysiew's explanation worked 
in the first-person case, it could not be extended 
to third-person knowledge attributions. It is 
essential to Rysiew's explanation that the ques-
tion arises, "Why did the speaker say that he knows 
that p rather than just that p?" The question does 
not arise in the same way in third-person cases. In 
saying that p, one does not ordinarily implicate 
that someone else, X, knows that p. So an asser-
tion that X knows that p does not call attention to 
itself in the same way as a first-person knowledge 
ascription. Thus, Rysiew's explanation does not 
generalize to third-person knowledge attribu-
tions. But the phenomenon it seeks to explain 
does extend to third-person attributions. So the 
explanation fails. 
3.1.2 
Embedded "know" 
There is an easy pragmatic explanation for the 
infelicity of asserting "I knew that p earlier, but 
now that standards have gone up, I don't know 
that p"" In asserting that 1 knew that p earlier, I 
represent myself as knowing that I knew that p. 
But in representing myself as knowing that I knew 
that p, 1 also represent myself as knowing that p, 
since it is common knowledge that knowledge is 
factive. Thus there is a clash between what 1 
commit myself to in asserting "I don't know that 
p now" and what I represent myself as knowing in 
asserting "I knew that pearlier." 
But this explanation only takes us so far. It 
explains why we do not assert "I don't know now 
that p, but I knew then that p:' But it does not explain 
our tendency to deny that we knew then that pY 
Nor does it explain why it is infelicitous to assert "If 
p is true, then I knew that p before standards went 
up, though I don't know that p now;'13 or "Joe 
doesn't know now that p, but he knew then that p;' 
or "I know now that p, but I didn't know then that 
p,"when all that has changed are the standards. Here, 
it seems, a defender of circumstance-variable 
semantics must resort to an error theory. 
3.1.3 
Truth ascriptions and retraction 
It might be suggested that the inconvenience of 
reformulating knowledge claims in a way that 
reflects their dependence on past standards some-
times makes it reasonable to treat them as if they 
had been made in light of current standards - even 
if this means saying that they were false when we 
know that they were true. The differences in usage 
between "know" and ordinary indexicals might 
then be attributed to the comparative ease of 
reformulating claims made using ordinary indexi-
cals when the relevant contextual factors have 
changed. If 1 say "I am tired now" at 3:30 p.m. 
today, others can easily re-express the content of 
my claim tomorrow by using the sentence "he was 
tired at 3:30 p.m. yesterday." But when it comes to 
"know" - supposing that "know" is context-sensi-
tive - things are messier. How can we re-express a 
knowledge claim made in one context in another, 
where standards are different? I might say some-
thing like this: "1 asserted that I knew, by the rela-
tively low standards for knowing in place at the 
time, that my car was in my driveway:' Or perhaps: 
"I said something that is true just in case 1 met the 
standards in place at the time for knowing that my 
car was in my driveway." But these reformulations 
are cumbersome and not very informative.'4 Even 
if they are correct, it may seldom be worth the 
trouble to use them; in many cases, it may be more 
efficient simply to withdraw the earlier knowledge 
claim. In this way, a contextualist might attempt to 
explain away the data about truth ascriptions and 
retraction that suggest a use-invariant semantics 
for "know." 
But if this is the explanation of our re,traction 
behavior, there ought to be some cases in which 
the disadvantages of retracting outweigh the 
inconvenience of reformulating. Suppose Sam is 
in the courtroom: 
JUDGE: 
Did you know on December 10 that 
your car was in your driveway? 
SAM: 
Yes, your honor. I knew this. 
JUDGE: Were you in a position to rule out the 
possibility that your car had been stolen? 
SAM: 
No, I wasn't. 
JUDGE: 
SO you didn't know that your car was in 
the driveway, did you? 
SAM: 
No, I suppose I didn't, your honor. 
JUDGE: 
But you just said you did. Didn't you 
swear an oath to tell the whole truth, and 
nothing but the truth? 

786 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
However inconvenient it would be for Sam to reply, 
My claim was that on December 10 I knew, by 
the standards for knowledge that were in play 
before you mentioned car thieves, that my car 
was in my driveway. That was true, your honor, 
so I did not speak falsely, 
it would surely be more inconvenient for him to 
be charged with perjury. Nonetheless, I think that 
Sam, ifhe is like most ordinary speakers, will con-
cede that his previous assertion was false and 
promise to be more careful in his future answers. 
This suggests that the calculus of inconvenience 
alone cannot explain why speakers tend to aban-
don their earlier knowledge claims when they are 
shown to be false in light of present standards. 
3.2 
Error theories 
A sincere speaker who wants to speak the literal 
truth and avoid literal falsity may fail to do so if 
she has false beliefs, either about the facts or about 
the literal meanings of the words she uses. 15 If I 
believe (as I once did) that "gravy" is the name of 
a vitamin-deficiency disease, I will refrain from 
asserting "I like gravy," even if 1 do like meaty 
sauce. And if I believe that whales are fish, I may 
assert "Whales are fish;' even though this is false. 
Before we make any inferences from facts about 
ordinary use to truth conditions, then, we must 
rule out the possibility that ordinary speakers are 
systematically mistaken in certain ways. As before, 
we'll consider our three facts about use in turn. 
3.2.1 
Variability of standards 
To explain the variability data, moderate strict 
invariantists must argue that speakers often 
underestimate their success in meeting the stand-
ards for knowledge and as a result disavow knowl-
edge that they actually possess. Sceptical 
invariantists, by contrast, must argue that speak-
ers systematically overestimate their success in 
meeting the standards for knowledge and as a 
result claim to know when in fact they do not. 
The sceptical version of the error theory is 
sometimes rejected on the grounds that it rules 
expressions of paradigm cases of knowledge, like 
"I know that I have hands," false. But the para-
digm case argument is not a good argument. 
A supposed paradigm case of F-ness can turn out 
not to be an F at all. Whales turned out not to be 
fish; glass turned out not to be a solid. This might 
even happen on a large scale. Suppose that in 
1750, all the emeralds on earth had been replaced 
by synthetic duplicates indistinguishable by the 
technology of the time. Then none of the extant 
"paradigm cases" of emeralds would have been 
emeralds. The sceptic's claim that ordinary speak-
ers are mistaken in nearly all of their knowledge 
claims cannot be rejected out of hand. 
Nonetheless, it is fair to ask the sceptical invar-
iantist for an explanation of the widespread and 
uniform error she attributes to speakers. Why do 
speakers so quickly revert to making everyday 
knowledge claims even after they have been led 
through sceptical arguments?16 Human beings are 
educable; the fact that the lesson does not stick 
deserves special explanation. Moreover, the scep-
tic must explain how "know" comes to have the 
exacting meaning it has, despite the fact that 
looser use is the norm. (It would be difficult to 
argue that "decimate" still means just "to kill one 
in every ten of," when it is now routinely used for 
cases of larger-scale destruction.) Here the sceptic 
will have to put great weight on certain widely 
accepted generalizations about knowledge (such 
as closure principles) that can be exploited in 
sceptical arguments. But it is not clear why these 
generalizations should have a better claim to be 
meaning-constituting than the "paradigm cases" 
the sceptic rejects. At the very least, the sceptic 
owes us a fancy story here. 
The moderate strict invariantist does not face 
this problem, since she takes many of our ordi-
nary knowledge claims to be true. But she must 
explain why speakers find the premises 
exploited in sceptical arguments so compelling, 
despite the implausibility of the conclusions to 
which they lead. If these premises are false, why 
do speakers not come to see their falsity and 
stop feeling the pull of sceptical arguments? 
Presumably a moderate strict invariantist will 
say that I can sometimes know that my car is in 
the driveway, even though I have been gone for 
fifteen minutes and cannot absolutely rule out 
the possibility of car theft in the interim. Why, 
then, does the closure-exploiting argument that 
I cannot know this seem so compelling? These 
are deep and difficult questions, to be sure. My 
point here is that until she answers them satis-
factorily, the moderate strict invariantist cannot 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
787 
explain away the apparent variability of stand-
ards in our knowledge attributions. 
There is a further problem with both kinds of 
error theory, recently emphasized by Keith 
DeRose and John Hawthorne. 17 Ordinary speak-
ers accept many generalizations linking knowl-
edge with other concepts. For example, one ought 
not assert something unless one knows it, one 
ought to decide what to do by reasoning from 
what one knows, and so on. The sceptical invari-
antist will have to hold that these generalizations, 
too, are in error, or else take the hard line that the 
vast majority of our assertions are improper and 
our decisions and actions irresponsible. The 
moderate strict invariantist will have trouble here, 
too, though less spectacularly, because in some 
situations (where much is at stake) we seem to 
require a very high standard of evidence before 
we will act on or assert a proposition. She must 
either say that our scruples here are unwarranted 
or reject the generalizations linking knowledge 
with assertion and action. 
3.2.2 
Embedded "know" 
According to sensitive invariantism, the fact that 
speakers use the same epistemic standards in 
evaluating 
embedded 
and 
non-embedded 
instances of "know" reflects some kind of system-
atic error. But what kind? There are two possibili-
ties. First, speakers might take the standards 
required to count as "knowing" to be fixed, or to 
be determined entirely by the context of use. 
Alternatively, instead of being mistaken about the 
semantics of "know;' speakers might systemati-
cally misjudge the standards in play at different 
circumstances of evaluation. 
There is something a bit perverse about the 
first explanatory strategy. One of the best argu-
ments in favor of a circumstance-variable, use-
invariant semantics for "know" is that it promises 
to explain both the variability data and the data 
about truth ascriptions and retraction. But it 
cannot explain this data unless it plays some role 
in guiding speakers' linguistic behavior. Thus, if 
we explain away the data about embedded occur-
rences by arguing that speakers implicitly take 
"know" to be circumstance-invariant and use it 
accordingly, we undercut one of the best argu-
ments in favor of sensitive invariantism. 
Better, then, to argue that speakers systemati-
cally misjudge the standards relevant at alternative 
circumstances of evaluation. Along these lines, 
John Hawthorne argues that we tend to "project" 
the standards currently in play to other putative 
knowers, times, and circumstances: 
... we do have some tendency to suppose that, as 
more and more possibilities of error become 
salient to us, we are reaching an ever more 
enlightened perspective. Thus when we consider 
someone who is not alive to these possibilities, 
we have a tendency to let our (putatively) more 
enlightened perspective trump his. This ten-
dency, when left unchecked, leads to scepticism. 
(Hawthorne 2004, pp. 164-5) 
This kind of projection is not unprecedented: it is 
well known that those for whom a recent disaster 
is salient will overestimate risks in past, future, 
and counterfactual situations. In much the same 
way, Hawthorne urges, 
Once we have gotten ourselves into the frame of 
mind of thinking "I do not in fact know whether 
or not I'll be able to afford the Safari," as we fre-
quently do when we use parity reasoning, we are 
not only unwilling to say "However I used to 
know that;" we are positively willing to say "I 
never did know that." (pp. 162-3) 
This strategy is worth pursuing, but we should 
remind ourselves how heavy an explanatory 
burden it must bear. It always seems wrong to say 
that Joe knew before, but doesn't know now, when 
the only thing that has changed are the relevant 
standards. Projection might explain occasional or 
even frequent mistakes, but I doubt it can account 
for our universal unwillingness to shift standards 
across circumstances of evaluation. 
Even if the projection strategy works, it is a 
double-edged sword. If it succeeds in explaining 
why we evaluate embedded occurrences of "know" 
in light of present standards, it should also explain 
why we evaluate occurrences of "know" at other 
contexts of use in light of present standards. That 
is, it should explain the data about truth ascrip-
tions and retraction. Indeed, Hawthorne suggests 
as much himself, when he adds, immediately after 
the second passage quoted above: "And, if pressed, 
we are willing, moreover, to say that 'I was mis-
taken in thinking that I did know that'" (p. 163). 
The problem is that one of the best arguments for 
an invariantist semantics for "know" is that it 

788 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
explains the data about truth ascriptions and 
retraction. If that data is explained instead by the 
story about projection, then the argument for 
preferring sensitive invariantism to contextual-
ism is significantly weakened. 
3.2.3 
Truth ascriptions and retraction 
The data about truth ascriptions and retraction 
is most straightforwardly explained by a use-
invariant semantics for "know." A contextualist 
must explain this data in some other way. We have 
ruled out a pragmatic explanation (§3.1.3), so it 
seems that a contextualist must appeal to an error 
theory here. Many contextualists are explicit 
about this: for example, Stewart Cohen (2001) 
says that "We mistakenly think that knowledge 
ascriptions we make in everyday contexts conflict 
with the skeptical judgements we make in stricter 
contexts" (p. 89, emphasis added)Y 
As before, there are two options: the contextu-
alist can suppose either that ordinary speakers are 
wrong about the semantics of "know" - treating it 
as use-invariant when it is not - or that they make 
systematic errors about what standards are in play 
in contexts other than their own. The problem is 
that both forms of error theory threaten to under-
mine the positive case for contextualism. This is 
especially clear if the error is semantic in charac-
ter. If ordinary speakers have a faulty grasp of the 
meaning of "know;' then we cannot confidently 
appeal to variability in the standards they require 
someone to meet in order to count as "knowing" 
as support for a theory about the meaning of 
"know." Yet this data is the primary evidence in 
favor of contextualism. 
What about the second option? It is undenia-
ble that speakers often misjudge features of other 
contexts of use than their own, but if we are to 
explain the data, the error we posit must be sys-
tematic. We must explain why speakers never 
allow their previous day's assertion of "I know 
that p" to stand as true while asserting "I did not 
know that p yesterday." I doubt that our tenden-
cies to project features of our present situations 
onto other situations are nearly strong or uni-
form enough to explain away the uniform data 
about truth ascriptions and retraction. 
The "double-edged sword" point applies here, 
too. If the projection story works with contexts of 
use, it ought to work with circumstances of evalu-
ation, too. So if it explains the data about truth 
ascriptions and retraction, it ought to explain the 
data about embedded occurrences of "know" as 
well. This would significantly weaken the contex-
tualist's case against sensitive invariantism. 
As should now be clear, a general problem with 
positing speaker error to explain away facts about 
use is that such explanations tend to undermine 
the evidential basis for the semantic theories they 
are intended to support. All of these semantic 
theories are justified indirectly on the basis of 
facts about speakers' use of sentences, and the 
more error we attribute to speakers, the less we 
can conclude from these facts. We have seen that 
the cost of defending sensitive invariantism in 
this way is that the case against contextualism is 
severely weakened, and conversely that the cost of 
defending contextualism in this way is that the 
case against sensitive invariantism is compro-
mised. It is possible that an error theory can be 
made to work - perhaps in conjunction with 
pragmatic explanations - but the prospects do 
not look good. 
3.3 
Eliminativism 
So far we have looked at ways of showing that one 
of the standard views is in fact consistent with all 
of the facts about use we considered in §2. An 
alternative response would be to concede that no 
single account of the semantics of "know" 
accounts for all of these facts.19 Perhaps our talk 
of "knowledge" confuses several distinct notions, 
in much the same way that prescientific talk of 
"warmer than" confused having a higher tempera-
ture than, having more heat energy than, and 
exchanging heat at a higher rate than. 20 In that case 
there may be no fully coherent way to assign 
truth-conditions to our knowledge-attributing 
sentences. The rational course of action would be 
to reform our thought and talk by introducing 
new, unconfused terms of epistemic assessment. 
At the risk of use-mention confusion, we 
might call this approach "eliminativism about 
knowledge." Like other eliminativisms, it is radi-
cal and should not be accepted unless there is no 
other good alternative. 
3.4 
Expanding the field of options 
Let us sum up our conclusions so far. Together, 
our three facts about use suggest that an adequate 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
789 
semantics for "know" must be sensitive to chang-
ing epistemic standards, but that it cannot be 
either use-variable or circumstance-variable. That 
rules out all three standard views: strict invariant-
ism because it is not sensitive to changing epis-
temic standards at all, sensitive invariantism 
because it is circumstance-variable, and contex-
tualism because it is use-variable. We might make 
room for one of these views by arguing that one 
of our three facts about use is a poor guide to 
truth-conditions, but attempts to do this either 
pragmatically or by positing systematic error on 
the part of ordinary speakers have so far been 
unpersuasive. If there is no other option, then, it 
seems we are left with eliminativism. 
But how could there be another option? How 
could there be a semantics for "know" that was 
use-invariant and circumstance-invariant, but 
still in some way sensitive to changing epistemic 
standards? What we would need is another 
dimension of variability. In the next section, I am 
going to open up room for just such a thing. This 
will make possible a semantics for "know" that 
neatly explains all three facts about use. 
4 A Relativist Semantics for "Know" 
Here is my proposal. The epistemic standards rel-
evant to determining the extension of "know" are 
not those in play at the context of use or those in 
play at the circumstance of evaluation, but those 
in play at the context of assessment. 
4.1 
Assessment sensitivity 
The notion of a context of assessment may be 
unfamiliar, but it is readily intelligible. Just as a 
context of use is a situation in which a sentence 
might be used, so a context of assessment is a situ-
ation in which a (past, present, or future, actual or 
merely possible) use of a sentence might be 
assessed for truth or falsity. I do not think that 
there should be any worries about the very idea of 
a context of assessment; even an arch anti-relativ-
ist ought to be able to accept it. 
What is controversial is the suggestion that we 
relativize sentence truth not just to a context of 
use, but to a context of assessment as well. This is 
certainly a departure from semantic orthodoxy, 
and I will defend it shortly.2l Here I want to focus 
on what we can do with it. By making sentence 
truth doubly context-relative, we open up a new 
way in which sentences can be context-sensitive. 
A sentence is context-sensitive in the usual way, 
or use-sensitive, if its truth value varies with the 
context of use (keeping the context of assessment 
fixed). A sentence is context-sensitive in the new 
way, or assessment-sensitive, if its truth value 
varies with the context of assessment (keeping the 
context of use fixed). Similarly, a sub sentential 
expression is use-sensitive if it is partially respon-
sible for the use sensitivity of (at least some) sen-
tences containing it, and assessment-sensitive if it 
is partially responsible for the assessment sensi-
tivity of (at least some) sentences containing it. 
My proposal is that "know" is sensitive to the 
epistemic standards in play at the context of 
assessment. It is a kind of contextualism, then, 
but not at all the usual kind. To avoid confusion, 
I will call it "relativism;' reserving the term "con-
textualism" for the view that "know" is sensitive 
to the epistemic standards in play at the context 
of use (see Figure 53.2). Call a semantics for 
"know" assessment-variable just in case it allows 
the epistemic standard relevant for determining 
the extension of "know" to vary with the context 
of assessment, and assessment-invariant other-
wise. If "know" is assessment-sensitive, then its 
semantics can be assessment-variable while being 
use- and circumstance-invariant, and in this way 
we can neatly explain all three facts about use: 
1. Variability of standards. Why is it that I'll hap-
pily assert "Joe knows that his car is parked in 
his driveway" when standards are low, and 
"Joe doesn't know that his car is parked in his 
driveway" when standards are high? The rela-
tivist semantics affords a simple explanation: 
the former sentence is true as used and 
assessed in a context where standards are low, 
and the latter is true as used and assessed in a 
context where standards are high. Because I 
can properly assess each sentence as true at 
the context in which I utter it, there is no need 
to appeal to pragmatic explanations or error 
theories to explain the variability data. (Note 
that in the special case where the context of 
use and the context of assessment coincide, 
the relativist semantics yields exactly the same 
truth-value assignments as the standard con-
textualist semantics. So the relativist is in just 

790 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
Is "know" 
standards-sensitive? 
No 
Strict Invariantism 
use-invariant, 
circumstance-invarian t, 
assesment -invariant 
circumstances of evaluation 
/ 
Sensitive Invariantism 
use-invariant, 
circumstance-variable, 
assessmen t -invariant 
Yes 
to standards at 
context of use 
context of assesment 
Contextualism 
Relativism 
use-variable, 
use-invariant, 
circumstance-invariant, 
circumstance-invariant, 
assessment-invariant 
assessment -variable 
Figure 53.2 
Expanded taxonomy of positions on the semantics of "know" 
as good a position to explain the variability 
data as the contextualist. This is significant, 
because one of the primary selling points of 
the contextualist account is its ability to 
explain this data.) 
2. Embedded "know." Why is it that we don't say 
things like "Before the standards went up, 
Harry knew that his car was in the driveway, 
but now he doesn't know this"? Or: "Harry 
doesn't know that his car is in the driveway, 
but he would know this if the possibility of 
car theft weren't relevant"? The relativist 
semantics has a straightforward explanation: 
the semantics of "know" is not circumstance-
variable. This is the same explanation that 
contextualism and strict invariantism offer. 
3. Truth ascriptions and retraction. Why is it that 
when standards go up, leading us to assert 
"Joe doesn't (and didn't) know that his car is 
in his driveway," we expect Joe to retract his 
earlier assertion of "I know that my car is in 
my driveway," and to concede that what he 
asserted was false? That is, why do we tend to 
use the standards appropriate to the present 
context in assessing past utterances? Where 
contextualism is forced to appeal to an error 
theory, the relativist semantics offers an easy, 
semantic explanation. Namely: the present 
standards are the appropriate standards to use 
in assessing past assertions, even ones that 
were made when very different epistemic 
standards were in play. According to the rela-
tivist, knowledge claims are always properly 
assessed in light of the standards in play at the 
assessor's current context.22 
4.2 
Expressive relativism and 
propositional relativism 
Contextualists 
typically 
hold 
that "know" 
expresses different relations at different contexts 
of use, and that this indexicality is the source of 
its use sensitivity. Must the relativist, then, hold 
that "know" expresses different relations relative 
to different contexts of assessment? This would 
be an odd view. It would require us to give up the 
idea that "knowledge" attributers are making 
determinate claims. Assessors at different con-
texts could disagree about what was said, and they 
could all be right! According to this expressive 
relativism, there would be no non-relative fact of 
the matter about what proposition was expressed 
by the sentence used, at its context of use. 23 
I go back and forth about the coherence of 
expressive relativism. It sometimes seems to me 
that with a bit of imagination, we can make sense 
of it. Even if we can make sense of it, however, it 
does not seem to be a very attractive view. It 
would require significant changes in orthodox 
theories of meaning. For example, we could no 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
791 
longer say, with Stalnaker 1978, that the effect of 
assertion is to add the proposition asserted to a 
"common ground" of presupposed propositions, 
for there may be no common fact of the matter 
about which proposition was asserted.24 Moreover, 
although expressive relativism might help us 
understand speech acts made using "know:' it 
would leave it rather mysterious what it is to believe 
that Joe knows that his car is in his driveway. 
Fortunately, assessment sensitivity can be had 
without expressive relativism. Call a sentence use-
indexical if it expresses different propositions at 
different contexts of use (keeping the context of 
assessment fixed), and assessment-indexical if it 
expresses different propositions relative to different 
contexts of assessment (keeping the context of use 
fixed). Call a sub sentential expression use- or assess-
ment-indexical if it is at least partially responsible 
for the use or assessment indexicality of sentences 
containing it. According to expressive relativism, 
"know" is assessment-indexical, and that is why it is 
assessment-sensitive. But in fact a sentence or sub-
sentential expression can be assessment-sensitive 
without being assessment-indexical. 
Indeed, although this is often overlooked, a 
sentence can be use-sensitive without being use-
indexical. Here is an example: "The number of 
AIDS babies born in the United States in 2003 is 
greater than 1000." This sentence expresses the 
same proposition at every context of use, so it is 
not use-indexical. But it is use-sensitive, because 
its truth value varies with the world of the context 
of use. Uttered in a world in which there were no 
AIDS babies in 2003, it would express a falsehood; 
uttered in the actual world, it expresses a truth. 25 
To see how a sentence can be use-sensitive 
without being use-indexical, we need to be explicit 
about the relation between sentence truth at a 
context and proposition truth at a circumstance 
of evaluation. (For simplicity, let us forget for a 
moment about contexts of assessment.) 
SENTENCE TRUTH AND PROPOSITION TRUTH I: 
A sentence 5 is true at a context of use C just in 
case for some proposition p, 
1. 
5 expresses pat C, and 
2. p is true when evaluated at the circum-
stances determined by C. 26 
Notice that the context of use plays two distinct 
roles here: (1) it determines what proposition is 
expressed by the sentence, and (2) it determines 
how that proposition is to be evaluated to yield a 
truth value for the sentence in context. Indexicality 
produces use sensitivity via role (1), while contin-
gency produces use sensitivity via role (2). 
The situation is much the same when we rela-
tivize sentence truth to contexts of assessment as 
well as contexts of use: 
SENTENCE TRUTH AND PROPOSITION TRUTH 
II: A sentence 5 is true at a context of use Cu 
and context of assessment CA just in case for 
some proposition p, 
1. 
5 expresses pat Cu and CA, and 
2. p is true when evaluated at the circum-
stances determined by Cu and CA. 
As before, there are two distinct roles for contexts 
to play: (1) determining which proposition is 
expressed and (2) determining how that proposi-
tion is to be evaluated to yield a truth value for 
the sentence in context. Accordingly, there are 
two ways in which a sentence can be assessment-
sensitive: it can be assessment-indexical, or the 
context of assessment can playa substantive role 
in determining the circumstances relative to 
which the proposition it expresses is to be evalu-
ated. We can state the point more simply if we 
define proposition truth relative to contexts in 
the natural way: 
CONTEXTS-RELATIVE 
PROPOSITION 
TRUTH: 
A proposition p is true at a context of use Cu 
and context of assessment CA just in case p is 
true when evaluated at the circumstances 
determined by Cu and CA· 
Call a proposition assessment-sensitive just in case 
its truth varies with the context of assessment 
(keeping the context of use fixed). Then a sen-
tence can be assessment-sensitive either by being 
assessment-indexical or by expressing an assess-
ment-sensitive proposition. In the former case, 
we have expressive relativism; in the latter case, 
propositional relativism. 
It might be thought that propositional relativ-
ism would require even more radical departures 
from orthodox semantics than expressive relativ-
ism. But that is not so. Granted, the form of prop-
ositional relativism I am advocating does require 
that the circumstances of evaluation to which 

792 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
proposition truth is relativized include an epis-
temic standards parameter in addition to a world 
parameter. But quite a few non-relativists have 
countenanced parameters of circumstances of 
evaluation besides the world parameter, so this 
hardly counts as a radical departure from stand-
ard semantic assumptions. For example, Kaplan's 
(1989) circumstances of evaluation include a time 
parameter. On Kaplan's account, a tensed sen-
tence like "Socrates is sitting" expresses the same 
proposition at every context of use; it nonetheless 
has different truth values at different contexts of 
use, because different contexts determine differ-
ent circumstances (times and worlds) with respect 
to which this proposition is to be evaluated. King, 
forthcoming, contemplates relativizing proposi-
tional truth to both worlds and standards of pre-
cision. On the view he considers (without 
endorsing or rejecting it), "France is hexagonal" 
expresses the same proposition at every context 
of use; it is true at a context of use just in case this 
proposition is true when evaluated with respect 
to the world of the context of use and the stand-
ards of precision in play at the context of use. 
Despite their appeal to parameters of circum-
stances of evaluation besides worlds, neither 
Kaplan nor King is a propositional relativist, 
because neither countenances assessment-sensi-
tive propositions. 
Nor is there anything particularly novel about 
having an epistemic standards parameter in the 
circumstances of evaluation. The non-relativist 
form of contextualism about "knows" defended 
in Kompa 2002 requires one, too. On Kompa's 
view, "know" expresses the same relation at every 
context of use, but this relation is "unspecific:' in 
the sense that "what counts as having the property" 
can vary with "the context at hand" (p. 88) - that 
is, the context of use. Although Kompa does not 
develop her view in formal detail, it is hard to see 
how she could do so without adding an epistemic 
standards parameter to the circumstances of eval-
uation. The intension of the relation expressed by 
"know" would then be a function from worlds, 
times, and epistemic standards to extensions. This 
relation would be "unspecific" in the sense that 
there would be no answer to the question whether 
a particular person and fact fall into its extension 
at a time and world: only when an epistemic 
standard was specified would it have a definite 
extension. Kompa could then define context-relative 
sentence truth as in Sentence Truth and 
Proposition Truth II, above, taking the circum-
stances determined by a context of use Cu (and 
context of assessment C) to be (w, t, e), where w 
= the world of Cu' t = the time of Cu' and e = the 
epistemic standards in play at Cll" "Know" would 
thus turn out to be use-sensitive but not use-
indexical, just like tense on Kaplan's view, vague 
expressions on the view explored by King, and 
contingent eternal sentences on just about every-
one's view. 
The only difference between the relativist view 
I am advocating and Kompa's non-relativist, non-
indexicalist form of contextualism is that I take 
the circumstances determined by a context of use 
Cu and context of assessment CA to be the ordered 
pair (w, t, e), where w = the world of Cu' t = the 
time of Cu' and e = the epistemic standards in 
play at CA (not Cu)Y In every other respect I can 
agree with Kompa. We can agree that proposition 
truth must be relativized to an epistemic stand-
ards parameter (in addition to a world and per-
haps a time parameter). We can agree about 
which propositions are expressed by which sen-
tences at which contexts of use. We can both 
accept the schematic principle Sentence Truth and 
Proposition Truth II (provided Kompa does not 
mind the relativization to a context of assessment, 
which plays no substantive role in her account 
but also does no harm). We will of course disa-
gree about the extension of the relation "S is true 
at context of use Cu and context of assessment 
CA ," because we disagree about how this sche-
matic principle is to be filled in. (That is, we disa-
gree about which circumstances of evaluation are 
"determined" by which contexts of use and assess-
ment.) But this disagreement does not concern 
the theory of propositions. I conclude that if 
propositional relativism is objectionable, it is not 
because it requires radical revision to our existing 
theories of propositions. 
5 Making Sense of Relative Truth 
I anticipate two objections to my proposal. First, 
that it is ad hoc. Good scientific practice dictates 
that we make central modifications to our theo-
ries only when they have great and wide-ranging 
explanatory value. Surely it is not a good idea 
to make structural changes to our semantic 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
793 
framework just to accommodate knowledge attri-
butions. Second, that it is incoherent. It is one 
thing to talk of propositions or sentences being 
true with respect to one context of assessment, 
and not with respect to another. It is quite another 
thing to make sense of that talk, and there are rea-
sons for doubting that any sense can be made of it. 
5.1 
Ad hoc? 
To the first objection I have two replies. First, I 
believe that assessment sensitivity is not limited 
to knowledge-attributing sentences. I believe it is 
also the key to adequate semantic treatments of 
future contingents, epistemic modals, accommo-
dation (in the sense of Lewis 1979 and 1980), 
terms like "delicious," and perhaps much else. 28 
So the modification I propose is not tailor-made 
for a single use, but has much wider application. 
Second, the structural changes that are 
required are less radical than one might think. As 
I have argued, propositional relativism requires 
minimal changes to existing semantic frame-
works. These changes are conservative. They 
allow us to describe assessment sensitivity, but 
they leave open the possibility that there is no 
assessment sensitivity in any natural language. 
Existing accounts of the semantics of expressions 
that are not assessment-sensitive can be carried 
over essentially unchanged. (In these cases, the 
relativization to contexts of assessment will be an 
idle wheel, but a harmless one, because truth will 
not vary with the context of assessment.) Thus 
although one might object to the claim that 
"know" is assessment-sensitive, it is hard to see on 
what grounds one might object to the framework 
that makes it possible-unless one thinks that 
assessment-relative truth is simply incoherent.29 
5.2 
Incoherent? 
What on earth can it mean to say that an assertion 
is true as assessed by me, now, but false as assessed 
by me, later; or true as assessed by me, but false as 
assessed by you? This is not the kind of question 
that can be answered by defining"true at a context 
of use Cu and context of assessment CA." Indeed, 
we have already done that, for both sentences (p. 
30) and propositions (p. 3l).30 But our definitions 
leave us in more or less the position of Dummett's 
(1959) Martian anthropologists, who know what 
counts as a winning position in chess and other 
games, but fail to grasp the significance of win-
ning. We don't know what to do with a claim that 
a sentence (or proposition) is true relative to a 
context of use Cu and context of assessment CA. 
And until we know that, we do not really under-
stand relative-truth talk. 
The charge of incoherence arises because a 
standard story about the significance of "true at a 
context of use Cu" cannot be extended to "true at 
a context of use Cu and context of assessment CA." 
According to this story, truth is the internal aim of 
assertion. Of course, people may have all kinds of 
goals in making assertions - influencing others, 
showing off, giving directions, offering reassur-
ance - and these goals may sometimes be better 
served by speaking falsely than by speaking the 
truth. But there is a sense in which a false assertion 
is always incorrect qua assertion, even if it suc-
ceeds in promoting these other goals. It may be 
useful to lie, but once your assertion has been 
shown to be false, you must withdraw it as mis-
taken. Dummett argues that the concept of truth 
gets its significance from this normative connec-
tion to the practice of assertion: just as it is part of 
the concept of winning a game that a player aims 
to win, so "it is part of the concept of truth that we 
aim at making true statements" (1959, p. 143 and 
1978, p. 2). But if our primary grip on the notion 
of truth comes from our understanding of it as 
the internal aim of assertion, then the idea that 
truth might be relativized to a context of assess-
ment just looks incoherent.3' It does not make 
sense to aim to assert a proposition that is true at 
the context of use and the context of assessment, 
because there is no such thing as the context of 
assessment: each assertion can be assessed from 
indefinitely many distinct contexts. 
At this point relativists typically say that the 
aim of assertion is to assert something that is true 
relative to the context of use and the asserter's 
own current context of assessment (which will of 
course be identical with the context of use).32 But 
this only gives a significance to "true at Cu' C/ 
for the special case where Cu = CA. The relativist 
has not told us what to do with "true at CU' C/ 
where Cu and CA are distinct. As a result, the anti-
relativist might justly charge that the relativist's 
"true at C, C" is just a notational variant of her 
own "true at C;' and that "true at CU' CA" has not 
yet been given a sense when Cu ot CA. 

794 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
In my view, the relativist should instead reject 
the whole idea of understanding truth as "the aim 
of assertion:' This idea is pretty obscure anyway. 
Even if truth is an internal normative aim of asser-
tion, it is certainly not the only such aim: it is also 
part of the practice of assertion that we strive to say 
what is relevant to the conversation at hand, and to 
say things that are appropriately justified (or on 
some accounts, known). Indeed, in his 1972 
Postscript to "Truth;' Dummett emphasizes that his 
talk of truth as the aim of assertion was intended as 
a placeholder for a more complex story about the 
role truth plays in our practice of assertion: "What 
has to be added to a truth-definition for the sen-
tences of a language, if the notion of truth is to be 
explained, is a description of the linguistic activity 
of making assertions; and this is a task of enormous 
complexity" (Dummett 1978, p. 20). 
Having given up the "aim of assertion" idea, 
what else might we say about the role truth plays 
in our practice of assertion? One plausible and 
widely accepted idea is that an assertion is a com-
mitment to the truth of what is asserted.33 To make 
an assertion - even an insincere or otherwise 
defective one - is, inter alia, to commit oneself to 
the truth of the proposition asserted (relative to 
its context of use). 34 But what is it to commit one-
self to the truth of a proposition? How does one 
honor or violate such a commitment? Some phi-
losophers seem to find "commitment to truth" 
intelligible without further analysis, but in my 
view, "commitment to [noun phrase l" is intelligi-
ble only when it can be glossed in terms of com-
mitment to do something. For example, we can 
make sense of "being committed to Al Gore," but 
only as meaning something like "being commit-
ted to working for (or perhaps supporting) Al 
Gore." When no obvious agentive complement 
presents itself, we can't make any sense of the 
deontic construction at all. What would it mean, 
for example, to be committed to the color of the 
sky, or to the texture of a damp rose petal? 
So, in committing myself to the truth of a 
proposition at a context of use, what exactly am I 
commiting myself to doing (or refraining from 
doing)? Well, suppose I assert "Jake is in Boston." 
If you ask "How do you know?" or challenge my 
claim more directly, by giving reasons for think-
ing it false, then it seems to me that I have an obli-
gation to respond, by giving adequate reasons for 
thinking that my claim was true, or perhaps by 
deferring to the person who told me. If I can't dis-
charge this obligation in a way that meets the chal-
lenge, I must "un commit myself" by retracting my 
assertion. If I neither withdraw the assertion nor 
reply to the challenge, I am shirking an obligation 
I incur not qua moral agent or friend or member 
of polite society, but simply qua asserter. 
These observations suggest an answer to our 
question. What I have committed myself to doing, 
in asserting that Jake is in Boston, is vindicating 
my claim when it is challenged." There may be no 
specific sanction for failing to follow through on 
this commitment. But if I fail too blatantly or too 
frequently, others may stop treating me as a being 
that is capable of undertaking this kind of com-
mitment. They may still take my utterances as 
expressions of my beliefs, as we take a dog's 
excited tail wagging as an expression of its psy-
chological state. They may even regard my utter-
ances, if found to be reliable, as useful bits of 
information. But they will be treating me as a 
measuring instrument, not as an asserter. They 
will not take me to be committing myself to the 
truth of anything. 
If this is right, then we should understand the 
"commitment to truth" incurred by an assertion 
as follows: 
ASSERTORIC COMMITMENT: In asserting that p 
at a context Cll, one commits oneself to pro-
viding adequate grounds for the truth of p 
(relative to Cll)' in response to any appropriate 
challenge, or (when appropriate) to deferring 
this responsibility to another asserter on whose 
testimony one is relying. One can be released 
from this commitment only by withdrawing 
the assertion.3(, 
The principle is schematic along many dimensions: 
to make it less schematic, one would have to say 
something about what kinds of challenges count as 
"appropriate," what grounds count as "adequate" 
responses to what kinds of challenges, and when it 
is appropriate to defer responsibility. I won't 
attempt to do any of this here. What is important 
for our purposes is that this account can be 
extended in a very natural way to allow for assess-
ment-relative truth. For whenever an assertion is 
challenged, there are always two relevant contexts: 
the context in which the assertion was originally 
made and the context in which the challenge must 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
795 
be met. A natural way to give significance to doubly 
context-relative truth, then, would be to say that 
what must be established when an assertion is 
challenged is truth relative to the original context 
of use and the asserter's current context of assess-
ment (at the time of the challenge): 
ASSERTORIC COMMITMENT (DUAL CONTEXTS): 
In asserting that p at a context Cu' one com-
mits oneself to providing adequate grounds 
for the truth of p (relative to Cu and one's cur-
rent context of assessment), in response to any 
appropriate challenge, or (when appropriate) 
to deferring this responsibility to another 
asserter on whose testimony one is relying.37 
One can be released from this commitment 
only by withdrawing the assertion. 3" 
Note that although this account assumes that 
it makes sense to talk about contexts of assess-
ment, it does not assume that propositional truth 
actually varies with the context of assessment. So 
non-relativists should be able to accept it, though 
for them the mention of "one's current context of 
assessment" will be an idle wheel. What we have, 
then, is a plausible story about the role of truth in 
our practice of assertion that gives a significance 
to talk of truth relative to a context of assessment, 
without prejudging the question whether we can 
actually assert anything whose truth is relative in 
this way. Indeed, this account gives us a way to 
test particular semantic hypotheses that make use 
of relative truth, by settling the normative conse-
quences of these hypotheses. 
We can now get a better feel for the assess-
ment-sensitive semantics for "know" by examin-
ing its normative consequences. Suppose that 
Linda asserts, in a "low standards" context C1, that 
Joe knew on March 10 that his car was in his 
driveway. If the assertion is challenged at this 
point, Linda must defend it by showing that 
(a) 
Joe's car was in his driveway on March 10, 
and 
(b) 
Joe's epistemic position with respect to this 
fact was good enough on March 10 to meet 
the (low) standards in play at CJ"'" 
Suppose that a little while later, standards are 
raised. If Linda's assertion is challenged in this new 
context, C2' she must defend it by showing that 
(a) 
Joe's car was in his driveway on March 10, 
and 
(b) 
Joe's epistemic position with respect to this 
fact was good enough on March 10 to meet 
the (higher) standards in play at C2• 
In asserting that Joe knew on March 10 that his 
car was in his driveway, Linda takes on an open-
ended commitment to show, whenever her asser-
tion is (appropriately) challenged at a context C, 
that what she asserted is true by the standards in 
play at C - even if these standards are different 
from those that were in play when she made the 
assertion. If she lacks the resources to reply to a 
challenge, or if the challenge is unanswerable, 
then she is obliged to withdraw her assertion. 
It seems to me that there is nothing incoherent 
about taking on such a commitment. Indeed, the 
facts about our use of "know" surveyed in §2, 
above, suggest that we implicitly take ourselves to 
be bound by just such a commitment whenever 
we attribute knowledge. 
6 
Conclusion 
According to the "relativist" semantics I have 
proposed, the epistemic standards relevant for 
determining whether someone can be truly said 
to "know" something are determined by the 
context of assessment, not the context of use. 
Consequently, in assessing knowledge claims 
made at different contexts for truth or falsity, one 
need not keep track of the standards that were in 
place at these contexts. The only relevant stand-
ards are the ones now in place. 40 This is why 
knowledge attributions can be reiterated and 
reported homophonically. 
On this view, knowledge attributions are not 
as robustly objective as ordinary claims about the 
world. We must be prepared to withdraw a knowl-
edge attribution if standards change, even if the 
subject's epistemic position is just as we thought 
it was. Relatedly, when we challenge others for 
having made false knowledge claims, we may be 
assessing them in light of standards higher than 
the ones they recognized when they made them. 
Isn't this unfair? Not unless retracting an asser-
tion is always tantamount to admitting that the 
assertion was made irresponsibly: and of course it 
is not, even without assessment sensitivity in the 

796 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
picture. When standards rise, speakers withdraw 
their knowledge attributions and take them to 
have been false, but they needn't (and typically 
don't) take themselves to have acted irresponsibly 
in making them. One indication of this is that 
when standards fall again, they go right back to 
their old ways, rather than becoming more cau-
tious in attributing knowledge. This is not so 
strange if we think of knowledge attributions as 
temporary record-keeping devices -
tools for 
keeping track of a normative status keyed to ever-
changing present circumstances - rather than 
straightforward statements of fact. 
If I am right, then knowledge attributions 
made blamelessly and with full access to the 
Notes 
For a kindred view, developed rather differ-
ently, see Richard 2004. I learned of Richard's 
work too late to take account of it in this paper. 
There are also some affinities between the 
present proposal and the "perspectival" view of 
knowledge attributions defended in Rosenberg 
2002: ch. 5 (see esp. pp. 148-9, 163-4), though 
Rosenberg does not develop his proposal in a 
truth-conditional framework. 
2 
For example, it classes the view advocated in 
Kompa 2002 as a form of contextualism, even 
though on Kompa's view "know" always 
expresses the same, "unspecific" relation, and 
so would be counted a form of invariantism 
on some criteria. Kompa's view will be dis-
cussed later, in §4.2. 
3 
See DeRose 2000 and DeRose, forthcoming. 
4 
Noticed by Feldman 2001: 77, Rosenberg 
2002, p. 164, and Hawthorne 2004, p. 163, 
among others. 
5 See Hawthorne 2004, §2.7. 
6 As Stephen Schiffer notes, "no ordinary person 
who utters 'I know that p,' however articulate, 
would dream of telling you that what he meant 
and was implicitly stating was that he knew 
that p relative to such-and-such standard." 
(Schiffer 1996, pp. 326-7). See also Feldman 
2001, pp. 74, 78-9, Hawthorne 2004, §2.7. 
7 
See Stanley 2004 for a detailed discussion of 
differences between "know" and various kinds 
of context-sensitive expressions. 
8 
See Grice 1989, Searle 1969, ch. 6. 
relevant facts must sometimes be withdrawn as 
false. In my view, philosophers have been too 
quick to find this incoherent. Sceptics argue that 
we are right to withdraw our knowledge claims in 
the face of sceptical challenges; they conclude that 
these claims were not responsibly made in the first 
place. Dogmatists and contextualists argue that 
we are wrong to withdraw our knowledge claims, 
precisely because they were responsibly made. I 
say that both sides have part of the truth: we are 
right to withdraw our knowledge claims in the 
face of certain sceptical challenges, even though 
they were responsibly made and we haven't 
learned anything new. A relativist semantics for 
"know" allows us to understand how this can be. 
9 See Schaffer, forthcoming. 
10 
Rysiew 2001, pp. 492, 499. 
11 
For a slightly different version of this expla-
nation, directed at third-person knowledge 
ascriptions rather than past-tensed ones, see 
Hawthorne 2004, p. 160. 
12 
See DeRose 2002, §3. 
13 
Hawthorne 2004, p. 166. 
14 
More informative reformulations would 
require a way of specifying epistemic stand-
ards directly, rather than as the standards in 
play at such-and-such a context. We do not 
consider speakers masters of the indexicals 
"here" and "now" unless they are in com-
mand of coordinate systems for specifying 
places and times independently of utter-
ance events ("in Berkeley, California," "at 
3:30 p.m. GMT on October 14, 2003"), 
which they can use to reiterate claims made 
using these indexicals in other contexts. 
Ordinary speakers possess no comparable 
coordinate system for specifying epistemic 
standards. 
15 
Although I doubt that a clean distinction 
between semantic and substantive error can 
be made, a rough and ready distinction will 
suffice for our purposes here. Note that it is 
ignorance about literal meaning that is at stake 
here, not ignorance about speaker's meaning. 
On many accounts of speaker's meaning, it is 
implausible to suppose that a speaker could 
be ignorant of what she means. Nonetheless, 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
797 
she can very well be ignorant of what her 
words mean, or of what she has literally said. 
See Rysiew 2001, p. 483, commenting on §IV 
of Schiffer 1996. 
16 
Cf. Hawthorne 2004, p. 131. 
17 
DeRose 2002, Hawthorne 2004, pp. 132-5. 
18 
Cohen argues that this error theory is innoc-
uous, on the grounds that speakers make 
similar mistakes with gradable adjectives like 
"flat" (pp. 90-1). Richard 2004 concedes 
Cohen's analogy and rejects his error theo-
ries, plumping for a relativist treatment of 
both "flat" and "know." For my part, I am not 
convinced of the analogy: I think that a 
pragmatic explanation of our retraction and 
reporting behavior is much more plausible 
for "flat" than for "know." When standards 
change so that the surface imperfections on 
pancakes count as "bumps" and "holes," a 
speaker might retract an earlier assertion of 
"pancakes are flat," but only to avoid ped-
antry, not because she thinks she's really 
contradicted herself. If enough were at stake, 
she would no doubt find an appropriate way 
to reiterate her earlier claim. (Contrast what 
is alleged about "know" in §3.1.3, above.) 
19 
See Schiffer 1996. 
20 
For a discussion of this example, see 
Churchland 1979, ch. 2. 
21 
The relativization of truth to a context of 
assessment should not be confused with the 
relativization of truth to a "point of evalua-
tion" (e.g., a tuple of time, world, and varia-
ble 
assignment) 
that 
IS 
standard 
III 
model-theoretic semantics. A point of evalu-
ation is not a context, but a sequence of 
parameters that can be "shifted" by opera-
tors. For more on the difference, see Lewis 
1980 and MacFarlane 2003, §V. 
22 
A full discussion of the truth ascription data 
would require giving a semantics (at least a 
naive semantics) for the monadic object-
language predicate "true." I will not pause to 
do that here. It turns out, not surprisingly, 
that in a language containing assessment-
sensitive expressions, object-language "true" 
must also be assessment sensitive. 
23 
Sometimes a single use of a sentence may 
express multiple propositions, as when a 
teacher says to a class of thirty: "Of the three 
people sitting nearest to you, only two are 
likely to finish this class." I take it that in this 
case the teacher has asserted thirty singular 
propositions, not a single general one. This 
does not amount to expressive relativism, 
since all parties can agree about which prop-
ositions were expressed. 
24 
This is pointed out by Egan, Hawthorne, and 
Weatherson, forthcoming, who also give 
other arguments against what they call "con-
tent relativism." 
25 
David Lewis put this point by saying that 
"[ c 1 ontingency is a kind of indexicality" 
(Lewis 1980, p. 82 and 1998, p. 25) - using 
"indexicality" for what I call "use sensitivity." 
Other writers use "context sensitivity" for 
what I call "use indexicality." I think it is 
useful to have distinct terms for both 
notions. 
26 
This definition is a close paraphrase of Kaplan 
1989, p. 522 (cE. p. 547). As it stands, it is not 
sufficiently general, for in some frameworks 
the context of use will not always determine a 
unique circumstance of evaluation. For 
example, 
III indeterministic frameworks 
allowing overlapping worlds or "histories;' 
the context of use will not pick out a single 
history (see 
Belnap and Green 
1994, 
MacFarlane 2003). For a more generally 
applicable definition, we could replace (2) 
with: "p is true when evaluated at all circum-
stances of evaluation compatible with e" 
(e.g., at all moment/history pairs in which the 
moment is the moment of e and the history 
contains the moment of e). We can ignore 
this complication for present purposes. 
27 
I include the time parameter for illustrative 
purposes only; nothing hangs on its pres-
ence. King, forthcoming, may be right that 
the best treatment of tense does not call for a 
time parameter in circumstances of evalua-
tion, in which case I am happy to remove it. 
28 
I discuss future contingents in MacFarlane 
2003 and the other issues in a book manu-
script, in progress. For independent argu-
ments for a relativist treatment of epistemic 
modals, 
see 
Egan, 
Hawthorne, 
and 
Weatherson, forthcoming. For a relativist 
treatment of accommodation (somewhat 
different from mine), see Richard 2004. For a 
relativism motivated by "delicious" and the 
like, see Kolbel 2002. 

798 
JOHN MACFARLANE 
29 
One might also worry that the extra degree 
of freedom I offer in constructing semantic 
theories does not come with sufficient 
counterbalancing constraints. The connec-
tions between contexts-relative truth and 
norms for assertion which I propose in 
the next section are meant to address this 
concern. 
30 
These definitions are of course schematic, but 
when the semantic details are filled in, they 
will determine an extension for "true at con-
text of use Cu and context of assessment CA'" 
31 
For a development of this argument, draw-
ing on Evans 1985, see Percival 1994, pp. 
196-8. 
32 
See Kolbel 2002, pp. 125, Egan, Hawthorne, 
and Weatherson, forthcoming: 29. 
33 
See e.g. Searle 1979, p. 12. 
34 
Inter alia, because presumably asserting a 
proposition involves more than simply com-
mitting oneself to its truth. Plausibly, the 
commitment must be undertaken publicly, 
by means of an overt utterance; perhaps 
there are other conditions as well. 
35 
For this way of looking at assertoric com-
mitment as a "conditional task responsibil-
ity" to vindicate a claim when it is challenged, 
see Brandom 1983 and chapter 3 of Brand om 
1994. I do not develop the idea in quite the 
same way as Brandom, but I am much 
indebted to his work. 
36 
Several philosophers have suggested to me 
that this account overgeneralizes, taking the 
norms of the seminar room to apply to asser-
tions in general. It may be that ordinary 
asserters recognize no general obligation to 
justify their claims in the face of reasoned 
challenges (though it would not follow that 
they are not bound by such a norm). But 
even these sceptics ought to be able to accept 
a weaker norm requiring withdrawal of 
assertions that have been shown to be untrue 
References 
Belnap, N. and M. Green (1994). "Indeterminism 
and the thin red line," Philosophical Perspectives 
8, pp. 365-88. 
Brandom, R. (1983). "Asserting," NoCts 17, pp. 
637-50. 
(relative to the context of use). This would 
be enough for my purposes here. 
37 
In speaking of "grounds for truth;' I do not 
mean to imply that the justification must be 
explicitly semantic. One can give grounds 
for the truth of a proposition p relative to 
context of use CUI and context of assessment 
CA simply by asserting another proposition 
at CU2 whose truth relative to CU2 and CA 
entails, or is evidence for, the truth of p rela-
tive to CUI and CA' (The grounds one offers 
can themselves be challenged, of course, as 
can their status as grounds.) 
38 
Those who accept only the weaker account 
of assertoric commitment in note 36, above, 
may modify it as follows to accommodate 
assessment-relative truth: one who asserts 
that pat Cu is obliged to withdraw this asser-
tion in context of assessment CA if P is shown 
to be false relative to Cu and CA' 
39 
To simplify the exposition, I am ignoring the 
possibility of deferring to the word of 
another. 
40 
Keith DeRose might call this view "single 
scoreboard semantics run amok" (see 
DeRose 2004). On this view, there is a "single 
scoreboard" not just for all parties to a single 
conversation, but for all uses of "know" as 
assessed from anyone perspective. It seems 
to me that the very same arguments DeRose 
uses to support his view that the various par-
ties to a conversation share a single score-
board can be applied transtemporally to 
show that the semantics for "know" must be 
use-invariant. If we shouldn't ignore the fact 
that speakers in a single conversation take 
themselves to be contradicting and agreeing 
with each other in making knowledge claims, 
then we shouldn't ignore the fact that speak-
ers take present knowledge claims to contra-
dict or agree with past ones, even ones made 
when different standards were in play. 
Brandom,R. (1994).MakingltExplicit( Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press). 
Churchland, P. (1979). Scientific Realism and the 
Plasticity of Mind (Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press). 

ASSESSMENT SENSITIVITY OF KNOWLEDGE ATTRIBUTIONS 
799 
Cohen, S. (2001). "Contextualism defended: Com-
ments on Richard Feldman's 'Skeptical prob-
lems, contextualist solutions'" Philosophical 
Studies 103, pp. 87-98. 
DeRose, K. (2000). "Now you know it, now you 
don't," in Proceedings of the Twentieth World 
Congress of Philosophy, Volume V: Epistemo-
logy, Bowling Green, Ohio, pp. 91-106. 
--(2002). "Assertion, knowledge, and context," 
Philosophical Review Ill, pp. 167-203. 
--(2004). "Single 
scoreboard 
semantics:' 
Philosophical Studies 119, pp. 1-2l. 
--(2004). "The problem with subject-sensitive 
invariantism," Philosophy and Phenomeno-
logical Research 68, 2, pp. 346-50. 
Dummett, M. (1959). "Truth:' Proceedings of the 
Aristotelian Society n.s. 59, pp. 141-62. 
--(1978). 
Truth 
and 
Other 
Enigmas 
(Cambridge: Harvard University Press). 
Egan, A., J. Hawthorne, and B. Weatherson 
(2005). "Epistemic modals in context:' in 
G. Preyer and P. Peter (eds), Contextualism in 
Philosophy (Oxford: Clarendon Press), pp. 
131-70. 
Evans, G. (1985). "Does tense logic rest upon a 
mistake?" in G. Evans, Collected Papers (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press) pp. 343-63. 
Feldman, R. (2001). "Skeptical problems, contex-
tualist solutions:' Philosophical Studies 103, pp. 
61-85. 
Grice, P. (1989). Studies in the Way of Words 
(Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press). 
Hawthorne, J. (2004). Knowledge and Lotteries 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press). 
Kaplan, D. (1989). "Demonstratives: An essay on 
the semantics, logic, metaphysics, and episte-
mology of demonstratives and other indexi-
cals," in J. Almog, J. Perry, and H. Wettstein 
(eds), Themes from Kaplan (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press) pp. 481-566. 
King, J. (2003). "Tense, modality, and semantic 
value:' in J. Hawthorne and D. Zimmerman 
(eds), Philosophical Perspectives, 17, Language 
and Philosophical Linguistics (Malden, MA: 
Blackwell), pp. 195-245. 
Kolbe!, M. (2002). Truth Without Objectivity 
(London: Routledge). 
Kompa, N. (2002). "The context sensitivity of 
knowledge ascriptions," Grazer Philosophische 
Studien 64, pp. 79-96. 
Lewis, D. ( 1979). "Scorekeeping in a language game:' 
Journal of Philosophical Logic 8, pp. 339-59. 
--(1980). "Index, context, and content," in 
S. Kanger and S. Ohman (eds), Philosophy and 
Grammar (Dordrecht: Reidel). 
--(1998). Papers 
in 
Philosophical 
Logic 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
MacFarlane, J. (2003). "Future contingents and 
relative truth;' Philosophical Quarterly 53(212), 
pp.321-36. 
Percival, P. (1994). "Absolute truth," Proceedings of 
the Aristotelian Society 94, pp. 189-213. 
Richard, M. (2004). "Contextualism and relativ-
ism," Philosophical Studies 119, pp. 215-42. 
Rosenberg, J. F. (2002). Thinking About Knowing 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press). 
Rysiew, P. (2001). "The context-sensitivity of know 1-
edge attributions:' Nous 35(4), pp. 477-514. 
Schaffer, J. (2004). "Skepticism, contextualism, 
and discrimination," Philosophy and Pheno-
menological Research 69, pp. 138-55. 
Schiffer, S. (1996). "Contextualist solutions to 
scepticism," Proceedings of the Aristotelian 
Society 96, pp. 317-33. 
Searle, J. 
(1969). Speech Acts (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press). 
Searle, J. R. (1979). Expression and Meaning 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press). 
Stalnaker, R. (1978). "Assertion:' in P. Cole (ed.), 
Syntax and Semantics, Vol. 9: Pragmatics (New 
York: Academic Press). 
Stanley, J. (2004). "On the linguistic basis for 
contextualism," Philosophical Studies 119, pp. 
119-46. 


PART IX 
Testimony, Memory, 
and Perception 


Introduction 
In this final section, we include selections on three specific ways that knowledge might 
be formed or transferred - through testimony, memory, and perception. 
Consider, first, trust in the testimony of others (as well as, more generally, trust that 
others will perform as you have been led to expect). A traditional evidentialist account 
of the matter will require evidence for belief to be rational. Contrary to this idea, trust 
seems to involve beliefs which are not accepted through evidence, yet these beliefs are 
both tolerated and valued. For example, if our friend is accused of a crime and claims 
to be innocent, we are inclined to believe that our friend is innocent without evidence 
and sometimes despite evidence to the contrary. Baker argues that our natural concep-
tion of rationality is inadequate to account for the phenomena of trust. Nonetheless, 
trust is essential and desirable in that it enables communication and friendship. But 
Baker resists the suggestion that we view the worth of trust as a battle between its epis-
temic irrationality and its moral value. Instead, she explores ways of modifying the 
traditional conception of rationality so that trust ends up rational. We do not need to 
have independent evidence that our trust will not be betrayed in order to be rational 
to trust. 
Even if Baker is right about the rationality of trust, the situation might be different 
when it comes to knowledge. Elizabeth Fricker asks whether we need to have indepen-
dent confirmation that a speaker is trustworthy before we can know that what the 
speaker says is true. Anti-reductionists about testimony say not. We don't need inde-
pendent confirmation that a speaker is trustworthy in order to know that what the 
speaker says is true: there is a "presumptive right" in favor of the word of others. After 
all, we do get knowledge through testimony even though, it seems, we lack non-circular, 
independent confirmation that testimony is reliable. In fact, such non-circular, inde-
pendent confirmation might seem impossible to obtain. Fricker rejects this "transcen-
dental" argument for the anti-reductionist position by rejecting the claim that we 
necessarily lack non-circular, independent confirmation for the trustworthiness of 
speakers. While we may not be able to acquire non-circular, independent confirma-
tion that testimony in general is reliable, this does not mean that we cannot acquire 

804 
INTRODUCTION 
utterance-specific independent confirmation - confirmation that some speaker is 
trustworthy on this occasion with regard to this utterance. We can do this by independ-
ently confirming that the speaker is sincere and competent with respect to the content 
of the utterance. And we can do this either by consulting the speaker's track record of 
utterances (often the less practical way) or by constructing, on the basis of conversa-
tional cues and evidence available to us, a psychological theory of the speaker and using 
it to explain the utterance (the better way). So, we can independently confirm that 
speakers are trustworthy with regard to specific utterances. And this is all that is needed 
to undercut the transcendental argument. In place of anti-reductionism, Fricker rec-
ommends reductionism, according to which we do need independent confirmation that 
a speaker is trustworthy in order for a speaker's say-so to give us knowledge. 
Tyler Burge argues that in testimony and retentive memory, the epistemic status 
of the acquired (retained) belief is noninferentially dependent on the epistemic 
status of the original belief. If I accept what you say in a normal case of testimony in 
which the testifier lacks defeaters, my belief is warranted only if yours is as well, and in 
fact the warrant my belief has is the very same as the warrant yours has. The same holds 
for memory. My memory belief's warrant is the warrant of the original belief. In nei-
ther case is the resultant belief inferred from the previous belief. For one thing, this is 
psychologically unrealistic: we are not continually making inferences when we form 
beliefs through testimony and retain beliefs in memory. For another, if the beliefs were 
inferential, then warrant could not be transferred. The hearer would have to have war-
rants for premises (e.g., "John told me that p") which are irrelevant to the warrant pos-
sessed by the speaker, and same for the rememberer (the premise might be "I seem to 
remember that p."). Indeed, Burge notes that, as Chisholm recognized, the inferential 
view would have the consequence that very few of the beliefs we think are a priori war-
ranted are so (in fact, for Chisholm, no beliefs that rely on sustained reasoning can be 
a priori). Burge claims that once we appreciate that warrants can be noninferentially 
transmitted, we can not merely accommodate the familiar idea that complex sustained 
reasoning can produce a priori warranted beliefs but arrive at the new and surprising 
insight that beliefs acquired through testimony can be a priori warranted. 
The dominant view of testimonial knowledge says that in order for a hearer H to 
acquire knowledge that p from a speaker S, S must have knowledge that p (or for every 
testimonial chain of knowledge, the first speaker S1 must have had knowledge that p, 
although the chain could include speakers who do not know p). In contrast, Jennifer 
Lackey argues that H's testimonial knowledge that p is independent of S or S1's knowl-
edge that p; statements of particular speakers can be reliably connected with the truth, 
though their beliefs are not. Lackey shows how H can acquire knowledge through S's 
testimony, even if S fails to believe that p (and so cannot know p). In addition, since 
defeaters are not necessarily transmitted via testimony, Lackey shows how a hearer can 
come to know that p even if the first speaker believed but failed to know that p. 
Statements and beliefs can come apart. Speakers can be reliable testifiers, offering 
truth-tracking statements, even if their beliefs are unreliable. Testimonial knowledge 
actually requires that if H comes to know that p via S's testimony, then S's statement 
that p must be appropriately connected to the fact that p. 
Problems of accounting for the source of justification also beset beliefs formed on 
the basis of memory. Michael Huemer draws our attention to what he calls the problem 
of memory knowledge (or memory justification). At any moment, each of us has a vast 

PART IX 
store of justified memory beliefs. What makes them justified? Huemer considers three 
leading theories: the inferential theory (according to which memory beliefs rely for 
their justification on premises about seeming memory and the reliability of memory in 
genera!), foundationalism (according to which memory beliefs are justified by quasi-
perceptual states of seeming memory), and preservationism (according to which 
memory beliefs retain the epistemic status they had originally). Huemer notes a number 
of problems for each theory and proposes a sort of marriage of foundationalism and 
preservationism, a theory he calls the dualist theory. For Huemer, a belief is justified if 
and only if it was both formed properly and maintained properly. The dualist view, like 
the foundationalist theory and unlike the preservationist theory, allows us to say that, 
as in Russell's five-minute hypothesis, if someone popped into existence with all the 
beliefs you now have, that person would be justified in having (most) of those beliefs, 
because they would be well-formed. However, like the preservationist and unlike foun-
dationalist, the dualist need not say that one becomes justified if one forgets one's orig-
inal bad reasons for one's belief. 
Seemingly less controversial than testimony or memory is perception. But how 
can perceptual experiences justify perceptual beliefs? For it seems to be the case that 
our perceptual experiences could be exactly what they are even if the objects of percep-
tion were dramatically different or didn't exist at all. John McDowell argues that this 
assumption - common to skeptics and certain kinds of internalists - is too quick. We 
need not assume that there is a "highest common factor" - something in common 
between states of veridical perceiving and states in which we are victims of illusion. 
Perhaps, when we are deceived by our senses, what we experience is a mere appearance. 
But it does not follow from this that when we are not deceived, what we experience is a 
mere appearance. Rather, when we are not deceived, we directly experience the fact that 
makes the experience veridical. There is, of course, a sense in which both when we are 
deceived and when we are not, the world appears to us the same way. But, according to 
McDowell, this is due to the disjunctive nature of appearance. For it to appear that X is 
such-and-such is either for it to be a mere appearance that X is such-and-such or for 
the fact that X is such-and-such to be made manifest. In this sense, whether we veridi-
cally or non-veridically experience that X is such-and-such, it will appear to us that X 
is such-and-such. This will be so even if there is no mere appearance that is common 
between the two states. 
McDowell takes experiences to be intentional. Can we make sense of perceptual 
justification if we deny this assumption, if we take experiences to be mere sensations? 
Stephen Reynolds argues that we can. How could a series of sensations that are not 
"about" anything justify a propositional belief? Reynolds suggests that perceivers 
develop skills connecting certain sensations with certain propositional contents. He 
argues that a perceptual belief is justified if and only if there are no undermining beliefs 
and the belief was produced as a response to a perceptual experience via an adequate 
exercise of properly learned recognitional skills. Such skills are accounted for by an 
agent's adherence to certain implicit rules governing the behavior in question, e.g., 
playing a piano piece. Correctly following the implicit rules governing perceptual belief 
production is sufficient for meriting a favorable normative judgment about epistemic 
justification. 
805 

806 
INTRODUCTION 
Further Reading 
Adler, Jonathan, "Testimony, Trust, Knowing;' 
Journal of Philosophy 91 (1994), pp. 264-75. 
--, Belief's Own Ethics (Cambridge, MA: 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press, 
2002). 
Brewer, Bill, Perception and Reason (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2000). 
Burge, Tyler, "Interlocution, Perception, and 
Memory;' Philosophical Studies 86 (1997), pp. 
21-47. 
Chisholm, Roderick, Perceiving: A Philosophical 
Study (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 
1957). 
Christensen, David, and Hilary Kornblith, "Testi-
mony, Memory and the Limits of the A Priori." 
Philosophical Studies 86 (1997), pp. 1-20. 
Coady, C. A. J., Testimony: A Philosophical Study 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992). 
Dancy, Jonathan (ed.), Perceptual Knowledge 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1988). 
Dretske, Fred, Knowledge and the Flow of Infor-
mation (Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Insti-
tute of Technology Press, 1981). 
Foley, Richard, Intellectual Trust in Oneself and 
Others (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2001). 
Ginet, Carl, Knowledge, Perception, and Memory 
(Boston, MA: D. Reidel, 1975). 
Goldman, Alvin, Knowledge in a Social World 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1999). 
Graham, Peter, "What is Testimony?" Philosophical 
Quarterly 47 (1997), pp. 227-32. 
Hardwig, John, "The Role of Trust in Knowledge;' 
Journal of Philosophy 88 (1991), pp. 693-708. 
Harman, Gilbert, Change in View: Principles of 
Reasoning (Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Press, 1986). 
Jackson, Frank, Perception: A Representative Theory 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1977). 
Lackey, Jennifer, "The Nature of Testimony;' 
Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 87 (2006), pp. 
177-97. 
Lackey, Jennifer and Ernest Sosa (eds.), The 
Epistemology of Testimony (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2006). 
Malcolm, Norman, Memory and Mind (Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1977). 
McDowell, John, Mind and World (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1994). 
McGrath, Matthew, "Memory and Epistemic 
Conservatism;' Synthese (forthcoming). 
Owens, David, Reason without Freedom: The 
Problem of Epistemic Normativity (London: 
Routledge, 2000) 
Pollock, John, Contemporary Theories of Knowledge 
(Totowa, NJ: Rowman and Littlefield, 1986). 
Senor, Thomas, "The Epistemological Problems 
of Memory;' Stanford Encyclopedia of Philo-
sophy (2005). 
Smith,A. D., TheProblems of Perception (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2002). 
Tye, Michael, Consciousness, Color, and Content 
(Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology Press, 2000). 
Webb, Gary, "Why I Know About As Much As 
You: A Reply to Hardwig;' Journal of Philosophy 
90 (1993), pp. 260-70. 

CHAPTER 54 
Trust and Rationality 
Judith Baker 
I want to discuss some ways in which our natural 
conception of rationality is inadequate to account 
for the phenomena of trust. Most of the paper 
sets out the ways in which trust, and our assess-
ment of that trust, do not conform to this picture 
of rationality. A more perplexing question is what 
modifications of our conception would be ade-
quate. Here I do no more than sketch the sort of 
program that I think might give us an under-
standing of the rationality of trust. 
I start with the most general statement of the 
problem. Belief aims at the truth - that is, we 
want our beliefs to be true. So a very natural and 
compelling picture of rationality with regard to 
belief would be the idea that we should only 
accept those beliefs which are likely to be true. 
Hence, what may be relevant, or, strictly speaking, 
reasons, for believing will be those supporting 
facts, items, which give evidence for the truth of 
what is believed. 
But trust seems to involve beliefs which are 
not accepted on the basis of evidence and beliefs 
which in some cases may be highly resistant to 
evidence that runs counter to them. One would 
think, in such a case, that they would be frowned 
on. But instead they are tolerated and, indeed, 
valued. The phenomena need to be sorted if the 
difficulties are to be assessed. Three kinds of trust 
Originally published in Pacific Philosophical Quarterly 
68 (1987), pp. 1-l3. 
can be distinguished. In the normal run of events, 
we trust people because we can't check all the 
bases for belief. So we accept, or rather assume, 
that what they say is true. A more exact expres-
sion is that we take some things on trust. If the 
clerk says that there is no more of the item we 
want in the store, the gas man reads the meters, 
the operator gives us a telephone number, and so 
on, we do not double-check. There is a great range 
of behaviour among people regarding what will 
be checked, and what is suspect, and of course 
differences in times and cities give reason to check. 
It is not only a matter of personality. But no one 
can check everything. What is to be noted is that 
ordinarily when I accept the reading of my meter, 
I don't accept it on the basis of evidence. I believe, 
or assume, that I am being correctly informed. It 
is reasonable to assume that in general, because 
there is no other way of getting on. There may be 
classes of assertions not to be trusted - those of 
clerks in supermarket chains, or those of travel 
brochures. But to get on we must be trusting in 
many classes of cases, for no matter how skeptical 
we may be, we cannot mistrust and check every 
casual piece of information. Our assumptions or 
beliefs in these plentiful cases where we do trust 
are not, however, resistant to counter-evidence. 
We can find out that the gas or electrical company 
is robbing us. 
That is not quite the end of the story, however. 
For we do not like people who are altogether sus-
picious, who do all that is humanly possible in 

808 
JUDITH BAKER 
these little matters to have well-confirmed belief. 
Such an individual, if I am correct, will have to 
stop somewhere. But, though forced to take mat-
ters on trust, he is only too apt to calculate the 
risk he takes in doing so. The individual who 
always calculates risks, we find lacking in sponta-
neity; when this trait is combined with operative 
distrust of others, an individual may be viewed as 
morally suspect. 
Let me offer a composite picture of all that 
seems negative in such an individual. I suggest 
that we don't like him because we think of him as 
suspicious, that is, as expecting, without evidence, 
that each new person he encounters will behave 
badly. We think of him as misanthropic, as both 
disliking people and enjoying his bad opinion of 
them. He likes security and safety to an extent we 
don't find praiseworthy; he raises the possibility 
that he is overly cautious with others because he 
is bad himself. So, I suggest, it is not merely a 
matter of convenience that we take people on 
trust: there is a fine web of adverse judgements 
ready at hand against those who cannot, or will 
not, do so. Nonetheless, this form of trusting 
others does not by itself require us to modify 
what we regard as rational for beliefs. Someone 
could resist any modification by making a special 
case for policies, arguing that though there are a 
multitude of situations in which it is reasonable 
to adopt and act on them, that they are not fully, 
or genuinely, beliefs. And taking people on trust, 
it would be argued, is one form of policy, of decid-
ing to act-as-if something were true in a given 
class of cases, but not fully believing it. 
A second kind of trust involves more than our 
willingness to accept people or to assume things 
on trust. It is exemplified in cases when we do not 
look for references or confirmation because "the 
person looks honest" or "seems very decent." This 
differs from my first kind of trust, which was 
about situations and did not directly reflect the 
character of the agent we are believing. In my 
second kind of trust, we are judging an individual 
on the basis of an extraordinary, that is, non-
ordinary, route to the truth. This presupposes an 
ordinary, or evidential, route. This is why we are 
not going on evidence insofar as we think the 
salesman at the door honest because he just "looks 
honest". But, again, such beliefs are not, nor do we 
think it rational that they should be, highly resist-
ant to counter-evidence. 
At this point it may be well to note that the 
first two classes of trust join a much larger class of 
ordinary beliefs about things and the world which 
have the common feature that they do not directly 
rely on evidence. Such beliefs are all over the 
place. But they do not, at least at a relatively 
superficial level of analysis, force us to revise our 
picture of rationality: they exhibit, rather, evi-
dence-substitutes, accepted ways of arriving at 
the truth in the absence of direct evidence. Only a 
third kind of trust leads us to the idea of a radical 
form of evidence-independence. 
The third kind of trust presents the greatest 
difficulty for our conception of rationality, for it 
is a case in which we think it rational to hold 
beliefs in the face of counter-evidence. Let me call 
this special trust, or friendship trust. Suppose I 
trust a friend who has been accused of wrong-
doing, with an impressive amount of evidence 
brought against her. Typically, I am faced with a 
novel situation, where there is no prior set of tests 
or testing situations that she has come through 
with flying colours. Suppose she is accused of 
selling secrets to a foreign government. It is 
unlikely that I have ever seen her approached by 
foreign agents, offered vast sums of money or 
other inducements to betray her government, 
indeed, unlikely that I have witnessed any 
situations offering great temptations. 
If! trust her in such a situation, I do not merely 
stand by her, acting in ways that support her, 
either materially or emotionally. I believe she is 
innocent. I do not, however, come to believe she 
is innocent, despite the evidence, by weighing or 
balancing present evidence against her past 
record. First, by hypothesis, there is precious little 
relevant past record. Second, what others regard 
as evidence against her isn't considered by me as 
evidence at all. It is not that I close my ears to 
what people say, or refuse to look at, or repress, 
the facts. I believe that there is an explanation for 
the alleged evidence, for the accusation, which 
will clear it all up. 
In advance of hearing the case, I am prepared 
to believe that there is such an explanation. I am 
biased in favor of my friend, in favor of her inno-
cence. To put it another way, I am committed to 
her being innocent. Moreover, as the case grows, 
as evidence mounts, I do not have corresponding 
mounting doubts. Although there may come a 
time when I cease to believe in my friend, there 

TRUST AND RATIONALITY 
809 
are no limits which can be set in advance, on epis-
temic grounds, which would determine the point 
at which it is irrational to continue to trust her. 
I have chosen a "favored" case, the story of a 
friend one trusts simpliciter. There may be friends 
one does not trust in certain areas, or perhaps in 
dealings with the other sex. In the most extreme 
case, one might have a friend one trusted only to 
be honest with oneself, to do well by oneself. But 
even this kind of limited trust will show the fea-
tures under examination here; if I ask my friend, 
and she proclaims her innocence, I trust her. 
I believe this to be a straightforward and natu-
ral description of trust. The strongest challenge to 
my claims, however, comes in the form of an 
equally natural defense of a friend: I know my 
friend is innocent because I know my friend. To 
trust a friend accused of wrongdoing is not irra-
tional because we know our friends - know their 
character, what motivates them, what they are 
likely to do in certain situations and what, psy-
chologically, they are capable of doing. I would 
not wish to deny that we know our friends. What 
I would like to show is that such knowledge, like 
the particular trusting belief discussed, does not 
conform to our picture of rationality. To do this I 
will articulate two ways in which a critic might 
appeal to the knowledge we have of friends in 
order to dispute the thesis that trusting beliefs 
are, by conventional standards, irrational. 
First, a critic might suggest that, given that we 
know our friends, it is not irrational to refuse to 
change our minds or drop our beliefs just because 
there are current charges and evidence against 
them. For we do not think a scientist irrational to 
continue to accept a theory when evidence is pre-
sented that runs counter to the theory, if it has 
been well-tested. So, the critic might say, it is not 
irrational to retain belief in a friend's innocence 
when one knows her character. 
Although both the friend and the scientist 
may have reason to be confident, the cases are not 
parallel. For, typically, a friend is not someone 
who has come through a set of tests. Of course I 
will claim, of someone I trust simpliciter, that I 
know her character to be one which would not 
allow the accusation to be true. It does not follow 
that such knowledge is based on observation of 
her behaviour in similar circumstances. It is from 
the little things that one comes to form an impres-
sion of character: if she wouldn't pad her expense 
account, she wouldn't embezzle. If, however, I am 
challenged regarding my beliefs, I do not think I 
can establish that my friend is incapable of embez-
zling by citing her scrupulous tax returns. 
It might be suggested that we were off to a 
false start - that it is not appropriate to try to 
articulate knowledge of friends in terms parallel 
to a scientist's acceptance of a theory. Knowledge 
of a friend is not sufficiently like confidence in a 
theory. The idea behind the criticism is, however, 
obvious and true: beliefs regarding a friend are 
not independent of observations and experience. 
The rationality of trust is supported by plain 
facts - that we come to know what people are like, 
that we witness a growth of understanding and 
knowledge of people when we do things with 
them, live with them, and that part of the process 
of becoming friends with someone is finding out 
who they are, when and how much we can rely on 
them and trust them. Even if there are no explicit 
tests, the conjectures or assumptions we make 
about a friend's character either become entrenched 
or are rejected as a result of our experiences. 
How, then, can trust be significantly inde-
pendent of evidence? I think one can acknowl-
edge the role of experience without denying what 
I claim to be distinctive about trust by using the 
notion of outrunning the evidence. The resist-
ance of trust to counter-evidence is the prime 
expression of this feature. The claim that trust 
exhibits such evidence-resistance does not rest 
on the idea that we have no evidence which sup-
ports beliefs about our friend but, rather, that 
belief runs ahead of experience and evidence. 
Confidence in a friend may well grow as a result 
of experience, with the growth of the friendship 
itself. But at each stage of a friendship the confi-
dence one has in one's friend leaps ahead of what 
we can think of as the evidence supporting it. It is 
important to note that it is belief proper and not 
conjecture, or hypothesis, which outruns the evi-
dence here. Popper has made both familiar and 
persuasive the idea that it is the business of scien-
tific conjectures to outrun the evidence, but not 
to be believed. Trusting beliefs are significantly 
distinguished from scientific conjectures by a 
second feature. 
The confidence one may have in a friend 
does not merely outrun the evidence or experi-
ences which may have led to its formation. Let 
me suggest the following model: we think of a 

810 
JUDITH BAKER 
belief-forming process as rational insofar as we 
adjust our belief to evidence according to some 
rule. Then we can say that one is committed to a 
belief if one adjusts it at a slower rate than the 
rule provides. This is typified in the trusting 
beliefs regarding one's friend. Although there 
may come a time when I cease to trust my 
friend, it will take much longer and require 
much more evidence for me to change my mind 
about her than rules for the rational formation 
of belief allow. My claim, then, is that whether 
we speak of belief in a friend's innocence of a 
particular act of wrongdoing or of knowl-
edge of her character, in both cases the beliefs 
in question will exhibit characteristics of 
outrunning the evidence. 
I believe in my friend's innocence, I believe 
that she is honest with me. I cannot set in advance 
the point at which it would be appropriate to 
doubt her. But there are limits to what would be 
the normal expression of belief in action. These, 
however, are set by conflicting moral obligations 
or responsibilities rather than epistemic stand-
ards. On the public level, one might well have 
argued at the time of the Watergate investigation 
that some American Congressmen failed to rec-
ognize the appropriate limits which conflicting 
duties set. It was not justifiable, given their 
responsibilities to the people and to the country 
at large, to act on their conviction that nothing 
short of "the smoking gun" would cause them to 
doubt the President's innocence. Many of us 
believed those Congressmen unreasonable and 
irrational. But we also believed them to be irre-
sponsible. They had responsibilities to the public 
which ought to have limited the ways in which 
they acted on their belief or trust in the President. 
One explanation of their irrationality relies on 
distinguishing the Congressmen's trust from 
friendship trust: it does not correspond to the 
model offered by friendship, but to a kind of loy-
alty to the office or the officer who holds author-
ity qua office holder, rather than trust in the 
person himself. Whatever this loyalty is, it is nei-
ther trust of a friend, nor is it reasoned belief in 
innocence, and so we regard it as unreasonable or 
irrational. 
I think that on a personal level, within friend-
ship trust, we may find a similar limit set by a per-
son's responsibilities to others. If! trust my friend, 
I do not lock up my silver, but there may be a 
situation in which I exercise caution with respect 
to others' belongings. It is not because I am will-
ing to risk my possessions but not yours, for I do 
not perceive us at risk. But I cannot take respon-
sibility for the safety of your goods on the basis of 
facts you would dispute. There are certain stand-
ards for the formation of rational belief which 
everyone accepts; although I have claimed that 
there are situations in which it is rational for an 
individual to form beliefs which do not comply 
with these standards, the individual can do it for 
herself only. People may disagree with my claim 
that within the personal domain responsibilities 
to others may limit acting on trusting beliefs, at 
least when those others would perceive them-
selves at risk. Given that I envisage conflicting 
responsibilities here, I cannot even appeal to 
one rule which would govern all situations. But 
the opposition, which would find trust unlim-
ited - that claims that insofar as a person is 
confident she acts on the basis of that belief - can 
only strengthen the case for new standards of 
rationality. 
I have argued that trust is robustly resistant to 
evidence which is counter to trusting belief, and 
that belief in a friend's innocence comes before 
hearing reasons for and against. The formation of 
belief discussed in the favored example runs 
counter to our general picture of what it is to be 
rational, but we not only tolerate it, we demand it 
of our friends, and we think well of people in gen-
eral who manifest such trust. I also want to claim, 
and this may be more open to disagreement, that 
it is rational of me to trust my friend. I do not 
think the example sketched presents a conflict 
between morality and rationality, between decent 
belief as opposed to rational belief. My aim is to 
find ways of understanding what makes the beliefs 
of the trusting individual rational. But there are 
alternative responses to the puzzles I have pre-
sented, and I shall first attempt to say what I find 
inadequate about them. 
Someone might try to distinguish trust from 
genuine or full belief. Trust, on such a view, would 
be a watered-down variant of belief, something 
more like pretence or acting -as-if something were 
true. But this is to view trust as a non-serious 
form of belief. Whereas what one demands from 
one's friend is belief, not pretence, that one is 
innocent. And what some outsiders find amazing 
is just the fact that serious belief continues in the 

TRUST AND RATIONALITY 
811 
face of rising evidence against it. As strategy, then, 
this response amounts to an arbitrary denial of 
the phenomena which raise the problem in the 
first place. 
Could one recognize the phenomena, but deny 
that there is a serious problem? 
We would like to think our trust In friends 
rational if challenged to defend our beliefs as 
either rational or not. But we have no way to 
establish this, to show by epistemic standards 
that trust really is respectable. This needn't, how-
ever, change our trust in friends and intimates. 
We shall live the same, we shall only withdraw 
our claims to objectivity or rationality for those 
beliefs. 
This looks, at least at first sight, to be a viable 
alternative. But is it? Suppose we take away the 
claim to rationality. This would be to view as one 
the beliefs we have about friends or intimates, 
and what I want to call pre-rational beliefs, the 
phenomena we observe in pet animals or young 
children, of trust in the adults that care for them. 
But, most important, although this view has the 
pleasant matter-of-fact tone of common sense, it 
cannot be made part of one's life. For we cannot 
stop with an observer's external description of 
trust. We are participants and agents as well as 
observers. And it does not seem possible to main-
tain two attitudes: the observer's belief that the 
trust in friends is no more than an attitude which 
is useful and the participant's conviction that her 
friend is really trustworthy. But to adopt only the 
epistemically respectable attitude of the observer 
as one's own in the midst of practical life would 
be to dissolve one's trust. 
What may be a common sense position can be 
replaced, however, by a philosopher's skepticism. 
And the skeptic has a response to my claim that 
we cannot maintain the two attitudes. He recog-
nizes that the attitudes in question drive one 
another off; as a participant in life he cannot trust 
his friend but also regard that trust as no more 
than a useful attitude. Nor can he, in the detach-
ment of his study, thinking of trust as a less than 
reputable epistemic state, sustain conviction in 
his friend's trustworthiness despite the evidence. 
What he maintains, however, is that he needn't 
strive for consistency. It is just the way humans 
are, that they trust their friends and are "really" 
convinced of their trustworthiness, in ordinary 
situations, in the thick of things. But a human 
being, or at least the skeptic, is also able to detach 
himself from life, to remove himself to his study 
and applying standards of "pure" rationality find 
the attitudes embodied in his daily behaviour 
failing with respect to rationality. If he were to try 
to apply those standards when he leaves the study, 
trust would be dissolved, or his skepticism would 
founder. But the skeptic can deny that any such 
attempt is rationally required: were we purely 
rational creatures, he could maintain, it would be 
appropriate, indeed required, always to act in 
accord with the principle accepted in the cool 
hour. But as composite creatures, true belief is 
only one of a variety of needs. Hence, he may 
believe it is not necessary in certain situations to 
aim for rationality. 
I do not believe one can convict such a skeptic 
of a logical fault. His position is, nonetheless, one 
we may find uncomfortable. Such a life displays 
an alarming lack of integration: for we are to 
imagine him fully trusting his friend but - at 
moments of detachment - prying off such belief. 
If a competing account of rationality can be made 
out, it would, then, be preferable. 
One might attempt, however, to cut the knot 
and do without trust. Although we now welcome 
the capacity to trust others, and judge it desirable, 
it might be claimed that we should take the more 
respectable line of dispensing with trust and 
therefore discouraging any disposition to trust. 
What I will maintain, in response, is that we 
cannot do without trust, that we both need it for 
morality and for interpersonal relationships. 
So far, I have merely claimed that we cannot 
do without trust. I cannot do more than to sug-
gest here some very general lines on which one 
might argue for such a thesis. There are three dif-
ferent ways in which I imagine morality might be 
undermined. First, as many writers have noted, 
many of our moral judgements about what it is 
right to do depend upon what may be expected of 
others. If I do not think anyone else will partici-
pate, I will not have the practical attitudes 
expressed by such thoughts as "I must do my 
part", or "pull my oar". If no one may be expected 
to keep to the rules of a game or an activity, "fair 
play" does not take hold. The production of cer-
tain goods depends upon what others do, and 
what I think they may do. A minimum of trust in 

812 
JUDITH BAKER 
others thus seems indispensable in these areas for 
moral principles to take hold. A quite different 
line might be thought of as Kantian. Respect is 
said to be essential to morality. But it would seem 
that, again, some minimum of trust in others, in 
their good will or in their own desire for recogni-
tion or respect, is required for there to be respect. 
It might be replied that the trust which moral-
ity can be seen to require is not of a sort which 
our picture of rationality would find it hard to 
accommodate. For what is needed is not a serious 
belief or conviction, but acting as if others were 
going to do their share, acting as if, or assuming 
that, others have good will and a similar serious 
desire for respect. This we can accommodate as a 
reasonable procedure, and one which is obviously 
alterable if not successful. 
I think that substitutes for belief will not do 
the job, but I have no adequate argument that full 
belief is required by morality. It may be suggested 
that, even if I did, the case would not yet be made 
that the trust required by morality presents prob-
lems for the standard picture of rationality. 
I claimed that only a third kind of trust, friend-
ship trust, presented a radical challenge to our 
standard conception of rationality, for only beliefs 
of this sort were, approvably, resistant to evidence. 
But morality does not require that our trust in 
people be evidence-resistant. 
The two kinds of trust discussed earlier were, 
first, acting or taking something on trust, and 
what I called the impression or intuitive judge-
ment that someone was trustworthy. The first 
class are best understood as policies, primarily 
ways of acting, and therefore not full-fledged 
belief. On my hypothesis, the trust required by 
morality must be more than acting-as-if. 
The required beliefs might, however, be 
thought similar to the second kind of trust. 
I acknowledged that our impressions about 
people joined a very large class of beliefs about 
the world which exhibit accepted ways of arriv-
ing at the truth in the absence of direct evidence. 
Members of this second class may, thus, be called 
evidence-substitutes. I stressed that one's impres-
sion of the individual as honest is not thought of 
as evidence, because it is an extraordinary route 
to the truth and one which, as rational people, we 
desire to supplant with evidence if possible. But 
it is clear that it is the object itself, something in 
the presentation of the individual, which one 
thinks of as justifying one's judgement that he is 
honest. Now, I think that what Kantian morality, 
for example, requires is that, independent of such 
presentation, we respect the individual we meet. 
Indeed, it is arguable that it is just because of the 
biases we have that the requirement would have 
us ignore such impressions. So there is a more 
radical separation of the belief from experience 
than in cases which might be considered as evi-
dence-substitutes. Although morality does not 
demand that our trust in people be evidence-
resistant, the independence from experience as 
well as evidence makes them problematic. Our 
picture of the rational formation of belief, even 
enlarged by evidence-substitutes, does not seem 
to have room for them. 
Since I am not sure how to directly counter 
the proposal that substitutes for belief will do 
the job, I take a third approach. Both the state-
ments of the desirability of trust for morality 
and the response have simply assumed the exist-
ence of rational beings capable, given certain 
conditions, of moral judgements and acts. But 
many philosophers have insisted that the possi-
bility of there being moral agents depends upon 
the kind of development of children in which 
certain trusting relationships are indispensable, 
in particular, the trust children have first in their 
parents, and next in their peers. It is clear that 
trust does not take the form of pretence in these 
relationships. What is now to be emphasized is 
that we cannot expect people themselves incapa-
ble of trusting others to engender trust on the 
part of their children, either toward themselves 
or other children. Nor can we expect to develop 
individuals capable of trust in their formative 
years only. If such philosophical speculation is 
correct, then even if the practice of morality 
itself did not demand the exhibition of trusting 
others, the institution of morality would none-
theless require it for creatures such as ourselves 
in a culture such as ours. 
I have claimed that we want our friends to 
stand by us, indeed to trust us. But this is a mis-
leading form of expression. For to think of some-
one as a friend is to expect her to have one's 
interest at heart, to act on one's behalf, to take 
one's part, and to take one at one's word. To be a 
friend is, reciprocally, to be trustworthy oneself. If 
one thinks one cannot, as a reasonable or rational 
person, form such expectations, and manages to 

TRUST AND RATIONALITY 
813 
behave accordingly, it is hard to believe that 
intimacy of friendships could be preserved. 
If I am correct, the advantages of trusting 
others, of the capacity to trust others, are appar-
ent. For they will include the advantages of mora-
lity and friendships. If trusting others were an 
activity in which we could chose to engage, we 
would have, then, a way to understand our choice 
as rational. One could imagine a version of 
Pascal's wager: despite our inability to establish 
the likelihood of our friend's decency, the belief 
itself is an outcome which has enormous value. 
But in most cases we do not decide to trust others, 
certainly in the example I have described, one 
does not decide to believe one's friend innocent 
of wrongdoing. Indeed, to suppose we do regu-
larly make such decisions would saddle us with 
the view that beliefs are subject to our control in 
an objectionable way. 
Despite the announced difficulties, it seems 
promising to me to look to the standards of 
rationality which apply to decisions in order to 
understand the rationality of trust. The success 
of such a program would seem to me to depend 
upon the following ideas. First, we should take 
seriously the natural forms of description which 
emerge in the story of trust. I said I was pre-
pared to find an explanation for the apparent 
evidence against my friend, that I was commit-
ted to her innocence. We should look at trust as 
a kind of commitment, a state of conviction 
which is also an inclination of will. This invites 
us to be skeptical about the classification of an 
item as either a belief or a matter of will. Second, 
we should hope, in understanding commit-
ments, to be able to give a plausible and unob-
jectionable account of the way in which trust is 
subject to our control. Finally, we should insist 
that the rationality of trust is genuine rational-
ity; it is not simply the propriety of pursuing 
means to ends we accept. To establish such an 
idea will require a separate program, which I 
only mention. We must look at the nature of 
moral facts. Just as trust is part of friendship, it 
may be that trust is both causally and logically a 
condition of there being truths of the sort we 
call moral. I will put to one side this last, most 
speculative idea. I will take the remaining space 
to discuss the first two points. I would like to 
make some case for considering trust in the 
nature of a commitment. 
First, if it is a commitment, it is usually an 
implicit, rather than an explicit one. One makes 
friends with someone but realizes only when the 
situation prompts reflection that one has come to 
count on her. There is typically no moment of 
choice, no act of undertaking to trust or to count 
on another (although such things happen). Now, 
how would one argue that there is an implicit 
commitment in a friendship? I suggest that, in 
general, one may attribute to an agent an implicit 
commitment if that is required in order to make 
sense of his activity, to show that it has a point, or 
is rational. Take the example of Grice's theory of 
meaning. It does not look plausible to assume 
that the speaker is aware of or could intend the 
nested assumptions required for meaning p. But 
(as Grice himself has suggested) he might be 
implicitly committed to them insofar as the only 
way to attribute rationality to his activity would 
be to make the assumption that he had those 
intentions. I do not strictly intend to believe my 
friend innocent, should she be accused. I do not 
intend to take her word. It might, however, be 
suggested that we need to assume that I have such 
intentions, as least implicitly, in order to under-
stand the ways in which I make myself vulnerable 
to my friend, as well as understand my behaviour 
should accusations arise. 
An example that seems to be helpful in under-
standing trust as a form of commitment to friends 
comes from our own profession. As a teacher, I do 
not decide, in typical cases, that my students are 
teachable. But if I didn't make such an assump-
tion, I couldn't teach, and it is quite likely that not 
only I couldn't take my profession seriously, but 
also students would not get taught. Here, too, I 
am inclined to say that we should attribute to me, 
as teacher, an implicit commitment to my stu-
dents, to the idea that they can be taught. Now, 
what is interesting is that we can speak of a payoff 
in such cases; I shall communicate, I will have and 
be a friend, I will teach. But the payoff is not 
something independent of the activity in which I 
engage. The implicit commitment, or assumed 
intention, constitutes in some way what it is to 
conduct or participate in the activity in question. 
If we think of trust as one kind of implicit 
commitment, must we think the beliefs of the 
trusting individual are voluntary, under her con-
trol in some objectionable way? As I have just 
noted, there are typically no datable events, 

814 
JUDITH BAKER 
whether of deciding, accepting, or coming to 
believe in the trustworthiness of a friend. Implicit 
commitments seem to be buried in the acts or 
activities they to some extent constitute. But there 
are many and varied acts which, for example, 
together comprise making a friend. These can be 
thought of as voluntary. If I am right, they also 
involve the cognitive attitudes in question. Is this 
formation of belief, then, objectionable? 
First, I would want to distinguish between 
something being under one's control at the drop 
of a hat and only being under one's control after a 
period of training, or through some process. One 
may think it is within one's control to become a 
nicer person, but one would be suspicious of 
someone who decided to be a nicer person and 
could bring it about on the spot. Second, even if 
one could become nicer in a slow way, one 
couldn't become nicer in just any way or for just 
any reasons. It may be that with regard to belief, 
as with character change, we would not object if 
the change were slow, as a result of some process, 
and for the right reasons. 
This format, at least, would be satisfied by the 
interchanges and growth of a friendship. The 
commitment to the friend or to the friend's 
decency would not be produced on the spot. But 
it may be that the requirements for the formation 
of belief are still stiffer than those for change of 
character just mentioned. One has no objection 
to someone doing what she can to alter her prej-
udices. It may be important that prejudices are 
thought of as obstacles that stand in the way of 
truth. Our objection to thinking belief is volun-
tary arises from the demand that belief should 
arise from the facts, the truth, the way the world 
is rather than how we would like it to be. So it is 
all right if we can remove obstacles to taking in 
the truth, but we should not like it to be the case 
that we could induce belief at will. Truth would 
not be served. 
This distinction has a ready home in the 
examples discussed. For I think it part of what is 
offered as our commendation of friendship that 
on becoming friends one removes the obstacles 
to openness, to honesty, to the direct display of 
feelings, attitudes, and concerns. Moreover, if this 
is correct, then not only would we counter what 
some have found objectionable in thinking of 
belief as in some way voluntary, but we would 
have the beginning of a reply to the worry that 
one can account for the rationality of trust only 
by appealing to standards of an inferior brand of 
rationality. For it might be charged that, in the 
area of belief, end-directed rationality is second-
rate. The standard form of rationality for action is 
that our means be adequate to our ends, but only 
truth-directed rationality is adequate in the area 
of belief. But if a result of becoming someone's 
friend, of one's trust, is that barriers to honesty 
are removed and the other person is open with us, 
then trust in their veracity will be merited and 
end-directed rationality will not be opposed to 
truth -directed rationality. 
A more immediate source of skepticism, how-
ever, is that, barriers removed, what one sees in 
the other party may not be someone who is very 
decent or trustworthy. But of course there is trust 
and there is trust. Isn't it possible to trust a friend 
in this relative way that I think she will do well by 
me, be honest with me? I do not trust her simplic-
iter, without qualification. I may even think that 
in some areas she is not so honourable, or that 
with other people she is not honest. And of course 
I may make mistakes, trust someone and be 
wrong. I think I am removing those obstacles to 
being open and honest, but that is not what hap-
pens. I think we are friends, but we are not. These 
all too familiar problems should not make us 
deny that trust is what enables people to be 
friends, to be open with one another, and that it 
thus removes the barriers between people. 

CHAPTER 55 
Against Gullibility 
Elizabeth Fricker 
1. 
One main school in the Indian classical tradition 
of philosophy insists that testimony - 'learning 
from words' - is a source or type of knowledge sui 
generis, one which cannot be reduced to any other 
type - not to perception, memory, or inference 
nor, we may add, to combinations of these. Such 
an irreducibility thesis could take diverse specific 
forms. One form it may take is as the thesis that a 
hearer has a presumptive epistemic right to trust 
an arbitrary speaker. We may essay an initial for-
mulation of this thesis thus: 
PR thesis: On any occasion of testimony, the 
hearer has the epistemic right to assume, without 
evidence, that the speaker is trustworthy, i.e. that 
what she says will be true, unless there are spe-
cial circumstances which defeat this presump-
tion. (Thus she has the epistemic right to believe 
the speaker's assertion, unless such defeating 
conditions obtain.) 
The claim that there is such a special presumptive 
right (PR) to trust associated with testimony con-
stitutes a kind of irreducibility thesis, since the 
hearer's right to believe what she is told, on this 
view, stems from a special normative epistemic 
Originally published in B. K. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti 
(eds), Knowing from Words (Dordrecht: Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 1994), pp. 125-6l. 
principle pertaining to testimony, and is not a 
piece of common-or-garden inductively based 
empirical inference. 
Testimony's alleged status as a special source 
of knowledge is underlined if this PR thesis is 
conjoined with a negative claim, which we may 
formulate initially thus: 
NC: It is not, generally speaking, possible for a 
hearer to obtain independent confirmation that 
a given speaker is trustworthy - that what she 
says will be true. 
If this Negative Claim is true, then knowledge can 
regularly be gained through testimony only if 
there is no need for independent confirmation 
of the trustworthiness of speakers; that is, if the 
PR thesis holds. So the existence of this special 
normative epistemic principle is then essential to 
the gaining of knowledge through testimony. This 
pair of claims together is one apt explication of 
the irreducibility thesis of the Nyaya school of 
Indian philosophy. 1 
In this paper I shall give one half of a refuta-
tion of the PR thesis, by arguing against the 
Negative Claim, which features as a premise in 
one central argument for it. My discussion also 
shows the prima facie case against a PR. A fuller 
treatment would also consider, and reject, various 
positive arguments for a PR which may be made, 
which appeal to the essential nature of language, 
and of understanding, arguing that these imply 

816 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
that a general disposition to trust is essential to 
language, and thence to its epistemic legitimacy. 
Here I can only record my view that no such argu-
ment succeeds. 
The Negative Claim that there can, generally 
speaking, be no non-circular confirmation that a 
given speaker is trustworthy, is false. And any 
fully competent participant in the social institu-
tion of a natural language simply knows too 
much about the characteristic role of the speaker, 
and the possible gaps which may open up 
between a speaker's making an assertion, and 
what she asserts being so, to want to form beliefs 
in accordance with the policy a PR allows. The 
PR thesis is an epistemic charter for the gullible 
and undiscriminating. This paper argues against 
gullibility. 
2. 
To say that testimony is a special source, or yields 
a special kind, of knowledge, could mean many 
things. I shall not here take it to mean that 
testimony constitutes an exception to an other-
wise fully general, over-arching conception of 
knowledge. I take it that its showing knowledge to 
be, at some level of description, one kind of thing, 
albeit acquired in different ways, is an adequacy 
condition on an account of the concept. Such an 
overarching conception might be causalist or 
reliabilist. But I favour a justificationist concep-
tion, on which a subject's being able to defend her 
belief appropriately is a necessary condition for it 
to be knowledge. 2 The claim that testimony is an 
irreducible source of knowledge will not then 
emerge as a counter-example to the thesis that 
knowledge requires appropriate justification, but 
as a claim about what kind of justification is 
required for a testimony belief.3 
The PR thesis is such a claim. It is a normative 
epistemic principle, amounting to the thesis that 
a hearer has the epistemic right to believe what 
she observes an arbitrary speaker to assert, just on 
the ground that it has been asserted: she need not 
attempt any assessment of the likelihood that this 
speaker's assertions about their subject matter 
will be true, nor modify her disposition to believe 
according to such an assessment. A corollary of 
the PR thesis is thus that a hearer gives a fully 
adequate justification of her belief just by citing 
the fact that "Someone told me so': This simple 
defence does not need supplementation with evi-
dence for the trustworthiness of her informant. 
Nor, on this view, does an ordinary hearer need to 
supplement the simple defence by invoking the 
PR thesis itself. That thesis is formulated by the 
philosopher, as a theoretical registering of the fact 
that the simple defence is all that is needed. 
The PR thesis is not to be confused with a 
descriptive premise that "speakers mainly tell 
the truth." The view that belief in what is asserted 
is justified by reference to such a descriptive 
premiss, cited as part of the first-level justifica-
tion of the belief, is a quite different view, one 
which would constitute a reduction of knowl-
edge from testimony to an ordinary case of 
inductively based inferential knowledge. The 
alleged descriptive premiss (whether claimed to 
be empirically confirmed fact, or a priori 
conceptual truth about language) might be 
invoked in an attempted philosophical argument 
for the PR thesis. But this is entirely different 
from its featuring among the premisses which 
an ordinary hearer must know and be able to 
cite, to justify her belief. 
Our target is the PR thesis. Arguments for it 
fall into two kinds: the positive arguments from 
the essential nature of language already men-
tioned, and a negative argument. This last is a 
transcendental argument which runs thus: 
(1) 
Knowledge can be and frequently is gained 
by means of testimony; 
(2) 
[NC] It is not, generally speaking, possible for 
a hearer to obtain independent confirmation 
that a given speaker is trustworthy; therefore 
(3) 
There is knowledge gained by testimony 
only if there is a presumptive right on the 
part of any hearer to trust an arbitrary 
speaker; therefore 
(4) 
There is such a presumptive right to trust.4 
One might reject this argument by rejecting its 
initial premiss. This is not my strategy. I agree 
with the proponent of the argument that it is a 
constraint on any epistemology of testimony, that 
it preserve our commonsense view that knowl-
edge can be gained through testimony. This paper 
is devoted to stopping the transcendental argu-
ment by showing its second premise, the Negative 
Claim, to be false. 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
817 
3. 
The epistemological "problem of justifying belief 
through testimony" is the problem of showing 
how it can be the case that a hearer on a particular 
occasion has the epistemic right to believe what 
she is told - to believe a particular speaker's asser-
tion. If an account showing that and how this is 
possible is given, then the epistemological prob-
lem of testimony has been solved. 
The solution can take either of two routes. It 
may be shown that the required step - from "5 
asserted that P"s to "P" - can be made as a piece of 
inference involving only familiar deductive and 
inductive principles, applied to empirically estab-
lished premisses. Alternatively, it may be argued 
that the step is legitimised as the exercise of a spe-
cial presumptive epistemic right to trust, not 
dependent on evidence. 
The Negative Claim, when appropriately 
glossed, is equivalent to the thesis that the first, 
reductionist, route to justifying testimony is 
closed. The gloss in question is to fix the notion 
of a speaker's "trustworthiness" programmati-
cally, as precisely that property of a speaker which 
would, if empirically established, allow the infer-
ence (using only standard principles) to the truth 
of what she has asserted. As we saw above, the 
anti-reductionist about testimony argues from the 
alleged closedness of the first route, to the conclu-
sion that the second route must be open: to the 
existence of a special presumptive epistemic right 
to trust. 
It is important to be clear that the only genu-
ine epistemological problem is the one stated 
above. There is no "problem of justifying belief 
through testimony" over and above the task of 
showing that particular instances of testimony 
can be such as to be justifiedly believed.6 The 
anti-reductionist's case, I shall show, gains most 
of its plausibility from confusion over just what 
the problem to be solved is. 
Before we can consider whether the "trustwor-
thiness" of particular speakers can be non-
circularly confirmed, and so whether the reductive 
route to justifying testimony is open, we need to 
determine just what this property is best taken to 
be. The first requirement on an explication of this 
notion is that it serve the purpose in hand: it must 
be a property of the speaker 5 knowledge of which 
suffices, for a hearer H on an occasion 0, to bridge 
the logical and epistemic gap between "5 asserted 
that P", and "P".7 That is to say, if H knows that 5 
asserted that P on 0, and she also knows that 5 is 
"trustworthy" on 0, then she has a basis justi-
fiedly to believe that P. Equally (subject to a 
desideratum explained below), "trustworthiness" 
should be no stronger than whatever property of 
5 it takes to bridge this gap, on particular occa-
sions. If H can know that 5 possesses this weakest 
gap-bridging property on an occasion 0, this is 
enough to justify her in believing that 5 asserts on 
0; thus it is only this weakest gap-bridging prop-
erty which must admit of non-circular confirma-
tion, to provide a reductive solution to the 
problem of justifying testimony, as we have con-
ceived it. We may also hope that our explication 
will answer to the intuitive notion of "trust-
worthiness" of a speaker. It should do so, since the 
intuitive notion has to it precisely this flavour of 
"that which warrants belief in the speaker's testi-
mony on an occasion". 
Precisely what trustworthiness, thus program-
matically identified, is best taken to be, is spelled 
out in §7. But we may note here a second theo-
retical desideratum on our explication. 
We may aspire to give a systematic general 
account of how knowledge (justified true 
belief) is gained through testimony; or more 
strictly: of how a subject's belief may be justi-
fied in virtue of its support from testimony. 
And this account may be conceived as having 
the following form: A specification of a set 'ZJ 
of sentence-schemata which characterise cases 
of knowledge through testimony in the sense: 
A hearer H has an adequate basis for a true 
belief of hers to count as justified, in virtue of 
its support from a certain speaker's testimony, 
just when she has knowledge whose content is 
given by instances, appropriate to the content 
of her belief, and her situation, of each member 
of the set 'ZJ. 8 
Clearly, a first component of 'ZJ will be: 
T\: "5 asserted that P on 0". 
That T\ is a necessary component of the set 'ZJ 
(whose members represent a jointly sufficient 
condition for justified belief) is the hallmark 
of 'ZJ's representing what it is for a subject's 
belief to be justified by, inter alia, evidence from 
testimony. 

818 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
And surely it is the notion of trustworthiness, 
explicated in accordance with the constraints 
suggested above, that will furnish the second 
premise of the desired characteristic set 'j? This is 
indeed so, if we gloss what it is for trustworthi-
ness to "bridge the gap" between Tl and "p" 
appropriately. But we need to be careful about 
just what this amounts to. 
An account which renders perspicuous what 
is going on in the acquisition of knowledge 
through testimony must separate out, in H's 
total evidence for "p", two different strands: 
The independent evidence for "P" which H 
already has; and the evidence for "P" which H 
gets, given what she knows about 5, from the 
fact that 5 has asserted it. Effecting this separa-
tion is essential, if we are to be able to model 
what goes on in a "Humean collision" - that is, 
a situation where the prima facie evidence for 
"P" from a trustworthy speaker's testimony 
clashes with strong evidence from other sources 
against "P".9 Now specifying a truly characteris-
tic set 'j will indeed achieve this separation. 
But specifying one is not so easy, because for 'j 
= (T l , T2) to be characteristic, it is not suffi-
cient, although we may take it as necessary, that 
the Tl we choose be such that Tl and T2 together 
entail "P".10 
We want our account to separate the two 
strands in H's evidence for "P". And this implies 
a further desideratum on 'j: its elements should 
be epistemically independent of "p", a notion I 
define thus: No element T of 'j must be such 
that H can know T to be true in virtue of know-
ing that P and knowing true the other elements 
of 'j. This means that "P"-plus-the-rest-of-'j 
must not together entail T, nor constitute strong 
evidence for it. 
If'j contains a T which is not epistemically 
independent of "p", then a situation is possible 
in which H knows that P, and knows that 
which is specified by all the elements of 'j, 
which is not a situation in which she has 
knowledge that P through 5's testimony; 
rather, it is one in which the direction of epis-
temic dependence is the reverse: not: H knows 
that P, in virtue of knowing all the elements of 
'j, but: H knows T in virtue of independently 
knowing that P, and knowing the rest of 'j. 
Such a 'j fails to characterise cases of knowledge 
through testimony. 
This desideratum that the elements of 'j all be 
epistemically independent of P further constrains 
the choice of T2 •ll It rules out choosing the mate-
rial conditional "If 5 asserts that P on 0, then P". 
This looks like the right choice if we consider only 
our first requirement, for it is the weakest premise 
which one can add to "5 asserted that P on 0", to 
get a pair which together entail "P". But it is ruled 
out by our second desideratum, because it is itself 
entailed by "P", and so H is in a position to know 
it whenever she knows that P.12 If she also knows 
that 5 has asserted that P, then she knows the set 
'j, on this choice of its elements. But she may 
have no grounds whatsoever for thinking that the 
material conditional holds of 5, other than her 
knowledge that "P" is true. This is not a situation 
in which she has a basis to know that P on the 
strength of 5's testimony. On the contrary, it is one 
exhibiting the reverse epistemic direction. Of 
course, a situation is also possible in which H 
knows that the material conditional holds of 5 not 
through knowing that P, but in virtue of knowing 
something genuinely about 5, the intuitive prop-
erty of "trustworthiness". In such a case, she does 
have knowledge which is based on 5's testimony. 
The trouble with choosing the material condi-
tional as T2, is that the mere fact that 5 knows the 
resulting 'j does not reveal which of these situa-
tions obtains. 
The same is true of"5 asserted truly that P": it 
too fails the test of epistemic independence of"P". 
The epistemic direction of knowledge through 
testimony obtains, when H knows that" 5 asserted 
truly that P" in virtue of knowing that 5 asserted 
that P, and knowing something genuinely about 
5 - namely, that 5 is "trustworthy". Here, H has 
knowledge that P in virtue of 5's testimony to it. 
The reverse epistemic direction obtains, when she 
knows that 5's assertion that P was true only 
because she already knows that P. Here 5's testi-
mony adds no further support to "P" for H. In 
requiring that the elements of'j be epistemically 
independent of "P': our idea is precisely to find a 
'j such that its identity is in itself enough to 
ensure that the direction of epistemic depend-
ence is always the first, and not the second - i.e. 
that 'j is a characteristic set. 
("5 asserted truly that P" is not a suitable 
choice for T2 for other reasons too: it entails "P" 
by itself, while we want a premise which does so 
only together with Tl ; and in fact, predicating 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
819 
truth of S's assertion is an inessential intermedi-
ate step, which we can skip, in identifying H's 
shortest inferential route from "s asserted that p" 
to "p" -
cf. the proposal eventually adopted 
below). 
In describing the direction of epistemic 
dependence that we want to isolate, I have just 
employed as a primitive the intuitive notion of S's 
"trustworthiness" which we are supposed to be 
explicating. But the notion we are groping towards 
is not doomed to remain an indispensable primi-
tive. We can draw a useful moral from what is 
wrong with the material conditional. The trouble, 
in the first instance, is that it is not epistemically 
independent of "P': But this is a symptom of the 
fact that any instance of the predicate-schema 
"If _ asserts that P on 0, then P", while it is gram-
matically predicable of S, does not represent a 
genuine property of S. This last is an intuitive 
notion we need not attempt to define here; we 
need only note that a genuine property of S, unlike 
the material conditional, will not be something 
which holds of S in a world, merely in virtue of the 
fact that "P" is true in that world. A hallmark of a 
genuine property of S, in short, is that (special 
cases apart) it will be epistemically independent 
of "P': To effect the desired separation of the two 
strands in H's evidence for "P", we must find, as 
our explication of "trustworthiness': such a genu-
ine property of S, one such that whether S pos-
sesses the property in a world is a matter of what S 
herself is like. Special cases apart, when "trustwor-
thiness" is so explicated, situations in which H 
knows that P, and knows that S asserted that P, 
and that S is trustworthy, will be precisely those in 
which, intuitively, we would judge that H has sup-
port for "P" from S's testimony; and, flukes apart. 
H's evidence confirming S's trustworthiness will 
be disjoint from her evidence confirming "P': 
To find such a notion: which just suffices, 
together with "S asserted that P on 0", to entail 
"P"; which constitutes a genuine property of S, 
hence, flukes and special cases apart, is epistemi-
cally independent of "P"; and which constitutes 
an explication of the intuitive notion of S's being 
trustworthy on an occasion of testimony, is our 
aspiration. A first approximation is the property 
of S specified by the subjunctive conditional: 
Trusl: "If S were to assert that P on 0, then it 
would be the case that P." 
This bridges the gap and is, special subject mat-
ters apart, epistemically independent of "P".13 
Knowing it to hold of S will, generally speaking, 
require having knowledge about S herself - her 
character, circumstances, etc. In fact, as we shall 
see in §7, the property of S specified by this sub-
junctive conditional is slightly stronger than the 
choice for T2 which best fulfils our requirements. 
We will see there also that the best explication of 
S's trustworthiness makes it relative not just to an 
occasion and an assertion-content, but to a par-
ticular utterance Uby S. I shall adopt this relativi-
sat ion from now on, although it is only in our 
final explication that it is not idle. It is in any case 
apt, since it is only with respect to her actual 
utterance that H needs to know that S is 
trustworthy. 
4. 
Our final explication of "trustworthiness", and 
detailed account of how it can be empirically con-
firmed by a hearer, occupies §§7, 8. But we have 
enough, armed with the provisional suggestion 
Trus1, to make some initial points regarding our 
central concern: the question whether the trust-
worthiness of a speaker can sometimes be empir-
ically confirmed, so that the reductionist route 
from "s asserted that P" to "P" is open. The reduc-
tionist must make good the following claim 
(of which, accordingly, the anti-reductionist's 
Negative Claim is to be construed as the denial): 
Local Reductionist Claim: It can be the case that,'4 
on a particular occasion 0 when a speaker S 
makes an utterance U and in doing so asserts that 
P to a hearer H, H has, or can gain, independent 
evidence sufficient to warrant her in taking S to 
be trustworthy with respect to U. 
(Notice that to appeal to one's independent knowl-
edge of the truth of what is asserted by a speaker's 
utterance, as evidence for her trustworthiness with 
respect to it, is not circular; but neither is it a case 
of possible knowledge through testimony. As we 
saw above, for just this reason our preferred expli-
cation of S's trustworthiness with respect to U will 
not be such that merely knowing the truth of what 
is asserted by means of U is sufficient to establish 
it. Nonetheless, many instances of independent 

820 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
confirmation of the truth of what a certain speaker 
asserts provide inductive grounds to attribute a 
more general trustworthiness to her, as she builds 
up a track record of independently confirmed 
accuracy - see below.) 
The reduction here claimed is only "local". 
That is to say, the claim is only that there can be 
occasions when a hearer has evidence that the 
particular speaker in question is to be trusted with 
respect to her current utterance, without assum-
ing this very fact. I shall call the question whether 
this local reductionist claim is true the "local 
question" about testimony. The conception of the 
epistemological problem of justifying testimony 
adopted in §3 implies that a local reduction is all 
we need aspire to, or hope for. A "reductionist" 
account of knowledge through testimony, in the 
context of this approach, means such a local 
reduction of each instance of knowledge through 
testimony to broader categories of knowledge, 
and patterns of inference. 
Thus on our conception of the problem, justi-
fying testimony by the reductionist route does 
not, at least in the first instance, require showing 
that the blanket generalisation, "Testimony is 
generally reliable", (or, more simply, "Most asser-
tions are true") can be non-circularly empirically 
established. Such globally independent confirma-
tion of the veracity of testimony would require 
that a hearer have evidence that most of what she 
has ever learned through testimony is true, where 
this evidence does not in any way rest on knowl-
edge acquired by her through testimony. The fact 
that such a global reduction is not required for it, 
is crucial to the local reductionist position I argue 
for in this paper. For, as I readily agree with the 
anti-reductionist, there are general reasons, stem-
ming from the essential role of simply-trusted 
testimony in the causal process by which an infant 
develops into the possessor of a shared language 
and conception of the world, why the prospects 
for a global reduction seem hopeless. So this neg-
ative claim is correct; but beside the present point. 
Notice therefore how the plausibility of the tran-
scendental argument evaporates, once we identify 
just what the relevant Negative Claim is. For then 
we see how modest are the possibilities of non-
circular confirmation which it denies, but which 
are all that is required, for knowledge through 
testimony to be possible in the absence of a 
presumptive right to trust. 
True, the local reductionist question would 
transform itself into the global one, if it were the 
case that the only way of showing that a given 
speaker was trustworthy with respect to an utter-
ance, was via appeal to the blanket generalisation. 
But, I suggest, this is not so. The blanket gener-
alisation is actually neither sufficient nor neces-
sary evidence to justify belief, on a particular 
occasion, that this speaker is trustworthy with 
respect to this utterance of hers, which is what it 
takes to justify belief in what she has thereby 
asserted. 15 Even if the generalisation were true, 
there could be circumstances surrounding par-
ticular utterances which rendered the speaker's 
trustworthiness with respect to them doubtful in 
spite of it. And typically the grounds, when there 
are such, for expecting a speaker to be trustwor-
thy with respect to a particular utterance of hers, 
relate to the circumstances and character of the 
speaker, and the nature of her subject matter; 
they do not concern the generality of assertoric 
utterances at all. 
More prima facie plausible is the claim that 
the only ground a hearer could ever have for 
believing a speaker to be trustworthy with respect 
to a particular utterance, would be knowledge on 
her part that that particular speaker is generally 
trustworthy, at least about that kind of thing. 
Certainly we very often do, quite reasonably, rely 
on, or distrust, particular individual's testimony 
on precisely such grounds. But such generalisa-
tions about a particular speaker very often can be 
established non-circularly (which amounts to: 
without reliance on any testimony from that 
speaker). One means (though not the only, nor 
the central one, as we shall see in §8) is the 
approved Humean fashion, induction from 
observed constant conjunction - we trust one 
person's report, because she has built up a track 
record of accuracy; we distrust another because 
she has accumulated the opposite. And anyway, 
knowledge of a speaker's general trustworthiness 
is not the only possible ground for believing her 
trustworthy with respect to a particular utterance, 
nor is it always sufficient: someone may be noto-
riously inaccurate about many things, but one 
can still reasonably expect her to be right about 
such elementary matters as what she had for 
breakfast, or whether she has a headache, or 
whether a familiar object is on a table in front of 
her. Conversely, certain circumstances and subject 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
821 
matters provide grounds to expect a generally 
trustworthy person to be less than reliable - a 
matter in which she is emotionally involved; 
something notoriously tricky; when she has 
been in deceptive or inadequately informing 
circumstances. 
(Note, however, that the prima facie incredibil-
ity of what a speaker asserts by an utterance is not 
best treated as evidence against her trustworthi-
ness with respect to it. As explained earlier, we 
need to separate the evidence for "P" stemming 
from the fact that it has been asserted by a trust-
worthy speaker, from other evidence for or against 
"P': Where these conflict, there will ensure a 
Humean battle between them in the belief-
updating processes of a rational hearer. To repre-
sent this battle most perspicuously, it is the ex ante 
estimate of the trustworthiness of a speaker that 
we should take; not one revised downwards in the 
light of her prima facie incredible utterance.) 
Anti-reductionism about testimony looks 
plausible if reductionism is so construed as to 
involve commitment to the claim that the blanket 
generalisation can be non-circularly established. 16 
But my "local" reductionist can happily grant that 
this is impossible. There is no need to show that 
the blanket generalisation can be non-circularly 
established, in order to show that a hearer can 
earn herself the right to trust a speaker on an 
occasion, without needing the gift of a PR; thereby 
providing a reductionist solution to the only epis-
temological problem of testimony which needs to 
be solved, viz. the local problem. 
There is no space in the present paper to con-
sider the reasons why the project of non-circu-
larly confirming the global generalisation is 
hopeless, nor to defend my view that this does not 
undermine the rationale for insisting on justifica-
tion severally for beliefs acquired through testi-
mony. So I shall simply state my views. My view 
of the global "problem" about testimony is that it 
is not a problem. The project of trying simultane-
ously to justify all of our beliefs which rest in any 
way on testimony (or equally, to justify a single 
testimony-belief, but without appealing to any 
beliefs based on testimony) is not one that is 
properly embarked on, and we certainly do not 
need to seek to found these beliefs as a totality in 
something else. The desire to show that the blan-
ket generalisation can be non-circularly estab-
lished is an instance of the foundationalist 
yearning to provide credentials for our system of 
beliefs from outside that system, or from a privi-
leged subset of it. In this instance this task would 
be to hive off the part of our belief-system which 
rests, inter alia, on testimony, and show that it can 
be "founded" in the remainder which is not. My 
insistence that the local question is the only legit-
imate question about testimony is of a piece with 
a more general coherentist approach in episte-
mology. Insofar as the anti-reductionist about 
testimony is expressing an adherence to coherent-
ism, in opposition to foundational ism, I am with 
her. But this issue of global reductionism, or 
foundationalism about testimony, comes apart 
from the issue I am concerned to address. My 
issue is the local reductionist question: whether, 
within a subject's coherent system of beliefs and 
inferential practices (in the gradual dawning of 
light over which testimony will have played an 
essential part), beliefs from testimony can be 
exhibited as justified in virtue of very general pat-
terns of inference and justification; or if a norma-
tive epistemic principle special to testimony must 
be invoked to vindicate them and explain their 
status as knowledge. The issue whether there is a 
presumptive right to trust not based on evidence 
is this internal, coherentist issue. 
s. 
Is knowledge through testimony a distinctive cat-
egory of knowledge at all? First note that we may 
define as our epistemic category, and topic of 
investigation: coming to know that something is 
so, through knowing that a certain speaker has 
asserted it to be so. This definition is restrictive in 
two respects. First, as to what comes to be known. 
This restriction is theoretically apt, since there is 
clearly nothing systematic and general to be said 
about the unrestricted topic of "whatever one 
may be able to infer, on an occasion, from the fact 
that someone has made an assertoric utterance 
with a certain content of that occasion"; while we 
may, as in the present paper, hope to say some-
thing general about the inferential path via which 
a hearer may come to know that which is the con-
tent of an assertion, from the fact that it has been 
asserted. Second, the definition restricts the 
means by which knowledge of that which is 
asserted is gained, to being via knowledge of the 

822 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
content and force of the speech act (which will, 
normally, be obtained through understanding it). 
This definition excludes, from counting as knowl-
edge gained through testimony, any knowledge 
gained by one who takes a "barometer" approach 
to a group of creatures: that is, who tries to obtain 
information about the world, from discovering 
correlations between the sounds the creatures 
make, and how things objectively are - but who 
does not regard the creatures as agents nor cate-
gorise their utterances as intelligent speech acts. 
This exclusion is again theoretically apt, since the 
mechanism involved in gaining any such knowl-
edge is quite different; but in any case, the 
possibilities for finding such brute phonetic type/ 
environmental-state correlations are very limited, 
with regard to a fully sophisticated human 
language-using practice. 
But in one respect our definition is permissive: 
there is no restriction on the subject matter of the 
speaker's assertion. The domain of potential 
knowledge through testimony is, on this concep-
tion, that of serious assertions aimed at commu-
nication, whatever their subject matter. This is at 
odds with the ordinary language use of "testi-
mony", which tends to confine it to eye-witness 
reports of observable events. 
Testimony, defined as just suggested, does 
indeed constitute a distinctive kind of epistemic 
link. There is a distinctive type of connection, 
characteristic of testimony, between a state of 
affairs, and a hearer's coming to believe in its 
obtaining. This connection runs through 
another person, a speaker - her own original 
acquisition of the same belief, her other mental 
states, her subsequent linguistic act, which 
transmits that belief to the hearer. 17 There being 
this distinctive type of link between a hearer, 
and what she comes to believe, in testimony, 
means that there is a distinctive type of justifica-
tion associated with testimony, in the sense sug-
gested earlier: we can identify a characteristic 
justificatory schema '!f. A hearer has knowledge 
through testimony just when she has knowledge 
whose content is given by appropriate instances 
of the elements of '!f, and can cite such knowl-
edge, or evidence for it, in defence of her belief. 
But what there is not, this paper argues, is any 
new principle of inference or other normative 
epistemic principle involved, which is special to 
testimony. 
This makes the "problem of justifying 
testimony" unlike the "problem of induction". In 
the latter, the task is to show the legitimacy of a 
general principle of inference, one which is broadly 
comparable to the principles of deductive infer-
ence in the way in which it validates particular 
inferences of the form in question. It is therefore 
appropriate to approach the "problem of induc-
tion" at a completely general level. The task is to 
show that an arbitrary inductive inference is valid, 
by showing that the principle of inference involved 
in any such inference is a valid one. I" 
Now the anti-reductionist may mistakenly 
suppose that the task of justifying testimony must 
be approached by looking for some highly gen-
eral premise or principle which would serve to 
justify an arbitrary testimony belief. Her error 
stems from a mistaken assimilation of the form of 
the problem of justifying testimony to that of jus-
tifying induction. An anti-reductionist who 
makes this mistake will start by investigating 
whether the blanket generalisation "Testimony is 
generally reliable" can be non-circularly empiri-
cally established, with the idea that this general 
premise, if established, would suffice to justify an 
arbitrary testimony belief. Finding that such 
global independent confirmation of testimony is 
unattainable, she concludes that testimony-beliefs 
must instead be justified by a special non-empirical 
normative epistemic principle. 
My local-reductionist approach avoids the 
initial mistake, and so short-circuits the anti-
reductionist's argument. If what were in question 
were a special normative epistemic principle, con-
cerning testimony as a distinctive and unitary cat-
egory of knowledge, then it would indeed apply 
indifferently to an arbitrary piece of testimony, 
and the task of justifying it would need to be con-
ducted at an abstract general level. (Thus positive 
arguments for a blanket PR must indeed be con-
ducted at that level.) But if there is no special 
epistemic principle in question, and what is 
common to all and only instances of knowledge 
through testimony is just a characteristic kind of 
belief-producing causal process, then there is no 
reason why what justifies belief in particular 
instances of testimony must be some proposition 
or principle applying to testimony in general. 
Instead, what justifies a particular hearer's belief 
in a particular assertion may be her knowledge of 
relevant facts about that situation and speaker, 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
823 
which warrant her in trusting him. (These will be, 
as it were, the foreground justifying facts - the 
ones in virtue of her knowledge of which she has 
gained this piece of knowledge through testimony. 
And which, as a minimum, we may require her to 
be able to articulate in its defence, for her belief to 
qualify as knowledge. Of course these facts can 
bestow knowledge of trustworthiness, and hence 
of what is asserted, only on a hearer who is 
equipped with a suitable background of more 
general knowledge. The account of §§7, 8 will 
spell out what this is.) 
I suggested above that it was hopeless, but 
fortunately unnecessary for any legitimate 
enquiry, for an individual to try for wholly inde-
pendent confirmation of the blanket generalisa-
tion that "Testimony is generally reliable". But it 
is only on this foundationalist conception of 
the project of confirmation that it is impossible. 
A more limited, non-foundationalist version 
(in which the enquirer makes no attempt to 
abrogate all of her existing knowledge which 
depends on testimony) is a perfectly feasible 
research project. But I think that looking for 
generalisations about the reliability or other-
wise of testimony, in the inclusive sense of seri-
ous assertions aimed at communication of belief, 
as a homogeneous whole, will not be an enlight-
ening project. Illuminating generalisations, if 
there are any, will be about particular types of 
testimony, differentiated according to subject 
matter, or type of speaker, or both. True, there is 
a belief-producing process characteristic of tes-
timony, and consequently a generic type of jus-
tification, as captured in 'j. This gives one sense 
in which it is a distinctive and unitary category 
of knowledge. But when it comes to the proba-
bility of accuracy of speakers' assertions, and 
what sorts of factors warrant a hearer in trust-
ing a speaker, testimony is not a unitary cate-
gory. The account of how trustworthiness may 
be empirically established given in §8 below 
draws on and develops this idea. One aspect of 
the disunity is, I shall argue, that while there are 
certain limited epistemic rights to trust involved 
in particular types of testimony, there is no 
blanket PR to believe what is asserted without 
needing evidence of trustworthiness, applicable 
to serious assertions aimed at communication 
as a whole, regardless of subject matter and 
circumstances. 
6. 
In §8 I shall sketch an account of how the trust-
worthiness with respect to an utterance of a 
speaker may be confirmed. The kind of confirma-
tion described is, I maintain, often available, and 
is sought by a discriminating, justifiedly-believing, 
hearer. The account adopts the standpoint of our 
commonsense theory of persons and of the nature 
of speech acts, according to which it is a contin-
gent matter whether a particular assertoric utter-
ance is true, and the speaker trustworthy; and 
vindicates, within this framework of common-
sense theory, the view that a speaker's trustwor-
thiness with respect to an utterance is an 
empirically ascertainable matter. 
But we need first to clarify further the PR 
thesis which I am opposing. It has several dimen-
sions of possible variation in strength, which 
must be spelt out, if we are to see just what is the 
contrast between it, and the view I shall propose. 
The "presumptive epistemic right" in question 
is a right to form belief in a certain proposition in 
a certain situation, without needing to have fur-
ther evidence, or to make further investigations. 
But we get a weaker, or a stronger thesis, accord-
ing to what this proposition is. The strongest PR 
thesis (that is, the one which demands the least of 
the hearer!) is one which legitimises simple trust 
as capable of yielding knowledge. A hearer has 
this attitude to a speaker if and only if she is dis-
posed to form belief in any proposition which the 
speaker seriously asserts in an utterance whose 
content she grasps; and she lacks the conceptual 
capacity even to appreciate the possibility that 
what the speaker says may be false; that is, she 
lacks a full grasp of our common-sense linguistics 
(CSL), which contains a conception of the nature 
of language as a social institution, and of the epis-
temic link which testimony constitutes, including 
the nature of the speaker's action, and her typical 
role. (Simple trust is, plausibly, the condition of 
children at a certain stage in their development.) 
A simple truster does not have the conception of 
the speaker's trustworthiness or lack of it, nor 
appreciate the need for it, so there is no question 
of her believing in it. A PR thesis endorsing simple 
trust thus posits an epistemic right on the part of 
a hearer to believe what is asserted in an utter-
ance, without further conditions, when she has 
perceived and grasped the content of that utterance; 

824 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
thus in particular without requiring of the hearer-
knower the capacity to conceive the trustworthi-
ness of the speaker. (This cagey formulation is 
required, since it is doubtful whether one who 
lacks a full grasp of CSL, though she may respond 
to an utterance by forming a belief in what is 
asserted, can be said to conceive the utterance as 
an assertion in the full richness of that concept.) 
A weaker PR thesis, which requires that the 
hearer be a master of CSL, and appreciate the 
need for trustworthiness, posits an epistemic 
right on the part of a hearer to presume an arbi-
trary speaker to be trustworthy, without needing 
to have any evidence for this, or to engage in any 
assessment of the speaker. This thesis is, in the 
first instance, a licence to believe in the trustwor-
thiness of the speaker; and only derivatively, in 
the proposition she asserts. 
The first, strongest PR thesis makes sense as a 
thesis about the conditions under which a sub-
ject may acquire knowledge from others' asser-
tions (although of course other, "external" 
conditions must be added - at the very least truth 
of what is asserted); but only as part of a reliabil-
ist account of that concept. It cannot be part of 
any plausible justificationist account, since a sub-
ject cannot defend her belief unless she under-
stands the defence; and, as remarked, even the 
concept of assertion is not available to one who 
lacks the rest of CSL - lacks understanding that 
an assertion is, by the nature of the act, not nec-
essarily true, hence the speaker needs to be trust-
worthy, etc. A simple truster is not in a position 
to say, with full understanding, even 'Someone 
told me so'. 
We can therefore leave behind this strongest 
PR thesis, and consider further only the PR to 
assume trustworthiness; which restricts the 
domain of knowledge through testimony to mas-
ters of CSL, full participants in the social institu-
tion of language, conceptually equipped to play 
the speaker's, as well as the hearer's role. 19 The 
point of this PR being the consequent entitle-
ment to believe what is asserted, it is, of course, 
the minimal gap-bridging property of trustwor-
thiness of the speaker with respect to her current 
utterance, which is its immediate object. No epis-
temic right to assume any generalisation about 
speakers' trustworthiness is needed. Cf. the local/ 
global distinction drawn earlier. Of course the 
sense in which a hearer is required by our PR to 
assume, or believe, the speaker to be trustworthy, 
is not that she is required consciously to form 
that belief, or consider the question, whenever 
she forms a belief in what a speaker asserts; but 
merely that she appreciates the need for trust-
worthiness, and is disposed to judge the speaker 
to be trustworthy (or else to abandon her origi-
nal belief in what was asserted), when challenged. 
Implicit belief in trustworthiness will always be 
attributable to such a hearer, when she believes 
an assertion. 
Our epistemic right to believe (whether in 
trustworthiness, or in what is asserted), to be at 
all plausible, must be only "presumptive" - that is, 
it must be defeasible in appropriate circum-
stances. Several dimensions of variation enter 
here: as to what these "defeating conditions" 
(d.c.s) are, and what the hearer's relation to them 
must be. How strong an epistemic charter our PR 
thesis is will depend very much on these details of 
its specification. 
A d.c. is, certainly, a condition which cancels 
the hearer's epistemic right to believe - in the 
speaker's trustworthiness or, for the strong PR, in 
what is asserted. That is to say, when the hearer 
knows one to obtain, she should not form, at any 
rate not without further evidence, the "defeated" 
belief. This gives us a first aspect of the hearer's 
required relation to a d.c. On a reliabilist approach, 
it could be enough that her disposition to believe 
is thus cancelled, when she is aware of a d.c. But 
within a justificationist approach, it must be that 
this disposition of the hearer stems from her 
appreciation of how the d.c. "defeats" this belief. 
Here, there is again a weaker and a stronger 
option. A d.c. may defeat a proposition, in the 
sense that it constitutes strong evidence for the 
falsity of that proposition. Call these proposition-
defeating d.c.s. Alternatively, it may merely defeat, 
i.e. cancel, the right to presume that proposition 
to be true - being a circumstance which indicates 
that the proposition may not be, or cannot be 
assumed to be true, rather than being definite evi-
dence for its falsity. Call these presumption-
defeating d.c.s. Clearly, the proposition-defeating 
d.c.s with respect to any presumptive belief are a 
subset of the presumption-defeating d.c.s. So a 
presumptive right to believe in the trustworthi-
ness of a speaker which is cancelled by anything which 
throws in doubt the presumption that a speaker is 
trustworthy, will be much weaker - since much more 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
825 
often defeated - than one which is cancelled only 
by definite evidence of untrustworthiness. 
Similarly, a defeasible right to believe in trust-
worthiness is a weaker epistemic charter for hear-
ers, than a defeasible right to believe what is 
asserted - since anything which defeats "P" will, 
ex post, defeat the speaker's trustworthiness with 
respect to any utterance she makes in which she 
asserts that P; while the converse does not hold. 
The strongest possible PR - to believe that P, just 
on the ground that it has been asserted that P, 
whenever one does not already possess evidence 
showing "P" to be false, is indeed an epistemic 
charter for gullibility! But the weakest one: Where 
the presumptive right is to assume trustworthi-
ness, and a d.c. is any condition which defeats the 
presumption, by merely raising a question as to 
the speaker's likely trustworthiness, is a much 
more limited affair. 
There remains a further dimension of varia-
tion in the hearer's required relation to the d.c.s, 
in whichever sense these are taken. The nub of 
their being d.c.s, is that when the hearer is aware 
of one, she should not form the "defeated" belief. 
When the d.c.s defeat the proposition that the 
speaker is trustworthy, she should not form belief 
in it at all; when they defeat the presumption in 
favour of trustworthiness, she should not believe 
in it without further investigation: without first 
engaging in some assessment of the speaker for 
trustworthiness. The further dimension of varia-
tion which remains is: Is the hearer required to 
look for, be on the alert for, the presence of such 
d.c.s (of whichever kind)? We know that, when 
aware of one, she should withhold belief: but is 
she in addition required to ensure that whenever 
a d.c. obtains, she will be aware of it, if it is within 
her epistemic grasp to be so? Or, if not this first, 
which is a very onerous requirement, then is she 
at least required to engage in some search for d.c.s, 
or to be on the alert for the presence or d.c.s? 
In fact, the grid of differences set up by our 
dimensions of variation exhibits some collapse 
here. Conditions which defeat the presumption in 
favour of trustworthiness are conditions which 
switch on a requirement to assess the speaker for 
trustworthiness, i.e. they switch off the right just 
to assume this without checking on it, the dispen-
sation from epistemic activity which the right to 
presume trustworthiness constitutes. But to be 
obliged to keep a constant look-out for any 
conditions which would suggest that the speaker 
may not be trustworthy, is not very different from 
being obliged to assess the speaker for trustwor-
thiness, simpliciter! Such an attenuated PR is not 
a PR at all: it is not a dispensation from epistemic 
activity. If the d.c.s defeat the proposition that the 
speaker is trustworthy, the requirement always to 
be on the look out for such conditions is some-
what less onerous, but still seems not to be very 
much weaker than a straightforward requirement 
to assess the speaker for trustworthiness. The 
notion of a PR, we may conclude, seems only to 
make sense when it is interpreted as giving the 
hearer the right to believe without engaging in 
epistemic activity; when there is no requirement 
to be on the alert for d.c.s, of either kind. 
These considerations reveal the possibility of 
an interestingly different kind of thesis, which is 
not a PR, that is, a dispensation from the require-
ment to assess the speaker; but is rather a thesis 
applying within the project of assessment, about 
how it is properly done. I shall call it a default-
position thesis. To say that a hearer must withhold 
belief in a speaker's trustworthiness whenever she 
is aware of signs revealing untrustworthiness, and 
that moreover she is obliged to be on the alert for 
such signs, is tantamount to saying the following: 
the hearer is obliged, always, to assess the speaker 
for trustworthiness; but within this exercise, the 
hypothesis of trustworthiness has special status in 
that it is the default position - it is to be ascribed, 
in the absence of positive signs of its opposite. 
The account given in the §8 of how a speaker's 
trustworthiness may be assessed by a hearer will 
posit limited default position precepts in favour 
of what we will shortly identify as the compo-
nents of trustworthiness. 
Our discussion has shown that a PR thesis 
which is strong enough to be worthy of the name, 
while fitting into a justificationist framework, is 
best formulated thus: 
PR: An arbitrary hearer Hhas the epistemic right, 
on any occasion of testimony 0, to assume, with-
out any investigation or assessment, of the 
speaker S who on 0 asserts that P by making an 
utterance U, that S is trustworthy with respect to 
U, unless H is aware of a condition C which 
defeats this assumption of trustworthiness - that 
is, C constitutes strong evidence that S is not 
trustworthy with respect to U; in which case, 

826 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
H should not form belief that P on the strength 
of S's assertion that P, and should believe, at least 
implicitly, that 5 is not trustworthy with respect 
to U. 
This PR is still programmatic, in that it does 
not specify just what circumstances would con-
stitute strong evidence against trustworthiness, 
and there is scope for broader and narrower 
interpretation here. But it clearly involves what 
we have identified as the key element of a PR: the 
dispensation from the requirement to monitor 
or assess the speaker for trustworthiness, before 
believing in it. Thus it may be called a PR to 
believe blindly, or uncritically, since the hearer's 
critical faculties are not required to be engaged. 
Notice also that it is a blanket PR, entitling the 
hearer to believe in trustworthiness, hence in 
what is asserted, on any occasion of testimony, 
whatever the subject matter may be. (Assuming 
only that the nature of the subject matter can 
never in itself constitute strong ex ante evidence 
against trustworthiness.) 
It is such a blanket PR to believe blindly that 
constitutes an epistemic charter for the gullible, 
and to which I am opposed. The account of how 
empirical confirmation of trustworthiness is 
possible set out in §8 involves a limited pre-
sumption in favour of trustworthiness, in the 
very different sense we have identified: it is, in 
some circumstances, the default hypothesis 
within the critical task of assessing the speaker 
for trustworthiness. 
7. 
The thesis I advocate in opposition to a PR 
thesis, is that a hearer should always engage in 
some assessment of the speaker for trustworthi-
ness. To believe what is asserted without doing 
so is to believe blindly, uncritically. This is gul-
libility. (Though not the only kind. Believing in 
trustworthiness too easily, i.e. attempting 
assessment, but doing it badly, is also being 
gulled!) 
50 - to return to our central question - if 
indeed a properly discriminating hearer always 
assesses a speaker for trustworthiness, what pre-
cisely is this property, and how is an empirically-
based estimate of it obtainable? 
Our method is to develop an epistemology of 
testimony, including an account of what a speak-
er's trustworthiness with respect to an utterance 
consists in, by appeal to the relevant parts of our 
commonsense theory of the world. This stance is 
part of a coherentist approach in epistemology: 
we criticise our belief-forming methods, and 
standards of justification, from within our exist-
ing conceptual scheme, rather than attempting to 
find some mythical point outside it from which 
to do so. 
Now, C5L tells us that, in the normal case,'o a 
serious assertoric utterance by a speaker 5 is true 
just if S is sincere, i.e. believes what she know-
ingly'l asserts, and the belief she thereby expresses 
is true. This breakdown is entailed by the com-
monsense conception of the nature of a speech 
act of assertion, and of the link between its occur-
rence, and the obtaining of the state of affairs 
asserted to obtain. And commonsense person-
theory tells us that it is moreover contingent 
whether any particular utterance is both sincere, 
and expresses a true belief: it is inherent in the 
nature of the link, and the psychology of the 
human subjects who are speakers, that insincerity 
and honest error are both perfectly possible. 
Indeed, commonsense person theory tells us that 
false utterances are quite common, especially for 
some subject matters. (This, we may note, consti-
tutes the prima facie case against a blanket PR to 
assume any assertoric utterance to be true, a for-
tiori against one to assume that the speaker is 
trustworthy. The case is an application of the 
epistemic precept: "If a significant percentage of 
Fs are not G, one should not infer that X is G, 
merely from the fact that it is F." A belief so 
formed is not epistemically rational, which is to 
say it is not justified.) 
In §3 we gave Trusl as a rough initial explica-
tion of a speaker's trustworthiness with respect to 
an utterance U made on an occasion 0, by which 
she asserts that P. Trusl is logically equivalent to 
the claim: "If S were to assert that P on 0, then her 
assertion would be true". We have now seen that the 
truth of S's utterance breaks down (in the normal 
case to which we confine ourselves) into the utter-
ance's being sincere, and S's expressed belief being 
true. This suggests that we may frame a more illu-
minating definition of a speaker S's trustworthi-
ness with respect to an utterance U made on an 
occasion 0, by which she asserts that P, thus: 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
827 
Trus 2: "If S were to assert that P on 0, then it 
would be the case that S's assertion is sincere, 
and that the belief she thereby expresses is 
true." 
Turs2 fulfils our basic requirement on T" that 
of entailing "P" when combined with T 1• It is 
more illuminating than Trusl, since S's sincerity, 
and whether it is likely that if S on ° believes that 
P, then her belief will be true, are what a hearer 
may, in the first instance, make an empirically-
based assessment of. (It is not equivalent to Trusl, 
since it does not cover the fluke case of a would-
be liar who unknowingly utters a truth.) 
But the illumination this breakdown provides 
also shows that Trus2 (and so also Trusl) gives a 
definition of trustworthiness which is needlessly 
strong. To be justified in believing what is asserted 
by an utterance U of a speaker 5 on an occasion 
0, a hearer need not know that any utterance 
with that content by Son ° would be sincere; it is 
enough that she is able to tell that S's actual utter-
ance U is so. And this difference of strength is 
empirically significant. We may take sincerity to 
be a predicate of utterances, and it is very often 
precisely a particular utterance that a hearer H is 
able to tell to be sincere, through sensitivity to 
such features of its delivery as tone of voice, and 
manner of the speaker. H may be able to tell this 
about an utterance of a speaker who in fact, and 
perhaps to Hs knowledge, is very often insincere -
one of whom the stronger sincerity condition 
contained in Trus2 is false. 
Thus, I suggest, our best and final definition of 
a speaker's trustworthiness with respect to an 
utterance U is as follows: 
Trus(S, U): A speaker S is trustworthy with 
respect to an assertoric utterance by her U, 
which is made on an occasion 0, and by which 
she asserts that P, if and only if 
(i) 
U is sincere, and 
(ii) 
S is competent with respect to "P" on 0, 
where this notion is defined as follows: 
If S were sincerely to assert that P on 0, then it 
would be the case that P. 
In this definition the relativisation to a parti-
cular utterance U by S is not idle. 
Trus(S, U) fulfils, as best we can,22 the require-
ments explained in §3. It combines with T to 
entail "p", and there is no weaker alternative which 
does so, and which is epistemically independent 
of "P". S's "competence with respect to P" is 
defined as in (ii), rather than by a strictly weaker 
material conditional, in order to fulfil the desid-
eratum of epistemic independence of "P", which 
we saw in §3 that a material conditional fails 
(equally when the requirement of sincerity is 
inserted in the antecedent).23 Notice also that it is 
right to take the antecedent as in (ii), rather than 
"If 5 were to believe that P on ° ... ". The latter 
would give a condition which is again unneces-
sarily strong: perhaps it is only the worlds in 
which S believes that P sufficiently confidently to 
assert her belief, that are all P-worlds. 
Trus(S, U) is weaker than the everyday notion 
of someone's being a trustworthy or reliable 
informant, since the latter usually refers to a 
speaker's assertions more generally, implying that 
she is generally sincere, and is competent with 
respect to most of the things she makes claims 
about. But a person S who is untrustworthy, in 
this generalised sense, can still be Trus(S, U), and 
known by a hearer H to be so, with respect to a 
particular utterance U; in which case, H has 
grounds to believe what is asserted by that utter-
ance. Trus (5, U) is the minimal gap-bridging 
property which we set out to find. As such, it cap-
tures the idea that that utterance of the speaker is 
to be trusted. 
8. 
We have identified the question how a speaker S's 
trustworthiness regarding an utterance U may be 
empirically confirmed as the question how Trus( 5, 
U) may be confirmed, that is to say, how the sin-
cerity of U, and S's competence with respect to 
the content of U, may be confirmed. Notice that 
these claims are not esoteric, nor technical, but 
are mere spellings out of what sheer common 
sense about language, and speakers, tells US.24 
Thus in requiring that hearers appreciate the need 
for trustworthiness, and assess the speaker for it, 
we are requiring nothing more than what any full 
participant in the institution of human language 
is well equipped to appreciate the need for; and, 
as I shall now argue, can very often achieve. 

828 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
In recognising an utterance by a speaker as a 
speech act of serious assertion, with a certain con-
tent, a hearer is ipso facto engaging in a minimal 
piece of interpretation of the speaker - ascribing 
to her an intentional action of a certain kind, and 
hence at the very least supposing the existence of 
some configuration of beliefs and desires which 
explain that action. The theme of my account is: 
the epistemically responsible hearer will do a bit 
more of the same. She will assess the speaker for 
sincerity and competence, by engaging in at least a 
little more interpretation of her. 
A speaker's sincerity and competence, or lack 
of them, are aspects of her psychology - in the 
case of competence, in a suitably "broad" sense, 
which takes in relevant parts of her environment. 
Assessment of them is part of, or a prediction 
from, a more extended psychological theory of 
her. So, in order to assess a speaker's trustworthi-
ness, a hearer needs to piece together at least a 
fragment of such a theory of the speaker - an 
ascription of beliefs, desires, and other mental 
states and character traits to her. Thus it is com-
monsense psychology or person-theory, and the 
related epistemic norms for attribution of these 
states, that we must look to, to see how trustwor-
thiness can be evaluated. 
Notice therefore that while, as we saw in §4, 
one way of estimating a speaker's trustworthiness 
is by induction from past assertions of hers inde-
pendently confirmed as accurate, this is not the 
best way. As always, predictions from a theory of 
the subject matter in question - in this case, the 
psychology of the speaker - will do better, and 
where there is conflict should override mere 
extrapolation of observed correlations with no 
underlying explanation of why they obtain.25 
Indeed the primary task for the hearer is to 
construct enough of a theory of the speaker, and 
relevant portions of her past and present envi-
ronment, to explain her utterance: to render it 
comprehensible why she made that assertion, on 
that occasion. Whether the speaker's assertion is 
to be trusted will, generally speaking, be fall-out 
from this theory which explains why she made it; 
and it is difficult to see how sincerity and compe-
tence could be evaluated other than through the 
construction of such an explanation. 
(The need to explain the utterance is sharply 
felt, when a hitherto reliable informant makes a 
wildly unlikely claim. - Has she gone crazy? Or 
been elaborately tricked? Is she kidding? - Or is 
the best explanation that her outrageous claim to 
have seen flying saucers is really true? We feel at a 
loss; but it is these alternative explanatory hypoth-
eses that we dither between.) 
A psychological interpretation of an individ-
ual being an explanatory theory of her, psycho-
logical concepts are theoretical in character at 
least in the respect that their meanings are fixed 
by their mutual interconnections, and their appli-
cation to a subject is only holistically constrained 
by the "data" to be explained, the subject's actions. 
Thus the norms which govern ascription of sin-
cerity and competence will be part and parcel of 
the norms governing the ascription of psycho-
logical states more comprehensively. Notice how-
ever that norms of ascription - call them Norms 
of Interpretation - whose existence and correct-
ness might be explained by the thesis that they 
have constitutive status in defining the so-applied 
psychological concepts, are ones which, at least in 
the first instance, apply to the highly idealised 
enterprise of constructing an extensive interpret-
ing description of a person, with "all" the data to 
hand; not to the construction of a small fragment 
of one, on very limited evidence. We shall return 
to this point below. 
I shall first state what I think are the epistemic 
norms regarding how a speaker's sincerity with 
respect to an utterance, and competence regarding 
its content, may properly be estimated by a hearer; 
and then address the question of why they hold. 
In claiming that a hearer is required to assess a 
speaker for trustworthiness, I do not mean to 
insist, absurdly, that she is required to conduct an 
extensive piece of MIS-type "vetting" of any 
speaker before she may accept anything he says as 
true (cf. the implausibly onerous requirement dis-
missed earlier). My insistence is much weaker: that 
the hearer should be discriminating in her attitude 
to the speaker, in that she should be continually 
evaluating him for trustworthiness throughout 
their exchange, in the light of the evidence, or cues, 
available to her. This will be partly a matter of her 
being disposed to deploy background knowledge 
which is relevant, partly a matter of her monitor-
ing the speaker for any tell-tale signs revealing 
likely untrustworthiness. This latter consists in it 
being true throughout of the hearer that if there 
were signs of untrustworthiness, she would regis-
ter them, and respond appropriately. 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
829 
Such monitoring of speakers, and appropri-
ate doxastic responses formed on its basis are, 1 
suggest, usually found in ordinary hearers, at 
least to some extent. However, this sort of mon-
itoring for signs of untrustworthiness in a 
speaker is typically conducted at a non -conscious 
level. And while its results can generally be 
fished up into consciousness and expressed, 
albeit roughly, in words ("I didn't like the look 
of him"; "Well, she seemed perfectly normal"), 
no doubt the specific cues in a speaker's behav-
iour which constitute the informational basis 
for this judgement will often be registered and 
processed at an irretrievably sub-personal level. 
Can a justificationist account of knowledge 
allow that this kind of process may be knowl-
edge-yielding? Yes, it can: insisting that subjects 
be able to retail the details of the cues they have 
responded to is demanding the impossible; but 
we may insist, compatibly with the sub-personal 
character of these perceptual or quasi-percep-
tual capacities, that the subject's beliefs must 
not be opaque to her, in that she must be able to 
defend the judgement which is the upshot of 
this capacity with the knowledge precisely that 
she indeed has such a capacity - that "she can 
tell" about that kind of thing; though she does 
not know how she does it. 
Expert dissimulators amongst us being few, 
the insincerity of an utterance is very frequently 
betrayed in the speaker's manner, and so is sus-
ceptible of detection by such a quasi-perceptual 
capacity. But honestly expressed false belief is not 
so readily detectable, and an informed assessment 
of a speaker's competence about some subject 
will typically require that the hearer already know 
something of the speaker's cognitive talents and 
failings. How then is knowledge of the latter 
attainable by a hearer, without, if not an MlS-
style vetting, then at least a lot more research than 
is feasible, when you just want to know the time 
and have forgotten your watch? As regards sincer-
ity, I suggested that it was tell-tale signs of its 
absence that a hearer must be disposed to pick up. 
The flip-side of this coin is that, while there is no 
right to assume sincerity without monitoring the 
speaker for it, sincerity is the default position, in 
assessing a speaker, in the sense we identified ear-
lier; one is justified in taking a speaker to be sin-
cere, unless one observes (and one must be alert 
for them) symptoms of duplicity. 
And, I suggest, the same is true regarding a 
speaker's competence, with respect to a certain 
range of subject matters - namely, all those for 
which commonsense person theory tells us that 
people are nearly always right about such things. 
Just which topics come within this range is a fur-
ther question; but it certainly includes such mat-
ters as: everyday perceptions of familiar types of 
item in one's current environment; memories, 
not too finely specified, of very recent events in 
one's personal history - such as what one had for 
breakfast; and a whole range of basic facts about 
oneself and one's life - one's name, where one 
works, one's tastes, etc. On such matters, I sug-
gest, competence is the default position - that is 
to say, one may justifiedly assume a sincere asser-
tion by a person of whom one has no previous 
knowledge to be true, when its subject matter 
comes within this range, just so long as one 
remains alert for any sign in their circumstances, 
or manner, to suggest otherwise, and there are no 
such signs. 
But there are many other possible topics of 
assertion about which commonsense person 
theory tells us that people are often, even in some 
cases usually, wrong. For these subject matters 
there is no default presumption in favour of com-
petence, and one is not justified in believing what 
someone says about such things unless one has 
specific knowledge of their relevant cognitive tal-
ents and circumstances. 
9. 
In virtue of what do these "default position" 
norms of attribution in favour of sincerity and, 
for certain everyday subject matters, competence, 
obtain? We can identify two opposed views about 
this. The first view, which is my own, runs as fol-
lows: These practical epistemic norms for ascrib-
ing the psychological attributes of sincerity, and 
competence, are justified because, and just inso-
far as, it is fact, and is part of commonsense 
person theory, that (i) nearly all utterances which 
seem sincere indeed are so; and (ii) About these 
everyday subject matters, where there are no spe-
cial circumstances, normal people are nearly 
always right. (Correspondingly, there is no default 
position in favour of competence for non-
everyday subject matters, just because it is not 

830 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
part of commonsense wisdom about persons that 
they are usually right about these things.) 
The opposed view objects to mine as follows: 
"This explanation gets things the wrong way 
round. These facts of commonsense person-
theory are themselves so as a consequence of the 
fact that the default positions are epistemic norms 
governing the ascription of psychological con-
cepts; so they cannot be appealed to to explain or 
justify these norms. More fully: (i) The obtaining 
of these norms of ascription guarantees that these 
'commonsense' facts will be so - so that they are 
not, as they might seem, contingent, but are fea-
tures of individuals' psychology which are guar-
anteed to be so in virtue of the way psychological 
concepts are correctly applied. And (ii) the direc-
tion of explanation, and justification, is from the 
existence of the norms of ascription, to the com-
monsense facts, not vice versa: These norms of 
ascription are primitive features of psychological 
concepts, which serve to fix their content; not 
rules of application which stand in need of justi-
fication by appeal to a supposed independently 
fixed content." 
This opposed view is mistaken, as I shall now 
show. I think it is plausible that there exist Norms 
of Interpretation (Nls), in the sense explained 
earlier: norms for applying psychological con-
cepts26 which have constitutive a priori status, 
fixing the content of these concepts; so that the 
truth of an interpreting description, as we may call 
it, of an individual reduces to its fitting the indi-
vidual in accordance with the correct set of such 
Nls. But, as mentioned earlier, such a reduction 
of truth conditions to conditions of ascription 
will hold, if at all, only with respect to a highly 
idealised, fancied all-data-in interpretation exer-
cise. And the Nls which apply in such an exercise 
are by no means the same thing as practical epis-
temic precepts, applicable in the task of estimat-
ing a speaker's trustworthiness on a very limited 
basis of evidence about her. Whether they trans-
fer to this limited-evidence (and limited aspira-
tion) case is a further question. 
And, I suggest, they do not transfer. It is plau-
sible that "Make no unforced attributions of 
insincerity", and the parallel principle for false 
beliefs, are among the correct Nls. But their 
being so does not ensure that the best interpret-
ing description of an individual will show her as 
being mainly sincere, or as having mainly true 
beliefs; that depends on what departures from 
the default setting are forced by other Nls. 
Perhaps there are also Nls setting a lower bound 
on how much insincerity, or false belief, an indi-
vidual may turn out to have, salva the hypothesis 
that she is indeed a subject of attitudes. But 
these are further, entirely distinct, constraints. 
And, I suggest, any such bounds, while being 
essentially vague, are nonetheless clearly quite 
low - both for truth of beliefs, and for sincerity 
of utterances. 
If this is right, then it is indeed a contingent 
empirical fact, not guaranteed by any concept-
constituting norms of application of psychological 
concepts, that, in some given linguistic commu-
nity, nearly all apparently-sincere utterances are 
so; and that the speakers in the community 
nearly always have true beliefs - if not on all sub-
jects (this being palpably false), then at least over 
a certain quite broad range of subject matters. 
There is of course an essentially vague lower 
bound on the possible incidence of insincerity in 
a community: beyond a certain point, hearers 
would cease ever to have the typical responses 
which are partly constitutive of what it is for a 
sentence to have a given meaning in a commu-
nity, and the language would wither away, or 
change its meaning. But - to reiterate the claim -
this lower bound is quite low. In any case, this 
argument establishes no lower bound on how 
often any single member of a community may lie, 
salva the persistence of language in that commu-
nity. As regards false belief, I do think it is a priori 
that for any individual there must be some core 
range of observable conditions in her immediate 
environment, such that she is at least disposed to 
have mainly true beliefs about such matters. If 
this is not so, she cannot be seen as having the 
capacity for states of informedness about her 
environment (which beliefs essentially are) at all. 
But, once more, this conceptually necessary con-
dition is too weak to affect the current argument. 
The "default position" precepts of attribu-
tion we have canvassed, applicable in the lim-
ited interpretation exercise typically engaged in 
by a hearer, clearly would not be justified if the 
commonsense facts which I have suggested to 
justify them were not so; the issue is only as to 
the direction of explanation between norm of 
attribution, and commonsense fact. If, as I 
have claimed, these commonsense facts are not 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
831 
guaranteed to hold by any constitutive attribu-
tion-norms for psychological concepts, then 
their contingent obtaining plays an essential 
part in the justifying explanation of these 
default position precepts, and the direction of 
explanation is as I have suggested: even if there 
are Norms ofInterpretation, and amongst them 
default settings in favour of sincerity, and true 
belief, these do not transfer automatically to the 
limited-evidence setting, and such limited-evi-
dence default position precepts are justified 
only by contingent facts of commonsense 
person theory, and hold only in a community in 
which these indeed obtainY 
A corollary of my account is that in a commu-
nity in which these facts which justify the default 
position precepts were not so, knowledge (though 
not necessarily beliefl) gained from what other 
people tell one would be much less easily come 
by, and less widespread. But a language might 
thrive there nevertheless. Transmission of accu-
rate information is not the only social role and 
function of the social institution of human lan-
guage; from many perspectives on human life it is 
not even the primary one. 28 
10. 
The skeptical reader may want to ask at this point: -
Just how different is the proposed account from a 
PR thesis? And can knowledge of trustworthiness 
obtained in the manner described really be called 
empirically based? 
For assertions whose subject matter is outside 
the range for which there is a default position in 
favour of competence, the contrast between my 
account and a PR thesis is obvious. But a clear 
difference remains too in cases in which there is a 
default position in favour of both components of 
trustworthiness. My account requires a hearer 
always to take a critical stance to the speaker, to 
assess her for trustworthiness; while a true PR 
thesis, as we have seen, does not. The nub of this 
distinction is a clear and sharp difference: on my 
account, but not on a PR thesis, the hearer must 
always be monitoring the speaker critically. This 
is a matter of the actual engagement of a counter-
factual sensitivity: it is true throughout of the 
hearer that if there were any signs of untrustwor-
thiness, she would pick them up. 
Moreover, as we have seen, the limited default 
positions in favour of the components of trust-
worthiness which my account posits, are precepts 
within the task of constructing a psychological 
theory of the speaker, not a dispensation from 
engaging in this task. There is no recognising 
their defeating conditions except through a gen-
eral grasp of commonsense psychological con-
cepts, and so the precepts can be conformed to (a 
fortiori appropriate defence of belief can be 
given), only by one who is a master of the latter. 
Thus, on my account, a person may gain knowl-
edge from others only when she has the needed 
conceptual framework to conceive and under-
stand them as persons and agents; and moreover 
engages, at least to some extent, in that interpre-
tative task. The strongest PR thesis we identified 
earlier does not require this at all; our best formu-
lation, while it required that the utterance is con-
ceived as the speech act it is, did not require any 
interpretation of the speaker beyond what this 
itself involves. 
Ascribing trustworthiness to a speaker is pos-
iting part of a larger psychological theory of her. 
Such a theory is empirically constrained by, and 
explanatory of, the speaker's behaviour. The fact 
that there are certain default settings regarding its 
construction does not detract from this. In any 
case the default position precepts do not allow 
ascription of trustworthiness on no evidence at 
all: even when trustworthiness is ascribed just on 
the strength of them, empirical warrant for this is 
needed, in the sense that the absence of defeaters 
must have been checked for - as, I have suggested, 
the hearer will show with such defence as "Well, 
she seemed perfectly normal': 
But it is important to remember that, as we 
saw above, while our default position precepts 
represent what is, given the facts of commonsense 
psychology, sufficient ground for ascribing trust-
worthiness to an unknown person, what that per-
son's indeed being trustworthy with respect to 
her assertion consists in is far from reducing to 
the obtaining of these limited-evidence ascrip-
tion conditions. Consequently, while undefeated 
presumption gives a reasonable basis to believe a 
speaker to be right about, say, where she lives, one 
gains stronger confirmation (or disconfirma-
tion!) of her trustworthiness about this and other 
matters, as one gets to know more about her -
acquires more specific knowledge of her relevant 

832 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
cognitive talents and circumstances. A fuller treat-
ment would refine the account offered here by 
introducing degrees of confirmation, and would 
introduce into the account of when it is rational 
(justified) to believe the costs of error: When it 
matters very much whether what someone says is 
true, we are less ready to accept what she says 
without checking her credentials. 
11. 
We set out to examine whether knowledge from 
testimony is a special, irreducible type of knowl-
edge. In reviewing what we have discovered, we 
may broaden our question to ask not only whether 
testimony is a special epistemic category, but also 
whether it is a unitary one. We have found that 
testimony, appropriately defined, is a distinctive 
epistemic link. That is to say, it is a distinctive type 
of belief-producing process, and there is conse-
quently a distinctive set of premise-schemata '!J 
recapitulating that process. Appropriate instances 
of the elements of '!J, or evidence for them, when 
known by a hearer, may be offered by her in 
defence of a belief acquired through that process, 
and a belief of hers is known through testimony 
(pace certain qualifications made earlier) just 
when she is in a position so to defend it. 
On the other hand, as regards the likelihood of 
truth of what is asserted by a speaker, and, conse-
quently, whether a hearer is entitled to presume 
that she is trustworthy, we have seen that testi-
mony, in the broad sense of serious assertions 
aimed at communication, is a rag-bag category. 
This is unsurprising, being a simple consequence 
of the fact, registered in commonsense person 
theory, that how likely people are to have true 
beliefs about a given subject matter depends 
entirely on what kind of thing it is, and how they 
are epistemically placed in regard to it. The epis-
temology of testimony can be no more homoge-
neous than is the psychology of belief, in this 
respect. 
We have rejected the thesis that there is a blan-
ket presumptive right to trust, applicable to all 
cases of testimony. Moreover the rag-bag nature 
of the category in regard of likely truth of what is 
asserted means that it is a mistake to expect to 
find any epistemic principles as to when one may 
believe testimony, which apply to all instances of 
it. Our default position in favour of competence 
was more selective. 
Our account has explained how knowledge 
may be gained through testimony without 
recourse to any mysterious epistemic primitives 
pertaining just to testimony. The limited default 
positions in favour of sincerity and competence 
which we have discovered, are epistemic norms 
within the enterprise of ascribing psychological 
states to others. Their existence is derived from 
and explained by the nature of commonsense 
psychological concepts, whose significance and 
domain of answerability is much broader than 
just the explanation of people's assertoric utter-
ances. Thus the conditions under which one may 
believe another's assertions have been exhibited 
as fall-out from the nature of commonsense psy-
chological concepts. The epistemology of testi-
mony in this respect is but one part of the broader 
domain of our knowledge of other minds, and is 
to be subsumed under that category, not treated 
as a separate epistemic domain with its own, irre-
ducible, normative epistemic principles.'" 
There is another central and fundamental 
respect in which testimony is a special, and uni-
tary, epistemic category. This paper has taken for 
granted a hearer's knowledge that a speaker has 
made a speech act with a certain content and 
force, and has focussed on the question how she 
may get from there to knowledge of that which 
has been asserted. But the epistemology of a hear-
er's understanding of utterances, and apprecia-
tion of them as speech acts, will be at the heart of 
a full account of how knowledge is gained through 
testimony. Understanding, whether of one's own 
or others' utterances, involves special perceptual 
capacities and kinds of informational states, dis-
tinctive of language and of language-using crea-
tures. The epistemology of understanding is 
intimately bound up with its phenomenology, 
and with the nature of these special states. 
Whether or not the best account of how a hearer 
may know what a speaker has said postulates any 
normative epistemic principles special to under-
standing, understanding remains a separate epis-
temic category in that it involves these special 
informational states. 
The strategy of this paper - to take knowledge 
of what is asserted as given, and consider the next 
step - is valid only if the nature of understanding 
does not itself have implications for that next step. 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
833 
This means, at the very least, that it is not intrinsic 
to the state of understanding an utterance that it 
compels the hearer towards belief in what she 
grasps as being asserted. It is my view that there is 
nothing in the nature of what it is to understand 
an utterance which is in tension with the view of 
knowledge through testimony as inferential 
knowledge (in the sense that it must be backed by 
a substantial justification) sketched in this paper, 
or which provides the materials to defend the pre-
sumptive right thesis. But my defence of this 
claim, and my rejection of other positive argu-
ments for PR, must wait till another day.30 
So too must wait further defence of the coher-
entist epistemic stance within which my account 
has been developed, from which comes the thesis, 
essential to my "local" reductionist approach, that 
Notes 
I am grateful here to accounts, both written 
and spoken, of the doctrines of the school. 
from Arindam Chakrabarti and Bimal Matilal. 
This pair of theses seems also to be implicit in 
the anti-reductionist stance of C. A. J. Coady 
"Testimony and Observation". Amer. Phil. 
Quart. 10, No.2, April 1973, pp. 149-55. 
2 Thus for me, the issue of what it takes for a 
testimony belief to be justified is one with the 
issue what it takes for it to be knowledge. 
Those for whom those issues are not the same 
- since they favour some other conception of 
knowledge - may read my account as being 
simply about justification. 
3 I.e. a belief originally acquired through testi-
mony, and whose status as knowledge still 
rests on that pedigree. In Fricker "The 
Epistemology of Testimony'; Proc. Aris. 50c. 
5uppl. vol. for 1987, pp. 57-83, I set out a 
framework which exhibits the complicated 
interrelations involved here, between original 
causation, sustaining, and available justifying 
support of a belief. 
4 This argument seems to be implicit in Coady 
"Testimony and Observation". 
5 In this paper I am assuming that knowledge 
that such-and-such has been asserted is often 
had by hearers, and am focusing on the epis-
temology of the step from there, to knowledge 
of its truth. See § 11. 
only the local question about testimony needs to 
be answered, and that it should be answered, as 
we have done, from within the world picture con-
stituted by the "commonsense" framework of 
beliefs which we all share; thus that it does not 
matter, nor does it undermine the rationale of 
insisting on "local" reduction and justification, if 
the global generalisation cannot be independ-
ently confirmed by an individual language-user; 
who will have made her way into her shared lan-
guage, and conceptual scheme, through a process 
in which she was necessarily, at an earlier stage, a 
simple truster. In this paper I have sought only to 
block the transcendental argument for a pre-
sumptive right thesis, by showing how empirical 
confirmation of the trustworthiness of a particu-
lar speaker is possible. 3l 
6 If this is shown, then it has been shown that 
testimony is not just a way of acquiring beliefs, 
but is moreover one which is capable of yield-
ing knowledge, what we may call an epistemic 
link. Cf. Fricker "The Epistemology of 
Testimony". 
7 Throughout my discussion, "H'; "5'; and "0" 
are to be regarded as names for an arbitrary 
hearer, speaker, and occasion respectively. "P" 
in contrast must be considered merely a sche-
matic letter holding a place to be occupied by 
an indicative sentence. Whether outside or 
inside quotes, "5", "H", and "0", and the pos-
sible substitution-instances for which "P" is 
schematic, are to be considered expressions of 
the metalanguage we are using to describe tes-
timony situations. Thus schematic sentences 
enclosed in quotes, such as "5 asserted that P'; 
constitute (schematic) specifications by us, in 
our terms, of the content of a hearer's knowl-
edge. 
8 Instances of '?J are sentences of a metalan-
guage which we use to describe what H knows. 
There is of course no guarantee a priori that 
we can thus identify a single justificatory 
schema which covers all and only cases of 
knowledge through testimony. But it turns 
out that we can do pretty well. See §5 for how 
we should define the epistemic link of "testi-
mony" to this end. 

834 
ELIZABETH FRICKER 
9 Cf. David Hume, An Enquiry Concerning 
Human Understanding, Ch. 10. An adequate 
treatment of such collisions of contrary evi-
dence would introduce probabilities, as a 
more detailed model of knowledge through 
testimony would do throughout. 
10 
Of course the grounds justifying a belief 
need not be so strong as to entail it. The 
reason for insisting nonetheless that the ele-
ments of?J be chosen so as to together entail 
P, is pragmatic and ad hoc: this represents 
the best strategy for finding a single charac-
teristic justificatory schema, and the result-
ing account is illuminating. The possibility 
of grounds for belief weaker than entailment 
is allowed for, in this set-up, in the fact that 
H need only have, and cite, evidence, which 
may be less than conclusive, that the relevant 
instances of?J obtain. What may afford this 
last is endlessly variable, and we cannot hope 
for a general description circumscribing the 
possibilities. 
11 
Note however that it is a desideratum, 
rather than an absolute constraint, that we 
thus succeed in characterising knowledge 
through testimony just by means of our 
choice of a set ?J. Clearly, one cannot find 
a ?J which is epistemically independent of 
the content of S's assertion whatever the 
latter may be: cf., when it is T2 itself, or evi-
dence for T2• But these are special cases, 
and we may hope to find a ?J which is epis-
temically independent of the content of S's 
assertion apart from such cases. As we shall 
see in § 7, it proves difficult to achieve even 
this perfectly. 
12 
Equally, of course, when she knows that S 
has not asserted that P on O! But this case 
need not concern us, since there is no ques-
tion of H gaining knowledge through S's tes-
timony, nor of all 
the elements of 
?J obtaining. 
13 
An appropriate semantics for this condi-
tional will make it strictly stronger than the 
material conditional, and with no supposi-
tion of falsity of the antecedent. Roughly, it 
will be true just if all the nearest S-asserts-
that-P worlds are P-worlds, where the near-
ness relation is reflexive. It would be nice if a 
case could be made for a nearness metric 
which does not have the consequence that 
the conditional is ensured true whenever "P" 
is a nomological truth. I think the ordinary 
language locution is rightly heard thus; but 
finding a regimented semantics with this 
consequence is another matter. It would, 
very likely, involve relativising the stand-
ard of nearness to the identity of the 
antecedent. 
14 
It is no part of the reductionist position I am 
arguing for, to claim that empirical warrant 
for trusting the speaker is available on every 
occasion of testimony. This is clearly false. In 
cases where it is not, the anti-reductionist 
and reductionist will disagree over whether 
the hearer is entitled to trust the speaker, 
and, in the event she does believe what is 
asserted, can be said to gain knowledge. 
15 
A really strong general claim, to the effect 
that all, or virtually all assertions are true, 
would suffice to justify belief in an arbitrary 
assertion, in the absence of further "defeat-
ers": and might indeed be employed in a 
meta-level argument to show the existence 
of a PR at object level. But a generalisation of 
this strength is obviously false. (A fortiori is 
not a conceptual truth about language, as 
one attempted argument for a PR would 
claim.) 
16 
As I understand it, this is an element in the 
Indian anti-reductionist case. And Coady 
"Testimony and Observation" assumes the 
anti-reductionist must establish generalisa-
tions about the reliability of testimony. 
17 
Is this connection causal? Its latter stages 
which are our primary concern always are, 
but whether the speaker's initial acquisition 
of her belief can be thought of as caused by 
its subject matter depends on what kind of 
thing that is, and how her belief arose. 
18 
If the reader is unhappy with this view of the 
problem of induction, she may consider the 
justification of deduction instead, which 
surely takes this form. 
19 
Is this unkind to children? The upshot of my 
casual discussions with developmental psy-
chologists is that they (children) acquire the 
ability to lie, and so maybe the grasp of CSL 
which shows this 
possibilit~1, remarkably 
early. But a feeling that my theory is too 
demanding on hearers may anyway be an 
intuition against the requirement that 

AGAINST GULLIBILITY 
835 
knowledge requires justification, rather than 
against my account of what it takes for a 
testimony-belief to be justified. 
20 
Freak cases are possible - where a would-be 
deceiver happens to have a compensatingly 
false belief. But for our project, of giving a 
systematic general account of how knowledge 
is gained through testimony, we may set these 
aside, taking the normal case as our domain. 
21 
That S understands her own utterance we 
may consider to be packed into the fact that 
it is a serious assertion. The epistemology of 
such knowledge is outside the scope of this 
paper. 
22 
Note that the definition of competence given 
does not allow any inference "backwards" to 
sincerity, from knowledge of competence 
and the truth of what is asserted; but a 
stronger definition - "If S were to believe 
that P, then it would be the case that p", 
would do so. Intuitively, this kind of "back-
wards" knowledge of sincerity can occur. 
There is another difficulty, viz. that one may 
also know competence backwards, when "P" 
expresses a necessary truth and one knows 
this fact; and equally, in the absence of a 
semantics which avoids this, when one 
knows it to express a nomological truth (see 
footnote in §3 above). But there is no alter-
native which meets our requirements better 
than the '3" consisting of T] and Trus(S, U); 
so we must perforce complete our charac-
terisation of knowledge through testimony 
by putting restrictions on how sincerity and 
competence are known by H, which rule out 
these cases of "backward" confirmation. 
23 
The present account thus differs from the 
one I offered in Fricker op. cit. There I opted 
for a material conditional expressing "com-
petence with respect to p", for the prima facie 
reason in its favour, that it is the weakest fur-
ther premise which validates the inference to 
"P': I now hold that earlier choice to be 
wrong because it fails the test of epistemic 
independence. 
24 
That it takes some care to arrive at a correct 
theoretical definition of trustworthiness in 
no way undermines this claim. The difficulty 
of formulating explicitly conditions of which 
we all have a sure implicit grasp, is the gen-
eral experience with analyses of ordinary 
concepts. 
25 
If Russell's chicken had only interpreted its 
feeder, her murderous intent on that last day 
would not have come as such a surprise! 
26 
And with them, simultaneously, semantic 
concepts, of course. My discussion here is 
too brief to bring in explicitly the fact that, in 
any ascription of psychological states to an 
individual, the meaning of the sentences she 
utters are always, at least in principle, also in 
the melting pot. But nothing I say here is in 
neglect of this fact, which does not invalidate 
the argument of this section, in particular 
the claims that any conceptually-ensured 
lower bounds on false belief, and false utter-
ance, are quite low. 
27 
If considerations about interpretation do 
not suffice on their own to justify a default 
position in favour of trustworthiness, then a 
fortiori they do not serve to justify a PR 
thesis. This is one of the attempted "positive 
arguments" which, in my view, does not 
work. 
28 
My views here have been influenced by dis-
cussions with Prof. Mike Gilsenan, about his 
experiences as an anthropologist studying 
Middle Eastern societies. There is of course 
much more to be said on these matters. 
29 It is itself part of that broader domain, rather 
than reducing to it, in that, as already noted, 
semantic and psychological concepts hang 
together, fitting simultaneously onto a 
subject. 
30 
See Fricker"The Epistemology of Testimony", 
pp.74-5. 
31 
I am grateful for comments from Michael 
Bacharach, John Campbell, Bill Child, Dale 
Jamieson, Philip Pettit, and Tim Williamson. 
I am also particularly indebted to Arindam 
Chakrabarti, whose vigorous defence of the 
Indian view provoked this paper. 

CHAPTER 56 
Content Preservation 
Tyler Burge 
Near the beginning of Rules for the Direction of the 
Mind Descartes holds that some things known 
"with certainty" and "by deduction" are not evi-
dent. He notes that in long deductions, we may 
know that "the last link is connected with the first, 
even though we do not take in by means of one 
and the same act of vision all the intermediate 
links on which that connection depends, but only 
remember that we have taken them successively 
under review .... "1 Though he acknowledges that 
such knowledge is not evident or purely intuitive, 
and that long deductions are more subject to error 
than is intuitive knowledge, Descartes thinks that 
if the knowledge is deduced from evident mathe-
matical premises, it is certain and demonstrative. 
Presumably he would not doubt that it is apriori. I 
lay aside certainty. But the view that the knowledge 
is demonstrative and apriori seems to me true. 
Roderick Chisholm sees matters differently. 
He defines "apriori" in such a way that a proposi-
tion is apriori (and known apriori) only if it is 
either evident or follows directly by evident 
entailment from something that is evident. He 
explicitly rules out the results of multi-stepped 
deductions: 
What if S derives a proposition from a set of 
axioms, not by means of one or two simple steps, 
but as a result of a complex proof, involving a 
Originally published in The Philosophical Review 102,4 
(Oct. 1993), pp. 457-88. 
series of interrelated steps? If the proof is for-
mally valid, then shouldn't we say that S knows 
the proposition a priori? I think that the answer 
IS no. 
He adds: 
[Ilf, in the course of a demonstration, we must 
rely upon memory at various stages, thus using 
as premisses contingent propositions about what 
we happen to remember, then, although we 
might be said to have "demonstrative knowledge" 
of our conclusion, in a somewhat broad sense of 
the expression "demonstrative knowledge," we 
cannot be said to have an a priori demonstration 
of the conclusion.2 
Some of the difference between us derives 
from different conceptions of apriority. There are 
many such conceptions. I will be explicit about 
mine. I understand "apriori" to apply to a person's 
knowledge when that knowledge is underwritten 
by an apriori justification or entitlement that 
needs no further justification or entitlement to 
make it knowledge. A justification or entitlement 
is apriori if its justificational force is in no way 
constituted or enhanced by reference to or reli-
ance on the specifics of some range of sense expe-
riences or perceptual beliefs. 
I take "apriori" to apply primarily to justifica-
tions or entitlements, rather than to truths. There 
are, of course, conceptual relations between these 

CONTENT PRESERVATION 
837 
notions. Justification or entitlement aims at truth 
since it rationally supports belief. Moreover, the 
notion of apriori truth is important, though it 
should probably be explicated in terms of possi-
ble apriori knowledge. But in this account, justifi-
cation and entitlement are fundamental. 
The distinction between justification and enti-
tlement is this: Although both have positive force 
in rationally supporting a propositional attitude 
or cognitive practice, and in constituting an epis-
temic right to it, entitlements are epistemic rights 
or warrants that need not be understood by or 
even accessible to the subject. We are entitled to 
rely, other things equal, on perception, memory, 
deductive and inductive reasoning, and on - I will 
claim - the word of others. The unsophisticated 
are entitled to rely on their perceptual beliefs. 
Philosophers may articulate these entitlements. 
But being entitled does not require being able to 
justify reliance on these resources, or even to con-
ceive such a justification. Justifications, in the 
narrow sense, involve reasons that people have 
and have access to. These may include self-suffi-
cient premises or more discursive justifications. 
But they must be available in the cognitive reper-
toire of the subject. The border between the 
notions of entitlement and justification may be 
fuzzy. I shall sometimes use "justified" and "justi-
fication" broadly, to cover both cases. 
A person's knowledge of a proposition might 
be adequately supported both by an apriori body 
and by an empirical body of justification or 
entitlement. Then the person's knowledge would 
be heterogeneously overdetermined. The person 
would have both apriori and empirical knowl-
edge of the proposition. To be apriori, the 
knowledge must be underwritten by an apriori 
justification or entitlement that needs no further 
justificatory help, in order for the person to have 
that knowledge. To be apriori, a person's justifica-
tion or entitlement must retain its justificational 
force even if whatever empirical justifications or 
entitlements the person also has to believe the rele-
vant proposition are ignored. 
In holding that the justificational force of an 
apriori justification or entitlement is in no way 
constituted or enhanced by reliance on the specif-
ics of some range of sense experiences or percep-
tual beliefs, I do not require that an apriori 
justification rely on reason or understanding 
alone -
as pre-Kantian rationalists required. 
A justification or entitlement would count as 
apriori if it did not rely for its justificational force 
on sense experience or perceptual belief at all. But 
it might also count if it depended on entirely gen-
eral aspects of sense experience or perceptual 
belief, or on aspects of the structure of the sub-
ject's sense capacities and on their function in 
yielding categories of information. 3 
An individual need not make reference to 
sense experiences for his justification or entitle-
ment to be empirical. My term "reliance on", in 
the explication of apriority, is meant to acknowl-
edge that most perceptual beliefs about physical 
objects or properties do not refer to sense experi-
ences or their perceptual content. Such beliefs 
make reference only to physical objects or pro-
perties. But the individual is empirically entitled 
to these perceptual beliefs. The justificational 
force of the entitlement backing such beliefs 
partly consists in the individual's having certain 
sense experiences, or at any rate in the individu-
al's perceptual beliefs' being perceptual. 
An apriori justification (entitlement) cannot 
rely on the specifics of sense experiences or per-
ceptual beliefs for its justificational force. An 
apriori justification will usually depend on sense 
experiences or perceptual beliefs in some way. 
They are typically necessary for the acquisition 
of understanding or belief. But such depend-
ence is not relevant to apriority unless it is 
essential to justificational force. Distinguishing 
the genesis of understanding and belief from the 
rational or normative force behind beliefs is 
fundamental to any view that takes apriori 
justification seriously.4 
No serious conception of apriority has held 
that all justifications held to be apriori are unre-
visable or infallible. Traditionally, the deepest 
apriori justifications were seen to be hard to come 
by. Putative apriori justifications were tradition-
ally held to be revisable because one could fail to 
understand in sufficient depth the relevant pro-
positions, or make errors of reasoning or analysis. 
Traditional views did tend to overrate the 
tightness of connection between genuine (as 
opposed to putative) apriori justifications and 
truth. First, apriori justification (entitlement) can 
be nondemonstrative: an apriori justification can 
be outweighed without being shown to be ration-
ally deficient or based on misunderstanding -
without being shown not to have justificational 

838 
TYLER BURGE 
force (not to be a justification). Some mathe-
matical arguments are nondemonstrative, even 
broadly inductive, yet apriori in my sense. If a 
principle is accepted because its truth would 
explain or derive a variety of other accepted 
mathematical principles, the justification for 
accepting the principle is nondemonstrative; but 
it may not derive any of its force from perceptual 
beliefs. Second, although some apriori justifica-
tions or entitlements may be invulnerable to 
empirical counterconsiderations, such invulner-
ability does not follow from the notion of aprior-
ity. As will emerge, I think that some beliefs with 
genuine apriori justifications or entitlements are 
vulnerable to empirical overthrow. 
In both ways, a belief's being apriori justified, 
for a person at a time, does not entail that it is 
true. There are, I think, some apriori justifica-
tions or entitlements that are demonstrative and 
do entail truth. But they do not do so purely by 
being apriori. The present conception of aprior-
ity fixes on the nature of the positive rational 
support for a belief. It says nothing about ways 
in which a belief may be vulnerable to counter-
considerations. 
Thus apriori justification may be unevident, 
fallible, nondemonstrative, and not "certain." 
Beliefs thought to be apriori, and even actually 
justified apriori, are subject to revision. In these 
ways, my conception of apriority differs from 
Chisholm's. 
Our differences are not primarily verbal, how-
ever. Chisholm regards long deductions as 
importing memory of particular past mental 
events into the justification of the deduction.5 If 
such memories are a necessary part of the justifi-
cation of the deduction, then - at least where they 
include memories of empirical beliefs or experi-
ences (memories of reading symbols carefully, for 
example) - such deductions are not apriori, even 
on my conception of apriority. 
But Chisholm's conception of the role of 
memory in demonstrative reasoning seems to me 
off the mark. If memory supplied, as part of the 
demonstration, "contingent propositions about 
what we happen to remember," the demonstra-
tion could not be purely logical or mathematical. 
But the normal role of memory in demonstrative 
reasoning is, I think, different. Memory does not 
supply for the demonstration propositions about 
memory, the reasoner, or past events.6 It supplies 
the propositions that serve as links in the demon-
stration itself. Or rather, it preserves them, together 
with their judgmental force, and makes them 
available for use at later times. Normally, the con-
tent of the knowledge of a longer demonstration 
is no more about memory, the reasoner, or con-
tingent events than that of a shorter demonstra-
tion. One does not justify the demonstration by 
appeals to memory. One justifies it by appeals to 
the steps and the inferential transitions of the 
demonstration. 
Why did Chisholm think otherwise? Long 
demonstrations are more fallible, and fallible in 
different ways, than short ones are. As he notes, 
people make mistakes of haste or incomplete 
understanding in judgments about relatively 
obvious propositions. But in longer demonstra-
tions there are not only more opportunities to 
make these mistakes. One may suffer memory 
slips, even if one is careful and fully understands 
each proposition in the deduction. Traditionally, 
belief that appealed to apriori justification was 
held to be subject to error. But the sources of 
error were sometimes limited to failures of under-
standing and reason. It may seem that failure of 
memory is a source of error not easily accommo-
dated by the traditional conception. 
But relevant differences between short and 
long demonstrations are at most those between 
short-term and longer-term memory. Even one-
step demonstrations could go bad if the reason-
er's short-term memory were defective enough. 
So if we take vulnerability to memory failure as a 
sign that a justification of reasoning must make 
reference to memory, no reasoning at all will be 
independent of premises about memory. This is 
unacceptable. It is one thing to rely on memory in 
a demonstration, and another to use premises 
about memory. Any reasoning in time must rely 
on memory. But not all reasoning must use 
premises about memory or the past. 
Here as elsewhere, to be justified in a cognitive 
process, one need not include premises in the jus-
tification that rule out all possible sources of 
error. This is a widely accepted point about per-
ceptual justification. To be entitled to a percep-
tual belief that there is a bird there, one need not 
rule out all ways that one could be fooled. The 
same point applies to reasoning. To be justified in 
deductive reasoning, one need not include in 
one's justification propositions that guard against 

CONTENT PRESERVATION 
839 
memory lapses, short or long term. Reliance on 
memory does not even add to the justificational 
force of the deductive justification. 
If a justification depends on valid deductive 
reasoning from (let us presume) premises that are 
known apriori, then one's being justified by the 
justification depends only on one's actually 
understanding the reasoning sufficiently, and on 
one's reasoning processes' actually working prop-
erly. The justification does not depend on a 
premise that says that these conditions obtain, a 
premise that would itself require further justifica-
tion. (I think that such dependence would involve 
a vicious regress.) One can presume that they 
obtain, without needing justification for the pre-
sumption, except in special situations in which 
these presumptions are called reasonably - and 
perhaps even correctly - into question. 
In a deduction, reasoning processes' working 
properly depends on memory's preserving the 
results of previous reasoning. But memory's 
preserving such results does not add to the jus-
tificational force of the reasoning. It is rather a 
background condition for the reasoning's suc-
cess. Memory is no more intrinsically an empir-
ical faculty than it is a rational faculty. Its 
function in deductive reasoning is preservative. 
Its role in justification derives from what it pre-
serves. Our entitlement to rely on memory in 
long deductions derives from our entitlement to 
rely on reasoning to carry out its functions. 
Memory failures that cause demonstrations to 
fail are failures of background conditions neces-
sary to the proper function of reasoning. Hence 
the fallibility of memory in deductive reasoning 
is a source of error that can be countenanced by 
the traditional conception of apriority - and 
our conception as well. 
Even in empirical reasoning, memory has a 
purely preservative function that does not con-
tribute to the force of the justification, but simply 
helps assure the proper working of other cogni-
tive capacities over time. When we perceive events 
and infer an explanation, memory preserves the 
perceptual beliefs as we carry out the explanation. 
But this preservation is not part of the justifica-
tion of the explanation, nor does it add to it - even 
though if it were to fail, the explanation would be 
jeopardized. Rather, memory just holds the results 
of the perception intact long enough for explana-
tion to be carried through. 
Of course, memory sometimes is not purely 
preservative, but is an independent element in 
justification. Memory of events, objects, experi-
ences, or attitudes may form a premise in a justi-
fication of an empirical belief. The beliefs that 
such memories support are justified partly by ref-
erence to the memory. Or else they may partly rely 
for their entitlement on memory. 
Substantive memories of specific events, 
objects, experiences, or attitudes may playa role 
in deductive reasoning. They may aid reasoning 
without being elements in the justification they 
aid. So, for example, we may draw pictures in a 
proof, or make use of mnemonic devices to aid 
understanding and facilitate reasoning, without 
relying on them to enhance the mathematical jus-
tification. Alternatively, substantive memories 
may be part of an auxiliary, double-checking jus-
tification. In such cases, they may playa justifica-
tional role, yet be justificationally dispensable. 
Substantive memory can even be needed to 
shore up gaps in a person's deductive reasoning. 
When a purely preservative instance is reasonably 
challenged, because memory has proved unrelia-
ble, one may have to rely on substantive memory. 
For example, if one knows one's memory has 
been slipping, one might have to resort to remem-
bering counting the number of implication signs 
in a pair of formulas to support one's presump-
tion that one's inference was based on correct 
memory. In such a case, reliance on the mne-
monic devices may be indispensable to the per-
son's justification -
not merely a part of an 
auxiliary double-checking procedure. For the 
person is no longer entitled to the presumption 
that memory can be relied upon. I think, how-
ever, that the need to make reference to memory 
in deductions in order to be justified by the 
deductions is uncommon. In certain cases one 
might reasonably doubt that one is entitled to rely 
on one's memory, but be wrong to doubt it. 
But the fact that memory can play substantive 
roles in justification or entitlement should not 
obscure the distinction between substantive and 
purely preservative memory. Let me summarize 
the distinction. Substantive memory is an element 
in a justification; it imports subject matter or 
objects into reasoning. Purely preservative 
memory introduces no subject matter, consti-
tutes no element in a justification, and adds no 
force to a justification or entitlement. It simply 

840 
TYLER BURGE 
maintains in justificational space a cogmtlve 
content with its judgmental force. Like inference, 
it makes transitions of reason possible, but con-
tributes no propositional content. Unlike infer-
ence, it is not a transition or move - so it is not an 
element in a justification. Hence in deductions, 
neither reliance on it nor susceptibility to errors 
that arise from its malfunction prevents the justi-
fication associated with the deduction from being 
apriori. 7 
My discussion of memory is pointed toward 
exploring analogies between memory and accept-
ance of the word of others. What is the role of 
interlocution in the justification of our beliefs? 
Relying on others is perhaps not metaphysi-
cally necessary for any possible rational being. 
But it is cognitively fundamental to beings at all 
like us. Though ontogenetically later than percep-
tion and memory, reliance on others for learning 
language and acquiring beliefs is deeply ingrained 
in our evolutionary history. Acquiring beliefs 
from others seems not only psychologically fun-
damental, but epistemically justified. We do not 
as individuals justify this reliance empirically, any 
more than we justify our use of perception empir-
ically. But we seem entitled to such reliance. Most 
of the information that we have, and many of the 
methods we have for evaluating it, depend on 
interlocution. If we did not acquire a massive 
number of beliefs from others, our cognitive lives 
would be little different from the animals'. 
What is the epistemic status of beliefs based 
on interlocution? I will state my view broadly 
before qualifying and supporting it. The use of 
perception is a background condition necessary 
for the acquisition of belief from others. But in 
many instances, perception and perceptual belief 
are not indispensable elements in the justifica-
tion of such beliefs, or in the justificational force 
of entitlements underwriting such beliefs. The 
function of perception is often analogous to the 
function of purely preservative memory in reason-
ing. Without perception, one could not acquire 
beliefs from others. But perception plays a trig-
gering and preservative role, in many cases, not a 
justificatory one. Sometimes, the epistemic status 
of beliefs acquired from others is not empirical. In 
particular, it is not empirical just by virtue of the 
fact that the beliefs are acquired from others. 8 
Such beliefs are sometimes apriori justified in the 
sense that they need not rely for justificational 
force on the specifics of some range of sense 
experiences or perceptual beliefs. 
Thomas Reid insightfully compares acquisition 
of belief from others to perception as a basic "chan-
nel to the mind," with its own functions in acquir-
ing knowledge. Reid also claims that the tendency 
to rely on others for acquiring beliefs is innate: 
The wise and beneficent Author of nature, who 
intended that we should be social creatures, and 
that we should receive the greatest and most 
important part of our knowledge by the infor-
mation of others, hath, for these purposes 
implanted in our natures two principles that tally 
with each other. The first of these principles is a 
propensity to speak truth ... [the second] is a 
disposition to confide in the veracity of others, 
and to believe what they tell us." 
Reid notes that credulity, unlike reasoning and 
experience, is "strongest in childhood, and lim-
ited and restrained by experience." We restrain 
credulity by weighing the character and disinter-
estedness of witnesses, the possibility of collusion, 
the 
antecedent likelihood 
of information. 
Moreover, our reliance on others is more fallible 
than our reliance on perception - as Reid also 
notes. We make perceptual errors, but the errors 
derive from illusions that often can be explained 
by reference to natural law. We are led into mis-
takes by others through lies and emotional inter-
ferences that are capricious in comparison to the 
patterns of nature. Why do these considerations 
not show that acquisition of beliefs from others is 
not only necessarily empirical but far more in 
need of empirical expertise than ordinary percep-
tion for its justification? 
Justification in acquiring beliefs from others 
may be glossed, to a first approximation, by this 
principle: A person is entitled to accept as true 
something that is presented as true and that is intel-
ligible to him, unless there are stronger reasons not 
to do so. Call this the Acceptance Principle. As chil-
dren and often as adults, we lack reasons not to 
accept what we are told. We are entitled to acquire 
information according to the principle - without 
using it as justification - accepting the informa-
tion instinctively. The justification I develop 
below is a reflective philosophical account of an 
epistemic entitlement that comes with being a 
rational agent. 

CONTENT PRESERVATION 
841 
Justified (entitled) acceptance is the epistemic 
"default" position. We can strengthen this posi-
tion with empirical reasons: "she is a famous 
mathematician." We can acquire empirical rea-
sons not to accept what we are told: "he has every 
reason to lie." But to be entitled, we do not have to 
have reasons that support the default position, if 
there is no reasonable ground for doubt. Truth 
telling is a norm that can be reasonably presumed 
in the absence of reasons to attribute violations. 
It is usually said that to be justified in accept-
ing information from someone else, one must be 
justified in believing that the source believes the 
information and is justified in believing it. I think 
this misleading. A presupposition of the 
Acceptance Principle is that one is entitled not to 
bring one's source's sincerity or justification into 
question, in the absence of reasons to the con-
trary. This too is an epistemic default position. 
The Acceptance Principle is not a statistical 
point about people's tending to tell the truth 
more often than not. Falsehoods might conceiv-
ably outnumber truths in a society. The principle 
is also not a point about innateness, though Reid's 
claim that a disposition to acceptance is innate 
seems to me correct. The principle is about enti-
tlement, not psychological origin. 
The epistemic default position articulated by 
the Acceptance Principle applies at an extremely 
high level of idealization in most actual communi-
cation, especially between sophisticated interloc-
utors. Social, political, or intellectual context 
often provides "stronger reasons" that counsel 
against immediately accepting what one is told. 
Given life's complexities, this default position is 
often left far behind in reasoning about whether 
to rely on a source. One might wonder, with some 
hyperbole, whether it can ever be the last word in 
the epistemology of acceptance for anyone over 
the age of eleven. The primary point - that it is a 
starting point for reason - would not be under-
mined if its purest applications were relatively 
rare. But I think that it has broader application 
than the hyperbolic conjecture suggests. 
Acceptance underlies language acquisition. 
Lacking language, one could not engage in 
rational, deliberative activity, much less the pri-
mary forms of human social cooperation. 
(Indeed, this point suggests the line of justifica-
tion for the principle that I shall begin to develop 
below.) But unquestioned reliance is also 
common in adult life. When we ask someone on 
the street the time, or the direction of some land-
mark, or when we ask someone to do a simple 
sum, we rely on the answer. We make use of a 
presumption of credibility when we read books, 
signs, or newspapers, or talk to strangers on 
unloaded topics. We need not engage in reason-
ing about the person's qualifications to be rational 
in accepting what he or she says, in the absence of 
grounds for doubt. Grounds for doubt are absent 
a lot of the time. 
The primary default position, the Acceptance 
Principle, is not an empirical principle. The gen-
eral form of justification associated with the prin-
ciple is: A person is apriori entitled to accept a 
proposition that is presented as true and that is 
intelligible to him, unless there are stronger reasons 
not to do so, because it is prima facie preserved 
(received) from a rational source, or resource for 
reason; reliance on rational sources - or resources 
for reason - is, other things equal, necessary to the 
function of reason. The justificational force of the 
entitlement described by this justification is not 
constituted or enhanced by sense experiences or 
perceptual beliefs.1O Before filling in this form of 
justification, I want to make some preliminary 
points. 
I think that I need not show that other rational 
beings are necessary to the function of one's 
reason in order for one to have these entitlements. 
One has a general entitlement to rely on the 
rationality of rational beings. The Acceptance 
Principle can be apriori instantiated where one 
has apriori, undefeated, prima facie entitlement 
to construe something prima facie intelligible as 
having a rational source. So I think that to main-
tain that one is apriori entitled to rely upon 
rational interlocutors, I need not show that a soli-
tary reasoner is impossible. 
Our account distinguishes rational sources 
and resources for reason. Resources for reason -
memory and perception, for example - need not 
themselves be rational beings or capacities to 
reason. In these senses they need not themselves 
be rational. Yet they may provide material and 
services that a rational being is apriori entitled to 
rely upon. Rational sources are sources that them-
selves are a capacity to reason or are rational 
beings. 
As with rational sources, I think that to show 
that we are apriori entitled to rely upon a given 

842 
TYLER BURGE 
resource for reason, I need not show that such a 
resource is necessary to any possible reasoning. 
One is entitled to rely upon resources for reason 
in general- other things equal- even if some par-
ticular resource for reason is not indispensable to 
the function of reason. Such resources may enrich 
reason without being necessary to every rational 
activity. This view puts pressure on explicating 
the notion of a resource for reason. This matter 
can be postponed, for it is relevant to interlocu-
tion only in special cases. 
There are deeper questions about rational 
entitlement that I cannot pursue in depth here. 
One can ask why one is entitled to rely on rational 
sources (or resources for reason), in view of the 
fact that they can be mistaken or misleading. 
This is tantamount to a traditional skeptical 
question about how putative rationality or justi-
fication is associated with truth. One can appar-
ently 
imagine 
systematic 
misconnections 
between being justified (entitled), according to 
ordinary canons, and having true belief. Why 
then should one ever think that ordinary canons 
provide ground for belief? I will not take on 
skepticism here. I will assume that we are ration-
ally entitled to rely on reason, memory, and per-
ception. The Acceptance Principle is an extension 
of this assumption: we are rationally entitled to 
rely on interlocution because we may presume 
that it has a rational source. 
Now I turn to filling in the justification for the 
Acceptance Principle. First, if something is a 
rational source, it is a prima facie source of truth. 
For a condition on reasons, rationality, and reason 
is that they be guides to truth. Explicating this idea 
is notoriously difficult; but I do not apologize for 
it. An epistemic reason for believing something 
would not count as such if it did not provide some 
reasonable support for accepting it as true. The 
same point applies to rational entitlements for 
belief. The entitlements that I am discussing are 
epistemic, not matters of politesse. If one has a 
reason or entitlement to accept something because 
it is, prima facie, rationally supported, one has a 
reason or entitlement to accept it as true. A source 
is a guide to truth in being rational. Rational mis-
takes are possible. But if there is no reason to think 
that they are occurring, it is rational to accept the 
affirmed deliverances of a rational source. For 
other things equal, reason can be reasonably fol-
lowed in seeking truth. 
It is not just the rationality of a source that 
marks an apriori prima facie connection to truth. 
The very content of an intelligible message pre-
sented as true does so as well. For content is con-
stitutively dependent, in the first instance, on 
patterned connections to a subject matter, con-
nections that insure in normal circumstances a 
baseline of true thought presentations. So presen-
tations' having content must have an origin in 
getting things right. The prima facie rationality of 
the source intensifies a prima facie connection to 
truth already present in the prima facie existence 
of presented content. 
The remaining main step in justifying the 
Acceptance Principle lies in the presumption that 
the source of a message is a rational source, or a 
resource for reason. I think that one is apriori 
prima facie entitled to presume that the interloc-
utor is a rational source or resource for reason -
simply by virtue of the prima facie intelligibility 
of the message conveyed. That is enough to pre-
sume that the interlocutor is rational, or at least a 
source of information that is rationally under-
written. 
The idea is not that we reason thus: "If it looks 
like a human and makes sounds like a language, it 
is rational; on inspection it looks human and 
sounds linguistic; so it is rational:' Rather, in 
understanding language we are entitled to pre-
sume what we instinctively do presume about our 
source's being a source of rationality or reason. 
We are so entitled because intelligibility is an 
apriori prima facie sign of rationality. 
If something is prima facie intelligible, one is 
prima facie entitled to rely on one's understand-
ing of it as intelligible. One is entitled to begin 
with what putative understanding one has. But 
anything that can intelligibly present something 
as true can be presumed, prima facie, to be either 
rational or made according to a rational plan to 
mimic aspects of rationality. Presentation of 
propositional content presupposes at least a 
derivative connection to a system of perceptual, 
cognitive, and practical interactions with a world, 
involving beliefs and intentional activity. I I Belief 
and intention in turn presuppose operation 
under norms of reason or rationality - norms 
governing information acquisition, inference, 
and practical activity. For propositional attitudes, 
especially those complex enough to yield articu-
lated presentations of content, are necessarily 

CONTENT PRESERVATION 
843 
associated with certain cogmtlve and practical 
practices. To be what they are, such practices must-
with allowances for some failures - accord with 
norms of reason or rationality. 
To summarize: We are apriori prima facie enti-
tled to accept something that is prima facie intel-
ligible and presented as true. For prima facie 
intelligible propositional contents prima facie pre-
sented as true bear an apriori prima facie 
conceptual relation to a rational source of true 
presentations-as-true: Intelligible propositional 
expressions presuppose rational abilities and 
entitlements; so intelligible presentations-as-
true come prima facie backed by a rational 
source or resource for reason; and both the con-
tent of intelligible propositional presentations-
as-true and the prima facie rationality of their 
source indicate a prima facie source of truth.12 
Intelligible affirmation is the face of reason; 
reason is a guide to truth. We are apriori prima 
facie entitled to take intelligible affirmation at 
face value. 
We could be apriori entitled to false beliefs. 
Sounds or shapes could have no source in ration-
ality but seem intelligible. A quantum accidental 
sequence of sounds could correspond to those of 
Hamlet's most famous speech. 13 But the fact that 
we could be mistaken in thinking that something 
is a message, or in understanding a message con-
veyed, is compatible with our having an apriori 
prima facie rational right to rely on our construal 
of an event as having a certain meaning or inten-
tional content. And where a message has meaning 
or intentional content, we are entitled to presume 
apriori that it has a rational source, or is a resource 
for reason. 
Just as the Acceptance Principle does not 
assume that truth is in a statistical majority, the 
justification of the Principle does not assume that 
most people are rational. We could learn empiri-
cally that most people are crazy or that all people 
have deeply irrational tendencies - not just in 
their performance but in their basic capacities. 
Human beings clearly do have some rational enti-
tlements and competencies, even though we have 
found that they are surprisingly irrational in cer-
tain tasks. The justification presupposes that there 
is a conceptual relation between intelligibility and 
rational entitlement or justification, between 
having and articulating propositional attitudes 
and having rational competencies. 
Rational backing is, other things equal, a 
ground for acceptance of something as true. But 
in dealing with others, one must often take 
account of their lies. Why is one apriori entitled, 
except when reasonable doubt arises, to abstract 
from the possibility that it may be in the inter-
locutor's rational interest to lie? 
This issue is more complex than I can see 
through now. I will make some general observa-
tions, and then sketch one line of reply. (I think 
there are others.) The Acceptance Principle and 
its justification are formulated so as to be neutral 
on whether what is "presented as true" comes 
from another person. Its application does not 
depend on an assumption that the source is out-
side oneself (although further articulation will, I 
think, give this source a place in the account). 
Many of the differences between content passing 
between minds and content processed by a single 
mind derive from differences in modes of acqui-
sition and in necessary background conditions, 
that do not enter into the justificational force 
underwriting an entitlement. 
An account of an entitlement that includes, as 
a special case, relying on the word of others must, 
however, acknowledge the following issue: The 
straight-line route from the prima facie intelligi-
bility of a presentation-as-true to prima facie 
rational characteristics of the source to prima 
facie acceptability (truth) of the presentation, is 
threatened by the fact that certain aspects of 
rationality (rational lying) may go counter to true 
presentations. So why should rationality, espe-
cially in another person, be a sign of truth? One 
can have empirical reasons to think someone is 
not lying. One could have nonrational tendencies 
to believe, which with luck might get one by. But 
can one have apriori prima facie rational entitle-
ment to accept what one is told, without consid-
ering whether the interlocutor is lying - lacking 
special reasons to think he is? 
Apart from special information about the 
context or one's interlocutor, neutrality (as well as 
doubt) is, I think, a rationally unnatural attitude 
toward an interlocutor's presentation of some-
thing as true. (Compare: lying for the fun of it is a 
form of craziness.) Explaining why, in depth, 
would involve wrestling with some of the most 
difficult issues about the relation between "prac-
tical" reason and reason. I will broach one line of 
explanation. 

844 
TYLER BURGE 
Reason necessarily has a teleological aspect, 
which can be understood through reflection on 
rational practice. Understanding the notion of 
reason in sufficient depth requires understanding 
its primary functions. One of reason's primary 
functions is that of presenting truth, independ-
ently of special personal interests. Lying is some-
times rational in the sense that it is in the liar's 
best interests. But lying occasions a disunity 
among functions of reason. It conflicts with one's 
reason's transpersonal function of presenting 
the truth, independently of special personal 
interests. 14 
The Humean reply that reason functions only 
to serve individual passions or interests is uncon-
vincing. Reason has a function in providing guid-
ance to truth, in presenting and promoting truth 
without regard to individual interest. This is why 
epistemic reasons are not relativized to a person 
or to a desire. It is why someone whose reasoning 
is distorted by self-deception is in a significant 
way irrational - even when the self-deception 
serves the individual's interests. It is why one is 
rationally entitled to rely on deductive reasoning 
or memory, in the absence of counter-reasons, 
even if it conflicts with one's interests. One can 
presume that a presentation of something as true 
by a rational being - whether in oneself or by 
another - has, prima facie, something rationally 
to be said for it. Unless there is reason to think 
that a rational source is rationally disunified - in 
the sense that individual interest is occasioning 
conflict with the transpersonal function of reason -
one is rationally entitled to abstract from indi-
vidual interest in receiving something presented 
as true by such a source. 
Another consideration pointing in the same 
direction is this. A condition on an individual's 
having propositional attitudes is that the content 
of those attitudes by systematically associated 
with veridical perceptions and true beliefs: 15 true 
contents must be presented and accepted as true 
within some individual; indeed, the very practice 
of communication depends on preservation of 
truth. If a rational interlocutor presents intelligi-
ble contents as true, one can rationally presume 
that the contents are associated with a practice of 
successfully aiming at and presenting truth. Now 
an inertial principle appears applicable: since the 
intelligibility of a presentation-as-true indicates 
a source of both rational and true content 
presentations, one needs special reason to think 
there has been deviation from rationally based, 
true truth-presentation. Other things equal, one 
can rationally abstract from issues of sincerity or 
insincerity. 
The apriori entitlement described by the 
Acceptance Principle is, of course, no guarantee 
of truth. It is often a much weaker sign of truth, 
from the point of view of certainty, than empiri-
cally justified beliefs about the interlocutor. The 
lines of reasoning I have proposed justify a prima 
facie rational presumption, a position of non-
neutrality - not some source of certainty. 
Even if the Acceptance Principle is not an 
empirical principle, it may seem that particular 
entitlements sanctioned by it, "applications;' 
must inevitably be empirical. To know what one 
is being told, one must use perception. One must 
perceive words as expressing content presented as 
true. In interlocution, perception does inevitably 
figure in acquisition of understanding and belief. 
Perception is necessary to minimal understand-
ing; and minimal understanding is essential to 
belief and justification. But our question con-
cerns perception's role in justification or entitle-
ment. I will first consider its role in justification 
in our narrow sense, and then turn to its role in 
entitlement. 
One might reason that since the Acceptance 
Principle counts it rational for a person to accept what 
is presented as true, and since one can know what is 
presented as true by another person only through 
perceiving an event in time, a person must rely 
for justificational force on perception of particu-
lar events to apply the principle. 
This reasoning rests on a confusion about the 
status of the Acceptance Principle and its justifi-
cation. The Acceptance Principle is not a premise 
in an argument applied by recipients of informa-
tion. It is a description of a norm that indicates 
that recipients are sometimes entitled to accept 
information from others immediately without 
argument. The justification of the principle is not 
an argument that need be used by interlocutors, 
but an account of why the practice of acquiring 
information from others is rationally justified. 16 
It is well known that we do not store the physical 
properties of sentences we hear or read. 17 The 
content of the linguistic forms is what is impor-
tant. We seem normally to understand content in 
a way whose unconscious details (inferential or 

CONTENT PRESERVATION 
845 
otherwise) are not accessible via ordinary 
reflection. To be entitled to believe what one is 
told, one need not understand or be able to justify 
any transition from perceptual beliefs about 
words to understanding of and belief in the words' 
content. One can, of course, come to understand 
certain inferences from words to contents. Such 
empirical meta-skills do enrich communication. 
But they are not indispensable to it. To be justi-
fied in understanding, we have to reason empiri-
cally about what we perceive only when 
communication runs into trouble, or when spe-
cial, contextual, nonliteral expressive devices are 
used (see note 21). Other things equal, we are 
entitled to presume that what seems intelligible is 
understood. Justification in the narrow sense is 
not basic to the epistemology of interlocution. 
But the question of entitlement is more subtle. 
In ordinary perception of physical objects and 
properties we have sense experiences that are not 
ordinarily the objects of reference or the basis of 
a justifying inference to perceptual beliefs to 
which we are entitled. Yet having such experi-
ences, or having perceptual beliefs, contributes to 
the justificational force of our empirical beliefs: lH 
A perceptual belief's being perceptual is an ele-
ment in its justificational power. The belief's 
being causally or constitutively associated with 
sense perception is part of the force of our entitle-
ment to the belief. 
In interlocution, we are also causally depend-
ent on perception. Our entitlements are thus 
dependent on perception. But in my view, per-
ception contributes nothing to the epistemic force 
of the fundamental "default" entitlement. 
Perceptions or perceptual beliefs about physi-
cal objects are constitutively dependent on bear-
ing natural lawlike causal relations to objects of 
perception - to their subject matter, physical 
objects. The contents of the beliefs and percep-
tions are what they are partly because of these 
relations to specific physical objects or properties. 
Our entitlement to rely on perception and per-
ceptual beliefs is partly grounded in this causally 
patterned, content-giving relation which is partly 
constitutive of perception. 
When we receive communication, the situa-
tion is different. The objects of cognitive interest -
the contents and their subject matters - are not 
the objects of perception. We do not perceive the 
contents of attitudes that are conveyed to us; we 
understand them. We perceive and have perceptual 
beliefs about word occurrences. We may perceive 
them as having a certain content and subject 
matter, but the content is understood, not per-
ceived. The subject matter, word occurrences, of 
our perceptual experiences and beliefs bears a 
nonconstitutive (quasi-conventional) relation to 
the content and subject matter of the beliefs to 
which we are entitled as a result of communica-
tion. So the accounts of our noninferential enti-
tlements to perception and to interlocution must 
be different. 
One might note that the relation between per-
ceived words and their contents or subject mat-
ters must involve some sort of explanatory 
relation. So one might be tempted to think that 
although one does not typically infer the content 
from the words explicitly and consciously, the 
entitlement must somehow be based on this 
explanatory relation. But it would be a mistake to 
embrace this temptation without reflecting care-
fully on the special character of the relation as it 
occurs in interlocution. The relation between 
words and their subject matter and content is not 
an ordinary, natural, lawlike causal-explanatory 
relation. Crudely speaking, it involves a mind. 
There are, of course, complex causal-
explanatory relations that may be used to infer 
the content or subject matter of an interlocutor's 
speech from perceived word occurrences. One 
could give an account of entitlement centered on 
possible inferential interpretations, or on reason-
giving explanatory connections between words 
and content. The interpretation might not be 
accessible to the recipient, but it could represent a 
reasonable route from the received message to a 
putative truth. Such an account - broadly famil-
iar in current discussion - would make the enti-
tlement empirical, because it would appeal in the 
account of justificational force to an inductive 
connection to perceived word occurrences. 
I do not doubt that such accounts are true. I 
doubt that they are fundamental. I think that what 
is fundamental is not a metalinguistic connection 
between word occurrences, taken as objects of 
perception, and their contents or subject matters. 
What is fundamental is an apriori prima facie 
entitlement to rely upon putative understanding, 
and an apriori prima facie connection between 
putatively understood contents and rational 
sources of truths. Understanding is epistemically 

846 
TYLER BURGE 
basic. Traditionally, a justification or entitlement 
was apriori if it could be derived from conceptual 
understanding - however experientially depend-
ent the understanding might be. The issue over 
apriority begins with conceptual understanding 
and asks whether perceptual experience is needed 
to supplement the understanding for one to be 
justified or entitled to one's belief. 
The epistemic status of perception in normal 
communication is like the status it was tradition-
ally thought to have when a diagram is presented 
that triggers realization of the meaning and truth 
of a claim of pure geometry or logic. Perception 
of physical properties triggers realization of 
something abstract, an intentional content, 
expressed by the sentence, and (often) already 
mastered by the recipient. Its role is to call up and 
facilitate mobilization of conceptual resources 
that are already in place. It is probably necessary 
that one perceive symbolic expressions to accept 
logical axioms - just as it is necessary to perceive 
words in interlocution. But perception of expres-
sions is not part of the justificational force for 
accepting the contents. In both cases, no refer-
ence to a possible meta-inference from expres-
sions to contents is needed in an account of 
justificational force. The primary entitlement in 
interlocution derives from prima facie under-
standing of the messages, and from a presump-
tion about the rational nature of their source - not 
from the role of perception, however necessary, 
in the process. 19 
In interlocution, perception of utterances 
makes possible the passage of propositional con-
tent from one mind to another rather as purely 
preservative memory makes possible the preser-
vation of propositional content from one time to 
another. Memory and perception of utterances 
function similarly, in reasoning and communica-
tion respectively. Their correct functioning is 
necessary for the enterprises they serve. Their 
failure could undermine those enterprises. They 
preserve the content of events (past thoughts in 
proof, word utterances in interlocution) - events 
that can become objects known empirically. But 
the basic epistemic role of memory and percep-
tion in these enterprises is not to present objects 
of knowledge. They function to preserve and 
enable - not to justify. 
In interlocution, the individual's basic default 
entitlement normally derives from the presump-
tive intelligibility of a message understood, not 
from anything specific in the words perceived. 
Unless reasonable doubt arises about the reliabil-
ity or interpretation of the source, the specific 
perceptions of utterances need not be relied upon 
in contributing force to the receiver's entitlement 
to his understanding of or belief in what is com-
municated. 
Perception might be thought part of the justi-
ficational force of our entitlement in another way. 
The justification of the Acceptance Principle says 
that one is entitled to accept intelligible contents 
"presented as true." We must perceive a speech act 
as involving a presentation-as-true to be justified 
under the principle. Why does it not follow that 
our entitlement to accept what we are told in par-
ticular cases relies for its force on perceptual 
beliefs? 
The issues here are again very complex. But 
the short answer to the question is that one's 
intellectually grounded entitlement to one's under-
standing of content includes an entitlement to 
understand presentations-as-true. Understanding 
content presupposes and is interdependent with 
understanding the force of presentations of con-
tent. So entitlement to the former must presup-
pose entitlement to the latter. In many normal 
cases the epistemology of our entitlement to 
understanding assertive force has a default status 
that is parallel to that of our entitlement to under-
standing content. Perception is no more basic to 
understanding assertive force than it is to under-
standing conceptual content. The default position 
is that presumed understanding of both content 
and force is epistemically fundamental. Empirical 
justification for an interpretation of content or 
force is demanded only when elements in the 
context demand reconsideration or supplemen-
tation of the default understanding. I find the 
parallel compelling. But I will sketch in two steps 
a picture of how default understanding of a pres-
entation-as-true can sometimes be derived from 
no more than default understanding of proposi-
tional content. This picture is not needed, but it 
may enrich the account. 
First, entitlement to one's understanding of a 
message's content carries with it, indeed rests on, 
an entitlement to understanding intentional 
events as having specific content. Understanding 
speech acts or thoughts as they occur is the root 
of understanding content types. The necessary 

CONTENT PRESERVATION 
847 
role of perception in enabling one to follow 
another's speaking or thinking is not fundamen-
tally different from its role in enabling one to 
grasp the abstract content of another's sentence. 
All that I have argued on the latter score applies to 
the former. Perception's basic role is to make 
understanding possible and to trigger it on par-
ticular occasions. But the justificational force of 
one's basic default entitlement to understand 
something as an event with a specific content is 
not perceptual. It is intellectual in that it resides 
in one's putative understanding of conceptual 
content in application or use, in one's ability to 
think-with. 
Second, understanding conceptual content -
both abstractly and in contentful events or uses -
involves understanding the content's mood. But 
for contents in the indicative (declarative) mood-
as distinguished from interrogative or imperative 
mood - presentation-as-true is the defeasible 
default use. The connection between declarative 
mood and presentations-as-true is conceptual. 
The justificational force of the entitlement to rely 
on the connection is correspondingly conceptual, 
not perceptuaUO 
In the absence of overriding reasons, the 
default presumption stands. Nonassertive uses 
(jokes, irony, fiction) that drain declaratives of 
assertive implications must employ context to 
make themselves understood. The recipient must 
infer that the sentence is used nonassertively from 
empirical 
information 
about 
the 
context. 
Although affirmative use of declarative contents 
must, on occasion, also be inferred from special 
contextual information, taking a declarative sen-
tence utterance as a presentation-as-true nor-
mally requires no such reasoning or empirical 
interpretation.2I 
Thus in many instances, one's entitlement to 
take something as a presentation-as-true in inter-
locution derives from understanding an event's 
content, and need not rely for its justificational 
force on perception of word occurrences. What 
one is entitled to on intellectual grounds is merely, 
prima facie, that a given content is presented as 
true. One gets nothing about the time, form, or 
circumstances of the assertion. All such informa-
tion is epistemically grounded in perception of 
aspects of the context. But the fundamental enti-
tlement to accept something as a presentation-as-
true derives from understanding. It can even be 
derived sometimes from understanding of 
content (its tokening and the relation of its mood 
to presentations-as-true). The justificational force 
of the derivation does not depend on any supple-
mentation from perception. Perception plays its 
role in making understanding possible and in jus-
tifying supplemental information about the form, 
existence, and context of the assertion. 
In appreciating these points, one must distin-
guish between knowing about the assertion as 
part of a pattern for explaining the psychology 
and behavior of the asserter, and using the inter-
locutor as a source of information. In the former 
enterprise, perception of an assertion as an action 
by a particular individual is commonly taken as 
an element in the justification of an explanation, 
or an object of interpretation. But in interlocu-
tion, perception need not play this role unless 
some reasonable doubt arises about the inform-
ant's message or the recipient's understanding 
(see note 25). 
One can know through memory the events 
that help recall the previous step in a proof, 
thereby making those events objects of knowl-
edge. One can know on the basis of perception 
that a particular person made an assertion at a 
given time. One can surely construct an empiri-
cal meta-justification (or entitlement) for one's 
belief based on interlocution: "She asserted that 
p (known empirically); it is prima facie reasona-
ble to rely on others' assertions; so I should rely 
on her assertion." Such meta-justifications sup-
plement one's epistemic position in interlocu-
tion. But they are not, I think, fundamental. Just 
as remembering events does not enhance the pri-
mary object-level justification in deductive argu-
ment, so relying on perception does not 
contribute to the justificational force of one's 
fundamental entitlement to one's understanding 
of content, or to one's acceptance of what is pre-
sented as true. 
Let us return from our entitlement to under-
standing to our entitlement to believe what we 
hear, given that we understand it. When we receive 
a message, we often know a lot about the context 
of the reception, the biography of the source, the 
antecedent empirical plausibility of the informa-
tion. This knowledge is inevitably perceptually 
grounded. Does this fact make our entitlement 
to believe what we receive from others inevita-
bly perceptual? I do not think so. Our initial 

848 
TYLER BURGE 
entitlement does not depend on this knowledge 
for its justificational force. 
In areas like politics, where cooperation is not 
the rule and truth is of little consequence, or phi-
losophy, where questioning is as much at issue as 
belief, we engage in complex reasoning about 
whetherto accept what we hear or read. Reasonable 
doubt becomes a norm. But these situations are 
not paradigmatic. They are parasitic on more 
ordinary situations where acceptance is a norm. 
The default position is justified acceptance. 
Often we need empirical reasons to defeat reason-
able doubts that threaten our right to acceptance. 
But sometimes empirical reasons sim ply reinforce 
and overdetermine the default entitlement. Our 
being justified does not then rest indispensably 
on empirical background information.22 
I turn now from our entitlement to applica-
tions of the Acceptance Principle to the role of 
interlocution in the acquisition of knowledge. In 
the absence of countervailing considerations, 
application of the Acceptance Principle often 
seems to provide sufficient entitlement for knowl-
edge. Most of our knowledge relies essentially on 
acceptance of beliefs from others - either through 
talk or through reading. Not only most of our sci-
entific beliefs, but most of our beliefs about his-
tory, ourselves, and much of the macro-world, 
would have insufficient justification to count as 
knowledge if we were somehow to abstract from 
all elements of their justification, or entitlement, 
that depended on communication. 
Our entitlement to ordinary perceptual belief 
is usually sufficient for perceptual knowledge. It is 
usually sufficient even though we may be unable 
specifically to rule out various possible defeating 
conditions. If there is no reason to think that the 
defeating conditions threaten, one has knowl-
edge despite ignoring them. Something similar 
holds for acquisition of belief from others. Other 
things equal, ordinary interlocution suffices for 
knowledge. 23 
In knowing something through interlocution, 
the recipient has his own entitlement to accept the 
word of the interlocutor, together with any supple-
mentary justification the recipient might have that 
bears on the plausibility of the information. Let 
this include all the reasons available to the recipi-
ent, together with all the entitlements deriving 
from his own cognitive resources. Call this body (i) 
the recipient's own proprietary justification. 
If the recipient depends on interlocution for 
knowledge, the recipient's knowledge depends on 
the source's having knowledge as well. For if the 
source does not believe the proposition, or if the 
proposition is not true, or if the source is not jus-
tified, the recipient cannot know the proposition. 
The recipient's own proprietary entitlement to 
rely on interlocution is insufficient by itself to 
underwrite the knowledge. 24 In particular, the 
recipient depends on sources' proprietary justifi-
cations and entitlements (through a possible 
chain of sources). The recipient depends on at 
least some part of this body of justification and 
entitlement in the sense that without it, his belief 
would not be knowledge. The recipient's own jus-
tification is incomplete and imp Ii city refers back, 
anaphorically, to fuller justification or entitle-
ment. Call the combination of the recipient's own 
proprietary justification with the proprietary jus-
tifications (including entitlements) in his sources 
on which the recipient's knowledge depends (ii) 
the extended body ofjustification that underwrites 
the recipient's knowledge. 
At the outset, I explained apriori knowledge in 
terms of apriori justification or entitlement. The 
question arises whether apriori knowledge based 
on interlocution is underwritten by the individu-
al's proprietary justification or by a justification 
that must include some nonproprietary part of 
the extended body of justification. 
The extended body of justification - the one 
that reaches beyond the individual - is the rele-
vant one. If I am apriori entitled to accept an 
interlocutor's word, but the interlocutor provides 
me with empirically justified information, it 
would be wrong to characterize my knowledge of 
the information as apriori. Similarly, if my source 
knows a proposition apriori, but I must rely on 
empirical knowledge to justify my acceptance of 
the source's word, it would be wrong to say that I 
know the proposition apriori - even though I 
have knowledge that is apriori known by some-
one. It seems most natural to think that a strand 
of justification that runs through the extended 
body into the individual's proprietary body of 
justification must be apriori for the recipient's 
knowledge to be apriori. People who depend on 
interlocution for knowledge of mathematical 
theorems but do not know the proofs can have 
apriori knowledge in this sense. The source math-
ematician knows the theorem apriori and the 

CONTENT PRESERVATION 
849 
recipient is entitled apriori to accept the word of 
the source, in the absence of reasons to doubt. 
Most of us knew the Pythagorean theorem at 
some stage in this manner. When apriori knowl-
edge is preserved through reports which the 
r~cipient is apriori justified in accepting, the 
receiver's knowledge is apriori. 
The Acceptance Principle is clearly similar to 
what is widely called a "Principle of Charity" for 
translating or interpreting others. The most obvi-
ous difference is that the former applies to situa-
tions in which one is not taking another as an 
object of interpretation, but rather as a source of 
information presumed to be understood without 
interpretation. This situation is basic for commu-
nication.25 Radical interpretation is not, I think, 
the paradigmatic situation for theorizing about 
linguistic interchange. 
We rely on being so formed that we take in 
information from others without interpretation. 
Unlike the Principle of Charity, the Acceptance 
Principle presumes not only that we are like 
others in being rational. It presumes that we pre-
serve content, other things equal. This presump-
tion works because we share with others around 
us our cognitive tendencies and means of express-
ing them, and a common environment. But we do 
not have to justify a claim that these conditions 
for success are in place to be entitled to rely upon 
our understanding. (Analogously, we do not have 
to justify a claim that the environment is normal 
and we are adapted to it in order to be entitled to 
rely on perception.) It is enough if we learn how 
to understand. Once we are in a position to 
understand, we are entitled to the following pre-
sumption apriori, other things equal: We under-
stand what we seem to understand. Or rather, 
other things equal, we need not use a distinction 
Notes 
Descartes, Philosophical Works, ed. Haldane and 
Ross (New York: Dover, 1955), voI.1,p. 8. Locke, 
in Essay Concerning Human Understanding, bk. 
4, chap. 2, sec. 7, notes that such knowledge is 
"less perfect" in the sense of more subject to 
error than intuitive knowledge. 
2 Roderick M. Chisholm, "The Truths of Reason;' 
in Theory of Knowledge, 2d edn (Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1977), reprinted in A 
between understanding and seeming to under-
stand. We need not take what we hear as an object 
of interpretation, unless grounds for doubt arise. 
Only then do we shift from content preservation 
to interpretation. 
The Acceptance Principle entails a presump-
tion that others' beliefs are justified, that others 
are sources of rationality or reason. The view that 
others' beliefs can be presumed to be true is famil-
iar from the Principle of Charity. The presump-
tion that others are reliable indices of truth rests 
on a presumption that they are rational sources. 
Their reliability is not some brute correlation 
between belief and world. We are entitled to treat 
others as reliable partly because we are entitled to 
presume that they are rationally justified or 
rationally entitled to their beliefs. We are entitled, 
most fundamentally, to think of others as sources 
of rationality or reason not because we take them 
as objects of interpretation and explanation, but 
because prima facie intelligibility is an apriori 
prima facie sign of rationality. 
This focus on others is articulated from a first-
person point of view. Each of us is justified in pre-
suming that others are justified. But we are 
possible interlocutors too. The idea that others 
are prima facie justified in their beliefs makes 
general sense only if we presume generally: 
people, including each of us, are reliable rational 
sources of true justified beliefs. Obviously the 
conclusion requires qualification and elabora-
tion. But the route to it is, I think, of interest. I 
arrived at it by arguing that we have intellection-
grounded prima facie entitlements to applica-
tions of the Acceptance Principle, though they are 
empirically defeasible. I think that this approach 
to epistemology may help with some of the tradi-
tional problems of philosophy. 
Priori Knowledge, ed. Paul K. Moser (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 1987). 
3 Kant thought that all synthetic apriori judg-
ments, except those in his practical philoso-
phy - and perhaps in the critical philosophy 
as a whole - rested on general ("pure") aspects 
of the structure of function of sense experi-
ence. In fact, he believed that the justifica-
tional force of all such judgments depended 

850 
TYLER BURGE 
on one's actually having had sense experi-
ences. My conception of apriori knowledge 
makes room for Kant's conception. I do not, 
however, agree with Kant that those apriori 
justifications whose justificational force is not 
enhanced at all by sense experience are vacu-
ous, or analytic in the sense of being true 
independently of any relation to a subject 
matter. The distinction between reliance on 
the specifics of a range of sense experiences, 
or perceptual beliefs, and reliance on the 
structure or function of one's sense capacities 
in obtaining categories of information is not 
sharp. I think it may remain useful. 
4 This explication of apriority applies to justifi-
cation of cogito-type thoughts like I am think-
ing, and of other judgments about intellection. 
(It does not apply to I am having an afterim-
age.) These thoughts' justification is grounded 
on understanding, not on sense experience or 
perceptual belief. I am aware that some tradi-
tional conceptions of apriority would exclude 
cogito cases. Some of these conceptions 
emphasize not justificational independence 
of sense experience, but justificational inde-
pendence of any "experience" at all, including 
intellectual "experience." (I leave open here 
whether this use of "experience" is appropri-
ate.) This is one of Leibniz's conceptions (see 
New Essays IV, ix). Of course Leibniz centered 
on apriori truth rather than on an individu-
al's justification. Frege's conception features 
justificational independence of any relation 
to particular events or facts in time (see 
Gottlob Frege, The Foundations of Arithmetic, 
sec. 3). On his conception, only general truths 
and truths derivable from general truths could 
be known apriori. 
The terminological issues here are com-
plex; but this difference with traditional expli-
cations will not affect my argument with 
Chisholm, which goes through on any of these 
conceptions. Moreover, the broader argument 
of the paper does not depend on how one 
uses the term "apriori." I am less interested in 
the term than in the conception I associate 
with it. The argument of the paper hinges on 
the role of perception in justification or enti-
tlement. I do think that there are significant 
substantive and historical issues regarding 
these different notions associated with the 
term "apriori" that bear on the way the issue 
between empiricism and rationalism has 
come to be understood since the work of 
Kant, Mill, and the positivists. For now, it is 
enough that the present explication signals 
my interest in justifications or entitlements 
whose force is grounded in intellection, 
reason, or reflection, as distinguished from 
perception, understood broadly to include 
feeling. 
5 
Descartes's own remark that in deductions we 
must remember that we have taken the links 
of the deduction "successively under review" 
may suggest this view. I find it unclear how he 
intended the remark. 
6 Chisholm's "thus," in the quoted passage, is 
clearly a mistake. It does not follow from a 
deduction's reliance on memory that it, or any 
justification associated with it, uses "contin-
gent 
propositions" 
about 
memory 
as 
premises. 
7 The distinction between substantive memory 
and purely preservative memory roughly par-
allels a distinction in psychology between "epi-
sodic memory" and "semantic memory." There 
is evidence that these sorts of memory func-
tion differently in our psychologies. See E. 
Tulving, "Episodic and Semantic Memory," in 
Organization of Memory, ed. Tulving and 
Donaldson (New York: Academic Press, 1972). 
Another difference between the two types 
of memory is that purely preservative memory 
necessarily plays a role in any reasoning in 
time. The extent to which substantive memory 
enters into reasoning depends on the psychol-
ogy of the reasoner, the subject of the 
argument, and so on. One should not under-
estimate, however, our dependence on the use 
of symbols in reasoning. The role of symbols 
is partly that of providing perceptual objects. 
Explicating this sort of dependence is a diffi-
cult and important matter. Doing so may 
complicate or blur the distinction between 
the sometime dependence on substantive 
memory and the more general rational neces-
sity of depending on purely preservative 
memory. But I think that the distinction will 
remain valuable. 
8 
Contrast Chisholm, "The Truths of Reason;' 
sec. 5, and James F. Ross, "Testimonial 
Evidence," in Analysis and Metaphysics, ed. 

CONTENT PRESERVATION 
851 
Keith Lehrer (Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1975). 
They assume that belief based on testimony 
cannot be justified apriori and, if it is knowl-
edge at all, must be empirical. 
I think that some of what I am saying here 
bears on the common assumption that 
knowledge based on the output of proofs by 
computers cannot be apriori. Cf. Kripke, 
Naming and Necessity (Cambridge: Harvard 
University Press, 1980), pp. 35; also Thomas 
Tymoczko, "The Four-Color Problem and its 
Philosophical 
Significance," 
Journal 
of 
Philosophy 76 (1979), pp. 57-83. Kripke says 
that such knowledge is based on the laws of 
physics. Although such knowledge depends 
on the functioning of a machine according 
to the laws of physics, it is not obvious that 
knowledge of the laws of physics is an indis-
pensable part of our justification for believ-
ing in the results of such output. I discuss 
this issue in "Computer Proof, Apriori 
Knowledge, and Other Minds," Philosophical 
Perspectives 12 (1998), pp. 1-37. 
9 Thomas Reid, An Inquiry into the Human 
Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 
1970), chap. 6, sec. 24. 
10 
Principles narrower than the Acceptance 
Principle could with luck and context achieve 
the same utility: rely on the first person one 
comes across and no one afterward. Such 
principles are not rational starting points. 
We are entitled to something more general. 
In learning a language, one usually need not 
know the credentials of one's source-beyond 
the fact that the source is intelligible. Having 
an apriori entitlement based on the 
Acceptance Principle is compatible with also 
having empirical justifications of prima facie 
acceptance - or of narrower principles, such 
as "nonaggressive care-givers are more trust-
worthy than strangers who threaten one." I 
think that one does not have to have these 
empirical justifications to be entitled to 
accept what one is told in particular cases 
(even though people do have such empirical 
justifications) . 
11 
The expression may be derivative in that a 
nonrational machine might express linguis-
tic content. But such machines are ultimately 
made by beings who have propositional atti-
tudes. 
12 
I think that the distinction between merely 
having attitudes with intentional content 
and being able to understand and present 
them is deeply significant, and marks a 
deeper level of rationality than that associ-
ated with merely having propositional atti-
tudes and inferential abilities. But I need not 
explore this point here. 
I have not here argued in depth for the 
connections between content, propositional 
attitudes, and rationality because they are a 
widely accepted theme in much contempo-
rary work. The idea that language is insepa-
rable from propositional attitudes, which are 
inseparable from assumptions about ration-
ality is present, for example, in the work of 
Paul Grice, Studies in the Way of Words 
(Cambridge: 
Harvard University Press, 
1989), and Donald Davidson, Essays on 
Actions 
and 
Events 
(Oxford: 
Oxford 
University Press, Clarendon Press, 1980) and 
Inquiries into 
Truth 
and Interpretation 
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, Clarendon 
Press, 1984). Elsewhere I have sought to 
show how having linguistic and proposi-
tional content is necessarily associated with 
individuals' having de re propositional atti-
tudes to objects of reference and with their 
interacting practically and perceptually with 
such objects. See my "Belief De Re," Journal 
of Philosophy 74 (1977), pp. 338-63, and 
"Other Bodies;' in Thought and Object, ed. 
Woodfield (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1982). The main novelty of the above argu-
ment lies in its first step - the claim that we 
are apriori entitled to rely on our under-
standing and acceptance of something that 
is prima facie intelligible - and in its drawing 
an epistemic consequence from the constitu-
tive, conceptual relations between content 
and rationality that others have long explored 
and elaborated. 
13 
In Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion, 
part 3, Hume imagines hearing an "articu-
late voice" from the clouds and asks whether 
one can avoid attributing to it some design 
or purpose. He never objects to this infer-
ence, though he objects to much of the theo-
logical purposes it was put to. He would, 
however, regard it as a non-apriori causal 
inference. One of the reasons that he would 

852 
TYLER BURGE 
invoke for thinking that the presumption of 
a rational source could not be based apriori 
on prima facie intelligibility is that one could 
learn empirically that the "voice" was mean-
ingless. This reason is powerless against my 
conception of the presumption, for I agree 
that the presumption is empirically defeasi-
ble. Apriority has to do with the source of 
epistemic right; defeasibility is a further 
matter. For recent criticisms of Hume's view, 
see A. J. Coady, "Testimony and Observation:' 
American Philosophical Quarterly 10 (1973), 
pp.149-55;FrederickESchmitt,"Justification, 
Sociality, and Autonomy:' Synthese 73 (1987), 
pp. 43-85. I think that empiricism cannot 
possibly explain all our justified acceptance 
of what we read or hear. The idea that we 
should remain neutral or skeptical of infor-
mation unless we have empirical grounds 
for thinking it trustworthy is, I think, a wild 
revisionary proposal. I also think that empir-
icism cannot account for norms for chil-
dren's relying on others in the acquisition of 
language or knowledge. 
14 
Although I think that my claim about this 
constitutive function of reason is apriori, I 
do not maintain that it is self-evident. It can 
be and has been coherently questioned, as I 
will note. But the claim has substantial initial 
plausibility, and I believe that this plausibil-
ity is deepened through reflection, including 
reflection on challenges to it. 
15 
These true beliefs could fail to be the indi-
vidual's own, but they must occur some-
where in the development of the content - for 
example, in the evolution of the cognitive 
apparatus. 
16 
Here is a more sophisticated objection along 
the same line. Suppose that a belief acquired 
from others may count as knowledge, though 
one often lacks sufficient grounds, on one's 
own, to underwrite the belief as knowledge. 
Suppose that one knows one lacks autono-
mous grounds for such a belief. Then one's 
knowledge that the belief was acquired from 
others would have to be used to enable one's 
belief to count as knowledge, in view of the 
known fact that unless the belief had been 
acquired from others, one's lack of autono-
mous justification would be insufficient for 
knowledge. (It is assumed that knowledge 
that a belief was acquired from others must 
be empirical. Let us grant the assumption for 
now.) 
This reasoning again rests on a level con-
fusion. If one has acquired one's belief from 
others in a normal way, and if the others 
know the proposition, one acquires knowl-
edge. No further reasoning about the prac-
tice is needed for the knowledge. No reasoning 
that does not show that the entitlement has 
lapsed can undermine the entitlement 
(though it might mistakenly undermine 
one's belief that one was entitled). 
17 
Kenneth I. Forster, "Lexical Processing:' in 
An Invitation to Cognitive Psychology, vol. 1, 
ed. Osherson and Lasnik (Cambridge: MIT 
Press, 1990). 
18 
Davidson and Sellars deny that having sen-
sations plays a role in justifying perceptual 
beliefs. I am not convinced by their reasons 
as applied to entitlements to perceptual 
belief. See Donald Davidson, "A Coherence 
Theory of Truth and Knowledge," in Truth 
and Interpretation, ed. Lepore (Oxford: Basil 
Blackwell, 1986), p. 311; and Wilfrid Sellars, 
"Empiricism and the Philosophy of Mind:' 
in Science, Perception, and Reality (London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1963), pp. 164ff. 
For an alternative to their views, see Steven 
L. Reynolds, "Knowing How to Believe with 
Justification," Philosophical Studies 64 (1991). 
273-92. My view here does not, however, rest 
on giving sensations (particularly seen as 
nonintentional) a role in perceptual entitle-
ment. One need not think of sensations as 
entities, though I do. It is enough that the 
perceptual character of perceptual belief 
contribute to the force of the entitlement. 
Moreover, I am not convinced that there is 
an epistemic transition from perceptual 
experience to perceptual belief in the ordi-
nary case. One can, of course, learn to sus-
pend such belief. But perceptual experience 
seems a constituent element in perceptual 
belief; and perceptual belief seems to be a 
default position. 
19 
The analogy goes with certain disanalogies. 
Understanding a simple logical truth yields a 
justification; understanding a communi-
cated message yields an entitlement. This is 
because in the logic case justificational force 

CONTENT PRESERVATION 
853 
derives from the content itself, whereas in 
interlocution justificational force derives 
from one's right to putative understanding 
and from the presumed status of the source 
of the message, not (typically) from the con-
tent itself. A corollary is that knowledge of a 
simple logical truth does not depend on any-
thing further than understanding and believ-
ing it, whereas knowledge based on 
interlocution depends on there being knowl-
edge in the chain of sources beyond the 
recipient. In neither case is correct percep-
tion of words or correct understanding of 
what they express necessary to the justifica-
tion (or entitlement). In neither case is cor-
rect perception of words necessary even for 
knowledge. But in the interlocution case 
(because knowledge depends on inheriting 
knowledge from a source), correct under-
standing of what the interlocutor conveys by 
the words is necessary for knowledge based 
on interlocution. (Correct understanding of 
words or interlocutor is not necessary for 
knowing whatever logical truth one happens 
to associate with them, if one understands 
the logical truth sufficiently.) The important 
analogy between the logic and interlocution 
cases is that perception of words makes 
understanding possible, but justificational 
force can be derived from the individual's 
understanding 
without 
supplementary 
appeal to perception. I am abstracting, in 
this discussion of applications, from cases 
where understanding a particular content 
itself involves perceiving - for example, per-
ceiving the referents of demonstratives. Such 
understanding is not purely conceptual; and 
as a consequence, the relevant entitlement to 
the particular belief is partly perceptual. 
20 
Donald Davidson has argued that there is no 
conventional connection between indicative 
sentences and assertive use. See "Moods 
and Performances" and "Communication and 
Convention" in Inquiries into Truth and 
Interpretation. His reason is that one can 
always use indicative utterances for nonas-
sertive purposes. I find the argument uncon-
vincing. A conventional connection between 
indicative mood and assertive use could be 
flouted. I believe that the connection between 
assertive use and indicative (declarative) 
mood is deeper and firmer than merely con-
ventional. But it is a contextually defeasible 
connection. 
I use the term "presentation as true" to 
cover more than assertions and judgments. 
Obvious presuppositions, or conventional 
implicatures, are examples. When someone 
says to kill the shortest spy, he or she presents 
it as true that there is a shortest spy. In such 
cases, as well as the indicative cases, the enti-
tlement to accept what is presented as true 
can be independent for its justificational 
force of perceptual connection to context 
(see note 21). 
21 
This point allies with Grice's distinction 
between conventional and conversational 
implicature. See Paul Grice, Studies in the 
Way of Words, pp. 28-31. Grice requires that 
to be "conversational," an implicature must 
be capable of being "worked out" from con-
siderations of the conversational context. 
Conventional implicatures may be inferred 
"intuitively" from the meaning of the words. 
I think that understanding based on conver-
sational implicatures must be justified, usu-
ally empirically, whereas understanding 
based on conventional implicatures can rest 
on apriori entitlement. Analogously, I think 
that a construal of a sentence or content as 
ironic must be justified, usually empirically, 
whereas a construal of a sentence as asserted 
can rest on an apriori entitlement. A parallel 
story needs to be told about ambiguities. 
Our ability to understand many ambiguous 
sentences as they are meant, even apart from 
context, indicates that certain readings are 
default readings. 
22 
The scope for intellection-based justification 
in interlocution is wider than these remarks 
may suggest. I think that in certain cases spe-
cial confidence in an interlocutor can be jus-
tified on grounds that are inductive but, with 
subtle qualifications, intellectual. I discuss 
these matters further in "Computer Proof 
and Apriori Knowledge." 
23 
The fact that most of our knowledge is 
dependent on others and has distinctive 
epistemic status is increasingly widely recog-
nized. See C. A. J. Coady, "Testimony and 
Observation"; John Hardwig, "Epistemic 
Dependence," Journal of Philosophy 82 

854 
TYLER BURGE 
(1985), pp. 335-49; Michael Welbourne, The 
Community 
of Knowledge 
(Aberdeen: 
Aberdeen University Press, 1986). For a 
wildly implausible, individualistic view of 
the epistemic status of testimony, see John 
Locke, 
An 
Essay 
Concerning 
Human 
Understanding 1.3.24. 
24 
Because the interlocutor must have knowl-
edge and because of Gettier cases, the inter-
locutor must have more than true, justified 
belief if the recipient is to have knowledge. 
The recipient's dependence for having 
knowledge on the interlocutor's having 
knowledge is itself an instance of the Gettier 
point. The recipient could have true justified 
belief, but lack knowledge because the inter-
locutor lacked knowledge. 
In requiring that the source have knowledge 
if the recipient is to have knowledge based 
on interlocution, I oversimplify. Some chains 
with more than two links seem to violate this 
condition. But there must be knowledge in 
the chain if the recipient is to have knowl-
edge based on interlocution. 
25 
The principle of charity is illuminatingly 
used by W. V. Quine, in Word and Object 
(Cambridge: MIT Press, 1960), chap. 2; and 
Donald Davidson, in "Radical Interpretation" 
(1973), 
in 
Inquiries 
into 
Truth 
and 
Interpretation. In holding that interpretation 
is the basic situation for understanding lin-
guistic interchange, Davidson writes, "The 
problem of interpretation is domestic as well 
as foreign: it surfaces for speakers of the 
same language in the form of the question, 
how can it be determined that the language 
is the same?" (Similar passages can be found 
in Quine.) Davidson presupposes that deter-
mining whether we are communicating suc-
cessfully when we appear to be is a question 
in place from the beginning. This seems to 
me mistaken. Such a question arises only 
when there is some reason to doubt that we 
are sharing information and preserving con-
tent. The default position is that understand-
ing can be presumed until something goes 
wrong. Incidentally, I do not assume that 
anything as global as a communal language 
need be thought of as fundamental. That is a 
further issue. 

CHAPTER 57 
Testimonial Knowledge 
and Transmission 
Jennifer Lackey 
I 
We often talk about knowledge being transferred 
or transmitted via testimony. This suggests two 
things: (1) that hearers can acquire knowledge via 
the testimony of others; and (2) that speakers 
must themselves have the knowledge in question 
in order to pass it to their hearers. In this way the 
picture we have of testimonial knowledge is like a 
chain of people passing buckets of water to put 
out a fire. Each person must have a bucket of 
water in order to pass it to the next person, and 
moreover there must be at least one person who is 
ultimately acquiring the water from another 
source. Similarly, each person in the chain of 
transmitting knowledge that p must know that p 
in order to pass it to the next person, and moreo-
ver there must be at least one person in the chain 
who ultimately acquired knowledge that p from 
another source, e.g., sense perception, introspec-
tion, reason, and the like. 
This picture is, in large part, suggested by the 
striking similarities which testimony bears to 
memory. For instance, it is often assumed that 
neither memory nor testimony is, strictly speak-
ing, a generative source of knowledge: while the 
latter transmits knowledge from one speaker to 
another, the former preserves beliefs from one 
Originally published in The Philosophical Quarterly 49, 
197 (Oct. 1999), pp. 471-90. 
time to another. In this way, just as I cannot 
remember that p unless I have something to 
remember, the thought underlying this picture of 
testimonial knowledge is that speakers cannot 
give knowledge that p unless they have something 
to give. So, for example, Robert Audi l writes that 
"1 cannot (testimonially) give you knowledge that 
p without knowing that p . ... Testimonially based 
knowledge is received by transmission and so 
depends on the attester's knowing that p." In a 
similar spirit, James Ross lays down the following 
conditions for testimonial knowledge: "S comes 
to know that h on Ws testimony iff: W knows 
that h, tells S, and his telling S brings it about that 
S believes that hand h is evident for S". 2 Following 
this view, Michael Welbourne maintains that "I 
take testimony to be essentially concerned with 
communicating knowledge, so I hold that it is 
necessary, if there is to be a successful process of 
testimonial transmission, that the speaker knows 
that p. Thus I stipulate that the speaker knows 
that p."3 And Tyler Burge concurs: "If the recipi-
ent depends on interlocution for knowledge, the 
recipient's knowledge depends on the source's 
having knowledge as well. For if the source does 
not believe the proposition, or if the proposition 
is not true, or if the source is not justified, the 
recipient cannot know the proposition."4 
These quotations are characteristic of thesis (2) 
above, and it is this view of how testimonial knowl-
edge is passed from one person to another which is 
the dominant one. This thesis, however, should be 

856 
JENNIFER LACKEY 
distinguished from one that is entailed by (2) but is 
a much weaker view of the transmission of testimo-
nial knowledge. We may compare with (2) above 
what Michael Dummett says about testimony: 
If remembering something is to count as retain-
ing a knowledge of it, it must have been known 
when originally witnessed or experienced; if it 
was derived from a misperception or misappre-
hension, the memory cannot of course rank as 
knowledge. The same naturally applies to taking 
something to be so, having been told it: the orig-
inal purveyor of the information - the first link in 
the chain of transmission - must himself have 
known it, and therefore have been in a position 
to know it, or it cannot be knowledge for any of 
those who derived it ultimately from him.s 
The difference between this claim and the one put 
forth by proponents of (2) is that, on Dummett's 
view, at least the first link in the chain of testimo-
nial transmission must know that p (via some 
non-testimonial means), whereas according to 
(2) every link in the chain must know that p (via 
either non-testimonial or testimonial means). 
I shall distinguish these two theses thus: 
2. 
For every speaker 5 and hearer H, if H comes 
to know that p via 5's testifying that p, then 
5 must know that p 
2*. 
For every testimonial chain of knowledge C, 
in order for a hearer H in C to come to know 
that p via the testimony of a speaker 5 in C, 
at least the first speaker 51 in C must know 
that p (in some non-testimonial way). 
So proponents of (2*), unlike those who endorse 
(2), can countenance testimonial chains which 
include some speakers who know that p and some 
who do not. The crucial point of (2*) is that the 
original source of the knowledge that p, that is, 
the speaker who first came to know that p via 
some non-testimonial means, must know that p. 
In this paper, however, I shall argue that both (2) 
and (2*) are false. Specifically, I shall claim that there 
are some plausible ways in which a hearer can acquire 
knowledge that p via a speaker's testimony that p 
despite the fact that even the first speaker in the chain 
in question fails to know that p. First, however, it may 
be helpful to make some preliminary remarks about 
the justification of testimonial beliefs. 
II 
Knowledge, it is widely agreed, is more than just 
true belief. There is far less agreement, however, 
regarding the particular nature of this additional 
element for knowledge. For present purposes, I 
shall call whatever this further element is "justifi-
cation", and put forth the following schematic 
definition of knowledge: 
K. 5 knows that p iff (i) p; (ii) 5 believes that p; 
(iii) 5 is justified in believing that p. 
Now, as suggested above, condition (iii) of this 
tripartite definition can be fleshed out in various 
and often competing ways. With respect to testi-
monial justification in particular, there are two 
main views. On the one hand, non-reductivists" 
maintain that testimony is just as basic a source of 
knowledge as sense-perception, memory, infer-
ence, and the like, and accordingly that hearers 
may be justified in accepting the reports of speak-
ers, albeit defeasibly, merely on the basis of a 
speaker's testimony. In this way, such accounts 
endorse 
a justificatory principle 
like 
the 
following: 
JP. If 5 reports that p to Hand H has no 
defeaters for 5's report that p, then H is 
justified in accepting that p on the basis 
of 5's testimony. 
Reductivists, on the other hand, argue that in 
order to be justified in accepting the reports of 
speakers, hearers must have reasons for trusting 
certain speakers and reports, and in particular 
that these reasons cannot themselves be inelimi-
nably based on the testimony of others. Instead, 
they are typically the result of induction: we 
observe a general conformity between facts and 
reports and, with the aid of memory and reason, 
we inductively infer that certain speakers are reli-
able sources of knowledge. In this way, the justifi-
cation of testimony is reduced to the justification 
we have for sense-perception, memory and infer-
ence. Thus reductivists put forth a justificatory 
principle like the following: 
JP*. If 5 reports that p to H, H has no defeaters 
for 5's report that p, and H has positive 

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE AND TRANSMISSION 
857 
reasons to accept 5's report that p, then H 
is justified in accepting that p on the basis 
of 5's testimony.? 
For our purposes, the crucial point to notice is 
that both OP) and OP*) include as a necessary 
condition for testimonial knowledge that the 
hearer in question must not have any defeaters 
for 5's report that p. In this way, regardless of 
whether (iii) of (K) is construed non-reductively 
or reductively for testimonial justification, the 
absence of defeaters is a necessary condition for 
testimonial knowledge. 
But what is a defeater and how does it func-
tion? With respect to these questions, there are 
three main responses. The first is that a defeater 
is a proposition D which is believed by 5 to be 
true, yet indicates that 5's belief that p is either 
false or unreliably formed or sustained. Defeaters 
in this sense function by virtue of being believed, 
regardless of their truth-value." For example, 5 
may believe that Betty's dog did not trample the 
flowers because Betty told her that he did not. 
But if Polly, another neighbour, later tells 5 that 
she saw Betty's dog trample the flowers, then, 
given Polly's testimony and assuming that 5 
believes her, 5 has evidence for the denial of the 
belief that Betty's dog did not trample the flow-
ers. Or suppose that 5 learns and comes to believe 
that the textbook from which 5 acquired a cer-
tain belief about history was written by an 
incompetent scholar or a pathological liar. In 
that case 5 acquires a belief which indicates that 
the source of this historical belief is unreliable. 
Even if one's original belief was produced by a 
reliable belief-producing process, and even if the 
defeating belief in question fails to be true, the 
fact that 5 believes D is often taken to be sufficient 
for preventing 5's belief that p from being justified. 
The second response is that a defeater is a 
proposition D which 5 is justified in believing to 
be true, yet which indicates that 5's belief that pis 
either false, or unreliably formed or sustained. 
Defeaters in this sense function by virtue of being 
propositions that 5 should believe given the evi-
dence which is available to 5. 9 So, for instance, Bill 
believes that the President is currently in Chicago, 
but then reads in the New York Times that the 
President is currently in China. Now if Bill con-
tinues to hold his original belief with no reason 
for doubting the report in the newspaper, it may 
be argued that even if the President is in fact in 
Chicago, Bill does not know this because there is 
evidence available to him which defeats his 
justification. 
The third response is that a defeater is a true 
proposition D such that if D were added to 5's 
belief system, then 5 would no longer be justified 
in believing that p. Defeaters in this sense func-
tion by virtue of being true. 10 For instance, you 
may correctly believe that there is a barn in the 
field and yet the presence of barn fa'tades in the 
vicinity may none the less prevent this belief from 
being an instance of knowledge. In particular, 
that there are barn farades surrounding the real 
barn you saw is a true proposition which, if added 
to your belief system, would result in your belief's 
being unjustified. 
Thus though it is generally accepted that 
defeaters are indeed incompatible with knowl-
edge, there are different views of the nature 
of defeat. I shall call these three conceptions of 
defeat doxastic defeaters, normative defeaters 
and factual defeaters respectively. For the pur-
poses of this paper I shall focus primarily on 
the role that doxastic defeaters play in individ-
ual belief systems, but I shall also present cases 
against (2) and (2*) involving normative and 
factual defeaters. 
The last preliminary remark is that not all 
cases of knowledge acquired from hearing what a 
speaker says are clear instances of testimonial 
knowledge. For instance, if I say, in a soprano 
voice, that I have a soprano voice, and you come 
to believe this, not on the basis of the content of 
my statement but rather on the basis of hearing 
my soprano voice,11 then in this case, even though 
my statement may cause you to form the belief in 
question, the acquired knowledge is based on 
your perceptual experience rather than on the 
content of my report. Roughly, I shall say that one 
requirement for testimonial knowledge is that it 
must be based on the content of the proposition 
to which a speaker testifies rather than entirely on 
features about the speaker's testimony, e.g., how it 
was testified to, where it was testified to, and so 
on. So if you are unable to discriminate between 
soprano voices and, say, baritone voices, then the 
acquired knowledge in the above case would be of 
the testimonial sort, since it would be based on 
the content of the proffered statement. There are 
also intermediate cases in which a hearer has 

858 
JENNIFER LACKEY 
relevant background information and uses it to 
derive knowledge from the statement of a speaker. 
For example, suppose that you know from past 
experience that I report that there is no milk in 
the refrigerator only when there is some. Now 
when I report to you that there is no milk in the 
refrigerator you may supplement my testimony 
with your background information and hence 
derive knowledge that there is milk in the refrig-
erator. These types of cases, though in part based 
on testimony, also rely heavily on memory and 
inference. Thus, even though perception, memory 
and inference arguably playa role in the acquisi-
tion of all testimonial knowledge, I shall here 
focus only on cases in which the knowledge in 
question is clearly based on the content of a 
speaker's testimony. 
III 
With these points in mind, I shall now present 
two differnt kinds of counter-examples. The first 
type of case is where speakers fail to know that p 
because they fail to believe that p, i.e., they fail 
condition (ii) of (K), but a hearer can none the 
less come to know that p via their testimony. 
These cases will be directed specifically at (2). The 
second type of case is where speakers fail to know 
that p because they have a defeater for their belief 
that p, i.e., they fail condition (iii) of (K), but a 
hearer can none the less come to know that p via 
their testimony. These cases will undermine both 
(2) and (2*). Both types of counter-examples, I 
shall argue, apply to non-reductivist and reduc-
tivist accounts of testimonial justification. I shall 
begin with the former type of case. 
Suppose that a Catholic elementary school 
requires that all teachers include sections on 
evolutionary theory in their science classes and 
that the teachers conceal their own personal 
beliefs regarding this subject-matter. Mrs Smith, 
a teacher at the school in question, goes to the 
library, researches this literature from reliable 
sources, and on this basis develops a set of reli-
able lecture notes from which she will teach the 
material to her students. Despite this, however, 
Mrs Smith is herself a devout creationist and 
hence does not believe that evolutionary theory 
is true, but she none the less follows the require-
ment to teach the theory to her students. Now 
assuming that evolutionary theory is true, in 
this case it seems reasonable to assume that Mrs 
Smith's students can come to have knowledge 
via her testimony, despite the fact that she fails 
condition (ii) and hence does not have the 
knowledge in question herself. That is, it seems 
that she can give to her students what she does 
not have herself. For in spite of Mrs Smith's fail-
ure to believe and therewith to know the propo-
sitions she is reporting to her students about 
evolution, she is a reliable testifier for this infor-
mation, and on the basis of her testimony it 
seems that the students in question can come to 
have knowledge of evolutionary theory. I take it 
that similar considerations apply in cases where 
a Kantian teaches utilitarianism, a dualist teaches 
physicalism, an atheist teaches Christianity, and 
so on. If the theory in question is true and a 
hearer comes to believe it by means of the teach-
er's testimony, then, I would say, the hearer can 
acquire knowledge on this basis despite the 
failure of condition (ii)Y 
This case can be fleshed out in certain plausi-
ble ways so that the students in question satisfy 
both OP) and OP*). For instance, we can suppose 
that the children have grown up in environments 
in which they have not acquired any reasons to 
favour evolutionary theory over creationism or 
vice versa. We can also assume that the students 
do have some positive reasons for accepting the 
testimony of Mrs Smith, e.g., her reports typically 
co-vary with their perceptual experiences, the 
reports of their parents and classmates, and so on. 
Thus according to both non-reductivist and 
reductivist accounts of testimonial justification, 
the children acquire the knowledge in question 
from Mrs Smith's testimony even though she does 
not have it herself. 
There are, however, three ways in which an 
objector can deny that cases like that of Mrs Smith 
and her students provide counter-examples to 
thesis (2). The first is to deny that her testimony is 
the source of the children's knowledge in ques-
tion, the second is to deny that the children actu-
ally do come to have knowledge of evolutionary 
theory, and the third is to deny that the teacher's 
statements qualify as instances of testimony. I 
shall examine these in turn. 
To argue that Mrs Smith's testimony is not the 
source of the children's knowledge is tantamount 
to denying that she is a link in the testimonial 

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE AND TRANSMISSION 
859 
chain of evolutionary knowledge. But what, we 
might ask, could justify such a claim? For ex 
hypothesi the children are not relying on or con-
sulting any textbooks, but are forming their 
beliefs solely on the basis of the reports made by 
Mrs Smith. Perhaps one way to defend this posi-
tion is to argue that a person who functions as a 
mere instrument for transmitting knowledge 
cannot be considered a testimonial source of 
knowledge. For example, one might claim that it 
is actually the authors of the books on evolution-
ary theory from which Mrs Smith derived her lec-
ture notes who are the links in the testimonial 
chain leading to the students in question. 
Mrs Smith is merely an instrument for transmit-
ting the knowledge of evolutionary theory from 
the authors of the books to the children in the 
elementary school, and hence such cases do not 
pose a problem for (2). 
Now one obvious way of responding to this 
objection is simply to modify the counter-
example so that the authors in question are merely 
interested in the topic of evolutionary theory but 
are themselves also creationists. This will, I take it, 
lead the objector to point to the sources from 
which the authors in question derived their infor-
mation on evolutionary theory, so as to avoid the 
counter-example. And I suppose we can add fur-
ther modifications and objections until ultimately 
we trace the chain back to Darwin himself. To my 
mind, however, this is an unwelcome conse-
quence. For not only does it seem a counter-
intuitive picture of the way we think of testimony, 
it is also question-begging. Let us ask the follow-
ing question: if the teacher in our envisaged case 
had had the requisite belief, would she have been 
the source of the children's knowledge or would it 
have been Darwin? I take it that proponents of (2) 
would respond that, in this case, Mrs Smith is the 
source of the knowledge in question precisely 
because they countenance chains of testimonial 
knowledge. That is, we need not receive the report 
that p directly from Darwin himself because testi-
mony is a source whereby people can acquire 
information across times, places and persons. 
Given this, it seems natural to assume that propo-
nents of (2) would countenance Mrs Smith as the 
source of the children's knowledge if she had had 
the requisite beliefs. But then to deny that she is 
the source in the envisaged case merely because 
she lacks the beliefs at issue is question-begging. 
A variant of this first response is to argue that 
there is a difference between what we might call 
direct and indirect testimony and that the case of 
Mrs Smith is an instance of the latter. For example, 
I do not believe that Bill ate the last cookie but I 
none the less report to you that John said that Bill 
ate the last cookie. Here one might say that what I 
am testifying to is simply what John said and that 
it is only in an indirect way that I convey the 
information about Bill. Similarly one might argue 
that even if it is not made explicit in her reports, 
what Mrs Smith is testifying to is merely what the 
authorities on evolutionary theory accept, and 
hence it is only in an indirect way that she com-
municates information about evolutionary theory 
itself. In this way it may be argued that, as it 
stands, (2) applies only to testimonial knowledge 
which is acquired in a direct way, and thus the 
example of Mrs Smith does not pose a problem 
for this view. 
However, it is not entirely clear what the crite-
rion could be for distinguishing between direct 
and indirect testimony in such a way that Mrs 
Smith's reports turn out to be instances of the 
latter. For in the above case I report that so and so 
said that p to you, while ex hypothesi Mrs Smith 
merely reports that p to her students. Now the 
distinguishing mark between direct and indirect 
testimony cannot be whether the speaker in ques-
tion believes or fails to believe that p, respectively. 
For instance, I may believe that Bill ate the last 
cookie but, because I do not want to be held 
accountable for divulging this information, I may 
none the less report that John said that Bill ate the 
last cookie. Here, even though I hold the belief 
about Bill, one might say that this is still a case of 
indirect testimony, since what I am testifying to is 
what John said. On the other hand, if the distin-
guishing mark of direct testimony is that the 
speaker did not acquire the information in ques-
tion from another speaker's testimony, this has 
the unwelcome consequence that most of the 
reports we make, with the exception of, for example, 
reports about our perceptual experiences, are 
cases of indirect testimony. Given this, the way in 
which I would distinguish between direct and 
indirect testimony is by the content of the prof-
fered statement. Specifically, ifI report to you that 
p (whether or not I believe that p), then this is a 
case of direct testimony. On the other hand, if I 
report to you that so and so said that p (whether 

860 
JENNIFER LACKEY 
or not I believe that p), then this is a case of indi-
rect testimony. In this way, Mrs Smith's reports 
to her students turn out to be instances of direct 
testimony, even though she fails the belief 
condition of (K). 
The second strategy for responding to cases 
like Mrs Smith's is to deny that the children in 
question come to have knowledge. I must admit 
that this response seems quite implausible to me, 
but perhaps one way to support it is to argue that 
testimony cannot be a source of knowledge if the 
speaker in question is lying or falsely testifyingY 
For if one reports that p but does not believe that 
p, then, it might be argued, it is merely an acci-
dent if a hearer comes to believe truly that p on 
this basis. And since it is widely assumed that 
there must be some non-accidental connection 
between a subject's belief that p and the fact that p, 
in order to rule out Gettier-type cases, one cannot 
know that p via a speaker's false testimony. Given 
this, one might argue that, broadly speaking, Mrs 
Smith is lying to her students, since she is reporting 
what she herself does not believe, and hence even 
if her students acquire true beliefs via her testi-
mony, this is merely an accident. 
The first thing to note about this response is 
that ex hypothesi Mrs Smith consulted reliable 
books in the library to develop her reliable lecture 
notes, and hence it is unclear how there could be 
any unacceptable degree of accidentality in this 
case. For instance, if there is a secular elementary 
school in the area, where Mr Jones teaches evolu-
tionary theory to his students, has the purport-
edly requisite beliefs, and develops reliable lecture 
notes which are similar to Mrs Smith's in all rele-
vant respects, it seems fairly safe to assume that 
the children in the secular school acquire knowl-
edge of evolutionary theory via Mr Jones' testi-
mony. But then why would not the children in the 
Catholic school? Why should it matter that Mrs 
Smith is a creationist and does not believe what 
she is teaching to her students? 
Second, it seems clear that hearers can acquire 
knowledge via the testimony of speakers even 
when the latter are pathological liars. For instance, 
Sally is radically yet consistently mistaken about 
most of her beliefs. That is, she consistently 
believes that objects are blue when they are in fact 
red, that a cat is in the room when in fact a dog is 
in the room, and so on for most of her beliefs. She 
is also a pathological yet consistent liar. For 
instance, when she sees red objects and believes 
that they are blue, she reports that they are red 
with the intention to deceive her hearers. Similarly, 
when she sees a cat and believes it is a dog, she 
reports that a cat is in the room with the intention 
to deceive her hearers. Since Sally's reports con-
sistently co-vary with the perceptual experiences 
of her hearers, not only do the hearers fail to have 
any defeaters for either Sally's particular reports 
or for her reliability as a testifier, they also have 
inductive evidence for believing that she is a reli-
able source of knowledge. 14 In a case such as this, 
I take it that hearers can acquire knowledge via 
Sally's testimony despite the fact that she consist-
ently reports what she herself does not believe 
and explicitly intends to deceive her hearers. To 
my mind, denying that hearers can acquire knowl-
edge via Sally's testimony conflates reliable know-
ers with reliable testifiers, that is, it conflates 
subjects reliably forming beliefs themselves with 
speakers reliably communicating information to 
others. What is crucial for hearers in order to 
acquire knowledge from speakers is that the prof-
fered statements be reliable, that is, that they be 
truth-conducive in some way. One of the ways in 
which this link with the truth can be ensured is if 
the speakers in question are reliable knowers, 
e.g., if their beliefs are connected with the truth, 
they report what they believe, and hearers come 
to acquire beliefs via their reports. But, as I have 
been arguing, there is no reason to believe that 
this is the way it has to be for a hearer to acquire 
knowledge via testimony. So long as the state-
ments themselves are truth-conducive, knowl-
edge can be acquired via testimony in the absence 
of knowledge on the part of the speaker. 
The third strategy for defending (2) from cases 
like Mrs Smith's is to grant that the children do 
come to have knowledge and that they do this via 
Mrs Smith's reports, but to deny that her state-
ments 
qualify 
as 
instances 
of testimony. 
Specifically, one might argue that in order for a 
speaker to testify, certain conditions must be sat-
isfied, either about the nature of the proffered 
statement itself or about the intentional activity 
of the speaker, and the satisfaction of such condi-
tions distinguishes testimony from mere state-
ments. In this way the children may acquire 
knowledge via Mrs Smith's reports, but that fails 
to show that they acquire knowledge via her 
testimony. 

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE AND TRANSMISSION 
861 
The first point which can be made on behalf 
of countenancing Mrs Smith's reports as testi-
mony is that it is not uncommon for those who 
are interested in the epistemology of testimony to 
embrace a broad notion of what it is to testify, a 
notion under which Mrs Smith's reports clearly 
fall. For instance, Elizabeth Fricker argues that the 
domain of testimony which is of epistemological 
interest is that of "tellings generally" with "no 
restrictions either on subject matter, or on the 
speaker's epistemic relation to it" ("Telling and 
Trusting" pp. 396-7). And Robert Audi (p. 405) 
claims that "Testimony of the wide sort that con-
cerns me - roughly, saying or affirming some-
thing in an apparent attempt to convey (correct) 
information - is what raises the question of how 
testimony is important for knowledge and justifi-
cation". (He later adds, p. 406, that in accounting 
for knowledge and justification we must under-
stand testimony as "people's telling us things".) 
But even for those who endorse a more restricted 
notion of what it is to testify, it is arguable that 
Mrs Smith's statements qualify as instances of tes-
timony. For example, it has been argued that tes-
tifying requires that speakers intend to convey 
epistemically useful information, or that they 
offer statements which are evidence in some 
objective sense, or that there be a need for the evi-
dence on the part of the hearer. IS Now Mrs Smith 
does intend to convey information which is epis-
temically useful to her students; her statements 
are evidence in an objective sense; and her stu-
dents are in need of the evidence being offered. 
Thus even according to many restrictive views of 
testimony, Mrs Smith satisfies the requisite con-
ditions for testifying. 
Moreover, it is questionable on independent 
grounds whether such conditions are necessary 
for a speaker to testify. For instance, if we 
require that a speaker intend to convey epistem-
ically useful information in order to testify, then 
there are many situations in which we shall have 
to deny that certain statements are instances of 
testimony when they do seem to be. Post-
humous publications of private journals will 
fail to qualify, since the authors did not intend 
to convey information to anybody but them-
selves. Or if I believe that you are already privy 
to the fact that p and I make a casual statement 
to the effect that p without intending to convey 
information, I fail to testify that p even if you 
acquire knowledge from my statement. Similarly, 
if one requires that the statement be some type 
of objective evidence, then it is arguably the 
case that speakers will not be able to testify 
about countless things, e.g., alien encounters, 
UFO sightings, and the like. 
Even more significantly, however, if we make 
our definition of what it is to testify so robust that 
it is necessary that the speaker have certain inten-
tions or that the statement be truth-conducive, 
then the work for epistemology is not to show 
that testimony is a reliable source of knowledge 
but rather to enquire whether we have an institu-
tion of testimony. Each time speakers report that 
p, we shall first have to ask "Did they really tes-
tify?", and, depending on the answer to this ques-
tion, we might have different epistemological 
accounts. If testimony is, by definition, a reliable 
source of knowledge, e.g., if the proffered state-
ments must be truth-conducive, then we need 
not give an account of the justification of testi-
monial beliefs. Instead, we need to show that we 
do have an institution of testimony or that when 
speakers are making statements, they actually are 
testifying. Similarly, if we require that a speaker 
have certain intentions in order to testify, then we 
shall have to do a bit of psychology in order to 
determine whether the statement is an instance of 
testimony. Moreover, I suppose that we shall then 
have an account of the justification of testimonial 
beliefs and a separate account of the justification 
of mere statements. 
Since these consequences seem so unattrac-
tive, I take it that such requirements are not nec-
essary for a speaker to testify. Surely the interesting 
epistemological question is how we are justified 
in accepting the testimony of others, rather than 
whether we really do have an institution of testi-
mony. Furthermore, it seems that so far as possi-
ble we should offer a unitary account of the 
knowledge we acquire from the reports of others, 
which would explain how we are justified in 
accepting the reports of speakers like Mrs Smith. 
For explaining how we acquire knowledge via tes-
timony is explaining how we acquire knowledge 
via the statements of others. Since the children in 
our case do seem to acquire knowledge via the 
reports of Mrs Smith, the process seems to fall 
under the general rubric of testimonial knowl-
edge. Given this, such cases seem to cast serious 
doubt on thesis (2). 

862 
JENNIFER LACKEY 
IV 
In the previous section, I argued that thesis (2) is 
false, since a hearer can acquire knowledge that 
p via speakers' testimony that p even when the 
latter themselves fail to believe and hence fail to 
know that p. In this section, however, I focus on 
the role that defeaters play in testimonial knowl-
edge, and I shall argue that since defeaters are not 
necessarily transmitted via testimony, a hearer 
can come to know that p via a speaker's testimony 
that p, despite the fact that even the first speaker in 
a chain of testimonial transmission fails to know 
that p. In this way I shall argue that both (2) and 
(2*) are false. 
I shall begin with doxastic defeaters, believed 
propositions which defeat the justification of 
other beliefs. For instance, if I believe that there is 
coffee in the kitchen because I saw it there this 
afternoon, but John tells me that he has just drunk 
the last cup, the justification I had for believing 
that there is coffee in the kitchen has been defeated 
by my belief that John just drank the last cup. But 
since doxastic defeaters are themselves beliefs, 
they, too, are candidates for defeat. For instance, 
suppose I go into the kitchen to check whether 
John did in fact just drink the last cup of coffee, 
and I discover that there is still coffee in the carafe. 
In this case, my perceptual belief provides me with 
a doxastic defeater for the belief that I acquired via 
John's testimony, and hence it provides me with a 
defeater-defeater for my original belief that there is 
coffee in the kitchen. Still further, defeater-
defeaters are also candidates for defeat, since they 
too are beliefs. Thus if I confront John and tell 
him that I have just seen that there is coffee in the 
kitchen, and he tells me that he poured tea in the 
carafe, his testimony provides me with a defeater 
for my defeater-defeater, that is, it provides me 
with a defeater-defeater-defeater for my original 
belief that there is coffee in the kitchen. And, as 
should be suspected, defeater-defeater-defeaters 
can also be defeated by further beliefs, which in 
turn can be defeated by further beliefs, and so on. 
Finally, when one has a defeater D for one's belief 
that p which is not itself defeated by another belief, 
one has what is called an undefeated defeater for 
one's belief that p. 
With these points in place, I shall begin by 
considering the following case. Jane is currently in 
the grips of sceptical worries which are so strong 
that she can scarcely be said to know anything at 
all. (I here emphasize "currently" to capture the 
idea in contextualist views of knowledge that 
sceptical doubts may undermine knowledge while 
those doubts are being entertained, even if they 
need not undermine knowledge in ordinary or 
everyday contexts. 16 ) That is, her belief that she 
could now be the victim of an evil demon is 
strong enough to defeat the justification she has 
for many of her ordinary beliefs and, moreover, it 
is currently an undefeated defeater. Jim, a pas-
serby, approaches her, asks her where the cafe is, 
and she reports that it is around the corner, but 
does not report her sceptical worries to Jim. Now 
Jim has never considered any sceptical possibili-
ties at all, and hence he does not have any doxastic 
defeaters for his ordinary beliefs. Furthermore, he 
does have positive reasons for accepting Jane's 
report, e.g., he has perceived a general conformity 
between facts and the reports of many speakers in 
these types of contexts, and he has inductively 
inferred that speakers are generally reliable when 
they are giving directions, and Jane does not 
exhibit any behaviour which indicates a lack of 
sincerity or competence with respect to her 
report. So Jim forms the true belief that there is a 
cafe around the corner on the basis of Jane's 
testimony. 
Given that Jane has an undefeated defeater 
which Jim does not have, he has knowledge which 
she lacks. Yet at the same time it seems possible 
for Jim to come to know that the cafe is around 
the corner via Jane's testimony even though her 
sceptical doubts currently undermine her know-
ing this. In this way, Jane fails OP) and OP*) 
because she has an undefeated defeater for the 
belief in question, Jim satisfies OP) and OP*) 
because he does not have such a doxastic defeater, 
and thus it seems possible for a hearer to acquire 
knowledge on the basis of a speaker's testimony 
even when the speaker does not personally have 
the knowledge in question. 
But the crucial thing about the above example 
is that Jane is the first link in the chain of testimo-
nial knowledge in question. For though it is only a 
two-person chain, it is still a process whereby a 
hearer comes to have knowledge via the report of 
a speaker. Moreover, we can certainly imagine a 
much longer chain in which Jim reports that the 
cafe is around the corner to another hearer Steve, 
who passes it to Bill, and so on, and we can 

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE AND TRANSMISSION 
863 
imagine that none of these speakers actually 
checked where the cafe is for himself. In this way, 
the chain itself finds its ultimate origin in Jane 
who ex hypothesi does not know that the cafe is 
around the corner. This shows that it is possible 
for a hearer to come to know that p via a speaker's 
testimony that p even when the first link in the 
testimonial chain in question fails to know that p. 
Thus even the weaker (2*) is false. 
Now one may wish to deny that sceptical 
doubts can ever be so strong as really to do the 
defeating work in question. But there are other, 
perhaps less questionable, examples to illustrate 
this point. For instance, we can adapt the follow-
ing example from Alvin Goldman (pp. 53-4): 
Millicent in fact possesses her normal visual 
powers, but has cogent reasons to believe these 
powers are temporarily deranged. She is a subject 
of a neurosurgeon's experiments, and the sur-
geon falsely tells her that current implantations 
are causing malfunction in her visual cortex. She 
is persuaded that her present visual appearances 
are no guide at all to reality. Yet despite this belief, 
she continues to place credence in her visual per-
cepts. She ignores her well justified belief in the 
incapacitation of her visual faculty; she persists 
in believing, on the basis of visual appearances, 
that a chair is before her, that the neurosurgeon 
is wearing a yellow smock, and so on. Now these 
beliefs are all, in fact, true. Moreover, they are 
formed by the usual, quite reliable, perceptual 
processes. But are they specimens of knowledge? 
Intuitively, no. The reason is that Millicent is not 
justified in holding these beliefs; they contravene 
her best evidence. 
So Millicent acquires an undefeated defeater for 
her visual powers via another person's testimony, 
and hence fails to have the knowledge in question. 
Suppose, however, that Millicent not only persists 
in forming perceptual beliefs, she also continues 
to report such experiences to her friends, though 
she does not report her doxastic defeater. Her 
friends have a sufficient amount of positive evi-
dence to trust her reports, e.g., her reports regu-
larly co-vary with their perceptual experiences, 
the reports of others, and so on. Millicent's hear-
ers, therefore, satisfy both OP) and OP*), but she 
does not, because she has the undefeated defeater 
in question. Thus Millicent seems capable of giving 
knowledge to others which she fails to possess 
herself. Indeed, like Jane, she may even be the first 
link in a testimonial chain, correctly reporting 
that she saw a groundhog in the field which no 
one else saw even though she is not justified in 
believing this herself. 
What these cases point to is that doxastic 
defeaters are not necessarily transmitted via testi-
mony. For defeaters in this sense are beliefs of the 
subjects in question which defeat the justification 
they have for holding another belief. In this way, 
doxastic defeaters do not simply "come along for 
the ride" when a speaker reports that p; instead, 
the defeater itself must be reported and believed 
by the hearer in order for it to be acquired via tes-
timony. Doxastic defeaters can also prevent the 
transmission of knowledge via testimony in cases 
where a speaker knows and reports that p but a 
hearer fails to know that p on this basis because 
the latter has a defeater for p. For instance, you 
might truly and with justification believe that 
Mary stole the money because you saw her take it. 
But if you report this to me, I may not be justified 
in accepting your testimony because I have an 
undefeated defeater for your reliability as a testi-
fier. Thus you know that p, you report that p to 
me, and yet I do not know that p because I have 
an undefeated defeater for your testimony. 
However, what proponents of (2) and (2*) fail to 
notice is that speakers can have doxastic defeaters 
which hearers do not have. I may report that p 
and even believe that p, but may not know that p 
because my justification is defeated by another 
belief D. And unless my hearers also come to 
believe D, they may know that p via my testimony 
while I do not. 
However, there are two different ways in which 
doxastic defeaters can fail to be transmitted via 
testimony. The first is like the cases above where a 
speaker reports that p but fails to report an unde-
feated defeater D. The second type of case is where 
a speaker reports that p and reports a defeater D, 
but the hearer accepts only the report. Thus if 
Jane reports that the cafe is around the corner 
and reports her sceptical worries to Jim, but he 
fails to believe that he could now be the victim of 
an evil demon, then he can still acquire knowl-
edge that the cafe is around the corner via Jane's 
testimony even though she fails to have it. 
Moreover, there are cases in which doxastic 
defeaters are transmitted via testimony, but 
the hearer in question is in possession of a 

864 
JENNIFER LACKEY 
defeater-defeater, thereby enabling testimony still 
to impart knowledge to the hearer. So, for example, 
suppose that Jane does report her sceptical doubts 
to Jim and he comes to believe that he could be the 
victim of an evil demon, that is, he acquires a dox-
astic defeater for his ordinary beliefs. However, he 
later comes to believe that he has a refutation of 
scepticism. So he has a belief which defeats the jus-
tification for believing that he could now be the 
victim of an evil demon, i.e., he has a defeater-
defeater for the original belief in question. 
Given the role that doxastic defeaters play in indi-
vidual epistemic frameworks, it is easy to imagine a 
chain of testifiers, some of whom have defeaters, 
some defeater-defeaters, some defeater-defeater-
defeaters, and so on. Indeed, it is also quite easy to 
imagine a chain of testifiers like Jane and Millicent 
who have undefeated defeaters for believing that p, 
but where the very last link in the chain, Sarah, has a 
defeater-defeater for believing that p. Such a chain 
would include only speakers who do not have the 
knowledge in question, and yet Sarah, the last hearer 
in the chain, could none the less come to know that 
p via the testimony of other members in the chain. 
Now even though I have thus far focused on the 
role doxastic defeaters play in individual epistemic 
frameworks, similar considerations can be adduced 
involving normative and factual defeaters. For 
instance, Alice is incorrectly told by an otherwise 
reliable optometrist that her vision is nearly com-
pletely unreliable, yet she refuses to accept his 
diagnosis, without having any rational basis for 
doing so. So, one might say, even though the 
optometrist's report is false, Alice should accept his 
diagnosis, given all of the evidence that she has 
available to her, and thus she has a normative 
defeater for her visual beliefs. Now as Alice is walk-
ing out of the doctor's office she sees a car accident, 
and later reports this fact to me but does not report 
the optometrist's diagnosis to me. In this case it 
seems possible for a hearer to acquire knowledge 
via Alice's testimony even though the presence of a 
normative defeater prevents her from having such 
knowledge. For if we assume that I have no other 
reasons for doubting her reliability as a testifier, 
and I have sufficient evidence for believing that 
she is reliable, then I satisfy OP) and OP*), while 
Alice does not. Moreover, we can imagine that 
Alice's report about the car accident is the very first 
link in a testimonial chain, imparting knowledge 
to others which she does not possess herself. 
Or suppose that Farmer Brown and I are very 
good friends, and I have every reason to believe 
that he is an honest and sincere man. Several 
weeks ago we were having coffee and he told me 
that even though he does not have a real barn 
himself, he is vehemently opposed to a trend in 
his community towards making the neighbour-
hood appear prosperous by putting up barn 
fa<;:ades. Today you drive past Farmer Brown's 
farm, notice that he has a new barn, and report 
this fact to me. You do not know, however, that 
his barn is the only real one in his community, 
surrounded by fa<;:ades which from a distance are 
indistinguishable from his barn. This being so, 
you do not know that Farmer Brown has a new 
barn, because there is a factual defeater, namely, 
that there are barn fa<;:ades surrounding the real 
barn, which prevents you from having knowl-
edge. To put this another way, the barn fa<;:ades are 
relevant alternatives which have not been elimi-
nated or ruled out with respect to your perceptual 
belief. But, given my belief that Farmer Brown has 
vehemently spoken out against barn fa<;:ades, it 
seems reasonable to say that such alternatives are 
eliminated with respect to my accepting your 
testimony. That is, I can come to know via 
your testimony that he has a new barn on his 
farm. For I have no reason to doubt your report 
and I have good reason to believe that, even if 
Farmer Brown's new barn were surrounded by 
fa<;:ades, his would be a real one. Once again, your 
factual defeater need not be transmitted to me via 
your testimony. 
As I have tried to show, the failure of different 
kinds of defeaters to be transmitted via testimony 
renders theses like (2) and (2*) indefensible. For 
once we grant, as proponents of these views do, 
that a hearer can have a defeater which a speaker 
does not, then what could justify our denying 
that a speaker can have a defeater which a hearer 
does not? That is, what could justify the claim 
that a speaker's defeaters are necessarily trans-
mitted to a hearer? Given cases like the ones dis-
cussed in this section, it seems uncontentious 
that speakers can have various defeaters which hear-
ersdo not (and, of course, vice versa). This has sig-
nificant epistemological consequences for the 
dominant picture of testimonial knowledge. 
Since defeaters do not necessarily come along for 
the ride with reports, testimonial chains can 
include speakers and hearers with very different 

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE AND TRANSMISSION 
865 
epistemic status. In particular, a single chain of 
testimony can include speakers and hearers, some 
of whom have undefeated defeaters, some 
defeater-defeaters, some defeater-defeater-defeat-
ers, and so on. Accordingly, such chains can 
include some speakers who know that p and 
others who fail to know that p. Indeed, as I have 
argued, even that first speaker in a testimonial 
chain need not know that p for hearers in the 
chain to come to know that p via that speaker's 
testimony. Thus the dominant picture of testi-
monial knowledge is false. 
v 
In this section, I shall offer some brief remarks 
regarding what is necessary for a hearer to acquire 
knowledge via the testimony of a speaker. I shall 
sketch an alternative thesis to (2) and (2*) which 
avoids the problems afflicting accounts which 
hold that some degree of speaker-knowledge is 
necessary for a hearer to acquire testimonial 
knowledge. 
In explaining how we acquire knowledge via 
the testimony of others, we are interested in 
offering an account of how hearers can come to 
know that p through a speaker's statement that p. 
Since it is post-Gettier knowledge that is at issue, 
it is widely accepted that, with respect to testimo-
nial knowledge in particular, there needs to be 
some non-accidental or reliable connection 
between a speaker's statement that p and the fact 
that p. Now as proponents of (2) and (2*) point 
out, one way in which such a connection can be 
secured is through the relationship between 
speakers' epistemic state and hearers'. If speakers' 
belief that p is reliably connected with the truth 
that p, then, assuming that speakers report what 
they themselves believe, hearers can reliably 
acquire true beliefs via this testimony. In this way, 
speaker-knowledge secures a non-accidental or 
reliable connection between the statements of 
speakers and the beliefs that hearers acquire via 
these statements. That this type of connection 
secures such a link with the truth seems uncon-
tentious. But it is crucial that speaker-knowledge 
is only one of the ways in which a reliable con-
nection between a speaker's statement that p and 
the fact that p can be secured. For, as I argued in 
§III, statements of particular speakers can be 
reliably connected with the truth even if their 
beliefs are not. Mrs Smith's statements about 
evolutionary theory, for example, "track the 
truth" even though her specific beliefs about evo-
lutionary theory do not. Sally, our pathological 
yet consistent liar who is systematically in error 
about her beliefs, can be a reliable testifier even 
though she is a radically unreliable knower. The 
upshot of these types of cases is that statements 
and beliefs can come apart. Speakers can be relia-
ble testifiers who offer statements which are 
truth-conducive or truth-tracking even if they 
are radically unreliable knowers whose beliefs fail 
to be mostly true or truth-tracking. What is nec-
essary for testimonial knowledge is that a speak-
er's statement be appropriately connected with 
the truth, where knowledge on the part of the 
speaker is only one such connection. 
So I propose the following general thesis about 
the acquisition of testimonial knowledge: 
2**. For every speaker 5 and hearer H, if H 
comes to know that p via S's statement that 
p, then S's statement that p must be appro-
priately connected with the fact that p. 
As should be clear, (2**) does not specify what 
kind of connection is appropriate between S's 
statement that p and the fact that p. The connec-
tion can be fleshed out in terms of one's general 
account of epistemic justification. For instance, it 
may be that one's statement that p is appropri-
ately connected with the fact that p if one's state-
ment "tracks the truth" in Nozick's sense, i.e., if p 
were not true 5 would not state that p, and if p 
were true 5 would state that p. So, for example, 
Sally, our pathological yet consistent liar, states 
that objects are red only if they are red even 
though she believes that objects are red when they 
are not. In this way, her statements are truth-
tracking even though her beliefs are not. Or it 
may be that one's statement that p is appropri-
ately connected with the fact that p if one's state-
ment that p is reliably correlated with the fact that p. 
Thus Mrs Smith's statements are reliably corre-
lated with the supposed facts of evolutionary 
theory even though her epistemic states fail to be 
so correlated. But whatever one's general account 
of epistemic justification turns out to be, the 
point which is of import here is that the relata of 
the appropriate connection specified in (2**) are 

866 
JENNIFER LACKEY 
statements and facts. In this way, speaker-knowledge 
is only one means whereby a connection is 
secured. 
Moreover, for a complete account of testimo-
nial knowledge, (2**) needs to be combined with 
either UP) or UP*), that is, with either a reductiv-
ist or a non-reductivist account of testimonial 
justification. On either account, a necessary con-
dition for knowing that p is that one must not 
have any defeaters for one's belief that p. Thus we 
may say that there are at least two necessary con-
ditions for a hearer to acquire testimonial knowl-
edge via the statement of a speaker, one which 
applies specifically to the speaker's statement, and 
another which applies to the epistemic states of 
the hearer. In particular, I propose the following 
minimal account of testimonial knowledge: 
TK. For every speaker S and hearer H, H comes 
to know that p via S's statement that p only 
if (i) S's statement that p is appropriately 
connected with the fact that p; and (ii) H 
has no defeaters indicating the contrary. 
Notes 
R. Audi, "The Place of Testimony in the Fabric 
of Knowledge and Justification", American 
Philosophical Quarterly, 34 (1997), pp. 405-22, 
at p. 410. 
2 
J. Ross, "Testimonial Evidence", in K. Lehrer 
(ed.), Analysis and Metaphysics: Essays in 
Honor of R.M. Chisholm (Dordrecht: Reidel, 
1975), pp. 35-55, at p. 53. 
3 
M. Welbourne, "Testimony, Knowledge and 
Belief", in B. Matilal and A. Chakrabarti (eds), 
Knowing from Words (Dordrecht: Kluwer, 
1994, hereafter KFW), pp. 297-313, at p. 302; 
see also his "The Community of Knowledge", 
The Philosophical Quarterly, 31 (1981), pp. 
302-14, and "The Transmission of Knowledge", 
The Philosophical Quarterly, 29 (1979), pp. 1-9. 
4 
T. Burge, "Content Preservation", Philosophical 
Review, 102 (1993), pp. 457-88, at p. 486. 
Other proponents of this view of testimonial 
knowledge include A. Plantinga, Warrant and 
Proper Function (Oxford University Press, 
1993), ch. 4; and T. Williamson, "Knowing 
and 
Asserting", 
Philosophical 
Review, 
105 (1996), pp. 489-523. 
(TK) does not specify sufficient conditions. There 
may be further necessary conditions which need to 
be added, e.g., one may endorse UP') and require 
that the hearer in question have positive reasons 
for accepting a speaker's statement that p. My pur-
pose, however, is only to show that the arguments 
in this paper lead to the acceptance of at least (TK), 
though such an account can be further developed 
for a complete view of testimonial knowledge. 
The considerations put forth in this paper 
suggest that, strictly speaking, knowledge is not 
necessarily transmitted via testimony, but that tes-
timony can itself generate knowledge. In a testi-
monial chain in which each link fails to know that 
p because each has an undefeated defeater for the 
belief that p, the last hearer in such a chain can 
none the less come to have new knowledge via 
testimony, either through not having the defeater 
in question or through having a defeater-defeater. 
Thus testimony seems to differ from memory in a 
particularly salient respect precisely because the 
former can be generative while the latter is merely 
preservative. 
5 
M. Dummett, "Testimony and Memory", in 
KFW, pp. 251-72, at p. 264 (my italics). 
6 
For different versions of non-reductivism, see 
Dummett; Audi; C. Coady, Testimony: a 
Philosophical Study (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1992), and "Testimony, Observation 
and Autonomous Knowledge", in KFW, 
pp. 225-50; Burge, "Content Preservation': 
and "Interlocution, Perception, and Memory", 
Philosophical Studies, 86 (1997), pp. 21-47; R. 
Foley, "Egoism in Epistemology", in F. Schmitt 
(ed.), Socializing Epistemology: the Social 
Dimensions of Knowledge (Lanham: Rowman 
& Littlefield, 1994), pp. 53-73. 
7 
For reductivist views of testimony, see 
E. Fricker, "The Epistemology of Testimony", 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supp. 
Vol. 61 (1987), pp. 57-83, "Against Gullibility", 
in KFW, pp. 125-61, and "Telling and Trusting: 
Reductionism and Anti-Reductionism in the 
Epistemology of Testimony", Mind, 104 
(1995), pp. 393-411; J. Lyons, "Testimony, 
Induction and Folk Psychology", Australasian 
Journal of Philosophy, 75 (1997), pp. 163-78. 

TESTIMONIAL KNOWLEDGE AND TRANSMISSION 
867 
8 
For proponents of this view, see R. Nozick, 
Philosophical 
Explanations 
(Cambridge, 
MA: Belknap, 1981); J. Pollock, Contemporary 
Theories of Knowledge (Totowa: Rowman & 
Littlefield, 1986); A. Goldman, Epistemology 
and Cognition (Harvard University Press, 
1986); A. Plantinga, Warrant and Proper 
Function (Oxford University Press, 1993). 
9 See, for example, Goldman; L. BonJour, 
"Externalist 
Theories 
of 
Epistemic 
Justification", Midwest Studies in Philosophy, 
5 (1980), pp. 53-73, and The Structure of 
Empirical Knowledge (Harvard University 
Press, 1985); R. Chisholm, Theory of Knowledge 
(Englewood Cliffs: Prentice-Hall, 1989). 
10 
See, for example, K. Lehrer, "Knowledge, 
Truth, and Evidence': Analysis, 25 (1965), 
pp. 
168-75, 
and 
Knowledge 
(Oxford 
University Press, 1974); K. Lehrer and T. 
Paxson, "Knowledge: Undefeated Justified 
True Belief", Journal of Philosophy, 66 (1969), 
pp. 225-37; P. Klein, "A Proposed Definition 
of Propositional Knowledge", Journal of 
Philosophy, 
68 
(1971), 
pp. 
471-82, 
"Knowledge, Causality, and Defeasibility", 
Journal of Philosophy, 73 (1976), pp. 792-
812, "Misleading 'Misleading Defeaters''', 
Journal of Philosophy, 76 (1979), pp. 382-86, 
and 
"Misleading 
Evidence 
and 
the 
Restoration of Justification", Philosophical 
Studies, 37 (1980), pp. 81-9; E. Sosa, "How 
Do You Know?", American Philosophical 
Quarterly, 11 
(1974), pp. 113-22, and 
"Epistemic Presupposition", in G. Pappas 
(ed.), Justification and Knowledge: New 
Studies in Epistemology (Dordrecht: Reidel, 
1980), pp. 79-92; M. Swain, Reasons and 
Knowledge (Cornell University Press, 1981). 
11 
This is a slight variation of an example found 
in Audi (p. 420). For a similar example, see 
Sosa, Knowledge in Perspective: Selected Essays 
in Epistemology 
(Cambridge University 
Press, 1991), p. 217. 
12 
This example undermines views of testi-
monial knowledge which are even weaker 
than (2) or (2*). For instance, John Hardwig, 
in "The Role of Trust in Knowledge", Journal 
of Philosophy, 88 (1991), pp. 693-708, 
claims that speakers must believe that p in 
order for their testimony to give hearers 
good reasons to believe that p. As myexam-
ple shows, however, even Hardwig's weaker 
thesis is false. 
13 
See, for example, Fricker; Burge; Plantinga; 
Audi. 
14 
For a line of argument purporting to show 
that widespread error of this sort is incoherent, 
see D. Davidson, "A Coherence Theory of 
Truth and Knowledge", in D. Henrich (ed.), 
Kant oder Hegel? (Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta, 
1983), pp. 423-38; Coady, Testimony ch. 9; L. 
Stevenson, "Why Believe What People Say?", 
Synthese, 94 (1993), pp. 429-51. For con-
vincing 
replies, 
see 
R. 
Foley 
and 
R. 
Fumerton, 
"Davidson's 
Theism?", 
Philosophical Studies, 48 (1985), pp. 83-9; 
Plantinga ch. 4. 
15 
See, for example, Ross; also P. Graham, 
"What is Testimony?", The Philosophical 
Quarterly, 47 (1997), pp. 227-32; Coady 
ch.2. 
16 
See, for example, K. DeRose, "Solving the 
Skeptical Problem", Philosophical Review, 
104 (1995), pp. 1-52; D. Lewis, "Elusive 
Knowledge", 
Australasian 
Journal 
of 
Philosophy,74 (1996), pp. 549-67. 

CHAPTER 58 
The Problem of Memory Knowledge 
Michael Huemer 
The sun is about 93 million miles away from the 
earth. How do I know that? Well, I learned it once. 
I don't know when or how I learned it, but I did, 
and I now remember it. I couldn't tell you how 
the distance to the sun was calculated either, but 
it's something that scientists have discovered. 
How do I know that scientists have discovered it? 
Well, I don't know how I learned that either, but I 
remember it, too. 
Even granting the reliability of scientists and 
other experts, this does not sound like a very 
impressive justification. Yet arguably, most of our 
knowledge is like that. A few more examples: 
there is a 3-hour time difference between Los 
Angeles and New York; Abraham Lincoln was 
President of the United States during the Civil 
War; the word "tree" refers in English to a certain 
kind of plant; the square on the hypotenuse of a 
right triangle equals the sum of the squares on the 
other two sides; wood is a poor conductor of heat 
and electricity; China is in Asia. I don't know how 
I learned any of those facts, but however I learned 
them, I kept them in memory since then (doubt-
less I gained numerous confirmations of them 
since the first time I learned them, and I can't 
specifically remember any of those occasions 
either), and I have no serious doubt about any 
one of them. 
Originally published in The Pacific Philosophical 
Quarterly 80, 197 (1999), pp. 346-57. 
What justifies me in believing that the sun is 
93 million miles from the earth? The fact that I 
don't remember my original reason for adopting 
that belief suggests that whatever that reason was, 
it can not be considered a reason I now have for 
my belief.! 
In general, when S remembers that P, what 
kind of justification does S have for believing P? 
Three possible answers to this question naturally 
come to mind: 
1. 
The Inferential Theory 
First, perhaps my justification is inferential. And 
perhaps it is something like this: I now seem to 
remember that the earth is 93 million miles away 
from the sun. In the past, I have generally found 
that expectations formed on the basis of my 
seeming memories have been borne out. For 
example, I seemed to remember my address, and 
when I went to that address, I found an apart-
ment of just the sort I was expecting. This 
strongly confirms that my seeming memories 
are highly reliable. Therefore (probably), it is 
true that the sun is 93 million miles away from 
the earth. 
The most obvious problem here is one of cir-
cularity. How do I know that in the past, my 
seeming memories have been corroborated? Well, 
I seem to remember that that's generally been the 
case. But, on the present theory of memory 

THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY KNOWLEDGE 
869 
knowledge,2 I cannot trust that until I first prove 
the reliability of my memory. Therefore, I cannot 
use my past experiences in this way - nor, in fact, 
in any other way -
in my argument for the 
reliability of memory. 
Thus, if any inferential account is to work, the 
premises of my argument must rely solely on my 
present experiences and/or a priori insights. I 
can't use any previously-gained knowledge. It 
seems unlikely that I could derive the reliability of 
memory from premises of this kind; at any rate, 
I have no idea how such an inference would go. 
Additionally, an inferential theory would face two 
further constraints that increase its difficulties. 
First, the argument would have to be short and 
simple, such that one could hold it all in mind at 
once. Otherwise, completion of the argument 
would depend on one's remembering that the ear-
lier stages of the argument had been correctly 
executed, and this would illicitly presuppose the 
reliability of memory. 
Second, I would have to be in some sense 
using the argument every time I had a justified 
memory belief. It would not be enough for me 
to go through the argument once, and thence-
forth merely remember that I had demon-
strated the reliability of memory. For if merely 
remembering that my memory is reliable were 
enough for me to be justified in believing my 
memory is reliable, then merely remembering 
that the sun is 93 million miles away from the 
earth should be sufficient for me to be justified 
in believing that the sun is 93 million miles 
away from the earth - contrary to the present 
theory, but in accord with the theory to be 
considered in section 2. 
Given that my belief that the sun is 93 mil-
lion miles from the earth is continuously present 
(it remains as a dispositional belief even when 
I'm not thinking about it), I will apparently 
need to be employing the argument for the reli-
ability of memory continuously, if I am to keep 
my justification. The defender of the inferential 
account may claim that I am using this argu-
ment (whatever it is) for the reliability of 
memory only unconsciously, but it remains 
implausible that I am using it all the time, even 
unconsciously. Indeed, there is no evidence that 
I have ever employed any such argument at all, 
so skepticism seems to be the price of the 
inferential account. 
2. 
The Foundational Theory 
Perhaps, then, my justification is non-inferential. 
Perhaps memory experiences create the same sort 
of foundational justification that (some episte-
mologists argue) sensory experiences do. Just 
having an experience of seeming to perceive that 
P makes one prima facie justified in believing that 
P, and similarly, having an experience of seeming 
to remember that P makes one prima facie justi-
fied in believing that P.3 
This view has counter-intuitive results. Suppose 
I initially learn that P by means of an a priori 
proof of it (the proof is short, so I can hold it all 
in mind at once and do not need to use memory). 
So I have an adequate justification for believing P 
from the start, although the possibility of mis-
takes, even in short proofs, makes my justification 
less than completely conclusive. However, a few 
moments pass, and I now am able, in addition, to 
recall that P. If I entertain the proof while also 
remembering that P, I will now have two justifica-
tions for P, one inferential and one foundational. 
Thus, my warrant becomes more secure with the 
passage of time. 4 
Here's another case. Suppose that I initially 
adopt the unjustified belief that P (perhaps by 
wishful thinking or some such irrational process). 
The next day, however, my belief is adequately 
justified, because I now seem to remember that P. 
The passage of time has transformed my irra-
tional belief into a rational one. 
It might be argued that in this latter case, I 
have a defeater for P, since I can recall that I 
adopted P by wishful thinking. 5 Therefore, 
modify the case as follows: a number of years 
pass, and I no longer recall how I initially 
"learned" that P, but I still clearly "remember" 
that P." For example, suppose that I initially 
accepted the existence of life after death by wish-
ful thinking. I now no longer remember where I 
got that belief, but I just seem to remember that 
that's something I know. On the other hand, my 
brother Pete adopted the same belief in exactly 
the same way. However, his memory is better 
than mine, so he also remembers how he got the 
belief. As a result, my belief system is rational and 
his is not. That seems wrong. 
To further confirm that this result is wrong, 
Thomas Senor (1993) asks us to consider an 
analogy to moral philosophy. Suppose there is a 

870 
MICHAEL HUEMER 
certain ruthless tyrant, call him "Saddam:' who 
decides to viciously attack a neighboring country. 
Suppose that at the time he makes this choice, 
Saddam's character is such that it would be psy-
chologically impossible for him to behave in any 
other way. Suppose, however, that Sad dam, 
having begun as a normal boy, acquired this 
deplorable character as a result of a series of evil 
choices that he made of his own free will. In this 
case, we would surely not excuse Saddam's 
present actions on the ground that he could not 
do otherwise. Rather, Saddam's culpability in his 
past choices follows him to the present day, ren-
dering him culpable for the present evil actions 
that flow from them. Similarly, argues Senor, a 
person's previous epistemic irresponsibility fol-
lows him, making him epistemically blamewor-
thy for any present likely-to-be-false beliefs that 
result from his previous irrationality. A present-
day belief cannot be rendered epistemically justi-
fied by the fact that, doing the best one can do 
now results in acceptance of the belief, if this situ-
ation results from previous epistemic irrational-
ity - just as a present-day action can not be 
rendered morally blameless by the fact that, 
doing the best one can do now results in per-
formance of the action, if this situation results 
from previous immorality.7 
Both of the above cases - the case where 
memory would increase one's justification for a 
belief, and the case where memory would convert 
an unjustified belief into a justified one - point 
up the following general, intuitive constraint on a 
theory of memory justification: the justification 
for a belief cannot be increased by its passing into 
memory; it can only be lowered. The founda-
tional theory fails to account for this.8 
3. 
The Preservation Theory 
Here is a third view. When I remember that P, my 
justification for believing P is whatever it was 
to begin with. Memory just preserves the justifi-
cation (or lack of it) of my beliefs.9 So my justifi-
cation for thinking that the sun is about 93 million 
miles away is, perhaps, that Mrs. Kim in second 
grade told me that it was - even if I don't know 
that that is my justification. On this view, the fact 
that I don't remember what my original justifica-
tion for P was does not prevent me from still 
having that justification for P. This seems more 
natural than the preceding two theories. 
But now recall Russell's five-minute hypothe-
sis. lO Suppose God created someone five minutes 
ago in exactly the state that I was in five minutes 
ago, surrounded by exactly the same kinds of 
things. Call this person Mike2. Mike2 was created 
complete with false memories of his past life, 
identical to my memories of my past life. He 
thinks his name is "Mike" and is presently writing 
a paper about the problem of memory knowl-
edge. His situation would be (to him) indistin-
guishable from my actual situation. Usually, this 
scenario is mentioned for the purpose of asking, 
How do I know I'm not actually in that situation? 
But here I mention it to make a positive point. 
What sort of things would it be rational for Mike2 
to believe? Pretty clearly, just the same things that 
it is rational for me, now, to believe (modulo 
appropriate changes in indexical references). 
Most of Mike2's beliefs about his own past are 
false, but he has no way of knowing that, and no 
more reason for suspecting it than I have for sus-
pecting that my beliefs about my past are false. So 
if I am justified in believing that I ate a bagel this 
morning, Mike2 is justified (though mistaken) in 
believing that he ate a bagel this morning. 
Furthermore, it seems that he has the same degree 
and kind of justification that I now have. 
But of course, this contradicts the present 
theory of memory knowledge. According to the 
present view, memory merely preserves one's ini-
tial justification, if any, for a belief.ll So I am ade-
quately justified in believing that I ate a bagel this 
morning, on the basis of the sensory experiences 
I had then. Mike2 has no such justification, since 
he never had any sensory experience of eating a 
bagel. At minimum, he does not have the same 
sort of justification that I have, and it appears that 
he has no justification at all, since, on the preser-
vation theory, memory experiences are not them-
selves a source of justification. 12 On this theory, 
then, Mike2 is highly irrational (unlike myself), 
even though he is intrinsically identical to me. 13 
Thus, there is an interesting problem of 
memory knowledge. The three most obvious the-
ories of the justification of memory beliefs are all 
unacceptable. How can we find a theory that is 
not subject to any of the preceding objections? 
Our verdict on the case of Mike2 seems to demand 
that the justification of memory beliefs depend 

THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY KNOWLEDGE 
871 
only on the current state of the believer, and not 
on his past; otherwise, Mike2 would be found to 
be drastically less rational than myself. But if the 
past history of a memory belief is thus irrelevant 
to its justification, won't this allow us to construct 
cases where memory transforms an irrational 
belief into a rational one (as in our objection to 
the foundational theory)? How, that is, can we 
reconcile the principle that the degree of justifica-
tion of a remembered belief can never exceed the 
original degree of justification one had for its 
adoption, with the apparent lesson of the five-
minute hypothesis, that the past history of a belief 
is irrelevant to its present justification? It seems 
that our intuitions are simply contradictory. 
4. A Solution: The Dualistic Theory 
Not so. There is a theory that accommodates our 
intuitions about all of the cases, incorporating 
elements of both the foundational view and the 
preservation view. I call it the "dualistic theory" 
because it holds that the question, "What is my 
justification for believing that P?" requires a two-
part answer: first, why I was justified in adopting 
the belief that P; and second, why I was justified 
in retaining it.14 On this view, a belief is justified 
full stop if and only if one had an adequate justi-
fication for adopting it at some point, and thence-
forward one was justified in retaining it. The 
normal functioning of memory, in the absence of 
specific reasons for revising a belief, constitutes 
an epistemically acceptable manner of retaining 
beliefs. 
So far, this sounds exactly like the preservation 
theory. However, we will see in a moment how, 
having distinguished two parts of a belief's justi-
fication, the dualistic theory is in a position to 
make an appropriate concession to the founda-
tionalist account that avoids the major objection 
to the preservation theory. 
It is already clear that the present view avoids 
the foundationalist's main problem. The dualistic 
view does not allow an initially irrational belief to 
become rational merely by passing into memory, 
since a rational belief, in the full sense, requires 
both rational acquisition and rational retention. 
How, then, can the dualistic theory avoid the 
objection from the five-minute hypothesis - how can 
it secure Mike2's epistemic rationality? Simply by 
this posit: coming to believe something by seem-
ing to remember it (in the absence of defeaters 
that one is aware of) is an epistemically rational 
way of acquiring the belief. This posit captures 
the foundationalist intuition, that I am rational in 
believing something I seem to remember even if 
on this particular occasion, unbeknownst to me, 
my memory is deceiving me - even if, that is to 
say, I never really had that belief before. From the 
standpoint of epistemic responsibility, this is 
surely correct. The unfortunate Mike2 has not 
committed any epistemic wrongs; he has done the 
best that could be expected of him. Our theory 
credits him this: since Mike2 acquired his belief 
that he ate a bagel this morning by seeming to 
remember it, he is rational in accepting it.15 
But this posit does not introduce the possi-
bility of memory's converting an irrational 
belief into a rational one. For the principle only 
applies to a case in which having a seeming 
memory that P was actually one's way of acquir-
ing the belief that P. Recall the case where 
I believe P by wishful thinking and later seem to 
remember that P. Having a seeming memory in 
this case is not my method of acquiring the 
belief; wishful thinking is. Apparent memory is 
only my way of retaining the belief. Since a justi-
fied belief must have both a rational acquisition 
method and a rational retention method, this 
belief is unjustified. 
It must be admitted that this view can not 
maintain the supervenience of epistemic justifi-
cation on the current, intrinsic state of the 
believer. That seemingly desirable characteristic is 
genuinely inconsistent with the conjunction of 
two other principles we have been assuming: first, 
that memory can not convert unjustified belief to 
justified belief; and second, that in typical cir-
cumstances our remembered beliefs are justified. 
For it is possible to have two people who are in 
the same state presently, each having forgotten his 
original reason for adopting P, one of whom did 
and the other of whom did not originally have a 
good reason for accepting P. The one person must 
be counted justified in his present belief (else we 
have memory skepticism), and the other must be 
counted unjustified (else we have an unjustified 
belief converted to a justified belief by the passage 
of time). It follows that the justificatory status of 
the belief that P does not supervene on the cur-
rent, intrinsic state of the believer. Of course, it 

872 
MICHAEL HUEMER 
may still supervene on the total history of intrinsic 
states of the believer. 
To illustrate, return to the case of myself and 
Mike2. Let's suppose that, among many beliefs I 
have for which I do not remember my original 
reasons for adopting them, there are some rational 
beliefs and a few irrational ones. I am justified in 
believing P, say, but unjustified in believing Q. 
Mike2, likewise, will be justified in believing P. 
But unlike me, on the present theory, Mike2 will 
also be justified in believing Q, since he, unlike 
me, acquired the belief through apparent memory. 
So there is one way in which the victim of the 
five-minute hypothesis would be epistemically 
better off than we actually are - he has no fewer, 
and possibly more, justified beliefs. 
On reflection, we can see that this result is cor-
rect and that the principle of current time-slice 
supervenience is therefore mistaken. For Mike2, 
there is no relevant difference between his belief 
that Q and his belief that P. Both are adopted in 
the same way, so if we grant that his belief that P 
is justified, we have to allow his belief that Q to be 
justified similarly. Recall Senor's analogy with 
moral philosophy. Suppose that a person (call 
him "Saddam2") were created and placed at the 
head of a country, with a compulsion to invade a 
neighboring country. Saddam2 is born lacking 
free will, his decision to invade already predeter-
mined. In that case, Saddam2 could not be mor-
ally blamed for his action. We have already said 
that Saddam, who acquired a similar psychologi-
cal compulsion through earlier bad choices, can 
be blamed for the same action. So the moral cul-
pability of a decision does not supervene on the 
internal state of the agent at the time of decision-
making; it depends, too, on the agent's past 
choices. Likewise, we should not be surprised that 
the epistemic status of a belief depends in part on 
the believer's past thought processes. 
5. 
The Theory Extended: Degrees 
of Justification 
So far, I have stated the dualistic theory as a theory 
of when a memory belief is justified or unjustified. 
But we can generalize the theory to give an 
account of the degree of justification that a belief 
has, and this generalization provides a further 
demonstration of the superiority of the dualistic 
view. The natural extension of the simple dualistic 
view would be to say that there are two degrees of 
justification involved in any belief - a degree of 
justification associated with the adoption of the 
belief, and a degree of justification associated 
with its retention - and that the overall level of 
justification of a belief is the product of those two 
quantities. The first of these two quantities is 
simply a matter of the conclusiveness of the 
grounds one originally had (again, this holds true 
even if one has forgotten those grounds). We can 
think of it as a number between 0 and 1, with 1 
representing infallible justification for believing 
the proposition in question, and 0 representing 
infallible justification for disbelieving it. The 
second quantity is a matter of the credibility of 
one's memory, and it, too, can be thought of as a 
number between 0 and 1. If one has a relatively 
faint memory, such that one is quite unsure 
whether one really remembers that P or not, then 
this number will be close to 112 (not 0, for even 
the faintest of memories would not be evidence 
against Pl. If one has a very firm and clear 
memory, the number will be close to 1. If one has 
special reason for doubting the reliability of one's 
memory (e.g., one knows that one has misre-
membered similar things in the past), this can 
lower the second number further. 
One of our objections to the foundationalist 
account was based on the principle that the justi-
fication of a belief can be lowered through its 
passing into memory but can not be raised. The 
foundationalist could not accommodate this fact, 
because for him, the past justification of a belief is 
irrelevant to its present justification. But the gen-
eralized dualistic view easily accommodates the 
principle -
when one multiplies the original 
degree of justification by a number less than or 
equal to 1 representing the credibility of the 
memory, one necessarily gets something less than 
or equal to the original degree of justification. 
The dualistic view also surpasses the straight 
preservation theory in the treatment of degrees of 
justification. Under the straight preservation 
view, the justification I now have for P when I 
remember that P is the same as the justification I 
had for P originally. Given this, the only natural 
view to take as to the degree of justification I now 
have for P is that it is identical to the degree of 

THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY KNOWLEDGE 
873 
justification I originally had, on the principle that 
the degree of one's justification for P is a function 
of what one's justification for P is. For example, 
suppose my original justification for P consisted 
in a conclusive, deductive proof of P, although I 
have since forgotten what my justification was. 
On the preservation view, I nevertheless retain 
my original justification for P. Therefore, my 
belief that P continues to be supported by a con-
clusive proof (the memory can hardly preserve 
the argument but turn it into an inconclusive 
one). Therefore, my degree of justification for P is 
the degree appropriate to having a conclusive 
proof, that is, conclusive justification. 
But this result is wrong - one should not be as 
confident that P ten years after learning it as one 
was when it was fresh in one's mind. One should 
not have 100% confidence in one's memory. The 
passage of time introduces new possibilities of 
error; therefore, it lowers one's justification for 
believing a proposition. Here, as elsewhere, the 
dualistic view succeeds in accommodating our 
intuitions about justification, escaping the objec-
tions that tell against the two main alternatives. In 
The preservation theorist might try arguing 
that as time passes, one's justification for P typi-
cally decreases, not because one's justification 
acquires a new, fallible component, but because 
one acquires new defeaters. For instance, the 
proposition that my memory is unreliable, or 
even the proposition that this particular memory 
experience is faint, would be defeaters for P when 
I seem to recall that P. In order to explain why 
one's justification typically (perhaps always) 
decreases with time, rather than only decreasing 
in certain special circumstances, the preservation 
theorist would have to maintain that even so weak 
a proposition as "my memory is not infallible" or 
"this memory is not absolutely clear" can be a 
defeater. 
There seems to be something ad hoc about 
introducing a defeater that is always or nearly 
always present and that functions to lower one's 
justification for P by just the amount that 
one's justification would fall short of its original 
level if one's having a memory experience were 
part of one's justification for P. But be that as it 
may, there is a more serious problem. Suppose 
that I initially learned that P through sensory 
observation, and I am now, ten years later, 
genuinely remembering that P. According to the 
preservation theory, my justification for believing 
P, now, consists in that same sensory experience. 
If this is the case, then why would a proposition 
about the reliability of my memory be a defeater 
for my belief? Certainly, at the time I was initially 
observing that P, "my memory is unreliable" 
would not have defeated my justification for 
believing P. "My memory is unreliable" is not a 
rebutting defeater for P (it is merely neutral with 
respect to the truth ofP), and nor is "my memory 
is unreliable" an undercutting defeater for a per-
ceptual justification of P - only something like 
"my senses are unreliable" would undercut a per-
ceptual justification. Therefore, if my present jus-
tification for P consists in my (earlier) sensory 
experience, my justification should be unaffected 
by the discovery that my memory is unreliable. 
An analogy here is instructive: suppose that I 
believe Q on the basis of Jones' testimony. Now 
suppose you come along and succeed in convinc-
ing me that Smith is an unreliable witness. Would 
this defeat my justification for believing Q? Of 
course not. You would have to show that Jones was 
unreliable in order to undermine my justification 
for Q; either that, or my justification for believing 
Q would have to depend at least in part on Smith's 
testimony (perhaps in addition to Jones'). 
According to the preservation theory, when I 
observe that P and later recall that P, my belief at 
the later time is based solely on the observation, 
not on the memory experience. Therefore, a criti-
cism of my senses would undermine the belief, 
but a criticism of my memory should not. On the 
other hand, the dualistic view naturally explains 
the significance of a criticism of my memory as 
affecting the second factor involved in the justifi-
cation of a memory belief - the factor neglected 
by the preservationist. 
One of the two main theories of memory knowl-
edge locates the justification of a memory belief 
solely in the memory impression. The other 
locates it solely in the original acquisition of the 
belief. As a result, one theory implies that memory 
can raise a belief's justification, while the other 
implies that memory cannot lower a belief's justi-
fication. The solution is to locate a belief's justifi-
cation both in the circumstances of its initial 
acquisition and in the nature of the present 
memory experience. 17 

874 
MICHAEL HUEMER 
Notes 
1 So argues Ginet (1975), pp. 153-6. 
2 
I am assuming that knowledge is a kind of 
justified belief, where justification is under-
stood in terms of epistemic responsibility (see 
Alston's (1985) discussion of "deontological" 
notions of justification for more on this kind 
of justification). If this is not what knowledge 
is, then what I am looking for should be 
described as "a theory of the justification of 
memory beliefs" rather than "a theory of 
memory knowledge." 
3 Pollock (1986), pp. 50-2 appears to defend 
this view. However, he has since indicated that 
he is addressing a different sense of "justifica-
tion" than mine (personal communication). 
4 
Pollock (1995), pp. 101-2 points out that it 
need not be the case that the conjunction of 
two reasons for believing P provides better 
justification for P than either reason alone 
provides. As an example, he considers a case 
in which SI and S2 are each generally reliable 
witnesses, but you know that SI tends to cor-
roborate S/s testimony only when the latter is 
a fabrication (otherwise, SI keeps his mouth 
shut). However, nothing like this is going on 
in my example (it isn't as if you tend to 
remember that P only when your argument 
for P was fallacious), so it's hard to see why 
getting a second justification for P shouldn't 
increase your degree of justification for P. See 
also the analogy below, in note 5. 
5 Pollock's (1986), p. 54 remarks imply such a 
response, although it is not clear that the 
response works. Consider a similar case: sup-
pose I initially adopt P by wishful thinking, 
but later I perceive that P. At this point, my 
belief becomes justified. The fact that I ini-
tially adopted P through wishful thinking is 
merely irrelevant to the truth of P - it does 
not count against P in the event that I discover 
a new justification for P. Since Pollock assimi-
lates the epistemology of memory to that of 
perception, it is unclear why the same assess-
ment would not apply when a memory expe-
rience is substituted for a perception - i.e., the 
memory experience provides a new justifica-
tion for the initially irrational belief. 
6 Annis (1980), pp. 325-6 raises this kind of 
counter-example to Pollock's view. 
7 Senor (1993), pp. 468-9. 
8 Malcolm (1963), pp. 230-1 almost says this, 
except he does not seem to allow the possi-
bility of one's justification being lowered. 
9 This view is defended by Malcolm (1963), 
pp. 229-30; Annis (1980); Naylor (1983); 
and Owens (1999). 
10 
See Russell (1971), p. 159. 
11 
See Malcolm (1963), p. 230: "When someone 
remembers that p does he have grounds for 
being sure that p? The answer is that he has 
the same grounds, if any, that he previously 
had." 
12 
Owens (1999), chapter 9 is particularly 
explicit about this point. 
l3 
Pollock (1986), p. 50 poses a related objec-
tion to the preservation theory, based on 
ordinary cases m which your memory 
deceives you: He thinks that in such cases, 
provided you have no reason for suspecting 
that your memory is deceiving you, you are 
justified in believing what you seem to 
remember; yet the preservation theory 
implies that these beliefs are unjustified. 
Pollock concludes that memory must be 
accepted as a source of justification, and 
hence that the foundational theory is true. 
14 
Owens (1999) makes use of this distinction, 
but he does not take advantage of the oppor-
tunity it provides to avoid the five-minute-
hypothesis objection. 
15 
The following objection could be pressed: 
Mike2 is created with a host of dispositional 
beliefs implanted in him. Having never con-
sciously entertained the propositions that 
these beliefs are about, he has not had any 
(occurrent) experiences of seeming to 
remember them, so the present theory cannot 
account for Mike2's justification for his dis-
positional beliefs. An obvious response 
would be to say that Mike2's beliefs are justi-
fied by virtue of his dispositional seeming-
memories (quasi-memories). But a more 
interesting response, and the one I favor, is 
that Mike2 does not (cannot) have the same 
dispositional beliefs that I have. A detailed 
discussion of this point would take us too far 
afield, but briefly: in order to genuinely 
believe that P, it is not enough that one would 

THE PROBLEM OF MEMORY KNOWLEDGE 
875 
occurrently belief P if one considered it -
"dispositional belief" does not merely mean 
"disposition to believe." To believe P, a person 
must either (i) occurrently believe it, (ii) have 
once believed it, having never changed his 
mind about it, (iii) believe something else 
which presupposes it, or (iv) believe some-
thing else which obviously entails it. So there 
are three ways of disposition ally believing 
something, but each presupposes another 
belief or belief at an earlier time. For this 
reason, Mike2 cannot be created with dispo-
sitional beliefs already implanted in him; he 
References 
Alston, William P. (1985). "Concepts of Epistemic 
Justification;' The Monist 68, pp. 57-89. 
Annis, 
David 
B. 
(1980). 
"Memory 
and 
Justification," Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 40, pp. 324-33. 
Ginet, Carl (1975). Knowledge, Perception, and 
Memory. Boston: D. Reidel. 
Malcolm, Norman 
(1963). 
Knowledge 
and 
Certainty. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-
Hall. 
Naylor, Andrew (1983). "Justification in Memory 
Knowledge," Synthese 55, pp. 269-86. 
can't have any dispositional beliefs prior to 
his first occurrent belief. 
16 
I don't count the inferential theory as one 
of the main alternatives, because I do not 
know of any philosopher who actually 
defends it. 
17 
My thanks are due to David Owens for stim-
ulating my interest in and initial thoughts on 
this topic, and to both David Owens and 
John Pollock for discussion of various ideas 
in this paper. Unfortunately, I do not believe 
either of these philosophers would agree with 
more than half of what I have said here. 
Owens, David (1999). Reason without Freedom 
(unpublished ms.), chapter 9. 
Pollock, John L. (1986). Contemporary Theories of 
Knowledge. Totowa, NJ: Rowman & Littlefield. 
-- (1995). Cognitive Carpentry: A Blueprint for 
How to Build a Person. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
Russell, Bertrand (1971). The Analysis of Mind. 
London: Allen & Unwin. 
Senor, 
Thomas 
D. 
(1993). 
"Internalistic 
Foundationalism and the Justification of 
Memory Belief," Synthese 94, pp. 453-76. 

CHAPTER 59 
Criteria, Defeasibility, and Knowledge 
John McDowell 
It is widely believed that in his later work 
Wittgenstein introduced a special use of the 
notion of a criterion. In this proprietary use, "cri-
teria" are supposed to be a kind of evidence.' 
Their status as evidence, unlike that of symptoms, 
is a matter of "convention" or "grammar" rather 
than empirical theory; but the support that a "cri-
terion" yields for a claim is defeasible: that is, a 
state of information in which one is in possession 
of a "criterial" warrant for a claim can always be 
expanded into a state of information in which the 
claim would not be warranted at alP This special 
notion is thought to afford - among much else3 -
a novel response to the traditional problem of 
other minds. 
What follows falls into three parts. In the first, 
I shall express, in a preliminary way, a doubt 
whether the supposed novel response can work. 
In the second, I shall question the interpretation 
of Wittgenstein that yields it. I believe it issues 
from reading Wittgenstein in the light of tacit 
epistemological assumptions whose strikingly 
traditional character casts suspicion on their 
attribution to Wittgenstein himself. My concern, 
however, is less with exegesis than with those 
epistemological assumptions, and in the third 
part I shall begin on the project of undermining 
an idea that seems central to them. 
Originally published in Proceedings of the British 
Academy 68 (1982), pp. 455-79. 
I 
It will help me to articulate my epistemological 
distrust if I let the "criterial" position define its 
stance towards our knowledge of other minds in 
explicit contrast with a possible alternative: 
namely, a position according to which, on a suit-
able occasion, the circumstance that someone else 
is in some "inner" state can itself be an object of 
one's experience.4 
I once tried to capture this idea by suggesting 
that such a circumstance could be "available to 
awareness, in its own right and not merely 
through behavioural proxies";5 and similarly by 
suggesting that 
we should not jib at, or interpret away, the com-
monsense thought that, on those occasions 
which are paradigmatically suitable for training 
in the assertoric use of the relevant part of a lan-
guage, one can literally perceive, in another per-
son's facial expression or his behaviour, that he is 
[for instance J in pain, and not just infer that he is 
in pain from what one perceives.' 
In the interest of a "criterial" position, Crispin 
Wright has protested against this attempt to describe 
an alternative (which he labels "M-realism"); he 
writes as follows: 
But that no inference, via "proxies" or whatever, 
should be involved is quite consistent with what 

CRITERIA, DEFEASIBILlTY, AND KNOWLEDGE 
877 
is actually perceived being not that someone is in 
pain, tout court, but that criteria - in what I take 
to be the Philosophical Investigations sense - that 
he is in pain are satisfied. Criteria are not proxies, 
and they do not form the bases of inferences, 
correctly so described. But, in contrast with 
truth-conditions, a claim made on the basis of 
satisfaction of its criteria can subsequently be jet-
tisoned' consistently with retention of the belief 
that criteria were indeed satisfied. So the M -realist 
about a particular kind of statement has to hold 
not just that inference via proxies is not invaria-
bly involved when the assertoric use of those 
statements is justified, but more: that the occa-
sions which are "paradigmatically suitable" for 
training in their assertoric use involve not just 
satisfaction of criteria - otherwise experience of 
them will be experience of a situation whose obtain-
ing is consistent with the falsity of the relevant 
statements - but realisation of truth-conditions, 
properly so regarded.' 
For my present purposes, what is important 
about this passage is not the issue it raises about 
the formulation of M-realism, but rather its 
account of the "criterial" alternative. Wright's 
remarks bring out clearly the commitment of the 
"criterial" view to the thesis that, even on the 
occasions that seem most favourable for a claim 
to be able to see that someone else is in some 
"inner" state, the reach of one's experience falls 
short of that circumstance itself-not just in the 
sense that the person's being in the "inner" state is 
not itself embraced within the scope of one's con-
sciousness, but in the sense that what is available 
to one's experience is something compatible with 
the person's not being in the "inner" state at all. 
Now is this position epistemologically satis-
factory? 
M-realism offers a conception of what consti-
tutes knowing that someone else is in an "inner" 
state, at least on certain favourable occasions: 
namely, experiencing that circumstance itself. 
Wright asks us to consider whether what is expe-
rienced on those occasions may not be something 
less: namely, the satisfaction of "criteria". One 
might incautiously assume that experiencing the 
satisfaction of "criteria" is meant to take over the 
role played in M-realism by experiencing the cir-
cumstance itself: that is, to be what, on those 
favourable occasions, constitutes knowing that 
the circumstance obtains. But since "criteria" are 
defeasible, it is tempting to suppose that to 
experience the satisfaction of "criteria" for a claim 
is to be in a position in which, for all one knows, 
the claim may not be true. That yields this thesis: 
knowing that someone else is in some "inner" 
state can be constituted by being in a position in 
which, for all one knows, the person may not be 
in that "inner" state. And that seems straightfor-
wardly incoherent. 
This line of thought is partly vitiated by the 
incautious assumption. A "criterial" theorist can 
say: experiencing the satisfaction of "criteria" is 
meant to be, not what constitutes knowing that 
things are thus and so, but rather a "criterion" for 
the claim to know it. Its "criterial" support for the 
claim to know that things are thus and so would 
be defeated by anything that would defeat the 
original "criterial" support for the claim that that 
is how things are. So the "criterial" view is not 
required to envisage the possibility that someone 
may be correctly said to know something when 
what he supposedly knows cannot itself be cor-
rectly affirmed." 
Nevertheless, the "criterial" view does envisage 
ascribing knowledge on the strength of some-
thing compatible with the falsity of what is sup-
posedly known. And it is a serious question 
whether we can understand how it can be knowl-
edge that is properly so ascribed. Rejecting the 
incautious assumption leaves unchallenged the 
tempting thought that, since "criteria" are defeasi-
ble, someone who experiences the satisfaction of 
"criteria" for the ascription of an "inner" state to 
another person is thereby in a position in which, 
for all he knows, the person may not be in that 
"inner" state. And the question is: if that is the 
best one can achieve, how is there room for any-
thing recognizable as knowledge that the person 
is in the "inner" state? It does not help with this 
difficulty to insist that being in that supposed best 
position is not meant to be constitutive of having 
the knowledge. The trouble is that if that is the 
best position achievable, then however being in it 
is supposed to relate to the claim to know that the 
person is in the "inner" state, it looks as if the 
claim can never be acceptable. 
Of course my characterization of the supposed 
best position is tendentious. If experiencing the 
satisfaction of "criteria" does legitimize ("criteri-
ally") a claim to know that things are thus and so, 
it cannot also be legitimate to admit that the 

878 
JOHN MCDOWELL 
position is one in which, for all one knows, things 
may be otherwise. But the difficulty is to see how 
the fact that "criteria" are defeasible can be pre-
vented from compelling that admission: in which 
case we can conclude, by contraposition, that 
experiencing the satisfaction of "criteria" cannot 
legitimize a claim of knowledge. How can an 
appeal to "convention" somehow drive a wedge 
between accepting that everything that one has is 
compatible with things not being so, on the one 
hand, and admitting that one does not know that 
things are so, on the other? As far as its bearing on 
epistemological issues is concerned, the "criterial" 
view looks no more impressive than any other 
instance of a genre of responses to scepticism to 
which it seems to belong: a genre in which it is 
conceded that the sceptic's complaints are sub-
stantially correct, but we are supposedly saved 
from having to draw the sceptic's conclusions by 
the fact that it is not done - in violation of a "con-
vention" - to talk that way." 
This line of thought may seem to be an indis-
criminate attack on the idea that knowledge can 
be based on an experiential intake that falls short 
of the fact known (in the sense I explained: 
namely, being compatible with there being no 
such fact). That would put the line of thought in 
doubt; but the objection fails. We can counte-
nance cases of knowledge in which the knower's 
epistemic standing is owed not just to an experi-
ential intake that falls short of the fact known, in 
that sense, but partly to his possession of theo-
retical knowledge: something we can picture as 
extending his cognitive reach beyond the 
restricted range of mere experience, so that the 
hostile line of thought does not get started. But 
that cannot be how it is in the "criterial" cases. To 
hold that theory contributes to the epistemic 
standing, with respect to a claim, of someone 
who experiences the satisfaction of "criteria" for 
it would conflict with the insistence that "cri-
teria" and claim are related by "grammar"; it would 
obliterate the distinction between "criteria" and 
symptoms. 
I have granted that experiencing the satisfac-
tion of "criteria" had better not be conceived as 
constituting the associated knowledge. It is 
tempting to ask: when the ground for attributing 
knowledge is experience of the satisfaction of 
"criteria", what would constitute possessing the 
knowledge? Someone who admits the question 
might be inclined to try this reply: the knowledge 
is constituted by experiencing the satisfaction of 
"criteria" - given that things are indeed as the 
person is said to know that they are. But does that 
specify something that we can intelligibly count 
as knowledge? Consider a pair of cases, in both of 
which someone competent in the use of some 
claim experiences the satisfaction of (undefeated) 
"criteria" for it, but in only one of which the 
claim is true. According to the suggestion we are 
considering, the subject in the latter case knows 
that things are as the claim would represent them 
as being; the subject in the former case does not. 
(In both cases it would be "criterially" legitimate 
to attribute the knowledge, but that is not to the 
present purpose.) However, the story is that 
the scope of experience is the same in each case: 
the fact itself is outside the reach of experience. 
And experience is the only mode of cognition -
the only mode of acquisition of epistemic stand-
ing -
that is operative; appeal to theory is 
excluded, as we have just seen. So why should we 
not conclude that the cognitive achievements of 
the two subjects match? How can a difference in 
respect of something conceived as cognitively 
inaccessible to both subjects, so far as the relevant 
mode of cognition goes, make it the case that one 
of them knows how things are in that inaccessi-
ble region while the other does not - rather than 
leaving them both, strictly speaking, ignorant on 
the matter? 
Proponents of the "criterial" view will have 
been impatient with my broaching a query 
about the notion's epistemological status out-
side any seman tical context. Things would look 
different, they will suggest, if we took note of the 
notion's primary role: namely, as an element in 
a novel, "anti-realist" conception of meaning, 
adumbrated in Wittgenstein's later work to 
replace the "realist", truth-conditional concep-
tion of Frege and the Tractatus. IU In particular, it 
may be suggested that the question with which I 
have just been trying to embarrass the "criterial" 
view - "What would constitute possession of 
'criterially' based knowledge?" - seems to need 
asking only in the superseded "realist" way of 
thinking. In the new framework, questions of 
the form "What would constitute its being the 
case that P?" lapse, to be replaced by questions 
of the form "What are the 'criteria' for the 
acceptability of the assertion that P?" 

CRITERIA, DEFEASIBILITY, AND KNOWLEDGE 
879 
I believe that this account of the relation 
between the truth-conditional conception of 
meaning and that implicit in Wittgenstein's later 
work is quite misguided. Of course that is not a 
belief I can try to justify in this lecture. II But it is 
worth remarking that the "criterial" view seemed 
already to be problematic, epistemologically 
speaking, before I raised the contentious ques-
tion what would constitute "criterially" based 
knowledge. If the supposed semantical context is 
to reveal that "criterial" epistemology is satisfac-
tory, two conditions must be satisfied: first, it 
must be shown that the epistemological qualms 
I have aired - supposing we bracket the conten-
tious question - arise exclusively out of adher-
ence to the supposedly discarded "realist" 
framework; and, second, it must be made clear 
how the supposedly substituted "anti-realist" 
framework puts the qualms to rest. It is not obvi-
ous that either of these conditions can be met. 
For the first: my account of the epistemological 
qualms certainly made implicit play with a 
notion of truth-conditions, in my talk of "cir-
cumstance" and "fact". But the notion involved 
nothing more contentious than this: an ascrip-
tion of an "inner" state to someone is true just in 
case that person is in that "inner" state. That is 
hardly a distinctively "realist" thought, or one 
that the later Wittgenstein could credibly be held 
to have rejected. 12 As for the second condition: 
we are told to model our conception of "anti-
realist" semantics on the mathematical intui-
tionists' explanations of logical constants in 
terms of proof-conditions. But proof is precisely 
not defeasible, so there is nothing in the model 
to show us how to make ourselves comfortable 
with the defeasibility of "criteria"Y 
II 
Understood in the way I have been considering, 
the notion of a criterion would be a technical 
notion; so commentators who attribute it to 
Wittgenstein ought to be embarrassed by his lack 
of self-consciousness on the matter. Mostly he 
uses "criterion" or "Kriterium" without ceremony, 
as if an ordinary mastery of English or German 
would suffice for taking his point. The striking 
exception (Blue Book,'4 pp. 24-5: the well-
known passage about angina) should itself be 
an embarrassment, since it introduces the word, 
with some ceremony, in the phrase "defining cri-
terion"; there seems to be no question of a defea-
sible kind of evidence here.'s The idea that criteria 
are defeasible evidence has to be read into other 
texts, and the readings seem to me to be vitiated 
by reliance on non-compulsory epistemological 
presuppositions. I shall consider three character-
istic lines of argument. 16 
The first is one that Gordon Baker formulates 
as follows: 
... C-support [criterial support] depends on cir-
cumstances. It might be thought that depend-
ence on circumstances might be reduced or even 
altogether avoided by conditionalization; e.g. if p 
C-supports q under the proviso r, then one could 
claim that the conjunction of p and r C-supports 
q independently of the circumstance r, and suc-
cessive steps of conditionalization would remove 
any dependence on circumstances, or at least any 
that can be explicitly stated. Wittgenstein, how-
ever, seems to dismiss this possibility with con-
tempt. This rejection, unless groundless, must 
be based on the principle that C-support may 
always be undermined by supposing the evi-
dence-statements embedded in a suitably enlarged 
contextY 
The idea that criterial knowledge depends on 
circumstances isobviouslyfaithful to Wittgenstein; 
but this argument rests on an interpretation of 
that idea that is not obviously correct. Baker's 
assumption is evidently this: if a condition'S is 
ever a criterion for a claim, by virtue of belonging 
to some type of condition that can be ascertained 
to obtain independently of establishing the claim, 
then any condition of that type constitutes a cri-
terion for that claim, or one suitably related to it. 
Given that such a condition obtains, further cir-
cumstances determine whether the support it 
affords the claim is solid; if the further circum-
stances are unfavourable, we still have, according 
to this view, a case of a criterion's being satisfied, 
but the support that it affords the claim is 
defeated. But when Wittgenstein speaks of 
dependence on circumstances, what he says seems 
to permit a different reading: not that some con-
dition, specified in terms that are applicable inde-
pendently of establishing a claim, is a criterion for 
the claim anyway, though whether it warrants the 
claim depends on further circumstances, but that 

880 
JOHN MCDOWELL 
whether such a condition is a criterion or not 
depends on the circumstances. 
At PI §164,19 for instance, Wittgenstein says 
that "in different circumstances, we apply differ-
ent criteria for a person's reading': Here the point 
need not be that each of a range of types of condi-
tion is anyway a criterion for a person's reading, 
though an argument from any to that conclusion 
may always be undermined by embedding the 
condition in the wrong circumstances. The point 
may be, rather, that what is a criterion for a per-
son's reading in one set of circumstances is not a 
criterion for a person's reading in another set of 
circumstances. 
At PI §154 Wittgenstein writes: 
If there has to be anything "behind the utterance 
of the formula" it is particular circumstances, 
which justify me in saying I can go on - when the 
formula occurs to me. 
I think we can take this to concern the idea that 
the formula's occurring to one is a criterion for 
the correctness of "Now I can go on", as opposed 
to a mere symptom, "behind" which we have to 
penetrate in order to find the essence of what it is 
to understand a series.2o And there is no sugges-
tion that the formula's occurring to one is a cri-
terion anyway, independently of the circumstances. 
It is a criterion, rather, only in the "particular cir-
cumstances" that Wittgenstein alludes to: namely, 
as PI § 179 explains, "such circumstances as that 
[the person in question] had learnt algebra, had 
used such formulae before". 
In a schematic picture of a face, it may be the 
curve of the mouth that makes it right to say that 
the face is cheerful. In another picture the mouth 
may be represented by a perfect replica of the line 
that represents the mouth in the first picture, 
although the face is not cheerful. Do we need a 
relation of defeasible support in order to accom-
modate this possibility? Surely not. What is in 
question is the relation of "making it right to say"; 
it holds in the first case and not in the second. 
Since the relation does not hold in the second 
case, it cannot be understood in terms of entail-
ment. But why suppose that the only alternative is 
defeasible support? That would require the 
assumption that the warranting status we are 
concerned with must be shared by all members of 
a type to which the warranting circumstance can 
be ascertained to belong independently of the 
claim it warrants. (In this case, it would be the 
type of circumstance: being a picture of a face in 
which the mouth is represented by such-and-such 
a line.) That assumption looks in this case like 
groundless prejudice; perhaps the generalized 
version of it, which yields the conception of cri-
teria that I am questioning, is similarly baseless. (I 
shall come shortly to the reason why commenta-
tors tend to think otherwise.)21 
The second line of argument that I want to 
mention starts from the fact that criteria for a 
type of claim are typically multiple, and con-
cludes that criteria may conflict. If that is so, the 
criterial support afforded by at least one of the 
conflicting criteria must be defeatedY This argu-
ment clearly rests on the same assumption about 
the generality of criterial status: that if some 
condition (specified in a non-question-begging 
way) is a criterion for a claim in some circum-
stances, then it is a criterion in any. Without that 
assumption, we are not forced to accept that the 
pairs of considerations that stand in some sort of 
confrontation, in the kind of case the commen-
tators envisage, are both criterial. A condition 
that fails to warrant a claim in some circum-
stances - trumped, as it were, by a criterion for 
an incompatible claim - may not be a criterion 
for the claim in those circumstances, even though 
in other circumstances it would have been one. 
And its failure when it is not criterial is no 
ground for saying that criterial warrants are 
defeasible. 
The third line of argument, which is the most 
revealing, consists in a reading of Wittgenstein's 
treatment of psychological concepts in the 
Philosophical Investigations. In Wittgenstein's view, 
clearly, there are criteria in behaviour for the 
ascription of "inner" states and goings-on (see PI 
§§269, 344, 580). Commentators often take it to 
be obvious that he must mean a defeasible kind of 
evidence; if it is not obvious straight off, the pos-
sibility of pretence is thought to make it SO.23 But 
really it is not obvious at all. 
Consider a representative passage in which 
Wittgenstein uses the notion of a criterion for 
something "internal". PI §377 contains this: 
... What is the criterion for the redness of an 
image? For me, when it is someone else's image: 
what he says and does. 

CRITERIA, DEFEASIBILITY, AND KNOWLEDGE 
881 
I think that amounts to this: when one knows 
that someone else has a red image, one can -
sometimes at least - correctly answer the ques-
tion "How do you know?", or "How can you 
tell?", by saying "By what he says and does". In 
order to accommodate the distinction between 
criteria and symptoms, we should add that ina-
bility or refusal to accept the adequacy of the 
answer would betray, not ignorance of a theory, 
but non-participation in a "convention"; but 
with that proviso, my paraphrase seems accu-
rate and complete. It is an extra - something 
dictated, I believe, by an epistemological pre-
supposition not expressed in the text - to sup-
pose that "what he says and does" must advert to 
a condition that one might ascertain to be satis-
fied by someone independently of knowing that 
he has a red image: a condition that someone 
might satisfy even though he has no red image, 
so that it constitutes at best defeasible evidence 
that he has one. 
Commentators often take it that the possibil-
ity of pretence shows the defeasibility of criteria. 24 
That requires the assumption that in a successful 
deception one brings it about that criteria for 
something "internal" are satisfied, although the 
ascription for which they are criteria would be 
false. But is the assumption obligatory? Here is a 
possible alternative; in pretending, one causes it 
to appear that criteria for something "internal" 
are satisfied (that is, one causes it to appear that 
someone else could know, by what one says and 
does, that one is in, say, some "inner" state); but 
the criteria are not really satisfied (that is, the 
knowledge is not really available). The satisfac-
tion of a criterion, we might say, constitutes a 
fully adequate answer to "How do you know?" -
in a sense that prevents an answer to that ques-
tion from counting as fully adequate if the very 
same answer can be really available to someone 
who lacks the knowledge in question. (Of course 
we cannot rule out its seeming to be available.) 
In the traditional approach to the epistemol-
ogy of other minds, the concept of pretence plays 
a role analogous to that played by the concept of 
illusion in the traditional approach to the episte-
mology of the "external" world. So it is not sur-
prising to find that, just as the possibility of 
pretence is often thought to show the de feasibility 
of criteria for "inner" states of affairs, so the pos-
sibility of illusion is often thought to show the 
defeasibility of criteria for "external" states of 
affairs. At PI §354 Wittgenstein writes: 
The fluctuation in grammar between criteria and 
symptoms makes it look as if there were nothing 
at all but symptoms. We say, for example: 
"Experience teaches that there is rain when the 
barometer falls, but it also teaches that there is rain 
when we have certain sensations of wet and cold, 
or such-and-such visual impressions." In defence 
of this one says that these sense-impressions can 
deceive us. But here one fails to reflect that the 
fact that the false appearance is precisely one of 
rain is founded on a definition. 
Commentators often take this to imply that when 
our senses deceive us, criteria for rain are satis-
fied, although no rain is falling. 25 But what the 
passage says is surely just this: for things, say, to 
look a certain way to us is, as a matter of "defini-
tion" (or "convention", PI §355), for it to look to 
us as though it is raining; it would be a mistake to 
suppose that the "sense-impressions" yield the 
judgement that it is raining merely symptomati-
cally - that arriving at the judgement is mediated 
by an empirical theory. That is quite compatible 
with this thought, which would be parallel to 
what I suggested about pretence: when our "sense-
impressions" deceive us, the fact is not that cri-
teria for rain are satisfied but that they appear to be 
satisfied. 
An inclination to protest should have been 
mounting for some time. The temptation is to 
say: "There must be something in common 
between the cases you are proposing to describe 
as involving the actual satisfaction of criteria and 
the cases you are proposing to describe as involv-
ing the apparent satisfaction of criteria. That is 
why it is possible to mistake the latter for the 
former. And it must surely be this common some-
thing on which we base the judgements we make 
in both sorts of case. The distinction between 
your cases of actual satisfaction of criteria (so 
called) and your cases of only apparent satisfac-
tion of criteria (so called) is not a distinction we 
can draw independently of the correctness or 
otherwise of the problematic claims themselves. 
So it is not a distinction by which we could guide 
ourselves in the practice of making or withhold-
ing such claims. What we need for that purpose is 
a basis for the claims that we can assure ourselves 

882 
JOHN MCDOWELL 
of possessing before we go on to evaluate the cre-
dentials of the claims themselves. That restricts us 
to what is definitely ascertainable anyway, whether 
the case in question is one of (in your terms) 
actual satisfaction of criteria or merely apparent 
satisfaction of criteria. In the case of judgements 
about the 'inner' states and goings-on of others, 
what conforms to the restriction is psychologi-
cally neutral information about their behaviour 
and bodily states. 26 So that must surely be what 
Wittgenstein meant by 'criteria'." 
It is difficult not to sympathize with this pro-
test, although I believe it is essential to see one's 
way to resisting the epistemological outlook that 
it expresses. I shall return to that in the last sec-
tion of this lecture; the important point now is 
the way in which the protest exposes a back-
ground against which the reading ofWittgenstein 
that I am questioning seems inescapable. The 
protest is, in effect, an application of what has 
been called "the Argument from Illusion", and its 
upshot is to locate us in the predicament envis-
aged by a traditional scepticism about other 
minds, and by the traditional ways of trying to 
meet that scepticism. The predicament is as fol-
lows. Judgements about other minds are, as a 
class, epistemologically problematic. Judgements 
about "behaviour" and "bodily" characteristics 
are, as a class, not epistemologically problematic; 
or at any rate, if they are, it is because of a differ-
ent epistemological problem, which can be taken 
for these purposes to have been separately dealt 
with. The challenge is to explain how our unprob-
lematic intake of "behavioural" and "bodily" 
information can adequately warrant our prob-
lematic judgements about other minds. 
The first two interpretative arguments that I 
mentioned depended on this assumption: if a 
state of affairs ever constitutes a criterion for 
some claim, by virtue of its conforming to a spec-
ification that can be ascertained to apply to it 
independently of establishing the claim, then any 
state of affairs that conforms to that specification 
must constitute a criterion for that claim, or one 
suitably related to it. What sustains that assump-
tion is presumably the idea to which the protest 
gives expression: the idea that the question 
whether a criterion for a claim is satisfied or not 
must be capable of being settled with a certainty 
that is independent of whatever certainty can be 
credited to the claim itself. 
With this epistemological framework in place, 
it is undeniable that the warrants for our judge-
ments about other minds yield, at best, defeasible 
support for them. We could not establish any-
thing more robust than that with a certainty 
immune to what supposedly makes psychological 
judgements about others, in general, epistemo-
logically problematic. So if we take Wittgenstein 
to be operating within this framework, we are 
compelled into the interpretation of him that I 
am questioning. According to this view, the scep-
tic is right to insist that our best warrant for a psy-
chological judgement about another person is 
defeasible evidence constituted by his "behav-
iour" and "bodily" circumstances. The sceptic 
complains that the adequacy of the warrant must 
depend on a correlation whose obtaining could 
only be a matter of contingent fact, although we 
are in no position to confirm it empirically; and 
Wittgenstein's distinctive contribution, on this 
reading, is to maintain that at least in some cases 
the relevant correlations are a matter of "conven-
tion", and hence stand in no need of empirical 
support. 
To an unprejudiced view, I think it should 
seem quite implausible that there is anything but 
contingency in the correlations of whose contin-
gency the sceptic complainsY And I argued in 
the first section of this lecture that it is quite 
unclear, anyway, how the appeal to "convention" 
could yield a response to scepticism, in the face 
of the avowed defeasibility of the supposedly 
"conventional" evidence. In fact I believe that this 
reading profoundly misrepresents Wittgenstein's 
response to scepticism about other minds. What 
Wittgenstein does is not to propose an alteration 
of detail within the sceptic's position, but to 
reject the assumption that generates the sceptic's 
problem.28 
The sceptic's picture involves a corpus of 
"bodily" and "behavioural" information, unprob-
lematically available to us in a pictured cognitive 
predicament in which we are holding in suspense 
all attributions of psychological properties to 
others. One way of approaching Wittgenstein's 
response is to remark that such a picture is attain-
able only by displacing the concept of a human 
being from its focal position in an account of our 
experience of our fellows, and replacing it with a 
philosophically generated concept of a human 
body.29 Human bodies, conceived as merely 

CRITERIA, DEFEASIBILITY, AND KNOWLEDGE 
883 
material objects, form the subject-matter of the 
supposed unproblematically available informa-
tion. The idea is that they may subsequently turn 
out to be, in some more or less mysterious way, 
points of occupancy for psychological properties 
as well; this would be represented as a regaining 
of the concept of a human being. In these terms, 
Wittgenstein's response to the sceptic is to restore 
the concept of a human being to its proper place, 
not as something laboriously reconstituted, out 
of the fragments to which the sceptic reduces it, 
by a subtle epistemological and metaphysical 
construction, but as a seamless whole of whose 
unity we ought not to have allowed ourselves to 
lose sight in the first place. 30 
Such a response might appropriately be 
described as urging a different view of the "con-
ventions" or "grammar" of our thought and 
speech about others. But it is a misconception to 
suppose that the appeal to "convention" is meant 
to cement our concept of a human being together 
along the fault-line that the sceptic takes himself 
to detect. It is not a matter of postulating a non-
contingent relation between some of what the 
sceptic takes to be given in our experience of 
others, on the one hand, and our psychological 
judgements about them, on the other. Rather, 
what Wittgenstein does is to reject the sceptic's 
conception of what is given.31 
I have suggested that to say a criterion is satis-
fied would be simply to say that the associated 
knowledge is available in the relevant way: by 
adverting to what someone says or does, or to 
how things look, without having one's epistemic 
standing reinforced, beyond what that yields, by 
possession of an empirical theory. That implies 
an indefeasible connection between the actual, as 
opposed to apparent, satisfaction of a criterion 
and the associated knowledge. But it would be a 
confusion to take it that I am postulating a spe-
cial, indefeasible kind of evidence, if evidence for 
a claim is understood - naturally enough - as 
something one's possession of which one can 
assure oneself of independently of the claim itself. 
It is precisely the insistence on something of this 
sort that dictates the idea that criteria are defeasi-
ble. Rather, I think we should understand criteria 
to be, in the first instance, ways of telling how 
things are, of the sort specified by "On the basis of 
what he says and does" or "By how things look"; 
and we should take it that knowledge that a 
criterion for a claim is actually satisfied - if we 
allow ourselves to speak in those terms as well -
would be an exercise of the very capacity that we 
speak of when we say that one can tell, on the 
basis of such-and-such criteria, whether things 
are as the claim would represent them as being. 
This flouts an idea that we are prone to find natu-
ral, that a basis for a judgement must be some-
thing on which we have a firmer cognitive 
purchase than we do on the judgement itself; but 
although the idea can seem natural, it is an illu-
sion to suppose that it is compulsory. 
III 
The possibility of such a position is liable to be 
obscured from us by a certain tempting line of 
argument. On any question about the world inde-
pendent of oneself to which one can ascertain the 
answer by, say, looking, the way things look can be 
deceptive: it can look to one exactly as if things 
were a certain way when they are not. (This can be 
so even if, for whatever reason, one is not inclined 
to believe that things are that way.32 I shall speak of 
cases as deceptive when, if one were to believe that 
things are as they appear, one would be misled, 
without implying that one is actually misled.) It 
follows that any capacity to tell by looking how 
things are in the world independent of oneself can 
at best be fallible. According to the tempting argu-
ment, something else follows as well: the argu-
ment is that since there can be deceptive cases 
experientially indistinguishable from non-deceptive 
cases, one's experiential intake - what one embraces 
within the scope of one's consciousness - must be 
the same in both kinds of case. In a deceptive case, 
one's experiential intake must ex hypothesi fall 
short of the fact itself, in the sense of being con-
sistent with there being no such fact. So that must 
be true, according to the argument, in a non-
deceptive case too. One's capacity is a capacity to 
tell by looking: that is, on the basis of experiential 
intake. And even when this capacity does yield 
knowledge, we have to conceive the basis as a high-
est common factor of what is available to experi-
ence in the deceptive and the non-deceptive cases 
alike, and hence as something that is at best a 
defeasible ground for the knowledge, though 
available with a certainty independent of what-
ever might put the knowledge in doubt. 

884 
JOHN MCDOWELL 
This is the line of thought that I described as 
an application of the Argument from Illusion. I 
want now to describe and comment on a way of 
resisting it. 
We might formulate the temptation that is to 
be resisted as follows. Let the fallible capacity in 
question be a capacity to tell by experience 
whether such-and-such is the case. In a deceptive 
case, what is embraced within the scope of expe-
rience is an appearance that such-and-such is the 
case, falling short of the fact: a mere appearance. 
So what is experienced in a non-deceptive case is 
a mere appearance too. The upshot is that even in 
the non-deceptive cases we have to picture some-
thing that falls short of the fact ascertained, at 
best defeasibly connected with it, as interposing 
itself between the experiencing subject and the 
fact itself.33 
But suppose we say - not at all unnaturally-
that an appearance that such-and-such is the case 
can be either a mere appearance or the fact that 
such-and-such is the case making itself perceptu-
ally manifest to someone.34 As before, the object 
of experience in the deceptive cases is a mere 
appearance. But we are not to accept that in the 
non-deceptive cases too the object of experience 
is a mere appearance, and hence something that 
falls short of the fact itself. On the contrary, we 
are to insist that the appearance that is presented 
to one in those cases is a matter of the fact itself 
being disclosed to the experiencer. So appear-
ances are no longer conceived as in general inter-
vening between the experiencing subject and the 
world.35 
This may sound like an affirmation of M-
realism, but I intend something more general. The 
idea of a fact being disclosed to experience is in 
itself purely negative: a rejection of the thesis that 
what is accessible to experience falls short of the 
fact in the sense I explained, namely that of being 
consistent with there being no such fact. In the 
most straightforward application of the idea, the 
thought would indeed be - as in M-realism - that 
the fact itself is directly presented to view, so that 
it is true in a stronger sense that the object of 
experience does not fall short of the fact. But a 
less straightforward application of the idea is pos-
sible also, and seems appropriate in at least some 
cases of knowledge that someone else is in an 
"inner" state, on the basis of experience of what 
he says and does. Here we might think of what is 
directly available to experience in some such 
terms as "his giving expression to his being in that 
'inner' state": this is something that, while not 
itself actually being the "inner" state of affairs in 
question, nevertheless does not fall short of it in 
the sense I explained.36 
In PI §344 -
which I quoted earlier -
Wittgenstein seems concerned to insist that the 
appearances to which he draws attention, in order 
to discourage the thought that there is "nothing at 
all but symptoms" for rain, are appearances that it 
is raining. If there is a general thesis about criteria 
applied here, it will be on these lines: one acquires 
criterial knowledge by confrontation with appear-
ances whose content is, or includes, the content of 
the knowledge acquired. (This would fit both the 
sorts of case I have just distinguished: obviously 
so in the straightforward sort, and in the less 
straightforward sort we can say that an appear-
ance that someone is giving expression to an 
"inner" state is an appearance that he is in that 
"inner" state.) 
This thesis about match in content might 
promise a neat justification for denying that cri-
terial knowledge is inferential. The content of 
inferential knowledge, one might suggest, is gener-
ated by a transformation of the content of some 
data, whereas here the content of the knowledge 
is simply presented in the data.37 But this does not 
establish the coherence of a position in which cri-
teria are conceived as objects of experience on the 
"highest common factor" model, but the accusa-
tion that criteria function as proxies can be 
rejected. If the object of experience is in general a 
mere appearance, as the "highest common factor" 
model makes it, then it is not clear how, by appeal-
ing to the idea that it has the content of the 
knowledge that one acquires by confrontation 
with it, we could save ourselves from having to 
picture it as getting in the way between the sub-
ject and the world. Indeed, it is arguable that the 
"highest common factor" model undermines the 
very idea of an appearance having as its content 
that things are thus and so in the world "beyond" 
appearances (as we would have to put it). 
This has a bearing on my query, in the first 
section of this lecture, as to whether the blankly 
external obtaining of a fact can make sense of the 
idea that someone experiencing a "criterion" 
might know that things were thus and so. Suppose 
someone is presented with an appearance that it 

CRITERIA, DEFEASIBILITY, AND KNOWLEDGE 
885 
is rammg. It seems unproblematic that if his 
experience is in a suitable way the upshot of the 
fact that it is raining, then the fact itself can make 
it the case that he knows that it is raining. But that 
seems unproblematic precisely because the con-
tent of the appearance is the content of the knowl-
edge. And it is arguable that we find that match in 
content intelligible only because we do not con-
ceive the objects of such experiences as in general 
falling short of the meteorological facts. That is: 
such experiences can present us with the appear-
ance that it is raining only because when we have 
them as the upshot (in a suitable way) of the fact 
that it is raining, the fact itself is their object; 
so that its obtaining is not, after all, blankly exter-
nal. 38 If that is right, the "highest common factor" 
conception of experience is not entitled to the 
idea that makes the case unproblematic. It would 
be wrong to suppose that the "highest common 
factor" conception can capture, in its own terms, 
the intuition that I express when I say that the fact 
itself can be manifest to experience: doing so by 
saying that that is how it is when, for instance, 
experiences as of its raining are in a suitable way 
the upshot of the fact that it is raining. That cap-
tures the intuition all right; but - with "experi-
ences as of its raining" - not in terms available to 
someone who starts by insisting that the object of 
experience is the highest common factor, and so 
falls short of the fact itself. 
The "highest common factor" conception has 
attractions for us that cannot be undone just by 
describing an alternative, even with the recom-
mendation that the alternative can cause a sea of 
philosophy to subside. The most obvious attrac-
tion is the phenomenological argument: the 
occurrence of deceptive cases experientially indis-
tinguishable from non-deceptive cases. But this is 
easily accommodated by the essentially disjunc-
tive conception of appearances that constitutes 
the alternative. The alternative conception can 
allow what is given to experience in the two sorts 
of case to be the same in so far as it is an appear-
ance that things are thus and so; that leaves it 
open that whereas in one kind of case what is 
given to experience is a mere appearance, in the 
other it is the fact itself made manifest. So the 
phenomenological argument is inconclusive. 
A more deep-seated temptation towards the 
"highest common factor" conception might find 
expression like this: "Ex hypothesi a mere appearance 
can be indistinguishable from what you describe 
as a fact made manifest. So in a given case one 
cannot tell for certain whether what confronts 
one is one or the other of those. How, then, can 
there be a difference in what is given to experi-
ence, in any sense that could matter to epistemol-
ogy?" One could hardly countenance the idea of 
having a fact made manifest within the reach of 
one's experience, without supposing that that 
would make knowledge of the fact available to 
one. 39 This protest might reflect the conviction 
that such epistemic entitlement ought to be 
something one could display for oneself, as it were 
from within; the idea being that that would 
require a non-question-begging demonstration 
from a neutrally available starting-point, such as 
would be constituted by the highest common 
factor.4o 
There is something gripping about the "inter-
nalism" that is expressed here. The root idea is 
that one's epistemic standing on some question 
cannot intelligibly be constituted, even in part, by 
matters blankly external to how it is with one 
subjectively. For how could such matters be other 
than beyond one's ken? And how could matters 
beyond one's ken make any difference to one's 
epistemic standing?41 (This is obviously a form of 
the thought that is at work in the argument from 
my first section which I have recently reconsid-
ered.) But the disjunctive conception of appear-
ances shows a way to detach this "internalist" 
intuition from the requirement of non-question-
begging demonstration. When someone has a 
fact made manifest to him, the obtaining of the 
fact contributes to his epistemic standing on the 
question. But the obtaining of the fact is precisely 
not blankly external to his subjectivity, as it would 
be if the truth about that were exhausted by the 
highest common factorY 
However, if that reflection disarms one episte-
mological foundation for the "highest common 
factor" conception, there are other forces that 
tend to hold it in placeY 
Suppose we assume that one can come to 
know that someone else is in some "inner" state 
by adverting to what he says and does. Empirical 
investigation of the cues that impinge on one's 
sense-organs on such an occasion would yield a 
specification of the information received by 
them; the same information could be available in 
a deceptive case as well. That limited informational 

886 
JOHN MCDOWELL 
intake must be processed, in the nervous system, 
into the information about the person's "inner" 
state that comes to be at one's disposal; and a 
description of the information -processing would 
look like a description of an inference from a 
highest common factor. Now there is a familiar 
temptation, here and at the analogous point in 
reflection about perceptual knowledge of the 
environment in general, to suppose that one's 
epistemic standing with respect to the upshot of 
the process is constituted by the availability to 
one's senses of the highest common factor, 
together with the cogency of the supposed 
inference. 
When one succumbs to this temptation, one's 
first thought is typically to ground the cogency of 
the inference on a theory. But the conception 
of theory as extending one's cognitive reach 
beyond the confines of experience requires that 
the theory in question be attainable on the basis 
of the experience in question. It is not enough 
that the experience would confirm the theory: the 
theory must involve no concept the formation of 
which could not intelligibly be attributed to a 
creature whose experiential intake was limited in 
the way envisaged. And when we try to conceive 
knowledge of the "inner" states of others on the 
basis of what they do and say, or perceptual 
knowledge of the environment in general, on this 
model, that condition seems not to be met.44 
Keeping the highest common factor in the pic-
ture, we might try to register that thought by 
grounding the cogency of the inferences on 
"grammar" rather than theory; this would yield 
something like the conception of criteria that I 
have questioned. But that this would be a distor-
tion is suggested by the fact that we have been 
given no idea of how to arrive at specifications of 
the content of the supposed "grammatically" cer-
tified warrants, other than by straightforward 
empirical investigation of what impinges on 
someone's senses on occasions when we are inde-
pendently prepared to believe that he has the 
knowledge in question. The truth is that, for all 
their similarity to inferences, those processings of 
information are not transitions within what 
Wilfrid Sellars has called "the logical space of rea-
sons",45 as they would need to be in order to be 
capable of being constitutive of one's title to 
knowledge. Acquiring mastery of the relevant 
tracts of language is not, as acquiring a theory can 
be, learning to extend one's cogmtlve reach 
beyond some previous limits by traversing path-
ways in a newly mastered region of the "space of 
reasons". It is better conceived as part of being ini-
tiated into the "space of reasons" itself.46 
I want to end by mentioning a source for the 
attraction of the "highest common factor" con-
ception that lies, I think, as deep as any. If we 
adopt the disjunctive conception of appearances, 
we have to take seriously the idea of an unmedi-
ated openness of the experiencing subject to 
"external" reality, whereas the "highest common 
factor" conception allows us to picture an inter-
face between them. Taking the epistemology of 
other minds on its own, we can locate the highest 
common factor at the facing surfaces of other 
human bodies. But when we come to consider 
perceptual knowledge about bodies in general, 
the "highest common factor" conception drives 
what is given to experience inward, until it can be 
aligned with goings-on at our own sensory sur-
faces. This promises to permit us a satisfying con-
ception of an interface at which the "inner" and 
the "outer" make contact. The idea that there is an 
interface can seem compulsory; and the disjunc-
tive conception of appearances flouts that intui-
tion - twice over, in its view of knowledge of 
others' "inner" states.47 
No doubt there are many influences that con-
spire to give this picture of the "inner" and the 
"outer" its hold on us. The one I want to mention 
is our proneness to try to extend an objectifying 
mode of conceiving reality to human beings. In 
an objectifying view of reality, behaviour consid-
ered in itself cannot be expressive or significant: 
not human behaviour any more than, say, the 
behaviour of the planetsY If human behaviour is 
expressive, that fact resides not in the nature of 
the behaviour, as it were on the surface, but in its 
being the outwardly observable effect of mental 
states and goings-on. So the mind retreats behind 
the surface, and the idea that the mental is "inter-
nal" acquires a quasi-literal construction, as in 
Descartes, or even a literal one, as in the idea that 
mental states are "in the head"49 
Modern adherents of this picture do not usu-
ally take themselves to be enmeshed in the prob-
lems of traditional epistemology. But the 
objectification of human behaviour leads inexor-
ably to the traditional problem of other minds. 
And it is hard to see how the pictured interface 

CRITERIA, DEFEASIBILITY, AND KNOWLEDGE 
887 
can fail to be epistemologically problematic in 
the outward direction too: the inward retreat of 
the mind undermines the idea of a direct open-
ness to the world, and thereby poses the tradi-
tional problems of knowledge about "external" 
reality in general. Without the "highest common 
factor" conception of experience, the interface 
Notes 
I shall put "criterion" or "criteria" in quotation 
marks to signal the supposed Wittgensteinian 
use that I am about to describe. 
2 A view of Wittgenstein on these lines is 
unquestioned in W. Gregory Lycan's survey 
article, "Non-inductive evidence: recent work 
on 
Wittgenstein's 
'criteria"', 
American 
Philosophical Quarterly viii (1971), pp. 109-25. 
Its outlines seem to date from Sydney 
Shoemaker's Self-Knowledge and Self-Identity 
(Cornell University Press: Ithaca, 1963); see 
P. M. S. Hacker, Insight and Illusion (Clarendon 
Press: Oxford, 1972), p. 293. My aim is to cap-
ture the common spirit of several readings 
that diverge in detail; so I shall try to preserve 
neutrality on nice questions about, for 
instance, what exactly the terms of the cri-
terial relation are: see Hacker, Insight and 
Illusion, pp. 285-8, and Gordon Baker, 
"Criteria: a new foundation for semantics", 
Ratio xvi (1974), pp. 156-89, at p. 160; and, 
for a contrasting view, Crispin Wright, "Anti-
realist semantics: the role of criteria", in 
Godfrey Vesey (ed.), Idealism: Past and Present 
(Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, 
1982), pp. 225-48, at pp. 233-8. 
3 
See Baker, "Criteria': 
4 
I introduce this position here not in order to 
defend it (see §III below, especially n. 36), but 
purely with the aim of exploiting the contrast 
in order to clarify the "criterial" view. 
5 "On 'The reality of the past"', in Christopher 
Hookway and Philip Pettit (eds), Action and 
Interpretation (Cambridge University Press: 
Cambridge, 1978), pp. 127-44, at p. 135. 
6 Ibid., p. 136. 
7 
"Realism, truth-value links, other minds and 
the past'; Ratio xxii (1980), pp. 112-32, at 
p. 123. (Clearly the last sentence should really 
read" ... involve the availability to perception 
can be left out of the picture, and the traditional 
problems lapse. Traditional epistemology is 
widely felt to be unsatisfying; I think this is a 
symptom of the error in the "highest common 
factor" conception, and, more generally, of the 
misguidedness of an objectifying conception of 
the human. 
not just of the satisfaction of criteria ... but 
of the realisation of truth -conditions ... ".) 
8 This partly undermines n. 29 (pp. 242-3) of 
my "Anti-realism and the epistemology of 
understanding", in Herman Parret and 
Jacques Bouveresse (eds), Meaning and 
Understanding (De Gruyter: Berlin and New 
York, 1981), pp. 225-48. But, as will emerge, 
I stand by the spirit of what I wrote then. 
9 
Such responses to scepticism are quite unsat-
isfying. Without showing that the "conven-
tions" are well founded, we have no ground 
for denying that the concession to the sceptic 
is an admission that we have reason to 
change the way we talk; and it is hard to see 
how we could show that the "conventions" 
are well founded without finding a way to 
withdraw the concession. 
10 
See Hacker, Insight and Illusion, ch. X; Baker, 
"criteria"; Wright, "Anti-realist semantics: 
the role of criteria". The general outlines of 
this conception of Wittgenstein's develop-
ment, and of the issue between "realism" and 
"anti-realism" in the philosophy oflanguage, 
are due to Michael Dummett: see Truth and 
Other Enigmas (Duckworth: London, 1978), 
especially essay II. 
11 
I think what I shall say will contribute indi-
rectly to its justification, by casting doubt on 
a conception of our knowledge of others 
that is implicit in the standard arguments for 
"anti-realism", and on the attribution of that 
conception to Wittgenstein. There is more in 
this vein in my "Anti-realism and the episte-
mology of understanding", and in my 
"Wittgenstein on following a rule", Synthese 
58 (1986), pp. 325-63. 
12 
See, e.g., Dummett, Truth and Other Enigmas, 
pp. xxxiv-v. Baker, "Criteria", pp. 177-8, 
finds, behind the thought that "criteria" are 

888 
JOHN MCDOWELL 
epistemologically insufficient, a baroque 
argumentative structure involving the notion 
(supposedly characteristic of "Classical 
Semantics") of maximally consistent sets of 
possible states of affairs; but I cannot find 
that notion implicit in what I have said. (I 
believe the idea that truth-conditions are a 
matter of "language-independent possible 
states-of-affairs" - Baker, p. 178, cf. p. 171- is 
a fundamental misconception of the intui-
tion about meaning that Wittgenstein 
adopted from Frege in the Tractatus; and 
that this is in large part responsible for a dis-
tortion in the Dummettian conception of the 
issue between "realism" and "anti-realism", 
and of the relation between Wittgenstein's 
earlier and later philosophies. There is more 
in this vein in my "In defence of modesty", in 
preparation for a collection of essays on 
Dummett's work edited by Barry Taylor.) 
13 
In "Strict finitism", Synthese Ii (1982), 
pp. 203-82, Wright formulates a position in 
which defeasibility extends even to proof-
based knowledge; see also "Anti-realist 
semantics: the role of criteria", p. 244. I do 
not believe that this yields an adequate epis-
temology of proof, on the model of which 
we might construct an acceptable account of 
defeasible "criterial" knowledge; rather, it 
saddles the epistemology of proof with prob-
lems parallel to those I have been urging 
against"criterial" epistemology. (Wittgenstein, 
On Certainty (Blackwell: Oxford, 1969), 
§651 - cited by Wright at p. 244 of "Anti-
realist semantics: the role of criteria" - makes 
a point about fallibility. Reliance on a defea-
sible basis is quite another matter: see §III 
below.) 
14 
The Blue and Brown Books (Blackwell: 
Oxford, 1958). 
15 
Baker, "Criteria", pp. 184-5, seems to deny 
this, but I cannot see how he would explain 
the presence of the word "defining': Most 
commentators in the tradition I am con-
cerned with deplore the passage as unchar-
acteristic; see, e.g., Hacker, Insight and 
Illusion, p. 288; Wright, "Anti-realist seman-
tics: the role of criteria': p. 227. There is a 
satisfying explanation of its point at pp. 133-6 
of John W. Cook, "Human beings", in Peter 
Winch (ed.), Studies in the Philosophy of 
Wittgenstein (Routledge and Kegan Paul: 
London, 1969),pp. 117-51. 
16 
There may be others; but I think the ones I 
shall consider illustrate the characteristic 
assumptions of the reading of Wittgenstein 
that I want to question. (Baker, "Criteria", pp. 
159-60, 162, mentions also the ancestry of 
the criterial relation in Wittgenstein's thought. 
But he would presumably not suggest that its 
descent, from a relation of a priori probabili-
fication, carries much independent weight.) 
17 
Ibid., pp. 161-2. 
18 
Or whatever is the right kind of item to be a 
criterion: see n. 2 above. 
19 
I shall refer III this way to sections of 
Philosophical Investigations (Blackwell: Oxford, 
1953). 
20 
The word "criterion" is not used, but the 
subject is the tendency to think that in 
reviewing the phenomena we find nothing 
but symptoms, which we have to peel away 
(like leaves from an artichoke: PI §164) in 
order to find the thing itself. On the connec-
tion with PI §354 ("the fluctuation in gram-
mar between criteria and symptoms"), see 
Cook, "Human beings", pp. 135-6. 
21 
This paragraph was suggested by pp. 138-40 
of Norman Malcolm's "Wittgenstein on the 
nature of mind': in his Thought and Knowledge 
(Cornell University Press: Ithaca and London, 
1977), pp. 133-58. 
22 
See Anthony Kenny, "Criterion", in Paul 
Edwards (ed.), The Encyclopaedia of Philosophy, 
vol. ii (Macmillan and Free Press: New York, 
1967), pp. 258-61 (at p. 260); and Baker, 
"Criteria", p. 162. 
23 
For versions of this line of interpretation, see 
Kenny, "Criterion", p. 260; Hacker, Insight 
and Illusion, pp. 289-90; John T. E. Richardson, 
The GrammarofJustification (Sussex University 
Press, 1976),pp.1l4, 116-17. Baker,"Criteria", 
p. 162, goes so far as to claim: "This princi-
ple, that C-support is defeasible, is explicitly 
advanced in the particular case of psycho-
logical concepts." 
24 
The supposed obviousness of this connec-
tion allows commentators to cite as evidence 
for the de feasibility of criteria passages which 
show at most that Wittgenstein is not unaware 
that pretence occurs. Note, e.g., Hacker's 
citation (Insight and Illusion, p. 289) of 

CRITERIA, DEFEASIBILITY, AND KNOWLEDGE 
889 
PI§§249-50 as showing that criteria for pain 
may be satisfied in the absence of pain. In 
fact the point of those passages is not the 
vulnerability to pretence, in general, of our 
judgements that others are in pain, but the 
invulnerability to pretence, in particular, of 
judgements "connected with the primitive, 
the natural, expressions of the sensation" 
and made about someone who has not yet 
learned "the names of sensations" (PI §244). 
25 
So Hacker, Insight and Illusion, pp. 289-90; 
Kenny, "Criterion", p. 260; Wright, "Antirealist 
semantics: the role of criteria", p. 227; 
James Bogen, "Wittgenstein and skepti-
cism", Philosophical Review lxxxiii (1974), 
pp. 364-73, at p. 370. 
26 
Psychologically neutral information: once 
the appeal to pretence has done its work -
that of introducing the idea of cases that are 
experientially indistinguishable from cases 
in which one can tell by what someone says 
and does that he is in some specified "inner" 
state, though he is not - it is quietly dropped. 
We are not meant to arrive at the idea of 
behavioural and bodily evidence that would 
indefeasibly warrant the judgement that 
someone is, so to speak, at least feigning the 
"inner" state. It is a nice question, on which I 
shall not pause, how the epistemological 
motivation for passing over this position 
should best be characterized. In the case of 
the "criterial" view, there is a seman tical 
motivation as well; it is plausible that such 
evidence could not be specified except in 
terms of the concept of the "inner" state 
itself, and this conflicts with the idea that 
criteria should figure in the explanation of 
the associated concepts: see Wright, "Anti-
realist semantics: the role of criteria", p. 23l. 
27 
See the splendid recanting "Postscript" to 
Rogers Albritton, "On Wittgenstein's use of 
the term 'criterion": in George Pitcher (ed.), 
Wittgenstein: The Philosophical Investigations 
(Macmillan: London, 1968), pp. 231-50. 
(Such regularities are not "conventions" but 
the "very general facts of nature" on which 
"conventions" rest: PI II xi; cf. §142.) 
28 
Without going into even as much detail as I 
shall about the case of other minds in par-
ticular, there is already ground for suspicion 
of this reading of Wittgenstein in the way it 
attracts the label "foundationalist": some-
thing that is surely quite uncharacteristic of 
Wittgenstein's approach to epistemological 
questions. 
29 
This is the key thought of Cook's admirable 
"Human beings", to which I am heavily 
indebted in this section. (One tempting 
route to the substituted notion is the idea 
that we can cleanly abstract, from the 
prephilosophical conception of a human 
being, the mental aspect, conceived as some-
thing each of us can focus his thoughts on 
for himself in introspection, independently 
of locating it in the context of our embodied 
life. This putatively self-standing conception 
of the mental is the target of the complex 
Wittgensteinian polemic known as the 
Private Language Argument. If this were the 
only route to the sceptic's conception of 
what is given in our experience of others, the 
wrongness of attributing that conception to 
Wittgenstein would be very straightfor-
wardly obvious: see Cook, "Human beings". 
But I think the situation is more complex; 
see §III below.) 
30 
I intend this to echo P. F. Strawson's thesis 
(Individuals (Methuen: London, 1959), ch. 3) 
that the concept of a person is primitive. 
Strawson's use of the notion of "logically 
adequate criteria" for ascriptions of psycho-
logical properties to others has often been 
subjected to what I believe to be a misun-
derstanding analogous to the misreading 
(as I believe) of Wittgenstein that I am 
considering. 
31 
Note that seeing behaviour as a possibly feigned 
expression of an "inner" state, or as a human 
act or response that one does not understand, 
is not seeing it in the way that the sceptic 
requires. See PI §420: and cf. n. 26 above. 
32 
On the "belief-independence" of the content 
of perception, see Gareth Evans, The Varieties 
of Reference (Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1982), 
p.123. 
33 
The argument effects a transition from sheer 
fallibility (which might be registered in a 
"Pyrrhonian" scepticism) to a "veil of ideas" 
scepticism: for the distinction, see Richard 
Rorty, Philosophy and the Mirror of Nature 
(Blackwell: Oxford, 1980), p. 94 n. 8 and pp. 
139ff. 

890 
JOHN MCDOWELL 
34 
In classical Greek, " ... qxxiVE'tat aoi/Jos mv 
[word for word: he appears wise being] gen-
erally means he is manifestly wise, and 
qxxtVE'tat aOl/Jor; etvat [word for word: he 
appears wise to be], he seems to be wise .. . ": 
William W. Goodwin, A Greek Grammar 
(Macmillan: London, 1894), p. 342. 
35 
See the discussion of a "disjunctive" account 
of "looks" statements in Paul Snowdon, 
"Perception, vision and causation",Proceedings 
of the Aristotelian Society lxxxi (1980/1), pp. 
175-92; and, more generally, J. M. Hinton's 
Experiences (Clarendon Press: Oxford, 1973) -
a work which I regret that I did not know 
until this lecture was virtually completed, 
although I expect that this section grew out 
of an unconscious recollection of Hinton's 
articles "Experiences': Philosophical Quar-
terly xvii (1967), pp. 1-13, and "Visual 
experiences", Mind lxxvi (1967), pp. 217-27. 
36 
M-realism might be accused of proposing a 
general assimilation of the second sort of 
case to the first. The plausibility of the assim-
ilation in a particular case depends on the 
extent to which it is plausible to think of the 
particular mode of expression as, so to speak, 
transparent. (This is quite plausible for facial 
expressions 
of emotional 
states: 
see 
Wittgenstein, Zettel (Blackwell: Oxford, 
1967), §§220-5. But it is not very plausible 
for "avowals", except perhaps in the special 
case of the verbal expression of thoughts.) 
The motivation for M-realism was the wish 
to deny that our experiential intake, when 
we know one another's "inner" states by 
experience, must fall short of the fact ascer-
tained in the sense I have introduced; it was 
a mistake to suppose that this required an 
appeal, across the board, to a model of direct 
observation. 
37 
But this idea is not available to Wright, in 
view of his insistence that grasp of criteria 
should not presuppose possession of the 
associated concepts: see "Anti-realist seman-
tics: the role of criteria", p. 231. 
38 
This fits the first of the two sorts of case dis-
tinguished above; something similar, though 
more complex, could be said about a case of 
the second sort. 
39 
This is to be distinguished from actually 
conferring the knowledge on one. Suppose 
someone has been misled into thinking his 
senses are out of order; we might then hesi-
tate to say that he possesses the knowledge 
that his senses (in fact functioning perfectly) 
make available to him. But for some purposes 
the notion of being in a position to know 
something is more interesting than the notion 
of actually knowing it. (It is a different matter 
if one's senses are actually out of order, though 
their operations are sometimes unaffected: in 
such a case, an experience subjectively indis-
tinguishable from that of being confronted 
with a tomato, even if it results from confron-
tation with a tomato, need not count as expe-
riencing the presence of a tomato. Another 
case in which it may not count as that is a case 
in which there are a lot of tomato fayades 
about, indistinguishable from tomatoes when 
viewed from the front: cf. Alvin Goldman, 
"Discrimination and perceptual knowledge", 
Journal ofPhilosophylxxiii (1976),pp. 771-91. 
One counts as experiencing the fact making 
itself manifest only in the exercise of a 
(fallible) capacity to tell how things are.) 
40 
The hankering for independently ascertain-
able foundations is familiar in epistemology. 
Its implications converge with those of a 
Dummett-inspired thesis in the philosophy 
of language: namely that the states of affairs 
at which linguistic competence primarily 
engages with extra-linguistic reality, so to 
speak, must be effectively decidable (or fall 
under some suitable generalization of that 
concept). See Baker, "Defeasibility and 
meaning", in P. M. S. Hacker and J. Raz (eds), 
Law, Morality, and Society (Clarendon Press: 
Oxford, 1977), pp. 26-57, at pp. 50-1. For 
criteria as decidable, see, e.g., Wright, "Anti-
realist semantics: the role of criteria", p. 230. 
41 
See, e.g., Laurence BonJour, "Externalist 
theories of empirical knowledge", Midwest 
Studies in Philosophy v (1980), pp. 53-74. 
42 
The disjunctive conception of appearances 
makes room for a conception of experiential 
knowledge that conforms to Robert Nozick's 
account of "internalism", at p. 281 of 
Philosophical Explanations (Clarendon Press: 
Oxford, 1981); without requiring, as he 
implies that any "internalist" position must 
(pp. 281-2), a reduction of "external" facts to 
mental facts. 

CRITERIA, DEFEASIBILITY, AND KNOWLEDGE 
891 
43 
Nozick must be a case in point. His drawing 
of the boundary between "internal" and 
"external" (see n. 2 above) must reflect some-
thing like the "highest common factor" con-
ception; and in his case that conception 
cannot be sustained by the "internalist" intu-
ition that I have just tried to disarm. 
44 
To the point here is Wittgenstein's polemic 
against the idea that "from one's own case" 
one can so much as form the idea of some-
one else having, say, feelings. On the case of 
perception in general, see, e.g., P. F. Strawson, 
"Perception and its objects", in G. 
F. 
Macdonald (ed.), Perception and Identity 
(Macmillan: London and Basingstoke, 1979), 
pp.41-60. 
45 
"Empiricism and the philosophy of mind", 
in Herbert Feigl and Michael Scriven (eds), 
The Foundations of Science and the Concepts 
of Psychology and Psychoanalysis (Minnesota 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science I, 
University of Minnesota Press: Minneapolis, 
1956), pp. 253-329, at p. 299. 
46 
Two supplementations to these extremely 
sketchy remarks. First: when we allow theory 
to extend someone's cognitive reach, we do 
not need to find him infallible in the region 
of logical space that the theory opens up to 
him; so we do not need to commit ourselves 
to the idea that the theory, together with 
the content of experience, must entail the 
content of the putative knowledge. Second: 
the rejection of the inferential model that I 
am urging does not turn on mere phenom-
enology (the absence of conscious infer-
ences). Theory can partly ground a claim to 
knowledge even in cases in which it is not 
consciously brought to bear; as with a scien-
tist who (as we naturally say) learns to see 
the movements of imperceptible particles in 
some apparatus. 
47 
Am I suggesting that the disjunctive concep-
tion of appearances precludes the idea that 
experience mediates between subject and 
world? It depends on what you mean by 
"mediate". If experience is conceived in terms 
of openness to the world, it will not be 
appropriate to picture it as an interface. 
(I am sceptical whether such a conception of 
experience is available within the dominant 
contemporary philosophy of mind.) 
48 
See 
Charles Taylor, 
Hegel 
(Cambridge 
University Press: Cambridge, 1975), pp. 3-1l. 
49 
This movement of thought can find sup-
port in the idea that the mental is conceptu-
ally captured by introspective ostensive 
definition. (That idea is perhaps naturally 
understood as a response to the obliteration 
of the notion of intrinsically expressive 
behaviour). But some versions of the posi-
tion are not notably introspectionist. 
(See n. 29 above.) 

CHAPTER 60 
Knowing How to Believe With 
Justification 
Steven L. Reynolds 
I will defend the unfashionable view that justified 
perceptual beliefs are justified in part by a rela-
tion to the appropriate sorts of perceptual experi-
ences, where experiences are conceived as 
non-propositional and indeed non-intentional in 
character. Experiences are like itches and tickles, 
and unlike beliefs, in not "saying" anything or 
even being about anything. They are complex 
ordered masses of sensations produced in percep-
tion. There are reasons to doubt that we have such 
experiences, but I will not address them here. 
Instead I will show that, if we have such non-
intentional experiences, they can help justify our 
perceptual beliefs. 
It has been recently maintained (by, for 
example, Donald Davidson and Laurence 
BonJour) that no relation of a belief to a non-
propositional experience could be epistemi-
cally justifying. 1 Those who hold this view 
usually concede to the experience a role in pro-
ducing the belief (if they allow the existence of 
experiences at all), but they deny that a mental 
state or process which consists of sensations, 
and which is, consequently, not about any of 
the things the belief is about, could play any 
role in justifying that belief. In this paper I will 
argue against this claim, by describing a relation 
Originally published in Philosophical Studies 64, 3 (Dec. 
1991), pp. 273-92. 
of belief to experience which plausibly could be 
justifying. 
The only recent attempt to respond directly to 
the Davidson-BonJour objection presents the 
transition from experience to belief as a kind of 
argument, in which the experience plays some-
thing like the role of a premise. I will argue that 
this response won't work. I argue instead for a 
view which can be expressed in the following 
thesis: 
A perceptual belief is justified if and only if there 
are no undermining beliefs, and it was arrived at 
in response to an experience through an adequate 
exercise of properly learned recognitional skills. 
I shall leave the notion of undermining beliefs 
vague, though I recognize that a full defense of 
the thesis would require clarification of it. I will 
attempt to give non-circular explications of the 
normative terms "adequate exercise" and "prop-
erly learned", though we will not be prepared for 
that until toward the end of the paper. In addi-
tion to citing evidence for the thesis of a more or 
less ordinary language sort, I will also try to 
answer several natural objections to regarding 
ordinary perceptual processes as exercises of 
skills. 
Although the view I develop in defending this 
thesis has points of contact with recent work by 
John Pollock, it is, I believe, a substantially new 
account of perceptual justification. 

HOW TO BELIEVE WITH JUSTIFICATION 
893 
I 
First some remarks about epistemic justification: 
Justification evidently has some close relation to 
knowledge. Thus many recent theories make jus-
tified true belief necessary for knowledge. It is 
also apparently uncontroversial that some beliefs 
are justified, at least in part, by inferential rela-
tions to other beliefs. 
Two further assumptions about justification 
help generate the problems about the experiential 
justification of beliefs. These assumptions are 
somewhat more controversial, but they are plau-
sible and widely accepted, and I won't challenge 
them. I will try to show that they are compatible 
with experiential justification. 
The first is that justification is a normative 
notion. Justified beliefs are epistemically accepta-
ble, and may thus be retained, while unjustified 
beliefs should be changed. Or at least the exist-
ence of an unjustified belief indicates some sort 
of epistemic fault on the part of the believer - at 
some point he should have done, or believed, 
otherwise than he did. 
The second is that justification has a pro-
nounced "internalist" character. One must be able 
to tell whether one's beliefs are justified, or at least 
be able (in some sense) to recognize, and so to 
attempt to avoid, the things that lead to having or 
to retaining unjustified beliefs. That justification 
has this internalist character may be argued for 
from a deontological conception of epistemic 
acceptability, on the ground that the right sort of 
ignorance obviates obligation. Or it might be 
stipulated, more or less, by picking out justified 
belief as the subjectively accessible aspect of 
knowledge (understanding that a mental state 
may wear the aspect of knowledge without actu-
ally being knowledge). In any case, whether or not 
one's belief is justified is commonly thought to 
depend only on subjectively accessible matters, 
such as one's own beliefs and experiences. 
So much for the assumptions about justi-
fication. Now for a few taxonomic stipulations. 
Coherentists hold that all justified beliefs are 
in effect justified by inferential relations to 
other beliefs. (This requires a broad concep-
tion of inferential support to be plausible.) 
Foundationalists hold on the contrary that some 
beliefs would be justified even if they had no such 
inferential supporting connections to other 
beliefs. The view that I will defend is foundation-
alist in this sense. It holds that some beliefs are or 
could be justified, not by the existence of any sup-
porting beliefs, but by a certain sort of relation to 
non-propositional experiences, together with the 
absence of undermining beliefs. Foundationalism 
proper also requires that all inferential support 
ultimately depends upon such basic beliefs, but I 
will not be discussing this further thesis. So much 
for taxonomy. 
A foundationalist view doesn't have to say that 
beliefs are justified by relations to experiences. 
There are views that are foundational in the sense 
just described but which do not assign any justi-
fying role to experiences. One such view is that all 
beliefs that have a certain kind of content are jus-
tified (e.g., those that are about one's own subjec-
tive perceptual states). Another is that all beliefs 
for which one has no countervailing reasons are 
justified. Still another view holds that there is 
something about the process of acquiring the 
belief apart from its relationship to experience 
that confers justification on it. One popular ver-
sion of this last view says, roughly, that a belief is 
justified if and only if it was acquired by a process 
that reliably produces true beliefs. 
But it is natural to think that a relationship to 
perceptual experience justifies at least some of 
our basic beliefs. On any plausible foundationa-
list view, many of the basic beliefs will be percep-
tual beliefs. That is, they will be beliefs caused by 
ordinary perceptual processes, such as seeing, 
hearing, smelling, tasting, and touching. In those 
processes, complex arrays of sensations are pro-
duced (we are assuming). It seems that these 
complex arrays of sensations, which I am calling 
"experiences", should have some role to play in 
justifying the resulting beliefs. If similar processes 
produced the same beliefs, but without produc-
ing any visual, auditory, etc., sensations, as per-
haps happens in the phenomenon of "blind-sight", 
we would not want to regard the resulting beliefs 
as justified. (And indeed patients who exhibit 
blind-sight abilities apparently do typically regard 
themselves as "just guessing".2) 
Some argue on the contrary that the sensa-
tional component of perception is just window 
dressing, and that the (reliable) causation of 
appropriate sorts of beliefs is the only epistemi-
cally relevant aspect of the perceptual process. 3 
But there is a strong temptation to think of the 

894 
STEVEN L. REYNOLDS 
sensational aspect of perception as epistemically 
relevant. Before we arm ourselves with philo-
sophical arguments to resist this temptation, per-
haps we should consider whether we can 
respectably embrace it. 
What sort of justifying relation could a non-
doxastic experience have to a belief? A first step 
toward answering this question would be to claim 
that justification requires an appropriate causal 
connection between the experience and the belief. 
For example, if, while at a party, I look absent-
mindedly across the room, and just guess that 
Sam is present, not noticing that he is in fact in 
view, then my belief is not justified. It doesn't 
have the appropriate causal connection to my 
visual experience. 
But the requirement of an appropriate causal 
connection is not specific enough to soothe 
doubts about the possibility of experiences justi-
fying beliefs. Why should we think that that a 
causal connection can be justifying? Causal con-
nections are naturalistically described, and justi-
fication is normative. We need to describe the 
experience-belief relation in enough detail to see 
how it captures the normative aspect of 
justification. 
II 
Alan Millar has attempted to show how non-
propositional experiences can help justify beliefs, 
by comparing the transition from experience to 
belief to the transition from beliefs to belief in 
inference. (John Pollock had earlier sketched a 
similar view of the relation of experience to justi-
fied belief, but not while trying to answer (at least 
explicitly) the worries that concern us.)4 On 
Millar's view, an experience of a certain type, and 
a belief that there are no undermining beliefs, 
play the role of premises in an argument-like 
structure whose conclusion is the justified belief. 
Millar classifies experiences according to the situ-
ations and objects that in fact typically produce 
them. An experience that could have been pro-
duced by a normal person's looking at a square 
yellow piece of paper in appropriate conditions is 
a square-yellow-piece-of-paper type experience. 
(This description of types of experience should 
not mislead us into thinking that, for Millar, the 
experience is about square yellow pieces of paper. 
The description just picks out a phenomenal type 
by its normal causal antecedents.) According to 
Millar, people who have such experiences, and 
have mastered the appropriate concepts, will tend 
to arrive at beliefs about square yellow pieces of 
paper in response to them. If such a person also 
believes that there are no facts that should under-
mine his belief, and this belief about the absence 
of undermining facts appropriately affects the 
transition from the experience to the perceptual 
belief, then the resulting perceptual belief is justi-
fied. The transition from experience and belief to 
belief is called a "quasi-inference". We learn to 
make appropriate quasi-inferences from experi-
ences to beliefs, Millar says, as a necessary part of 
mastering the concepts. 
Millar's claim that the recognitional abilities 
involved are required for the mastery of the con-
cepts seems dubious, for, as everyone now says, it 
seems that I might have beliefs about, say, elms, 
without being able to recognize elms. Perhaps 
however Millar intends to claim a connection 
between recognition and concepts, not for elms 
and other natural kinds, but only for concepts 
such as those of colors. But then what is the justi-
ficational status of recognizing elms? Does the 
lack of a recognition-concept connection imply 
thatthe quasi-inferences one makes in recognizing 
elms won't justify beliefs about elms? Or is the 
recognition-concept connection not really neces-
sary for experiential justification? (Although he 
doesn't say so, it may be that he wants that con-
nection because concepts are naturally connected 
to truth, and he wants to connect justification 
and truth.) 
John L. Pollock also claims that the epistemic 
norms relevant to the justification of a belief are 
determined by the concepts involved (where the 
norms could be expressed as rules for arriving at 
beliefs, apparently including perceptual recogni-
tional beliefs). He motivates this claim in part by 
arguing that it rules out a kind of epistemic rela-
tivism that he dislikes. 5 According to this sort of 
epistemic relativism, it is possible for there to be 
two people who hold the same belief, on the same 
grounds (such as being in the same non-doxastic 
perceptual state), but one is justified and the other 
is not. Their justification in holding the belief 
differs because they differ in the epistemic norms 
to which they happen to be committed. This sort 
of relativism is ruled out by Pollock's thesis 

HOW TO BELIEVE WITH JUSTIFICATION 
895 
(and presumably also by Millar's), for if the rele-
vant epistemic norms for a belief are determined 
by the concepts involved in that belief, everyone 
who holds a particular belief is thereby commit-
ted to the same epistemic norms for it. So this 
sort of relativism is false. 
Pollock handles the difficulty about elms by 
holding that two people may both have the same 
belief about elms, in one sense of "same belief", 
without having the same concept of elms.6 There 
are different ways of thinking of the attribute 
of being an elm, that is to say, different concepts of 
being an elm, and people who have different con-
cepts in this sense may nevertheless have the same 
belief. The relativism he rules out then applies 
only to beliefs individuated very narrowly - it will 
still be possible for two people to have exactly 
similar experiences, and the same belief in 
response (in the coarser, but much more usual 
sense of "same belief"), and yet one is justified 
and the other is not. So there may be ways to suc-
cessfully finesse the apparent counterexamples to 
theses connecting recognitional abilities and con-
cept possession. 
The other problem with Millar's (and 
Pollock's) account seems to run much deeper. 
Millar wants us to think of the transition from 
experience to belief as somehow like an inference. 
He calls it a "quasi -inference", and he even presents 
it in an argument-like format. It is fairly clear why 
he does. He wants us to accept the transition from 
an experience to a belief as justifying that belief. 
Appropriate inferential transitions are uncontro-
versially justifying, so, naturally, he wants to 
present the experience-belief transition as analo-
gous, in its normative aspects, to such inferences. 
But how is the experience-belief transition like 
an inference? 
Inferences are typically transitions from old 
beliefs to new. (The exceptions are cases where an 
already existing belief acquires new support, but 
they don't pose any special problems here.) One 
starts off, for example, with the beliefs that busi-
ness executives tend to be impatient, and that Sam 
is a business executive, and one moves from these 
pre-existing beliefs to the new belief that Sam is 
likely to be impatient. But not just any transition 
from old beliefs to new beliefs counts as an infer-
ence. The old beliefs must be regarded (in some 
sense) by the believer as having a relevant logical 
or evidential relation to the new belief.? 
The norms for inferential transitions among 
beliefs are apparently analogous to the norms by 
which we evaluate arguments (although there are 
important differences between the norms of 
argument and the norms for inferential transi-
tions among beliefs8). Thus in order to apply the 
norms of inference to determine the quality of a 
particular inference, one needs to know (at least) 
what relevant logical or evidential relations there 
are between the old and new beliefs, just as one 
needs to know the logical or evidential relations 
among premises and conclusion in order to deter-
mine the quality of an argument. 
But the analogy to arguments, which seems 
fairly strong in the case of genuine inferences, 
completely breaks down for Millar's quasi-
inferences from experiences and beliefs to 
beliefs. For experiences just aren't like the 
premises of arguments. They don't, and can't, 
have evidential or logical relations to the result-
ing beliefs, because they can't be true. So the 
truth-preserving norms that we apply to argu-
ments evidently cannot be applied, even with 
modifications, to the experience-belief transi-
tion. But if those kinds of norms can't be 
applied, then it is not clear yet whether any 
other sort can be. Thus Millar's attempt to 
present the experience-belief transition as nor-
mative, by analogizing it to the undoubtedly 
normative inferential transition, fails. 
III 
But Millar's general strategy for answering doubts 
about whether experiences can justify beliefs 
seems to me to be very promising. The idea is to 
find a process which everyone accepts, or can be 
brought to accept, as normative in the right way, 
and then show it to be relevantly analogous to the 
transition from experience to belief. The com-
parison with inference doesn't work. But perhaps 
we can find a more appropriate comparison. 
We might compare epistemic evaluation to the 
moral evaluation of actions. It has been held, for 
example, that one has epistemic duties to believe, 
or to refrain from believing, certain things in cer-
tain circumstances.9 This suggests that the proc-
esses that lead to unjustified belief can be 
understood as analogous to actions in violation 
of moral duties. 

896 
STEVEN L. REYNOLDS 
But it is difficult to see how to develop this 
analogy in order to make it plausible that the 
transition from experience to belief has a similar 
normative aspect, perhaps because we are not 
very clear about the details of the normative 
structure of our moral evaluations. Are moral 
norms expressible in rules? If so, what kinds of 
rules? What are the relevant underlying properties 
of actions in terms of which such rules should be 
framed? We don't have uncontroversial answers 
to these questions, and the attempted answers we 
do have (utilitarianism, rights theories, virtue 
theories etc.) don't initially seem very promising 
as analogies to perceptual justification. 
So I don't think that either of these paradigms, 
the logical evaluation of arguments, or the moral 
evaluation of actions, is likely to help us under-
stand, by analogy, the normative aspect of per-
ceptual believing. 
But there is another normative paradigm 
worth considering seriously for this sort of 
project. If is our evaluations of the correctness of 
particular exercises of learned skills. 10 
Think of a student playing a piece at the piano 
from sheet music. We can talk about whether he is 
playing the piece correctly - whether he gets all of 
the indicated notes, in the right order, with the 
appropriate rhythm, dynamics, accents and 
phrasing. This sort of evaluation does not involve 
the difficulties and vaguenesses of true aesthetic 
evaluation - we're not asking whether his per-
formance counts as music, but just whether it's 
correctly played, according to the generally 
accepted standards of proper piano technique. 
Or think of someone speaking a natural lan-
guage such as English. We can evaluate the sen-
tences he produces for phonetic and grammatical 
correctness. There is 
clearly a normative 
dimension to the exercises of these skills. The 
performances are reliably evaluated as acceptable 
or unacceptable according to publicly known 
standards. 
The standards for correctness in the exercises 
of these skills are taught to new performers and 
critics primarily by bringing to their attention 
examples of good performance and secondarily 
by expressing disapproval of performances that 
don't meet the standards. Rules for correct per-
formance are rarely stated. But if we were to try to 
articulate in words the standards involved, we 
would presumably have to express them in rules. 
Thus books on piano technique usually include 
lots of advice phrased as rules, and attempted 
grammars for natural languages take the form of 
systems of rules for forming acceptable sentences. 
Of course it is understood that the performers 
usually cannot state such rules in anything like 
sufficient detail, and they certainly don't explic-
itly consider such rules in the course of exercising 
their skills. Nevertheless, if we had a complete 
system of rules, one that really articulated all of 
the standards of correct performance at the piano, 
say, we could characterize any particular mistake 
(that a fully competent performer or critic would 
recognize as such) as a violation of the rules. And 
we could see the performer's attempts to meet the 
standards of acceptable performance as a matter 
of trying to follow the rules. 
There is a bit of metaphor involved in calling 
this "rule following", but only a bit. If we are going 
to talk about skills in any detail, it seems that 
characterizing them in terms of rules is unavoid-
able. So the relation to these rules of the person 
who intentionally performs correctly may as well 
be called "following" them, provided we keep in 
mind that he doesn't (and often can't) state or 
consult them. 
Another very important point for our pur-
poses is that the exercise of these skills does not 
itself require one to have beliefs, either about the 
rules, or about the circumstances of the anteced-
ent clauses of those rules. "Whenever you are in 
such and such circumstances, do so and so" says 
the rule. But to "follow" it, in the sense we have in 
mind, a performer need not believe that he is in 
such and such circumstances, at least not in any 
ordinary sense of "believe", such as concerns us 
while we are doing epistemology. I I His ability to 
perform correctly is a matter of knowing how, 
which is not to be reduced to any kind of know-
ing, or even believing, that. The possession of a 
skill for speaking a language or performing music 
is not plausibly regarded as a matter of possessing 
great heaps of wonderfully detailed and instantly 
accessible propositional knowledge. (This point 
is obviously important for an account of 
perceptual justification that makes it analogous 
to correctness in exercising a skill, because deny-
ing that such exercises involve beliefs will avert 
otherwise threatening regresses of justification.) 
Although he doesn't have beliefs that would 
enable him to usefully consult a rule book of the 

HOW TO BELIEVE WITH JUSTIFICATION 
897 
sort we have been imagining, the performer is 
nevertheless constantly aware of whether he 
is performing correctly. He monitors the process 
of performing, in some sort of non-doxastic way, 
avoiding or correcting mistakes. So correctness in 
exercising a skill seems to be "internal" in the way 
that we expect justification to be. 
I claim that the normative aspect of perceptual 
justification is best understood by analogy with 
the correctness of such exercises of skills. We have 
learned how to respond to particular sorts of 
experiences by acquiring the appropriate sorts of 
beliefs. To put it more in the language of the thesis 
stated above: We have recognitional skills, which 
we exercise in arriving at our perceptual beliefs. If 
the skill has been properly learned, and the par-
ticular exercise of it is up to certain public stand-
ards, and the believer does not have other 
undermining beliefs, then the resulting perceptual 
belief counts as justified. 
IV 
I doubt that anyone is going to object to calling 
our perceptual recognitional abilities "skills': It is, 
after all, only ordinary language, or something 
pretty close. Ordinary language admits the exist-
ence of skilled judges of music or horses or wines 
or paintings. Part of what makes them skilled 
judges is that they are more capable of arriving at 
justified perceptual beliefs about their subject 
matter than are others who lack their talent and 
training. They are more sensitive to the relevant 
perceptual differences than are people who 
haven't had similar instruction and practice. But 
the differences to which they are sensitive are rele-
vantly similar to the features that we become sen-
sitive to in learning to recognize people and 
objects. So no one could reasonably refuse to call 
our recognitional abilities "skills", though some 
may want to claim that there are important dif-
ferences between these recognitional skills and 
such skills as skill in playing the piano. 
As in the cases of playing piano or speaking a 
natural language, there are public standards for 
correctly arriving at one's perceptual beliefs. 
Think of a defense attorney cross-examining a wit-
ness to a crime. She may ask questions designed 
to show that he lacks the relevant recognitional 
skills (the ability to recognize a particular person, 
or a certain kind of gun, for example), or that cir-
cumstances were such that he could not, or at 
least did not, effectively exercise those skills (dis-
tractions, obstructions of his view, etc.). If the 
questions succeed, they will show that the wit-
ness's beliefs were not justified, for they will show 
that, in the circumstances, he should not have 
acquired the perceptual beliefs he has expressed. 
Very likely he will then feel some embarrassment 
about having held those beliefs. The jury can tell 
from the appropriate answers to the questions 
whether or not the standards for the acquisition 
of perceptual beliefs are likely to have been vio-
lated. So there must be public standards, public 
not in the sense that others can follow the rules by 
responding to the same experiences the performer 
does, but in the sense that others have ways of 
telling whether the recognitional standards the 
witness has have been properly learned and 
adequately complied with. 
The witness's capacity to respond to the ques-
tions in a revealing way also seems to indicate that 
these standards are internally applicable, at least 
at the time of acquiring the beliefs. ("The shape 
of his chin did seem a little odd at the time, I must 
admit.") Memory may fail to reveal the incorrect-
ness later, but the believer was able to tell, at the 
time, whether he was arriving at his perceptual 
beliefs correctly. 
Some people may still doubt however whether 
these so-called perceptual skills are relevantly 
similar to the skills of piano playing and speaking 
a natural language. 
There are three apparent dis analogies: 1) The 
normative aspect of exercises of skills such as 
playing the piano or speaking English can be seen 
as a matter of "following rules': But how can we 
ever hope to see perceptual judgments as a matter 
of following rules? How could one hope to write 
rules for perceptual judgment? 2) Arriving at per-
ceptual beliefs on having experiences doesn't 
seem to be something that one does, in the way 
that one speaks or plays the piano. It seems to be 
something that just happens, like digestion. But if 
so, then, again, how could it be a matter of 
"following" prescriptive rules? 3) Correctness in 
exercises of the skills of piano playing and speak-
ing English seems to be largely a matter of arbi-
trary cultural history. But epistemic justification 
is not a matter of arbitrary cultural history; cul-
tural variation in standards of justification seems 

898 
STEVEN L. REYNOLDS 
to be constrained by a close relationship between 
justification and truth. But how could there be 
such a relationship on the skills account? 
v 
Let us take these apparent disanalogies in order. 
For the first question, as to whether any system of 
rules could describe our transitions from the pat-
terns of experience to beliefs, we have a model at 
hand in the attempts to write visual recognition 
programs for computer driven robots. Presumably 
those programs are roughly akin to the sets of 
rules that would (if we could only write them) 
capture the recognitional skills of a human being. 
The rules for the experience-belief transition 
would collectively prescribe beliefs of certain 
types as responses to appropriate patterns in sen-
sory input, or in experience, where the patterns 
might be described, perhaps, in terms of sensory 
qualities occupying regions of a sensory field. 
We can now try to explain the term "adequate 
exercise". An adequate exercise of a recognitional 
skill conforms to the rules that would capture 
that skill. 
Most of the complications found in describing 
the patterns of experience to which one responds 
in recognition presumably have no particular 
philosophical interest, and are best left to experi-
mentally oriented cognitive scientists. One of the 
advantages of giving up the claim that having rec-
ognitional abilities is somehow constitutive of 
having the concepts, or of understanding the 
meanings of the corresponding words, is that we 
aren't tempted to suppose, as perhaps some of the 
sense-data theorists did, that describing our rec-
ognitional abilities is equivalent to providing 
definitions, or elucidating ideas, and should 
therefore be capable of being done a priori. 
I don't think recognitional skills can be 
described a priori. But I do have some specula-
tions to offer about the structure of our recogni-
tional abilities. 
Experience is amorphous stuff, not easy to 
divide up into separate experiences. But suppose 
we agree to think of a person's total visual sensa-
tions over a period of a few seconds, as organized, 
as a single visual experience. We will distinguish 
types of such experiences by phenomenal quality-
say, if it's phenomenally indistinguishable in 
(accurate) memory, then it's the same type 
of experience. Note that Millar's classification of 
experiences is much coarser than this - on my 
classification 
scheme 
square-yellow-piece-of-
paper Millar-type experiences are broken down 
into a vast number of phenomenally distinguish-
able experiences that might be caused, in part, by 
visual contact with a square yellow piece of paper. 
The finer individuation is desirable for talking 
about learning recognitional skills. 
It seems that I am constantly having experi-
ences of phenomenal types I have not had 
before, in response to which I arrive at beliefs of 
types that I have not had before. And it seems 
that the number of types of experiences that I 
can have, and the number of resulting types of 
beliefs, are practically unlimited. But how can 
any finite and learnable skill have this sort of 
protean creativity? 
This question echoes the familiar question 
about how we can understand an indefinitely 
large number of sentences that we haven't heard 
before. The natural answer to it is similar - we 
must understand our skills for arriving at 
perceptually justified beliefs as being com-
pounded of lesser skills which can be combined 
and re-combined in a practically unlimited 
number of ways. My ability to be perceptually 
justified in believing that Sam is standing in the 
doorway will somehow be composed of my sev-
eral abilities to recognize Sam, the posture of 
standing, the doorway, and instances of the rela-
tion of being in. Each of these abilities can also be 
used in responding to many other experiences of 
types that I have never had before - such as when 
I come to believe that Irving, whom I have previ-
ously only seen in a seated posture, is standing. 
So it seems that our perceptual skills for 
appropriately arriving at beliefs must be com-
posed of re-combinable sub-skills, which, appar-
ently, roughly correspond to some of the nouns 
and predicates of our language. Arriving at the 
justified perceptual belief that Sam is standing 
requires recognizing the referent of "Sam", by, for 
example, a pattern of visual qualities produced by 
light reflected from his face; it requires recogniz-
ing an instantiation of the predicate "is standing", 
by another pattern of visual qualities; and (to jus-
tify the combination) it requires recognizing the 
appropriate arrangement in the experience of the 
(facial) pattern for "Sam" and the (bodily) pattern 

HOW TO BELIEVE WITH JUSTIFICATION 
899 
for "is standing': Since the ability to recognize a 
pattern is presumably also the ability to tell when 
it is absent, justifiedly coming to believe that Sam 
is not standing also requires an exercise of the 
same abilities. One will be responding to the facial 
pattern for "Sam': and the absence, in any appro-
priate relation to the pattern for "Sam", of the pat-
tern for "is standing". Perhaps for the perceptual 
belief that someone is standing one would only 
need to exercise the ability to recognize the 
(humani-form) visual pattern for "is standing". 
These analogies between the structure of our 
recognitional abilities and the linguistic struc-
tures in which we express the resulting beliefs 
may help explain why we are tempted to say that 
we see what makes a certain sentence true, or that 
we perceive the fact that corresponds to the sen-
tence. It also suggests some tenuous connection 
between truth and justification by recognitional 
skills, although I won't be relying on this sort of 
connection in reply to that objection. 
This account may appear to be at odds with 
Quine's epistemology. He connects observation 
sentences, not terms, with experiences. 12 But the 
provision for undermining perceptual justifica-
tion retains the most considerable part of Quine's 
holism; on this view empirical justification is not 
independent of systematic considerations. And 
Quine himself has taken a small step in the direc-
tion of connecting terms with sensory stimula-
tions in his suggestion that some predications, 
such as "This pebble is blue", are compoundings 
of observation sentences. 13 
VI 
The second objection holds that, unlike playing 
the piano or speaking a language, perceptually 
coming to believe is not something that one 
does. 14 It just happens, like digestion, so it doesn't 
make sense to call it a skill in the full sense of the 
word "skill". Of course we can evaluate it as work-
ing well or ill, as we could evaluate the workings 
of someone's digestive system, but we cannot 
evaluate it as a performance, and so regard it as 
correct or incorrect. On this view the rules that 
might be stated by cognitive scientists studying 
our recognitional processes should not be 
regarded as rules in the sense of prescriptions; 
instead they are generalizations about the process. 
They are more like scientific laws for normal bio-
logical systems than they are like the laws of a 
nation. We follow such rules only in the sense in 
which we might be said to follow rules that 
describe the process of (normal) digestion. But 
then the normative aspect of the transition from 
experience to belief disappears, since the pre-
scriptive rules in which we had hoped to repre-
sent it now appear to be instead only idealized 
factual generalizations. 
Presumably the reason for holding that per-
ceptual processes just happen is that they seem 
to be quite automatic, and not under our con-
scious control. But a process can be quite auto-
matic, and even out of one's conscious control, 
and yet still be an instance of the exercise of a 
skill in the full, normatively governed sense. 
Indeed, the transition from deliberate, control-
led, "doing" of constituent actions to their 
"automatic" performance is typically required 
for mastery of a skill. Compare a beginning 
piano player's laborious and deliberate search 
for the correct keys with the expert player's 
automatic reaching for them, or the novice fenc-
er's slow, deliberate actions with the expert's 
"reflexive" responses. Or compare a chess novice's 
deliberate assessment of the material advan-
tage by tabulating the pieces on each side with 
the expert's instantaneous and practically 
involuntary assessment. 
The process of acquiring new perceptual skills 
evinces a similar distinction between novice and 
expert. A novice first identifies elms slowly and 
deliberately, looking for particular distinguishing 
features. With practice, this process becomes 
quicker, until at last she can't help but recognize 
an elm at a glance. 
The objection thus seems to be claiming, 
absurdly, that we should stop regarding recogni-
tion as normatively governed just at the point 
where full proficiency is reached. 
But it may be replied that control is necessary 
for normative evaluation to be appropriate. If the 
unjustified believer lacks control, he could not be 
at fault. In answer we may say that sufficient con-
trol is exercised in acquiring, or failing to acquire, 
appropriate instruction and practice, and in con-
trolling the circumstances - e.g. making sure one 
gets a good look. 
So I don't think it is plausible to hold that per-
ceptual processes fail to be performances in any 

900 
STEVEN L. REYNOLDS 
way that threatens our normative characterization 
of them as exercises of skills. 
VII 
The final objection holds that the skills account 
cannot or will not include a close relation of jus-
tification to truth, and that it consequently threat-
ens to leave justification too dependent on the 
vagaries of cultural and individual development 
of epistemic norms. 
A more or less standard account of the rela-
tion of truth and justification sees truth as a goal, 
and justification as an evaluation relative to that 
goal. One is justified if and only if one believes as 
one ought. This "ought" is understood on the 
model of the "ought" that occurs in "If you want 
go to the market, you ought to turn right at the 
second stop sign". It indicates advice about how to 
achieve a goal. Roughly speaking, the epistemic 
goal is to acquire true beliefs and avoid false 
beliefs. This goal is not often explicitly stated, 
since it is assumed that everyone has it, or, per-
haps, more cautiously, that striving to realize this 
goal is a defining characteristic of the epistemic 
enterprise, so that advice in epistemic contexts 
always presupposes it. 15 
One might try to depict exercises of recogni-
tional skills as always being focused, somehow, 
on a goal of truth, as one might try to depict exer-
cises of piano playing skills as always aiming at a 
goal of beauty. But that seems most implausible. 
I doubt that most perceptual believers have a goal 
of truth, in any straightforward sense of "have a 
goal", and I know for a fact that not all piano stu-
dents have beauty as their goal. Often they're only 
seeking to avoid embarrassing mistakes. They just 
want to play it correctly, as they were taught. 
It seems more plausible to regard "epistemi-
cally justified", not as an evaluation relative to a 
goal of achieving true and avoiding false beliefs, 
but instead as an evaluation indicating an accept-
able degree of conformity to epistemic norms. In 
the case of perceptual beliefs, it indicates an 
acceptable degree of conformity to the rules that 
would describe the appropriate recognitional 
skill. 
What relation does justification then have to 
truth? I think that a tendency to produce true 
beliefs causally explains why we are committed to 
certain epistemic norms. It is true, on my view, 
that certain practices of belief acquisition are jus-
tifying because they tend to produce true beliefs. 
But the "because" indicates, not a goal, but the 
salient aspect of a causal explanation of our adop-
tion of the epistemic norms that permit such 
belief acquisition. 
First, notice that recognitional skills, if they 
are to be justifying, have to be properly learned. 
For example, ordinarily I would learn to recog-
nize a particular person, Sam Smith, when he is 
pointed out to me, or introduced to me. Let us 
suppose instead that I know him by reputation, 
but not by sight. I acquire a recognitional skill 
associated with his name in the following way. At 
a large meeting where I expect him to be present 
I notice, among many people whom I do not 
know, someone whom I think may be Sam Smith. 
I look at this person several times, fixing his 
appearance in my memory. 
Later, not recollecting these events, I see this 
same man coming out of Mae's restaurant, and, 
in response to the visual experience thus pro-
duced, I come to believe that Sam Smith is coming 
out of Mae's. I have a recognitional skill which I 
use on this occasion, yet my belief that Sam Smith 
is coming out of Mae's is not justified. The reason 
seems to be that I haven't properly learned how 
to recognize Sam Smith (even if this man is 
Sam Smith). 
Similar stories could be told about my abilities 
to recognize instantiations of various predicates. 
It thus seems that recognitional skills have to be 
properly learned to be capable of helping justify 
the perceptual beliefs they give rise to. 
Now think of our earliest acquisitions of rec-
ognitional skills, when, as children, we learned to 
distinguish and name such things as colors, 
shapes, common objects, and a few people. It is 
most implausible that a small child has any goal 
of truth in learning these skills. He has various 
other goals: finding Mama, taking food, seeing a 
certain color, avoiding falling, chewing on some-
thing soft but resistant, gaining parental 
approval. 
He responds to a particular sort of experience, 
when he is hungry, by reaching and grabbing. If 
the experience is of a certain kind, by so doing he 
successfully satisfies his hunger. As this is repeated 
he learns to believe that there is food in front of 
him in response to this sort of experience. If such 

HOW TO BELIEVE WITH JUSTIFICATION 
901 
beliefs are likely to be true when he is having that 
sort of experience, the actions guided by the 
beliefs thus arrived at will frequently be success-
ful. The successes encourage similar beliefs in 
response to similar experiences in the future. The 
behavior guided by these beliefs also brings 
approval or correction from others. (I mention 
the role of other people because I think there is 
something to the Kripke-Wittgenstein claim that 
prescriptive rules are possible only in a commu-
nity.ln) He thus gradually adopts as a perceptual 
norm this pattern of believing in response to that 
sort of experience. 
The likelihood of developing true beliefs when 
responding to experiences as a norm requires is 
thus typically a part of the causal explanation of 
someone's adopting that perceptual norm. 
Being likely to produce true beliefs is not 
essential to a properly learned recognitional skill 
however. If someone fraudulently introduces 
himself to me as Sam Smith, then I will acquire a 
recognitional skill that will typically lead me to 
have false beliefs about Sam Smith. But so long as 
I exercise this skill properly, and do not acquire 
any new reason to doubt it, the resulting beliefs 
will be justified. A properly learned recognitional 
skill is just a skill confirmed by successful actions 
and (a certain kind of) approval from other 
members of the community. 
Should this soothe fears that the skills approach 
is prone to a bad sort of cultural or individual 
relativism? If my conjectures are roughly correct 
(and no doubt they need refinement), then, pre-
sumably, accepted epistemic practices which seem 
to us not to justify the resulting beliefs, fail to do 
so, in our opinion, because we think that some 
other pressures guided their adoption. They were 
adopted for some reason other than success in the 
resulting actions and the appropriate approval 
from the community. The dubious epistemic 
practices of primitive societies are seldom purely 
recognitional in character. But perhaps the fol-
lowing case sufficiently illustrates this point. 
A man has a powerful desire to find rare minerals 
easily. After finishing a good mineral identifica-
tion course involving frequent correction by 
experts, this man, although he has normal visual 
acuity and color vision, confidently identifies 
various worthless stones as rare minerals. 
Evidently he has failed to benefit from correction 
while he was learning. The norms he has in fact 
adopted were shaped not by success in his actions 
or by the approval or disapproval of his instruc-
tors, but by his desire to see himself as easily find-
ing rare minerals. So his recognitional skills have 
not been properly learned, and, consequently, 
exercises of them are not justifying. Other socie-
ties' adoption of epistemic norms which seem to 
us not to be justifying will also, on examination, 
be found to have been wrongly influenced, per-
haps by religion or politics, and so to have been 
improperly learned. The skills approach will thus 
rule that these practices are not epistemically jus-
tifying. 
Now we are in a position to answer a final 
question about the relation between experience 
and truth. We assumed that an experience isn't 
propositional and isn't about anything. But by 
way of it, it seems, we can learn the truth. How is 
that possible? 
I think that the experience conveys informa-
tion of the truth in question, in somewhat the 
way that a dinosaur footprint in rock conveys 
information about the dinosaur. The rock isn't 
about the dinosaur, but by looking at it we can 
learn about the dinosaur. 
Experiences differ from fossils in that experi-
ences are typically not objects of thought for the 
person who obtains beliefs in response to them. 
He doesn't have beliefs about the experience as 
the paleontologist has beliefs about the fossil. So 
perhaps in some ways my experience is typically 
more like the electronic signal in a telephone line -
although it brings me information, I don't think 
about that signal when receiving the telephone 
messages. Likewise, although the experience 
brings me information, I don't usually think 
about the experience itself. I just process the 
information from the experience into a belief 
that really is about the objects the information 
comes from. 
This distinction between merely carrying 
information and being genuinely about some-
thing is a slippery one, but I think that the exam-
ples strongly suggest that it is genuine. The visual 
experience I have carries the information that 
Bernie is standing in the door, but I don't have 
any mental state that is about Bernie just in virtue 
of having that experience. Even if I do acquire a 
belief about Bernie in response to it, it will still be 
true that that very same complex mass of sensa-
tions was carrying lots of other information about 

902 
STEVEN L. REYNOLDS 
things that I probably didn't acquire any beliefs, 
or other propositional mental states, about -
lighting patterns, shapes etc. There is a mass of 
detailed information in that array of sensations, 
only some of which was processed into proposi-
tional mental states. 17 
Notes 
Donald Davidson, "A Coherence Theory of 
Truth and Knowledge" in Kant Oder Hegel: 
Stuttgart: Klett-Cotta 1983, p. 428, reprinted in 
E. LePore (ed.) Truth and Interpretation (Oxford, 
1986) p. 311. Laurence BonJour, The Structure of 
Empirical Knowledge (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1985), pp. 69, 75. 
2 1. 
Weiskrantz, 
"Varieties 
of 
Residual 
Experience" Quarterly Journal of Experimental 
Psychology, XXXIII, 3 (1980), pp. 365-86. See 
especially pp. 371, 374, 378. 
3 Donald Davidson, "A Coherence Theory" p. 
428, Laurence BonJour, The Structure of 
Empirical Knowledge, pp. 111-38. 
4 Alan Millar, "Experience and the Justification 
of Belief", Ratio (New Series) II, 2 December 
1989, pp. l38-52. John 1. Pollock, Contem-
porary Theories of Knowledge (Savage, MD: 
Rowman & Littlefield, 1986), pp. 175-7. 
5 John 1. Pollock, Contemporary Theories of 
Knowledge, pp. 148, 175-7. It is also supposed 
to be useful in replying to skepticism. John 1. 
Pollock, 
Knowledge 
and 
Justification, 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1974), 
pp.20-2. 
6 John 
1. Pollock, 
The 
Foundations 
of 
Philosophical Semantics (Princeton: Princeton 
University Press, 1984), Chapter 2. 
7 Millar, "Experience", p. 140. 
8 Gilbert Harman, Change in View: Principles 
of Reasoning (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
1986), pp. 1-20. 
9 Laurence BonJour, The Structure of Empirical 
Knowledge, chapter 1, John 1. Pollock, 
Contemporary Theories of Knowledge, pp. 
7-8, Roderick M. Chisholm, Theory of 
The information contained in the experience 
has to be processed to result in a perceptual belief. 
I have argued that this processing is normatively 
governed in such a way that it is appropriate to 
think of it, and so of the experience, as capable of 
helping to justify the resulting belief. 
Knowledge (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1989), pp. 58-60. For argument against, 
see William P. Alston "The Deontological 
Conception of Epistemic Justification" in his 
Epistemic Justification: Essays in the Theory 
of Knowledge (Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1989), pp. 115-52. 
10 
The analogy has been used for other pur-
poses. John 1. Pollock, Knowledge and 
Justification 15, and Contemporary Theories 
of Knowledge, pp. 126-32. 
11 
For senses that are not ordinary, see Daniel 
C. 
Dennett, 
The 
International 
Stance 
(Cambridge MA: MIT Press 1987). 
12 
Willard Van Orman Quine, Word and Object 
(Cambridge MA: The MIT Press 1960). 
l3 
W. V. Quine, Pursuit of Truth, (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1990), p. 4. 
14 
For discussion of the related issue of doxas-
tic voluntarism, see William P. Alston, "The 
Deontological Conception of Epistemic 
Justification" pp. 119-33, Richard Feldman 
"Epistemic Obligation" in James E. Tomberlin 
ed. Philosophical Perspectives, 2 (Atascadero: 
Ridgeview, 1988), p. 239, Alvin 1. Goldman, 
Epistemology and Cognition (Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard, 1986), pp. 26, 384 n. 6. 
15 
One statement of this standard account is in 
BonJour, 
The 
Structure 
of Empirical 
Knowledge pp. 7-8. 
16 
Saul A. Kripke, Wittgenstein on Rules and 
Private Language (Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1982), pp. 88-93. 
17 
Fred Dretske, Knowledge and the Flow of 
Information (Cambridge MA: MIT Press), 
1981, chapter 6. 

Index 
a fortiori knowledge 
511 
a priori knowledge 
402 
Acceptance Principle 
840-9 
Chisholm and 
106 
contextual 
524 
debates and approaches to 
595-6 
experience and 437 
intuition 
613,649,650 
mathematics and 586-8 
memory and 804 
methodology 
388-90 
Minimal Principle of Contradiction 524-5 
Principle of Contradiction 
586-92 
Quine rejects 
585-7,591-4 
reliabilism and 525, 602-9 
rules of inference 
655-6 
source of belief 525 
unrevisability thesis 
596-602 
"A Priori Knowledge and the Scope of Philosophy" 
(Bealer) 
612-21 
Acceptance Principle 
defined 
840 
justification 840-9 
reading 847-9 
acquaintance, Russell's Principle of 219 
actuality, rule of: Gettier cases and 708-9,713-14 
''Against Gullibility" (Fricker) 
815-33 
agency 
performance evaluation 
482-4 
three sorts of 484 
wise action 
485-6 
Alston, William P. 
choices 
381 
evidentialism 429 
externalism and 
366, 404-5 
higher order beliefs 
415-17 
justifiers 
380 
The Reliability of Sense Perception 
404 
Alternatives: relevant 
244-5, 251-3 
An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation 
(Lewis) 
89 
Antony, Louise M. 
523-4 
"Quine as Feminist" 552-78 
appearance 
396-7 
arbitrariness 
harmless 
l70-1 
Principle of Avoiding 
166-8 
"Are There Counterexamples to the Closure 
Principle?" (Vogel) 
290-9 
Aristotle 
fallacy of coherentism 42 
justification 
83 
Metaphysics 
174 
Nichomachean Ethics 
477 
Posterior Analytics 
174-5 
seeking precision 
440 
sensible characteristics 
158 
virtues and vices 
442, 487 
Armstrong, D. M. 
antecedents of belief 546 
Belief, Truth and Knowledge 
114-15, 
248-9,366 
direct/indirect knowledge 
395 
externalism 
365 
noninferential knowledge 
398 
reliability criterion 
366-7,368-9,370 

904 
INDEX 
"The Assessment Sensitivity of Knowledge 
Attributions" (MacFarlane) 
779-96 
attention, rule of 665, 698-9, 702 
Cohen on 
707 
Audi, Robert 
172, 855 
on internalism 
407 
Augustine of Hippo 
87,89 
Austin, J. L. 
99, 103,252,432 
axiology, see values and valuing; virtue 
Ayer, A. 1. 
52, 564 
Bacon, Francis 
57 
Baker, Gordon 
879 
Baker, Judith 
803 
"Trust and Rationality" 807-14 
Baltimore, David 
431 
Bealer, George 
525 
"A Priori Knowledge and the Scope of 
Philosophy" 
612-21 
objects to naturalism 
655-7 
Philosophical Limits of Science 
616 
standard justification procedures 
647,649-50 
Belief, Truth and Knowledge (Armstrong) 
114-15, 
248-9,366 
beliefs 
assertion 
503-5 
base-clause principles 
334-8 
basic 
364-5 
causal connection 
196-201 
coherence theory and 
126-32 
epistemic acceptance 
507-9 
foundherentism 
137-43 
higher order 
415-17 
justifying 
307 
knowledge and relation to knowing 
192-3, 
224-8 
Lewis's rule of 711-16 
misleading evidence 
769 
Nozick's conditions for knowledge 
255-62 
open to doubt 
493 
probabilistic rules of acceptance 
194-6 
process of forming 
338-45 
qualifying as truth 
477-80 
rationality of 544-5 
stored 
412-13 
true enough 
428 
voluntarism 
381 
what may not be ignored 
695-6 
wishful 
307 
Benacerraf, Paul 
595,608 
Bentham, Jeremy 
531 
Blanshard, Brand: The Nature of Thought 
84,89 
BonJou~Laurence 40,307,447,648,892 
"Can Empirical Knowledge Have a 
Foundation?" 
109-20 
"Externalist Theories of Empirical 
Knowledge" 
363-76 
internalism 
407,608-9 
justification 
76, 169-70 
Norman, case of 369-71 
on a priori and naturalism 
655,657 
reliabilism 
317, 351 
Burge, Tyler 
613,804,855 
"Content Preservation" 836-49 
Campbell, Donald T. 
535-6 
"Can Empirical Knowledge Have a Foundation?" 
(BonJour) 
109-20 
Cappelen, Herman: The Collective Description Test 
(with Lepore) 
728 
Carey, Susan 
572 
Carnap, Rudolf 
acceptance rules 
85 
external statements 
68 
logical positivism 
533 
Der logische Aujbau der Welt 
530, 531, 540-1 
"Testability and Meaning" 
531 
Cartwright, Nancy 
515 
Castaneda, H. N. 
434 
Casullo, Albert 
525 
"Revisability, Reliabilism and A Priori 
Knowledge" 
595-609 
causality 
402 
belief-forming process 
338 
connections to belief 
196-201 
explanatory reasons 
242 
relation to senses 
543 
"Certainty" (Moore) 
4,31-4 
Charity Principle 
849 
Cherniak, Christopher 
386 
Chisholm, Roderick M. 
75-6,341,366 
the a priori 
836-8 
on appearances 
396 
BonJour responds to 
109,112 
direct knowability 
381-2 
epistemic principles 
387,388 
justification 
380 
"The Myth of the Given" 
80-91 
obligation 
313, 364 
perception 
430 
refutes phenomenalism 
613 
self-presenting propositions 
335-6 
Sellars' response to 
94-8, 99-107 
Theory of Knowledge 
102, 335 
Chomsky, Noam 
565-6,572 
Circularity, Principle of Avoiding 
166-8 

INDEX 
905 
Clarke, Thompson 
68 
Clarke Jr, D. S. 
748 
closure, see epistemic closure 
Code, Lorraine 
555,560,561 
fairness of science 
566 
the knower 
570 
on mainstream epistemology 556-7 
standards for knowledge 
574-5 
cognition and cognitive ability 
acceptance 
511 
agent reliabilism 
469-70 
cognitive design plan 
425-6 
essentialism 
559-60 
intuitive knowledge 
102-3 
proper functioning of 429-34 
responsibility 467 
as a system 
488-9 
thinking 
446 
"Cognitive Responsibility and the Epistemic Virtues" 
(Pritchard) 
462-73 
Cohen, L. J. 
627 
Cohen, Stewart 
5,663,665,727 
"Contextualist Solutions to Epistemological 
Problems" 
706-20 
practical reasoning 
7 61 
coherence theory 39,40,42-3,61 
beliefs and sensations 
126-7 
combined with foundationalism 
134-43 
congruence and 
91 
critique of foundationalism 
147-9 
Davidson on 
76-7 
defining 
124-5 
formal foundationalism and 
77-8 
justification 
341, 385-6, 893 
meta-justification 
170 
Pyrrhonian problem 
75 
question-begging reasoning 
166 
raft metaphor 
146-7,160 
realism and 
125-6 
substantive foundationalism and 
153, 
156-7, 160 
truth 84 
"A Coherence Theory of Truth and Knowledge" 
(Davidson) 
l24-32 
coincidence and accident 
366-7 
The Collective Description Test (Cappelen and 
Lepore) 
728 
common sense 
Sosa on Moore 
235, 280-6 
trustworthiness 
823-33 
Completion Requirement 
176-7 
Conee,Earl 305-6,308-9,429 
"Evidentialism" (with Feldman) 
310-19 
"Internalism Defended" (with Feldman) 
407-17 
consequences 
241-5 
conservatism, rule of 697-8 
"Content Preservation" (Burge) 
836-49 
contextualism 5,65,663-7,771-3 
argument from ignorance 
677-8 
ascriber-dependence 
760; see also 
contextualism: sensitivity, speaker-
Cohen on 
706-7 
context-sensitive expressions 
665-6 
definition 
529-31; Carnap and 
531 
evaluating knowledge 
692 
knowledge ascriptions 
727-37 
Lewis's rules 
701-3 
MacFarlane's relativism 
789-96 
salience 
761-6 
semantic accommodation 
763 
sensitivity and 
678-81; see also sensitive belief 
skeptical arguments 
669-72,681-6 
skepticism and 
707-8,712 
speaker-sensitivity 
711-12,716-17; see also 
contextualism: ascriber-dependence 
subject-sensitivity, see invariantism, sensitive 
Subjunctive Conditionals Account (SCA) 
672-7,683 
types of 780-1 
uses of "know" 
781-2 
Williams on 
66-70 
"Contextualist Solutions to Epistemological 
Problems: Scepticism, Gettier and the Lottery" 
(Cohen) 
706-20 
contradiction, minimal principle of 524-5, 
586-92 
courage 
447,450 
creativity 
451 
"Criteria, Defeasibility, and Knowledge" 
(McDowell) 
876-87 
criteria for knowledge 
879-83 
cultural differences 
645-6 
epistemic intuitions 
629-38 
epistemic relativism 
638 
Intuition Driven Romanticism 
525 
philosophical relevance 
639-40 
curiosity: desire/need 
492 
Current Time-Slice theories 
341 
damage 
430 
Dancy, Jonathan 
43,176 
Davidson, Donald 
892 
"A Coherence Theory of Truth and 
Knowledge" 
l24-32 
coherentism 
76-7 
network for beliefs 
544 

906 
INDEX 
defeasibility 
500,517-18 
criteria for knowledge 
881-3 
Defeat Principle 
763 
defeating conditions 
824-5 
doxastic defeaters 
862-5 
rule of resemblance 
697 
in transmission 
857-8 
demons 
and cognitive ability 
488-9 
Descartes and 
307,375 
evil 
455-6 
helpful 
468 
New Evil Demon problem 
497 
Dennett, Daniel 
436 
deontology: guidance-deontological 
justification 
379-81 
DeRose, Keith 
5,233,663,727,733-4 
error theory 
787 
pragmatic explanations 
726 
"Solving the Skeptical Problem" 
669-86 
So sa responds to 
280, 282-4, 286 
Descartes, Rene 
accessibility to mental states 
214 
defines tasks of epistemology 
538 
doubting beliefs 
493,494-5 
evil demon 
307,375 
externalism 
365 
failure of programme 
541 
foundationalist approach 
539-40 
importance of experience 
560-2 
Meditations 
8-9,11-13,21,323,560,562 
Moore on 
29 
no guarantee of truth 
322-31 
the order of reasons 
63 
permanence of knowledge 
493 
Regulae 
626 
requires certainty 653 
Rules for the Direction of the Mind 
379, 446, 836 
skepticism 
3 
Stroud's discussion of 7-25 
systematic questioning 
55-6, 59 
design 
430, 434-8 
Devonshire, Duke of 31 
Dewey, John 
the given 
80-1,82,91 
How We Think 
446 
instrumentalism 
89 
intellectual virtues 
444, 446-8, 449 
Dickens, Charles 
451 
Dimnet, Ernest 
451 
"Doctrine of Chances" (Peirce) 
451 
"Does Empirical Knowledge Have a Foundation?" 
(Sellars) 
94-8 
doxastic attitudes 
310-12 
ascent arguments 
decision interval 
defeaters 
862-5 
internalism 
408 
voluntarism 
381 
dreams 
155-6, 160 
385 
Descartes on 
13-25 
sensory evidence and 
31-4 
Dretske, Fred 
38 
certainty 664 
cognitive function 
430 
context -dependence 
701-2 
"Epistemic Operators" 
233-4,237-45 
evolving thought of 653 
Seeing and Knowing 
114-15, 366 
Sosa responds to 
280 
Stine responds to 
249-53 
Vogel responds to 
290-9 
zebra case 
291-2,635-6 
Ducasse, C. J. 
86 
Dummett, Michael 
128,856 
truth as aim of assertion 
793-4 
Elgin, Catherine Z. 
428 
"True Enough" 
507-18 
eliminativism about the semantics of "know" 
788-9 
"Elusive Knowledge" (Lewis) 
691-703 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 
444, 445 
empiricism 
bias paradox 
570-7 
break with tradition 
562-4 
inferential justification 
399-400 
methodology 388-90 
narrow inductivism 
567-70 
radical 
614-15 
versus rationalism 
558-62 
sensory evidence 
530-1 
theory of biases 
575-7 
An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding 
(Hume) 
268 
entitlement 
836-49 
epistemic closure 
233, 666 
deductive 
247-53 
Dretske rejects 
239 
multi-premise 
769-71 
Nozick rejects 
265-9 
single-premise 
762,769,771 
So sa defends Moore and 
280-6 
Vogel's counterexamples 
290-9 
epistemic obligation 
313-15 
epistemic operators 

INDEX 
907 
non-, semi-, and fully penetrating 
237-41 
relevant alternatives 
244-5,251-3 
"Epistemic Operators" (Dretske) 
233-4,237-45 
Epistemic Possibility Constraint 
768,771 
"Epistemic Principles" (Sellars) 
99-107 
epistemic regress argument 
160,363-5,370 
Bonjour on 
109-20 
foundationalism and 
149-52 
"Epistemological Realism" (Williams) 
4-5,51-70 
epistemology 
Ameliorative Project 
625-6 
assumptions of 
145 
bias and 
554-6 
break with tradition 
562-6 
conceptual 
523,530,540 
Descriptive Project 
625-6 
dilemma of 51-4 
doctrinal 
523,529-30,540 
Evaluative Project 
625-6 
language and 
127-8 
limits of philosophy 400-1,403-4 
mathematics and 
528-9 
as a natural science 
396-9 
naturalizing 
403-4 
normative 
542 
Normative Project 
625-9 
principles 
387-8 
terminology of 656-7 
Epistemology and Cognition (Goldman) 
627-8 
"Epistemology Naturalized" (Quine) 
528-36 
error theories 
786-8 
essentialism 
cognitive 
559-60 
scientific 
618-21 
Evans, Gareth 
594 
evidence and evidentialism 
cause and senses 
543 
doxastic 
305,310-12 
internalism and 
410, 411-12 
misleading 
769 
objections to 
742-4,749-51 
reliabilism and 
315-19 
role of salience 
763 
trusting persons 
807-14 
what can be ignored 
664-5 
"Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification" (Fant! and 
McGrath) 
742-55 
evil demons, see demons 
experience 
a priori and 
437 
credulity and 
840 
givenism and 
119 
highest common factor 
883-7 
introspective beliefs 
417 
transition to belief 898-902 
Experience and Prediction (Reichenbach) 
88 
external world 
everyday knowledge of 7-25 
Moore's proof 26-8 
sensory information 
127 
as theoretical construct 
54-60 
externalism 
306, 308 
ascendant theory 
407 
Bonjour on 
114-16,307,363-76 
cognitive responsibility 
463-5 
coincidental truth of clairvoyance 
367-72 
compared to internalism 
408-9 
fundamental problem 
401-5 
inferential justification 
399-400 
limits of philosophy 
400-1 
moral 371 
naturalistic 
394, 403-5 
"Externalism and Skepticism" (Fumerton) 
394-405 
"Externalist Theories of Empirical Knowledge" 
(Bonjour) 
363-76 
fallibilism 
608-9 
versus skepticism 
691-2 
falsehoods 
hyperbole and metaphor 
783-4 
insincere transmission 
858-61 
Minimal Principle of Contradiction 
586-92 
rationality of 843-4 
systematic 
684-5 
Fant!, Jeremy 
666 
"Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification" (with 
McGrath) 
742-55 
Feldman, Richard 
305-6, 308-9 
dispositional justification 
382-3 
epistemic obligations 
380,381,385 
evidentialism 
429 
"Evidentialism" (with Conee) 
310-19 
"Internalism Defended" (with Conee) 
407-17 
feminist epistemology 
523-4,577-8 
bias paradox 
554-6 
critique of mainstream epistemology 
556-66 
development of 552-4 
idea of objectivity 566-7 
recognizing bias 
575-7 
"Feminist Epistemology and Politics" (Jaggar) 
557 
fiction 
513-14, 515 
Firth, Roderick 
314 
Fischhoff, Baruch 
763 
Flax, Jane 
558, 559-60, 562 
Foley, Richard 
306 

908 
INDEX 
Foley, Richard (Cont'd) 
objection to infinitism 
172, 173 
rationality 
429 
responsible beliefs 
743 
"Skepticism and Rationality" 
322-31 
foundationalism 
39,40-2 
basic beliefs 
364-5, 385 
by-product of skepticism 
51-4 
Chisholm on 
75-6 
coherentist critique of 147-9,160 
combined with coherentism 
134-43 
Current Time-Slice views 
341 
Descartes's approach 
539-40 
doxastic ascent arguments 
155--6, 160 
empirical knowledge 
109-10 
epistemic regress argument 
lO9-11,149-52 
externalism and 
367 
feminism and 
523 
formal 
62,77-8, 153-4 
inference and 
lOl-2 
justification 
893 
memory belief 805,869-70,871,872 
meta-justification 
170 
noninferred beliefs 
395 
pyramid metaphor 
146-7,160, 163 
Pyrrhonian problem 
75 
Quine's critique of 564-5 
rationalists and empiricists 
560 
science and 
567 
strong/weak 
111-14 
substantive 
62,153, 156-7, 160 
Williams on 61-5 
foundherentism: Haack's explanation of 134-43 
"Foundherentist Theory of Empirical Justification" 
(Haack) 
134-43 
"Four Forms of Scepticism" (Moore) 
4,29-30 
The Fragmentation of Reason (Stich) 
628-9 
Frege, Gottlob 
439,529-30,878 
Freud, Sigmund 
435-6 
Fricker, Elizabeth 
803-4 
"Against Gullibility" 815-33 
Fumerton, Richard 
308 
"Externalism and Skepticism" 394-405 
objections to infinitism 
173, 176-7 
functioning, cognitive 
design 
434-8 
dysfunction 
430 
proper cognitive function 
429-34 
Gambler's Fallacy 468 
Gettier, Edmund and Gettier examples 
60-1, 99 
agent reliabilism 
468, 469 
cognitive ability and 
162 
contextualism 
665 
cultural differences 
525, 634 
Descartes and 323-4 
epistemic luck 
463,470-3 
epistemic regress 
110 
false beliefs and 
227 
intuition and 
613,649 
"Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?" 
189,192-3 
Kvanvig responds to 
499-502, 502-5 
Lewis's rules and 
713-14,716-17 
Nozick's response to 
256 
principle P 
195-6,201, 204 
refuting traditional analysis 
218 
rule of actuality and 
708-9 
rule of resemblance 
696-7 
speaker-sensitivity and 
711-12 
Zagzebski responds to 
190,207-12 
Ginet, Carl 
249,381 
the given 
acceptance rules 
84 
BonJour on 
116-19 
coherency theory 84 
doctrine of 80-1 
justification and 
81-3 
myth of 91 
probable propositions 
83-4 
self-justification 
85-8 
Sellars on 
94-8 
Gleitman, Lila 
572 
Godel, Kurt 
528-9, 609 
Goldman, Alvin 1. 
249,306-7,677 
belief-forming process 
546 
causal theory of knowledge 
196-201 
cognitive function 
430 
on doxasticlimits 
311-12 
Epistemology and Cognition 
627 
evolving thought of 653 
externalism 
308, 366 
false perceptions 
863 
folk epistemology 
654 
forgotten evidence 
413-15 
"Internalism Exposed" 
379-90 
J-rules 
627-8 
process reliabilism 
603 
reliabilism 
401,436 
stored beliefs and internalism 
412-l3 
veritism 
507 
"What Is Justified Belief?" 
333-45 
Goodman, Nelson 
68,627 
Graff, Delia 
731-2 
Gramsci, Antonio 
552 
Greco, John 
425,426 
virtue reliabilism 
466, 467 

"Virtues and Vices of Virtue 
Epistemology" 454-61 
Grice, H. P. 
252 
analytic/synthetic 
58 
"A Guide to Feminist Epistemologies" 
(Harding) 
557-8 
Haack, Susan 
"Foundherentist Theory of Empirical 
Justification" 
134-43 
truth-conduciveness 
77 
Haidt, J. 
630-1,636 
Hanson, Kurt 
535 
Harding, Sandra 
566 
"A Guide to Feminist Epistemologies" 557-8 
Hare, R. M. 
548 
Harman, Gilbert 
189-90,762 
subjunctive condition 
257 
"Thought, Selections" 
194-205 
Hawthorne, John 
666 
error theory 787 
"Sensitive Moderate Invariantism" 
760-73 
hedonism 
153 
Heil, John 
311,314,381 
Hempel, C. G. 
85 
Hempel, Carl R. 
567 
Herrnstein, Richard 
577 
Hinton, J. M. 
226 
Hobbes, Thomas 
intellectual and moral virtues 
444, 445-6 
Leviathan 
445 
"How a Pyrrhonian Skeptic Might Respond to 
Academic Skepticism" (Klein) 
4,35-49 
"How to Defeat Opposition to Moore" 
(Sosa) 
280-6 
How We Think (Dewey) 
446 
Huemer, Michael 
804-5 
"The Problem of Memory Knowledge" 
868-73 
"Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of 
Reasons" (Klein) 
165-78 
Hume, David 
323, 530 
a priori knowledge and 
591 
beliefs and sensations 
126 
breaks with tradition 
563-4,565 
dilemma about induction 
564 
An Enquiry Concerning Human 
Understanding 
268 
Genetic theories 
341 
infant deities 
438 
natural knowledge 
529 
on questioning 
53 
skepticism of 268 
INDEX 
909 
systematic questioning 
55, 56 
A Treatise of Human Nature 
268 
identity, Leibniz's Law 
219-20,224 
ignorance, argument from 
668-74,676-8,685-6 
illusion, argument from 
884 
imagination, memory and 
389 
impartiality 
empiricist model 
560-2 
upholding power status 
524 
Indian philosophy 
815 
"The Inescapability of Gettier Problems" 
(Zagzebski) 
207-12 
infallibilism, intuitive 
664-5 
inference 
100-1, 104 
anxiety-provoking 
761-2 
Aristotle on 
174-5 
epistemic regress problem 
110 
evidence against 
203-4 
evidence one doesn't possess 
201-2 
externalism and 
399-400 
Gettier's principle P 
204 
Harman's principle Q 
204-5 
memory belief 868-9 
naturalism and 655-6 
non-inferential knowledge 
395-9 
statistical 
199-201 
infinitism 4,39,43-4 
Aristotelian objection 
174-5 
avoiding circularity and arbitrariness 
166-8 
concepts of 165-8 
finite mind objection 
171-4 
infinite regress objection 
175-6 
Klein on 
78 
Pyrrhonian problem 
75 
skepticism 
176-8 
instrumentalism: Dewey 
89 
intellectualism 
723-7 
contextualism 
665-6 
internalism 
cognitive responsibility 
463-5 
compared to externalism 
408-9 
defined 
407-9 
epistemic principles 
387-8 
Feldman and Conee defend 
407-17 
forgotten evidence 
413-15 
Goldman on 
379-90 
higher order beliefs 
415-17 
internal justifiers 
411-12 
introspective beliefs 
417 
justification 
608-9 
KJ constraint on justification 
380-90 
norms 
458-9 

910 
internalism (Cont'd) 
stored beliefs 
412-13 
strong 
381-3 
virtue epistemology and 
458-61 
weak 
383-4 
"Internalism Defended" (Feldman and 
Conee) 
407-17 
"Internalism Exposed" (Goldman) 
379-90 
intuition 
102-3 
a priori knowledge 
604, 607 
appeals to 
648-9,650-5 
Austinian 
642 
car theft cases 
294-5 
closure 
769-71 
cultural variations 
629-38 
as empirical belief 526 
as evidence 
615-17 
infallibilist claim 
664-5 
INDEX 
coincidental/accidental truth 
366-7 
computational factors 
386 
Current Time-Slice theories 
341 
dispositional 
382-3 
dominating concept 
538-9 
epistemic regress problem 
363-4 
evidentialism 
310-19 
guidance-deontological conception 
379-81 
inference and 
399-400 
internalism 
408, 893 
intuition 
612-13 
logical relations 
384-7,415-17 
memory beliefs 
804-5 
meta-
169-70 
non-inferential 
395-9 
normative 
893, 894-5 
not always necessary (for knowledge) 
692-3 
perceptual skills 
895-902 
Intuition Driven Romanticism 
525,626,627-9, 
pragmatic conditions on 722-7,744-9,751-2 
reliabilism 
348-51,357-8 
637-8,638-42 
justification procedure and 612-13 
limits of philosophy 617-18 
phenomenology and 
613-15 
process reliabilism 
465-6 
socioeconomic class and 
636-8 
standard justification procedures 
647,649-50 
wronglright sort 640-2 
Intuition Driven Romanticism, objections and 
replies 
638-42 
invariantism 
761-4,782,783 
sensitive 
666,667,780,790 
strict 
667, 779-80, 790 
"Investigating Knowledge Itself" (Kornblith) 
647-58 
irreducibility thesis 
815 
"Is Justified True Belief Knowledge?" 
(Gettier) 
192-3 
Jackson, Frank 
648,651 
Jaggar, Alison 
559, 560, 562 
fairness of science 
566 
"Feminist Epistemology and Politics" 
557 
the knower 
570 
James, William 
434, 505 
religious belief 503 
will to believe 
314 
Johnson, Alexander Bryan 
529, 530 
Johnson, Marcia K. 
393 
judgment, assessment sensitivity 789-92 
justification 
305-9 
Acceptance Principle 
840-9 
base-clause principles 
334-8 
Cartesian accounts 
333,341 
value of 495-9 
warrant fallibility 
207-12 
see also coherence theory; foundationalism; 
infinitism 
Kant, Immanuel 
323 
externalism 
558 
proof of external world 
26 
traditional epistemology 559 
Kaplan, David 
727,792 
Kaplan, Mark 
648 
Keller, Evelyn Fox 
566-7 
Kim, Jaegwon 
524 
"What Is 'Naturalized Epistemology'?" 
538-48 
King, J. 
792 
Kitcher, Philip 
514 
a priori debate 
595 
apsychologistic attitude 
546 
Austinian intuitions 
642 
reliabilism and a priori 
602-8 
revisability and a priori 
599-600 
Klein, Peter D. 
189 
"How a Pyrrhonian Skeptic Might Respond to 
Academic Skepticism" 4, 35-49 
"Human Knowledge and the Infinite Regress of 
Reasons" 
165-78 
on infinitism 
78 
"Knowing How to Believe With Justification" 
(Reynolds) 
892-902 
knowledge 
attribution shifts 
666-7 
authority from memory 
76 
causal theory of 196-201 

INDEX 
911 
context-sensitivity 
727-37 
criteria for 
876-83 
Descartes's method 
7-25 
different sense of 638-9 
direct and indirect 
381-3,395 
egocentric rationality and luck 
324-31 
evidence 
105-6,201-5 
failure of cognition 
161-3 
failure of information 
214-15 
guarantees 
99-100 
highest common factor 
883-7 
indirect knowability 
383-4 
infallibility 693-5 
inferred 
100-1, 104 
intuitive 
102-3 
justification 
112,192-3 
key questions 
145-6 
luck and 
306 
as a mental state 
213-20 
metaphors for 
146-7 
motivation of intellectual virtues 
443-8 
Nozick on conditions for 
255-62 
permanence of 493-5 
position to know 
161-3 
principles of 9-10 
qualifying beliefs 
477-80 
relation to believing 
224-8 
self-justifying 
104 
semantics of "know" 
779,781-8 
sensitivity contrasted with safety 280-6 
skepticism 
3 
standards for 
574 
from testimony 
804,815-17,821-3 
as theoretical construct 
54-60 
transmission of 855-66 
understanding implies 
502-3 
value of 427 
Knowledge and its Place in Nature (Kornblith) 
526 
"Knowledge and Practical Interest" (Stanley) 
721-40 
"Knowledge and Skepticism" (Nozick) 
255-72 
Kompa, N. 
792 
Kornblith, Hilary 
epistemic obligation 
313 
"Investigating Knowledge Itself" 647-58 
justification 
311-12,315 
Knowledge and its Place in Nature 
526 
motivation to knowledge 
447 
Kripke, Saul 
592 
closure of knowledge 
701-2 
scientific essentialism 
618 
Single-Premise Closure 
769 
Kuhn, Thomas S. 
epistemological nihilism 
535 
scientific paradigms 
572-3 
Kvanvig, Jonathan L. 
427 
"Why Should Inquiring Minds Want to 
Know?" 
492-505 
Kyburg, Henry 
194 
Lackey, Jennifer 
804 
"Testimonial Knowledge and 
Transmission" 855-66 
Land, Irwin 
589 
Landau, Barbara 
572 
language 
coherency and meaning 
127-32 
information 532-6 
naturalism and 656-7 
Quine and translation 
127-32 
semantic stability 619 
as a skill 
896-7 
use of "know" 779,781-8 
Leeds, Stephen 
60 
Lehrer, Keith 
168-9,306,351,631,743 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm: law of identity 
219-20,224 
Lepore, Ernie: The Collective Description Test (with 
Cappelen) 
728 
Letvin, Jerome 
589 
Lewis, c.1. 
An Analysis of Knowledge and Valuation 
89 
congruence 
91 
critique of cogency 82 
the given 
116 
Mind and the World-Order 
80, 89 
Lewis, David 
5,512-14,663,664-5,727,732-4,766 
Cohen responds to 
706-20 
"Elusive Knowledge" 
691-703 
what may not be properly ignored 
695-703 
Lichtenstein, Sarah 
763 
Lobachevskii, Nikolai Ivanovich 
586 
Locke, John 
323 
Genetic justification 
341 
warrant 435 
logic, mathematics and 
528-9, 530 
logical positivism 
break with mainstream epistemology 564 
foundationalism of 540 
the given 
81 
Vienna circle 
533 
Der logische Aufbau der Welt (Carnap) 
530, 
531,540-1 
lottery paradox 
194-5,373-4,375,666 
contextualism 
665,761-2 
rule of resemblance 
702, 709-10 

912 
luck 
306 
accidental truth 
501-2 
epistemic 
462-3 
externalism and internalism 
463-5 
knowledge and 
324-31 
reliabilism and 
468-70 
virtue and 
426-7 
Ludlow, Peter 
728,736-7 
Luper-Foy, Stephen 
170-1 
McDowell, John 
226, 805 
"Criteria, Defeasibility, and Knowledge" 
876-87 
MacFarlane, John 
"The Assessment Sensitivity of Knowledge 
Attributions" 
779-96 
knowledge attributions 
666-7 
McGrath, Matthew 
666 
"Evidence, Pragmatics, and Justification" (with 
Fantl) 
742-55 
MacIntyre, Alisdair 
442 
Malcolm, Norman, on printed words 
252-3 
Margalit, Avishai 
259 
Marr, David 
572 
Marx, Karl, on religion 
435 
mathematics 
a priori knowledge and 
598-9 
Euclidean and a priori 
586-8 
logic and 
528-9,530 
Mattingly, Don 454-5 
meaning 
coherence theory 
76-7,127-32 
contextual definition 
529-31 
Meditations (Descartes) 
323,560,562 
memory 
authority of 76 
dualistic theory 871-3 
forgotten evidence 
383-4,413-15 
inferential theory 
868-9 
justification 
838-40 
perception or imagination 
389 
perceptual skills 
897-8 
preservation theory 
870-1 
recognition skills 
900 
reliability 
438 
transmission of 855 
unreliable 
343-4 
Meno (Plato) 
270,427,492,493,502 
mental states 
conceptof 216-20 
factive attitudes 
213-14,220-4 
internalism and 
385 
knowledge as 
213-20 
INDEX 
mentalism 
408-9 
personal accessibility 
214-16 
mentalism, see internalism 
Metaphysics (Aristotle) 
174 
methodology 
empirical or a priori 
388-90 
necessity 
65-70 
rule of 697 
Mill, John Stuart 
564 
Millar, Alan 
894,895 
mind: internal/external distinction 
408-9 
Mind and the World-Order (Lewis) 
80,89 
modusponens 
436-7 
Montmarquet, James: intellectual virtues 
444,447-8 
Moore, G. E. 
"Certainty" 
4,31-4 
common sense 
235 
Duke of Devonshire's dream 
13, 18,20 
"Four Forms of Scepticism" 
4, 29-30 
on naturalism 
547 
paradox of 504, 725 
"Proof of an External World" 
3-4, 26-8 
So sa defends 
280-6 
"The Myth of the Given" (Chisholm) 
80-91 
Nagel, Thomas 
55 
naturalized epistemology 
523-6 
appeals to intuition 
650-5 
bias paradox 554-6,570-7 
Chomsky and 
565-6 
empiricism and recognizing bias 
575-7 
objectivity and bias 
566 
Quine and 
540-8 
Quine's break with mainstream 
565,566 
self-defeating 
647-8,649 
terminology of 656-7 
The Nature of Things (Quinton) 
117-18 
The Nature of Thought (Blanshard) 
84,89 
Neurath, Otto 
534 
Nichols, Shaun 
525 
"Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions" (with 
Weinberg and Stich) 
425-42 
Nichomachean Ethics (Aristotle) 
477 
Nisbett, Richard 
629-30,631, 640 
normative epistemology 
beliefs and 
544 
epistemic romanticism 
626-7 
epistemic supervenience 
547-8 
internalism and virtue 
458-9 
intuition 
614-15 
justification 
893,894-5 
normality 
430 
problem of 628-9 

INDEX 
913 
"Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions" (Weinberg, 
Nichols, and Stich) 
425-42 
Nozick, Robert 
234-5,341, 682, 865 
a priori knowledge 
401 
against epistemic closure 
265-72 
argument from ignorance 
676-7 
credibility values 
752 
"Knowledge and Skepticism" 
255-72 
miserable belief 749 
non inferential beliefs 
395 
Philosophical Explanations 
672 
sensitive belief 663-4 
skeptical puzzle 
670 
Sosa reponds to 
280-4, 286 
Subjunctive Conditionals Account (SCA) 
672-7 
truth-tracking 
258,501 
objectivity 
bias paradox 
570-7 
capitalist science 
566-70 
open-mindedness 
446-8,450 
Our Knowledge of the External World (Russell) 
530 
Owens, David 
744,751 
Pasteur, Louis 
451 
Peacocke, C. A. B. 
224 
Peirce, C. S. 
532 
a priori debate 
595 
"Doctrine of Chances" 
451 
perception 
false 
863 
judgment and 
10-11 
memory and 
389 
natural epistemology 403-5 
non-propositional beliefs 
892-902 
performance values 
488-9 
recognition skills 
805, 895-902 
reliability 
438 
of utterances 
845-7 
persons 
authority of subjects 
766 
knowledge from testimony 
821-3 
trusting in 
807-14 
phenomenology 397 
intuition and 
613-15 
Philosophical Explanations (Nozick) 
672 
Philosophical Investigations (Wittgenstein) 
879-80 
Philosophical Limits of Science (Bealer) 
616 
philosophy 
authority and autonomy of 525,612-21,657 
feminist critique 
557 
Indian 
815 
Piaget, Jean 
431 
Plantinga, Alvin 
190 
agent reliabilism 
466 
on internalism 
407,411-12 
proper functionalism 
425-6 
"Warrant: A First Approximation" 429-40 
warrant justification 
208 
Plato 
Academic skepticism 
36-9 
epistemic romanticism 
627 
A1eno 
270,427,492,493,502 
recollection theory 341 
Pohinyi, Michael 
535 
Pollock, John 
609,892 
functioning 
430, 431 
on internalism 
407-8 
justification 
379,894-5 
Popper, Karl 
341 
possibility 
764 
what may not be properly ignored 
695-703 
Post, John 
175 
Posterior Analytics (Aristotle) 
174-5 
postmodernism 
558 
power relations 
ideology of science 
566-70 
impartiality and 
524 
see also feminist epistemology 
Practical Environmental Constraint 
666 
practical reasoning 
761 
deliberative environment 
766-9 
and justification 
722-7,744-9,751-2 
and knowledge 
782-6 
misleading evidence 
769 
see also invariantism, sensitive 
preferences, rational 
750-1 
preservation theory 805,870-1 
Prichard, H. A. 
214,225 
Pritchard, Duncan 426-7 
"Cognitive Responsibility and the Epistemic 
Virtues" 462-73 
response to Zagzebski 
470-3 
probability 
internalism 
384-7 
the lottery paradox 
194-5 
rule of acceptance 
194-6 
statistical inference 
199-201 
"The Problem of Memory Knowledge" 
(Huemer) 
868-73 
"The Problem of the External World" 
(Stroud) 
7-25 
"Proof of an External World" (Moore) 
3-4,26--8 
psychology 
as empirical 533-4,541-2 
Gestalt theory 
534 

914 
INDEX 
psychology (Cont'd) 
Kim's response to Quine on relation to 
epistemology 
545-7 
trusting testimony 
828-33 
purpose 
430 
Putnam, Hilary 
524-5,595 
a priori debate 
595,598,599 
intuitions and 
613 
realism 
125-6 
"There is at Least One A Priori Truth" 
585-94 
Pyrrhonism 
4,36,322 
Hume on 
268 
infinitism 
176 
problem of 75 
skepticism 
39-40 
Quine, W. V. 
53,341,899 
context of critical approach 
554 
on conventionality 
63 
critique of externalism 
563 
critique of foundationalism 
564-5 
deflation of truth 
60 
"Epistemology Naturalized" 528-36 
holistic meanings 
57-8,59 
interpretation oflanguage 
127-32 
Kim responds to 
540-8 
naturalized epistemology 403,405,523-5 
rejects a priori 
585-7,591-4 
on theory by data 
572 
"Two Dogmas of Empiricism" 
585 
"Quine as Feminist: The Radical Import of 
Naturalized Epistemology" (Antony) 
552-78 
Quinton, Anthony 
116 
epistemic regress argument 
109-10 
The Nature of Things 
117-18 
"The Raft and the Pyramid" (Sosa) 
145-63 
rationalism, versus empiricism 
558-62 
rationality 
egocentric 
306 
luck and ego centrality 
324-31 
of trust 
803 
trusting people 
807-14 
Rawls, John 
disinterest 
511, 513, 516 
A Theory ofJustice 
511 
Raye, Carol 
389 
realism 
coherence theory and 
125-6 
M-
876-7,884 
reality monitoring 
389 
reasoning 
circular 
35-6 
coherentism 
42-3 
countenancing rules of 458-9 
deductive 
591 
foundationalism 
40-2 
inductive 
403,438,564,567-70,591 
infinitism 
43-4 
memory and 
839-40 
practical 
666 
rational beliefs 
544-5 
see also practical reasoning; rationality 
reductionism 
anti-
803 
justifying testimony 
817-21 
trusting speakers 
856-7 
Regulae (Descartes) 
626 
Reichenbach, Hans: Experience and Prediction 
83-4,88 
Reid, Thomas 
685 
credulity 
840 
relativism 
142,895 
expressive and propositional 
790-6 
objections to 
638 
semantics of "know" 
789-92 
relevant alternatives: car theft cases 
297-9 
reliabilism 
159-60, 168-9,305,306-7,394 
a priori and 
525, 602-9 
agents 
465-70 
antireliabilism and virtue 
480,481-2,484 
BonJour's criticism of 351 
contingent and modal 
616-17 
counterfactual 
351-2,357-8 
egocentric epistemology and 
323 
epistemic value 
425 
evidence 
315-19,616 
forms of 307 
Goldman and 
341-5,436 
Historical 
341-5 
justification 
401-2 
modal 
525 
neighborhood 
352-7 
noninferential justification 
397-8 
process 
465-6 
reliability and 
348-51 
rule of reliability 
697 
value of truth 
480 
virtues 
443-8,451,454 
warrant 
438-40, 602-9 
"Reliabilism Leveled" (Vogel) 
348-58 
The Reliability of Sense Perception (Alston) 
404 
religion 
435 
resemblance, rule of 665,696-7,716-17 
Cohen on 
709-10 
Gettier problems and 
713,714 

INDEX 
915 
skepticism and 
710-11 
responsibility 
425 
cognitive 
464-5,467 
Deweyon 
447 
epistemic virtue 
456-8 
revisability: a priori knowledge 
596-602 
"Revisability, Reliabilism and A Priori Knowledge" 
(Casullo) 
595-609 
Reynolds, Steven L. 
805 
"Knowing How to Believe With 
Justification" 
892-902 
Richard, Mark 
730 
Ridgeway, Sam 
436 
Roberts, Robert 
442 
romanticism, see Intuition Driven Romanticism 
Rorty, Amelie 
450 
Rorty, Richard 
126 
Ross, James 
855 
Rudner, Richard 
743 
Rules for the Direction of the Mind (Descartes) 
379, 
446,836 
Russell, Bertrand 
definite descriptions 
225 
five-minute hypothesis 
870 
logical positivism 
564 
Our Knowledge of the External World 
530 
Principle of Acquaintance 
219 
singular descriptions 
529-30 
skepticism and 
29,30 
thinking and being 
32 
Rutgers University 
631,634 
Rysiew, Patrick 
784-5 
safety and safe belief 281-6 
salience, contextualism and 
761-6 
Salmon, Wesley 
591 
Samuels, Richard 
625 
Schaffer, Jonathan 
784 
Schlick, Moritz 
564 
sCience 
a fortiori arguments 
511 
approximations 
512-18 
autonomy of philosophy and 
657 
capitalism and objectivity 
566-70 
ceteris paribus claims 
509-10 
curve smoothing 
509 
epistemic acceptance 
507-9 
General Theory of Relativity 
588 
idealizations 
510 
Kuhn and paradigms 
572-3 
language and 
533-6 
mathematics and logic 
528-9 
naturalized epistemology 524,541 
network of commitments 
512-13 
proper function 
430-1 
Quine on natural knowledge 
529-36 
society's intuitions 653-4 
stylized facts 
510-11 
unselfish scientists 
451 
scientific essentialism 
618-21 
Scott, Sir Walter 
451 
Seeing and Knowing (Dretske) 
114-15,366 
Sellars, Wilfrid 
396, 425, 886 
"Does Empirical Knowledge Have a 
Foundation?" 94-8 
"Epistemic Principles" 99-107 
on foundationalism 
75-6 
Senor, Thomas 
869-70 
senses 
appear-statements 
87-90 
authority of 94-8 
beliefs and 
126-7 
dreaming and 
31-4 
naming experiences 
57-8 
as source of knowledge 
10-12 
systematic questioning 
55-6 
trusting 
3 
sensitive belief 280-6, 682, 686 
DeRose on 
663-4 
Nozick on 
663-4 
"Sensitive Moderate Invariantism" 
(Hawthorne) 
760-73 
sensitivity 280-6 
assessment-
78; see also relativism 
speaker-
711-16; see also contextualism 
subject-, see invariantism, sensitive 
Sextus Empiricus 
on infinite regress 
176 
Outlines of Pyrrhonism 
39 
Siegel, Harvey 648 
skepticism 
Academic 
4,36-9,45--6 
access to mental states 
214-16,395 
argument from ignorance 668-74,676-7,685-6 
bold skeptics 
682-4 
burden of proof 398-9 
circular reasoning 
35-6 
conditions for knowledge 
269-72 
contextualism and 
663,669-72,681-6,707-8 
deductive closure 
247-53 
dilemma of epistemology 
51-4 
Dretske and 241-5,293-4 
everyday experience 
7-25 
versus fallibilism 
691-2 
fundamental arguments of 394-9 
inferential justification 
399-400 

916 
INDEX 
skepticism (Cont'd) 
Moore on 
26-34 
non-closure 
265-9 
Nozick on 
262-72 
objection to infinitism 
176-8 
Pyrrhonism and 
36, 39-40 
rule of attention and 
698-9 
rule of resemblance and 
71 0-11 
second-level 
401-5 
seml-
295-7 
"Skepticism and Rationality" (Foley) 
322-31 
"Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives, and Deductive 
Closure" (Stine) 
247-53 
Sklar, Lawrence 
510 
Slovic, Paul 
763 
Snell's law 
510 
Snowdon, Paul 
226 
"Solving the Skeptical Problem" (DeRose) 
669-86 
Sosa, Ernest 
evil demon problem 
455-6 
formal foundationalism 
77-8 
"How to Defeat Opposition to Moore" 280-6 
introspective beliefs 
417 
objections to infinitism 
175, 177 
"The Place of Truth in Epistemology" 477-90 
"The Raft and the Pyramid" 
145-63 
reflective versus animal knowledge 
457-8 
safety 
281-6 
sensitivity 280-6 
taxonomy of values 
427 
Spelke, Elizabeth 
572 
Spinoza, Baruch 
444 
Stanley, Jason 
665-6 
"Knowledge and Practical Interest" 
721-40 
"A State of Mind" (Williamson) 
213-28 
Steup, Matthias 
384 
Stich, Stephen 
525 
The Fragmentation of Reason 
628-9 
"Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions" (with 
Weinberg and Nichols) 
425-42 
Stine, Gail 
234, 663 
"Skepticism, Relevant Alternatives, and Deductive 
Closure" 247-53 
Strawson, P. F. 
58,591 
Stroud, Barry 
3, 682 
"The Problem of the External World" 
7-25 
Williams responds to 
51-2,53-4,55 
Subjunctive Conditionals Account (SCA) 
confirmation of 675-6 
skeptical arguments and 672-5 
substantive, formal 
160 
supervenience 
547-8 
symmetry 257-8 
Tarski, Alfred 
125 
"Testability and Meaning" (Carnap) 
531 
"Testimonial Knowledge and Transmission" 
(Lackey) 
855-66 
testimony 
insincere 
858-61 
sincere utterance 
803-4 
as special knowledge 
815-17, 821-3 
transmission of 855-66 
warrant of belief 804 
Thagard, Paul 
311-12 
A Theory of Justice (Rawls) 
511 
Theory of Knowledge (Chisholm) 
102,335 
"There is at Least One A Priori Truth" 
(Putnam) 
585-94 
"Thought, Selections" (Harman) 
194-205 
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Wittgenstein) 
878 
A Treatise of Human Nature (Hume) 
268 
Trianosky, Gregory 
442 
"True Enough" (Elgin) 
507-18 
trust 
in persons 
807-14,823 
presumptive right thesis 
815-33 
rationality of 803 
reliability of testimony 
803 
transmitting testimony 
855-66 
"Trust and Rationality" (Baker) 
807-14 
truth 
approximations of 498-9,512-18 
ascribing 
782 
base-clause principles 
334-8 
coherence theory 76-7,84 
coincidental/accidental 
367-72 
deflation 
60-1 
epistemic acceptance 
507-9 
epistemic values and 
427 
felicitous falsehoods 
509-18 
qualifying beliefs 
477-80 
role of falsehoods 
500 
semantics of "know" 
781-8 
Tarski's Convention T 
125 
tracking 
500-1; see also safety and safe belief; 
sensitive belief 
true enough beliefs 
428 
truth-conducive factors 
721-2 
value of 480,494,495-9 
"Two Dogmas of Empiricism" (Quine) 
585 
understanding 
implication of knowledge 
502-3 
in a network of beliefs 
511 
Unger, Peter 
682 
utilitarianism 

act-
333 
moral externalism 
371 
values and valuing 
different conceptions of 429 
forms of evaluation 
484-5 
idea of neutrality 
568 
instrumental 
480-1,497-8 
intrinsic 
480-1,482,487-9,496-7 
of knowledge 
492-3 
performance 
483-4, 485, 488-9 
praxical 
481, 482, 486, 489 
reliabilism 
425 
source of 427 
taxonomy of 427 
see also virtue 
Vendler, Z. 
225, 226 
verbal behaviorism 
103-4 
verification theory 532-3 
Vienna Circle 
the given 
81 
language and meaning 
532-4 
logical positivism 
564 
virtue 
cognitive 
454-5 
defining 
426,442-3 
epistemic irresponsibility 
456-8 
evil demon problem 
455-6 
habit and 
450 
intellectual 
443-8,481-2 
luck and 
426-7 
as motivation 
443-8 
neo-Aristotelian 
470-3 
norms 
426 
in performance 
482-4 
success from 
448-51 
theory 425,427 
understanding 
502-3 
see also values and valuing 
"Virtues and Vices of Virtue Epistemology" 
(Greco) 
454-61 
"Virtues of the Mind, Selections" 
(Zagzebski) 
442-51 
visualism 
614-15 
Vogel, Jonathan 
235,307 
"Are There Counterexamples to the Closure 
Principle?" 
290-9 
car theft cases 
292-9 
"Reliabilism Leveled" 
348-58 
voluntarism, doxastic 
311 
INDEX 
Walton, Kendall 
514 
warrant 
a priori beliefs 
804 
design plan 
434-8 
means and ends 
496 
proper functioning 
430-4 
reliability 
438-40 
"Warrant: A First Approximation" 
(Plantinga) 
429-40 
Weinberg, Jonathan M. 
525 
"Normativity and Epistemic Intuitions" (with 
Nichols and Stich) 
425-42 
Welbourne, Michael 
855 
Wettstein, H. K. 
734 
"What Is Justified Belief?" (Goldman) 
333-45 
"What Is 'Naturalized Epistemology'?" (Kim) 
538-48 
wholeheartedness 
446, 448 
"Why Should Inquiring Minds Want to Know?: 
917 
Meno Problems and Epistemological Axiology" 
(Kvanvig) 
492-505 
Williams, John 
43-4 
finite mind and infinitism 
171-2 
Williams, Michael 
"Epistemological Realism" 
4-5,51-70 
reliabilism and 
353 
Williamson, Timothy 
190 
''A State of Mind" 213-28 
Wittgenstein, Ludwig 
564 
criteria 
876,879-83 
direction of inquiry 65-6 
foundationalism 
64 
justification 
81, 82 
on mathematics 
57 
Philosophical Investigations 
879-80 
Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus 
878 
Wright, Crispin 
69,876-7 
Yablo, Stephen 
514 
Yilmaz, Huseyin 
536 
Zagzebski, Linda 
425 
defining virtue 
426 
epistemic luck and Gettier 
470-3 
"The Inescapability of Gettier Problems" 
207-12 
onluck 463-4 
response to Gettier 
190 
"Virtues of the Mind, Selections" 
442-51 
Zeno 
763 
Zermelo, E. 
598 


