
ESSAYS IN THE PHILOSOPHY AND HISTORY
OF LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS 

POZNAē STUDIES 
IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SCIENCES AND THE HUMANITIES 
VOLUME 98
EDITORS
Leszek Nowak (founding editor) 
Jerzy BrzeziĔski
Katarzyna Paprzycka (editor-in-chief)
Andrzej Klawiter 
Piotr Przybysz 
Krzysztof àastowski 
Michael J. Shaffer
Izabella Nowakowa 
Joanna OdrowąĪ-Sypniewska
Michaá Siwek (assistant editor) 
Mieszko Taáasiewicz
ADVISORY COMMITTEE 
Joseph Agassi (Tel-Aviv)
Étienne Balibar (Irvine, CA) 
Wolfgang Balzer (München)
Mario Bunge (Montreal)
Nancy Cartwright (London) 
Robert S. Cohen (Boston)
Francesco Coniglione (Catania)
Andrzej Falkiewicz (Wrocáaw)
Dagfinn Føllesdal (Oslo, Stanford) 
Jaakko Hintikka (Boston) 
Jacek J. Jadacki (Warszawa)
Jerzy Kmita (PoznaĔ)
Theo A.F. Kuipers (Groningen)
Witold Marciszewski (Warszawa)
Ilkka Niiniluoto (Helsinki)
Günter Patzig (Göttingen)
Jerzy Perzanowski (Kraków)
Marian PrzeáĊcki (Warszawa)
Jan Such (PoznaĔ)
Max Urchs (Konstanz)
Jan WoleĔski (Kraków)
Ryszard Wójcicki (Warszawa)
Address: dr hab. Katarzyna Paprzycka . Institute of Philosophy . University of Warsaw 
Krakowskie PrzedmieĞcie 3 . 00-927 Warszawa . Poland . fax ++48(0)22-826-5734
E-mail: kpaprzycka@uw.edu.pl  

POZNAē STUDIES IN THE PHILOSOPHY OF THE SCIENCES AND THE HUMANITIES, VOLUME 98 
Roman Murawski 
ESSAYS IN THE PHILOSOPHY 
AND HISTORY OF LOGIC
AND MATHEMATICS
Foreword
Jan WoleĔski
 
Amsterdam - New York, NY 2010

The paper on which this book is printed meets the requirements of "ISO 
9706:1994, Information and documentation - Paper for documents - 
Requirements for permanence".
ISSN 0303-8157
Printed in The Netherlands
©Editions Rodopi B.V., Amsterdam - New York, NY 20
ISBN: 978-90-420-3090-9
E-Book ISBN: 978-90-420-3091-6
10

Dedicated to
my wife Hania and daughter Zosia

CONTENTS
Jan Wole´nski, Foreword . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
1. Cantor’s Philosophy of Set Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15
2. Leibniz’s and Kant’s Philosophical Ideas vs. Hilbert’s Program . . . . . . . . 29
3. Truth vs. Provability. Philosophical and Historical Remarks . . . . . . . . . . . .41
4. Philosophy of Mathematics in the 20th Century. Main Trends
and Doctrines . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
5. On New Trends in the Philosophy of Mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 75
6. Remarks on the Structuralistic Epistemology of Mathematics
(with Izabela Bondecka-Krzykowska) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 85
7. From the History of the Concept of Number (with Thomas Bedürftig) . . 95
8. Church’s Thesis and Its Epistemological Status . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .123
9. Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
10. Hoene-Wro´nski – Genius or Madman? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 149
11. Grassmann’s Contribution to Mathematics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 161
12. Giuseppe Peano and Symbolic Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 169
13. E.L. Post and the Development of Logic . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 183
14. John von Neumann and Hilbert’s School . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .195
15. Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory . . . . . . . . . . . . . 211
16. Contribution of Polish Logicians to Predicate Calculus . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 233
17. The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 245
18. The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical
Background (with Thomas Bedürftig) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 271
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 301
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 335
Name Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 337

FOREWORD
Roman Murawski is a hard mathematical logician, working on technically
advanced problems. He obtained several important results concerning satisfac-
tion classes, decidability, incompleteness, recursion theory and the foundations
of arithmetic. These interests and achievements are summarized in Murawski’s
book Recursive Functions and Metamathematics. Problems of Completeness
and Decidability, Gödel’s Theorems, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dordrecht
1999 (Synthese Library, vol. 286), one of the best introductions to the ﬁelds in-
dicated by the title. This monograph combines three features, namely mathemat-
ical sophistication, philosophical depth and historical accuracy. Due to the char-
acter of Recursive Functions and Metamathematics, this book can effectively
serve a very broad range of readers, coming from mathematics and philosophy,
in particular those interested in mathematical logic and its problems.
The present collection brings together 18 of Murawski’s essays (three of
them are co-authored) in the philosophy and history of logic and mathemat-
ics. This material is naturally divided into two parts: philosophy of mathematics
(9 essays) and history of mathematics and logic (9 essays). The papers in the
ﬁrst part vary from general surveys of the present philosophy of mathematics to
studies devoted to very concrete topics, like Cantor’s philosophy of set theory,
the Church thesis and its epistemological status, the history of the philosophical
background of the concept of number, the structuralistic epistemology of math-
ematics and the phenomenological philosophy of mathematics. Murawski was
always deeply involved in investigations concerning the Hilbert program in the
foundations of mathematics. These interests are represented in his Essays in the
Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics by works dealing with the
relation of Hilbert’s ideas to those of Leibniz and Kant as well as with the de-
velopment of the consciousness of the distinction between truth and provability.
In other his papers devoted to Hilbert’s program and its development (cf. Ref-
erences; unfortunately they could not be included into the present volume for
technical reasons) he showed that Gödel’s theorems, contrary to ﬁrst reactions
to them, do not invalidate Hilbert’s hopes to establish theoretical mathematics on
formalistically understood foundations – just the opposite, the results of the so-
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n
Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 9–11. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

10
Foreword
called reverse mathematics show that Hilbert’s program can be in fact partially
realized.
The second part of Murawski’s collection is mostly devoted to particular
topics with the exception of the last paper, which outlines a general perspective
and philosophical background of the development of symbolism in mathemati-
cal logic. Three papers touch on the history of mathematics and logic in Poland:
Józef M. Hoene-Wro´nski, Polish works on decidability and on predicate calcu-
lus. Other studies concern Giuseppe Peano and his rôle in the creation of con-
temporary logical symbolism, Emil L. Post’s works in mathematical logic and
recursion theory, the formalist school in the foundations of mathematics (John
von Neumann and David Hilbert) and the algebra of logic in England in the 19th
century. Although some of these studies concern well-known facts and persons
or schools, they are additionally illuminated by Murawski by locating them in
a wider historical perspective, in particular, by taking into account what hap-
pened later in logical studies. As a historian of logic in Poland, I would like to
stress that Murawski’s works on logic in Poland remind us of some forgotten, but
important persons, like Hoene-Wro´nski, as well as of directions of investigations
that are often neglected. The Polish school of logic and the foundations of math-
ematics became famous for many-valued and modal logic of Jan Łukasiewicz,
systems of Stanisław Le´sniewski, the metamathematical and semantic works of
Alfred Tarski, generalized quantiﬁers introduced by Andrzej Mostowski or the
hierarchy of recursive constructions proposed by Andrzej Grzegorczyk, but sev-
eral other achievements, precisely those described by Murawski, also deserve
attention.
Murawski studied with Andrzej Mostowski. The Mostowski school deﬁni-
tively treated mathematical logic as a part of pure mathematics. This fact meant
that logical investigations had to fulﬁl all typical professional criteria of mathe-
matical work. On the other hand, Mostowski considered the history and philoso-
phy of mathematics as extremely important. He documented this attitude by his
beautiful Thirty Years of Foundational Studies, Societas Philosophica Fennica,
Helsinki 1965, commonly considered as the best survey of the development of
mathematical logic and the foundations of mathematics after the discovery of
incompleteness phenomena by Gödel in 1931. Mostowski demanded that every
technical study in mathematical logic should also be elaborated from a historical
and, if possible, philosophical point of view. This manner of doing logic and the
foundations of mathematics was a continuation of Tarski’s (he was Mostowski’s
mentor) attitude, but also Łukasiewicz’s idea of how the history of logic is to
be done. Łukasiewicz, who was the pioneer of the modern history of logic in
Poland, maintained that the only way of doing historical work consisted in look-
ing at the past from the perspective of what happened later and until now. In
order to understand, for instance, Aristotelian syllogistic, one should try to lo-
cate it in the body of contemporary logic. Murawski is an eminent follower of

Foreword
11
this line of thought. Perhaps his treatment of the Hilbert program is the best ex-
ample here. Murawski’s way of elaborating how the original formalistic project
functions is not limited to its Hilbertian version, but explains its internal limi-
tations by showing what follows from its partial realizations. This perspective,
consisting in discovering the past by using the spectacles displaying the contem-
porary situation is perhaps the most impressive feature of the present collection.
Thanks are due to Roman and also to the publisher for collecting these extremely
important philosophical and historical studies in one book.
Jan Wole´nski
Cracow, June 2009

PART I
PHILOSOPHY OF MATHEMATICS

1
CANTOR’S PHILOSOPHY OF SET THEORY1
Set theory founded by Georg Cantor (1845–1918) in the second half of the
nineteenth century (his main papers in this domain were published between 1874
and 1897) has already found his place in mathematics becoming not only a lan-
guage of mathematics but providing also ﬁrm foundations of it – in fact, the
whole of mathematics can be reduced to set theory.2 Before set theory reached
this status and before it became a well founded and fully recognized mathe-
matical theory, it passed through the difﬁcult period of crises (connected among
others with the discovery of various antinomies). The reaction of contemporary
mathematicians was also not always positive – recall critical and full of scep-
ticism reactions of L. Kronecker, one of the university teachers of Cantor from
Berlin. The reason for those reactions was among others the free usage of the
inﬁnity by Cantor. On the other hand in set theory were interested philosophers
and theologians – at the very beginning even more than mathematicians. The rea-
son for their interest was the fact that set theory was a theory of inﬁnite objects
and inﬁnity – since the antiquity – puzzled scientists and caused many troubles.
One should add that the inspirations of Cantor in constructing and developing
set theory were not only of mathematical but also of philosophical nature – what
today, when still more and more technically sophisticated results appear, is not
always recognized. Hence it is worth looking back at the very beginnings of the
theory of sets and to consider not just the mathematical aspects but rather the
philosophical and ideological motivations of its founder.
It should be stressed that we shall restrict ourselves to the presentation of
philosophical views of Cantor and try to reconstruct them on the basis of his
papers and letters. We shall make no valuations and will not enter a discussion
with them – those are left to the reader.
1Originally published in Polish under the title “G. Cantora ﬁlozoﬁa teorii mnogo´sci”, Studia
Filozoﬁczne 11–12 (1984), 75–88. Translated and reprinted with the permission of the publisher.
2This is the main thesis of logicism, one of the three principal doctrines in the modern philosophy
of mathematics.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n
Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 15–28. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

16
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
Start from the fact that Cantor was interested in philosophy and had a good
knowledge of it. In his library he had works of classical writers from Plato and
Aristotle through Augustine, Boëthius, Thomas Aquinas, Descartes, Spinoza,
Locke, Leibniz to Kant. He not only possessed them but read them and knew
them quite well. In fact one ﬁnds in his writings many quotations from works
of famous philosophers and discussions with their views in connection with his
own conceptions concerning, for example, the way of existence of mathematical
objects or the inﬁnity. He gave also classes in philosophy for students, devoted
among others to Leibniz’s philosophy (it was for him an occasion to compare
his own views on the inﬁnity with those of Leibniz). He had also friends among
philosophers – let us mention here E. Husserl and H. Schwarz who received
their Habilitation at the University in Halle where Cantor was professor between
1872–1913.
Cantor was attracted especially by scholastics. He found by them problems
and considerations similar to those which fascinated him and saw the similar-
ity and certain relationship between his abstract set-theoretical considerations
on the one hand and the consideration of scholastic logic and theology on the
other. In fact philosophy was for him not something foreign and exterior with
respect to mathematics. He saw certain strong and interior connections between
them. How important for him was the fact that readers of his papers should have
knowledge both in mathematics as well as in philosophy follows from his re-
mark from the introduction to one of his papers in which he says that he wrote
this paper in fact for two circles of readers, “for philosophers who follow the
development of mathematics till the modern time and for mathematicians who
know most important old and new philosophical ideas”3 (Grundlagen einer all-
gemeinen Mannigfaltigkeitslehre, 1883; see also Cantor 1932, p. 165). Cantor
was convinced that “without a bit of metaphysics it is impossible to establish
any strict science” (this sentence can be found in his notes from 1913 made in
pencil and never published). This conviction can be easily seen also in his works
devoted to set theory.
Starting the presentation of Cantor’s philosophical views in a detailed way
one should begin with his ideas concerning the reality of scientiﬁc concepts (for
example of ﬁnite integers or inﬁnite numbers). Cantor maintained (in the paper
quoted above, cf. Cantor 1932, pp. 165–204) that the reality of mathematical
concepts can be understood: (1) as an intra-subjective, hence immanent real-
ity guaranteed by deﬁnitions which assign a given concept a place in human
thinking which is well deﬁned and different from other concepts (he adds that
a concept “modiﬁes in a certain way the substance of our spirit”, p. 181); and
(2) as an extra-subjective reality in which the concept appears as “a reﬂection
of processes and relations taking place in an outer world located vis-à-vis in-
3If not stated otherwise, all quotations form Cantor’s works are given in my own translation.

Cantor’s Philosophy of Set Theory
17
tellect” (p. 181). A characteristic advantage of mathematics Cantor sees in the
fact that “by developing its ideas (Ideenmaterial) only the immanent reality of
its concepts must be taken into account and consequently there is no obligation
to consider their extra-subjective existence” (p. 182). Therefore one can speak
about “free mathematics”.
Note that Cantor was not ready to treat consistency as a unique and sufﬁcient
criterium of the existence in mathematics. He was convinced that mathematical
concepts posses not only immanent (in a mathematician’s mind) but also extra-
subjective existence. Indeed, he was convinced that a mathematician does not
create mathematical objects but discovers them. He expressed it already in the
third thesis of his Habilitation dissertation from 1869 where he wrote: “Numeros
integros simili modo atque corpora coelestia totum quoddam legibus et relation-
ibus compositum efﬁcere” (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 62). He conﬁrmed it also at the
end of his creative activity when he provided his fundamental work, consisting
of two parts, namely Beiträge zur Begründung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre,
part I: 1895, part II: 1897; cf. Cantor 1932, p. 282–351) with the following three
mottos:4 “Hypotheses non ﬁngo”, “Neque enim leges intellectui aut rebus damus
ad arbitrium nostrum, sed tanquan scribe ﬁdeles ab ipsius naturae voce latas et
prolatas excipimus et describimus”, “Veniet tempus, quo ista quae nunc latent,
in lucem dies extrahat et longioris aevi diligentia”.
For a “normal” mathematician who is working in, say, function theory, the
deﬁnite decisions concerning the ways in which mathematical objects do exist
are in fact not of a great importance for his research activity. On the other hand
this is very important, even crucial, for set theory. Therefore Cantor attached
importance to it. His conviction that mathematical objects posses existence in-
dependent of our thinking and of our discoveries, an existence in a certain sense
primitive with respect to them implied his particular research attitude. It was the
reason and source of his lonely defence of his ideas concerning set theory and
of his stubborn attempts to solve the continuum problem.5 It was not the mod-
esty but just his philosophical convictions that forced him to write in a letter to
G. Mittag-Lefﬂer from 1884 the following words: “all this is not my merit –
4The ﬁrst one has been taken from Newton what Cantor explicitly says. Two others are given
without any indication of the source. We have ascertained that the second motto is a quotation from
Francis Bacon’s Scripta in naturali et universali philosophia, IV, 4: Prodrimi sive anticipationes
philosophiae secundae. Praefatio. We were unable to determine the source of the third motto. May
be it comes from Cantor himself?
5The impossibility of solving this problem – which was in a sense inconsistent with his Platonic
views concerning the nature of mathematical objects – was one of the reasons of his nervous break-
down in the fall of 1884 and of the later mental disease which lasted till the end of his life. The
fact that he cannot solve the problem had a strong inﬂuence on him — there were periods when he
had serious doubts whether the set theory developed by him has any sense and can be treated as a
scientiﬁc theory.

18
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
with respect to the contents of my works I was only a reporter and an ofﬁcial
(nur Berichterstatter und Beamter) (cf. Fraenkel 1932, p. 480).
Note that Cantor attributed to the concepts of set theory not only the exis-
tence in the world of ideas but also in the physical world. Hence he was con-
vinced of the real existence in this world of, say, sets of cardinality ℵ0 or of the
cardinality of continuum. In a letter to G. Mittag-Lefﬂer from 16th November
1884 (cf. Meschkowski 1967, pp. 247–248) he wrote that the set of atoms in the
All is countable (i.e., of the cardinality ℵ0) whereas the cardinality of the set
of “atoms in the ether” (Ätheratomen) belong to cardinals of the second class,
hence this set is not countable. Since the picture of the world provided by the
modern physics is different from that of Cantor’s days (e.g., one has to reject the
idea of the existence of the ether) the examples given by him do not convince us.
Notice also that two theses of Cantor, namely the thesis on speciﬁc “free-
dom” of mathematics and the thesis that mathematical objects are given to us
and not created by us, are in fact not fully compatible and consistent.
Consider now particular philosophical problems connected with the set the-
ory. Cantor treated basic objects of it, hence classes, sets, ordinals or cardinals, in
accordance with his Platonic attitude. Explaining the concept of a set he wrote:
By an “aggregate” (Menge) we are to understand any collection into a whole (Zusammen-
fassung zu einem Ganzen) M of deﬁnite and separate objects m of our intuition or our
thought. These objects are called the “elements” of M
(Beiträge zur Begründung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre, 1895; see Cantor 1932,
p. 282; English translation p. 85). In the paper Über unendliche lineare Punkt-
mannigfaltigkeiten (1883) he wrote:
By a concept of ‘variety’ (Mannigfaltigkeit) or a ‘set’ (Menge) I understand generally any
multiplicity (jedes Viele) which can be thought of as a unity (als Eines), that is, any totality
(Inbegriff ) of a deﬁnite elements which by a certain law can be unitied in a one object.
And he added (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 204):
I hope I am deﬁning in this way something which is connected with Plato’s ε
,ιδoς or ιδ´εα
as well as with this what Plato in his dialogue Philebos or the highest good calls µικτóν.
He sets this against the concept of ´
,απειρoν, i.e., of unboundedness or undetermined what
I am calling an improper inﬁnity (Uneigentlich-unendlich) as well as against the concept
of π´ερασ, i.e., a limit and describes this as an ordered “mixture” (Gemisch) of both. Both
those concepts come from Pythagoras what was indicated already by Plato himself.
In a similar way Cantor treated cardinals and ordinals. In Mitteilungen zur
Lehre vom Transﬁniten (1887–1888) he wrote (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 380):
Cardinal numbers as well as order types are simple conceptual objects; each of them is a
real unity (eine wahre Einheit) (µoν´ας) because in it a certain multitude and variety of units
is uniﬁed into a uniform whole.
Elements of a set M which we consider, should be seen as separated; in an intellectual
picture M of this set [. . . ] which I call its order type are units connected in one organism.

Cantor’s Philosophy of Set Theory
19
In a certain sense every order type can be thought as a whole consisting of a matter and
a form; units contained in it being conceptually different are the matter whereas the order
between them corresponds to the form.
As usual, Cantor refers to ideas of his predecessors and writes (cf. Cantor
1932, pp. 380–381):
If one considers the deﬁnition of a ﬁnite ordinal number by Euclid then one must admit
that he ascribes a number – as we do – to a set what corresponds to its real origin and
does not make it only a “sign” which is ascribed to a single thing in a subjective process
of counting. [. . . ] It seems to me that he conceives units in a number separated in a similar
way as elements in a discrete set to which it refers. Euclid’s deﬁnition lacks at least an
explicit indication that a number has certain comprehensive character [that it is something
homogeneous] (der einheitliche Charakter der Zahl) what is very important.
Considering cardinals numbers Cantor wrote in Beiträge zur Begründung
der transﬁniten Mengenlehre (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 282; English translation p. 86):
We will call by the name ‘power’ or ‘cardinal number’ of M the general concept which,
by means of our active faculty of thought, arises from the aggregate M when we make
abstraction of the nature of its various elements m and of the order in which they are given.
[. . . ]
Since every single element m, if we abstract from its nature, becomes a “unit” the cardinal
number ¯¯M is a deﬁnite aggregate composed of units, and this number has existence in our
mind as an intellectual image or projection of the given aggregate M.
The concept of a set as well as the concept of an order type and of a cardinal
number understood by Cantor not precisely enough led to the discovery of anti-
nomies. Two of them knew already Cantor himself. He discovered the ﬁrst one
– the so called antinomy of the set of all ordinal numbers – in 1895 and in 1896
communicated it in a letter to Hilbert. Independently it was discovered also by
Burali-Forti who published it in 1897 (in the journal Rendic. Palermo 11 (1897),
154–194). It is called today the antinomy of Burali-Forti. It can be formulated
as follows: Let W be a set of all ordinal numbers. As a set of ordinal numbers,
W is well-ordered. Let α be its order type. By theorems on ordinal numbers, α
is greater than all elements of the set W, hence greater than any ordinal number.
But this leads to a contradiction: indeed, on the one hand α does not belong to
W, i.e., ¬α ∈W, and on the other α as an ordinal number, belongs to W, hence
α ∈W.
The second antinomy known to Cantor is the so-called antinomy of the set of
all sets. Cantor wrote about it in a letter to R. Dedekind from 31st August 1899
(cf. Cantor 1932, p. 448). Let A be the set of all sets. Let for a given cardinal
number a, Ma denote a set of cardinality a. For every cardinal number a choose
one set Ma. Let now B =  Ma. Let a0 be the cardinality of B. By appropriate
properties of cardinal numbers one has that the cardinality a
′
0 of the set of all
subsets of a set of cardinality a0 is bigger than a0, i.e., a
′
0 > a0. On the other
hand, since the family B is the sum over all cardinal numbers, there must be in

20
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
it a representative Ma′
0. Hence Ma′
0 is a subset of B and consequently a
′
0 ⩽a0. So
we obtain two contradictory statements:
a
′
0 > a0
and
a
′
0 ⩽a0.
What type of solution did Cantor see? Hence the possibility to form sets from
any multiplicities leads to antinomies, one should, according to Cantor, restrict
the possibilities of forming sets. In a letter to Dedekind from 28th July 1899 he
wrote (cf. Cantor 1932, pp. 443–444):
If we start from the notion of a deﬁnite multiplicity (Vielheit) of things, it is necessary, as I
discovered, to distinguish two kinds of multiplicities.
For a multiplicity can be such that the assumption that all its elements ‘are together’ leads
to a contradiction, so that it is impossible to conceive the multiplicity as a unity, as ‘one ﬁn-
ished thing’ (ein fertiges Ding). Such multiplicities I call absolutely inﬁnite or inconsistent
multiplicities.
As we can readily see, the ‘totality of everything thinkable’, for example, is such a multi-
plicity.
If, on the contrary, the totality of elements of a certain multiplicity can be thought of –
without a contradiction – as ‘being together’ (zusammenseind), so that it is possible to
consider it as ‘one thing’, then I call such a multiplicity consistent or ‘a set’. (In French or
Italian one can express this by words ‘emsemble’ or ‘insieme’).
So the distinction between inconsistent multiplicities called today classes
and consistent multiplicities called sets should solve the difﬁculties. Of course
the multiplicity of all ordinal numbers as well as the family of all sets are not
sets but just inconsistent multiplicities and consequently there are no ordinal nor
cardinal numbers corresponding to them. In this way Cantor eliminated both
antinomies (he wrote about that in letters to Dedekind: about the multiplicity of
all ordinal numbers in a letter from 28th July 1899 – cf. Cantor 1932, pp. 443–
447, and about the multiplicity of all sets in a letter from 31st August 1899 – cf.
Cantor 1932, p. 448).
It is worth noticing that Cantor’s distinction between sets and classes can be
seen as a reference to Leibniz’s metaphysics.
The most important part of Cantor’s set theory was formed by his consid-
erations about inﬁnite sets. Cantor distinguished several forms of inﬁnity. In
the paper Mittteilungen zur Lehre vom Transﬁniten he wrote (cf. Cantor 1932,
p. 378):
I have distinguished three forms of actual inﬁnity: ﬁrst that which is realized in the highest
perfection, in a completely independent being existing outside of the world, in God (in Deo)
and which I call the absolute inﬁnity or shortly the Absolute; secondly that which appears in
an dependent and created world, and third that which can be comprehended in the thought
in abstracto as a mathematical quantity, number or ordinal type. In the both latter cases
in which it appears as a bounded quantity that can be extended and as connected with the
ﬁnite, I call it the transﬁnite (Transﬁnitum) and strictly set it against the Absolute.
This distinction of several types of inﬁnity leads to certain distribution of tasks

Cantor’s Philosophy of Set Theory
21
connected with the investigations of it. Cantor writes (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 378):
As the investigation of the absolute inﬁnity together with the determination how much the
human mind can say about it belongs to the speculative theology, so, on the other side,
questions concerning the transﬁnite belong to metaphysics and mathematics.
Note that the question on the existence of the actual inﬁnity is in all those cases
answered by Cantor afﬁrmatively (what he stated already at the very beginning
of Mittteilungen ...).
Apart from this (ontological) distinction of various forms of inﬁnity accord-
ing to the way of existing Cantor considers also another one coming back to
Aristotle, namely the distinction between actual and potential inﬁnity. In a let-
ter (included later into Mitteilungen ..., cf. Cantor 1932, pp. 400–407) from
28th February 1886 to A. Eulenberg (professor of medicine from Berlin) Cantor
writes (cf. Cantor 1932, pp. 400–404):
If one has before the eyes deﬁnitions of actual and potential inﬁnity then the problems you
are writing about can be easily solved.
I. About P-I (P-I = potential inﬁnity, ´
,απειρoν) one says ﬁrst of all in those cases when one
has a certain indeﬁnite variable ﬁnite quantity which increases above all ﬁnite bounds (here
one can think, e.g., about the so called time counted from a given initial moment) or which
can become smaller than any ﬁnite bound (what is the case of a so called differential);
generally I am talking about P-I in all cases in which a certain indeﬁnite quantity is given
which can be deﬁned in an inﬁnitely many ways (die unzählich vieler Bestimmungen fähig
ist).
II. Under A-I (A-I = actual inﬁnity,
,αϕωρισµ´ενoν) one should understand a quantity which
on the one hand is invariable, constant and deﬁnite in all its parts, which is a real constant
(eine richtige Konstante) and which simultaneously goes beyond any quantity of the same
type. As an example I can quote the totality (Gesamheit, Inbegriff) of all ﬁnite positive
integers; this set is an object for itself (ein Ding an sich) and forms – independently of
the sequence of numbers belonging to it – a certain deﬁnite quantity (Quantum) which is
constant and invariable in all its parts (
,αϕωρισµ´ενoν) and which should be considered as
being greater than any ﬁnite number. [. . . ] Another example is the totality of all points lying
on a certain circle (or on any other given curve).6
Answering the question of A. Eulenberg concerning the problem whether it
is reasonable to use the name inﬁnity in the case of the potential inﬁnity Cantor
wrote (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 404):
P-I is in fact no real inﬁnity – therefore in my Grundlagen I call it improper inﬁnity. On the
other hand it would be difﬁcult to remove completely the mentioned usage of this concept
– the more so as P-I is an easier, nicer and more superﬁcial, less independent concept with
which is connected a certain nice illusion of having something proper and really inﬁnite; in
fact the P-I posses only a borrowed existence (eine geborgte Realität) and the whole time
it indicates the A-I thanks to which it is possible. Hence the name of it used by scholastics,
namely συνκατηγoρηµατικóς is sound.
6As we see Cantor is using here the term ‘quantity’. It was characteristic for the mathematics of
the 19th century. Today it has been eliminated from mathematics and replaced by the concept of set.

22
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
This distinction between actual and potential inﬁnity was treated by Cantor
as very essential. In a letter to S.G. Vivanti from Mantua from May 1886 (in-
cluded later in the paper Mitteilungen ... – cf. Cantor 1932, pp. 409–411) he
wrote (see p. 409):
If one wants to be aware of the origin of widely spread prejudices concerning the actual
inﬁnity, of that horror inﬁniti in mathematics then one should take into account ﬁrst of
all the contrast between actual and potential inﬁnity. While the potential inﬁnity denotes
nothing more than a certain undeﬁned changing quantity (variable) being all the time ﬁnite
and taking values which are either smaller than any small or bigger than any big ﬁnite limit
then the actual inﬁnity refers to a certain ﬁxed in itself (in sich fest) constant value which is
greater than every ﬁnite quantity of the same type. Hence for example the variable taking as
values the integers 1, 2, 3, . . . , ν is a potential inﬁnity while a set (ν) of all ﬁnite integers ν
deﬁned completely in an abstract way by certain law is the simplest example of the actually
inﬁnite quantity (ein aktual-unendliches Quantum).
Despite essential differences between actual inﬁnity and potential inﬁnity
there were in mathematics many misunderstandings concerning them, in partic-
ular in cases “when there was given only a certain potential inﬁnity that was
taken incorrectly as an actual inﬁnity or vice versa, notions which make any
sense only from the point of view of the actual inﬁnity were treated as potential
inﬁnity” (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 409). With the ﬁrst case one has to do, e.g., “when
one treats a differential as an actually inﬁnitely small while it can be treated
only as an auxiliary variable that can take arbitrarily small values – this has been
explicitly stated already by both discoverers of the inﬁnitesimal calculus New-
ton and Leibniz. This mistake can be treated as defeated thanks to the so called
method of limits by which French mathematicians under the direction of great
Cauchy have taken part with glory” (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 410).
Cantor considered the second indicated mistake as more dangerous. It ap-
peared for example in the theory of irrational numbers which cannot be founded
without using the actual inﬁnity in a certain form. The latter is indispensable
both in analysis as well as in number theory and algebra. Its indispensability is
justiﬁed by Cantor in the following way (cf. Cantor 1932, pp. 410–411):
As there is no doubt that we are forbidden not to have changing quantities in the sense
of the potential inﬁnity, one can deduce from that the necessity of the actual inﬁnity as
follows: To be able to apply such a changing quantity in mathematical considerations one
should beforehand exactly know, by a deﬁnition, its scope; but the latter cannot be unstable
because there will be no constant and ﬁrm basis of our considerations; hence this scope is a
certain deﬁned actually inﬁnite set.
Consequently any potential inﬁnity, if it should be mathematically useful, assumes the ac-
tual inﬁnity.
Since the actual inﬁnity is indispensable for foundations of mathematics, it
should be carefully studied. From the characteristics of the actual inﬁnity given
above (and its distinction from the potential one) one could deduce that it is

Cantor’s Philosophy of Set Theory
23
a quantity that cannot be increased (unvermehrbar). But this is – according to
Cantor – an incorrect supposition though it is widely spread in the antique phi-
losophy as well as in scholastic and modern philosophy. One should make (cf.
Cantor 1932, p. 405) “a fundamental distinction by distinguishing:
– IIa actual inﬁnity that can be increased, hence the transﬁnite (Transﬁni-
tum),
– IIb actual inﬁnity that cannot be increased, hence the Absolute.”
All mathematical examples of the actual inﬁnity given by Cantor (hence “the
totality consisting of all points lying on a certain circle (or on any other curve)”
mentioned above or the smallest transﬁnite ordinal number ω) are of the type IIa.
There are certain connections between the actual inﬁnity that can be increased,
i.e., the transﬁnite, and the actual inﬁnity that cannot be increased, i.e., the Ab-
solute. Cantor writes (cf. 1932, pp. 405–406):
The transﬁnite – with various shapes and forms it can take – indicates in a necessary way
the Absolute, the “real inﬁnity”, a quantity to which nothing can be added or from which
nothing can be deducted and which consequently can be treated as the absolute quantitative
maximum. The latter overcomes in a certain sense the human ability of comprehension and
cannot be described mathematically; on the other hand the transﬁnite not only ﬁlls a sub-
stantial space of possibility in God’s knowledge but is also a rich and constantly expanding
domain of ideal research and – in my opinion – is realized also in the world of created
things and does exists to a certain degree and in various relations. In this way it expresses
the magniﬁcence of the creator strongly than it would be possible in a “ﬁnite world”. This
fact must wait still a long time to be commonly acknowledged and accepted especially by
theologians.
Accepting the existence of the actual inﬁnity Cantor decidedly rejected the
actually inﬁnitely small quantities. In his later writings, specially in letters, he
sharply engaged in polemics with the introduction of them into mathematics,
with “this inﬁnitely bacillus of cholera in mathematics” (inﬁnitär Cholera Bacil-
lus der Mathematik) as he writes in the letter to S.G. Vivanti from 13th Decem-
ber 1893 (cf. Meschkowski 1962–1966). In the letter to F. Goldscheider, the
grammar-school teacher in Berlin, from 13th May 1887 (and in the almost iden-
tical letter to K. Weierstrass from 16th May 1887 – both included into Mitteilun-
gen ..., cf. Cantor 1932, p. 407–409) he wrote (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 407):
You mention in your letter the question concerning the actually inﬁnitely small quantities.
In many places of my works you will ﬁnd an opinion that they are impossible mental objects
(Gedankendinge), i.e., inconsistent in themselves.
Cantor attempts to justify this position using his theory of transﬁnite numbers.
In the letters mentioned above he wrote (cf. Cantor 1932, pp. 407–408):
I mean the following theorem: “Linear numerical quantities ζ different from zero (i.e.,
shortly speaking such numerical quantities that can be represented by certain bounded con-
tinuous rectilineal segments) which would be smaller than arbitrarily small ﬁnite numerical

24
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
quantity, do not exists, that is they are inconsistent with the notion of a rectilineal numerical
quantity.” My proof is as follows: I am starting from assuming the existence of a rectilineal
quantity ζ which is so small that its nth product
ζ · n
for any arbitrarily big ﬁnite integer n is smaller than one and I am proving now – using the
concept of a rectilineal quantity and some theorems of the transﬁnite number theory – that
also
ζ · ν
is smaller that any arbitrarily small ﬁnite quantity where ν denotes an arbitrarily big trans-
ﬁnite ordinal number (i.e., the cardinality (Anzahl) or the type of a certain well ordered set)
from any arbitrarily high class of numbers. This does not mean that ζ cannot be made a
ﬁnite quantity by an arbitrarily big actually inﬁnite product, hence it certainly cannot be
an element of ﬁnite quantities. Consequently the assumption made at the very beginning
is inconsistent with the concept of a rectilineal quantity which has the property that any
rectilineal quantity can be thought of as being an integral part of other quantities, in partic-
ular of the ﬁnite rectilineal quantities. Hence the only thing that can be done is to reject the
assumption according to which there would exist such a quantity that for any ﬁnite integer
n it would be smaller than 1
n and in this way our theorem has been proved.
It is rather difﬁcult to agree with this reasoning of Cantor. First he does
not make precise the properties that he associates with his “rectilineal numeri-
cal quantities”. Does he allow nonarchimedian number systems? Secondly, he
makes use in his proof of “certain theorems of transﬁnite number theory” but he
does not mention them explicitly.
Today having tools of the model theory and of the nonstandard analysis we
know much more about inﬁnitely small quantities and we do not call them “paper
quantities” as Cantor did in the letter to S.G. Vivanti from 13th December 1893
mentioned above (cf. Meschkowski 1962–1966, p. 507).
Looking for philosophical justiﬁcation of his theory of inﬁnite sets Cantor re-
ferred to metaphysics and theology. He was convinced that just there one should
look for the foundations. In a letter to Th. Esser, a Dominican friar being active
in Rome, from 1st February 1896 he wrote (cf. Meschkowski 1967, p. 111 and
p. 123):
The general theory of sets [. . . ] belongs entirely to metaphysics. [...] The founding of
principles of mathematics and natural sciences belongs to metaphysics; hence it should
treat them as its own children as well as servants and assistants that should not be lost, on
the contrary – it should constantly take care of them; as a queen bee residing in a beehive
sends thousands of diligent bees to gardens to suck out nectar from ﬂowers and to convert it
then under its supervision into excellent honey, so metaphysics – in a similar way – should
take care that mathematics and natural sciences bring from the far kingdom of the corporal
and spiritual nature bricks to ﬁnish its own palace.
Consequently Cantor tried to prove the existence of the transﬁnite on the ground
of the Absolute. This is mentioned, e.g., by cardinal J. Franzelin, a Jesuit, philo-
sopher and theologian, one of the main papal theologians of Vaticanum Primum

Cantor’s Philosophy of Set Theory
25
with whom Cantor corresponded. He wrote answering a letter of Cantor (cf.
Cantor 1932, p. 386):
In a letter to me you are writing [. . . ] that there exists a proof starting from the existence
of God and deducing from the highest perfectness of God the possibility of creating an
ordered transﬁnite. Assuming that your actual transﬁnite does not contain any inconsis-
tency, your conclusion on the possibility of creating the transﬁnite deduced from the God’s
omnipotence is entirely correct.
Cantor believed that the transﬁnite does not only take anything from the na-
ture of God but – on the contrary – it adds glory to it. The real existence of
the transﬁnite reﬂects the inﬁnite nature of God’s existence. Cantor constructed
even two proofs in which, a priori and a posteriori, resp., showed the exis-
tence of transﬁnite numbers in concreto. A priori, from the concept of God one
can deduce directly, on the base of the perfectness of his nature, the possibility
and necessity of the creation of the transﬁnite.7 On the other hand construct-
ing the proof a posteriori Cantor proved that since it is impossible to explain in
a complete way the natural phenomena without assuming the existence of the
transﬁnite in natura naturata, hence the transﬁnite does exists.
Moreover, Cantor was convinced of the great meaning and signiﬁcance of
his set theory for metaphysics and theology. In particular he was of the opinion
that it will help to overcome various mistakes appearing in them, for example the
mistake of pantheism. In a letter to the Dominican friar Th. Esser from February
1896 he wrote: “Thanks to my works the Christian philosophy has now for the
ﬁrst time in the history the true theory of the inﬁnite” (cf. Dauben 1979, p. 147).
It is worth saying more on the relations between pantheism and Cantor’s the-
ory of the inﬁnity. Just the suspicion that Cantor’s theory contains elements of
pantheism forced catholic theologians, in particular cardinal J. Franzelin men-
tioned above, to look carefully at his theory. Cantor believed that the inﬁnity
exists in natura naturata. Franzelin thought that such an opinion was very dan-
gerous and could lead to the pantheism. And the latter, as is known, was ac-
knowledged to be a erroneous doctrine and has been formally condemned by
the decree of Pio IX from 1861. Every attempt to correlate God’s inﬁnity and a
concrete temporal inﬁnity suggested the pantheism. Every actual inﬁnity in con-
creto, in natura naturata, could be identiﬁed with the inﬁnity of God, in natura
naturans. Cantor maintaining that his actually inﬁnite transﬁnite numbers exist
in concreto seemed to go in the direction of pantheism.
This explains why Franzelin protested against the thesis on the admissibil-
ity of the actual inﬁnity in concreto maintaining the “possible” inﬁnity only.
7This proof was criticized by the cardinal Franzelin mentioned above. In a letter to Cantor he
indicates that it is a mistake to deduce the necessity of the creation of something from the assumption
of God’s perfectness, from his “inﬁnite goodness and magniﬁcence” and from the possibility of the
creation act. Such a necessity would in a certain sense limit God’s freedom and consequently will
diminish his perfectness (cf. Cantor 1932, p. 386).

26
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
But Cantor believing in the actual inﬁnity in concreto distinguished two types
of inﬁnity what reassured the theologians, in particular cardinal Franzelin. In a
letter to J. Franzelin of 22nd January 1886 Cantor explained that he added to
the distinction between the inﬁnity in natura naturans and in natura naturata
the distinction between Inﬁnitum aeternum increatum sive Absolutum (reserved
for God and his attributes) and Inﬁnitum creatum sive Transﬁnitum (exempliﬁed
for example in the actually inﬁnite number of objects in the Universe). Franzelin
was satisﬁed by those explanations and gave a sort of imprimatur to Cantor’s
works. On this occasion he wrote that the absolute inﬁnity is a proper inﬁnity
while the actual inﬁnity (transﬁnite) should be treated only as the improper in-
ﬁnity. This story explains also what was the reason of distinguishing various
types of inﬁnity mentioned above.
Cantor had vivid contacts with catholic philosophers and theologians. This
followed not only from common – in a certain sense – interests but also from
the fact that just in them he found true and faithful readers and recipients of
his conceptions (what strongly and painfully contrasted with the big lack of un-
derstanding and aversion he experienced form his colleagues mathematicians).
One should mention here the German theologian and philosopher C. Gutberlet,
professor of philosophy, apologetics and dogmatics in Fulda, the founder of the
journal Philosophisches Jahrbuch der Görres-Gesellschaft, leading representa-
tive of the neoscholastic thought. He was interested very much in problems of
the actual inﬁnity. He thought that the works of Cantor began a new phase in the
studies on the inﬁnity. He tried to ﬁnd in Cantor’s works a justiﬁcation of his
own conceptions and the usage of the actually inﬁnite numbers.
Works of Cantor were carefully studied and commented by neoscholastics.
One should mention here ﬁrst of all T. Pesch and J. Hontheim, Benedictines from
the abby Maria-Laach in Reihnland as well as the Italian theologian I. Jeiler,
the Jesuit and later cardinal J. Franzelin mentioned above and Dominican friar
Th. Esser. Cantor listened with care to their opinions and he was very particu-
lar about being in accordance with the ofﬁcial catholic doctrine. In a letter to
I. Jeiler he wrote in 1896: “Everything concerning this problem (and I am telling
you this conﬁdentially) will be of course checked now by Dominican friars in
Rome – they correspond with me about this subject. All will be directed by Fa-
ther Thomas Esser” (cf. Dauben 1979, p. 144). One can wonder why Cantor was
so full of fear and did not want to depart from the ofﬁcial doctrine of Roman
Catholic Church. He was not Roman Catholic, his father was a Jew and believer
of the Judaism. Shortly before Georg’s birth he converted to Protestantism. Can-
tor’s mother was Roman Catholic. He himself was brought up in the protestant
spirit and in this religion he brought up his own children. Nevertheless he was
a very religious man and this can explain his interests in the theological impli-
cations of set theory as well as his search for justiﬁcation of the latter just in
theology and metaphysics. Moreover he was convinced about the absolute truth

Cantor’s Philosophy of Set Theory
27
of his set theory because, as he stated, it has been revealed to him. Hence he saw
himself not only as a messenger of God transferring exactly the new revealed
theory of transﬁnite numbers but also as an ambassador of God. In a letter to
I. Jeiler from 1888 he wrote (cf. Dauben 1979, p. 147):
I have no doubts towards the truth of the transﬁnite which I have recognized with the help
of God and which I have been studied in its variety for the last twenty years; each year and
even each day lead me further in those studies.
The turn of his interests from mathematics to philosophy which took place be-
ginning with the crisis of 1884 was treated by him as a consequence of God’s ac-
tion. In a letter to C. Hermite from 21st January 1894 he wrote (cf. Meschkowski
1967, p. 124):
I should admit that metaphysics and theology took possession of my soul to such a degree
that I have relatively few time left for my ﬁrst hobby (für meine erste Flamme).
If ﬁfteen years ago, even eight years ago, I had been given – in accordance with my wishes
– a wilder ﬁeld of activity, for example at the university in Berlin or Göttigen,8 I would
have probably performed my duties not worse than Fucks, Schwarz, Frobenius, Felix Klein,
Heinrich Weber etc. But now I thank God, the best and omniscient, for refusing those wishes
because in this way he forced me through deeper penetration of theology to serve him and
his holy Roman Catholic Church, to serve better that I would be able to do working in
mathematics.
Cantor tried to interpret his results in the religious way. As G. Kowalew-
ski, one of the biographers of Cantor, remembers, the increasing sequence of
cardinal numbers was for him “something holy, it formed in a certain sense steps
leading to the throne of the Inﬁnite” (cf. Kowalewski 1950). At another place
Kowalewski mentiones Cantor’s statement connected with the antinomy of the
set of all sets (cf. Kowalewski 1950, p. 120):
In one of the speeches of Solomon on the occasion of the consecration of the temple (1
Kings 8, 27; 2 Chronicles 6, 18) we read: “But will God indeed dwell on the earth? Behold,
the heaven and heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I
have builded?”9 “Heaven of heavens” – does it not remember “the set of all sets”? What
Solomon has said can be translated into the language of mathematics as follows: God, the
highest inﬁnity can be grasped (erfasst werden) neither by a set nor by a set of all sets.
And Kowalewski adds that Cantor “liked such religious thoughts very much”.
∗∗∗
Finishing our considerations we can say that Cantor’s set theory grew out
not only from strictly mathematical considerations but there is a deep philo-
8Cantor attempted for a long time to get a position of professor at the university in Berlin or
Göttingen. He did not succeed and the whole life was professor at the provincial university in Halle.
9Translation according to The Holy Bible Containing the Old and New Testament. Translated out
of the Original Tongues and with the Former Translations Diligently Compared and Revised by His
Majesty’s Special Command. London: Trinitarian Bible Society.

28
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
sophical background behind it. The concept of the inﬁnite appearing so often in
mathematics (and in many cases indispensable) puzzled Cantor. The necessity of
explaining the essence of the inﬁnite was the reason and basis of his studies that
led him not only towards “dry” technical mathematical considerations but also
towards deeper philosophical justiﬁcations of the mathematical inﬁnity and his
attempts to put it in the context of theological and metaphysical considerations.
The connections between those scientiﬁc problems and studies with his deepest
outlook on life (Weltanschauung) is also very interesting and should be stressed.

2
LEIBNIZ’S AND KANT’S PHILOSOPHICAL IDEAS
VS. HILBERT’S PROGRAM1
The aim of this paper is to indicate some connections between Leibniz’s and
Kant’s philosophical ideas on the one hand and Hilbert’s and Gödel’s philosophy
of mathematics on the other. We shall be interested mainly in issues connected
with Hilbert’s program and Gödel’s incompleteness theorems.
Hilbert’s program – which gave rise to one of the important domains of math-
ematical logic, i.e., to proof theory, and to one of the three main theories in the
contemporary philosophy of mathematics, i.e., to formalism – arose in a crisis
situation in the foundations of mathematics on the turn of the nineteenth cen-
tury.2
Main controversy centered around the problem of the legitimacy of abstract
objects, in particular of the actual inﬁnity. Some paradoxes were discovered in
Cantor’s set theory but they could be removed by appropriate modiﬁcations of
the latter. The really embarrassing contradiction was discovered a bit later by
Russell in Frege’s system of logic.
Hilbert’s program was on the one hand a protest against proposals of over-
coming those difﬁculties and securing the ediﬁce of mathematics by restricting
the subject and methods of the latter (cf. Brouwer’s intuitionism as well as pro-
posals of L. Kronecker, H. Poincaré, H. Weyl) and on the other an attempt to
justify the classical (inﬁnite) mathematics and to save its integrity by showing
that it is secure.3 His attitude can be well characterized by his famous (and often
1Originally published under the title “Leibniz’s and Kant’s Philosophical Ideas and the Develop-
ment of Hilbert’s Program” in Logique et Analyse 179–180 (2002), 421–437. Reprinted with kind
permission of the editor of the journal Logique et Analyse.
2It is not clear who introduced the name ‘crisis of the foundations of mathematics’ (Grundlagen-
krise der Mathematik) but it was Hermann Weyl who popularized it through his lecture “Über die
neue Grundlagenkrise in der Mathematik” held in Zurich – cf. (Weyl 1921).
3Detlefsen writes that “Hilbert did want to preserve classical mathematics, but this was not for
him an end in itself. What he valued in classical mathematics was its efﬁciency (including its psy-
chological naturalness) as a mean of locating the truths of real or ﬁnitary mathematics. Hence, any
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n
Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 29–39. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

30
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
quoted) sentence from (1926): “No one should be able to drive us from the par-
adise that Cantor created for us” (“Aus dem Paradies, das Cantor uns geschaffen
hat, soll uns niemand vertreiben können”).
The problem was stated for the ﬁrst time by Hilbert in his lecture at the Sec-
ond International Congress of Mathematicians held in Paris in 1900 (cf. Hilbert
1901). Among twenty three main problems which should be solved he men-
tioned there as Problem 2 the task of proving the consistency of axioms of arith-
metic (by which he meant number theory and analysis). He has been returning
to the problem of justiﬁcation of mathematics in his lectures and papers (espe-
cially in the twenties) where he proposed a method of solving it.4 One should
mention here his lecture from 1901 held at the meeting of Göttingen Mathe-
matical Society in which he spoke about the problem of completeness and de-
cidability. Hilbert asked there, in E. Husserl’s formulation: “Would I have the
right to say that every proposition dealing only with the positive integers must
be either true or false on the basis of the axioms for positive integers?” (cf.
Husserl 1891, p. 445). In a series of lectures in the twenties, Hilbert continued to
make the problems more precise and simultaneously communicated partial re-
sults obtained by himself and his students and fellow researchers: Paul Bernays,
Wilhelm Ackermann, Moses Schönﬁnkel, John von Neumann. One should men-
tion here Hilbert’s lectures in Zurich (1917), Hamburg (1922) (cf. Hilbert 1922),
Leipzig (1922), Münster (1925) (cf. Hilbert 1926), second lecture in Hamburg
(1927) (cf. Hilbert 1927) and the lecture “Problems der Grundlegung der Mathe-
matik” at the International Congress of Mathematicians held in Bologna (1928)
(cf. Hilbert 1929). In the latter Hilbert set out four open problems connected with
the justiﬁcation of classical mathematics which should be solved: (1) to give a
(ﬁnitistic) consistency proof of the basic parts of analysis (or second-order func-
tional calculus), (2) to extend the proof for higher-order functional calculi, (3)
to prove the completeness of the axiom systems for number theory and analysis,
(4) to solve the problem of completeness of the system of logical rules (i.e., the
ﬁrst-order logic) in the sense that all (universally) valid sentences are provable.
In this lecture Hilbert claimed also – wrongly, as it would turn out – that the
consistency of number theory had been already proved.5
alternative to classical mathematics having the same beneﬁts of efﬁciency would presumably have
been equally welcome to Hilbert” (cf. Detlefsen 1990, p. 374).
4A good account of the development of Hilbert’s views can be found in Smory´nski (1988); see
also Peckhaus (1990) where detailed analysis of Hilbert’s scientiﬁc activity in the ﬁeld of the founda-
tions of mathematics in the period 1899–1917 can be found, as well as Detlefsen (1986) and Ketelsen
(1994).
5Only after Gödel published his incompleteness theorems in 1931 did Hilbert come to realize
that Ackermann’s proof, which he meant here, did not establish the consistency of all of number
theory. In fact, Ackermann showed in (1924–1925) only the consistency of a fragment of number
theory. Cf. also Ackermann (1940). Other results of that type were also obtained by J. von Neumann
(1927) and J. Herbrand (1931).

Leibniz’s and Kant’s Philosophical Ideas vs. Hilbert’s Program
31
Hilbert’s attempts to clarify and to make more precise the program of justi-
fying classical mathematics were accompanied by a philosophical reﬂection on
mathematics. One can see here the turn to idealism,6 in particular to Kant’s phi-
losophy. In fact Hilbert’s program was Kantian in character. It can be seen ﬁrst
of all in his paper “Über das Unendliche” (1926). He wrote there:
Finally, we should recall our true theme and draw the net result of our reﬂections for the
inﬁnite. That net result is this: we ﬁnd that the inﬁnite is nowhere realized. It is neither
present in nature nor admissible as a foundation in that part of our thought having to do
with the understanding (in unserem verstandesmäßigen Denken) – a remarkable harmony
between Being and Thought. We gain a conviction that runs counter to the earlier endeavors
of Frege and Dedekind, the conviction that, if scientiﬁc knowledge is to be possible, certain
intuitive conceptions (Vorstellungen) and insights are indispensable; logic alone does not
sufﬁce. The right to operate with the inﬁnite can be secured only by means of the ﬁnite.
The role which remains for the inﬁnite is rather that of an idea – if, following Kant’s termi-
nology, one understands as an idea a concept of reason which transcends all experience and
by means of which the concrete is to be completed into a totality [...].7
In Kant’s philosophy, ideas of reason, or transcendental ideas, are concepts
which transcend the possibility of experience but on the other hand are an an-
swer to a need in us to form our judgements into systems that are complete and
uniﬁed. Therefore we form judgements concerning an external reality which
are not uniquely determined by our cognition, judgements concerning things in
themselves. To do that we need ideas of reason.
Kant claimed that space and time as forms of intuition (Formen der reinen
Anschauung) sufﬁce to justify and to found the notion of potential inﬁnity (the
actual inﬁnity was not considered by him). Hilbert indicated a mistake in this
approach. Since the actual inﬁnity cannot be justiﬁed by purely logical means,
Hilbert treated it as an ideal element. Hence his solution to the problem of the
actual inﬁnity was in fact of a Kantian character.
In likening the inﬁnite to a Kantian idea, Hilbert suggests that it is to be un-
derstood as a regulative rather than a descriptive device. Therefore sentences
concerning the inﬁnite, and generally expressions which Hilbert called ideal
propositions, should not be taken as sentences describing externally existing en-
tities. In fact they mean nothing in themselves, they have no truth-value and they
cannot be the content of any genuine judgement. Their role is rather regulative
than descriptive. But on the other hand they are necessary in our thinking. Hence
their similarity to Kant’s ideas of reason is evident – they play the similar cogni-
tive role. We do not claim that the ideal elements by Hilbert are the same as (are
identical with) ideas of reason by Kant. We claim only that they play the same
role, i.e., they enable us to preserve the rules of reason (Verstand) in a simple,
6Detlefsen says in this context about instrumentalism – cf. his (1986).
7English translation after Detlefsen (1993a).

32
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
uniform and simultaneously general form. It is achieved just by extending the
domain by ideal elements (ideas) (cf. Majer 1993a; 1993b).
We use ideas of reason and ideal elements in our thinking because they al-
low us to retain the patterns of classical logic in our reasoning. But the operations
of the classical logic can no longer be employed semantically as operations on
meaningful propositions – there is nothing in the externally existing reality that
would correspond to ideal elements and ideas of reason, in fact they are free
creations of our reason and have only “symbolic” meaning. Their meaning can
be determined only by an analogy – they cannot be understood as given by in-
tuition (Anschauung). Therefore the operations of the classical logic should be
understood only syntactically, as operations on signs and strings of sings. Hilbert
wrote in (1926):
We have introduced the ideal propositions to ensure that the customary laws of logic again
hold one and all. But since the ideal propositions, namely, the formulas, insofar as they do
not express ﬁnitary assertions, do not mean anything in themselves, the logical operations
cannot be applied to them in a contentual way, as they are to the ﬁnitary propositions.
Hence, it is necessary to formalize the logical operations and also the mathematical proofs
themselves; this requires a transcription of the logical relations into formulas, so that to the
mathematical signs we must still adjoin some logical signs, say
&
∨
→
–
and
or
implies
not
and use, besides the mathematical variables, a, b, c, . . ., also logical variables, namely vari-
able propositions A, B,C, . . .
Hence the abstracting from meaning of expressions is connected with Hil-
bert’s attempt to preserve the laws of classical logic as laws governing mathe-
matical thinking and reasoning. It is also connected with the distinction between
real and ideal propositions according to which real propositions play the role of
Kant’s judgements of the understanding (Verstand) and the ideal propositions
the part of his ideas of pure reason. In (1926) Hilbert wrote:
Kant taught – and it is an integral part of his doctrine – that mathematics treats a sub-
ject matter which is given independently of logic. Mathematics, therefore can never be
grounded solely on logic. Consequently, Frege’s and Dedekind’s attempts to so ground it
were doomed to failure.
As a further precondition for using logical deduction and carrying out logical operations,
something must be given in conception, viz., certain extralogical concrete objects which
are intuited as directly experienced prior to all thinking. For logical deduction to be cer-
tain, we must be able to see every aspect of these objects, and their properties, differences,
sequences, and contiguities must be given, together with the objects themselves, as some-
thing which cannot be reduced to something else and which requires no reduction. This is
the basic philosophy which I ﬁnd necessary not just for mathematics, but for all scientiﬁc
thinking, understanding and communicating. The subject mater of mathematics is, in ac-
cordance with this theory, the concrete symbols themselves whose structure is immediately
clear and recognizable.

Leibniz’s and Kant’s Philosophical Ideas vs. Hilbert’s Program
33
According to this Hilbert distinguished between the unproblematic, ﬁnitistic
part of mathematics and the inﬁnitistic part that needed justiﬁcation. Finitistic
mathematics deals with so called real propositions, which are completely mean-
ingful because they refer only to given concrete objects. Inﬁnitistic mathematics
on the other hand deals with so called ideal propositions that contain reference
to inﬁnite totalities.
By Hilbert, analogously as it was by Kant, ideal propositions (and ideal el-
ements) played an auxiliary role in our thinking, they were used to extend our
system of real judgements. Hilbert believed that every true ﬁnitary proposition
had a ﬁnitary proof. Inﬁnitistic objects and methods enabled us to give easier,
shorter and more elegant proofs but every such proof could be replaced by a ﬁni-
tary one. This is the reﬂection of Kant’s views of the relationship between the
ideas of reason and the judgements of the understanding (cf. Kant 1787, p. 383).
Kant’s and Hilbert’s ideas on the nature of mathematics and the character of
its propositions described above resemble also some ideas of Leibniz. Leibniz’s
ideas on the nature of mathematics can be characterized as simultaneously pla-
tonic and nominalistic. His nominalism was rather ontological than linguistical.
He claimed that we can point out mathematical objects such as, for example,
geometrical ﬁgures, only by our reason. They do not exist anywhere in things
of the external world. The mathematics of the Nature does not apply to the sub-
stance, to what is ontologically primitive. To the latter applies mathematics of
ideas and possibilities, i.e., God’s real mathematics.
Let us return to Hilbert’s program. According to that the inﬁnitistic math-
ematics can be justiﬁed only by ﬁnitistic methods because only they can give
it security (Sicherheit). Hilbert’s proposal was to base mathematics on ﬁnitistic
mathematics via proof theory (Beweistheorie).8 It was planned as a new math-
ematical discipline in which one studies mathematical proofs by mathematical
methods. Its main goal was to show that proofs which use ideal elements in order
to prove results in the real part of mathematics always yield correct results. One
can distinguish here two aspects: consistency problem and conservation prob-
lem.
The consistency problem consists in showing by ﬁnitistic methods that the
inﬁnitistic mathematics is consistent;9 the conservation problem consists in show-
8Later Hilbert named it metamathematics (Metamathematik). This name was used by him for the
ﬁrst time in his lecture “Neubegründung der Mathematik” (1922). It is worth noting that the very
term ‘Metamathematik’, though in another meaning, appeared already in the nineteenth century in
connection with discussions on non-Euclidean geometries. It was constructed in the analogy to the
word ‘Metaphysik’ (metaphysics) and had a pejorative meaning. For instance, F. Schultze in (1881)
said about “die metamathematischen Spekulationen über den Raum” (metamathematical specula-
tions about the space). B. Erdmann and H. von Helmholtz contributed to the change of the meaning
of this term to a positive one.
9Note that consistency of the mathematical domain extended by ideal elements (which have

34
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
ing by ﬁnitistic methods that any real sentence which can be proved in the in-
ﬁnitistic part of mathematics can be proved also in the ﬁnitistic part, i.e., that
inﬁnitistic mathematics is conservative over ﬁnitistic mathematics with respect
to real sentences and, even more, that there is a ﬁnitistic method of translating
inﬁnitistic proofs of real sentences into ﬁnitistic ones. Both those aspects are
interconnected.
Hilbert’s proposal to carry out this program consisted of two steps. To be
able to study seriously mathematics and mathematical proofs one should ﬁrst of
all deﬁne accurately the notion of a proof. In fact, the concept of a proof used
in mathematical practice is intuitive, loose and vague, it has clearly a subjective
character. This does not cause much trouble in practice. On the other hand if
one wants to study mathematics as a science – as Hilbert did – then one needs
a precise notion of proof. This was provided by mathematical logic. In works
of G. Frege and B. Russell (who used ideas and achievements of G. Peano) one
ﬁnds an idea (and its implementations) of a formalized system in which a math-
ematical proof is reduced to a series of very simple and elementary steps, each
of which consisting of a purely formal transformation on the sentences which
were previously proved. In this way the concept of mathematical proof was sub-
jected to a process of formalization. Therefore the ﬁrst step proposed by Hilbert
in realization of his program was to formalize mathematics, i.e., to reconstitute
inﬁnitistic mathematics as a big, elaborate formal system (containing classical
logic, inﬁnite set theory, arithmetic of natural numbers, analysis). An artiﬁcial
symbolic language and rules of building well-formed formulas should be ﬁxed.
Next axioms and rules of inference (referring only to the form, to the shape of
formulas and not to their sense or meaning) ought to be introduced. In such a
way theorems of mathematics become those formulas of the formal language
which have a formal proof based on a given set of axioms and given rules of
inference. There was one condition put on the set of axioms (and rules of in-
ference): they ought to be chosen in such a way that they sufﬁce to solve any
problem formulated in the language of the considered theory as a real sentence,
i.e., they ought to form a complete set of axioms with respect to real sentences.
The second step of Hilbert’s program was to give a proof of the consistency
and conservativeness of mathematics. Such a proof should be carried out by
ﬁnitistic methods. This was possible since the formulas of the system of formal-
ized mathematics are strings of symbols and proofs are strings of formulas, i.e.,
strings of strings of symbols. Hence they can be manipulated ﬁnitistically. To
prove the consistency it sufﬁces to show that there are not two sequences of for-
mulas (two formal proofs) such that one of them has as its end element a formula
ϕ and the other ¬ϕ (the negation of the formula ϕ). To show conservativeness
only “symbolic” meaning given by analogy and not by intuition (Anschauung)) corresponds to the
regulative role of the ideas of reason by Kant.

Leibniz’s and Kant’s Philosophical Ideas vs. Hilbert’s Program
35
it should be proved that any proof of a real sentence can be transformed into a
proof not referring to ideal objects.
Having formulated the program of justiﬁcation of the classical (inﬁnite)
mathematics Hilbert and his students set out to realize it. And they scored some
successes – cf., e.g., Ackermann (1924–1925; 1940) or von Neumann (1927).
But soon something was to happen that undermined Hilbert’s program.
In 1930 Kurt Gödel proved two theorems, called today Gödel’s incomplete-
ness theorems, which state that (1) arithmetic of natural numbers and all richer
formal systems are essentially incomplete provided they are consistent and that
(2) no consistent theory containing arithmetic of natural numbers proves its own
consistency (cf. Gödel 1931a).
Gödel’s results struck Hilbert’s program. We shall not consider here the prob-
lem whether they rejected it.10 We shall rather ask what were the reactions and
opinions of Hilbert and Gödel. It turns out that their proposals and solutions
were strongly connected with some ideas of Leibniz.
Having learned about Gödel’s result (i.e., the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem)
Hilbert “was angry at ﬁrst, but was soon trying to ﬁnd a way around it” (cf.
Smory´nski 1988). He proposed to add to the rules of inference a simple form of
the ω-rule:
ϕ(0), ϕ(1), ϕ(2), . . . , ϕ(n), . . .
(n ∈N)
∀x ϕ(x)
.
This rule allows the derivation of all true arithmetical sentences but, in contrast to
all rules of the ﬁrst-order logic, it has inﬁnitely many premisses.11 In Preface to
the ﬁrst volume of Hilbert and Bernays’ monograph Grundlagen der Mathematik
(1934, 1939) Hilbert wrote:
[. . . ] the occasionally held opinion, that from the results of Gödel follows the non-executa-
bility of my Proof Theory, is shown to be erroneous. This result shows indeed only that for
more advanced consistency proofs one must use the ﬁnite standpoint in a deeper way than
is necessary for the consideration of elementary formalism.
To be able to indicate some connections between those ideas of Hilbert and
some ideas of Leibniz, let us recall that according to Leibniz theorems are either
primitive truths, i.e., axioms of a given theory, or propositions (called derived
truths) which can be reduced to the primitive ones by means of a proof. A proof
consists either of a ﬁnite number of steps (in this case one says about ﬁnitistic
truth or about ﬁnitely analytic sentences) or of an inﬁnite number of steps (one
deals then with inﬁnitistic truths or with inﬁnitely analytic sentences). Primitive
10This problem is discussed, e.g., in Murawski (1994; 1999a).
11In fact the rule proposed by Hilbert in his lecture in Hamburg in December 1930 (cf. Hilbert
1931) had rather informal character (a system obtained by admitting it would be semi-formal). Hil-
bert proposed that whenever A(z) is a quantiﬁer-free formula for which it can be shown (ﬁnitarily)
that A(z) is correct (richtig) numerical formula for each particular numerical instance z, then its uni-
versal generalization ∀xA(x) may be taken as a new premise (Ausgangsformel) in all further proofs.

36
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
truths are necessary and ﬁnitely (directly) analytic, derived truths are either nec-
essary (though not identical), i.e., ﬁnitely analytic, or contingent, i.e., inﬁnitely
analytic. On the other hand Leibniz claimed that necessary truths possess ﬁnite
proofs while contingent ones have only inﬁnite proofs. So the difference be-
tween them is rather of a practical character and not of a substantial character.
A being with unbounded calculating possibilities would be able to decide all the
truths directly, hence any truth would be for him necessary. Here is the source
and reason for Leibniz’s idea of a real logical calculus, ars combinatoria (only
its fragments are known to us in the form of ﬁnitistic systems of logic). This
calculus must be inﬁnitistic. So Leibniz allowed inﬁnite elements in reasonings
and proofs. Consequently Hilbert’s proposal to allow the ω-rule is compatible
with Leibniz’s ideas and has in fact the Leibnizian character.
An explicit inﬂuence of Leibniz on Gödel’s reactions on the new situation
in logic and the foundations of mathematics after incompleteness results can
be also seen. Before we present and discuss some details note that after 1945
Gödel’s interests were concentrated almost exclusively on the philosophy of
mathematics and on the philosophy in general. He studied works of Kant and
Leibniz as well as phenomenological works of Husserl (especially in the ﬁfti-
eth). In his Nachlaß several notes on the works of those philosophers and on their
views were found. Gödel claimed that it was just Leibniz who had mostly inﬂu-
enced his own scientiﬁc thinking and activity (Gödel studied Leibniz’s works al-
ready in the thirties). Hao Wang writes that “Gödel’s major results and projects
can be viewed as developments of Leibniz’s conceptions along several direc-
tions” (cf. Wang 1987, p. 261). Gödel accepted main ideas of Leibniz’s mon-
adology, he was interested in a realization of a modiﬁed form of characteris-
tica universalis (Gödel’s incompleteness theorems indicated that the idea can-
not be fully realized). Both Leibniz and Gödel were convinced of the meaning
and signiﬁcance of the axiomatic method. Gödel’s results indicated the neces-
sity of some changes and modiﬁcations in Leibniz’s program, though Gödel was
still looking for axiomatic principles for metaphysics from which the whole of
knowledge could be deduced (or which at least would be a base of any knowl-
edge). He was searching among others for a method of analyzing concepts which
would induce methods allowing to obtain new results. Add also that Gödel ﬁrst
got the idea of his proof of the existence of God in reading Leibniz (cf. Wang
1987, p. 195).
Having presented the connections between Leibniz and Gödel in general, let
us turn now to problems related to the incompleteness theorems. Observe at the
beginning that in his ﬁrst philosophical paper “Russell’s Mathematical Logic”
(1944) Gödel has turned among others to the question whether (and in which
sense) the axioms of Principia Mathematica can be considered to be analytic.
And he answered that if analyticity is understood as reducibility by explicit or
contextual deﬁnitions to instances of the law of identity then even arithmetic is

Leibniz’s and Kant’s Philosophical Ideas vs. Hilbert’s Program
37
not analytic because of its undecidability. He wrote in (1944, p. 150):
[. . . ] analyticity may be understood in two senses. First, it may have the purely formal
sense that the terms occurring can be deﬁned (either explicitly or by rules for eliminating
them from sentences containing them) in such a way that the axioms and theorems become
special cases of the law of identity and disprovable propositions become negations of this
law. In this sense even the theory of integers is demonstrably non-analytic, provided that one
requires of the rules of elimination that they allow one actually to carry out the elimination
in a ﬁnite number of steps in each case.12
The inspiration of Leibniz can be easily seen here (compare Leibniz’s ﬁnitely
analytic truths). On the other hand if inﬁnite reduction, with intermediary sen-
tences of inﬁnite length, is allowed (as would be suggested by Leibniz’s theory
of contingent propositions) then all the axioms of Pricipia can be proved ana-
lytic, but the proof would require “the whole of mathematics”. Gödel wrote in
(1944, pp. 150–151):
Leaving out this condition by admitting, e.g., sentences of inﬁnite (and non-denumerable)
length as intermediate steps of the process of reduction, all axioms of Principia (including
the axioms of choice, inﬁnity and reducibility) could be proved to be analytic for certain
interpretations [. . . ] But this observation is of doubtful value, because the whole of mathe-
matics as applied to sentences of inﬁnite length has to be presupposed in order to prove this
analyticity, e.g., the axiom of choice can be proved to be analytic only if it is assumed to be
true.
What concerns problems directly connected with the incompleteness results
one should note that already in (1931a) Gödel wrote explicitly:
I wish to note expressly that Theorem XI (and the corresponding results for M and A)
do not contradict Hilbert’s formalistic viewpoint. For this viewpoint presupposes only the
existence of a consistency proof in which nothing but ﬁnitary means of proof is used, and
it is conceivable that there exist ﬁnitary proofs that cannot be expressed in the formalism of
P (or M or A).13
And in the footnote 48a (evidently an afterthought) to (1931a) Gödel wrote:
As will be shown in Part II of this paper, the true reason for the incompleteness inherent
in all formal systems of mathematics is that the formation of ever higher types can be
continued into the transﬁnite [. . . ] while in any formal system at most denumerably many
of them are available. For it can be shown that the undecidable propositions constructed
here become decidable whenever appropriate higher types are added (for example, the type
ω to the system P). An analogous situation prevails for the axiom system of set theory.14
12Because this would imply the existence of a decision procedure for all arithmetical propositions.
Cf. Turing 1937. [Gödel’s footnote]
13Theorem XI states that if P (the system of arithmetic of natural numbers used by Gödel in
(1931a) and based on the system of Principia) is consistent then its consistency is not provable in
P; M is set theory and A is classical analysis. English translation according to Heijenoort (1967,
p. 615).
14English translation taken from Heijenoort (1967, p. 610). Note that as one of the conﬁrmations
of Gödel’s thesis expressed here can serve the fact that if, e.g., T is an extension of Peano arithmetic

38
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
At the Vienna Circle meeting on 15th January 1931 Gödel argued that it is
doubtful, “whether all intuitionistically correct proofs can be captured in a single
formal system. That is the weak spot in Neumann’s argumentation”.15
Gödel suggested that Hilbert’s program may be continued by allowing two
principles which can be treated as ﬁnitistic, namely (1) the principle of transﬁ-
nite induction on certain primitive recursive well-orderings, and (2) a notion of
computable functions of ﬁnite type (i.e., of computable functionals), to which
the process of primitive recursion can be extended in a natural way.
The ﬁrst principle (more exactly, the induction up to the ordinal ε0) was
later applied by Gerhard Gentzen to prove the consistency of the arithmetic of
natural numbers (cf. Gentzen 1936; 1938). Later many Gentzen style proofs of
the consistency of various fragments of analysis and set theory have been given
– cf., e.g., the monographs by Schütte (1960) and Takeuti (1975).
The second principle was applied by Gödel in (1958). He considered there
the question of how far ﬁnitary reasoning might reach. The problem was con-
sidered by him also in (1972) (this paper was a revised and expanded English
version of (1958)). Gödel claimed here that concrete ﬁnitary methods are insuf-
ﬁcient to prove the consistency of elementary number theory and some abstract
concepts must be used in addition. He wrote (pp. 271–273):
P. Bernays has pointed out [. . . ] on several occasions that, in view of the fact that the con-
sistency of a formal system cannot be proved by any deductive procedures available in the
system itself, it is necessary to go beyond the framework of ﬁnitary mathematics in Hilbert’s
sense in order to prove the consistency of classical mathematics or even of classical number
theory. Since ﬁnitary mathematics is deﬁned [. . . ] as the mathematics of concrete intuition,
this seems to imply that abstract concepts are needed for the proof of consistency of number
theory. [. . . ] By abstract concepts, in this context, are meant concepts which are essentially
of the second or higher level, i.e., which do not have as their content properties or relations
of concrete objects (such as combinations of symbols), but rather of thought structures or
thought contents (e.g., proofs, meaningful propositions, and so on), where in the proofs of
propositions about these mental objects insights are needed which are not derived from a
reﬂection upon the combinatorial (space-time) properties of the symbols representing them,
but rather from a reﬂection upon the meanings involved.
And in the footnote b to (1972) Gödel added:
What Hilbert means by ‘Anschauung’ is substantially Kant’s space-time intuition conﬁned,
however, to conﬁgurations of a ﬁnite number of discrete objects. Note that it is Hilbert’s
insistence on concrete knowledge that makes ﬁnitary mathematics so surprisingly weak
and excludes many things that are just as incontrovertibly evident to everybody as ﬁnitary
number theory. E.g., while any primitive recursive deﬁnition is ﬁnitary, the general principle
of primitive recursive deﬁnition is not a ﬁnitary proposition, because it contains the abstract
concept of function. There is nothing in the term ‘ﬁnitary’ which would suggest a restriction
PA and a predicate S of the language L(T) is a satisfaction predicate for the language L(PA) with the
appropriate properties then T proves consistency of PA (cf., e.g., Murawski 1997; 1999b).
15Quotation after Sieg (1988).

Leibniz’s and Kant’s Philosophical Ideas vs. Hilbert’s Program
39
to concrete knowledge. Only Hilbert’s special interpretation of it makes this restriction.
(p. 272)
However he was convinced that a precise deﬁnition of concrete ﬁnitary method
would have to be given in order to establish with certainty the necessity of using
abstract concepts. In (1946) he explicitly called for an effort to use progressively
more powerful transﬁnite theories to derive new arithmetical theorems or new
theorems of set theory. He wrote (p. 151):
Let us consider, e.g., the concept of demonstrability. It is well known that, in whichever
way you make it precise by means of a formalism, the contemplation of this very formal-
ism gives rise to new axioms which are exactly as evident and justiﬁed as those with which
you started, and that this process of extension can be iterated into the transﬁnite. So there
cannot exist any formalism which would embrace all these steps; but this does not exclude
that all these steps (or at least all of them which give something new for the domain of
propositions in which you are interested) could be described and collected together in some
non-constructive way. In set theory, e.g., the successive extensions can most conveniently
be represented by stronger and stronger axioms of inﬁnity. It is certainly impossible to give
a combinational and decidable characterization of what an axiom of inﬁnity is; but there
might exist, e.g., a characterization of the following sort: An axiom of inﬁnity is a propo-
sition which has a certain (decidable) formal structure and which in addition is true. Such
a concept of demonstrability might have the required closure property, i.e., the following
could be true: Any proof for a set-theoretic theorem in the next higher system above set
theory (i.e., any proof involving the concept of truth which I just used) is replaceable by a
proof from such an axiom of inﬁnity. It is not impossible that for such a concept of demon-
strability some completeness theorem would hold which would say that every proposition
expressible in set theory is decidable from the present axioms plus some true assertion about
the largeness of the universe of all sets.
∗
The above considerations indicated some connections between the philoso-
phy of Leibniz and Kant on the one hand and ideas of Hilbert and Gödel con-
cerning the philosophy of mathematics on the other. We showed that the essen-
tial assumptions of Hilbert’s program (i.e., the distinction between real and ideal
propositions and the conception of the role and meaning of ideal elements in the
mathematical knowledge) are connected with some distinctions made by Leibniz
and Kant (ideas of reason). On the other hand Hilbert’s and Gödel’s proposals
how to continue the program of justiﬁcation of (inﬁnitary) mathematics after the
discovery of the incompleteness phenomenon indicate some inﬂuence of Leib-
niz, namely the admittance, at least in certain contexts, of some of the inﬁnitistic
methods and principles.

3
TRUTH VS. PROVABILITY.
PHILOSOPHICAL AND HISTORICAL REMARKS1
1. Since Plato, Aristotle and Euclid the axiomatic method was considered
as the best method to justify and to organize mathematical knowledge. The ﬁrst
mature and most representative example of its usage in mathematics were Ele-
ments of Euclid. They established a pattern of a scientiﬁc theory and in particular
a paradigm in mathematics. Since Euclid till the end of the nineteenth century
mathematics was developed as an axiomatic (in fact rather a quasi-axiomatic)
theory based on axioms and postulates. Proofs of theorems contained several
gaps – in fact the lists of axioms and postulates were not complete, one freely
used in proofs various “obvious” truths or referred to the intuition. Consequently
proofs were only partially based on axioms and postulates. In fact proofs were
informal and intuitive, they were rather demonstrations and the very concept of
a proof was of a psychological (and not of a logical) nature. Note that almost no
attention was paid to making precise and to specifying of the language of the-
ories – in fact the language of the theories was simply the imprecise colloquial
language. One should also note here that in fact till the end of the nineteenth cen-
tury mathematicians were convinced that axioms and postulates should be sim-
ply true statements, hence sentences describing the real state of affairs (in mathe-
matical reality). It seems to be connected with Aristotle’s view that a proposition
is demonstrated (proved to be true) by showing that it is a logical consequence of
propositions already known to be true. Demonstration was conceived here of as
a deduction whose premises are known to be true and a deduction was conceived
of as a chaining of immediate inferences.
Add that the Euclid’s approach (connected with Platonic idealism) to the
problem of the development of mathematics and the justiﬁcation of its state-
1Originally published in Logic and Logical Philosophy 10 (2002), 93–117. Reprinted with kind
permission of Dział Wydawnictw Uniwersytetu Mikołaja Kopernika (Publishing Department of
Nicolaus Copernicus University).
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n
Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 41–57. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

42
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
ments (which found its fulﬁlment in the Euclidean paradigm), i.e., justiﬁcation
by deduction (by proofs) from explicitly stated axioms and postulates, was not
the only approach and method which was used in the ancient Greek (and later).
The other one (call it heuristic) was connected with Democritus’ materialism.
It was applied for example by Archimedes who used not only deduction but
any methods, such as intuition or even experiments (not only mental ones), to
solve problems. Though the Euclidean approach won and dominated in the his-
tory, one should note that it formed rather an ideal and not the real scientiﬁc
practice of mathematicians. In fact rigorous, deductive mathematics was rather
a rare phenomenon. On the contrary, intuition and heuristic reasoning were the
animating forces of mathematical research practice. The vigorous but rarely rig-
orous mathematical activity produced “crises” (for example the Pythagoreans’
discovery of the incommensurability of the diagonal and side of a square, Leib-
niz’s and Newton’s problems with the explanation of the nature of inﬁnitesi-
mals, Fourier’s “proof” that any function is representable in a Fourier series,
antinomies connected with Cantor’s imprecise and intuitive notion of a set).
Basic concepts underlying the Euclidean paradigm have been clariﬁed on
the turn of the nineteenth century. In particular the intuitive (and rather psycho-
logical in nature) concept of an informal proof (demonstration) was replaced
by a precise notion of a formal proof and of a consequence. Several events and
achievements contributed to the revision of the Euclidean paradigm, in partic-
ular the origin and the development of set theory (G. Cantor), arithmetization
of analysis (A. Cauchy and K. Weierstrass, R. Dedekind), axiomatization of the
arithmetic of natural numbers (G. Peano), non-Euclidean geometries (N.I. Loba-
chewsky, J.Bolayi, C.F. Gauss), axiomatization of geometry (M. Pasch, D. Hil-
bert), the development of mathematical logic (G. Boole, A. de Morgan, G. Frege,
B. Russell). Beside those “positive” factors there was also a “negative” factor,
viz., the discovery of paradoxes in set theory (C. Burali-Forti, G. Cantor, B. Rus-
sell) and of semantical antinomies (G.D. Berry, K. Grelling). They forced the
revision of some basic ideas and stimulated in particular metamathematical in-
vestigations.
One of the directions of those foundational investigations was the program
of David Hilbert and his Beweistheorie. Note at the very beginning that “this
program was never intended as a comprehensive philosophy of mathematics; its
purpose was instead to legitimate the entire corpus of mathematical knowledge”
(cf. Rowe 1989, p. 200). Note also that Hilbert’s views were changing over the
years, but always took a formalist direction.
2. Hilbert sought to justify mathematical theories by means of formal sys-
tems, i.e., using the axiomatic method. He viewed the latter as holding the key
to a systematic organization of any sufﬁciently developed subject. This idea was
very well stated already in a letter of 29th December 1899 to G. Frege where

Truth vs. Provability
43
Hilbert explained his motives of axiomatizing the geometry and wrote (cf. Frege
1976, p. 67):
I was forced to construct my systems of axioms by a necessity: I wanted to have a possibility
to understand those geometrical propositions which in my opinion are the most important
results of geometrical researches: that the Parallel Postulate is not a consequence of other
axioms, and similarly for the Archimedean one, etc.2
In “Axiomatisches Denken” (1918, p. 405) Hilbert wrote:
When we put together the facts of a given more or less comprehensive ﬁeld of our knowl-
edge, then we notice soon that those facts can be ordered. This ordering is always introduced
with the help of a certain network of concepts in such a way that to every object of the given
ﬁeld corresponds a concept of this network and to every fact within this ﬁeld corresponds a
logical relation between concepts. The network of concepts is nothing else than the theory
of the ﬁeld of knowledge.3
By Hilbert the formal frames were contentually motivated. First-order the-
ories were viewed by him together with suitable non-empty domains, Bereiche,
which indicated the range of the individual variables of the theory and the in-
terpretations of the nonlogical vocabulary. But Hilbert, as a mathematician, was
not interested in establishing precisely the ontological status of mathematical
objects. Moreover, one can say that his program was calling on people to turn
their mathematical and philosophical attention away from the problem of the
object of mathematical theories and turn it toward a critical examination of the
methods and assertions of theories. On the other hand he was aware that once a
formal theory has been constructed, it can admit various interpretations. Recall
here his famous sentence from a letter to G. Frege quoted already above:
Yes, it is evident that one can treat any such theory only as a network or schema of concepts
besides their necessary interrelations, and to think of basic elements as being any objects.
If I think of my points as being any system of objects, for example the system: love, law,
chimney-sweep [. . . ], and I treat my axioms as [expressing] interconnections between those
objects, then my theorems, e.g., the theorem of Pythagoras, hold also for those things. In
other words: any such theory can always be applied to inﬁnitely many systems of basic
elements.4
2“Ich bin zu der Aufstellung meines Systems von Axiomen durch die Not gezwungen: ich wollte
die Möglichkeit zum Verständnis derjenigen geometrischen Sätze geben, die ich für die wichtigsten
Ergebnisse der geometrischen Forschungen halte: dass das Parallelenaxiom keine Folge der übrigen
Axiome ist, ebenso das Archimedische etc.”
3“Wenn wir die Tatsachen eines bestimmten mehr oder minder umfassenden Wissensgebiete
zusammenstellen, so bemerken wir bald, daß diese Tatsachen einer Ordnung fähig sind. Diese Ord-
nung erfolgt jedesmal mit Hilfe eines gewissen Fachwerkes von Begriffen in der Weise, daß dem
einzelnen Gegenstande des Wissensgebietes ein Begriff dieses Fachwerkes und jeder Tatsache inner-
halb des Wissensgebietes eine logische Beziehung zwischen den Begriffen entspricht. Das Fachwerk
der Begriffe ist nicht Anderes als die Theorie des Wissensgebietes.”
4“Ja, es ist doch selbsverständlich eine jede Theorie nur ein Fachwerk oder Schema von Begriffen
nebst ihren nothwendigen Beziehungen zu einander, und die Grundelemente können in beliebiger
Weise gedacht werden. Wenn ich unter meinen Punkten irgendwelche Systeme von Dingen, z.B.

44
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
The essence of the axiomatic study of mathematical truths was for him to clarify
the position of a given theorem (truth) within the given axiomatic system and
the logical interconnections between propositions.5
Hilbert sought to secure the validity of mathematical knowledge by syntac-
tical considerations without appeal to semantic ones. The basis of his approach
was the distinction between the unproblematic, “ﬁnitistic” part of mathematics
and the “inﬁnitistic” part that needed justiﬁcation. Finitistic mathematics deals
with so called real propositions, which are completely meaningful because they
refer only to given concrete objects. Inﬁnitistic mathematics on the other hand
deals with so called ideal propositions that contain reference to inﬁnite totali-
ties. Hilbert proposed to base mathematics on ﬁnitistic mathematics via proof
theory (Beweistheorie). The latter was planned as a new mathematical discipline
in which one studies mathematical proofs by mathematical methods. Its main
goal was to show that proofs which use ideal elements (in particular actual inﬁn-
ity) in order to prove results in the real part of mathematics always yield correct
results. One can distinguish here two aspects: consistency problem and con-
servation problem. The consistency problem consists in showing (by ﬁnitistic
methods, of course) that the inﬁnitistic mathematics is consistent; the conser-
vation problem consists in showing by ﬁnitistic methods that any real sentence
which can be proved in the inﬁnitistic part of mathematics can be proved also in
the ﬁnitistic part. One should stress here the emphasis on consistency (instead of
correctness).
To realize this program one should formalize mathematical theories (even
the whole of mathematics) and then study them as systems of symbols governed
by speciﬁed and ﬁxed combinatorial rules. The advantage of this approach was
the fact that references to ideal objects were replaced by reasonings of a purely
ﬁnitary character, reasonings applied not to mathematical entities themselves but
to the symbols of a formal language in which the concepts had been axiomatized,
i.e., by syntactical considerations without appeal to the semantic ones. Another
advantage was – as Bernays remarked – the fact that the problems and difﬁculties
das System: Liebe, Gesetz, Schornsteinfeger [. . . ] denke und dann nur meine sämtlichen Axiome
als Beziehungen zwischen diesen Dingen annehme, so gelten meine Sätze, z.B. der Pythagoras auch
von diesen Dingen. Mit anderen Worten: eine jede Theorie kann stets auf unendliche viele Systeme
von Grundelementen angewandt werden.”
5He wrote in (1902–1903, p. 50): “By the axiomatic study of any mathematical truth I under-
stand a study whose aim is not to discover new or more general propositions with the help of given
truths, but a study whose purpose is to determine a position of a given theorem within the system
of known truths and their logical connections in such a way that one can clearly see which as-
sumptions are necessary and sufﬁcient to justify the considered truth.” (“Unter der axiomatischen
Erforschung einer mathematischen Wahrheit verstehe ich eine Untersuchung, welche nicht dahin
zieht, im Zusammenhang mit jener Wahrheit neue oder allgemeinere Sätze zu entdecken, sondern
die vielmehr die Stellung jenes Satzes innerhalb des Systems der bekannten Wahrheiten und ihren
logischen Zusammenhang in der Weise klarzulegen sucht, dass sich sicher angeben lässt, welche
Voraussetzungen zur Begründung jener Wahrheit notwendig und hinreichend sind.”)

Truth vs. Provability
45
in the foundations of mathematics can be transferred from the epistemological-
philosophical to the properly mathematical domain.
The formal axiomatic system should satisfy three conditions: it should be
complete, consistent and based on independent axioms. The consistency of a
given system was the criterion for mathematical truth and for the very existence
of mathematical objects.6 It was also presumed that any consistent theory would
be categorical, that is, would (up to isomorphism) characterize a unique domain
of objects. This demand was connected with the completeness.
The meaning and understanding of completeness by Hilbert plays a crucial
rôle from the point of view of our subject. Note at the beginning that in the
Grundlagen der Geometrie completeness was postulated as one of the axioms
(the axiom was not present in the ﬁrst edition, but was included ﬁrst in the French
translation and then in the second edition of 1903). In fact the axiom V(2) stated
that: “Elements of geometry (i.e., points, lines and planes) form a system of
things does not admit any extension provided all the mentioned axioms are pre-
served” (1903, p. 31).7 In Hilbert’s lecture at the Congress at Heidelberg in 1904
(cf. 1905b) one ﬁnds such an axiom for the real numbers. Later there appears
completeness as a property of a system. In lectures “Logische Principien des
mathematischen Denkens” (1905a, p. 13) Hilbert explains the demand of the
completeness as the demand that the axioms sufﬁce to prove all “facts” of the
theory in question. He says: “We will have to demand that all other facts of the
given ﬁeld are consequences of the axioms.”8 On the other hand one can say that
Hilbert’s early conviction as to the solvability of every mathematical problem –
expressed for example in his 1900 Paris lecture (cf. Hilbert 1901) and repeated in
his opening address “Naturerkennen und Logik” (cf. Hilbert 1930b) before the
Society of German Scientists and Physicians in Königsberg in September 1930
– can be treated as informal reﬂection of his belief in completeness of axiomatic
theories. In Paris Hilbert said (cf. 1901, p. 298):
6Cf. Hilbert’s letter to G. Frege of 29th December 1899 where he claimed that: “If the arbi-
trary given axioms do not contradict one another with all their consequences, then they are true
and the things deﬁned by the axioms exist.” (“Wenn sich die willkürlich gesetzten Axiome nicht
einander widersprechen mit sämtlichen Folgen, so sind sie wahr, so existieren die durch die Axiome
deﬁnierten Dinge.”) (cf. Frege 1976, p. 66).
7“Die Elemente (Punkte, Geraden, Ebenen) der Geometrie bilden ein System von Dingen,
welches bei Aufrechterhaltung sämtlicher genannten Axiome keiner Erweiterung mehr fähig ist.”
In last editions of Grundlagen, beginning with the seventh edition from 1930, Hilbert replaced
this axiom by the axiom of lineare completeness stating that: “Points of a line form a system which
admits no extension provided the linear order of the line (Theorem 6), the ﬁrst congruence axioms
and Archimedean axioms (i.e., axioms I1–2, II, III1, V1) are preserved.” (“Die Punkte einer Ger-
aden bilden ein System, welches bei Aufrechterhaltung der linearen Anordnung (Satz 6), des ersten
Kongruenzaxioms und des Archimedischen Axioms (d.h. der Axiome I1–2, II, III1, V1) keiner Er-
weiterung mehr fähig ist.”)
8“Wir werden verlangen müssen, dass alle übrigen Thatsachen des vorgelegten Wissensbereiches
Folgerungen aus den Axiomen sind.”

46
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
The conviction of the solvability of any mathematical problem is for us a strong motive in
this work; we hear the whole time the call: There is a problem, look for a solution. You can
ﬁnd it by a pure thinking; there is no Ignorabimus in the mathematics.9
And in Königsberg he said (cf. 1930b, p. 962):
For the mathematician there is no Ignorabimus, and, in my opinion, not at all for natural
science either. [. . . ] The true reason why [no one] has succeeded in ﬁnding an unsolvable
problem is, in my opinion, that there is no unsolvable problem. In contrast to the foolish
Ignorabimus, our credo avers: We must know, We shall know.10
In his 1900 Paris lecture Hilbert spoke about completeness in the following
words (see Hilbert 1901, second problem, pp. 299–300):
When we are engaged in investigating the foundations of a science, we must set up a system
of axioms which contains an exact and complete description of the relations subsisting
between the elementary ideas of that science. The axioms so set up are at the same time
the deﬁnitions of those elementary ideas; and no statement within the realm of the science
whose foundations we are testing is held to be correct unless it can be derived from those
axioms by means of a ﬁnite number of logical steps.11
One can assume that the phrase ‘exact and complete description’ (genaue und
vollständige Beschreibung) is equivalent to the requirement that this description
is complete in the sense that it allows to decide decide the truth or falsity of
every statement of the given theory. Semantically such completeness follows
from categoricity, i.e., from the fact that any two models of a given axiomatic
system are isomorphic; syntactically it means that every sentence or its negation
is derivable from the given axioms. Hilbert’s own axiomatizations were complete
in the sense of being categorical. But notice that they were not ﬁrst-order, indeed
his axiomatization of geometry from Grundlagen as well as his axiomatization
of arithmetic published in 1900 were second-order. Each of those system had a
second-order Archimedean axiom and both had a “completeness axiom” stating
9“Diese Überzeugung von der Lösbarkeit eines jeden mathematischen Problems ist uns ein
kräftiger Ansporn während der Arbeit; wir hören in uns den steten Zuruf: Da ist das Problem, suche
die Lösung. Du kannst sie durch reines Denken ﬁnden; denn in der Mathematik gibt es kein Ignora-
bimus!”
10“Für den Mathematiker gibt es kein Ignorabimus, und meiner Meinung nach auch für die Natur-
wissenschaft überhaupt nicht. [. . . ] Der wahre Grund, warum es [niemand] nicht gelang, ein unlös-
bares Problem zu ﬁnden, besteht meiner Meinung nach darin, daß es ein unlösbares Problem über-
haupt nicht gibt. Statt des törichten Ignorabimus heiße im Gegenteil unsere Losung: Wir müssen
wissen, Wir werden wissen.”
11“Wenn es sich darum handelt, die Grundlagen einer Wissenschaft zu untersuchen, so hat man
ein System von Axiomen aufzustellen, welche eine genaue und vollständige Beschreibung derjeni-
gen Beziehungen enthalten, die zwischen den elementaren Begriffen jener Wissenschaft stattﬁnden.
Die aufgestellten Axiome sind zugleich die Deﬁnitionen jener elementaren Begriffe, und jede Aus-
sage innerhalb des Bereiches der Wissenschaft, deren Grundlage wir prüfen, gilt uns nur dann als
richtig, falls sie sich mittels einer endlichen Anzahl logischer Schlüsse aus den aufgestellten Ax-
iomen ableiten läßt.”

Truth vs. Provability
47
that the structure under consideration was maximal with respect to the remaining
axioms.12
The demand discussed here would imply that a system of axioms complete in
this sense is possible only for sufﬁciently advanced theories. On the other hand
Hilbert called for complete systems of axioms also for theories being developed.
In “Mathematische Probleme” (1901, p. 295) he wrote:
[. . . ] wherever mathematical concepts emerge from epistemological considerations or from
geometry or from theories of science, mathematics acquires the task of investigating the
principles lying at the basis of these concepts and deﬁning [...] these through a simple and
complete system of axioms.13
One should also add here that Hilbert admitted the possibility that a math-
ematical problem may have a negative solution, i.e., that one can show the im-
possibility of a positive solution on the basis of a considered axiom system. In
“Mathematische Probleme” (1901, p. 297) he wrote:
Occasionally it happens that we seek the solution under insufﬁcient hypotheses or in an
incorrect sense, and for this reason we do not succeed. The problem then arises: to show the
impossibility of the solution under the given hypotheses, or in the sense contemplated [...]
and we perceive that old and difﬁcult problems [. . . ] have ﬁnally found fully satisfactory
and rigorous solutions, although in another sense than that originally intended. It is probably
this important fact along with other philosophical reasons that give rise to the conviction
[. . . ] that every deﬁnite mathematical problem must necessarily be susceptible of an exact
settlement, either in the form of an actual answer to the question asked, or by a proof of the
impossibility of its solution and therewith the necessary failure of all attempts.14
In Hilbert’s lectures from 1917–1918 (cf. Hilbert 1917–1918) one ﬁnds com-
pleteness in the sense of maximal consistency, i.e., a system is complete if and
only if for any non-derivable sentence, if it is added to the system then the system
becomes inconsistent.15
12Note that this axiom was not even properly a second-order axiom.
13“[. . . ] wo immer von erkenntnistheoretischer Seite oder in der Geometrie oder aus den Theorien
der Naturwissenschaft mathematische Begriffe auftauchen, erwächst der Mathematik die Aufgabe,
die diesen Begriffen zugrunde liegenden Prinzipien zu erforschen und dieselben durch einfaches und
vollständiges System von Axiomen [. . . ] festzulegen.”
14“Mitunter kommt es vor, daß wir die Beantwortung unter ungenügenden Voraussetzungen oder
in unrichtigem Sinne erstreben und infolgedessen nicht zum Ziele gelangen. Es entsteht dann die
Aufgabe, die Unmöglichkeit der Lösung des Problems unter den gegebenen Voraussetzungen und in
dem verlangten Sinne nachzuweisen. [. . . ] alte schwierige Probleme [...] eine völlig befriedigende
und strenge Lösung gefunden haben. Diese merkwürdige Tatsache neben anderen philosophischen
Gründen ist es wohl, welche in uns eine Überzeugung entstehen lässt [...] daß ein jedes bestimmte
mathematische Problem einer strengen Erledigung notwendig fähig sein müsse, sei es, daß es gelingt
die Beantwortung der gestellten Frage zu geben, sei es, daß die Unmöglichkeit seiner Lösung and
damit die Notwendigkeit des Mißlingens aller Versuche dargetan wird.”
15Hilbert wrote in (1917–1918, p. 152): “Let us now turn to the question of completeness. We
want to call the system of axioms under consideration complete if we always obtain an inconsistent
system of axioms by adding a formula which is so far not derivable to the system of basic formulas.”
(“Wenden wir uns nun zu der Frage der Vollständigkeit. Wir wollen das vorgelegte Axiomensys-

48
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
In his lecture at the International Congress of Mathematicians in Bologna in
1928 Hilbert stated two problems of completeness, one for the ﬁrst-order predi-
cate calculus (completeness with respect to validity in all interpretations, hence
the semantic completeness) and the second for a system of elementary number
theory (formal completeness, in the sense of maximal consistency, i.e., Post-
completeness, hence the syntactical completeness) (cf. Hilbert 1930a).
The emphasis on the ﬁnitary and syntactical methods together with the de-
mand of (and belief in) the completeness of formal systems seems to be by
Hilbert the source and reason of the fact that, as Gödel put it (cf. Wang 1974,
p. 9), “[...] formalists considered formal demonstrability to be an analysis of
the concept of mathematical truth and, therefore were of course not in a posi-
tion to distinguish the two”. Indeed, the informal concept of truth was not com-
monly accepted as a deﬁnite mathematical notion at that time.16 Gödel wrote
in a crossed-out passage of a draft of his reply to a letter of the student Yossef
Balas: “[...] a concept of objective mathematical truth as opposed to demonstra-
bility was viewed with greatest suspicion and widely rejected as meaningless”
(cf. Wang 1987, 84–85). It is worth comparing this with a remark of R. Carnap.
He writes in his diary that when he invited A. Tarski to speak on the concept
of truth at the September 1935 International Congress for Scientiﬁc Philoso-
phy, “Tarski was very sceptical. He thought that most philosophers, even those
working in modern logic, would be not only indifferent, but hostile to the ex-
plication of the concept of truth”. And indeed at the Congress “[...] there was
vehement opposition even on the side of our philosophical friends” (cf. Carnap
1963, pp. 61–62).
All these explain in some sense why Hilbert preferred to deal in his meta-
mathematics solely with the forms of the formulas, using only ﬁnitary reasoning
which were considered to be save – contrary to semantical reasonings which
were non-ﬁnitary and consequently not save. Non-ﬁnitary reasonings in mathe-
matics were considered to be meaningful only to the extent to which they could
be interpreted or justiﬁed in terms of ﬁnitary metamathematics.17
On the other hand there was no clear distinction between syntax and seman-
tics at that time. Recall for example that, as indicated earlier, the axiom systems
came by Hilbert often with a built-in interpretation. Add also that the very no-
tions necessary to formulate properly the difference syntax–semantics were not
available to Hilbert.
tem vollständig nennen, falls durch die Hinzufügung einer bisher nicht ableitbaren Formel zu dem
System der Grundformeln stets ein widerspruchsvolles Axiomensystem entsteht.”)
16Note that there was at that time no precise deﬁnition of truth – this was given in (1933a) by
A. Tarski.
17Cf. Gödel’s letter to Hao Wang dated 7th December 1967 – see Wang (1974, p. 8).

Truth vs. Provability
49
3. The problem of the completeness of the ﬁrst-order logic, i.e., the fourth
problem of Hilbert’s Bologna lecture, was also posed as a question in the book
by Hilbert and Ackermann Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik (1928). It was
solved by Kurt Gödel in his doctoral dissertation (1929; cf. also 1930b) where
he showed that the ﬁrst-order logic is complete, i.e., every true statement can
be derived from the axioms. Moreover he proved that, in the ﬁrst-order logic,
every consistent axiom system has a model. More exactly Gödel wrote that by
completeness he meant that “every valid formula expressible in the restricted
functional calculus [...] can be derived from the axioms by means of a ﬁnite
sequence of formal inferences” (1929, p. 61). And added that this is equivalent
to the assertion that “Every consistent axiom system [formalized within that
restricted calculus] [...] has a realization” (1929, p. 61) and to the statement that
“Every logical expression is either satisﬁable or refutable” (1929, p. 61) (this is
the form in which he actually proved the result). The importance of this result is,
according to Gödel, that it justiﬁes the “usual method of proving consistency”
(1929, p. 61).
In fact the completeness theorem shows in a sense an equivalence of truth
and demonstrability, an equivalence of semantical and syntactical approach. It
shows that the logical methods admitted by the notion of derivability are appro-
priate and sufﬁcient. One should notice here that the notion of truth in a structure,
central to the very deﬁnition of satisﬁability or validity, was nowhere analyzed
in either Gödel’s dissertation or his published revision of it. There was in fact a
long tradition of use of the informal notion of satisﬁability (compare the work
of Löwenheim, Skolem and others).18
Some months later, in 1930, Gödel solved three other problems posed by Hil-
bert in Bologna by showing that arithmetic of natural numbers and all richer the-
18In Gödel’s doctoral dissertation (1929, p. 69) one ﬁnds the following explanation concerning the
considered problem: “Let S be a system of functions f1, f2, . . . , fk (all deﬁned in the same universal
domain), and of individuals (belonging to the same domain), a1, a2, . . . , al, as well as propositional
constants, A1, A2, . . . , Am. We say that this system, namely
S = ( f1, f2, . . . , fk; a1, a2, . . . , al; A1, A2, . . . , Am),
satisﬁes the logical expression if it yields a proposition that is true (in the domain in question) when
it is substituted in the expression. From this we see at once what we must understand by satisﬁable
in a certain domain, by satisﬁable alone (there is a domain in which the expression is satisﬁable), by
valid in a certain domain (the negation is not satisﬁable), and by valid alone.” (Wir sagen von einem
System (sämtlich in demselben Denkbereich deﬁnierter) Funktionen, f1, f2, . . . , fk, und (ebenfalls
demselben Denkbereich angehörenden) Individuen, a1, a2, . . . , al, sowie Aussagen, A1, A2, . . . , Am
– von diesem System
S = ( f1, f2, . . . , fk; a1, a2, . . . , al; A1, A2, . . . , Am)
sagen wir, daß es den logischen Ausdruck erfülle, wenn es in denselben eingesetzt einen (in dem
betreffenden Denkbereich) wahren Satz ergibt. Daraus erfolgt sich ohneweiteres, was unter erfüll-
bar in einem bestimmten Denkbereich, erfüllbar schlechthin (= es gibt einen Denkbereich, in dem
der Ausdruck erfüllbar ist), allgemein giltig in einem bestimmten Denkbereich (= Negaton nicht
erfüllbar), allgemein giltig schlechthin verstanden werden soll.)

50
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
ories are essentially incomplete (provided they are consistent) (cf. Gödel 1931a).
It is interesting to see how Gödel arrived at this result. Hao Wang, on the basis of
his discussions with Gödel, reports this in the following way (see 1981, p. 654):
[Gödel] represented real numbers by formulas [. . . ] of number theory and found he had to
use the concept of truth for sentences in number theory in order to verify the comprehension
axiom for analysis. He quickly ran into the paradoxes (in particular, the Liar and Richard’s)
connected with truth and deﬁnability. He realized that truth in number theory cannot be
deﬁned in number theory and therefore his plan [. . . ] did not work.
Gödel himself wrote on his discovery in a draft reply to letter dated 27th May
1970 from Yossef Balas, then a student at the University of Northern Iowa (cf.
Wang 1987, pp. 84–85). Gödel indicated there that it was precisely his recogni-
tion of the contrast between the formal deﬁnability of provability and the formal
undeﬁnability of truth that led him to his discovery of incompleteness. One ﬁnds
also there the following statement (cf. Wang 1987, p. 84):
[. . . ] long before, I had found the correct solution of the semantic paradoxes in the fact that
truth in a language cannot be deﬁned in itself.
On the base of this quotation it is sometimes argued that Gödel obtained the
result on the undeﬁnability of truth independently of A. Tarski (cf. Tarski 1933a;
German translation – 1936, English translation – 1956). One should add that
Tarski proving the undeﬁnability of truth had the precise deﬁnition of this con-
cept whereas Gödel used only an intuitive (and consequently imprecise) notion
of truth. Hence there arises a problem: in which sense one can say that Gödel
obtained the result of the undeﬁnability of truth.19
Note also that Gödel was convinced of the objectivity of the concept of math-
ematical truth. In a latter to Hao Wang (cf. Wang 1974, p. 9) he wrote:
I may add that my objectivist conception of mathematics and metamathematics in general,
and of transﬁnite reasoning in particular, was fundamental also to my other work in logic.
How indeed could one think of expressing metamathematics in the mathematical systems
themselves, if the latter are considered to consist of meaningless symbols which acquire
some substitute of meaning only through metamathematics [...] it should be noted that the
heuristic principle of my construction of undecidable number theoretical propositions in the
formal systems of mathematics is the highly transﬁnite concept of ‘objective mathematical
truth’ as opposed to that of ‘demonstrability’ (cf. M. Davis, The Undecidable, New York
1965, p. 64 where I explain the heuristic argument by which I arrive at the incompleteness
results), with which it was generally confused before my own and Tarski’s work.
In this situation one should ask why Gödel did not mention the undeﬁnability
of truth in his writings. In fact, Gödel even avoided the terms ‘true’ and ‘truth’ as
well as the very concept of being true (he used the term ‘richtige Formel’ and not
the term ‘wahre Formel’). In the paper “Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze ...”
19For the problem of the priority in proving the undeﬁnability of the concept of truth, see Wole´nski
(1991) and Murawski (1998a).

Truth vs. Provability
51
(1931) the concept of a true formula occurs only at the end of Section 1 where
Gödel explains the main idea of the proof of the ﬁrst incompleteness theorem
(but again the term ‘inhaltlich richtige Formel’ and not the term ‘wahre Formel’
appears here). Indeed, talking about the construction of a formula which should
express its own unprovability invokes the interpretation of the formal system.
At the very end of the introductory section one ﬁnds the following remarks (see
Gödel 1931a, 175–176; English translation: Gödel 1986, p. 151):
The method of proof just explained can clearly be applied to any formal system that, ﬁrst,
when interpreted as representing a system of notions and propositions, has at its disposal
sufﬁcient means of expression to deﬁne the notions occurring in the argument above (in
particular, the notion ‘provable formula’) and in which, second, every provable formula is
true in the interpretation considered. The purpose of carrying out the above proof with full
precision in what follows is, among other things, to replace the second of the assumptions
just mentioned by a purely formal and much weaker one.20
[Add that the “purely formal and much weaker” assumption mentioned by
Gödel was the assumption of the ω-consistency, i.e., the assumption that for any
formula ϕ(x) with one free variable, if in the considered theory the sentences
ϕ(0), ϕ(1), ϕ(2), . . . , ϕ(n), . . .
(n ∈N)
are provable then the formula ∃x¬ϕ(x) is not provable in it.]
On the other hand the term ‘truth’ occurred in Gödel’s lectures on the incom-
pleteness theorems at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton in the spring
of 1934.21 He discussed there, among other things, the relation between the ex-
istence of undecidable propositions and the possibility of deﬁning the concept
‘true (false) sentence’ of a given language in the language itself. Considering
the relation of his arguments to the paradoxes, in particular to the paradox of
“The Liar”, Gödel indicates that the paradox disappears when one notes that the
notion ‘false statement in a language B’ cannot be expressed in B. Even more,
the paradox can be considered as a proof that ‘false statement in B’ cannot be
expressed in B. In the footnote 25 (added to the version published in Davis 1965,
p. 64) Gödel wrote:
For a closer examination of this fact see A. Tarski’s papers published in: Trav. Soc. Sci. Lettr.
de Varsovie, Cl. III, No. 34, 1933 (Polish) (translated in: Logic, Semantics, Metamathemat-
ics. Papers from 1923 to 1938 by A. Tarski, see in particular p. 247 ff.) and in Philosophy
and Phenom. Res. 4 (1944), p. 341–376. In these two papers the concept of truth relating
20“Die eben auseinandergesetzte Beweismethode läßt sich offenbar auf jedes formale System an-
wenden, das erstens inhaltlich gedeutet über genügend Ausdrucksmittel verfügt, um die in der obigen
Überlegung vorkommenden Begriffe (insbesondere den Begriff ‘beweisbare Formel’) zu deﬁnieren,
und in dem zweitens jede beweisbare Formel auch inhaltlich richtig ist. Die nun folgende exakte
Durchführung des obigen Beweises wird unter anderem die Aufgabe haben, die zweite der eben
angeführten Voraussetzungen durch eine rein formale und weit schwächere zu ersetzen.”
21Notes of Gödel’s lectures taken by S.C. Kleene and J.B. Rosser were published in Davis’s book
in 1965 (cf. Gödel 1934).

52
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
to sentences of a language is discussed systematically. See also: R. Carnap, Mon. Hefte f.
Math. u. Phys. 4 (1934), p. 263.
The reasons for the incompleteness results were also explicitly mentioned in
Gödel’s reply to a letter of A.W. Burks. This reply is quoted in von Neumann’s
Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata, 1966, pp. 55–56. Gödel wrote:
I think the theorem of mine which von Neumann refers to is not that on the existence of
undecidable propositions or that on the length of proofs but rather the fact that a complete
epistemological description of a language A cannot be given in the same language A, be-
cause the concept of truth of sentences of A cannot be deﬁned in A. It is this theorem which
is the true reason for the existence of the undecidable propositions in the formal systems
containing arithmetic. I did not, however, formulate it explicitly in my paper of 1931 but
only in my Priceton lectures of 1934. The same theorem was proved by Tarski in his pa-
per on the concept of truth published in 1933 in Act. Soc. Sci. Lit. Vars., translated on pp.
152–278 of Logic, Semantics and Metamathematics.
What were the reasons of avoiding the concept of truth by Gödel? An answer
can be found in a crossed-out passage of a draft of Gödel’s reply to a letter of the
student Yossef Balas (mentioned already above). Gödel wrote there (cf. Wang
1987, p. 85):
However in consequence of the philosophical prejudices of our times 1. nobody was looking
for a relative consistency proof because [it] was considered axiomatic that a consistency
proof must be ﬁnitary in order to make sense, 2. a concept of objective mathematical truth
as opposed to demonstrability was viewed with greatest suspicion and widely rejected as
meaningless.
Hence it leads us to the conclusion formulated by S. Feferman in (1984,
p. 112) in the following way:
[. . . ] Gödel feared that work assuming such a concept [i.e., the concept of mathematical
truth – R.M.] would be rejected by the foundational establishment, dominated as it was by
Hilbert’s ideas. Thus he sought to extract results from it which would make perfectly good
sense even to those who eschewed all non-ﬁnitary methods in mathematics.
Though he tried to avoid concepts not accepted by the foundational estab-
lishment, Gödel’s own philosophy of mathematics was in fact Platonist. He was
convinced that (cf. Wang 1996, p. 83):
It was the anti-Platonic prejudice which prevented people from getting my results. This fact
is a clear proof that the prejudice is a mistake.
Note that A. Tarski was free of such limitations. In fact in the Lvov-Warsaw
School no restrictive initial preconditions were assumed before the proper in-
vestigation could start. The main demands were clarity, anti-speculativeness and
scepticism towards many fundamental problems of traditional philosophy. The
principal method that should be used was logical analysis. The Lvov-Warsaw
School was not so radical in its criticism of metaphysics as the Vienna Circe
(see, for example, Wole´nski 1989 and 1995a).

Truth vs. Provability
53
Tarski pointed out on many occasions that mathematical and logical research
should not be restricted by any general philosophical views. In particular he
wrote in (1930a, p. 363):
In conclusion it should be noted that no particular philosophical standpoint regarding the
foundations of mathematics is presupposed in the present work.
And in (1954, p. 17) he wrote:
As an essential contribution of the Polish school to the development of metamathematics
one can regard the fact that from the very beginning it admitted into metamathematical
research all fruitful methods, whether ﬁnitary or not.
Hence Tarski, though indicating his sympathies with nominalism, freely used
in his logical and mathematical studies the abstract and general notions that a
nominalist seeks to avoid.
It is known that Tarski showed not only the undeﬁnability but – and this is
his main merit here – he gave the precise inductive deﬁnition of satisﬁability and
truth. In connection with this one should ask whether Gödel saw the necessity to
give an analysis of the concept of truth (note that in his doctoral dissertation Über
die Vollständigkeit des Logikkalküls (1929) and in his paper “Die Vollständigkeit
der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalküls” (1930) on the completeness of
the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus the notion of the validity was understood in an
informal way what was in fact a long tradition – cf. Löwenheim and Skolem).
The answer is afﬁrmative. Indeed, in a letter to R. Carnap of 11th September
1932 he wrote (quotation after Köhler 1991, p. 137):
On the basis of this idea I will give in the second part of my work a deﬁnition of [the con-
cept] ‘true’ and I am of the opinion that one cannot do it in another way and that the higher
calculus of induction cannot be grasped semantically [i.e., at that time – syntactically].22
Köhler explains in (1991) that “II. Teil meiner Arbeit” means here the joint
project of Gödel together with A. Heyting to write a survey of the current inves-
tigations in mathematical logic for Springer-Verlag (Berlin). Heyting wrote his
part while the part by Gödel was never written (the reasons were his problems
with the health). One can assume that Gödel planned to develop there a theory
of truth based on the set theory.
Gödel’s theorem on the completeness of ﬁrst-order logic and his discovery
of the incompleteness phenomenon together with the undeﬁnability of truth vs.
deﬁnability of formal demonstrability showed that formal provability cannot be
treated as an analysis of truth, that the former is in fact weaker than the latter.
It was also shown in this way that Hilbert’s dreams to justify classical math-
ematics by means of ﬁnitistic methods cannot be fully realized. Those results
22“Ich werde auf Grund dieses Gedankens im II. Teil meiner Arbeit eine Deﬁnition für ‘wahre’
geben und ich bin der Meinung, daß sich die Sache anders nicht machen läßt und daß man den
höheren Induktionenkalkül nicht semantisch [d.h. damals syntaktisch!] auffassen kann.”

54
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
together with Tarski’s deﬁnition of truth (in the structure) and Carnap’s work on
the syntax of a language led also to the establishing of syntax and semantics in
the 1930s.
On the other hand it should be added that Gödel shared Hilbert’s “ratio-
nalistic optimism” (to use Hao Wang’s term) insofar as informal proofs were
concerned. In fact Gödel retained the idea of mathematics as a system of truth,
which is complete in the sense that “every precisely formulated yes-or-no ques-
tion in mathematics must have a clear-cut answer” (Gödel 1961, p. 379). He
rejected however – in the light of his incompleteness theorem – the idea that
the basis of these truths is their derivability from axioms. In his Gibbs lecture
of 1951 Gödel distinguishes between the system of all true mathematical propo-
sitions from that of all demonstrable mathematical propositions, calling them,
respectively, mathematics in the objective and subjective sense. He claimed also
that it is objective mathematics that no axiom system can fully comprise.
4. Gödel’s incompleteness theorems and in particular his recognition (before
Tarski) of the undeﬁnability of the concept of truth indicated a certain gap in Hil-
bert’s program and showed in particular, roughly speaking, that (full) truth can-
not be established (achieved) by provability and, generally, by syntactic means.
The former can be only approximated by the latter. Hence there arose a problem:
how should one extend Hilbert’s ﬁnitistic point of view?
Hilbert in his lecture in Hamburg in December 1930 (cf. Hilbert 1931) pro-
posed to admit a new rule of inference to be able to realize his program. This rule
is similar to the ω-rule, but it has rather informal character and a system obtain
by admitting it would be semi-formal. In fact Hilbert proposed that whenever
A(z) is a quantiﬁer-free formula for which it can be shown (ﬁnitarily) that A(z)
is a correct (richtig) numerical formula for each particular numerical instance z,
then its universal generalization ∀xA(x) may be taken as a new premise (Aus-
gangsformel) in all further proofs.
In Preface to the ﬁrst volume of Hilbert and Bernays’ monograph Grundla-
gen der Mathematik (1934) Hilbert wrote (p. V):
[. . . ] the occasionally held opinion, that from the results of Gödel follows the non-executa-
bility of my Proof Theory, is shown to be erroneous. This result shows indeed only that for
more advanced consistency proofs one must use the ﬁnite standpoint in a deeper way than
is necessary for the consideration of elementary formalism.23
Gödel pointed in many places that new axioms are needed to settle both
undecidable arithmetical and set-theoretic propositions. In the footnote 48a (evi-
23“[. . . ] die zeitweilig aufgekommene Meinung, aus gewissen neueren Ergebnissen von Gödel
folge die Undurchführbarkeit meiner Beweistheorie, als irrtümlich erwiesen ist. Jenes Ergebnis zeigt
in der Tat auch nur, daß man für die weitergehenden Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweise den ﬁniten Stand-
punkt in einer schärferen Weise ausnutzen muß, als dieses bei der Betrachtung der elementaren For-
malismen erforderlich ist.”

Truth vs. Provability
55
dently an afterthought) to (1931a) he wrote (English translation taken from Hei-
jenoort 1967, p. 610):
As will be shown in Part II of this paper, the true reason for the incompleteness inherent
in all formal systems of mathematics is that the formation of ever higher types can be
continued into the transﬁnite [. . . ] while in any formal system at most denumerably many
of them are available. For it can be shown that the undecidable propositions constructed
here become decidable whenever appropriate higher types are added (for example, the type
ω to the system P). An analogous situation prevails for the axiom system of set theory.24
In (193?), handwritten notes in English, evidently for a lecture, one ﬁnds the
following words of Gödel:
[. . . ] number-theoretic questions which are undecidable in a given formalism are always
decidable by evident inferences not expressible in the given formalism. As to the evidence
of these new inferences, they turn out to be exactly as evident as those of the given formal-
ism. So the result is rather that it is not possible to formalize mathematical evidence even in
the domain of number theory, but the conviction about which Hilbert speaks [i.e., the con-
viction of the solvability of every well formulated mathematical problem – R.M.] remains
entirely untouched. Another way of putting the result is this: It is not possible to mechanize
mathematical reasoning, i.e., it will never be possible to replace the mathematician by a
machine, even if you conﬁne yourself to number-theoretic problems. (p. 164)
In (1931c, p. 35) he stated that “[...] there are number-theoretic problems that
cannot be solved with number-theoretic, but only with analytic or, respectively,
set-theoretic methods”.25 And in (1933, p. 48) he wrote: “there are arithmetic
propositions which cannot be proved even by analysis but only by methods in-
volving extremely large inﬁnite cardinals and similar things”. In (1951, p. 318)
Gödel stated that:
In order to prove the consistency of classical number theory (and a fortiori of all stronger
systems) certain abstract concepts (and the directly evident axioms referring to them) must
be used, where ‘abstract’ means concepts which do not refer to sense objects, of which
symbols are a special kind. [. . . ] Hence it follows that there exists no rational justiﬁcation of
our precritical belief concerning the applicability and consistency of classical mathematics
(nor even its undermost level, number theory) on the basis of a syntactical interpretation.
In (1961) Gödel proposed “cultivating (deepening) knowledge of the abstract
concepts themselves which lead to the setting up of these mechanical systems”
(p. 383). In (1972) (this paper was a revised and expanded English version of
24“Der wahre Grund für die Unvollständigkeit, welche allen formalen Systemen der Mathema-
tik anhaftet, liegt, wie im II. Teil dieser Abhandlung gezeigt werden wird, darin, daß die Bildung
immer höcherer Typen sich ins Transﬁnite fortsetzen läßt (vgl. Hilbert 1926, S. 184), während in
jedem formalen System höchstens abzählbar viele vorhanden sind. Man kann nämlich zeigen, daß
die hier aufgestellten unentscheidbaren Sätzen durch Adjunktion passender höcherer Typen (z.B. des
Types ω zum System P) immer entscheidbar werden. Analoges gilt auch für das Axiomensystem der
Mengenlehre.”
25“[. . . ] es [gibt] zahlentheoretische Probleme, die sich nicht mit zahlentheoretischen sondern nur
mit analytischen bzw. mengentheoretischen Hilfsmitteln lösen lassen.”

56
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
(1958)) Gödel claimed that concrete ﬁnitary methods are insufﬁcient to prove
the consistency of elementary number theory and some abstract concepts must
be used in addition. He wrote (pp. 271–273):
Since ﬁnitary mathematics is deﬁned [. . . ] as the mathematics of concrete intuition, this
seems to imply that abstract concepts are needed for the proof of consistency of number
theory. [. . . ] By abstract concepts, in this context, are meant concepts which are essentially
of the second or higher level, i.e., which do not have as their content properties or relations
of concrete objects (such as combinations of symbols), but rather of thought structures or
thought contents (e.g., proofs, meaningful propositions, and so on), where in the proofs of
propositions about these mental objects insights are needed which are not derived from a
reﬂection upon the combinatorial (space-time) properties of the symbols representing them,
but rather from a reﬂection upon the meanings involved.
In the paper (1946) Gödel explicitly called for an effort to use progressively
more powerful transﬁnite theories to derive new arithmetical theorems. He wrote
there:
Let us consider, e.g., the concept of demonstrability. It is well known that, in whichever way
you make it precise by means of a formalism, the contemplation of this very formalism
gives rise to new axioms which are exactly as evident and justiﬁed as those with which
you started, and that this process of extension can be iterated into the transﬁnite. So there
cannot exist any formalism which would embrace all these steps; but this does not exclude
that all these steps (or at least all of them which give something new for the domain of
propositions in which you are interested) could be described and collected together in some
non-constructive way. (p. 151)
These remarks correspond with the words of R. Carnap who wrote in (1934a,
p. 274):
[. . . ] all that is mathematical can be formalized; yet the whole of mathematics cannot be
grasped by one system but an inﬁnite series of still richer and richer languages is neces-
sary.26
One can compare the above remarks with those of Turing from his paper
(1939). In the introduction to this paper Turing wrote (p. 162):27
The well-known theorem of Gödel (1931a) shows that every system of logic is in a certain
sense incomplete, but at the same time it indicates means whereby from a system L of logic
a more complete system L′ may be obtained. By repeating the process we get a sequence
L, L1 = L′, L2 = L
′
1, ... each more complete than the proceeding. A logic Lω may then be
constructed in which the provable theorems are the totality of theorems provable with the
help of logics L, L1, L2, ... Proceeding in this way we can associate a system of logic with
any constructive ordinal. It may be asked whether such a sequence of logics of this kind is
complete in the sense that to any problem A there corresponds an ordinal α such that A is
solvable by means of the logic Lα.
26“[. . . ] alles Mathematische ist formalisierbar; aber die Mathematik ist nicht durch Ein System
erschöpfbar, sondern erfordert eine Reihe immer reicherer Sprachen.”
27See also Feferman (1962; 1988) where Turing’s idea and its development are discussed.

Truth vs. Provability
57
Also Zermelo proposed to allow inﬁnitary methods to overcome restrictions
revealed by Gödel. According to Zermelo the existence of undecidable proposi-
tions was a consequence of the restriction of the notion of proof to ﬁnitistic meth-
ods (he said here about “ﬁnitistic prejudice”). This situation could be changed if
one used a more general “scheme” of proof. Zermelo had here in mind an inﬁni-
tary logic, in which there were inﬁnitely long sentences and rules of inference
with inﬁnitely many premises. In such a logic, he insisted, “all propositions are
decidable!”28 He thought of quantiﬁers as inﬁnitary conjunctions or disjunctions
of unrestricted cardinality and conceived of proofs not as formal deductions from
given axioms but as metamathematical determinations of the truth or falsity of a
proposition. Thus syntactic considerations played no rôle in his thinking.
5. Above the process of the development of the consciousness of the dif-
ference between provability and truth in mathematics has been analyzed. The
rôle of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems in this process was stressed and the
attempts to overcome the limitations disclosed by those theorems by admitting
new inﬁnitary methods (instead of ﬁnitary ones only) in the concept of a math-
ematical proof was indicated. To close this considerations let us note that the
very distinction between provability and truth in mathematics presupposes some
philosophical assumptions. In fact for pure formalists and for intuitionists there
exists no truth/proof problem. For them a mathematical statement is true just in
case it is provable, and proofs are syntactic or mental constructions of our own
making. In the case of a platonist (realist) philosophy of mathematics the situ-
ation is different. One can say that platonist approach to mathematics enabled
Gödel to state the problem and to be able to distinguish between proof and truth,
between syntax and semantics.29
28Note that that time was not yet ripe for such an inﬁnitary logic. Systems of such a logic, though
in a more restricted form than demanded by Zermelo, and without escaping incompleteness, were
constructed in the mid-ﬁfties in works of Henkin, Karp and Tarski (cf. Barwise 1980 and Moore
1980).
29Note that, as indicated above, Hilbert was not interested in philosophical questions and did not
consider them.

4
PHILOSOPHY OF MATHEMATICS
IN THE 20TH CENTURY.
MAIN TRENDS AND DOCTRINES1
The aim of the paper is to present the main trends and tendencies in the phi-
losophy of mathematics in the 20th century. To make the analysis more clear we
distinguish three periods in the development of the philosophy of mathematics
in this century: (1) the ﬁrst thirty years when three classical doctrines: logicism,
intuitionism and formalism were formulated, (2) the period from 1931 till the
end of the ﬁfties – period of stagnation, and (3) from the beginning of the sixties
till today when new tendencies putting stress on the knowing subject and the
research practice of mathematicians arose.
1. The First 30 Years – the Rise of Classical Conceptions
Philosophy of mathematics and the foundations of mathematics entered the 20th
century in the atmosphere of a crisis.2 It was connected mainly with the problem
of the status of abstract objects. In set theory created by Georg Cantor in the last
quarter of the 19th century antinomies were discovered. Some of them were al-
ready known to Cantor – e.g., the antinomy of the set of all sets or the antinomy
of the set of all ordinals (the latter was independently discovered by C. Burali-
Forti). He was able to eliminate them by distinguishing between classes and sets.
New difﬁculties appeared when B. Russell discovered the antinomy of irreﬂex-
ive classes (called today Russell’s antinomy) in the system of logic of G. Frege
1Originally published in: J. Malinowski and A. Pietruszczak (eds.), Essays in Logic and On-
tology, pp. 331–347 (2006). Amsterdam–New York: Editions Rodopi. c⃝Editions Rodopi B.V.,
Amsterdam – New York, NY 2006. Reprinted with kind permission of the Editions Rodopi.
2It is usually called the second crisis and distinguished from the ﬁrst one which took place in the
antiquity and was connected with the discovery of incommensurables by Pythagoreans.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n
Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 59–73. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

60
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
(to which the latter wanted to reduce the entire mathematics). Besides those anti-
nomies one discovered also so called semantical ones (G.D. Berry, K. Grelling)
connected with semantical notions such as reference, sense and truth.
In this situation there was a need to ﬁnd a new solid and safe foundations
for mathematics. Attempts to provide such a foundations and to overcome the
crisis led, among others, to the rise of new directions and conceptions in the
philosophy of mathematics, namely of logicism, intuitionism and formalism.
One used here of course achievements of earlier mathematicians, especially of
those living in the 19th century. In particular important were the very rise of
set theory (G. Cantor), the idea of the arithmetization of analysis (A. Cauchy,
K. Weierstrass, R. Dedekind), axiomatization of the arithmetic of natural num-
bers (G. Peano), non-Euclidean geometries (N.I. Lobachevsky, J. Bolayi and
C.F. Gausss) and the complete axiomatization of systems of geometry (M. Pasch,
D. Hilbert) and, last but not least, the rise and the development of mathematical
logic (G. Boole, A. De Morgan, G. Frege, B. Russell).
New doctrines in the philosophy of mathematics looking for solid, sure and
safe foundations of mathematics saw them ﬁrst of all in mathematical logic and
set theory. The most important proposals are called logicism, intuitionism and
formalism.
1.1. Logicism
Logicism was founded by Gottlob Frege (1848–1925) and developed by Bertrand
Russell (1872–1970) and Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947). It grew out
from the tendency to arithmetize the analysis – this tendency was characteris-
tic for foundational studies in the 19th century. The aim of it was to show that
the theory of real numbers underlying the analysis can be developed on the basis
of the arithmetic of natural numbers. The realization of this task led to a new one,
namely to ﬁnd foundations for the arithmetic of natural numbers, i.e., to found it
on a simpler, more elementary theory. This task was undertaken just by G. Frege
who tried to reduce arithmetic to logic (cf. Frege 1884, 1893, 1903). Unfortu-
nately the system of logic used by him turned out to be inconsistent what was
discovered by B. Russell in 1901 (Russell discovered that one can construct in
this system the antinomy of irreﬂexive classes called today Russell’s antinomy).
In this situation Russell together with A.N. Whitehead undertook anew the task
of reducing arithmetic to a simpler theory. They introduced so called ramiﬁed
theory of types and showed that the whole mathematics can be reduced to it.
This was the beginning of a mature form of logicism. Its main thesis says that
(the whole) mathematics is reducible to logic, i.e., mathematics is only a part
of logic and logic is an epistemic ground of all mathematics. This thesis can be
formulated as the conjunction of the following three theses: (1) all mathemat-
ical concepts (in particular all primitive notions of mathematical theories) can

Philosophy of Mathematics in the 20th Century
61
be explicitly deﬁned by purely logical notions, (2) all mathematical theorems
can be deduced (by logical deduction) from logical axioms and deﬁnitions, (3)
this deduction is based on a logic common for all mathematical theories, i.e.,
the justiﬁcation of theorems in all mathematical theories refers to the same basic
principles which form one logic common for the whole of mathematics (here is
also included a thesis that any argumentation in mathematics should be formal-
ized). Hence theorems of mathematics have uniquely determined contents and
it is a logical contents. Moreover, mathematical theorems are analytic (similarly
as logical theorems).
Russell and Whitehead showed in their monumental work Principia Mathe-
matica (vol. I – 1910, vol. II – 1912, vol. III – 1913) how to reduce the whole of
mathematics to the system of logic given by the ramiﬁed theory of types. Some
difﬁculties by the attempts to prove certain properties of natural numbers forced
the necessity of introducing principles of a non-logical character, in particular
the axiom of inﬁnity, reducibility axiom and the axiom of choice (they have
in fact a set-theoretical character). This led to the modern version of logicism
which states that the whole of mathematics is reducible to logic and set theory.
1.2. Intuitionism
Second doctrine of the philosophy of mathematics formulated at the begin-
ning of the 20th century was intuitionism founded by the Dutch mathemati-
cian Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer (1881–1966). It used some ideas which ap-
peared by Leopold Kronecker (1823–1891), Henri Poincaré (1854–1912) and
by a group of French mathematicians called the Paris group of intuitionism or
French semi-intuitionists (R.L. Baire, E. Borel, H.L. Lebesgue and the Russian
mathematician N.N. Lusin).
Brouwer presented his philosophical views for the ﬁrst time in his doctoral
dissertation Over de Grondslagen de Wiskunde (1907) and developed them in the
papers (Brouwer, 1912 and 1949). The main aim of him (and of the intuitionism)
was to avoid inconsistencies in mathematics. Brouwer proposed means to do that
which turned out to be very radical and led in the effect to the deep reconstruction
of the whole of mathematics.
The main fundamental thesis of Brouwer’s intuitionism is the rejection of
platonism in the philosophy of mathematics, i.e., of the thesis about the exis-
tence of mathematical objects which is independent of time, space and human
mind. The proper ontological thesis is the conceptualism. According to Brouwer
mathematics is a function of the human intellect and a free activity of the hu-
man mind, it is a creation of the mind and not a theory or a system of rules and
theorems. Mathematical objects are mental constructions of an (idealized) math-
ematician. Mathematics is based on the fundamental intuition of the a priori time
(one can see here the connection with the philosophy of I. Kant). This intuition is

62
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
a basis for the mental construction of natural numbers. Moreover this construc-
tion is the basic of mathematical activity from which all other mathematical
activity springs. One of the consequences of this is the thesis that arithmetical
statements are synthetic a priori judgements.
One should reject the axiomatic-deductive method as a method of developing
and founding mathematics. It is not sufﬁcient to postulate only the existence of
mathematical objects (as it is done in the axiomatic method) but one must ﬁrst
construct them. One must also reject the actual inﬁnity. An inﬁnite set can be
understood only as a law or a rule of forming more and more of its elements, but
they will never exist as forming an actual totality. Hence there are no uncountable
sets and no cardinal numbers other than ℵ0.
The conceptualistic thesis of intuitionism implies also the rejection of any
nonconstructive proofs of the existential theses, i.e., of proofs giving no con-
structions of the postulated objects. In fact in intuitionism ‘to be’ equals ‘to be
constructed’. Brouwer claimed that just nonconstructive proofs were the source
of all troubles and mistakes in mathematics. Since such proofs are usually based
on the law of the excluded middle (p ∨¬p) as well as on the law of double
negation (p ≡¬¬p), intuitionists could not any longer use the classical logic.
Moreover they claimed that logic is neither a basis for mathematics nor a starting
point of it. Brouwer said that logic is based on mathematics, that it is secondary
and dependent on mathematics and not vice versa, i.e., logic is a basis for math-
ematics as the logicists assert.
A mathematical theorem is a declaration that a certain mental construction
has been completed. All mathematical constructions are independent of any lan-
guage (the only role of a language is to enable the communication of mathemat-
ical constructions to others). Hence there is no language (formal or informal)
which would be safe for mathematics and would protect it from inconsistencies.
It is a mistake to analyze the language of mathematics instead of analyzing the
mathematical thinking.
The ideas of Brouwer were popularized by his student Arend Heyting (1898–
1980). He attempted to explain them in a language usually used in the reﬂection
on mathematics – note that Brouwer expressed his ideas in a language far from
the standards accepted by mathematicians and logicians and therefore not al-
ways understandable. It seems that without those attempts of Heyting the ideas
of Brouwer would soon disappear. Heyting constructed also the ﬁrst formalized
system of the intuitionistic propositional calculus, i.e., of the propositional calcu-
lus satisfying principles of the intuitionism. This system has been never accepted
by Brouwer.

Philosophy of Mathematics in the 20th Century
63
1.3. Formalism
The third classical doctrine in the philosophy of mathematics of the 20th century
is formalism created by David Hilbert (1862–1943). Hilbert was of the opinion
that the attempts to justify and found mathematics undertaken hitherto, espe-
cially by the intuitionism, were unsatisfactory because they led to the restriction
of mathematics and to the rejection of various parts of it, in particular those
considering inﬁnity (cf. Hilbert 1926). He undertook an attempt to justify the
actual inﬁnity by ﬁnitistic methods referring only to concrete, ﬁnite objects be-
ing the starting point of mathematics. Those objects are natural numbers meant
as numerals (systems of signs). They are given immediately and clearly. Actual
inﬁnity on the other hand is only an idea of reason in Kant’s sense, hence a
notion for which there is no real basis because it transcends every experience.
Hilbert proposed to justify the mathematics using the notion of an actual inﬁn-
ity (in Hilbert’s terminology – inﬁnitistic mathematics) by ﬁnitistic methods. He
wanted to do it via proof theory (Beweistheorie). To do this one should formalize
the whole mathematics, i.e., to represent it as a formalized system (or a set of
formalized systems) and then to study such systems as systems of symbols only
(hence as systems of concrete and visible objects clearly and immediately given)
governed by certain rules referring only to the form and not to the sense or mean-
ing of formulas. This can be done by ﬁnitistic and consequently safe methods.
In particular one should show in this way the consistency and conservativeness
of inﬁnitistic mathematics. This was the task of proof theory.
One should note here that formalization was for Hilbert only an instrument
used to prove the correctness of (inﬁnitistic) mathematics. Hilbert did not treat
mathematical theories as games on symbols or collections of formulas without
any contents. Formalization was only a methodological tool in the process of
studying the properties of the preexisting mathematical theories.
2. Between 1931 and the End of the Fifties
In 1931 a paper by a young Austrian mathematician Kurt Gödel (1906–1978)
was published (cf. Gödel 1931a). It turned out to be revolutionary and played
a crucial rôle in the foundations and philosophy of mathematics. Gödel proved
in it that arithmetic of natural numbers and all formal systems containing it are
essentially incomplete provided they are consistent (and based on a recursive,
i.e., effectively recognizable set of axioms). He announced also a theorem stat-
ing that (roughly speaking) no such theory can prove its own consistency, i.e., to
prove the consistency of a given theory T containing arithmetic one needs meth-
ods and assumptions stronger than those of the theory T. Hence in particular
one cannot prove the consistency of an inﬁnitistic theory by ﬁnitistic methods.

64
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
In this way Gödel’s incompleteness theorems indicated certain epistemologi-
cal limitation of axiomatic method. In particular they showed that one cannot
completely axiomatize neither the arithmetic of natural numbers nor other richer
theories (what was required by Hilbert’s program) and that there are no absolute
inconsistency proofs for mathematical theories.3
Since one of the main aims of doctrines in the philosophy of mathematics
formulated at the beginning of the century was to show that mathematics is con-
sistent and that it is free of antinomies, one sees that Gödel’s results were in fact
a shock for them.4 Indeed after 1931 one can observe certain stagnation in the
philosophy of mathematics which lasted till the end of the ﬁfties. There were
formulated new conceptions but they were not so signiﬁcant as logicism, intu-
itionism and formalism. One should mention here ﬁrst of all works by Willard
Van Orman Quine (1908–2000), Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951) and Kurt
Gödel.
2.1. Quine’s Philosophy of Mathematics
Quine’s philosophy of mathematics can be characterized as holistic. According
to it mathematics should be considered not in separation from other sciences
but as an element of the collection of theories explaining the reality (cf. Quine
1948–1949; 1951a; 1951b). Mathematics is indispensable there, in particular in
physical theories, hence its objects do exist.5 In this way Quine attacked the anti-
realist and anti-empiricist approaches to the philosophy of mathematics. This
cleared the way for empiricist approaches (see below). Quine accepted only one
way of existence. One does not ﬁnd by him physical, mathematical, intensional,
conceptual etc. existence but simply existence. He rejected also the possibility
of dividing a scientiﬁc theory into an analytical (hence purely conventional) part
and a synthetic one (dealing with the reality).
2.2. Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics
Wittgenstein’s ideas concerning mathematics can be reconstructed from his re-
marks made at various periods – hence they are not uniform, moreover they are
even inconsistent (cf. Wittgenstein 1953; 1956). They grew out from his philos-
ophy of language as a game. He was against logicism, and especially against
Russell’s attempts to reduce mathematics to logic. He claimed that by such re-
ductions the creative character of a mathematical proof disappears. A mathemat-
ical proof cannot be reduced to axioms and rules of inference, because it is in
3For Gödel’s theorems and the discussion of their philosophical and methodological conse-
quences see, e.g., Murawski (1999a).
4One can ﬁnd opinions that Gödel’s theorems have deﬁnitely deprived mathematics of certainty,
absolute truth and necessity (cf. Kline 1980).
5This argumentation is known in the literature as Quine’s-Putnam indispensability argument.

Philosophy of Mathematics in the 20th Century
65
fact a rule of constructing a new concept. Logic does not play so fundamental
role in mathematics as logicism claims – its role is rather auxiliary. Mathemat-
ical knowledge is independent and speciﬁc in comparison with logic. Mathe-
matical truths are a priori, synthetic and constructive. Mathematicians are not
discovering mathematical objects and their properties but creating them. Hence
mathematical knowledge is of a necessary character. One can easily see here the
connections of Wittgenstein’s philosophy of mathematics and Kant’s ideas as
well as the ideas of intuitionists.
2.3. Gödel’s Philosophy of Mathematics
Gödel formulated his philosophical ideas concerning mathematics especially in
connection with some problems of set theory (cf. Gödel 1944; 1947). His philos-
ophy of mathematics can be characterized as platonism. He claimed that math-
ematical objects exist in the reality independently of time, space and the know-
ing subject. He stressed the analogy between logic and mathematics on the one
hand and natural sciences on the other. Mathematical objects are transcendental
with respect to their representation in mathematical theories. The basic source
of mathematical knowledge is intuition6 though it should not be understood as
giving us the immediate knowledge. It sufﬁces to explain and justify simple ba-
sic concepts and axioms. Mathematical knowledge is not the result of a passive
contemplation of data given by intuition but a result of the activity of the mind
which has a dynamic and cumulative character. Data provided by the intuition
can be developed by a deeper study of mathematical objects and this can lead
to the adoption of new statements as axioms. Those new axioms can be justiﬁed
from outside, i.e., by their consequences (whether they enable us to solve prob-
lems which are unsolvable so far, whether they make possible to simplify the
proofs or to obtain new interesting corollaries). Gödel admits here consequences
both in mathematics itself as well as in physics. This is, according to him, the
second (besides intuition) criterion of the truth of mathematical statements.
As stated above, Gödel presented and explained his philosophical ideas main-
ly in connection with set theory, in particular with the problem of continuum. As
a realist he was convinced that the continuum hypothesis has a determined log-
ical value, i.e., it is true or false (though we are not able now to decide which
one). So Gödel assumed that there exists an absolute universe of sets which we
try to describe by axioms of set theory. The fact that we can neither prove nor
disprove the continuum hypothesis indicates that the axioms does not describe
this universe in a complete way. Hence the necessity of adopting new axioms in
mathematics, in particular in set theory. Gödel suggested that new inﬁnity ax-
6Gödel never explained what he meant by intuition. Hence various interpretations are possible.
Since 1959 he was interested in Husserl’s phenomenology. This probably inﬂuenced his theory of
mathematical intuition.

66
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
ioms postulating the existence of new large cardinals should be considered. He
claimed that such axioms can imply not only some corollaries concerning the
continuum hypothesis but also some new results in arithmetic of natural num-
bers.
2.4. The Inﬂuence of the Philosophy of Mathematics on the Foundations
of Mathematics
Above we indicated the signiﬁcance and the inﬂuence of mathematical logic
on the rise and development of doctrines in the philosophy of mathematics, in
particular in the case of the classical conceptions, i.e., logicism, intuitionism and
formalism. But also another dependence should be noted, namely the inﬂuence
of philosophical doctrines and conceptions on foundational studies. This was the
case especially after 1931.
Under the inﬂuence of the logicism and platonism Alfred Tarski (1901–
1983) founded and developed set-theoretical semantics. It gave rise to the very
important part of the foundations of mathematics, namely to model theory. Hil-
bert’s formalism stimulated researches in the proof theory, hence in the ﬁnitistic
metamathematics. Though Gödel’s results indicated that Hilbert’s program of
justiﬁcation of mathematics cannot be realized in the original form but soon ap-
peared new results and ideas which showed that this can be partially done. Proof
theory became an independent discipline in the foundations of mathematics. Un-
der the inﬂuence of intuitionism various systems of constructive mathematics as
well as various constructivistic trends were developed.
Constructivism is a common name for various doctrines the main thesis of
which is the demand to restrict mathematics to the consideration of constructive
objects and to constructive methods only. Hence constructivism is a normative
attitude the aim of which is not to build appropriate foundations for and to jus-
tify the existing mathematics but rather to reconstruct the latter according to the
accepted principles and to reject all the methods and results which do not fulﬁl
them. The constructivistic tendencies appeared in the last quarter of the nine-
teenth century as a reaction against the intensive development of highly abstract
methods and concepts in mathematics inspired by Cantor’s set theory.
There are various constructivist programs and schools. They differ by their
interpretation and understanding of the concept of constructivity. One of the
most developed schools is intuitionism discussed above (see Section 1.2). Oth-
ers are ﬁnitism, ultraintuitionism (called also ultraﬁnitism or actualism), pred-
icativism, classical and constructive recursive mathematics, Bishop’s construc-
tivism.
One should also note that intensive studies on intuitionistic mathematics and
logic took place. Recently those researches became strong impulse from the

Philosophy of Mathematics in the 20th Century
67
computer science since it turned out that intuitionistic logic provides a very use-
ful tool in theoretical informatics.
3. Philosophy of Mathematics after 1960
In the early sixties certain renaissance of interests in the philosophy of mathe-
matics can be observed. The old doctrines: logicism, intuitionism and formalism,
still prevail but there appear some new conceptions based on another presuppo-
sitions and having another aims.
Formalism and intuitionism did not abandon in principle the ideas of their
founders though the development of mathematical logic and the foundations of
mathematics inﬂuenced them and forced some modiﬁcations of the original the-
ses.
As indicated above, Gödel’s incompleteness results struck Hilbert’s formal-
istic program and showed that it cannot be fully realized. In this situation two
ideas appeared: One suggested to extend the scope of the admissible methods
and allow general constructive ones instead of only ﬁnitistic methods (the idea
was explicitly formulated for the ﬁrst time by Paul Bernays) – this led to the
so called generalized Hilbert’s program. The second idea was based on the fol-
lowing reasoning: If the entire inﬁnitistic mathematics cannot be reduced to and
justiﬁed by ﬁnitistic mathematics then one can ask for which part of it is that
possible. In other words: how much of inﬁnitistic mathematics can be devel-
oped within formal systems which are conservative over ﬁnitistic mathematics
with respect to real sentences? This question constitutes the relativized version
of the program of Hilbert. Recently results of the so called reverse mathematics
developed mainly by H. Friedman and S.G. Simpson contributed very much to
this program.7 In fact they showed that several interesting and signiﬁcant parts
of classical mathematics are ﬁnitistically reducible. This means that Hilbert’s
program can be partially realized.
Under the inﬂuence of intuitionism several constructivistic doctrines were
developed – we wrote about them above.
Logicism appears as so called pluralistic logicism and is represented by
H. Mehlberg and H. Putnam. According to it the main task in mathematics is
the construction of proofs in axiomatic systems. By the deduction theorem if
a sentence ϕ is a theorem of an axiomatic theory T then there exist axioms
ϕ1, ϕ2, . . . , ϕn of this theory such that the formula ϕ1 ∧ϕ2 ∧. . . ∧ϕn −→ϕ is a
theorem of logic. Hence mathematical theories are nothing more than a source
of logical laws. It is absolutely inessential what axioms one adopts, there do
7Detailed description of the results of the reverse mathematics and of their meaning for the phi-
losophy of mathematics is given in Murawski (1994) (one can also ﬁnd there an extensive bibliog-
raphy).

68
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
not exist better and worse theories – important are only the logical intercon-
nections between axioms and theorems. Hence for example there is (from the
point of view of the pure mathematics) no difference between Euclidean or non-
Euclidean geometry.8
Researches in mathematical logic and the foundations of mathematics indi-
cated the crucial role played in mathematics by set theory. Therefore so much
attention was devoted to it not only in foundational studies but also in the philo-
sophical context. This attitude was strengthened by results of Gödel (1939) and
Paul Cohen (1963) who showed that two most discussed principles of set theory:
the axiom of choice and the continuum hypothsis are consistent and independent
of other axioms of Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory. Hence various mutually incon-
sistent axiomatic set theories are possible and consequently there is no unique
set-theoretical base for mathematics. The situation is even more complicated:
Zermelo-Fraenkel axiomatization of set theory is not the only possible, there are
also other axiomatic theories based on another principles – e.g., Gödel-Bernays
set theory (with sets and classes), Quine’s system of New Foundations, theory of
semi-sets of P. Vopˇenka and his alternative theory of sets (based on the ideas of
Bolzano instead of those of Cantor). All this led anew to the discussion between
formalism and realism in set theory (and consequently in mathematics).
By the formalistic approach there is no necessity of justifying the accepted
axioms (one can in fact adopt any consistent axioms) – cf. Cohen (1971). The
realistic one pretends that axioms provide the description of the real world of
sets. The latter was represented, e.g., by Gödel (see above). In the eighties a nat-
uralized version of Gödel’s ideas has been developed by Penelope Maddy (cf.
Maddy 1980; 1990a; 1990b; 1997). Gödel thought we can intuit abstract sets,
Maddy claims that we can see sets of concrete objects whose members are be-
fore our eyes. We perceive sets of concrete physical objects by perceiving their
elements (physical objects). Sets are located in the space-time real world. In this
way we can know “simple” sets, i.e., hereditarily ﬁnite sets. More complicated
sets are treated by Maddy as theoretical objects in physics – they and their prop-
erties can be known by metatheoretical considerations. One sees that in this con-
ception Gödel’s mathematical intuition has been replaced by the usual sensual
perception. The advantage of Maddy’s approach is that it uniﬁes the advantages
of Gödel’s platonism enabling us to explain the evidence of certain mathematical
facts with Quine’s realism taking into account the role that mathematics plays in
scientiﬁc theories.
8One can see certain similarity of this idea and Aristotle’s thesis that the necessity cannot be
found in any single statement about mathematical objects but in hypothetical statements saying that
if a certain proposition is true then a certain other proposition is also true. Hence (using today’s ter-
minology) we can say that for Aristotle the necessity of mathematics was that of logically necessary
hypothetical propositions. Similar ideas one ﬁnds also by Russell before 1900, later he has changed
his mind.

Philosophy of Mathematics in the 20th Century
69
The most characteristic feature of the development of the philosophy of
mathematics in the second half of the 20th century is the anti-foundational ten-
dency and the empiricist approach. They were the reaction to the limitations and
one-sidedness of the classical views which are giving one-dimensional static
picture of mathematics as a science and are trying to provide indubitable and
infallible foundations for mathematics. They treat mathematics as a science in
which one automatically and continuously collects true proved propositions.
Hence they provide only one-sided reconstructions of the real mathematics in
which neither the development of mathematics as a science nor the development
of mathematical knowledge of a particular mathematician would be taken into
account.
New conceptions challenge the dogma of foundations and try to reexamine
the actual research practices of mathematicians and those using mathematics and
to avoid the reduction of mathematics to one dimension or aspect only. They
want to consider mathematics not only in the context of justiﬁcation but to take
into account also the context of discovery.
One of the ﬁrst attempts in this direction was the conception of Imre Lakatos
(1922–1974). He attempted to apply some of Popper’s ideas about the methods
of natural science to episodes from the history of mathematics.9
Lakatos claims that mathematics is not an indubitable and infallible science
– on the contrary, it is fallible. It is being developed by criticizing and correcting
former theories which are never free of vagueness and ambiguity. One tries to
solve a problem by looking simultaneously for a proof and for a counterexam-
ple. New proofs explain old counterexamples, new counterexamples undermine
old proofs. By proofs Lakatos means here usual non-formalized proofs of actual
mathematics. In such a proof one uses explanations, justiﬁcations, elaborations
which make the conjecture more plausible, more convincing. Lakatos does not
analyze the idealized formal mathematics but the informal one actually devel-
oped by “normal” mathematicians, hence mathematics in process of growth and
discovery. His main work Proofs and Refutations (1963–1964) is in fact a critical
examination of dogmatic theories in the philosophy of mathematics, in partic-
ular of logicism and formalism. Main objection raised by Lakatos is that they
are not applicable to actual mathematics. Lakatos claims that mathematics is a
science in Popper’s sense, that it is developed by successive criticism and im-
provement of theories and by establishing new and rival theories. The role of
“basic statements” and “potential falsiﬁers” is played in the case of formalized
mathematical theories by informal theories (cf. Lakatos 1967).
Another attempt to overcome the limitations of the classical theories of phi-
losophy of mathematics is the conception of Raymond L. Wilder (1896–1982).
9The reference to the history of mathematics is one of the characteristic features of new trends in
the philosophy of mathematics.

70
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
He presented his ideas in many papers and lectures – complete version of them
can be found in two of his books (1968; 1981). Wilder’s main thesis says that
mathematics is a cultural system. Mathematics can be seen as a subculture, math-
ematical knowledge belongs to the cultural tradition of a society, mathematical
research practice has a social character. Thanks to such an approach the develop-
ment of mathematics can be better understood and the general laws of changes
in a given culture can be applied in historical and philosophical investigations
of mathematics. It also enables us to see the interrelations and inﬂuences of
various elements of the culture and to study their inﬂuence on the evolution of
mathematics. It makes also possible to discover the mechanisms of the develop-
ment and evolution of mathematics. Wilder’s conception is therefore sometimes
called evolutionary epistemology. He has proposed to study mathematics not
only from the point of view of logic but also using methods of anthropology,
sociology and history. Wilder maintains that mathematical concepts should be
located in the Popper’s “third world”. Mathematics investigates no timeless and
spaceless entities. It cannot be understood properly without regarding the cul-
ture in the framework of which it is being developed. In this sense mathematics
shares many common features with ideology, religion and art. A difference be-
tween them is that mathematics is science in which one justiﬁes theorems by
providing logical proofs and not on the basis of, say, general acceptance.
The thesis that mathematical knowledge is a priori, absolutely certain and
indubitable as well as infallible was criticized also in the quasi-empiricism of
Hilary Putnam. He claimed (cf. Putnam 1975) that mathematical knowledge is
not a priori, absolute and certain, that it is rather quasi-empirical, fallible and
probable, much like natural sciences. He argues that quasi-empirical mathemat-
ics is logically possible and that ordinary mathematics has been quasi-empirical
all along. In (1967) Putnam proposed a modal picture of mathematics accord-
ing to which mathematics does not study any particular objects themselves but
rather possibilities involving any objects whatsoever. Hence mathematics studies
the consequences of axioms and asserts also the possibility of its axioms having
models. The introduction of modalities opened the door to new epistemology of
mathematics.
The new anti-foundational trends in the philosophy of mathematics described
above should not be treated as competitive with respect to old theories. They
should be rather seen as complements of logicism, intuitionism and formalism.
One is looking here not for indubitable, unquestionable and irrefutable founda-
tions of mathematics, one tries not to demonstrate that the actual mathematics
can be reconstructed as an infallible and consistent system but one attempts to
describe the actual process of building and constructing mathematics (both in
individual and historical aspect).
The quasi-empirical or even empirical approach to mathematics became re-
cently a new dimension through the broader and broader application of comput-

Philosophy of Mathematics in the 20th Century
71
ers. This phenomenon puts new challenges to the philosophy of mathematics.
Computers are applied in mathematics in at least six different ways: (1) to
do numerical calculations, (2) to solve (usually approximatively) algebraical or
differential equations and systems of equations, to calculate integrals, etc. (3) in
automated theorem proving, (4) in checking mathematical proofs, (5) in prov-
ing theorems (one speaks in such situations about proofs with the help of com-
puters), (6) to do experiments with mathematical objects. Special interests and
controversies awake applications of the type (5). One of the main problems con-
sidered in this context is the problem of the epistemological status of theorems
obtained in this way and consequently – in the case of accepting such theorems
as legitimated mathematical theorems – the problem of the character of mathe-
matical knowledge.
This problem is usually discussed in the context of the four-colour theo-
rem (cf. for example Tymoczko 1979). This theorem – proved in 1976 – is the
ﬁrst mathematical theorem whose proof is essentially based on the application
of a computer program. We have no proof of this theorem not using computer.
Moreover, some of the deciding ideas used in the proof were obtained and im-
proved with the help of computer experiments, by a “dialogue” with the com-
puter. Hence the four-colour theorem is the ﬁrst theorem of the new type, i.e., it
has (at least so far) no traditional proof and its only proof we know is based on
a(n) (computer) experiment (more exactly: it uses computer computations). So
one should ask whether the mathematical knowledge can be still classiﬁed as an
a priori knowledge and one should choose between the following two options:
(1) to extend the scope of admissible proof methods and admit also the usage
of computers (hence a certain experiment) in proving theorems or (2) to decide
that the four-colour theorem has not been proved so far and does not belong to
the domain of mathematical knowledge. Observe that the ﬁrst option implies the
thesis that mathematical knowledge is not an a apriori knowledge any more but
has in fact a quasi-empirical character. The thesis of the quasi-empirical char-
acter of mathematical knowledge can be found, e.g., by R. Hersh, Ph. Kitcher
and E.R. Swart (cf. Swart 1980). They argue that mathematics always admitted
empirical elements and had in fact an empirical character. On the other hand one
attempts also to defend the a priori character of mathematics despite the usage of
computers in it by arguing that proofs using computers can be transformed into
traditional proofs by adding new axioms or that a computer is in fact a mathe-
matician and it knows the result proved deductively or that procedures similar
to applying computer programs have been used in mathematics for a long time,
hence the applications used in the proof of the four-colour theorem are in fact
nothing essentially new (cf. for example Levin 1981, Krakowski 1980 or Detlef-
sen and Luker 1980).
It is worth noting here that not only the usage of computers is the source of
new challenges in the philosophy of mathematics but also the theoretical com-

72
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
puter science, in particular the computation theory, raises new problems and
simultaneously provides new tools to analyze known results and to give new
interpretations of them. As an example can serve here the information theory
and its application to the epistemology of mathematics (cf. Chaitin 1982 and
1998). In particular the analysis of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems from the
point of view of the information theory leads to the conclusion that mathemati-
cal knowledge has a quasi-empirical character and is in fact similar to sciences,
in particular in the case of the criteria of accepting new axioms and methods.
Considering new conceptions in the philosophy of mathematics one must
also mention structuralism.10 It can be characterized as a doctrine claiming that
mathematics studies structures and that mathematical objects are featureless po-
sitions in these structures. As forerunners of such views one can see R. Dedekind,
D. Hilbert, P. Bernays and N. Bourbaki. The latter is in fact a pseudonym of a
group of (mainly French) mathematicians who undertook in the thirties the task
of a systematization of the whole of mathematics (the result of their investiga-
tions was the series of books under the common title Éléments de mathéma-
tique). Their work referred to Russell’s idea of reconstructing mathematics as
one system developed on a ﬁrm (logical) basis. For Bourbakists the mathemati-
cal world is the world of structures. The very notion of a structure was explained
by them in terms of set theory. They distinguished three principal types of math-
ematical structures: algebraic, order and topological structures.
The idea of treating mathematics as a science about structures is being de-
veloped nowadays by Michael Resnik, Stewart Shapiro and Geoffrey Hellman.
Resnik claims (cf. Resnik 1981; 1982; see also Resnik 1997) that mathematics
can be viewed as a science of patterns with its objects being positions in pat-
terns. The identity of mathematical objects is determined by their relationships
to other positions in the given structure to which they belong. He does not postu-
late a special mental faculty used to acquire knowledge of patterns (they are not
seen through a mind’s eyes). We go through a series of stages during which we
conceptualize our experience in successively more abstract terms. This process
do not necessarily yield necessary truths or a priori knowledge. Important is here
our tendency to perceive things as structured. The transition from experience to
abstract structures depends upon the culture in which it takes place. Add that the
transition from simple patterns to more complicated ones and the development
of pure theories of patterns rely upon deductive evidence.
S. Shapiro claims (cf. Shapiro 1989; 1991) that there is a strict connection
between objects of mathematics and objects of natural sciences. An explana-
tion of it can be provided in his opinion just by structuralism according to which
mathematics studies not objects per se but structures of objects. Hence objects of
10The presentation and analysis of structuralistic doctrines can be found in the doctoral disserta-
tion by I. Bondecka-Krzykowska – cf. Bondecka-Krzykowska (2002); see also (2007).

Philosophy of Mathematics in the 20th Century
73
mathematics are only “places in a structure”. The advantage of such an approach
is that it enables us to explain the phenomenon of applicability of abstract math-
ematical theories in natural sciences as well as the interrelations between various
domains of mathematics itself. It enables also a holistic approach to mathematics
and science.
G. Hellman argues (cf. Hellman 1989) that one can interpret mathematics
(in particular arithmetic and analysis) as nominalistic theories concerned with
certain logically possible ways of structuring concrete objects. He uses by such
interpretations second-order logic and modal operators (hence his approach is
sometimes called modal-structural).
4. Conclusions
The overview of the development of the philosophy of mathematics in the 20th
century given above shows on the one hand the strong inﬂuence of and inter-
connections between mathematical logic and the foundations of mathematics on
the one hand and the philosophy of mathematics and on the other. It indicates
also the dominating (especially in the second half of the century) tendency to
provide not only a reconstruction of the existing mathematics and to show in
this way that it is safe and consistent (what was the aim of the classical doctrines
developed at the beginning of the century) but to study the real research prac-
tice of mathematicians. The latter leads to the development of quasi-empirical
trends and doctrines in the philosophy of mathematics. Those tendencies – re-
construction of mathematics on a safe base on the one hand and the study of the
mathematical practice on the other – should not be treated as competitive but
as complementary. They attempt to show and to investigate new aspects of the
phenomenon of mathematics not covered by the others.

5
ON NEW TRENDS IN THE PHILOSOPHY
OF MATHEMATICS1
The aim of this paper is to present some new trends in the philosophy of
mathematics. The theory of proofs and counterexamples of I. Lakatos, the con-
ception of mathematics as a cultural system of R.L. Wilder as well as the con-
ception of R. Hersh and the intensional mathematics of N.D. Goodman and
S. Shapiro will be discussed. All those new trends and tendencies in the phi-
losophy of mathematics try to overcome the limitations of the classical theories
(logicism, intuitionism and formalism) by taking into account the actual prac-
tices of mathematicians.
Since the beginning of the sixties a renaissance of interests in the philosophy
of mathematics can be observed. It is characterized, on the one hand, by the
dominance of the classical theories like logicism, intuitionism, formalism and
platonism developed at the turn of the century, and, on the other, by emergence
of some new conceptions. The latter are reactions to the limitations and one-
sidedness of the classical views which are in fact results of certain reductionist
tendencies in the philosophy of mathematics and consequently are of explicitly
monistic character.
Logicism claims that the whole mathematics can be reduced to logic, or, in
a modern version, to set theory. Hence mathematics is nothing more than logic,
or set theory.
Intuitionism rejects the existence of an objective mathematical reality and
says that mathematical knowledge can be founded on the activity of human
mind and that this activity can be directly known. Hence the subject of math-
ematics is the mental activity of mathematicians. A. Heyting, the follower of
1Originally published in: E. Orłowska (ed.), Logic at Work. Essays Dedicated to the Memory
of Helena Rasiowa, pp. 15–24 (1999). Heidelberg–New York: Physica-Verlag, A Springer-Verlag
Company. c⃝Physica-Verlag Heidelberg 1999. Reprinted with kind permission of Springer-Verlag
GmbH.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n
Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 75–84. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

76
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
L.E.J. Brouwer, the founder of intuitionism, wrote: “In fact, mathematics, from
the intuitionistic point of view, is a study of certain functions of the human mind
[... ].” (cf. Heyting 1966, p. 10).
Formalism (at least in the radical version of H.B. Curry, cf. 1951) – Hilbert,
the founder of formalism, was not so radical) reduces mathematics to certain
play on meaningless symbols. Mathematics is simply a study of formal systems
expressed in artiﬁcial formal languages and based on certain formal rules of
inference.
Platonism,2 founded by Plato and taking various forms in the history of
mathematics, is always alive and is in fact the philosophy of most mathemati-
cians (if they do thing of philosophy at all and express their views). Platonism
claims that the subject of mathematics are certain timeless and spaceless enti-
ties being independent of mathematicians. The nature and existence of them was
understood and explained in various ways. What is important here is the fact
that a mathematician who constructs mathematics was not taken into account.
Mathematics was an absolute knowledge about certain absolute objects.
This attitude is characteristic for all classical theories in philosophy of math-
ematics. They are giving us one-dimensional static pictures of mathematics as
a science and are trying to construct indubitable and infallible foundations for
mathematics. They treat mathematics as a science in which one automatically
and continuously collects true proved propositions. The complexity of the phe-
nomenon of mathematics is lost in this way – neither the development of math-
ematics as a science nor the development of mathematical knowledge of a par-
ticular mathematician are taken into account. The classical theories provide us
only with one-sided reconstructions of the real mathematics. The reason for that
can be seen in the fact that they were created at the turn of the century in an
atmosphere of a crisis in the foundations of mathematics which was the result of
the discovery of antinomies in set theory. What one needed then mostly were un-
questionable and indubitable foundations on which the “normal” pursued math-
ematics could be founded. One supposed here of course that mathematics should
be an infallible and indubitable science and that in fact it is such a science.
Logicism claims that mathematics can be reduced to logic (or: set theory);
intuitionism says that mathematics can be based on the intuition of natural num-
bers and the latter can be founded on the intuition of a priori time; formalism
sees the resource in formal languages to which all mathematical theories should
be reduced. As a result one receives idealized pictures of mathematics being
really practised.
All this, together with the growing interests in the history of mathematics,
led to the rise of new more adequate theories in philosophy of mathematics. Its
characteristic feature is the fact that the actual practices of real mathematicians
2This name was introduced by P. Bernays.

On New Trends in the Philosophy of Mathematics
77
are taken into account and, secondly, that the reduction of mathematics to one
dimension or aspect only is avoided.
1. Lakatos and the Conception of Proofs and Refutations
One of the ﬁrst attempts in this direction was the conception of Imre Lakatos.3
It was developed under the inﬂuence of the philosophy of Karl Popper and was
published in the work “Proofs and Refutations. The Logic of Mathematical Dis-
covery” (cf. Lakatos 1963–1964).
Lakatos claims that mathematics is not an indubitable and infallible science
– just the opposite, it is fallible. It is being developed by criticizing and correct-
ing former theories which are never free of vagueness and ambiguity. There is
always a dangerous that an error or an oversight can be discovered in them. One
tries to solve a problem by looking simultaneously for a proof and for a coun-
terexample. Lakatos wrote: “Mathematics does not grow through a monotonous
increase of the number of indubitably established theorems, but through the in-
cessant improvement of guesses by speculation and criticism, by the logic of
proofs and refutation” (1976, p. 7). New proofs explain old counterexamples,
new counterexamples undermine old proofs. By proofs Lakatos means here
usual non-formalized proofs of actual mathematics. In such a proof one uses
explanations, justiﬁcations, elaborations which make the conjecture more plau-
sible, more convincing. Lakatos does not analyze the idealized formal mathe-
matics but the informal one actually developed by “normal” mathematicians,
hence mathematics in process of growth and discovery. The work Proofs and
Refutations is in fact a critical examination of dogmatic theories in philosophy
of mathematics, in particular of logicism and formalism. Main objection raised
by Lakatos is that they are not applicable to actual mathematics. He also tries to
show that the Popperian philosophy of mathematics is possible.
Lakatos claims that mathematics is a science in Popper’s sense, that it is de-
veloped by successive criticism and improvement of theories and by establishing
new and rival theories. But what are in the case of mathematics the “basic state-
3Imre Lakatos (1922–1974), proper name Lipschitz, born in Hungary, studied mathematics,
physics and philosophy in Debrecin. In 1944 changed his name to Imre Molnár (for safety under
Germans) and later (when he found a shirt bearing the monogram I.L.) – to Imre Lakatos. After
the war he was an active communist and a high ofﬁcial of the Ministry of Education in Budapest.
Arrested in 1950 he spent three years in prison. After release he earned his living by translating math-
ematical books into Hungarian. In 1956 he left Hungary and emigrated to England where he came
under the inﬂuence of the philosophy of Karl Popper. He wrote his doctoral dissertation devoted to
the history of Euler-Descartes formula V −E + F = 2 which says that in any simple polyhedron
the number of vertices V minus the number of edges E plus the number of faces F is equal 2. His
fame began with the work “Proofs and Refutations” which was published as a four-part series in the
British Journal for the Philosophy of Science (1963–1964) and later appeared as a book (1964).

78
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
ments” and “potential falsiﬁers”? One ﬁnds no answer in Proofs and Refutations.
A partial answer can be found in his paper “A Renaissance of the Empiricism
in the Recent Philosophy of Mathematics?” (cf. Lakatos 1967). It is said there
that informal theories are potential falsiﬁers for formalized mathematical theo-
ries. For example: constructing a system of axioms for set theory one takes into
account how and to what extent those axioms reﬂect and conﬁrm an informal
theory used in actual research practice. But what are the objects of informal the-
ories, what do they speak about? What are we talking about when we talk about
numbers, triangles or other objects? One ﬁnds various answers to this question
in the history. Lakatos does not take here a deﬁnite attitude. He writes only: “The
answer will scarcely be a monolithic one. Careful historico-critical case-studies
will probably lead to a sophisticated and composite solution” (1967, p. 35). And
just in the history one should look for a proper answer. Lakatos claims that the
separation of the history of mathematics from the philosophy of mathematics
(what was done by formalism) is one of the greatest sins of formalism. In the In-
troduction to Proofs and Refutations he wrote (paraphrasing Kant): “The history
of mathematics, lacking the guidance of philosophy , had become blind, while
philosophy of mathematics, turning its back on the most intriguing phenomena
in the history of mathematics, has become empty” (1976, p. 4).
Lakatos indicated that the classical theories in the philosophy of mathematics
are not adequate with respect to actual research practice and proposed a new
model being closer to that practice. It is only a pity that he did not succeed
to realize his program of reconstructing the philosophy of mathematics in the
framework of his epistemology. One should note that Lakatos’ scheme of proofs
and refutations does not explain the development of all mathematical theories
– for example the origin and the development of the theory of groups can be
explained as a result of certain uniﬁcation tendencies. Lakatos was conscious
of those limitations. Nevertheless it is doubtlessly his merit that he proposed a
picture of mathematics as a science which is alive and which cannot be closed in
a framework of a formal system, a picture in which a mathematician developing
mathematics is taken into account and in which the actual research practice –
and not only idealized reconstructions – is considered.
2. Mathematics as a Cultural System
Another attempt to overcome the limitations of the classical theories of the phi-
losophy of mathematics is the conception of Raymond L. Wilder.4 Wilder pro-
4Raymond L. Wilder (1896–1982) studied mathematics at the University of Texas where he also
received his doctor degree in topology (the supervisor of his thesis was R.L. Moore). Professor of
mathematics at Ohio State University, University of Michigan and University of California, Santa
Barbara.

On New Trends in the Philosophy of Mathematics
79
posed to treat mathematics as a cultural system. A source of this conception can
be probably seen in his interests in anthropology (his daughter, Beth Dilling-
ham, was an anthropologist and professor of anthropology at the University of
Cincinnati).
Wilder presented his ideas in many papers and lectures. A complete version
of it can be found in two of his books: Evolution of Mathematical Concepts. An
Elementary Study (1968) and Mathematics as a Cultural System (1981).
The main thesis of Wilder says that mathematics is a cultural system. Mathe-
matics can be seen as a subculture,5 mathematical knowledge belongs to the cul-
tural tradition of a society, mathematical research practice has a social character.
The word ‘culture’ means here “a collection of elements in a communication
network” (cf. Wilder 1981, p. 8). Thanks to such an approach the development
of mathematics can be better understood and the general laws of changes in a
given culture can be applied in historical investigations of mathematics. It en-
ables also to see the reciprocal relations and inﬂuences of various elements of
the culture and to study their inﬂuence on the evolution of mathematics. It makes
also possible to discover the mechanisms of the development and evolution of
mathematics. Wilder’s conception is therefore sometimes called evolutionary
epistemology. He has proposed to study mathematics not only from the point
of view of logic but also using methods of anthropology, sociology and history.
In the history of mathematics one can spot various phenomena which de-
velop along general patterns. As an example can serve here the phenomenon of
multiples, i.e., cases of multiple independent discoveries or inventions. Probably
the best known case is the invention of the differential and integral calculus by
Leibniz (1676) and Newton (1671) or the invention of non-euclidian geometry
by Bolayi (1826–1833), Gauss (about 1829) and Lobachewsky (1836–1840).
Other examples are: the invention of logarithms by Napier and Briggs (1614)
and by Bürgi (1620), the discovery of the principle of least squares by Legendge
(1806) and Gauss (1809), the geometric law of duality by Plücker, Poncelet and
Gergonne (early 19th century). Today such simultaneous and independent dis-
coveries and inventions are very often.
Wilder explain this phenomenon in the following way: mathematicians –
who should be treated, of course, as social beings – work on problems which in
a given culture are considered as being important, i.e., there are various cultural
tendencies which suggest that this or that problem should be solved. If one ad-
ditionally assumes that the abilities and cultural forces are uniformly distributed
then one can expect that solutions will appear simultaneously and independently.
5The following problem arises here: when can one see mathematics as a subculture and when
only as an element of a culture? In Babylon and Egypt, for example, mathematics did not possess
the status of a subculture, today it is certainly a subculture. It seems that the crucial thing is here
the fact if the given mathematics has its own tradition, if it can be directly and univocally identiﬁed
inside a given culture and if it has its own laws of development.

80
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
It is not an exception but a rule (not only in mathematics but in science in gen-
eral). “When a cultural system grows to the point where a new concept or method
is likely to be invented, then one can predict that not only will it be invented but
that more than one of the scientists concerned will independently carry out the
invention” (Wilder 1981, p. 23).
The conception of Wilder enables also the study of the evolution of mathe-
matics in a given culture or between various cultures as well as to predict in a
certain sense the development of mathematics (the latter is possible if one knows
the laws and rules of development in a given cultural system).
The advantages of Wilder’s conceptions can be better seen when compared
with other theories. For example, for E.T. Bell (cf. his book The Development
of Mathematics, 1945) mathematics is a “living stream” with occasional minor
tributaries as well as some backwaters. Moslem mathematics was for him a slow
spot in the river, a dam useful for conserving the water. It was necessary to con-
serve the achievements of the Greek mathematics but it brought no new original
results.
For O. Spengler (cf. his Der Untergang des Abendlandes, 1918, 1922) math-
ematics is pluralistic, every culture has its own mathematics. And cultures are
organisms like men, they go through deﬁnite stages of development. Hence, for
example, the Greek mathematics became quite different, quite new mathemat-
ics under the Moslems. Greek mathematics had been an abstract and speculative
activity of a leisure class, Moslem mathematics was a concrete and practical ac-
tivity of the descendants of nomads who had been shaped by a somewhat harsher
environment. It was simply the mathematics of another culture. Spengler would
never condemn the Moslems and their mathematics for not continuing the Greek
tradition, as Bell did.
For Wilder a culture, and in particular the mathematical culture, is not an or-
ganism which goes through various stages of development from youthful to de-
cline and death (as it is the case by Spengler) but a species that evolves. Hence he
does not say that the Greek mathematics died with Moslem mathematics thence
born, but rather that mathematics moved from one culture to the other and sub-
jected to different cultural forces, altered its course of development. But it was
the same mathematics.
Wilder formulates certain laws governing the evolution of mathematics. We
give here some examples:
1. New concepts usually evolve in response to hereditary stress (unsolved
problems) or to the pressure from the host culture (Wilder calls it environ-
mental stress).
2. An acceptance of a concept presented to the mathematical culture is deter-
mined by the degree of its fruitfulness. It will not be rejected because of
its origin or because it is “unreal” by certain metaphysical criteria (com-

On New Trends in the Philosophy of Mathematics
81
pare, e.g., the introduction to mathematics of negative integers, of complex
numbers or of Cantor’s theory of inﬁnite sets).
3. An important and crucial element in the process of accepting new mathe-
matical concepts is the fame or status of its creator. It is especially impor-
tant in the case of concepts which break with tradition. This same applies
also to the invention of new terms and symbols. (Cf. the introduction of π,
e and i by Euler).
4. The acceptance and importance of a concept or theory depend not only
on their fruitfulness but also on the symbolic mode in which they are ex-
pressed. As an example can serve here the case of Frege and his sophisti-
cated and complicated symbolism – this symbolism was replaced later by
better and simpler symbolism due to Peano and Russell but the ideas of
Frege survived and were further developed.
5. At any given time there exists a cultural intuition shared by (almost) all
members of the mathematical community.
6. Diffusions between cultures or between various ﬁelds in a given culture
result in the emergence of new concepts and accelerated growth of math-
ematics.
7. Discovery of inconsistency in existing theories (or in existing conceptual
structure of a theory) results in the creation of new concepts. As an ex-
ample one can mention here the crisis of the ancient Greek mathematics
that resulted from the discovery of irrationals and the theory of propor-
tion by Eudoxus as well as antinomies of set theory and the emergence of
axiomatic systems of set theory.
8. There are no revolutions in the core of mathematics – they may occur in
the metaphysics, symbolism or methodology of mathematics.
9. Mathematical systems evolve only through greater abstraction, general-
ization and consolidation prompted by hereditary stress.
10. A mathematician is limited by the actual state of the development of math-
ematics as well as of its conceptual structure. As an example of this rule
let us mention here mathematical logic. It was hardly possible to create it
in the earlier stages of the development of mathematics because the new
attitude towards algebra and its symbols was required. In fact one needed
the idea that algebraic symbols do not necessarily represent numbers but
that they can represent arbitrary objects of thought satisfying certain op-
erational laws.
11. The ultimate foundation of mathematics is the cultural intuition of the
mathematical community. Without that intuition mathematical investiga-
tions would be fruitless.
12. As mathematics evolves, hidden assumptions are made explicit and either
generally accepted or (partially or fully) rejected. The acceptance usually
follows an analysis of the assumption and a justiﬁcation of it by new meth-

82
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
ods of proof. As a classical example can serve here the axiom of choice
used by Peano in 1890 in the proof of the existence of a solution of a
system of differential equations. In 1902 Beppo-Levi recognized it as an
independent proof principle and in 1904 Zermelo used it in his proof of the
well-ordering theorem. It was this latter proof that made mathematicians
to discuss the axiom carefully and to study its status.
13. Since mathematics has a cultural basis, hence there is no such thing as
the absolute in it, everything is relative. In particular any mathematical
concept must be related to the cultural basis which engendered the math-
ematical structure to which it belongs. There is also no unique universal
pattern of precision and correctness and one cannot say that mathemat-
ics in a given period was not precise enough. There are also no absolute
objects studied by mathematics. The only existence that the mathematical
objects have is the existence of the cultural objects. Mathematical con-
cepts are created by mathematicians – of course it is not being done in an
arbitrary way but on the basis of objects already existing and under the
inﬂuence of the inner stress (unsolved problems) or of the environmental
stress (problems of other sciences or of the praxis). Hence in particular the
concept of a number is a cultural object and as such it should be investi-
gated.
Wilder maintains that mathematical concepts should be located in the Pop-
per’s “third world”. Mathematics investigates no timeless and spaceless entities.
It cannot be understood properly without regarding the culture in the framework
of which it is being developed. In this sense mathematics shares many common
features with ideology, religion and art. A difference between them is that math-
ematics is science in which one justiﬁes theorems by providing logical proofs
and not on the basis of, say, general acceptance.
3. The Conception of Hersh
An interesting synthesis of the conceptions by Lakatos and Wilder is the paper
by Reuben Hersh6 “Some Proposals for Reviving the Philosophy of Mathemat-
ics” (1979).
He says ﬁrst of all that the thesis “that mathematics must be a source of in-
dubitable truth” (1979, p. 32) is simply false. This thesis is not conﬁrmed by
the real practice of mathematicians. In fact we have in mathematics no absolute
certainty – mathematicians make mistakes and later correct them, they are often
not sure if a given proof is correct or not. Mathematicians deal in their research
6Reuben Hersh is a professor of mathematics at the Universtity of New Mexico. He works in the
domain of partial differential equations.

On New Trends in the Philosophy of Mathematics
83
practice with ideas. They are using symbols just to be able to tell about ideas
and to communicate their results to others (it is similar to the usage of scores
in music). Axioms and deﬁnitions serve to describe main properties of mathe-
matical ideas. But there are always properties which are not explicitly described
in them. Hersh says that “a world of ideas exists, created by human beings,
existing in their shared consciousness. These ideas have properties which are
objectively theirs, in the same sense that material objects have their own proper-
ties. The construction of proof and counterexample is the method of discovering
the properties of these ideas. This is the branch of knowledge which we call
mathematics” (1979, p. 47).
4. Intensional Mathematics
All attempts to give a new explanation of the phenomenon of mathematics de-
scribed above are reactions to the classical tendencies in the philosophy of math-
ematics which tried to build an indubitable and unquestionable foundation for it
and which disregarded the real practice of mathematicians. One should also note
that there are not only attempts to replace the old theories but also to extend them
in such a way that the practice would be regarded. We mean here the so called
intensional mathematics. It is an attempt to build dualistic foundations of mathe-
matics and to treat it in a similar way as, e.g., the quantum mechanics where the
observer must be taken into account. One proposes to add to the classical mathe-
matics certain epistemological notions. In particular an idealized mathematician
(it should be an idealized picture of a mathematician in a collective sense) and
an epistemological operator □Φ (Φ is knowable) are introduced. It is assumed
that it has the following properties (they are analogous to the properties of the
operator of necessity in the modal logic) (cf. Goodman 1984):
1. □Φ −→Φ,
2. □Φ −→□□Φ,
3. □Φ & □(Φ →Ψ) −→□Ψ,
4. from ⊢Φ infer □Φ.
Axiom 1 says that everything knowable is true. Axiom 2 states that anything
knowable can be known to be knowable. Axiom 3 claims that if both a condi-
tional and its antecedent are knowable then the consequent is knowable. Rule 4
says that if we actually prove a claim then we know that claim to be true, and so
that claim is knowable. One should note that if we take □to mean known then
there arise problems with Axiom 3. In fact Axiom 3 would claim in this case that
whenever our mathematician can make an inference, he has already done so. But
even an idealized mathematician does not follow out every possible chain of in-
ference. Hence we take □to mean knowable.

84
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
The ﬁrst system constructed according to the described ideas and taking
into account the epistemological aspect was the system of arithmetic due to
S. Shapiro (cf. Shapiro 1985a). Later other systems were constructed, e.g., a
system of set theory, of type theory, etc. (cf. Shapiro 1985b).
Systems of the indicated type make possible the study of constructive aspects
of proofs and classical inferences. They enable also to take into account the ways
in which mathematical objects are given. From the philosophical point of view
one rejects here the platonism.
It is impossible to give here further technical details. Nevertheless it should
be said that systems of intensional mathematics are an interesting attempt to
develop classical – as a matter of fact – foundations of mathematics and simul-
taneously to take into account the real practice of a mathematician. Just this
tendency is, as we tried to indicate above – the leading tendency in the modern
philosophy of mathematics.
The new trends in the philosophy of mathematics should not be treated as
competitive with respect to old theories. They should be rather seen as comple-
ments of logicism, intuitionism and formalism. One is looking here not for in-
dubitable, unquestionable and irrefutable foundations of mathematics, one tries
not to demonstrate that the real mathematics can be reconstructed as an infallible
and consistent system but one attempts to describe the real process of building
and constructing mathematics (both in individual and historical aspect).

6
REMARKS ON THE STRUCTURALISTIC
EPISTEMOLOGY OF MATHEMATICS1
(Co-authored by Izabela Bondecka-Krzykowska)
The paper is devoted to the discussion of structuralistic solutions to princi-
pal problems of the epistemology of mathematics, in particular to the problem:
how can one get knowledge of abstract mathematical entities and what are the
methods of developing mathematical knowledge. Various answers proposed by
structuralistic doctrines will be presented and critically discussed and some dif-
ﬁculties and problems indicated.
1. Introduction
Mathematical structuralism can be brieﬂy characterized as a view that objects
studied by mathematics are structures. Hence the slogan connected with this:
mathematics is the science of structures. In the philosophy of mathematic, struc-
turalism is often treated as an alternative to platonism. Its chief motivation and
aim is to avoid some ontological and epistemological problems of the latter with-
out the necessity of rejecting realism.2
1Originally published as a joint paper with I. Bondecka-Krzykowska in Logique et Analyse 193
(2006), 31–41. Reprinted with kind permission of the editor of the journal Logique et Analyse.
2Note that structuralism, as deﬁned above, is not a form of platonism (in a strict sense). In the
ontological issues the differences between them seem to be signiﬁcant. Platonism claims that math-
ematics is a science about independently existing mathematical objects – they are independent of
any human activities, of time and space but also of one another. Structuralism rejects this form of
independent existence. It claims that mathematical objects have no important features outside struc-
tures they belong to and that all of the features must and can be explained in terms of relations of
the structures. Note that the ante rem structuralism (see below for an explication of this term) claims
that structures exist independently of human activities (therefore it is sometimes called platonistic
structuralism) but it does not concern the very objects of mathematics (such as numbers, points,
lines, etc.).
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n
Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 85–93. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

86
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
One of the main problems that realism is faced with is the question: how
mathematical methods, in particular computing and proving, could generate in-
formation about the mathematical realm and whether such a knowledge is legiti-
mate. Almost every realist agrees that mathematical objects are abstract entities,
hence the problem reduces to the question: how can we know anything about
abstract objects, how can we formulate beliefs about such objects and claim that
our beliefs are true? Structuralism attempts to avoid those questions by main-
taining that mathematical objects, such as numbers or points, are only positions
in appropriate (mathematical) structures and that we cannot possess knowledge
about such isolated objects outside the structures. On the contrary, we can get to
know only structures or their parts and not single numbers or points. But now a
question arises: how can we get knowledge about structures?
In the contemporary philosophy of mathematics various structuralistic con-
ceptions were formulated – they offer also various solutions to this principal
epistemological question. Let us mention here at least structuralism of Parsons,
Shapiro’s axiomatic theory of structures, the theory of patterns developed by
Resnik and Hellman’s modal structuralism. Those theories propose in particu-
lar different answers to the question about how structures can be deﬁned and
about the very existence of structures. Generally one can distinguish two main
attitudes towards ontological problems in structuralism:
1. in re structuralism (called also eliminative structuralism), and
2. ante rem structuralism.
The main thesis of the eliminative structuralism (whose examples are Par-
sons’ and Hellman’s structuralistic conceptions) is: statements about some kind
of objects should be treated as universal statements about speciﬁc kind of struc-
tures. So in particular all statements about numbers are only generalizations. The
in re structuralism claims that the natural number structure is nothing more than
systems which are its instantiations. If such particular systems were destroyed
then there would be also no structure of natural numbers.
Add that eliminative structuralism does not treat structures as objects. It
is claimed that talking about structures is only a comfortable form of talking
about all systems which are instances of the given structure. Therefore this form
of structuralism is called by many authors “structuralism without structures”.
On the other hand one needs here a basic ontology, a domain of considerations
whose objects could take up places in structures in re. Such an ontology should
be rich enough and we are not interested in the very nature of objects but rather
in their quantity. The ontology of the in re structuralism requires an inﬁnite base.
The ante rem structuralism – for example Shapiro’s theory of structures –
claims that structures do exist apart from the existence of their particular ex-
amples. It is often said that ante rem structures have ontological priority with
respect to their instantiations.

Remarks on the Structuralistic Epistemology of Mathematics
87
The different versions of structuralism have – as indicated above – different
ontologies. But they have also different epistemologies and propose different an-
swers to the main questions formulated above. With respect to this questions the
hard part – from the eliminative perspective – is to understand how can we know
anything about systems of abstract objects that exemplify in re structures. On the
other hand, the ante rem structuralism must speculate how do we accomplish the
knowledge about structures which exist independently of their instantiations.
2. How do We Get Knowledge about Structures?
Structuralism claims that mathematical objects are only positions in structures
and that consequently one cannot possess any knowledge about, say, single num-
bers or points – on the contrary, one can recognize only structures. But how can
one get knowledge about structures? The answer to this question depends on the
type, more exactly, on the size of the considered structures. So let us distinguish
some cases:
• Small ﬁnite structures. In this case knowledge about structures is appre-
hended through abstraction from their physical instances via pattern cog-
nition. The process of acquiring beliefs about patterns (structures)3 can be
described as a series of stages: (a) experiencing something as patterned,
(b) recognizing structural equivalence relations, (c) level of predicates, (d)
supplementing predicates with names for shapes, types and other patterns.
It is worth noticing that the abstraction process yields necessary truths or
a priori knowledge. Such approach treats mathematics like other sorts of
empirical knowledge.
• Large ﬁnite structures. The method of pattern cognition described above
works only for small structures whose instances can be perceived. This
idea is not appropriate with respect to structures we have never seen, for
example a billion-pattern. In this case another strategy is used.
A small ﬁnite structure, once abstracted, can be seen as forming a pattern
itself. Next one projects this pattern or those patterns beyond the structures
obtained by simple abstraction. Reﬂecting on ﬁnite patterns one realizes
that the sequence of patterns goes well beyond those one has ever seen,
for example the billion-pattern. Hence we have the ﬁrst step to knowledge
about ante rem structures.
• Countable structures. The strategy of grasping large ﬁnite structures de-
scribed above can be adopted to the simplest inﬁnite structure, i.e., to the
natural number structure. One ﬁrst observes that ﬁnite structures can be
3The term ‘pattern’ appears in papers and books by Resnik and it is used either as a synonym of
the term ‘structure’ or to indicate a physical example of an abstract structure.

88
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
treated as objects in their own right. Then a system of such objects with
the appropriate order is formed. Finally the structure of this system is be-
ing discussed. The important point that should be stressed here is that such
strategy ﬁts the ante rem structuralism, because in the case of the elimina-
tive structuralism there might not be enough ﬁnite structures.4
After a given structure has been understood one can discuss and describe
other structures in terms of this structure and structures one had known
before. For example, the integer structure can be understood as a structure
similar to the natural number structure but unending in both directions.
The rational number system can be seen as a structure of pairs of natural
numbers with the appropriate relations. Another original method of in-
troducing abstract objects was presented by S. Shapiro in (1997). A kind
of linguistic abstraction over an equivalence relation on a base class of
entities has been used there.
Notice that all the methods of apprehending structures we described above
can be applied only to denumerable structures, i.e., to structures with denumer-
ably many places. But what about larger structures?
• Inﬁnite uncountable structures. The most powerful but simultaneously
most speculative technique of grasping structures is their direct descrip-
tion by an implicit deﬁnition (statements used in it are usually called ax-
ioms). Such a deﬁnition provides a characterization of a number of items
in terms of their mutual relations. It can characterize a structure or a possi-
ble system. In this way one deﬁnes, e.g., natural numbers or real numbers.
• From old structures to new ones. There are still other ways of getting
knowledge about new structures: one can collect patterns (originally treat-
ed in isolation) into a new pattern or “extend” the old ones (compare the
deﬁnition of integers or the deﬁnition of the rational numbers). Mathemat-
ics itself also produces new structures and theories by proving, calculating
and ﬁnding solutions to problems. This can lead to new theories of new
mathematical objects such as the theory of equations, proof theory or the
computation theory.
3. Mathematical Methods and Knowledge of Structures
One of the major problems facing mathematical realism is to explain how do
mathematical methods – such as, e.g., computing and proving – generate in-
formation about the mathematical realm. One of the possible answers is that
4On requirements needed for the ontology of the ante rem and in re structuralism we wrote above.
Add also that Field in (1980) tried to give an argument that there is enough concrete stuff to get the
continuum. His ideas have been discussed (but also criticized) by many authors.

Remarks on the Structuralistic Epistemology of Mathematics
89
mathematicians learn about this realm appealing to structural similarities be-
tween abstract mathematical structures and physical computations and diagrams
(note that the latter are always ﬁnite whereas patterns may be vastly inﬁnite). But
mathematicians can and do obtain evidence of higher-level theories also through
results belonging to more elementary levels. Resnik tried in (1997) to describe
connections between certain elementary mathematical results and physical op-
erations that we can perform.
The examples given by him show that operations on dot templates can gener-
ate information about some features of sequences of natural numbers.5 Of course
ﬁnite templates can represent only initial segments of an inﬁnite number se-
quence. Some properties of initial segments can be generalized to the inﬁnite
sequence of natural numbers, however this generalization is not always simple
and straightforward. Observe also that mathematicians do not work with dots
but they are doing computations using Arabic numerals and methods we learned
at school. Nevertheless Resnik (1997, p. 236) claims that this is not important
because “if we seek a more basic explanation of why they work, we can appeal
to theorems of some axiomatic number theory, or alternatively we can explain
our current rules in terms of dot arithmetic”.
Notice that, unfortunately, we cannot explain the computation of the values
of a derivative, a trigonometric expression or a transﬁnite polynomial by the
arithmetic of dots. In those cases there is no straightforward connection between
computations and patterns they concern. So rules of such computations are the-
orems of some axiomatic system describing the pattern.
In practice most proofs of theorems are in fact not proofs within an explicitly
formulated axiomatic system. This is no problem when the premises of a given
mathematical proof state uncontroversial features of the pattern in question.
On the other hand there is a problem if a proof of a theorem about some sim-
ple structure employs facts concerning other, more complex, structures. For ex-
ample, proofs in elementary number theory can appeal to premises from real or
complex analysis. Resnik claims, however, that it is not really a problem because
this situation is similar to the situation when one is proving a fact concerning the
natural number system by appealing to some features of its initial segment. In
our opinion this is not so simple. Indeed, one of the major presuppositions of
structuralism is that all facts about mathematical objects should be expressed
and explained in the language of the structure they belong to. Hence using facts
about a different structure in order to prove a statement about the given one does
not ﬁt to it (even if one notice that, e.g., the natural number structure can be
treated as a part of the real or complex number structure6).
5The term ‘pattern’ (or ‘structure’) is reserved by Resnik for abstract patterns. The term ‘tem-
plate’ is used to refer to concrete devices representing how things are shaped, designed or structured.
6To explain this one should recall some facts from model theory, in particular the distinction
between being a submodel, being an elementary submodel and being elementarily equivalent.

90
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
So we might get information about structures by manipulating templates,
one can even prove theorems in such a way. The question is: how can we know
that the premises of proofs are true of the pattern. Resnik responds here by say-
ing that they constitute an implicit deﬁnition of the pattern. Theorems of a given
branch of mathematics are supposed to be true in the structure they are describ-
ing, they follow from the clauses deﬁning the structure in question. But one
should remember that this claim is connected with the claim that structures of
the considered type do exist. The latter existential claim is not a logical conse-
quence of the very deﬁnition of the structure. Thus combining structuralism with
the doctrine of implicit deﬁnitions does not make mathematics analytic.
The problem of existence together with another one, namely the problem of
categoricity, appears quite clearly in the situation when the structure is intro-
duced by implicit deﬁnitions where one characterizes objects in terms of their
interrelations (this is the method mostly used in mathematics, the axiomatic
method). Mathematical logic and in particular model theory provide some meth-
ods of solving them and indicate simultaneously various connections and in-
terdependencies between structures (models) and languages used. But are they
compatible with structuralistic attitude and structuralistic presuppositions? The
answer seems negative. In fact the most delicate problem is the existence prob-
lem. Can one claim that a structure deﬁned by an implicit deﬁnition, hence by a
set of axioms, does exist by appealing to the consistency of the axioms and to the
completeness theorem (stating that a consistent set of axioms has a model)? No
“normal” mathematician is doing so. Furthermore, the proof of the completeness
theorem provides a model constructed on terms. From the point of view of a real
mathematics this is extremely artiﬁcial and unnatural! If such methods were re-
jected so where from should we know then that structures deﬁned by implicit
deﬁnitions do exist? What inﬂuence would it have on the distinctions between in
re and ante rem structuralism? Would the structuralism in re be possible in this
situation?
There are also other methods of showing that deﬁned structures do exist –
one of them is to construct examples of them in set theory. But the latter has no
structuralistic base and is not founded and justiﬁed in a structuralistic way.7 In
which sense can one say then that instantiations of deﬁned abstract structures
are known?
Another problem is the problem of uniqueness, i.e., the problem whether the
implicit deﬁnitions, hence the axioms, deﬁne the appropriate needed structure in
a unique way. Even in the simplest case of the structure of natural numbers there
arise big problems. In fact ﬁrst order arithmetic is not categorical, i.e., it has
nonstandard models, hence models different (non-similar, non-isomorphic) to
7An attempt to provide structuralistic account of set theory made by Hellman in (1989) is – in
our opinion – not satisfactory.

Remarks on the Structuralistic Epistemology of Mathematics
91
standard, intended one. On the other hand Löwenheim-Skolem theorems show
that any theory with an inﬁnite model has also models of any cardinality. Thus
nonstandard models of ﬁrst-order arithmetic can be even uncountable! This is
very far from the intended structure of natural numbers! To characterize natural
numbers in a categorical way and to obtain a categorical arithmetic one should
use second-order logic (which is in fact natural for mathematical research prac-
tice). Unfortunately there arises a problem: how second-order variables should
be understood in structuralistic terms?8
Besides difﬁculties indicated above there are also other connected with the
structuralistic approach that should be considered and solved. The most impor-
tant is the problem of inﬁnite and more complex structures studied by mathe-
maticians.
One can try to look for a solution using Takeuti’s result (cf. Takeuti 1978)
which states that more complex mathematical theories such as (parts of) analy-
sis can be translated into number theory if the deﬁnitions are explicit. In other
words: there exist extensions of number theory9 which are conservative over it
and in which one can develop a sufﬁciently large portion of analysis provided
that one uses only predicative deﬁnitions. Though promising this does not give
a solution. Indeed, most more complex theories are extensions of number theory
obtained by adding implicit deﬁnitions, i.e., axioms. So even if, as Takeuti in
(1978) shows, “theorems which can be proved in analytic number theory can be
proved in Peano arithmetic”, this does not solve the problem.
One can also try to argue using results of the so called reverse mathematics
initiated by H. Friedman and developed intensively by S.G. Simpson. They show
that a signiﬁcant and important part of mathematics can be developed in frag-
ments of analysis (second-order arithmetic) which are conservative with respect
to arithmetic of natural numbers.10 The problem is here that such reductions and
proofs in those systems are quite different than proofs presented in “real” mathe-
matics, in fact they are far from real research practice of mathematicians and are
artiﬁcial from a point of view of a working mathematician. They can be consid-
ered only as (foundational) reconstructions of mathematics and do not explain
the real mathematics as it is being done.
Artiﬁcial is also an attempt to reduce a more complex theory to number-
theoretic structure using completeness theorem or Löwenheim-Skolem theorem.
According to them every consistent theory has a countable model, hence a model
whose universe is the set of natural numbers and whose relations can be inter-
preted as relations among natural numbers. Though it gives a reduction of a com-
plex theory to a simple one, namely to the arithmetic of natural numbers, but this
8Note that Boolos in (1985) has made an attempt to solve this problem.
9In Takeuti (1978) two such systems are described and studied.
10A presentation of those results and of their meaning for foundations of mathematics, in particular
for the Hilbert’s program can be found in Murawski (1999a).

92
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
reduction is entirely unnatural from the point of view of the mathematical prac-
tice and from what mathematicians are really doing. No “normal” mathematician
will accept this as a picture, as a model of his/her research practice.
On the other hand there are results in number theory whose proofs really
need much more than Peano arithmetic and consequently much more than the
considerations of ﬁnite patterns (proposed by structuralists) can give. We mean
here results by Kirby, Paris, Harrington and Friedman on true arithmetical sen-
tences which can be proved only using necessary some methods of set theory,
i.e., some inﬁnite objects (cf. Friedman 1998 or Murawski 1999a). One can ar-
gue – trying to defend the structuralistic doctrine – that those results provide
examples coming from metamathematical and not directly mathematical con-
siderations or mathematical practice but it does not help and the problem is not
solved.
4. Conclusions
The main question considered in this paper was: how can one know anything
about abstract mathematical objects which are only positions in structures? Since
one cannot get to know isolated mathematical objects, the problem is: how can
one recognize structures or their parts?
Structuralists are providing various answers to those questions. Resnik for
example claims that mathematicians are getting knowledge about the mathemat-
ical realm by appealing to structural similarities between abstract mathematical
structures and physical computations and diagrams.
It is often stressed that one gets the knowledge about structures by abstrac-
tion from concrete examples of them. This can work fairly well in the case of
ﬁnite small structures which can be apprehended through abstraction from their
physical instances via pattern cognition.11 It is possible also in the case of ﬁ-
nite large structures. But what about inﬁnite structures which do not have any
concrete instantiations that could be investigated directly?
Observe that all examples provided and considered by structuralists are usu-
ally restricted to natural numbers (and sometimes other number structures). But
what about other (really abstract) objects like those studied in more advanced
branches of mathematics as functional analysis, topology, etc.? Explanations
provided by structuralists are not fully satisfactory in those cases!
In the case of more advanced and more sophisticated structures one can refer
in fact to methods of model theory. But does it sufﬁce to explain the full richness
of the realm of structures of the real mathematics? On the other hand all restric-
11This indicates also the role of pictures and diagram in the process of developing mathematical
knowledge (cf. Brown 1999).

Remarks on the Structuralistic Epistemology of Mathematics
93
tions and speciﬁcations of methods and theorems of the theory of models should
be taken into account and respected. This concerns in particular the problem of
proving categoricity usually connected with the language chosen to describe and
characterize the deﬁned structures – we indicated it above on the example of the
categoricity of the structure of natural numbers deﬁned as a structure satisfying
appropriate axioms (i.e., Peano’s axioms).
It should be also added that the usage of methods of mathematical logic
and in particular of the model theory can be a source of doubts whether the
proposed explanations do concern the real cognitive and epistemic activity of a
real mathematician (as it seems to be the case when simple structures are being
considered) or provide rather an artiﬁcial reconstruction of real mental processes
(in the spirit of foundationalist theories in the philosophy of mathematics).
∗∗∗
Structuralism is an interesting proposal in the epistemology of mathematics
and provides a reasonable alternative to the platonism (not rejecting realism).
But explanations of the process of getting and developing mathematical knowl-
edge given by it are in fact mostly restricted to simple number structures. Above
we indicated some difﬁculties one meets when trying to apply structuralistic ap-
proach in the case of more abstract, more complex and more sophisticated parts
of mathematics. If structuralism wants to be a doctrine explaining the whole real
mathematics (and not only its elementary fragments) then those problems should
be solved.

7
FROM THE HISTORY OF THE CONCEPT OF NUMBER1
(Co-authored by Thomas Bedürftig)
1. Introduction
What are numbers, where do they come from, what is their nature? The an-
cient Greeks seem to be the ﬁrst who formulated 2500 years ago the ontological
question about the concept of number. Today one is very cautious in this respect
and tries to omit the problem. This is the case especially by those from whom
one should expect to receive the answer, namely by mathematicians.
Instead of an attempt to answer the question “What are numbers?” we are
cautious and adopt a “structuralistic” attitude: we ask how does one count and
calculate using numbers, where are they used? This is explained usually by giv-
ing appropriate axioms. In this way one describes the structure formed by num-
bers and avoids the ontological problems. In the sequel by using the term ‘num-
ber’ we mean always ‘natural number’.
In university teaching one is taught that the whole of mathematics is founded
on logic and set theory. The concept of a natural number can be then deﬁned by
using some set-theoretical operations and the empty set. Negative integers, frac-
tions (rational numbers), roots, reals and complex numbers can be constructed
on the basis of natural numbers by set-theoretical methods. In this way the on-
tology of numbers is reduced to the ontology of sets.
What do we get in this way? There are various deﬁnitions of natural numbers
in set theory. And what are sets? There are many various set theories. Which
deﬁnition, which set theory should be chosen? Should we refer to our intuition
to answer this question? But what is in fact intuition? Does it come from the
1Originally published as a joint paper with Th. Bedürftig under the title „Alte und neue An-
sichten über die Zahlen – aus der Geschichte des Zahlbegriffs“, Mathematische Semesterberichte 51
(2004), 7–36. c⃝Springer-Verlag 2004. Translated into English by Th. Bedürftig and R. Murawski.
Published with kind permission of Springer Science and Business Media.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n
Studies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 95–122. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

96
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
practice of using numbers? Do we all have the same intuition? What do we get
by reducing the ontology of numbers to the ontology of sets?
Such a reduction seems to give us an answer to the question “What are num-
bers?” via a chosen deﬁnition in a chosen set theory and via omitting the problem
of the ontology of sets. On the other hand at the beginning of the 20th century it
turned out that the reduction to pure logic is impossible. The ontological problem
cannot be solved by mathematical means only.
So can one expect to receive an answer to the question about the nature and
essence of numbers from the philosophy? How did mathematical attempts to
ﬁnd the answer look like and where did they lead?
Considering the history of the concept of number, one should always take
into account the philosophical background that inﬂuenced the appropriate view.
Such philosophical backgrounds can be classiﬁed in the form of the following
triangle:
spiritual world
•
thinking •
• reality
The fundamental question is: where are the sources of knowing and of con-
cepts? Conceptions corresponding to the limit points indicated above are classi-
cal philosophical conceptions:
• idealism which sees the source of knowing in the spiritual, intelligible
world,
• empiricism according to which the reality and the experience are source
of all knowledge,
• rationalism which claims that the foundation of our knowledge is the
structure of our thinking.
The famous representative of the idealism was Plato. Positivists represent
clearly the empiricism and Kant represents what we – partially contrary to the
usual classiﬁcations – call rationalism.
We shall describe in a chronological order some conceptions and character-
ize them. At the end we shall attempt to present our own conceptions and to
consider the problem of the philosophical relevance of some current trends.
2. Antiquity
In the prehistory numbers have been developed as instruments used in the ev-
eryday life. They were used to solve various practical problems. In the ancient

From the History of the Concept of Number
97
Egypt and Babylon they served as measures in the astronomy and as symbols
with mystical meaning in the astrology. Pythagoreans seem to be the ﬁrst who
asked about the essence and nature of numbers.
Pythagoras (about 570 – 500 B.C.) traveled to Egypt and Babylon and
learned there arithmetic, astronomy, geometry as well as the mystic of numbers.
Later he transformed this knowledge into a philosophical metaphysics. “All is
number” was the main philosophical thesis of Pythagoreans. Only this which
has a form is knowable – said Philolaos, a pupil of Pythagoras – and form is
based on measure and number. For Pythagoreans numbers form a higher spiri-
tual world and a pattern for everything that exists.
This conception is important for at least two reasons:
• It explains the origins of a theory. In fact, Pythagoreans investigated the
higher world of number to get knowledge about the material world. It was
impossible to justify the laws of numbers on the basis of experience in
the material world. They should be justiﬁed within the world of numbers.
Hence the ﬁrst theory was established: the theory of numbers.
• This number theory is simultaneously mathematics and metaphysics. So
the knowledge of things was based on the knowledge about numbers and
their interrelations.
Hence at the beginning of the philosophy there is – one can say – mathemat-
ics. But the theory of numbers as a philosophical project of a reality has been
destroyed when the phenomenon of incommensurability had been discovered.
The meaning of numbers by Pythagoreans was manifold. According to Jam-
blichos (about 300 B.C.) Pythagoras said that numbers are the “development”
of “the creating principles lying in the unity”. This formulation explains why
Pythagoreans did not treat the unit as a usual number but saw it as a principle of
a unity and as a source of “usual normal numbers”.
The usual numbers have beside their practical meaning also the metaphorical
meaning coming back to their mystical and symbolical sources. The even num-
bers were “feminine”, the odd numbers – “masculine”, ﬁve, the sum of ﬁrst odd
and the ﬁrst even number symbolized the marriage. Ten, the sum of the ﬁrst four
numbers – τετρ´ακτυς (tetraktys) – was a “divine” number. They distinguished
also perfect numbers, i.e., numbers being equal to the sum of their divisors – and
formulated a task to provide a formula giving perfect numbers. The unity (one)
was interpreted geometrically as a point – the geometrical unit, two – as a line,
three – as a surface, four – as a body and the three dimensions of the space.

98
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
Numbers were for Pythagoreans not abstractions, they were real forces acting in
the nature. “Number” was a principle of all that exists.
One can shortly characterize numbers of Pythagoreans so:
Numbers are elements (coming from the unit) of the higher world. They are spiritual powers
– over things.
Every segment was for Pythagoreans – relatively to a given measure unity –
a number or a relation of numbers and consequently geometry was a part of
the theory of numbers. The absolute superiority of numbers was ﬁnished by
the discovery of the phenomenon of incommensurability about 450 B.C. There
were no numbers which could give the relation of the side and the diagonal of a
regular pentagon (cf. Bigalke 1983). This discovery meant a real philosophical
and Weltanschauung crisis. Maybe it can be treated as the birth of mathematics
that lost its metaphysical function and was separated from philosophy.
“A unit is that by virtue of which each of the things that exist is called one”
and “A number is a multitude composed of units” wrote Euclid in Book VII
of his Elements. In this work geometry plays the ﬁrst role. Euclid described the
theory of quantities (developed in the ﬁrst half of the 4th century by Eudoxos)
in Book V of Elements before the theory of numbers. The latter is by him a part
of the theory of quantities and their relations.
Ideas formed by Plato (427 – 347 B.C.) – similarly as numbers by Pythago-
reans – a higher world. They possessed their own existence and determined the
existence of real things. Plato was then a realist – the reality, i.e., the higher re-
ality of ideas and the lower one of material things exist independently of human
thinking.
The material things formed a domain of causality, imperfectness and being
not sure. The world of ideas was characterized by safety, clarity, necessity and
perfectness. At the end of Book IV of State Plato considers the classes of objects
described in the following table:
nonmaterial
ideas
unity, beauty, justice,
circularity, . . .
mathematical
circle, number, relation,
objects
proportion . . .
material
physical objects
wheel, table, house, tree. . .
pictures of physical
picture of a wheel, picture
objects
of a tree . . .
Ideas are unique: there is only one idea of unit, of beauty or of circularity.
Physical things are, e.g., circular if they participate in the idea of circularity.
There are many circle objects. A human being gets the knowledge – means by
Plato that – his/her soul recalls the ideas and their interrelations that it saw before
its world existence.

From the History of the Concept of Number
99
The mathematical objects are – according to the interpretation of Plato by
Aristotle (Metaphysics A 6; cf. Thiel 1982, p. 19) – between ideas and physical
objects. There are many realizations of them: there are many circles, many num-
bers. On the other hand the mathematical objects are nonmaterial and therefore
possess the property of safety, clarity and necessity.
Plato says often about numbers in a similar way as about ideas. They seem
to be of a special kind among mathematical objects. Except the unit (τ´o ´ϵ‘ ν)
from which by Pythagoreans emerged all numbers, there appears the two, the
proportion, λ´oγoς, where the numbers of Pythagoreans collapsed. Using that he
attempts to explain – again according to Aristotle – in a bit obscure way the
origin of numbers in a similar way as the origin of the ideas (cf. Toeplitz 1931,
p. 60ff).
Numbers by Plato can be characterized in the following way:
Numbers are non-material intermediators between ideas and the material reality.
Human knowledge consists of remembrances of a soul about ideas which it saw
before its earthly existence.
Numbers provide – in a similar way as geometry – the gate to the world of ideas.
A proper method to describe and to investigate the domain of mathematical ob-
jects was – according to the ancient Greeks – the axiomatic method., i.e., the
reduction of mathematical statements and concepts to axioms and primitive no-
tions. Most probably it was just Plato who essentially contributed to the estab-
lishing of this method. The source of mathematics is – according to Plato – not
experience but it forms its own mental domain.
Aristotle (ca. 384–322 B.C.) developed another conception of mathematical
objects than his teacher Plato. For him, e.g., “three” was not an independently
existing non-material object but something like a property of material objects:
for example, a table has the length of three feet, something lasted three years,
etc. Mathematical objects do not belong to an independent non-material domain.
They emerge by abstraction from real objects (Metaphysics, Book M 1–3; cf.
Thiel 1982, pp. 22–28). But numbers are not detached from things as properties
– as one understands today abstraction. On the opposite: they belong inseparably
to the essence of things. They did not loose their Pythagorean power to determine
things: they are forming, together with other properties, the matter to become
particular objects. They are inseparably connected with things. Brieﬂy:
Numbers are (spiritual) forms – in things.
A human being grasps in numbers and forms the essence of things and refers
in this way to the spiritual world to which he/she belongs together with his/her
knowing soul. Hence the philosophical conception of Aristotle is based in the
reality. It cannot be characterized as a point in the diagram indicated above but

100
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
rather as a vector in the triangle of basic positions – in fact as a vector that leads
from the reality to the spiritual world.
One should mention here also Aristotle’s contribution to the study of the in-
ﬁnity. He accepted only the potential inﬁnity. He rejected the actual inﬁnity and
his attitude dominated the mathematical as well as the philosophical investiga-
tions through the next 2200 years.
3. Nicolaus of Kues, Kant, Mill
Nicolaus of Kues (1401–1464), one of the last scholastics, was a mathemati-
cian and theologian as well as a preparer of the philosophy of modern times.
Mathematics play an important role in his philosophy (cf. Radbruch 1999). His
conceptions can be placed in the middle of the indicated fundamental positions.
The spiritual world is represented – according to Nicolaus von Kues – by
God. God created the world according to mathematical principles, numbers and
ideas come from Him. This idea appeares again by Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz
(1646–1716): “Dum DEUS calculat et cogitationem exercet, mundus ﬁt”.
In Liber de mente speaks Nicolaus von Kues about the concept of number.
He distinguishes numbers as objects of mathematics – their source is human
mind, and numbers that exist in God. The “human” numbers are reﬂections of
“God’s numbers”. What is measurable in real things is a realization of God’s
numbers. Numbers in mathematics are only products of human mind and they
exists only as ideal objects in the mind.
How does a human being create mathematical objects and numbers, how are
God’s numbers reﬂected in human mind? Nicolaus’ attempts to answer those
questions reveal a rationalistic and empiristic features of his conception. He in-
dicates a particular feature of human thinking consisting in the ability to simulate
– in an own construction – the process of creating due to God. This simulation
is based on an abstraction from real things. Nicolaus writes in Liber de mente:
“[.. .] there is nothing in the mind that before was not in senses” (“[...] ut nihil
sit in ratione, quod prius non fuit in sensu”). So one can try to summarize his
conception of a number in the following way:
Numbers are rational reconstructions of God’s principles that are active in the reality.
We should also say some words about René Descartes (1596–1650). His
uniﬁcation of algebra and arithmetic with geometry done in Géométrie (1637)
inﬂuenced very much the future views on numbers. Numbers obtained in this
way new, still more and more abstract character and lose their connections with
quantities what was the case since Euclid’s Elements.
Quite new elements in the approach to numbers can be found by Immanuel
Kant (1724–1804). The base of our considerations is here his fundamental work

From the History of the Concept of Number
101
Kritik der reinen Vernunft (Kant 1781, 1787). The main feature of his epistemol-
ogy was ﬁrst of all to indicate the a priori elements of our thinking and knowl-
edge, i.e., those conditions that proceed any experience, that give appropriate
structure to data of experience and that make our knowledge possible. Among
them are the forms of pure intuition (Anschauung) of space and time as well as
the a priori structure of the reason given by categories of reason.
Space and time – as forms of pure intuition – are not anything existing in
the outer world but they are forms of the human sensuality that order sensations.
Space understood in this way provides a base for geometry and the pure intuition
of time – the base for arithmetic and for the concept of number. Numbers are –
according to Kant – partial a priori structures of reason:
A number is the ‘pure scheme’ of the mind’s concept of quantity, i.e., the imagination that
grasps ‘the successive addition of one to one’. (Kant 1781, pp. 142–143)
Consequently:
arithmetical statements are synthetic a priori.
‘Synthetic’ means that concepts are connected with other concepts and in this
way new concepts are obtained (they cannot be obtained analytically from the
given initial concepts). “Hence our counting is a synthesis with respect to con-
cepts” (Kant 1781, p. 78). Kant explains this on the example of 7 + 5 = 12. The
12 is obtained as every number by successive addition of 1 – and it is contained
neither in (the concept of) 5 nor in (the concept of) 7. Arithmetical statements as
synthetic a priori are not empirical and – as arithmetical concepts – are objec-
tively valid (Kant 1781, p. XVI). This validity assigns the nobility of knowledge
to the (bare) experience.
Another standpoint represented positivists of the 19th century, among them
John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) – it was in opposition to Kant’s transcendental
idealism (cf. Mill’s System of Logic, 1843). Positivists attempted to develop their
philosophy on the basis of “positive facts”. The question about the nature of
concepts and philosophical objects in general as well as the search for the ﬁrst
and true reasons were dismissed by them as “metaphysical”.
John Stuart Mill attempted to found his theory of cognition on psychology,
i.e., on the research of “positive facts” of the consciousness. Starting point were
perceptions and the connections of perceptions. The task of logic was then to
distinguish the constant perceptions from the elusive ones and contingent con-
nections of perceptions from constant ones.
The process of building mathematical and arithmetical concepts was seen
as an art of abstraction, i.e., they were obtained by omitting some properties
of real objects and by generalizing and idealizing other properties. Numbers
were cardinalities as abstractions of sets obtained by successive addition of units.
Brieﬂy:

102
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
Numbers have their source and origin in the reality. Numbers are the result of successively
appearing perceptions.
The exclusive cognition principle was induction, i.e., an inference from particu-
lar observations to a general statement. Arithmetical statements are not implied
by deﬁnitions of numbers but are based on observed facts. Hence arithmetical
and generally mathematical judgements could not be necessarily true. The task
of mathematics is – according to Mill – to search for consequences of assump-
tions and the latter can be – in principle – arbitrary. Only the logical connections
between assumptions and their consequences are necessary truths. So the task
of mathematics is not to look for valid assumptions and on the basis of them to
produce valid statements.
Elements of positivism one ﬁnds also in the marxist epistemology. Friedrich
Engels claimed that (1878, Chapter III, p. 20):
The concepts of a number and of a ﬁgure does come from the real world. Ten ﬁngers with
the help of which human beings are counting, hence the ﬁrst arithmetical operation they
learn, can be anything else but certainly not free creations of human reason.
This sentence has been quoted very often, in particular in materials for teachers
in the former GDR in order to found the introduction of numbers as cardinal
numbers (cf. Ministerium für Volksbildung 1988, p. 5). This quotation looks
like a polemics with “bourgeois” conceptions of Cantor and Dedekind – we shall
consider them just now.
4. Gauss, Cantor and Dedekind
One can say that C.F. Gauss stands at the beginning of modern mathematics. On
the other hand his views concerning numbers were rather traditional. New contri-
butions to the mathematical foundations of numbers due to G. Frege, G. Cantor,
R. Dedekind and G. Peano appeared almost one century later.
Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777–1855) through his manifold mathematical ac-
tivity changed the mathematical thinking dissolving mathematics from its philo-
sophical ties. This happened in the era dominated by Kant’s philosophy. The
latter inﬂuenced ﬁrst of all geometry – compare in particular the a priori form
of the pure intuition of space which was assumed to be Euclidean. Gauss was
the ﬁrst who admitted a non-Euclidean model of geometry in which the axiom
of parallels is not fulﬁlled. He released geometry from the ontological ties and
challenged the ontological character of geometrical axioms.
Gauss’ views towards numbers seem to be rather traditional and in fact go
back to Book V of Euclid’s Elements.
According to C.F. Gauss, objects of mathematics are “extensive quantities”.
Among them are “space or geometrical quantities, [...], time, number”. He ex-

From the History of the Concept of Number
103
plained that “the proper objects of mathematics are relations between quantities”
(Gauss 1973, vol. X, 13. Zur Metaphysik der Mathematik, p. 57–59). Numbers
were for him abstractions of relations between quantities:
“Numbers” indicate “how many times a directly given quantity should be repeated.”
Gauss conﬁrmed this opinion (coming from the beginning of the 19th century
or even earlier) also at the end of his life (Wagner 1975, p. 155). But he noticed
that “the arithmetical approach will gain advantage over the geometrical one”
(cf. Wagner 1975, p. 155). The reason is our “method of counting that is much
easier than that of the ancients” (cf. Wagner 1975, p. 155).
Though Gauss links his concept of a number to the concept of a quantity,
he sees also the possibility of constructing the domain of numbers in a purely
arithmetical way. On the one hand he has given the geometrical interpretation of
complex numbers but on the other he did not treat the latter as a foundation of
them. In a letter to a mathematician, psychologist and philosopher Max Drobisch
from 14th August 1834 Gauss wrote: “The interpretation of complex quantities
as relations between points on the plane is only an example of application of
them and does not describe their proper nature – this should be still done. I
presented my theory many times in lectures and I came to the conclusion that it
can be easily formulated and contains nothing absurd.” (Gauss 1973, vol. X/1,
Briefwechsel [zum Fundamentalsatz der Algebra], p. 106). Gauss means here
a theory about which also Wolfgang Bolyai asked him when he wrote: “I am
awaiting the development of your theory of complex numbers [...]” (a letter
of W. Bolyai to Gauss from 18th January 1848, Gauss–Bolyai 1899, p. 129).2
Since the construction of the domain of numbers begins with the construction
of natural numbers, we have here a reference to the problem of the concept of a
natural number independent of the concept of a quantity.
Considering Georg Cantor’s (1845–1918) views concerning numbers one
ﬁnds elements of all three philosophical positions indicated at the beginning. He
sees the concept of a number as a result of “twofold abstraction act” – he un-
derstands it as an “abandonment” from properties of objects and simultaneously
as the reﬂection on the common properties of sets. A result of it is a “general
concept” (Allgemeinbegriff) (Cantor 1895, p. 281f). He wrote:
Since every single element m, if we abstract from its nature, becomes a “unit”, the cardinal
number ¯¯M is a deﬁnite aggregate composed of units, and this number has existence in our
mind as an intellectual image or projection of the given aggregate M. (1932, p. 283)
2There are authors who attribute the interpretation of complex numbers as pairs of reals just to
Gauss and to the year 1831 and in this way give him the priority before Hamilton (1837) (cf. Kline
1972, p. 776; Bell 1945, p. 179). They refer – without giving the proper sources – to two letters of
Gauss and Bolayi from 1837 that cannot be found in (Gauss–Bolyai 1899). – The authors would like
to thank Professor Olaf Neumann from University of Jena for indicating the appropriate places in
Gauss’ writings.

104
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
This recalls Euclid’s “set consisting of units” and applies not only to ﬁnite but
also to inﬁnite numbers which Cantor discovered beyond the natural numbers.
He called them “transﬁnite cardinal numbers”. It is clear that a concept of a
number that admits also inﬁnite numbers necessarily eliminates an attachment to
Kant’s pure intuition of time. The transﬁnite cardinal numbers reject deﬁnitely
Aristotle’s dogma against the actual inﬁnity. Cantor introduced cardinals into
mathematics as actual inﬁnite realities and defended them against acute mathe-
matical and philosophical resistance and objections from theologians. He look
for a support for his conceptions in the history of philosophy and found “points
of contact” (Cantor 1883, p. 205) by Plato, Nicolaus von Kues and Bolzano
(against Aristotle, Leibniz, Kant, supposedly also Gauss, Kronecker and many
others).
Cantor’s attitude towards concepts and statements was on the one hand pla-
tonistic. They are not invented by a mathematician: “Hypotheses non ﬁngo”
(Cantor 1895, motto).3 He/she rather discovers them and describes: “[...] with
respect to the contents of my works I was only a reporter and an ofﬁcial (nur
Berichterstatter und Beamter)” (Cantor, 1884, in a letter to Mittag-Lefﬂer, cf.
Fraenkel 1932, p. 480). Hence Cantor defends in his transﬁnite cardinal numbers
no bare subjective imaginations but ideas that are really given and that cannot
be denied.
Besides the described platonistic realism in which numbers form the “trans-
subjective” reality one ﬁnds by Cantor also a second rationalistic conception of
numbers in which numbers form an “intrasubjective” or “immanent (intrinsic)”
reality or – as in the quotation given above – exist “in our mind” (in unserem
Geiste) (Cantor 1883, p. 181f). The intrinsic reality of mathematical concepts
is – according to Cantor – a necessary condition of the possibility of a pure,
or – as he prefers to say – of a free mathematics. The freedom of mathematics
consists of being free from “commitment [...] to check them [i.e., concepts –
remark of the authors] with respect to their transient reality” (1883, p. 182). In
opposition to all other sciences, mathematics is “free of any metaphysical ties”
(Cantor 1883, p. 182f).
Cantor’s conception of numbers can be summarized in the following way:
On the one hand numbers are given as ideal realities – independent of human thinking, and
on the other they exist as projections of sets in our thinking and can be obtained by the
process of abstraction.
Cantor and Richard Dedekind (1831–1916) exchanged lively ideas since
3It has been taken from Newton’s Philosophiae naturalis principia mathematica what Cantor
explicitly says. The second motto to the same work indicating Cantor’s platonism is: “Neque enim
leges intellectui aut rebus damus ad arbitrium nostrum, sed tanquan scribe ﬁdeles ab ipsius naturae
voce latas et prolatas excipimus et describimus”. Here Cantor gives no source. We have ascertained
that the motto is a quotation from Francis Bacon’s Scripta in naturali et universali philosophia, IV,
4: Prodrimi sive anticipationes philosophiae secundae. Praefatio.

From the History of the Concept of Number
105
1872 (cf. Cantor 1991, pp. 29–66; Cantor 1932, pp. 443–450). There seems to be
an agreement between them with respect to the problem of the intrinsic existence
of mathematical concepts in mind. By Dedekind there appears an additional psy-
chological component. Arithmetical truths are – according to Dedekind – “never
given by inner consciousness” [emphasis of the authors] but “gained by a more
or less complete repetition of the individual inferences” (Dedekind 1888, p. V).
The reference to mathematical inference steps describes Dedekind in his famous
work Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? (1888). And he continues:
So from the time of birth, continually and in increasing measure we are led to relate things
to things and thus to use that faculty of the mind on which the creation of numbers depends.
(p. V)
The creation of numbers describes Dedekind in the following way (1888,
Section 73):
If in the consideration of a simply inﬁnite system N set in order by a transformation ϕ we
entirely neglect the special character of the elements; simply retaining their distinguishabil-
ity and taking into account only the relations to one another [...] then are these elements
called natural numbers [. . . ]. With the reference to this freeing the elements from every
other content (abstraction) we are justiﬁed in calling numbers a free creation of the human
mind.
“Simply inﬁnite systems” describe the inﬁnite process of counting in an inﬁnite
set (thought as actually given). Dedekind obtains (in a structuralistic way) from
the structure of counting – which he described earlier by giving three appropriate
axioms – a concept of a number and he sees just in the abstraction the core of
“creating”.
More clearly appears the idea of “mental creation” (geistige Schöpfung) in
his work Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen (1872). Dedekind realizes that there
are gaps in the domain of rational numbers between upper and lower classes
forming cuts. Those gaps will be closed – according to him – by numbers that
we are creating (Dedekind 1872, p. 13; English translation: p. 15):
Whenever, then, we have to do with a cut (A1, A2) produced by no rational number, we
create a new, an irrational number α, which we regard as completely deﬁned by this cut
A1, A2); we shall say that the number α corresponds to this cut, or that it produces this cut.
Frege and Russell have shown later that the irrational numbers can be identiﬁed
with cuts (even simpler, with their lower classes). Hence from the mathematical
point of view one can avoid in this way the acts of creating. On the other hand,
from the psychological point of view, it is difﬁcult to treat cuts or lower classes
of them as numbers.
When one considers the concept of a natural number then there are no con-
crete objects as cuts to which the natural numbers would correspond. The base
is now a particular abstract structure and the imagination of abstract unidentiﬁed
places in a series. This is the core of Dedekind’s conception of a number:

106
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
Numbers are abstractions of places in an inﬁnite counting series.
It is difﬁcult to understand as “creation” the process of abstracting that creates
numbers. We shall try to explain this concept.
Note ﬁrst of all that to be able to apply a concept one needs a name, a sym-
bol, a picture or a word for it. Dedekind describes the process of counting. One
needs there signs (symbols) which represent not only single numbers but also
the structure of them. Counting (objects) can be then reduced to a concept of
ordering (those objects) with the help of a given particular series that should be
“invented”. Elements of such a series can be called numbers – they represent
abstract positions in the abstract structure of counting. One sees also how close
a number and a symbol in this “structuralistic” concept of number are.
For Dedekind – similarly as for Cantor – inﬁnite sets given as actual inﬁnities
were something obvious. He deﬁned the concept of an inﬁnite set and attempted
to give an example of a concrete inﬁnite set: “My world of thoughts, i.e., the
totality of all things which can be objects of my thoughts, is inﬁnite” (“Meine
Gedankenwelt, d.h. die Gesamtheit aller Dinge, welche Gegenstand meines Den-
kens sein können, ist unendlich”) (Dedekind 1888, Section 66). From the math-
ematical point of view – inside set theory – such a psychological example is
useless. The inﬁnite process used here by Dedekind to build in his mind a chain
of thoughts (a thought of a thought of a thought of ...) has been later mathemat-
ically reformulated by Zermelo and led to the inﬁnity axiom in his system of set
theory: There exist inﬁnite sets!
Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932) attempted – similarly as Dedekind – to de-
scribe axiomatically the process of counting. In opposition to Dedekind he used
only logical and arithmetical methods. His main aim in the work Arithmetices
principia nova methodo exposita (1889a) was to develop arithmetic in a formal
way using speciﬁc logical and arithmetical symbols invented by himself. He did
not explain directly his views concerning the nature of numbers. Variables and
constants used by Peano in his symbolism for the arithmetic of natural num-
bers were connected – as all his symbols – with thoughts. In 1896 he wrote: “In
this way is established a one-to-one correspondence between thoughts and sym-
bols, a correspondence that cannot be found in the colloquial language” (p. 572).
Symbols represent by Peano not real ideas or intellectual creations but intellec-
tual objects in the sense of “intrinsic realities” of Cantor.
5. Logicism, Intuitionism, Formalism
The modern philosophy of mathematics begins with the attempts to move the
task of building a ﬁrm foundations of mathematics – and simultaneously the
classical philosophy of mathematics – to mathematics itself. It took place in

From the History of the Concept of Number
107
mathematical logic and set theory – in the development of them took part Bol-
zano, Peano, Frege, Dedekind and Cantor. One wanted to found on them the
arithmetic of natural numbers and further also the theory of reals (hence the
analysis as well).
There are three main trends in the modern philosophy of mathematics: logi-
cism, intuitionism, formalism. We shall describe what did they claim with re-
spect to natural numbers.
The main representatives of the logicism were Gottlob Frege (1848–1925)
and Bertrand Russell (1872–1970). The idea of Frege – developed further by
Russell together with Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947) in the famous
Principia Mathematica – was to found numbers and statements about numbers
on the basis of pure thinking, i.e., on logic alone. Such a system of logic has
been developed by Frege in his epochal Begriffsschrift (1879). In Grundlagen
der Arithmetik (1884) attempted Frege to develop arithmetic as a part of logic.
This forced a necessity of building a new view on the concept of number. The
philosophical attitude of Frege can be characterized as follows:
• antiempiricism: arithmetical propositions are not inductive generalizations,
• anticantianism: arithmetical propositions are not synthetic a priori,
• antiformalism: arithmetical propositions are not the result of manipula-
tions on symbols made according to certain rules.
The antiempiricism of Frege implied also his antipsychologism: everything
that is psychic was for him necessarily subjective. His aim was “to separate
what is psychic from that what is logical as well as subjective from objective”
(Frege 1884, p. ix). According to him the arithmetical propositions are analytic
(because they can be reduced to logical propositions) and consequently they are
a priori.
Frege treated numbers as cardinal numbers:
Numbers are cardinal numbers.
The latter were classes of equipolent sets and sets were understood as domains
of concepts (Frege avoided to speak about sets – he wanted to eliminate all ex-
tralogical concepts). Concepts were treated by Frege as elements of pure think-
ing, hence as objects of logic. Consequently:
numbers are elements of logic,
i.e., of pure thinking. Concepts exist – according to Frege who took here the pla-
tonic attitude – independently of space, time and human mind. Note that Frege –
contrary to Dedekind and Peano who took the structuralistic position – attempted
to explain ﬁnally the ontological status of numbers by mathematical means.
In Grundgesetze der Arithmetik. I, II (1893 and 1903) Frege developed arith-
metic of natural numbers along those lines. In 1901 Russell discovered in Frege’s

108
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
system of logic the famous Russell’s antinomy, i.e., an unsolvable contradiction.
Later Russell and Whitehead developed in Principia Mathematica, vol. 1, 2, 3
(1910, 1912 and 1913) a new system of logic in which this antinomy could be
eliminated. Principia are written in a symbolic language built on the basis of
ideas of Peano. To prove that for every natural number there exists its successor,
Russell and Whitehead had to use the axiom of inﬁnity which in fact has a set-
theoretical (and not logical) character. Consequently the reduction of numbers
undertook in Principia was the reduction not to logic itself but to logic and set
theory. And this is the main thesis of the contemporary logicism.
Intuitionism was developed in opposition to logicism on the one hand and –
on the other – to the practice of unbounded and careless usage of the inﬁnity in
mathematics which was the case by Cantor and formalists (see below). Its char-
acteristic ideas can be seen already by Leopold Kronecker (1823–1891) and his
pupils in the 1870s and 1880s. In his Über den Zahlbegriff (1887) formulated
Kronecker the idea of an “arithmetization” of algebra and analysis that should
be founded on the intuition of a natural number. His views on natural numbers
were soundly summarized in his famous remark made at a scientiﬁc meeting in
Berlin in 1886: “The natural numbers were made by God, all others is a prod-
uct of a man” (“Die ganzen Zahlen hat der liebe Gott gemacht, alles andere ist
Menschenwerk”).
Mathematics is – according to Kronecker – “abstraction of the arithmetical
reality” (1887, p. 342). His concept of a series of natural numbers was quite
different than that of his contemporaries Dedekind and Frege. This series was
in fact only potentially inﬁnite (and not actually inﬁnite), moreover, existential
statements on natural numbers were permissible only when their “pure exis-
tence”, i.e., the constructibility of necessary numbers could be proven. Conse-
quently a deﬁnition of a natural number is correct only if it can be decided in
a ﬁnite number of steps whether any given number fulﬁlls this property (deﬁni-
tion) or not.
The proper founder of the intuitionism was Luitzen Egbertus Jan Brouwer
(1881–1966). Hermann Weyl (1885–1955) was during some time an adherent
of Brouwer’s ideas (in a modiﬁed version) and contributed to the propagation
of his conceptions. Arend Heyting (1898–1980), the pupil of Brouwer, popu-
larized his ideas and attempted to explain them in the language usually used in
the reﬂection on mathematics (note that Brouwer used often a language full of
mystical elements). According to intuitionism mathematics is a function of the
human intellect and a free activity of the human mind, it is a creation of the mind
and not a theory or a system of rules and theorems. The basis of mathematics –
and of the whole thinking – is the fundamental pre-intuition of a natural number
which is founded on the intuition of a priori time. Similarly as by Kant, math-
ematical propositions are synthetic a priori judgements. Brouwer spoke about
natural numbers as about “unsubstantial sensation of time” (1912, p. 185).

From the History of the Concept of Number
109
Paul Lorenzen (1915–1994) attempted to link the formalism of Hilbert to
the intuitionistic critique of Brouwer by replacing the psychologistic way of de-
scribing the series of natural numbers by some rules of constructing the sign used
by counting. Christian Thiel (born 1938) describes them in his book Philoso-
phie und Mathematik (1995, p. 114) in the following way:
N

=⇒
|
n
=⇒
n |
By those simple rules N one gets counting signs
|, ||, |||, ||||, . . . ,
which were put at the beginning of Hilbert’s considerations (see below). Thiel
makes one step more and moves from those counting signs to “ﬁctitious ob-
jects”, to “numbers” (Thiel 1995, p. 135). He says that the counting signs n and
n′ – belonging to the same or to different systems of counting signs – are “equiv-
alent with respect to counting” if one considers only the steps of constructing n
and n′, resp., and if the results of constructions of n and n′ coincide (Thiel 1995,
p. 115). One does not take here into account anything that is speciﬁc in a given
system of signs and this allows to speak about the number n and to say that n
and n′ represent the same number. This process leads as a “purely logical pro-
cedure” (Thiel 1995, p. 131) from counting signs to numbers and to arithmetical
statements that hold in all systems of counting signs. Brieﬂy:
Numbers are ﬁctitious objects which one gets by abstraction from counting signs in various
systems of counting signs.
Formalism was in a sense a reaction to the radical intuitionistic critique.
David Hilbert (1862–1943) claimed that (1926, p. 161 and p. 163; English
translation: p. 369 and pp. 370–371:
[. . . ] the signiﬁcance of the inﬁnite for mathematics had not yet been completely clariﬁed
and
the deﬁnite clariﬁcation of the nature of the inﬁnite has become necessary, not merely for
the special interests of the individual sciences but for the honor of human understanding
itself.
Formalism is an attempt to clarify and to provide the foundations of mathemat-
ics by formalization, i.e., by reducing mathematics to symbols and operations on
them. This was the method of realizing the Hilbert’s program. The formal do-
main of symbols and sequences of symbols was treated by Hilbert as “ﬁnitistic”
and he proposed to found on them in a “ﬁnitistic” way the “inﬁnitistic” mathe-
matics in which the actual inﬁnity is used. This should be applied especially to
analysis and its “inﬁnitistic” concepts. What “ﬁnitistic” means has been never
precisely explained by Hilbert.

110
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
In this “ﬁnitistic” foundations of mathematics the important role was played
by natural numbers. In the lecture Über das Unendliche (1925, published in
1926) (from which also the quotations given above are taken) Hilbert said (p. 171;
English translation: p. 377):
In number theory we have the numerals
1, 11, 111, 11111,
each numeral being perfectly perceptually recognizable by the fact that in it 1 is always
again followed by 1. These numerals, which are the object of our consideration, have no
meaning at all in themselves.
Hence numbers as symbols are for Hilbert concrete and directly given and are in
fact nothing more than symbols. Brieﬂy:
Numbers are meaningless symbols.
One ﬁnds by Hilbert no further explanation of the nature of numbers. At another
place (Hilbert 1922, p. 18) admits Hilbert “his ﬁrm philosophical conviction
that is essential for the foundation of mathematics – and of all scientiﬁc think-
ing, understanding and communicating – namely: At the beginning [...] there
is a symbol”. Weyl was later of the same opinion. In 1940 he said (Weyl 1940,
p. 443): “The power of science [...] rests upon the combination of a priori sym-
bolic construction with systematic experience [...]”. Earlier he characterized the
status of symbols in the following way (p. 442): “We now come to the decisive
step of mathematical abstraction: we forget about what the symbols stand for.”
Those meaningless symbols are – according to Weyl (1948) – the end of the
chain of the reduction of our knowledge: “We are left with our symbols” (from
the Nachlass of Weyl, quoted according to Beisswanger 1965, p. 146).
The reduction to the domain of ﬁnite sequences of symbols should justify
and found the concept of the actual inﬁnity in mathematics. The actual inﬁnity
is an idealized concept that Hilbert considered to be indispensable and necessary
and – on the other hand – neither constructible nor represented by anything in the
real world. Note that formalization was for Hilbert a metamathematical method
of justifying mathematics and that he never claimed that mathematics is a game
of symbols (cf. Jahnke 1990, p. 168ff).
Symbols used by Hilbert are similar to those used by Lorenzen and Thiel
in their operative approach as well as to those used by Weyl – but they played
completely different role.
The symbols by Hilbert and Lorenzen were constructed from the signs for
units and referred to the archaic signs as scores, balls, ﬁngers used by counting.
Those objects represented other objects in the process of counting and conse-
quently they played the role of symbols. A sign is meaningless since it denotes
(and means) itself and only itself. It is simultaneously an object and a sign. And
at this point the views of Lorenzen and Hilbert differ. Lorenzen manipulates with

From the History of the Concept of Number
111
symbols as objects and gets in this way in his calculus new objects, Thiel intro-
duces then an operation of an arithmetical abstraction on them. Hilbert on the
other hand understood symbols as being characterized by their interpretations.
Kurt Gödel (1906–1978) showed in his incompleteness theorems (1931)
that Hilbert’s program cannot be realized in his original formulation. He proved
that for every consistent theory extending the arithmetic of natural numbers there
are sentences which are true (in the intended model) but which cannot be proved
(decided) by means of the considered theory. The proof of this theorem uses (in
a certain artiﬁcial and sophisticated) way natural numbers – with the help of an
arithmetization of syntax one can speak inside a theory about this theory itself.
Let us make also a short remark on a current trend in the philosophy of
mathematics – namely on structuralism (being developed mainly in the USA).
We cannot consider here the technical details – so we shall describe only what is
said there about natural numbers. We take into account conceptions developed
by Geoffrey Hellmann (1989), Michael Resnik (1997) and Stuart Shapiro
(1997).
In the middle of 1950s a group of French mathematicians attempted to or-
der and classify all mathematical ﬁelds and disciplines on the basis of some
fundamental structures. This is the starting point of structuralism that claims
that mathematics is a structure of structures. The smallest units there are the
so called “patterns”. Mathematical objects, in particular numbers, are positions
in such patterns. This recalls the description of numbers given by Dedekind –
numbers were there simply positions in particular series. What is new here is
the treatment of the nature of numbers – whereas Dedekind spoke about “mental
creations” and by Cantor numbers were ideal and simultaneously real objects
outside our thinking, so in structuralism they possess only “modal existence”.
Hellmann suggests to treat mathematics and in particular arithmetic, only as
a nominalistic theory the concepts of which are only names and symbols and
hence have no meaning. So summing up one can say:
Numbers are positions in patterns. They have a “modal” existence and no meaning.
The “modal existence” of numbers and of other mathematical objects is shown
by using second-order logic and modal operators of second-order modal logic.
Sophisticated technical methods are applied here and in this way structuralism
becomes a bit artiﬁcial (in a certain sense).
6. Genetical Positions
Finally we present two further important contributions to the concept of number.
Both come from very different ﬁelds, from psychology and cultural anthropol-

112
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
ogy – the latter formulated inside the modern philosophical anthropology (Dux
et al. 1994).
The psychological contribution originates in the school of Jean Piaget (1896–
1980), the important researcher in psychological genetics. Piaget’s concept of
number was inﬂuenced by the logistical attempts of Frege and Russell. At the
same time he reprehended their one-sided cardinal concept of number. He him-
self explicated the nature of number as a complex and inseparable connection of
cardinal classiﬁcation and ordinal succession (while he considered the latter as
a logical operation). He wrote in (1971, p. 208):
Finite numbers are at the same time cardinal and ordinal numbers; this follows from the
nature of number itself, which is a single system of classes and asymmetric relations melted
into an operational totality.
From this – mathematically not precise – position Piaget criticized “the often
artiﬁcial deduction, [...] which separated logical research in a fundamental way
from the psychological analysis, though both are qualiﬁed for relying on each
other as mathematics and experimental physics are” (Piaget 1971, p. 11). In
comparison with this we recall the deeply anti-psychological attitude of Frege.
Piaget’s conception of number itself is not so meaningful as his idea of the
development which is basic for his conception. Fundamentals of psychological
development are the biological organization of human beings and their empirical
approach to the world which is simultaneously formative and adapting. Accord-
ing to Piaget numbers are in each case outcomes of individual constructions and
new creations which arise from practical acts by abstracting conceptions from
them. (The idea of development presented in a similarly clear way can be found
only in the paper of Dedekind Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? which was
obviously unknown to Piaget.) Piaget gained and proved his assumptions about
numbers and about the stages of development by his famous experiments in
which children were observed in precisely arranged tests.
Piaget’s conception of number can be summarized as follows:
Numbers are ﬁnite cardinals possessing also ordinal features. They are individual cognitive
constructions having their source in acts performed on concrete objects.
There is something striking in Piaget’s conception of number: though stress-
ing ordinal qualities in his conception of number, counting appears in it only
as an epiphenomenon. Counting has the subordinated position and rôle in the
development of numbers (Piaget 1971, p. 100 [translated by the authors]):
We must not dwell upon the latter [i.e., counting – annotation by the authors] for the object
of this book is the analysis of the formation of the concept of number.
Piaget did not notice counting for itself as a schema of concept formation –
as we found it in the conception of Dedekind who described it mathematically
as the structure of the natural numbers.

From the History of the Concept of Number
113
The conception formulated in the framework of the cultural anthropology re-
gards development additionally in a historical way. Peter Damerow (born 1939)
makes an attempt to locate the concept of number between ontogenesis and his-
togenesis. His “constitutive basic assumptions” are (Damerow 1994, p. 271)
ﬁrst, logical-mathematical concepts are abstracted invariants and transformations which are
realized by acts, and
second, such abstractions are passed down by collective external representations [...].
With respect to the ﬁrst basic assumption Damerow assumed “that the theo-
retical reconstruction of the development of the concept of number by Piaget in
ontogenesis reﬂects this process in a basically correct way” (p. 255).
Damerow regards ontogenesis and histogenesis as fundamentally different
processes: the one is not the analogue of the other. External representations, for
instance systems of arithmetical symbols, are snapshots in histogenesis. On the
one hand they are results of psychological constructions performed by single
individuals inside their social history. On the other hand they are objects of on-
togenetical reconstruction made by individuals at any time.
Damerow reﬂects upon the development of the concept of number in con-
junction with so called “arithmetical activities”. These are “operations of com-
paring, correspondence, aggregation and iteration” (p. 280). In a zeroth “pre-
arithmetical level” there are no such activities in the proper sense. Here they are
bounded to concrete situations and objects. Collective external representations
as symbols and systems of symbols do not exist at all.
In the following “proto-arithmetical level” (p. 285) one can ﬁnd “counting
objects” as objective symbols for real objects – like calculi and notches, then
words or symbolic acts in standard “counting successions ” (p. 286) expressing
quantities by iteration. In the second level of “symbolic arithmetic” (p. 293)
there appear contextual and abstract symbols as representatives of the second
order which are made up for symbolization and calculation as well. Technical
terms occur interacting with symbols and objects.
Arithmetical techniques build a new area of activities from which the third
and last level in the development, the “level of theoretic arithmetic” was achieved
(p. 302). This means a ﬁeld of statements about abstract numbers within deduc-
tive systems which are obtained only by mental operations. If deductions need
arithmetical interpretations then they are “linguistic”. If they are removed from
these in systems of axioms which can be interpreted in optional ways, then they
are “formal”.
Damerow regards his approach as a background for the theoretically unde-
terminable (p. 314; cf. Damerow 2001, p. 51)
respond to the question about the historical or nonhistorical nature of logical-mathematical
and particularly arithmetical thinking.

114
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
He speaks about the potential “part of arithmetical thinking [...] traced back
to cultural acquirements” and about the potential “extent [...] where structures
and processes in arithmetical thinking are historically unchangeable universalia
in the nature of homo sapiens”. He regards historical external representations
as the key for “historical-cultural comparative” analysis which are able to give
answers in this area.
The concept of number in Damerow’s considerations is affected by its com-
mitment to Piaget. It is not easy to outline his complex conception of number:
Numbers are ﬁnite cardinals possessing ordinal features. Numbers are at the same time in-
dividual and social cognitive constructions which cultivate or which have been cultivated
in the psychological development of individuals and in the historical development of so-
cieties. External representations are linking individual, social and historical development.
The concept of number includes nonhistorical universal and historical cultural units.
We observe that Damerow, though he postulates fundamental counting struc-
tures as necessarily belonging to the concept of number, does not study their ori-
gin and early development. Counting structures seems to spring up from systems
of operations which are a part of the natural environment of human beings and
precede the speciﬁc arithmetical activities. Potentially they belong to “logical-
mathematical universalia of thinking” .
7. The Evolutionary Position
The positions of genetical psychology and cultural anthropology are exceed-
ingly important for didactics of mathematics. It seems that in the philosophy of
mathematics scarcely anybody takes note of such positions.
We note that both of these positions trace back to the theory or better to the
discovery of evolution which not only altered biology but also radically chal-
lenged philosophy. The idea of evolution is a turning point for epistemology. It
calls old fundamental positions into question. We will try to characterize shortly
this new position. This will also provide us with a look at our object of investi-
gation, namely at the concept of number.
At ﬁrst we have to extend our picture of the fundamental positions – see
below.
If one takes the position of the evolution then formations of thinking collapse
– in them thinking attempted to solve its mysteries referring solely to itself.
For the ﬁrst time in the history of philosophy this new position provides the
opportunity of looking at the development of thinking just as an external object

From the History of the Concept of Number
115
– it is done by studying biological and psychological development of human
beings.
s
s
s
s
Evolution
Thinking
Reality
Spiritual World
The “biological” or “evolutionary epistemology” was founded by Konrad
Lorenz (1903–1989) and is represented today for instance by Gerhard Vollmer
and Rupert Riedl. One of its key messages is:
– Life is a process leading to knowledge. This process continuously leads
from the evolution of molecules up to civilization.
From this one obtains that:
– Thinking is like a higher organ formed in a “second step of evolution”.
Structures of thinking are copies of natural patterns.
– Knowledge and insight (in its classical meaning) is actual reﬂection of
reality inside structures of thinking.
The problem of knowledge (cognition) in the philosophy becomes a biological,
anthropological, historical and ﬁnally a psychological and sociological problem.
Life is a process of getting knowledge. From the evolutionary point of view
the old fundamental positions amalgamate. Thinking, spirit and reality are phe-
nomena of one and the same life. The ﬁrst job is to study evolution and the
development of human beings. This can in principle lead to a solution of the old
problems of philosophy. The artiﬁcial separation of matter and spirit, subject and
object, thinking and being, idea and reality principally disappears.
What does it mean to adopt the position of the biological evolution in relation
to the old fundamental positions?
– Evolutionary epistemology is empiristic.
For biology belongs to natural sciences. In its own structures thinking is reﬂect-
ing structures of the world which in this process come ﬁrst.
– Evolutionary epistemology is anti-rationalistic.

116
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
Thinking is the product of nature. Therefore it matches with natural objects and
procedures. Any rationalistic remainder isolating thinking and knowledge from
objects disappears. Objects of the world are directly given to thinking by its
evolutionary biography. The so called “Ding an sich” (Kant) is a metaphysical
nonsense.
– Evolutionary epistemology is anti-idealistic.
Evolution is managed by external processes: chance, mutation, accommodation,
selection. Higher spiritual principles guiding evolution are unneeded and absurd.
In fact there exists for the ﬁrst time the possibility of monitoring the development
of spirit – and of deﬁning it. Attempts of deﬁnitions made by Dux (1994) for in-
stance remain necessarily inexact. For example: Spirit is the medium between
acquiring and designing environments (cf. p. 175). Or: “Which is being devel-
oped as spirituality, in fact is linked to the functionality of the central nervous
system” (p. 108).
It is interesting to check the range of the new position on the simple example
of numbers. What consequences for numbers, more precisely: for their nonhis-
toric universal part, has the thesis that they are the product of evolution? We
state:
– Certainly numbers are not any longer “made by God”. They are mainly
products of the evolution and from now on caused genetically.
This position is very popular today.
– Does there exist anything like “number center” or “calculation (comput-
ing) center” in human brain, the development of which could be observed
along the line of human ancestors?
– Do number genes exist?
The second question is undecided, the ﬁrst one is temporarily answered in a
negative way.
Evolution is a process proceeding in the course of time, it is a random pro-
cess. The following question arises:
– Did the development of numbers proceed in the random way too? Can
one imagine that if the genetical and anthropological development of hu-
man beings had proceeded in a different way, numbers could have been
different than 1, 2, 3, ...?
One would rather think that the answer is: No. So where is the source of
numbers in this case? This question is connected with the limits of the theory of
evolution:
– Up to which point one can follow numbers and their origins through pre-

From the History of the Concept of Number
117
history and early history, evolution or cosmological progression, respec-
tively?
– To ask the question about the evolution of numbers means also to ask
the question about their temporality. This question may be absurd if the
concept of number cannot be separated from time.
– Are numbers objects that must be thought of being independent of the
evolution?
– Finally: is it necessary to accept a spiritual origin or a given structure of
evolution. Are numbers elements of this structure?
Are numbers ideas, forms, divine thoughts? Though the position of evolu-
tion is revolutionary and very important, the simple question on the evolution of
numbers seems to refer back to the good old philosophy.
8. Our Conception
At ﬁrst we try to survey and to order the broad spectrum of conceptions about
numbers leading from mystic till insigniﬁcance. Doing this we strongly simplify
and concentrate on few and basic aspects of the conceptions. The following dia-
gram should not be treated as a classiﬁcation. We will ﬁnd some conceptions in
pretendedly conﬂicting places. This diagram should be seen as an attempt.
Read the following table in this way: For example “numbers are in the con-
ception of Dedekind (see blocks inside) on the one hand structurally (see en-
tering column) founded, on the other hand nonhistoric, universal (see entering
row)”.
historic
nonhistoric, universal
transcendent
—
Pythagoras, Plato, Nicolaus of
Kues, Aristotle
transcendental
—
Kant, intuitionism
abstractions
Mill, Damerow
Euclid, Aristotle, Cantor, Pia-
get, Frege
formal
—
Frege, Hilbert, Peano
semiotic
Damerow
Hilbert,
Weyl,
Lorenzen,
Thiel
structural
—
Dedekind, Peano
genetic
Damerow
Dedekind, Piaget, Damerow
We try to ﬁnd our own position in relation to these conceptions.
We not only notice the genetic positions but also integrate these positions in
the case of looking at the structure of natural numbers.

118
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
Like Dedekind we ﬁrstly regard numbers as counting numbers (to use a di-
dactic expression). These are
digits in elementary counting structures,
i.e., elements in very elementary, ﬁnite cognitive pattern necessarily connected
with internal or external representations. To understand this we have to try to ex-
plain the meaning of the process of counting. In Bedürftig and Murawski (2001)
we tried to do this in a mathematical way – even regarding the most elementary
ﬁnite cases.
Even simple counting shows something very fundamental: the ability of
building sequences. Counting generally is
the concept of sequence – by a self-conscious, actual sequence.
Behind this there is the ability to put digits or intervals in time – consciously
re- and anticipating what is a precondition to conscious actions at all. Such digits
may be linked with acts, perceptions, points in space and ﬁnally with symbols.
This ability is being developed psychologically and historically as well. Systems
of symbols are transformed and reconstructed. One can say:
Counting in standardized sequences of number symbols is the external and collective rep-
resentation of the concept of sequence.
In principle the inner construction of a pattern of counting is independent from
abstractions from reality and applications at all. In this context we may speak of
pure counting. We think that this construction is connected with inner time like
Kant’s form of pure intuition. Arithmetical matters are a priori and analytic for
one can reduce them to simplest principles of pure counting. Like Dedekind and
Cantor we regard numbers as “mental creations” and “intrinsic realities” arising
from psychological constructions of schemata of counting.
In the real psychological, prehistoric and historic development are the inter-
nal constructions of counting and of numbers from the very beginning generally
connected with the interchange with external environment. Such internal con-
structions a priori are instruments of individuals helping to acquire and to mas-
ter the outside world. Dealing with objects in the outside world the schemata of
counting are induced to be formed, organized and differentiated.
In this process the inner constructions of numbers cross abstractions, which
give numbers the sense of cardinals, ordinals, quantities or operators (functions).
In this way inner numbers get external reﬂections. They become manifest and
need external representations by symbols that inﬂuence the inner constructions.
By internal and external representations the counting can refer to itself:
Numbers count numbers.
This situation is characteristic for the interaction between counting and numbers.
It is a fundamental condition of the development of arithmetic.

From the History of the Concept of Number
119
Our conception is evidently inﬂuenced by the genetic positions. But we do
not accept the radical position of biologic epistemology which rejects other fun-
damental positions in philosophy.
Our position is rationalistic if it treats the construction of inner schemata
of counting. It is empiristic by emphasizing external conditions ab initio in the
formation of these schemata.
We tend to regard numbers treated as counting numbers as nonhistoric uni-
versalia. Counting numbers arise from systems of acts which come before “arith-
metic activities” (according to Damerow, see above). In our opinion the psycho-
logical, prehistorical and historical development is also oriented towards num-
bers as universalia. We are not able to decide this.
What about ideas (Plato) and forms (Aristotle)? Do inner numbers impose a
structure to the external world? Does there exist something like “external num-
bers” independent of thinking, corresponding to inner numbers? Do such ex-
ternal numbers on their part impose a structure upon the material world and
determine the development of counting and numbers? Well, these are meta-
metaphysical questions. We tend to a view which integrates aristotelian, platon-
istic and rationalistic elements and accepts numbers as inner and outer forms as
well. In the interplay between inner construction, application to external forms
and retroaction to inner construction we see impulses to the development of
numbers and inﬂuences on the interpretation of the external world.
We do not regard numbers as pure symbols or as abstractions from them. The
inner construction of schemata of counting depends on representations by inter-
nal and external symbols. In addition abstraction from the variety of symbols
is needed which completes the concept of number. It appears to us that internal
schemata of counting and external representations by symbols are connected to
each other. Here we see an important interface between internal and external
reality.
Finally we regard numbers not only as abstractions (implying ordinal fea-
tures), which arise in connection with arithmetical activities (according to Da-
merow). The reason is that the structural ordinal aspect of numbers, which is
represented in the process of counting and which is fundamental to the con-
cept of number, goes back beyond these arithmetical activities. From the very
beginning those acts are successions of acts. Therefore the ordinal structure of
numbers as cardinals being abstracted from arithmetical activities is not a conse-
quence of abstraction. This structure is a precondition for systems of arithmetical
and already for “prearithmetical” systems of acts. The most elementary concept
behind this is “counting”.
Our conception therefore implies the necessity of widening the meaning of
“arithmetical”, for counting and “counting numbers” are arithmetical in their
proper sense. These enables us to deduce the whole of arithmetic – without any
additional ingredients.

120
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
9. Questions for the Philosophy of Mathematics
We already noticed that in the modern philosophy of mathematics only scant
or no attention is given to the genetic conceptions of numbers. There are some
reasons for this abstinence.
Metamathematics and philosophy of mathematics study mathematical theo-
ries taking inﬁnite sets as granted. The task is to investigate and establish inﬁnite
concepts and methods in usual and successful inﬁnitesimal mathematics. Con-
ceptions trying to explain the origin of the elementary concept of number are far
from this world of the inﬁnite.
The reﬂection on the concept of number is usually begun in the philosophy
of mathematics with natural numbers. Natural numbers are characterized and
based transﬁnitely. Either a set theory postulating the axiom of inﬁnity (natural
numbers form a set) forms the basis or one deals with Peano-arithmetic and its
models which necessarily are inﬁnite. This is the starting point. At the same time
this is the point where the development of the elementary concept of numbers
ends.
In addition to that we ﬁnd platonistic positions about mathematical concepts.
According to them the latter are nonhistoric universalia determining any psycho-
logical and historical development. Only their selection and their linguistic oc-
currence lie in the psychological, social and historical sphere of inﬂuence, which
is irrelevant to mathematics. Frege’s anti-psychological attitude is still actual.
Is the development of the concept of number and of the elementary arith-
metic necessarily beyond the interest of philosophy of mathematics? We do not
think so.
We think that it is not adequate to connect numbers that are in fact ﬁnite,
with the inﬁnity. In the textbook quoted above we choose a ﬁnite basis (NBG
set theory without the axiom of inﬁnity) and consider counting and numbers in
elementary ﬁnite structures (Bedürftig and Murawski 2001, p. 9). Our approach
is similar to that of Dedekind (1888).
Models of such ﬁnite counting structures are usually not isomorphic as it is
the case with models of natural numbers fulﬁlling Peano axioms and given in
a set theoretical version. Instead of isomorphism we get the isomorphic embed-
ding of models of such ﬁnite structures (p. 68). We regard this as an adequate
alternative.
Finite counting structures allow us to develop elementary arithmetic in a
mathematical way going along with psychological development in stages. That
is the didactic sense and aim of our approach.
A pure logical axiomatic for ﬁnite arithmetical structures similar to Peano
arithmetic is not possible. It would be also uninteresting for it would only record
arithmetical states and not trace any development of them.

From the History of the Concept of Number
121
It appears to us that a ﬁnite set theoretical characterization of ﬁnite numbers
and its arithmetical progression is of interest to the philosophy of mathematics.
Finite mathematical positions are possible and give the possibility to take into
account the development of the concept of number and to discuss the concept of
number in a new and advanced way. A well-founded ﬁnite basis enables us to
follow the structural development of numbers from the ﬁnite to the inﬁnite level.
One can ﬁnd examples of this in Chapter 4 of our textbook – they show how we
can get a new position facing the phenomenon of inﬁnity (and ﬁniteness). We
quote a proposition from this textbook (Bedürftig and Murawski 2001, p. 200):
THEOREM. Let ⟨N, ν, 1⟩be an unary structure generated by 1. If it satis-
ﬁes the property:
For any unary structure ⟨A, µ, a, p⟩there exists an homomorphism
β : A →N with β(a) = 1
then ⟨N, ν, 1⟩is a model of the Peano axioms.
The colloquial meaning of this theorem is the following: Any counting schema,
which is able to enumerate any ﬁnite set, has the structure of the natural numbers.
The application of numbers as enumerating instruments to determinate quanti-
ties involves inﬁnity.
10. Concluding Remarks
If we look back at the various conceptions of numbers we realize that there is no
and there will never be a ﬁnal clariﬁcation of the nature of numbers. Mathematics
alone cannot (and perhaps should not) clarify it. On the other hand mathematics
can be developed without clarifying the essence of the concept of number, more-
over, we can understand quite well the concepts of our predecessors and claim
that our conception is similar to theirs. Does it mean that the philosophical re-
ﬂection on the foundations of mathematics is irrelevant?
It seems to be the case when one considers the internal process of the de-
velopment of mathematics in an isolation. On the other hand it is certainly not
irrelevant from the point of view of teaching mathematics and when one consid-
ers the meaning of mathematics as a science. This meaning was understood in a
different way in various periods. We tried to indicate the differences:
from the numbers by Pythagoreans and the ideas of Plato that are metaphysical powers in
the development of the world
through the continuous quantities in the Greek theory of quantities
to the actual inﬁnite sets that deconstructed the quantities into elements and eliminated them
from mathematics, and ﬁnally

122
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
to meaningless symbols that generate today – as bits and bytes – virtual worlds and net the
real world.
Conceptions – discussed at the end of our considerations – that are looking
for the genesis of the concept of number, show how the seemingly meaningless
symbols are in fact associated with the individual subject, world and history.

8
CHURCH’S THESIS AND ITS EPISTEMOLOGICAL
STATUS1
The aim of this paper is to present the origin of Church’s thesis and the main
arguments in favour of it as well as arguments against it. Further the general
problem of the epistemological status of the thesis will be considered, in par-
ticular the problem whether it can be treated as a deﬁnition and whether it is
provable or has a deﬁnite truth-value.
1. Origin and Various Formulations of Church’s Thesis
The Church’s thesis is one of the widely discussed statements in the recursion
theory and computability theory. For the ﬁrst time formulated in 1936, it still fo-
cuses interest of specialists in foundations and philosophy of computer science.
It can be stated simply as the equation
O = R,
where O denotes the class of all (effectively) computable functions and R the
class of all recursive functions. So it says that
a function is (effectively) computable if and only if it is recursive.2
The central notion we should start with is the notion of an algorithm. By an
algorithm we mean an effective and completely speciﬁed procedure for solving
problems of a given type. Important is here that an algorithm does not require
creativity, ingenuity or intuition (only the ability to recognize symbols is as-
1Originally published in Annales Universitatis Mariae Curie-Skłodowska, Sectio AI, Informatica
2 (2004), 57–70. Reprinted with kind permission of Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu Marii Curie-Skło-
dowskiej (Publishing House of Maria Curie-Skłodowska University).
2The exact deﬁnition of recursive functions and properties of them can be found in various books
devoted to the recursion theory – cf., e.g., Murawski (1999; 2000).
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 123–134. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

124
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
sumed) and that its application is prescribed in advance and does not depend
upon any empirical or random factors.
A function f : Nk −→N is said to be effectively computable (shortly: com-
putable) if and only if its values can be computed by an algorithm. So con-
sequently a function f : Nk −→N is computable if and only if there exists
a mechanical method by which for any k-tuple a1, . . . , ak of arguments the value
f(a1, . . . , ak) can be calculated in a ﬁnite number of prescribed steps. Three facts
should be stressed here:
• no actual human computability or empirically feasible computability is
meant here,
• functions are treated extensionally, i.e., a function is identiﬁed with an
appropriate set of ordered pairs; consequently the following function
f (x) =
 1,
if Riemann’s hypothesis is true,
0,
otherwise,
is computable since it is either the constant function 0 or the constant
function 1 (so a classical notion of a function is assumed and not the intu-
itionistic one – see below),
• the concept of computability is a modal notion (“there exists a method”,
“a method is possible”).
Many concrete algorithms have long been known in mathematics and logic.
In any such case the fact that the alleged procedure is an algorithm is an intu-
itively obvious fact. A new situation appears when one wants to show that there
is no algorithm for a given problem – a precise deﬁnition of an algorithm is
needed now. This was the case of Gödel’s incompleteness theorems and Hilbert’s
program of justiﬁcation of classical mathematics by ﬁnitary methods via proof
theory. Hence in the thirties of the last century some proposals to precise the no-
tion of an effectively computable function appeared – there were the proposals
by Alonzo Church (1936a), Emil Post (1936) and Alan Turing (1936–1937).
A natural problem of adequacy of those proposals arose. The positive answer
to this question is known in the literature as Church’s thesis (sometimes called
also Church-Turing thesis). It was formulated for the ﬁrst time by A. Church in
(1936a) and appeared in the context of researches led by himself and his students
(among them was S.C. Kleene) on the λ-deﬁnability. They studied computable
functions asking whether they are λ-computable. In §7 of (1936a) Church wrote:
We now deﬁne the notion, already discussed, of an effectively calculable function of posi-
tive integers by identifying it with the notion of a recursive function of positive integers (or
of a λ-deﬁnable function of positive integers). This deﬁnition is thought to be justiﬁed by
the considerations which follow, so far as positive justiﬁcation can ever be obtained for the
solution of a formal deﬁnition to correspond to an intuitive notion.
The very problem of the adequacy appeared in a conversation of Church and

Church’s Thesis and Its Epistemological Status
125
Gödel – as has been explained by Church in (1936a) in the footnote where he
wrote:
The question of the relationship between effective calculability and recursiveness (which
it is proposed to answer by identifying the two notions) was raised by Gödel in conver-
sation with the author. The corresponding question of the relationship between effective
calculability and λ-deﬁnablility had previously been proposed by the author independently.
Though published in 1936, the thesis was announced to the mathematical
world by Church already on 19th April 1935 at a meeting of the American Math-
ematical Society in New York City in a ten minute contributed talk. In the ab-
stract received by the Society on 22nd March 1935 (cf. Church 1935) one can
read:
Following a suggestion of Herbrand, but modifying it in an important respect, Gödel has
proposed (in a set of lectures at Princeton, N.J., 1934) a deﬁnition of the term recursive
function, in a very general sense. In this paper a deﬁnition of recursive function of positive
integers which is essentially Gödel’s is adopted. And it is maintained that the notion of
an effectively calculable function of positive integers should be identiﬁed with that of a
recursive function, since other plausible deﬁnitions of effective calculability turn out to
yield notions which are either equivalent to or weaker than recursiveness.
Add that the term ‘Church’s thesis’ appeared for the ﬁrst time in S.C. Kleene’s
monograph (1952) (on page 317) published in 1952 (earlier, in the paper from
1943 he referred to it as ‘Thesis I’).
A thesis similar to Church’s thesis was independently formulated by Alan
Turing in (1936–1937). He introduced there what is called today Turing ma-
chines and stated that:
The computable numbers include all numbers which could naturally be regarded as com-
putable.
Explain that “computable numbers” are those reals whose decimal extension is
computable by a Turing machine.
Later other formulations similar (and equivalent) to Church’s thesis as well
as some paraphrases of it were proposed. Let us mention here the formulation of
Kleene (cf. Kleene 1943) where one ﬁnds Thesis I stating that:
Every effectively calculable function (effectively decidable predicate) is general recursive.
A.A. Markov in (1955) formulated a principle which is equivalent to Church’s
thesis. It is formulated in the language of algorithms (in the precise sense of
Markov!) and says that every algorithm in the alphabet A is fully equivalent
with respect to A to a normal algorithm over A.
As examples of some paraphrases of the considered thesis let us quote Boo-
los and Jeffrey’s (1980) where they write:
[. . . ] the set of functions computable in our sense [i.e., by a Turing machine – R.M.] is iden-
tical with the set of functions that men or machines would be able to compute by whatever

126
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
effective method, if limitations on time, speed, and material were overcome (p. 20)
and
[. . . ] any mechanical routine for symbol manipulation can be carried out in effect by some
Turing machine or other. (p. 52)
Some other paraphrases can be found in L. Kalmár (1959), G. Kreisel (1970) or
in D.R. Hofstadter (1979).
2. Attempts to Justify Church’s Thesis
The natural question that should be asked is the following: is Church’s thesis
true (correct, sound)?
Let us start by noticing that the thesis is widely accepted today. Within recur-
sion theory a technique (called sometimes “argument by Church’s thesis”) has
been developed. It consists in concluding that a function is recursive, or that a
set is decidable, just because there is an algorithm for it. Examples of its appli-
cations can be found in the monograph by H. Rogers (1967).
Note also that Church’s thesis has a bit different meaning when considered
from the constructivist (or intuitionistic) position. Indeed, for a constructivist a
formula ∀x∃!yΦ(x, y) (hence a deﬁnition of a function) states that given an x one
can ﬁnd a unique y such that Φ(x, y). This amounts to an assertion that a certain
function is computable. In consequence Church’s thesis is the statement that if
∀x∃!yΦ(x, y) then there is a recursive function f such that ∀xΦ(x, f (x)). Hence
for a constructivist Church’s thesis is a claim that all number-theoretic functions
are recursive.
Church’s thesis is a statement formulated rather in a colloquial language
than in the precise language of mathematics – it is about the class of computable
functions deﬁned in the colloquial, pragmatic, pre-theoretic language using the
imprecise notion of an algorithm or an effective mechanical method. Hence it
seems that a priori no precise mathematical proof of this thesis can be expected.
The only thing one can do is to try to indicate evidences conﬁrming it (or argu-
ments against it). All such arguments must, at least in part, be of a philosophical
character – they cannot be purely mathematical arguments.
Since one cannot give a precise mathematical proof of the thesis of Church,
let us look for arguments in favour of it (arguments against it will be indicated
in the sequel). Further, since the inclusion R ⊆O is obvious, the essential part
of Church’s thesis is the inclusion O ⊆R. The arguments in favour of it can be
divided into three groups:
(A) heuristic arguments (no counterexample arguments),
(B) direct arguments,

Church’s Thesis and Its Epistemological Status
127
(C) arguments based on the existence of various speciﬁcations of the notion
of computability.
Among arguments of group (A) one can ﬁnd the following ones:
(A1) all particular computable functions occurring (so far) in mathematics
were shown to be recursive,
(A
′
1) no example of a computable function not being recursive was given,
(A2) it was shown that all particular methods of obtaining computable func-
tions from given computable ones lead also from recursive functions to recursive
functions,
(A
′
2) no example of a method leading from computable functions to com-
putable functions but not from recursive functions to recursive ones was given.
One can easily see that the above arguments are in a certain sense of empiri-
cal (or quasi-empirical) character.
Arguments of group (B) consist of theoretical analysis of the process of com-
putation and attempts to show in this way that only recursive functions can be
computable. Such was the argumentation of Turing in (1936–1937) where a de-
tailed analysis of the process of computing a value of a function was given and
where the conclusion was formulated that any possible computation procedure
has a faithful analogue in a Turing machine and that, therefore, every computable
function is recursive.
Arguments of group (C) are based on the fact that in the second quarter
of this century several somewhat different mathematical formulations of com-
putability were given (more or less independently). All of them have been proven
to be extensionally equivalent and equal to the class R of recursive functions. It
suggests that their authors have the same intuitions connected with the notion
of computability. The equality of all those classes of functions can serve as an
argument in favour of the thesis that the class R comprises all computable func-
tions.
All attempts to deﬁne the notion of computability in the language of mathe-
matics can be classiﬁed in the following way:
(1) algebraical deﬁnitions – they consist of ﬁxing certain initial functions and
certain operations on functions. One considers then the smallest class of func-
tions containing the initial functions and closed under the indicated operations;
(2) deﬁnitions using abstract mathematical machines – as an example of such
a deﬁnition can serve the deﬁnition of the class of functions computable in the
sense of Turing (cf. Turing 1936–1937);
(3) deﬁnitions using certain formal systems – an example of a deﬁnition of
this sort is the deﬁnition of functions computable in the sense of Markov (i.e.,

128
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
of functions computable by normal Markov’s algorithms, cf. Markov, 1955),
Herbrand-Gödel-Kleene deﬁnition of computable functions (cf. Gödel 1934 and
Kleene, 1952), deﬁnition of computability by representability in a formal sys-
tem, the theory of λ-deﬁnability by Church (cf. Church 1941) or the theory of
Post normal systems (cf. Post 1943).
Add also the following pragmatic argument due to M. Davis who writes in
(2004, p. 207):
The great success of modern computers as all-purpose algorithm-executing engines em-
bodying Turing’s universal computer in physical form, makes it extremely plausible that
the abstract theory of computability gives the correct answer to the question “What is a
computation?” and, by itself, makes the existence of any more general form of computation
extremely doubtful.
Having considered arguments in favour of Church’s thesis let us study now
arguments against it. One can ﬁnd various such arguments but, as Shapiro writes
in (1981 (p. 354), “[they] seem to be supported only by their authors”. We shall
discuss here only arguments of Kalmár formulated by him in (1959).
Kalmár gives of course no example of a particular function which is not re-
cursive but for which there exists a mechanical method of calculating its values.
He shows only that Church’s thesis implies certain peculiar consequences.
Let F(k, x, y) be a ternary partially recursive function universal for binary
recursive functions. Let f(x, y) be its diagonalization, i.e., a function deﬁned as:
f(x, y) = F(x, x, y).
The function f is recursive. Consider now the following example of a non-
recursive function (given by Kleene – cf. Kleene 1936, Theorem XIV).
g(x) = µy (f (x, y) = 0) =
⎧⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎨⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎪⎩
the smallest y such that
f(x, y) = 0, if such y exists,
0, otherwise.
The function g is nonrecursive, hence by Church’s thesis it is also noncom-
putable. On the other hand, for any natural number p for which there exists a
number y such that f(p, y) = 0, there is a method of calculating the value of
g(p), i.e., of computing the smallest number y such that f(p, y) = 0. Indeed, it
sufﬁces to compute successively f(p, 0), f(p, 1), f (p, 2), ... (each of them can
be calculated in a ﬁnite number of steps since f is recursive) till we get the value
0. For any number p for which it can be proved (by any correct method) that there
exists no y such that f (p, y) = 0, we also have a method of calculating the value
of g(p) in a ﬁnite number of steps – it sufﬁces simply to prove that there exists no
number y such that f(p, y) = 0 which requires a ﬁnite number of steps and leads
to the result g(p) = 0. Hence assuming that the function g is not computable
and using tertium non datur (note that it was already used in the deﬁnition of g)
one comes to the conclusion that there are natural numbers p such that, on the

Church’s Thesis and Its Epistemological Status
129
one hand, there is no number y with the property f(p, y) = 0 and, on the other
hand, this fact cannot be proved by any correct means. So Church’s thesis im-
plies the existence of absolutely undecidable propositions which can be decided!
An example of such a proposition is any sentence of the form ∃y[ f(p, y) = 0]
where p is a number for which there is no y such that f(p, y) = 0. Hence it is an
absolutely undecidable proposition which we can decide, for we know that it is
false!
In the above considerations we used a somewhat imprecise notion of prov-
ability by any correct means. This imprecision can be removed by introducing
a particular formal system (more exactly: a system of equations) and showing
that the considered sentence cannot be proved in any consistent extension of this
system.
But the situation is even more peculiar. Church’s thesis not only implies that
the existence of false sentences of the form
∃y[ f(p, y) = 0]
is absolutely undecidable, but also that the absolute undecidability of those sen-
tences cannot be proved by any correct means. Indeed, if P is a relation and the
sentence ∃yP is true then there exists a number q such that P(q). So the ques-
tion: “Does there exist a y such that P(y)?” is decidable and the answer is YES
(because P(q) →∃yP(y)). Hence if the sentence ∃yP(y) is undecidable then it
is false. So if one proved the undecidability of the sentence ∃yP(y) then one
could also prove that ¬∃yP(y). Hence one would decide the undecidable sen-
tence ∃yP(y), which is a contradiction. Consequently, the undecidability of the
sentence ∃yP(y) cannot be proved by any correct means.
Kalmár comes to the following conclusion: “there are pre-mathematical no-
tions which must remain pre-mathematical ones, for they cannot permit any re-
striction imposed by an exact mathematical deﬁnition” (cf. Kalmar 1959, p. 79).
Notions of effective computability, of solvability, of provability by any correct
means can serve here as examples.
Observe that one can treat the argumentation of Kalmár given above not as
an argumentation against Church’s thesis but as an argumentation against the
law of excluded middle (tertium non datur) – this law played a crucial role in
Kalmár’s argumentation. So did, for example, Markov.
Arguments against Church’s thesis were formulated also by R. Péter (1959),
J. Porte (1960) and G.L. Bowie (1973). The latter claims that the notion of an
effective computability is intensional whereas the concept of recursiveness is
extensional. Hence they cannot be identical and consequently Church’s thesis is
possibly false. Note (in favour of the intensionality of the concept of computabil-
ity) that the existence of a computation of (a value of) a function depends not
only on the description of the function but also on the admissible notation for
inputs and outputs.

130
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
3. Epistemological Status of Church’s Thesis
Let us look now at Church’s thesis from the epistemological point of view and
ask: what does this thesis really mean, is it true or false or maybe has no truth-
value at all, is this problem decidable, and if yes, then where and by which means
can it be decided?
Start by noting that computability is a pragmatic, pre-theoretical concept. It
refers to human (possibly idealized) abilities. Hence Church’s thesis is connected
with philosophical questions about relations between mathematics and material
or psychic reality. There are scholars who treat the notion of computability as
a notion of a psychological nature. For example E. Post wrote (cf. Post 1941,
pp. 408 and 419):
[. . . ] for full generality a complete analysis would have to be made of all the possible ways
in which the human mind could set up ﬁnite processes for generating sequences. [...] we
have to do with a certain activity of the human mind as situated in the universe. As activity,
this logico-mathematical process has certain temporal properties; as situated in the universe
it has certain spatial properties.
On the other hand the concept of computability has modal character whereas
the notion of a recursive function (or of a function computable by Turing ma-
chine) is not a modal one. Hence Church’s thesis identiﬁes the extension of an
idealized, pragmatic and modal property of functions with the extension of a for-
mal, precisely deﬁned prima facie non-modal arithmetical property of functions.
Consequently Church’s thesis is a proposal to exchange modality for ontology.
In a philosophical tradition one has two approaches to this problem: (1) One
of them, traced to W.V.O. Quine, is skeptical of modal notions altogether and
suggests that they are too vague or indeterminate for respectable scientiﬁc (or
quasi-scientiﬁc) use. On such a view Church’s thesis has no deﬁnite truth-value,
so it is neither true nor false. (2) Other tradition, while not so skeptical of modal-
ity as such, doubts that there can be any useful reduction of a modal notion to a
non-modal one.
S. Shapiro (1993) claims that both those traditions should be rejected while
considering Church’s thesis. In this case the problem of modality is solved by as-
suming that Turing machines represent in a certain sense all possible algorithms
or all possible machine programs and sequences of Turing machine conﬁgura-
tions represent possible computations. Hence Church’s thesis would hold only
if, for every possible algorithm there is a Turing machine that represents an algo-
rithm that computes the same function. So we have a thesis that the possibilities
of computation are reﬂected accurately in a certain arithmetic or set-theoretic
structure. Similarly for λ-deﬁnability and for recursive functions. This leads us
to the so called Church’s superthesis (formulated for the ﬁrst time by G. Kreisel
in (1969, p. 177) in the following way:

Church’s Thesis and Its Epistemological Status
131
[. . . ] the evidence for Church’s thesis, which refers to results, to functions computed, ac-
tually establishes more, a kind of superthesis: to each [...] algorithm [...] is assigned a
[. . . ] [Turing machine] program, modulo trivial conversions, which can be seen to deﬁne
the same computation process as the [algorithm].
Pragmatic modal notions do not have sharp boundaries. There are usually
borderline cases. Similar situation is of course also in the case of Church’s the-
sis – recall the idealized character of an unequivocal notion of computability. In
general vague properties cannot exactly coincide with a precise one. Since com-
putability is a vague notion and recursiveness (and other equivalent notions) is
a precise one, hence Church’s thesis does not literally have a determinate truth-
value or else it is false. Church’s thesis might then be treated as a proposal that
recursiveness be substituted for computability for certain purposes and in certain
contexts.
Church’s thesis is suited for establishing negative results about computabil-
ity. When one shows that a given function is not recursive, then one can conclude
that it cannot be computed. On the other hand, if the function has been shown
to be recursive, then this gives no information on the feasibility of an algorithm
and does not establish that the function can be calculated in any realistic sense.
Church’s thesis can also be treated simply as a deﬁnition. If we treat it as a
nominal deﬁnition then its acceptance (or rejection) is a matter of taste, conve-
nience, etc. If accepted, it is vacuously true, if rejected, there is no substantive
issue. Add however that such an approach to Church’s thesis cannot be found
in the literature – it is a subject of philosophical and mathematical studies what
proves that it is not treated as a nominal deﬁnition only.
Note that Church proposing for the ﬁrst time the thesis thought of it just as a
deﬁnition. In fact in the paper (1936) he wrote:
The purpose of the present paper is to propose a deﬁnition of effective calculability [...].
(p. 346)
Recall also his words from §7 of (1936) quoted above where he said:
We now deﬁne [emphasis is mine – R.M.] the notion, already discussed, of an effectively
calculable function of positive integers by identifying it with the notion of a recursive func-
tion [. . . ]. (p. 357)
But it should be stressed that Church understood here the deﬁnition as a real one
(and not as a nominal deﬁnition), i.e., as an explication or rational reconstruction.
Turing in (1936-1937) – though he did not use the term ‘deﬁnition’, but
writing that he wants to show “that all computable numbers are [Turing] ‘com-
putable’ ” (p. 231) – clearly regarded it just as the deﬁnition of computability.
Also by Gödel one ﬁnds words which may suggest that he treated Church’s
thesis as a deﬁnition. In fact in (1946) he wrote:
[. . . ] one has for the ﬁrst time succeeded in giving an absolute deﬁnition of an interesting

132
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
epistemological notion, i.e. one not depending on the formalism chosen. (p. 1)
And in (1951) he wrote:
The greatest improvement was made possible through the precise deﬁnition of the concept
of ﬁnite procedure. [. . . ] This concept, [. . . ] is equivalent to the concept of a “computable
function of integers” [. . . ] The most satisfactory way, in my opinion, is that of reducing the
concept of ﬁnite procedure to that of a machine with a ﬁnite number of parts, as has been
done by the British mathematician Turing. (pp. 304–305)
E. Post treated Church’s thesis as “a working hypothesis” and as “a fun-
damental discovery in the limitations of the mathematicizing power of Homo
Sapiens” (1936, p. 105). He was convinced that in the process of conﬁrming
it can receive the status of “a natural law” (cf. Post 1936, p. 105). Add that he
warned against treating Church’s thesis as a deﬁnition because it would dispense
us from the duty and necessity of looking for conﬁrmations of it.
The standard approach to Church’s thesis hold it to be a rational reconstruc-
tion (in the sense of R. Carnap and C. Hempel). A rational reconstruction is a
precise, scientiﬁc concept that is offered as an equivalent of a prescientiﬁc, intu-
itive, imprecise notion. It is required here that in all cases in which the intuitive
notion is deﬁnitely known to apply or not to apply, the rational reconstruction
should yield the same outcome. In cases where the original notion is not determi-
nate, the reconstruction may decide arbitrarily. Conﬁrmation of the correctness
of a rational reconstruction must involve, at least in part, an empirical investiga-
tion. And, what is more important, it cannot be proved. So was for example the
opinion of Kleene who wrote in (1952, pp. 317–319):
Since our original notion of effective calculability of a function (or of effective decidability
of a predicate) is a somewhat vague intuitive one, the thesis [i.e., Church’s thesis – R.M.]
cannot be proved.
[. . . ]
While we cannot prove Church’s thesis, since its role is to delimit precisely a hitherto
vaguely conceived totality, we require evidence that it cannot conﬂict with the intuitive no-
tion which it is supposed to complete; i.e. we require evidence that every particular function
which our intuitive notion would authenticate as effectively calculable is general recursive.
Similar was the opinion of L. Kalmár who wrote in (1959):
Church’s thesis is not a mathematical theorem which can be proved or disproved in the
exact mathematical sense, for it states the identity of two notions only one of which is
mathematically deﬁned while the other is used by mathematicians without exact deﬁnition.
(p. 72)
J. Folina claims in (1998) that Church’s thesis is true (since “there is a good
deal of convincing evidence” – cf. Folina 1998, p. 321) but that it is not and
cannot be mathematically proved.
Talking about “mathematical provability” one should ﬁrst clearly explain

Church’s Thesis and Its Epistemological Status
133
what does it exactly mean. This is stressed by S. Shapiro in (1993). He says that
there exists of course no ZFC proof of Church’s thesis, there is also no formal
proof of it in a deductive system.
To prove (in a formal way) Church’s thesis one should construct a formal
system in which the concept of computability would be among primitive notions
and which would be based (among others) on axioms characterizing this notion.
The task would be then to show that computability characterized in such a way
coincides with recursiveness. But another problem would appear now: namely
the problem of showing that the adopted axioms for computability do in fact
reﬂect exactly properties of (intuitively understood) computability. Hence we
would arrive at Church’s thesis again, though at another level and in another
context.
On the other hand it should be stressed that in mathematics one has not
only formal proofs, there are also other methods of justiﬁcation accepted by
mathematicians. Taking this into account E. Mendelson comes in (1990) to the
conclusion that it is completely unwarranted to say that “CT [i.e., Church’s thesis
– R.M.] is unprovable just because it states an equivalence between a vague,
imprecise notion (effectively computable function) and a precise mathematical
notion (partial-recursive function)” (p. 232). And adds (p. 230):
My viewpoint can be brought out clearly by arguing that CT is another in a long list of
well-accepted mathematical and logical “theses” and that CT may be just as deserving of
acceptance as those theses. Of course, these theses are not ordinarily called “theses”, and
that is just my point.
As a justiﬁcation of his claim Mendelson considers several episodes from the
history of mathematics, in particular the concept of a function, of truth, of logi-
cal validity and of limits. In fact, till the 19th century a function was tied to a rule
for calculating it, generally by means of a formula. In 19th and 20th centuries
mathematicians started to deﬁne a function as a set of ordered pairs satisfying
appropriate conditions. The identiﬁcation of those notions, i.e., of an intuitive
notion and the precise set-theoretical one, can be called “Peano thesis”. Simi-
larly “Tarki’s thesis” is the thesis identifying the intuitive notion of truth and the
precise notion of truth given by Tarski. The intuitive notion of a limit widely
used in mathematical analysis in the 18th century and then in the 19th century
applied by A. Cauchy to deﬁne basic notions of the calculus has been given a
precise form only by K. Weierstrass in the language of ε −δ. There are many
other such examples: the notion of a measure as an explication of area and vol-
ume, the deﬁnition of dimension in topology, the deﬁniction of velocity as a
derivative, etc. Mendelson argues that in fact the concepts and assumptions that
support the notion of recursive function are no less vague and imprecise than
the notion of effective computability. They are just more familiar and are part
of a respectable theory with connections to other parts of logic and mathemat-

134
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
ics (and similarly for other theses quoted above). Further the claim that a proof
connecting intuitive and precise notions is impossible is false. Observe that the
half of Church’s thesis, i.e., the inclusion R ⊆O is usually treated as obvious.
Arguments are here similar to others used in mathematics (and one uses here two
notions only one of which is precisely given). In mathematics and logic, proof is
not the only way in which a statement comes to be accepted as true. Very often
– and so was the case in the quoted examples – equivalences between intuitive
notions and precise ones were simply “seen” to be true without proof or based
on arguments which were mixtures of intuitive perceptions and standard logical
and mathematical reasonings.
Note at the end that there are also theorists who regard Church’s thesis as
proved. So, for example, R. Gandy says in (1988) that Turing’s direct argument
that every algorithm can be simulated on a Turing machine proves a theorem.
He regards this analysis to be as convincing as typical mathematical work.
4. Conclusions
The above survey of opinions on Church’s thesis shows that there is no com-
mon agreement about its epistemological status. The crucial point are always
the philosophical presuppositions concerning, for example, the nature of mathe-
matics and of a mathematical proof. The situation can be summarized as follows:
there are some arguments and evidences in favour of Church’s thesis (arguments
against it are weaker), hence there are reasons to believe it is true. On the other
hand there is no (and there cannot exist any) formal proof (on the basis of, say,
Zermelo-Fraenkel set theory or any other commonly accepted basic theory) of
the thesis that would convince every mathematician and close the discussions.
But this happens not so rarely in mathematics (compare Mendelson’s examples
given above). Mathematics (and logic) is not only a formal theory but (the work-
ing mathematics) is something more. Hence one should distinguish several levels
in mathematics (pre-theoretical level, level of formal reconstructions, etc.) and
consequently take into account various ways of justiﬁcation adopted in them.

9
PHENOMENOLOGY AND PHILOSOPHY
OF MATHEMATICS
1. Introduction
The aim of this paper is to show some connections between philosophy and
the philosophy of mathematics, in particular the inﬂuence of phenomenological
ideas on the philosophical conceptions concerning mathematics. We shall start
by indicating the attachment of Edmund Husserl to mathematics and by present-
ing the main points of his phenomenological philosophy of mathematics. Next
works of two philosophers who attempted to apply Husserl’s ideas to the philos-
ophy of mathematics, namely of Hermann Weyl and Oskar Becker will be brieﬂy
discussed. At last the connections between Husserl’s ideas and the philosophy of
mathematics of Kurt Gödel will be studied. One ﬁnds in Gödel’s writings ideas
similar to those of Husserl long before he started to study his works.
2. Husserl’s Mathematical Background
The attachment of Edmund Husserl to mathematics can be seen from the very
beginning of his scientiﬁc activity and career. In fact he had a mathematical
background with respect to his education. As is commonly known, Husserl stud-
ied mathematics at the universities of Leipzig and Berlin under Carl Weierstrass
and Leopold Kronecker (in particular he attended the full cycle of Weierstrass’s
lectures; Husserl’s notes were among those that were used in the published edi-
tion of Weierstrass’s lectures). In 1881 Husserl went to Vienna to study under the
supervision of Leo Königsberger (a former student of Weierstrass) and obtained
the Ph.D. in 1883 with the work Beiträge zur Variationsrechnung (Contributions
to the Calculus of Variations).
Lectures of Brentano on psychology and philosophy attended by Husserl
from 1881 at the University of Vienna impressed him so much that he decided
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 135–146. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

136
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
to dedicate his life to philosophy. In 1886 he went to the University of Halle to
obtain his Habilitation with Carl Stumpf, a former student of Brentano. The Ha-
bilitationsschrift was entitled Über den Begriff der Zahl. Psychologische Analy-
sen (On the Concept of Number. Psychological Analyses) (1887). This 64 pages
work was later expanded into a book (of ﬁve times the length) being one of
Husserl’s major works: Philosophie der Arithmetik. Psychologische und logische
Untersuchungen (Philosophy of Arithemtic. Psychological and Logical Studies)
(1891).
Working as Privatdozent at the University of Halle, Husserl came in contact
with mathematicians: Georg Cantor, the founder of set theory (which turned
to be one of the most important and fundamental theories in mathematics) and
Hermann Grassmann’s son, also Hermann. The former, with whom he had long
philosophical conversations when they were teaching together in Halle in the
1890s, told him about Bernhard Bolzano. In fact Husserl was perhaps the ﬁrst
philosopher outside Bohemia to be inﬂuenced signiﬁcantly by Bolzano (cf. Grat-
tan-Guinness 2000). He discovered him ﬁrst through the article by Stolz and then
especially via the enthusiasm of Brentano.
Husserl’s next book was two volumes Logische Untersuchungen (published
in 1900 and 1901, resp.). Partly because of it, he was promoted in 1901 to ex-
traordinary professor at the prestigious Göttingen university. Here one of his
new colleagues was the eminent mathematician David Hilbert. At the university
in Freiburg im Breisgau where he moved in 1916, Husserl met another famous
mathematician, Ernst Zermelo.
Though much of Husserl’s philosophy has no speciﬁc mathematical concern,
mathematics had an important inﬂuence on it. In particular the origin of his
philosophy can be seen in Weierstrass’s program of rigorization of calculus. Also
the inﬂuence of Cantor seems to be quite marked (though he was mentioned only
twice in Husserl’s Habilitationscschrift). One should mention here the choice of
the number concept as the topic and the distinction of cardinal and ordinal by
‘Zahl’ and ‘Anzahl’. We should not forget the discussions with Gottlob Frege,
the founder of the logicism, one of the main trends in the modern philosophy of
mathematics.
3. Husserl’s Philosophy of Mathematics
Weierstrass’ program of rigorization of calculus consisted of “le style epsilonien”
(i.e., the usage of ε−δ approach in the theory of limits) and by the demand of the
arithmetization of analysis. The latter should provide the reduction of all notions
used in the mathematical analysis (i.e., the differential and integral calculus) to
those of the arithmetic of natural numbers that seemed to be clear. Hence the
concepts of (analytic) function and of a real number should be clearly deﬁned.

Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mathematics
137
And this has been done by Weierstrass, Dedekind, Cantor and others. In this sit-
uation there arose the need to characterize the very concept of a natural number.
One of the approaches was that proposed by Giuseppe Peano who character-
ized natural numbers and their arithmetic axiomatically. Another one was the
approach by Gottlob Frege who attempted to reduce this concept to pure for-
mal logic using some ideas and methods of Cantor’s set theory and deﬁning1
numbers as extensions of concepts (the latter were themselves taken to be the
references of concept-words).
Husserl was not satisﬁed with those solutions. His position, especially in
Philosophie der Arithmetik was resolutely anti-axiomatic. According to him one
should not found “arithmetic on a sequence of formal deﬁnitions, out of which
all the theorems of that science could be deduced purely syllogistically” – as he
wrote in Philosophie der Arithmetik (cf. 2003, p. 311). As soon as one comes
to the ultimate, elementary concepts, all deﬁning has to come to an end and one
should point to the concrete phenomena from or through which the concepts are
abstracted and to show the nature of the abstraction process. According to that,
one should focus on “our grasp of the concept of number” (cf. 2003, p. 311) and
not on the number as such.
He wrote (cf. Husserl 2003, pp. 310–311):
Today there is a general belief that a rigorous and thoroughgoing development of higher
analysis [. . . ] excluding all auxiliary concepts borrowed from geometry, would have to em-
anate from elementary arithmetic alone, in which analysis is grounded. But this elementary
arithmetic has, as a matter of fact, its sole foundation in the concept of number; or, more
precisely put, it has it in that never-ending series of concepts which mathematicians call
‘positive whole numbers’. [. . . ] Therefore, it is with the analysis of the concept of number
that any philosophy of mathematics must begin.
In this way Husserl took on the task of continuing Weierstrass’ program. In
Philosophie der Arithmetik he wrote (cf. Husserl 2003, p. 7):
[. . . ] perhaps I have succeeded in preparing the way, at least on some basic points, for the
true philosophy of the calculus, that desideratum of centuries.
In the Philosophie der Arithmetik Husserl enhanced the approach taken by
Weierstrass and other mathematicians of the time in deﬁning the natural numbers
by counting with Brentano’s methods of descriptive psychology.2 Hence in the
1He did it informally in Grundlagen der Arithmetik (1884) and then carried out the project for-
mally in Grundgesetze der Arithmetik (1893 and 1903) by using his concept-script (ideography)
introduced in Begriffsschrift (1879).
2Later when he was attacking the psychologistic point of view of logic and mathematics – e.g., in
the ﬁrst volume of Logische Untersuchungen – he appears to reject much of his early work, though
the forms of psychologism analysed and refuted there do not apply directly to his Philosophie der
Arithmetik. It is sometimes suggested that Husserl changed from psychologism to antipsychologism
under the inﬂuence of Frege’s review of his Philosophie der Arithmetik (cf. Frege 1894). In fact he
changed his mind about psychologism as early as 1890, a year before Philosophie was published. He

138
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
ﬁrst part of it Husserl gave a psychological analysis of our everyday concept
of number. And this analysis was for him an analysis of an experience of the
presentation of a number and in particular an elucidation of its origin. According
to Husserl the concept of a number cannot be deﬁned in logic. He wrote (cf.
Husserl 2003, p. 136):
[. . . ] the difﬁculty lies in the phenomena, in their correct description, analysis and interpre-
tation. It is only with reference to the phenomena that insight into the essence of the number
concept is to be won.
Our intellect and time are limited and consequently we can have an intuitive un-
derstanding of only a small part of mathematics. To overcome those limitations
we make use of symbols to assist our thinking. In particular we know almost
all of arithmetic only indirectly through the mediation of symbols. This explains
why in the second part of Philosophie der Arithmetik Husserl discusses the sym-
bolic representation of numbers.
Husserl highlighted the intentional act of abstraction from maybe disparate
or heterogeneous somethings to form embodiments (Inbegriffe). Two bases fur-
nished the psychological foundation of the number-concept: (1) the concept of
collective uniﬁcation, and (2) the concept of Something.
Husserl claims that numbers are no abstracta and distinguishes, say, ‘5’ from
‘the concept 5’. According to him “the arithmetician does not operate with the
number concept as such at all, but with the generally presented objects of this
concept” (2003, p. 315). In his phenomenological approach to numbers the latter
are seen as multiplicities (Vielheiten) of units.
Husserl claimed, following Brentano, that consciousness can be best char-
acterized by being intentional in a theoretical sense of directedness towards an
object. In our perception we can focus on some general features, among others
on geometrical or arithmetical features, rather than focusing on the individual
physical objects. Mathematical entities are typical of the kind of entity that we
are dealing with when we are focusing on essence. For Husserl, mathematics is
a typical example of an eidetic science, a science of eidos. In mathematics one
studies certain kinds of essences: numbers in arithmetic and shapes and related
features in geometry.3 We can have insights into essences as well as physical
objects. Husserl uses here the term ‘intuition’ (Anschauung) and divides it into:
perception when the object is a physical object, and essential insight or Wesenss-
chau when the object is an essence. For him there is no difference in principle
between experiencing mathematical objects and experiencing physical objects,
in fact in both cases we are structuring the world we are confronted with. Mathe-
said that he has had doubts about psychologism from the very beginning. He attributed his change
of mind to Leibniz, Bolzano, Lotze and Hume. He makes no mention of Frege as being decisive for
the change.
3Husserl proposed an extension of geometry into a systematic examination of the kind of features
one later has come to study under the heading ‘topology’.

Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mathematics
139
matics as an eidetic science is exploring the world of abstract entities. The latter,
like numbers and other essences are transcendent (as physical objects are), i.e.,
they have more to them than what we grasp in any normal process of grasping,
for example in perception. They have not only a richness of features that we
know but they are also conceived of as having much more to them than what
we know, something that we might want to ﬁnd out. There arises a question:
how we go about studying abstract entities? Husserl uses here the method called
by him eidetic variation. It is based on an idea which Bolzano used to deﬁne
analyticity and to develop his theory of probability, anticipating a main idea in
Carnap’s theory of probability. According to it one tries out various objects that
instantiate some essences to see whether they also instantiate others.
Mathematics is a formal ontology, it studies all the possible forms of being
(of objects). Formal categories in their different forms are the objects of study
of mathematics – and not the sensible objects themselves. Through the faculty
of categorial abstraction we are able to get rid of sensible components of judge-
ment and focus on formal categories themselves. Thanks to eidetic intuition (or
essential intuition) we are able to grasp the possibility, impossibility, necessity
and contingency among concepts or among formal categories. Categorial intu-
ition together with categorial abstraction and eidetic intuition are the basis for
mathematical knowledge.
Comparing Husserl and Frege one sees that for the former direct experience,
i.e., perception, is the ultimate basis for the meaningful analysis of numbers (and
other mathematical notions), whereas the latter relies on the certainty given by
logic. Husserl wants only to describe our experiences. Frege’s logical analysis
consists in constructing a notion of number in the ideography. For Husserl such
an approach is artiﬁcial or, as he says, “chimerical”.4 He claims that one should
analyse concepts as they are given to us.
4. Weyl’s and Becker’s Phenomenological Philosophy of Mathematics
Ideas of Husserl found response in papers of the famous German mathematician
Hermann Weyl (1885–1955). His interests in philosophy go back to his graduate
student days between 1904 and 1908 and his allegiance to it lasted till the early
twenties.5 The inﬂuence of Husserl’s ideas can be seen in the care with which
Weyl treated issues like the relationship between intuition and formalization (cf.
his Das Kontinuum, 1918), the connection between his construction postulates
4Cf. Husserl 1970, pp. 119–120; 2003, p. 125.
5Few years after the publication of Das Kontinuum (1918) Weyl joined the intuitionistic camp
of L.W.J. Brouwer and developed his own approach to the intuitionism claiming that philosophy
and intuitionism are strictly connected. Later he attempted to do justice to Hilbert’s program of
formalism and doing this he changed his philosophical position substantially.

140
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
and the idea of a pure syntax of relations, the appeal to a Wesensschau, etc. In
the preface to the work Das Kontinuum, Weyl explicitly declares that he agrees
with the conceptions that underlie the Logische Untersuchungen with respect
to epistemological side of logic. Answering to Husserl’s gift of the second edi-
tion of the Logische Untersuchungen to him and his wife he wrote in a letter to
Husserl’s (cf. Husserl 1994, p. 290):
You have made me and my wife very happy with the last volume of the Logical Investi-
gations; and we thank you with admiration for this present. [...] Despite all the faults you
attribute to the Logical Investigations from your present standpoint, I ﬁnd the conclusive
results of this work – which has rendered such an enormous service to the spirit of pure
objectivity in epistemology – the decisive insights on evidence and truth, and the recogni-
tion that ‘intuition’ [Anschauung] extends beyond sensual intuition, established with great
clarity and concisiveness.
On the other hand Husserl read Weyl’s Das Kontinuum as well as published
in the same year Raum, Zeit, Materie (cf. 1922) and found them close to his
views. He stressed and praised Weyl’s attempts to develop a philosophy of math-
ematics on the base of logico-mathematical intuition. Husserl was pleased to
have Weyl – who was a prominent mathematician – on his side. In a private cor-
respondence he wrote to Weyl that his works were being read very carefully in
Freiburg and had had an important impact on new phenomenological investiga-
tions, in particular those of his assistent-to be Oskar Becker.
Oskar Becker (1889–1964) studied mathematics at Leipzig and wrote his
doctoral dissertation in mathematics under Otto Hölder and Karl Rohn in 1914.
He then devoted himself to philosophy and wrote his Habilitationsschrift on the
phenomenological foundations of geometry and relativity under Husserl’s direc-
tion in 1923. He admitted that it was Weyl’s work that made a phenomenological
foundation of geometry possible. Becker became Husserl’s assistant in the same
year. In 1927 he published his major work Mathematische Existenz. The book
was strongly inﬂuenced by Heidegger’s investigations, in particular by his in-
vestigations on the facticity of Dasein. This led Becker to pose the problem of
mathematical existence within the conﬁnes of human existence. He wrote (cf.
1927, p. 636):
The factual life of mankind [. . . ] is the ontical foundation also for the mathematical.
This stand point in the philosophy of mathematics led Becker to ﬁnd the ori-
gin of mathematical abstractions in concrete aspects of human life. In this way
he became critical of the Husserl’s style of phenomenological analysis. This an-
thropological current played an important rôle in Becker’s analysis of the transﬁ-
nite. Hence Becker utilized not only Husserl’s philosophy but also Heideggerian
hermeneutics, in particular discussing arithmetical counting as “being towards
death”. At the end of his life Becker re-emphasized the distinction between in-
tuition of the formal and Platonic realm as opposed to the concrete existential

Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mathematics
141
realm and developed his own approach to the philosophy called by him ‘mantic’.
With this word he referred to the fact that there is a divinatory aspect related to
any attempt to understand ‘Natur’. In the light of this mathematics appears as a
divinatory science which by means of symbols allows us to go beyond what is
accessible. Mantic philosophy will have to replace the older ‘eidetic’ philosophy.
Becker’s works have not had great inﬂuence on later debates in the foun-
dations of mathematics, despite many interesting analyzes included in them, in
particular of the existence of mathematical objects.
Talking about Weyl and Becker one should mention also Felix Kaufmann
(1895–1949), an Austrian-American philosopher of law. He studied jurispru-
dence and philosophy in Vienna and from 1922 till 1938 (when he left for the
USA) he was a Privatdozent there. He was associated with the Vienna Circle.
He wrote on the foundations of mathematics attempting, along with Weyl and
Becker, to apply the phenomenology of Husserl to constructive mathematics.
His main work is here the book Das Unendliche in der Mathematik und seine
Ausschaltung (1930).
5. Gödel’s Philosophy of Mathematics and Phenomenology
One of the most eminent logicians and philosophers of mathematics by whom
we ﬁnd Husserl’s phenomenological ideas is Kurt Gödel (1906–1978). Let us
start by noting that Husserl never referred to Gödel. In fact he was more than 70
when Gödel obtained his great results on the incompleteness and consistency,
and he died a few years later, in 1938, without seeming to have taken notice
of Gödel’s work. Also Gödel never referred to Husserl in his published works.
However his Nachlass shows that he knew Husserl’s work quite well and appre-
ciated it highly.
Gödel started to study Husserl’s works in 1959 and became soon absorbed
by them ﬁnding the author quite congenial. He owned all Husserl’s main works.6
The underlinings and comments (mostly in Gabelsberger shorthand) in the mar-
gin indicate that he studied them carefully. Most of his comments are positive
and expand upon Husserl’s points but sometimes he is critical. One should note
that Gödel expressed philosophical views on mathematics similar to those of
Husserl long before he started to study them. Views found in Husserl’s writings
were not radically different from his own. It seems that what impressed him was
Husserl’s general philosophy which would provide a systematic framework for
a number of his own earlier ideas on the foundations of mathematics.
6He owned among others the Logische Untersuchungen (in the edition from 1968), Ideen, Carte-
sianische Meditationen und Pariser Vorträge, Die Krisis der europäischen Wissenschaften und die
transzendentale Phänemenologie.

142
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
Gödel considered both central questions in the philosophy of mathematics:
(1) what is the ontological status of mathematical entities, and (2) how do we
ﬁnd out anything about them?
Considering the ﬁrst problem one should say that Gödel had held realist
views on mathematical entities since his student days (cf. Wang 1974, pp. 8–11)
– more exactly since 1921–1922. In “Russell’s Mathematical Logic” (1944) he
wrote about classes and concepts:
It seems to me that the assumption of such objects is quite as legitimate as the assumption
of physical bodies and there is quite as much reason to believe in their existence. They are
in the same sense necessary to obtain a satisfactory systems of mathematics as physical
bodies are necessary for a satisfactory theory of our sense perceptions and in both cases
it is impossible to interpret the propositions one wants to assert about these entities as
propositions about the “data”, i.e., in the latter case the actually occurring sense perceptions.
(p. 141)
Similar views were expressed by him in his Gibbs lecture (1951) and in the
unﬁnished contribution to The Philosophy of Rudolf Carnap (1953) “Is Mathe-
matics Syntax of Language?” (cf. Gödel 1953). In (1953, p. 9) he writes about
concepts and their properties:
Mathematical propositions, it is true, do not express physical properties of the structures
concerned [in physics], but rather properties of the concepts in which we describe those
structures. But this only shows that the properties of those concepts are something quite
as objective and independent of our choice as physical properties of matter. This is not
surprising, since concepts are composed of primitive ones, which, as well as their properties,
we can create as little as the primitive constituents of matter and their properties.
It should be stressed that Gödel does not claim here the objective existence
of properties but says only that they are as objective as the physical properties of
matter. Compare this with Husserl’s claim that abstract objects of mathematics
have – like other essences – the same ontological status as physical objects, that
they are objective but not in the straightforward realist sense.
The comparison of the status of mathematical objects and physical objects
one ﬁnds also in Supplement to the second edition of Gödel’s paper “What is
Cantor’s Continuum Problem?” where he says (cf. Gödel 1947, p. 272) that
the question of the objective existence of the objects of mathematical intuition
is an exact replica of the question of the objective existence of objects of the
outer world. Føllesdal (1995a, p. 440) notes that “Gödel’s use of the phrase ‘ex-
act replica’ brings to mind the analogy Husserl saw between our intuition of
essences in Wesensschau and of physical objects in perception”.
Let us turn now to the second problem, i.e., to the epistemology of mathemat-
ics. As indicated above in “Russell’s Mathematical Logic” (1944) Gödel talked
about elementary mathematical evidence or mathematical “data” and compared
it to sense perception. The notion of mathematical intuition has been discussed
by him also in the papers (1951) and (1953) quoted above. In (1951, p. 320) he

Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mathematics
143
wrote:
What is wrong, however, is that the meaning of the terms (that is, concepts they denote) is
asserted to be something manmade and consisting merely in semantical conventions. The
truth, I believe, is that these concepts form an objective reality of their own, which we
cannot create or change, but only perceive and describe.
In (1953, p. 359) he writes:
The similarity between mathematical intuition and physical sense is very striking. It is ar-
bitrary to consider “This is red” an immediate datum, but not so to consider the proposi-
tion expressing modus ponens or complete induction (or perhaps some simpler propositions
from which the latter follows). For the difference, as far as it is relevant here, consists solely
in the fact that in the ﬁrst case a relationship between a concept and a particular object is
perceived, while in the second case it is a relationship between concepts.
In the Supplement to the second edition of “What is Cantor’s Continuum Prob-
lem?” (Gödel 1947) he writes:
But despite their remoteness from sense experience, we do have something like a perception
of the objects of set theory, as is seen from the fact that the axioms force themselves upon
us as being true. I don’t see any reason why we should have less conﬁdence in this kind
of perception, i.e., in mathematical intuition, than in sense perception, which induces us to
build up physical theories and to expect that future sense perceptions will agree with them
[. . . ]. (p. 271)
Gödel did not explain what is the object of mathematical intuition. There
are the following possibilities: propositions (cf. 1953), concepts (cf. 1951), sets
and concepts (1947), or all three. Recall that Husserl distinguished two kinds of
intuition: perception (where physical objects are intuited) and eidetic intuition
(where the object is an abstract entity) and claimed that the former is more basic.
It is not clear if Gödel shared his views in this respect.
It is worth quoting still one passage from the second edition of (Gödel 1947)
where he wrote (pp. 271–271):
That something besides the sensations actually is immediately given follows (independently
of mathematics) from the fact that even our ideas referring to physical objects contain con-
stituents qualitatively different from sensations or mere combinations of sensations, e.g.,
the idea of object itself. [. . . ] Evidently the “given” underlying mathematics is closely re-
lated to the abstract elements contained in our empirical ideas. It by no means follows,
however, that the data of this second kind, because they cannot be associated with actions
of certain things upon our sense organs, are something purely subjective, as Kant asserted.
Rather they, too, may represent an aspect of objective reality, but, as opposed to the sensa-
tions, their presence in us may be due to another kind of relationship between ourselves and
reality.
Føllesdal (1995a, p. 442) suggests that Gödel’s point in this passage is that “what
is given in our experience is not just physical objects, but also various abstract
features that are instantiated by these objects”.

144
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
Mathematical intuition cannot guarantee us certainty of our knowledge. In
fact neither perception nor categorical intuition are infallible sources of evi-
dence. Gödel writes about four different methods one can use to get insight into
the mathematical reality:
• elementary consequences,
• success, i.e., fruitfulness in consequences,
• clariﬁcation,
• systematicity.
With the ﬁrst one we have to do in the situation when recondite axioms have
elementary consequences, e.g., axioms concerning great transﬁnite numbers can
have consequences in the arithmetic of natural numbers. Clariﬁcation refers to
situations when a discussed hypothesis cannot be solved generally but it is solv-
able with the help of some new axioms (compare the problem of the continuum
hypothesis and the axiom of constructibility). The last systematicity refers to
the method of arranging the axioms in a systematic manner what enables us to
discover new ones.
The last method (that recalls Husserl’s “reﬂective equilibrium” approach to
justiﬁcation) was mentioned by Gödel in the manuscript “The Modern Develop-
ment of the Foundations of Mathematics in Light of Philosophy” (1961). Gödel
described there in philosophical terms the development of the study of the foun-
dations of mathematics in the 20th century and ﬁtted it into a general scheme
of possible philosophical Weltanschauungen. Among others he discussed also
Husserl’s philosophy ﬁnding in it the method for the clariﬁcation of meaning of
mathematical concepts.7 He wrote there (cf. 1961, p. 385):
[. . . ] it turns out that in the systematic establishment of the axioms of mathematics, new
axioms, which do not follow by formal logic from those previously established, again and
again become evident. It is not at all excluded by the negative results mentioned earlier
that nevertheless every clearly posed mathematical yes-or-no question is solvable in this
way. For it is just this becoming evident of more and more new axioms on the basis of the
meaning of the primitive notions that a machine cannot imitate.
Gödel refers here to his famous incompleteness results from (1931a). They state
that (1) every consistent theory containing the arithmetic of natural numbers
contains undecidable propositions and that (2) no such theory can prove its own
consistency. Those results showed that neither Hilbert’s program of justiﬁcation
of the classical mathematics by means of ﬁnitary methods nor Carnap’s syn-
tactical program reducing mathematics to its syntax can be realized. Hence the
rôle of mathematical intuition which can help us to ﬁnd out deeper meaning and
properties of mathematical concepts that are not included in deﬁnitions given by
axioms. Gödel says in (1961) that there “exists today the beginning of a science
7This is the only place in which Gödel mentions Husserl and his philosophy explicitly.

Phenomenology and Philosophy of Mathematics
145
which claims to possess a systematic method for such clariﬁcation of meaning,
and that is the philosophy founded by Husserl” (p. 382). And he continues (1961,
p. 383):
Here clariﬁcation of meaning consists in concentrating more intensely on the concepts in
questions by directing our attention in a certain way, namely, onto our own acts in the use
of those concepts, onto our own powers in carrying out those acts, etc. In so doing, one
must keep clearly in mind that this philosophy is not a science in the same sense as the
other sciences. Rather it is [or in any case should be] a procedure or technique that should
produce in us a new state of consciousness in which we describe in detail the basic concepts
we use in our thought, or grasp other, hitherto unknown, basic concepts.
This path of Gödel from the incompleteness results to philosophy is not sur-
prising. In a sense the incompleteness theorems support and are supported by
phenomenological views. They support philosophy because they suggest that an
intuition of mathematical essences or a grasp of abstract concepts that cannot
be understood on the basis of axioms alone is required in order to solve certain
problems and to obtain consistency proofs for formal theories. On the other hand
they are supported by philosophy because the latter gives mathematical essences
their due. Gödel claimed that it is necessary to ascend to stronger, more abstract
principles and axioms to be able to solve problems from the lower levels (for
example to set theoretic principles to solve number-theoretic problems). This
idea was strongly supported by the results of Paris, Harrington and Kirby which
provided examples of genuine mathematical statements that refer only to natural
numbers, that are undecidable in number theory but that can be solved by using
inﬁnite sets of natural numbers.
In the paper “The Modern Development of the Foundations of Mathematics
in Light of Philosophy” (1961) Gödel says also that it is not excluded that ev-
ery clearly formulated mathematical yes-or-no question can be solved through
cultivating our knowledge of abstract concepts, through developing our intuition
of essences. In fact in this way more and more new axioms become evident on
the basis of the meaning of the primitive concepts that a machine, i.e., a formal
procedure, cannot emulate.
It seems that Gödel have settled on Husserl’s philosophy because according
to it we are directed toward and have access to essences in our experience – and
this is a support for platonism which was Gödel’s favourite conception in the
philosophy of mathematics.
6. Conclusions
Husserl’s postpsychologistic, transcendental view of mathematics is still a live
option in the philosophy of mathematics. As Tieszen writes, it is “compatible
with the post-Fregean, post-Hilbertian and post-Gödelian situation in the foun-

146
Part I: Philosophy of Mathematics
dations of mathematics” (cf. Tieszen 1994, p. 335). Phenomenological approach
to the philosophy of mathematics is still being developed by various authors. The
starting point for their considerations are, however, not directly Husserl’s works
but rather Gödel’s considerations. Let us mention here, for example, P. Benac-
erraf, Ch. Chihara, P. Maddy, M. Steiner, Ch. Parsons and R. Tieszen. They are
not only commenting Gödel’s works but are developing their own phenomeno-
logical interpretations of mathematics concentrating ﬁrst of all on the problem
of mathematical intuition – cf., for example, Maddy (1980), Parsons (1980) or
Tieszen (1988). One should also mention here G.-C. Rota (cf. Atten 2007).

PART II
HISTORY
OF LOGIC AND MATHEMATICS

10
HOENE-WRO ´NSKI – GENIUS OR MADMAN?1
The aim of the paper is to present main facts from the life of Józef Maria
Hoene-Wro´nski as well as his most important achievements in philosophy and
mathematics.
1. The Life of Hoene-Wro´nski
Józef Maria Hoene-Wro´nski was born on 23rd August 1776 in Wolsztyn near
Pozna´n.2 His father Antoni Hoene (a Czech who came to Wolsztyn from Sak-
sonia) was an architect. In 1777 the family moved to Pozna´n where between
1786 and 1790 Józef attended the school (Szkoła Wydziałowa). After ﬁnishing
the school he decided to enter the army but his father was against it. So Józef
left the family house and having changed the name to Wro´nski became the cadet
of the artillery. He moved up very quickly: in July 1794 he was Second Lieu-
tenant and in August Lieutenant and the commander of a battery. In the battle by
Maciejowice he was taken prisoner. He entered then the Russian army and was
promoted to the rank of major; he was even in the headquarters of A.W. Suvorov.
After the death of his father in 1796 and after he has come into an inher-
itance (about 17,035 Polish zloties) Wro´nski decided to resign from the army
career and to devote himself to science. In 1797 he resigned (he was granted the
right to carry the ofﬁcer’s uniform till the end of his life). In 1798 Wro´nski left
for Königsberg where he wanted to study philosophy. When it turned out that
1Originally published under the title “Genius or Madman? On Life and Work of J.M. Hoene-
Wro´nski” in: W. Wi˛esław (ed.), European Mathematics in the Last Centuries, pp. 77–86 (2005),
Wrocław: Stefan Banach International Mathematical Center/Institute of Mathematics, Wrocław Uni-
versity. c⃝Copyright by Institute of Mathematics, Wrocław University. Reprinted with kind permis-
sion of the Institute of Mathematics of Wrocław University.
2This is the most probable date. Wro´nski himself in a biographical note for the police from the
year 1801 wrote that he was born on 20th August 1776 and on his gravestone the date 24th August
1776 is written.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. xx), pp. 149–160. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2009.

150
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Kant is already pensioned he changed his plans and started his studies at univer-
sities in Halle and Göttingen. In 1800 he left to England and next to France with
the aim to enter Polish legions. General D ˛abrowski accepted his request and sent
him to Marseille where at that time both legions of Polish Corp were quartered.
In Marseille Wro´nski came into several scientiﬁc contacts, became the mem-
ber of Marseille Academy of Sciences and of Marseille Medical Society. Being
engaged in science, he soon left legions.
For the further scientiﬁc fate of Wro´nski very important was the day 15th
August 1803, hence the day on which in the Roman catholic church the Feast of
the Assumption (of Mary) is celebrated. On that day, during a ball he received
illumination. To remember this day he took the new forename, namely Maria.
He devoted himself at that time to two problems:
(1) to develop a new philosophy, the “achromatic” philosophy3 as he used to
call it, which should overcome the limits of the world of things and reach
the Absolute and the principles of the creation in order to deduce from
them a logically consistent theory of the whole universe,
(2) to realize the fundamental reform of the system of knowledge which should
begin with the reform of mathematics (the latter should consist ultimately
of the deduction of all parts of mathematics from a unique general law,
namely from the “absolute law of algorithm”).
The costs of living and of the edition of his works (as well as of rewriting
his manuscripts) were soon so high that all his funds have been exhausted. The
unique source of income were the lessons in mathematics he was giving. In 1810
he married one of his pupils – Wiktoria Sarrazin de Montferrier.
In September this year he decided to move to Paris and to present there
the results of his investigations. Unfortunately he found there neither recogni-
tion nor support. So he ran in ﬁnancial troubles. In this situation he turned to
the Russian embassy with the request for a support. He was granted a support
and could publish Introduction á la philosophie des mathématiques et technie
d’algorithmie which was dedicated to the emperor of Russia Alexander I. This
work has not found recognition and the author was forced to look for further
patrons. He wrote even to Napoleon but received no answer.
Fortunately he found a new pupil, namely Peter Joseph Arson who was a
rich businessman and who wanted to study. He became Wro´nski’s student and
patron and helped Wro´nski also by scientiﬁc and editorial as well as daily duties.
His generosity was enormous (his ﬁnancial contributions is estimated at 108,516
francs). The reason for that was his hope that Wro´nski will let him to the mystery
and will reveal him the essence of the Absolute. The latter promised to do so but
ﬁnally was not true to his word. So Arson left Wro´nski.
3The name comes from the Greek chrema – thing.

Hoene-Wro´nski – Genius or Madman?
151
Using the money Hoene-Wro´nski was given by Arson, he started to publish
a journal Le Sphinx. This journal together with the other journal Ultra which has
also been founded by Wro´nski should help to popularize the ideas and principles
of his social doctrine. According to it the world consists of two blocks: the party
of “independent”, i.e., the party of “human rights” and the party of “royalists”,
i.e., the party of “God’s rights”. Both are right but only partially. The outcome
from that antinomic situation saw Wro´nski in the knowledge and in the practical
realization of the absolute truth. Both journals were published a short time.
To get money for living Wro´nski decided to be occupied by inventions. After
the attempts to get a loan (to cover the costs of the journey to St. Petersburg or
at least to Warsaw) from the Russian ambassador in Paris failed he decided in
1820 to travel to England. (To be able to do that he was forced to pledge all
his movables.) In London he presented to Thomas Young – the member of the
London Royal Society for Supporting the Natural Sciences – a new theory of the
moon. This theory was intended to solve deﬁnitively the problem of measuring
the longitude. He also gave him his manuscript with the new theory of solving
the equations. Both works were rejected by Young because he saw in them ﬁrst
of all “metaphysical abstractions”. This decision was of course not accepted by
Wro´nski and in this way the quarrel with Young began. Since Wro´nski saw no
chances for a success he decided to come back to France. Even the news that all
his mathematical manuscripts which he had pledged by booksellers have been
sold by the weight of the paper did not keep him back.
After coming back to France in 1823 he was occupied by constructing math-
ematical instruments and by improving steam machines. He was also active in
writing. In particular he wrote then the Absolute Encyclopedia (which till today
exists only as a manuscript) and prepared a memorial to the Pope Leo XII. The
latter consisted of the explanation of the principles of the absolute philosophy
with applications to theology. Wro´nski proclaimed there also a new principle of
the religion which should make possible (with the help of the reason) the solv-
ing of all problems of faith. He worked also on Messianisme. Union ﬁnale de la
philosophie et de la religion, constituant la philosophie absolue, volume I: Pro-
drome du messianisme. Révélaton des destinées de l’humanité (1831). He began
then to call his doctrine and his role in the history by the name Messianism.
Using the support of (among others) Emil Thayer, Wro´nski was able to pub-
lish his next works, in particular the second volume of Métapolitique messian-
ique (1823) and Le destin de la France, de l’Allemagne et de la Russie, comme
Prolégomènes du messianisme (1842–1843). The latter won for him two fol-
lowers from the circle of Polish emigration, namely Antoni Bukaty and Leo-
nard Nied´zwiecki (Nied´zwiecki has later published at his own expense some of
Wro´nski’s works). He attacked Adam Mickiewicz and Andrzej Towia´nski and

152
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
reproached them for having stolen the name Messianism and having used it for
their “mad theosophical phantasies”.4
The cooperation with Thayer went on to the year 1847 and the breach was
turbulent – similarly as it was in the case of Arson. After that the ﬁnancial situa-
tion of Wro´nski was catastrophic. He tried to ﬁnd a solution by selling his works
by the weight of the paper. The rescue came from the side of the Kamil Count
Durutte – he invited Wro´nski to Metz and covered there his costs of living as
well as the costs of publishing his works.
After the coup d’état of Ludwig Napolean Wro´nski came back to Paris. Here
he found a new student and supporter – namely Ludwik Crozals who wanted to
be introduced into the world of Messianic truths. Wro´nski rejected his request
(what did not abstain him from using his ﬁnancial support). He justiﬁed his
refusal by saying that “his doctrine brings new ideas to the world and as such
has so far no ﬁxed price; its price can be either null or inﬁnite”.
At the end of 1853 Wro´nski fell ill. He died on 10th August and was buried
on the cemetery in Neuilly. On the gravestone (the costs of it were covered by
Count Durutte) the words “L’acte de chercher la Verité accuse le pouvoir de la-
trouver” as well as formulas of three mathematical laws (treated by Wro´nski as
symbols of the Messianism) and the letters A.M.D.G. (Ad Maiorem Dei Glo-
riam) were engraved.
2. Works and Manuscripts of Wro´nski
The best bibliography of Hoene-Wro´nski was given by S. Dickstein in Kata-
log dzieł i re¸kopisów Hoene-Wro´nski [The Catalogue of Works and Manuscripts
of Hoene-Wro´nski] (1896a) and by B.J. Gawecki in Wro´nski i o Wro´nskim
[Wro´nski and About Wro´nski] (1958).
Manuscripts of Hoene-Wro´nski belong now to the Biblioteka Kórnicka [Kór-
nik Library]. A part of them (mostly manuscripts with mathematico-physical
contents) was bought in 1875 by the count Jan Działy´nski from Hoene-Wro´nski’s
stepdaughter Batylda Conseillant, the rest (mostly manuscripts of philosophical
contents) was the property of Leonard Nied´zwiecki (we mentioned him earlier)
and after his death became the property of Biblioteka Kórnicka.
4The poet Adam Mickiewicz and Andrzej Towia´nski were representatives of one of the trends
in Polish Messianism – both, similarly as Wro´nski, were active in France. The Messianism was an
ideology proclaiming that the Polish nation plays the role of the saviour of the whole humanity and
of the spiritual leader, hence of the Messiah. It started after the overthrow of the November uprising
(1831) as an attempt to explain the metaphysical sense of the overthrow and to describe its role in
the history. As a historiographical conception it was heterogeneous. It referred to the Bible as well
as to ideas of French, German and other thinkers (L.C. Saint-Martin, J. Boehme, E. Swedenborg).

Hoene-Wro´nski – Genius or Madman?
153
The list of published works by Hoene-Wro´nski comprises 107 items, among
them Dickstein mentions: 28 mathematico-physical papers, 35 philosophical and
political works, 8 papers devoted to problems of transport, 11 polemic papers as
well as 23 manifestos, programs and brochures. Add that on title pages of most
of Hoene-Wro´nski’s works there is a sign of Sphinx on which the “the law of
highest algorithm”, i.e., the law:
Fx = A0 · Ω0 + A1 · Ω1 + A2 · Ω2 + A3 · Ω3 + . . .
is written.
The list of Hoene-Wro´nski’s manuscripts was divided by Dickstein into some
sections, namely: pure and applied mathematics (222 items), transport (37),
statistics and economy (19), philosophy and pedagogy (23), politics and ju-
risprudence (20), varia (16). Most of the manuscripts contain a date. At the end
of every work one ﬁnds sign A.M.D.G. or/and (especially in earlier works) at
the beginning the symbol O (what meant: in nomine coeli) or letters W.I.B. (an
abbreviation of Polish: W imie¸ Bo˙ze, what means: In God’s name). Manuscripts
were written exclusively in French (with one exception which was written in
English). Many of them are copies prepared by the secretary or by Hoene-
Wro´nski’s wife. Mathematical formulas were mostly written by Hoene-Wro´nski
himself.
Hoene-Wro´nski wrote and published almost exclusively in French. His works
have been translated into Italian, Spanish, Portuguese, German, Russian, English
and Polish. His selected philosophical works have been published in French and
Italian, namely: Oeuvre philosophique de Hoëne-Wro´nski (2 volumes, 1933 und
1936) and Collezione italiana degli scritti ﬁlosoﬁci (3 parts, 1870–1872 and
1878).
3. Philosophy of Hoene-Wro´nski
The philosophical system of Hoene-Wro´nski is included into the Messianic phi-
losophy. This philosophy was born under the inﬂuence of German thinkers like
Kant, Schelling and Hegel. Hoene-Wro´nski belonged to the earlier generation
of Polish Messianists and was in a sense a forerunner. Other Messianists were
active between 1830 and 1863 (one should mention here Bronisław Trentowski,
Józef Gołuchowski, August Count Cieszkowski, Karol Libelt and Józef Kre-
mer).
The characteristic feature of those philosophers was their interest in the
metaphysics. The metaphysics founded by them was rather spiritual than ide-
alistic (like the German one). Typical for it was the theistic conviction of the
existence of God as a person, of the immortality of soul and of the full and un-
bounded superiority of spiritual powers over the bodily ones. The aim of this

154
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
philosophy was not only the knowledge of the truth but ﬁrst of all the reform
of the life and the redeption of the mankind. Characteristic was the belief in the
metaphysical role of the nation. It was taught that a man can realize his fate
only in the framework of a national spirit and that the nations decide about the
development of the humanity. The special task was given to the Polish nation –
namely the task of being the Messiah. This explains also the name “Messianism”
for the trend.
The starting point of the philosophical system of Hoene-Wro´nski was the
philosophy of Immanuel Kant. Wro´nski claimed that Kant made an error by
treating the knowledge (reason) and the objective reality as being heterogeneous
instead of treating them as homogeneous. This led to the duality of knowledge
and being, of mental and phenomenal worlds. To overcome those limits one
should derive both of them from a single higher principle: from the Absolute
(one can see here the inﬂuence of Hegel; Hegel reduced the empirical reality
to the thinking, to the absolute world-ghost whereas Hoene-Wro´nski wanted to
derive both from one main principle).
But what is the Absolute? Hoene-Wro´nski gave no answer to that question.
He understood the Absolute in an abstract way and claimed that one can give
various features of the Absolute but they will be only descriptions of it relatively
to other beings (objects) and not the description of the essence of it. To get to
know the Absolute one should “overcome the temporal conditions of a rational
being” and to raise to the absolute reason. This can be done in a “pure inspec-
tion”, hence by intuition which is a cognitive activity as well as an existential
one.
The aim of Hoene-Wro´nski was not only to get to know and to describe the
Absolute but to derive the whole reality from the Absolute using one general
principle (also here the inﬂuence of Hegel can be seen). He called it “the law of
the creation” (loi de la création). He spoke very enigmatically about this law and
claimed that the being creates itself: it comes into existence by a dichotomy (it
plays here a similar role as that played by the trichotomy in Hegel’s dialectics)
and by the disintegration of any unity into thesis and antithesis (antitheses) .
Philosophy leads to the knowledge about the Absolute and therefore one can
identify it with the religion. It transforms the revealed religion into the rational
one. As a consequence the discoverer of the absolute philosophy becomes in a
certain sense a Messiah who proclaims the unity of the knowledge and religion.
For that reason Hoene-Wro´nski distinguished two main parts of the philoso-
phy: the one which gets to know the reality (he called it theory) and the one
that directs it to the fulﬁlment of its aims (called technie by him). Just the sec-
ond component (unifying the philosophy and the practice) makes the system of
Hoene-Wro´nski richer than the system of Hegel and the whole German idealism.
Being led by the law of creation the mankind can fulﬁll its destiny and to
pass from the present political system which is full of antagonisms and incon-

Hoene-Wro´nski – Genius or Madman?
155
sistencies to a fully rational system. In connection with this Hoene-Wro´nski dis-
tinguished four stages in the hitherto history. Each of them had different aims,
in particular materialistic aims (Orient), moral ones (Greece, Rome), religious
aims (the Middle Ages) and intellectual ones (modern times till the 18th cen-
tury). The 19th century was a transitory period: period of the struggle between
the conservative trend aiming at the good and the liberal one whose aim is the
truth. The future of the mankind is in the uniﬁcation of the good and the truth,
of the religion and the knowledge, in a creation of the epoch of “absolute good
and truth”. And just here a special role should be played by Slavonic nations
(Hoene-Wro´nski gave no justiﬁcation of this thesis).
One can see that the philosophical system of Hoene-Wro´nski was in fact
idealistic. The mystical elements were braided in it with extremely rationalis-
tic ones. Hence his system belongs to the rationalistic trend as well as to the
romantic one. It was a peculiar combination of metaphysics, historiography, re-
ligion, ethics and politics. This explains the interests of Hoene-Wro´nski in the
philosophy but also his engagement in the political activity.
4. Mathematical Works of Hoene-Wro´nski
Hoene-Wro´nski was interested in many branches of mathematics. He worked
in algebra, differential and integral calculus, function theory, differential equa-
tions, arithmetic and number theory, combinatorics and probability, geometry
and trigonometry as well as general mechanics, mechanics of liquids, thermody-
namics, mathematical physics, astronomy and philosophy and history of mathe-
matics. Most of his works have not been published and exist in manuscripts.
We cannot go into technical details of Hoene-Wro´nski’s mathematical works
– we shall discuss only main ideas contained in them.
Mathematics of Hoene-Wro´nski grew out of his philosophical ideas pre-
sented above, even more – it was subordinated to hem. The main goal of Wro´nski
was the reform of all the existing mathematics and the eduction of it from certain
fundamental principles and laws.
At the beginning Hoene-Wro´nski worked in the theory of equations, in par-
ticular he was interested in the problem of solvability of algebraic equations. It is
worth noticing that he had enormous patience in calculations. Most of the results
of his work in this direction have not been published.
The ﬁrst “public” appearance of Hoene-Wro´nski was his dissertation Prie-
mier principe des méthodes analytiques (not published) presented to the French
Academy in 1810. One ﬁnds there an idea which will later appear in almost all
his mathematical works, namely the idea that every knowledge, hence in partic-
ular mathematics, consists of the theory and the technie. The aim of the theory is
to investigate the essence of mathematical quantity and the aim of the technie is

156
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
the investigation of its values. Hence a theory is a system of theorems and laws
whereas technie consists of methods. Hoene-Wro´nski divides mathematics into
arithmetic and geometry and obtains in this way arithmetical theory and tech-
nie as well as geometrical theory and technie. The latter is the then new branch
of mathematics – descriptive geometry. According to Hoene-Wro´nski the arith-
metical (or analytical) technie did not exist so far. He claimed that there existed
only one unique principle which enabled us to unify all known methods in a sys-
tematic way. Just this principle is the subject of the considered dissertation. This
principle or the absolute law (loi absolute) of technical creation, later called “the
highest law” (loi suprême) consists of the representing of a function of a vari-
able x by a sum of some inﬁnite sequence. Making some additional assumptions
Hoene-Wro´nski deduces from it (as particular cases) various known formulas
and laws as well as indicates how it can be applied to solving equations. The
decision of the commission which should evaluate the dissertation was very dis-
creet though rather friendly for the author.
Soon afterwards Hoene-Wro´nski published a fundamental work Introduction
à la philosophie des mathématiques et technie d’algorithmie. He distinguishes
here two parts of mathematics: algorithmie and geometry. Algorithmie is divided
into the knowledge about laws of numbers (algebra) and the knowledge about
facts concerning numbers (arithmetic). The laws of extent are the subject of the
general geometry whereas the facts concerning the extent – the subject of the
special geometry. The task of the theory of algorithmie is to describe the nature
of all “elementary algorithms” and their mutual inﬂuence and interconnections,
i.e., of the “systematic algorithms”. This subject has been then developed in the
considered work. At the end of the book one ﬁnds “an architectonic table of
mathematic” indicating the classiﬁcation of branches of mathematics according
to the principles presented in the work.
The work has not found many readers and those who read it were of critical
opinion. In particular the mathematician Joseph Diaz Gergonne (1771-1859),
editor of the journal Annales de Mathématiques wrote there that the dissertation
of Hoene-Wro´nski is characterized by an obscure and hardly understandable
style. Its main weakness is the subordination of mathematical matters to princi-
ples of the imagined philosophical system. He admitted that Hoene-Wro´nski has
received some results in mathematics but it is inappropriate to connect them with
a metaphysical system. Laplace called Wro´nski “revealer of imaginary illusions
[phantasms] included into the philosophy of mathematics”.
Next mathematical work by Hoene-Wro´nski was the dissertation Résolution
générale des équations de tous les dégrés (1812). It contains a general method
of solving algebraic equations of arbitrary degree as well as formulas for the so-
lutions. They were given without proofs. The work has been sharply criticized.
Wro´nski did not acknowledge the censure (most probably he did not know about

Hoene-Wro´nski – Genius or Madman?
157
the results of Rufﬁni from 1799).5 A great debate followed which sometimes
over-went into passionate personal polemics. Gergonne demanded from Hoene-
Wro´nski proofs and examples of the application of his methods. Wro´nski did not
react to the reviews and was further convinced of the perfection of his method.
He did not take note of the critique of his theories and works indicating simul-
taneously the incorrectnesses (it is not clear whether he knew about other works
in this ﬁeld and whether he read them). Still in 1818 Hoene-Wro´nski justiﬁed
his decision not to publish the proof of his methods saying that his solution is so
great and valuable that it can be paid by nobody.
In 1812 Hoene-Wro´nski published another work, namely Réfutation de la
théorie des fonctions analytiques de Lagrange. He criticized there the work
Théorie des fonctions analytiques by Lagrange and in particular the idea of
developing the differential calculus on the basis of the theory of sums of se-
quences. Hoene-Wro´nski’s work was criticized by Academie Française ﬁrst of
all for the lack of clarity, for presenting formulas in the form of puzzles and
for the lack of proofs. But it should be admitted that Wro´nski’s work contained
some important statements and remarks which have not been seen or have been
simply ignored (one of the reasons could be certainly the unclear language used
by Hoene-Wro´nski as well as his mannerism of presenting his results in a way
which had nothing in common with the commonly accepted standards in the
mathematical community).
In years 1814–1819, thanks to the ﬁnancial support of Arson, Hoene-Wro´nski
was able to publish his most extensive mathematical work: Philosophie de l’inﬁni
(1814), Philosophie de la Technie algorithmique (volume I: 1815, volume II:
1816–1817) and Critique de la théorie des fonctions génératrices de Laplace
(1819). Those works were planned as the realization of his project to reform
mathematical knowledge and simultaneously as the warrant of the reform of the
whole of human knowledge.
In the ﬁrst work Hoene-Wro´nski considered the concept of the inﬁnity in
mathematics. It is also in a certain sense a reaction to the work by L.N.M. Carnot
Réﬂexions sur la métaphysique du calcul inﬁnitésimal (ﬁrst edition: 1783, sec-
ond edition: 1813) though the name Carnot is not mentioned there. One ﬁnds
there critique of Carnot’s conceptions and further the philosophy of the differ-
ential calculus and ﬁnally some remarks on Lagrange’s Théorie des fonctions
analytiques.
The aim of the work Philosophie de la Technie algorithmique was to jus-
tify and to indicate applications of “the highest law” which was considered by
Hoene-Wro´nski as his most important mathematical discovery. One ﬁnds there
5Paolo Rufﬁni (1765–1822) published in 1799 a thesis that there do not exist general formulas for
solutions of algebraic equations of degree higher than 4. His proof contained gaps. The ﬁrst correct
proof of this heorem was given by Niels Henrik Abel (1802–1829) in 1826 (he did not know the
works of Rufﬁni).

158
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
a “philosophical” deduction of this law, i.e., Hoene-Wro´nski justiﬁes the possi-
bility of presenting any function of the variable x in the form
F(x) = A0 · Ω0 + A1 · Ω1 + A2 · Ω2 + A3 · Ω3 + . . . ,
where Ωi are functions of x. Wro´nski presented also a “mathematical” proof of
the law. Unfortunately it was given in a way which was typical for him, i.e.,
without any details and having not precisely described the conditions and as-
sumptions.
In Critique de la théorie des fonctions génératrices de Laplace Hoene-Wro´n-
ski attempts to show that the generatrixes of Laplace do not provide – as Laplace
pretended – a general tool and being applied to differential equations they pro-
vide in fact only artiﬁcial methods.
In 1812 Hoene-Wro´nski’s work Introduction to a Course of Mathematics
has been published. It was thought as a popular presentation to the general pub-
lic of his plans to reform mathematics. The author begins by stating that any
positive knowledge is based on mathematics or at least uses mathematics. He
distinguishes four periods in the development of mathematics. The ﬁrst one is
the period when mathematics was carried on in concreto, i.e., there was no ab-
straction from the material reality, mathematics had a practical character (so was
the case of mathematics in ancient Egypt and Babilon). The second period is the
period of Greek mathematics. It can be characterized by the fact that abstraction
was used but – according to Hoene-Wro´nski – mathematical truths were “only
particular facts [cases] and have still not reached the general truths”. The third
period is the time from Cardano and Fermat till Kepler and Wallis. Some general
truths did appear in mathematics, but they were isolated, they were “individual
mathematical products”. In particular the formulas for solutions of equations of
degree 3 and 4 have been found but there was no idea about the general setting
of the problem. The last fourth period has begun with Newton and Leibniz. Then
methods have been developed which can be applied to “all the appearances of
the nature”. This period is characterized by the usage of sums of sequences, the
only common tool so far.
The characteristic feature of all periods in the hitherto development of math-
ematics was – according to Hoene-Wro´nski – that they were based on some
relative principles. This means that there were no absolute principles and – on
the other hand – science should be based just on such ideas. Hence the prediction
of the new higher stage in the development of mathematics. Its basis should be
the reform proposed by Wro´nski. It consists of the division of mathematics into
theory and technie. All mathematical truths should be deduced from the unique
highest law and in this way they should receive the absolute certainty.
After having returned from England to Paris (1823) Hoene-Wro´nski devoted
himself to the construction of calculating machines, in particular of the “arith-
metical ring” (it was thought as an instrument for multiplying and dividing num-

Hoene-Wro´nski – Genius or Madman?
159
bers), “arithmoscope” (an instrument on which various arithmetical operations
could be performed) and at last “universal calculator”. With this trend is also
connected his work Canons de logarithmes (1827). He presented there the idea
of simpliﬁcation of tables of the logarithmic function by the decomposition of
every number and every logarithm into three components. He has taken into ac-
count the fact that various approximations are needed and therefore prepared six
canons (tables) of logarithms. The ﬁrst one contained logarithms with four dig-
its, the next three – logarithms with ﬁve digits, the ﬁfth – with six digits and the
last one – logarithms with seven digits. Unfortunately it is rather difﬁcult to use
the tables.
To ﬁnish the overview of Hoene-Wro´nski’s mathematical works let us men-
tion still one of them, namely the short note “Loi téléologique du hasard” (1828)
which shows that he was interested also in the probability theory. He said in the
paper about “the teleological law of chance”. It has been already discovered but
the exact explication of its mathematical character requires still further studies
in which algorithms of higher order will be necessary. This law should enable us
“to describe all cases of chance and to become lords of the games; games will
be deprived of the fatality”. He added also that he has already successfully used
this law in a lottery in France.
5. Conclusions
Hoene-Wro´nski belongs to scientists who are rather forgotten today. His ideas
have found neither supporters nor successors. It should make one wonder be-
cause he has been an extraordinary scientist and one of the most original thinker.
He knew many (a dozen or so) languages, had good knowledge in various do-
mains, he was a real scholar and erudite. On the other hand he was rather a
difﬁcult person in contact and this had certainly inﬂuenced the fate of his ideas.
He belonged to the best European metaphysicians of the beginning of the
19th century. Unfortunately the ways in which he presented his ideas and re-
sults, the unclear language he used and his self-conﬁdence (which sometimes
was close to arrogance) isolated him from his contemporaries. His philosophical
ideas did not ﬁnd any echo. He had no big circle of supporters or students. He
was alone.
The fate of his mathematical ideas was similar. His ideas were rejected or
ignored and not positively evaluated. The reason was the subordination of his
mathematics to the philosophical ideas, his unclear and imprecise language in
which he formulated his results and which was far from the standards accepted
at that time.6 Additionally he has consciously hidden his proofs and was con-
6One should take into account the fact that Hoene-Wro´nski lived at the time when many funda-

160
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
vinced that they are of special value and meaning. Hence he has ignored the
results of other mathematicians. Even more: he read and knew almost no con-
temporary mathematical literature. Only some of his achievements and of his
ideas survived. In fact the unique trace of his ideas which is still recognized
is the concept of Wro´nski’s determinant, i.e., the Wronskian7 which was intro-
duced in 1812 in the work Réfutation de la théorie des fonctions analytiques de
Lagrange. It is worth noting that his ideas connected with the problem of solv-
ing of algebraical equations found recently appreciation. It has turned out that
Hoene-Wro´nski was looking not for exact formulas giving the solutions but was
interested in formulas and methods which enable the approximation of solutions.
Nowadays studies based on Hoene-Wro´nski’s ideas and leading to the numerical
approximations of solutions are developed.
Similarly his idea of the development of a function into the sum of a se-
quence – though not precise enough – contained something interesting. It has
been developed among others by Stefan Banach (cf. Banach 1939).
Remarkable are also Hoene-Wro´nski’s attempts to unify and systematize
the whole of mathematics. He has not succeeded in accomplishing it. His idea
found also no support and understanding by his contemporaries. The reason was
the fact that the whole project has been based on rather obscure philosophical
ideas. Quite different was the situation later when mathematicians like Cauchy,
Bolzano, Weierstrass, Dedekind as well as Frege, Russell and Whitehead re-
duced mathematics (in particular analysis) to the arithmetic of natural numbers
and at the end to logic (and set theory). What distinguishes both those projects
is the precision, clarity and exactness of the latter mathematicians and the im-
precision and unclarity of Hoene-Wro´nski. Maybe it was too early at Hoene-
Wro´nski’s days and the idea was not yet ripe. The needed concepts had not been
developed yet.
Summing up one can say that at least some of Hoene-Wro´nski’s ideas were
really deep but one cannot understand literally what he has said – one should
disclose the seeds of the truth. Mathematical activity of Hoene-Wro´nski was
something on the boarder between the greatness and madness.
mental mathematical concepts have not been precisely deﬁned yet.
7The name was introduced in 1882 by the English mathematician Thomas Muir.

11
GRASSMANN’S CONTRIBUTION TO MATHEMATICS
Hermann Günter Grassmann (1809–1877) was no professional mathemati-
cian and had no formal university training in this discipline. After ﬁnishing gym-
nasium he decided to study theology. So he went (with his elder brother) in 1927
to Berlin to study at the university. There he took courses in theology, classical
languages, philosophy and literature. But he does not appear to have taken any
courses in mathematics or physics. Nevertheless he was interested in mathemat-
ics what became evident when he returned in 1830 to Stettin after completing
the studies. Perhaps the inﬂuence of his father Justus Günther Grassmann (1779–
1852), a teacher of mathematics and physics at a gymnasium in Stettin, was im-
portant here. Hermann decided to become a school teacher as well but he was
also determined to undertake mathematical research on his own.
It is worth noting here – in connection with Grassmann’s studies in Berlin –
that he attended the lectures and sermons of the neo-Kantian Friedrich Schleier-
macher (1768–1834) and was inﬂuenced philosophically by his Dialektik (1839).
This inﬂuence can be seen in his later works. In particular he drew upon pairs of
opposites, for example: pure mathematics (or mathematics of forms) and its ap-
plications, discrete and continuous, space and time, analysis and synthesis – all
this was covered by the principle known in German philosophy as “Polarität”.
Grassmann was active as a teacher at various schools in Stettin (with the
exception of the school year 1834/1835 when he taught at the Gewerbeschule
in Berlin). At the beginning he taught mathematics, physics, German, Latin and
religious studies only at the lower level (this explains the wide range of topics).
The examinations passed in 1839 (in theology) and in 1840 allowed him to teach
mathematics, physics, chemistry and mineralogy at all secondary school levels.
In 1847 Grassmann attempted to get a university position. In fact he asked
the Prussian Ministry of Education to be considered for such a position. The
ministry asked Ernst Kummer (1810–1893) for the opinion. Unfortunately the
opinion was not positive and this ended any chance for Grassmann. Kummer
wrote in his report that Grassmann’s works contain “considerably good mate-
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 161–168. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

162
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
rial expressed in a deﬁcient form” and that his results in mathematics “will be
ignored by mathematicians as they were so far”.
Grassmann was a dedicated teacher. He wrote also several textbooks in math-
ematics and languages. This activity took a lot of time and he was unable to
devote much time to researches in mathematics. Nevertheless he did not resign
from them. Despite the fact that his scientiﬁc works did not ﬁnd an appropri-
ate acceptance and appreciation by the contemporaries, even more, were largely
ignored, he continued his studies moving temporarily from mathematics to lin-
guistics or physics. His works devoted to Sanskrit – contrary to his achievements
in mathematics – found recognition among specialist still during his life: in 1876
he was elected to the American Oriental Society and the University in Tübingen
honored him with the honorary doctorate (doctor honoris causa). His transla-
tion of Rig Veda and a huge commentary on it is – according to Encyclopedia
Britannica – still used today.
∗∗∗
For the examination taken by Grassmann in 1840 (mentioned above) he
should submit an essay. His essay Theorie der Ebbe und Flut was devoted to
the theory of the tides – cf. (1840). As a basic theory he took the theory from
Laplace’s Méchanique céleste and Lagrange’s Méchanique analytique but ex-
posed them making use of the vector methods which he had been developing
since 1832 (as he wrote later in the preface to his main work, namely Die Aus-
dehnungslehre, 1844). This enabled him an original and simpliﬁed approach.
This essay introduced for the ﬁrst time an analysis based on vectors including
vector addition and subtraction, vector differentiation and vector function the-
ory. It was the ﬁrst known appearance of what is now called linear algebra and
of the notion of a vector space. He developed those methods in later works, in
particular in Die lineale Ausdehnungslehre (1844) and Die Ausdehnungslehre.
Vollständig und in strenger Form begründet (1862) seeing that his theory can
be widely applied. The examiners accepted the essay but they failed to see the
importance of innovations introduced by Grassmann.
The book Die lineale Ausdehnungslehre, ein Zweig der Mathematik pub-
lished in 1844 is his most important work. In this original work Grassmann pro-
posed a new foundation for all of mathematics. The book began with quite gen-
eral deﬁnitions of a philosophical nature. Further he developed the idea of an al-
gebra in which the symbols representing geometric entities such as points, lines
and planes, are manipulated using certain rules. In fact he studied algebras whose
elements are not speciﬁed, hence are abstract quantities. He considered systems
of elements on which he deﬁned a formal operation of addition, scalar multi-
plication and multiplication. Starting with undeﬁned elements which he called
‘simple quantities’ he generalized more complex quantities using speciﬁed rules.

Grassmann’s Contribution to Mathematics
163
He represented subspaces of a space by coordinates leading to point mapping of
an algebraic manifold now called the Grassmannian.1 Fearnley-Sanders writes
in (1979, p. 811):
Beginning with a collection of “units” e1, e2, e3, . . . he effectively deﬁnes the free linear
space which they generate; that is to say, he considers formal linear combinations a1e1 +
+ a2e2 + a3e3 + . . . where the a j are real numbers, deﬁnes addition and multiplication by
real numbers [in what is now the usual way] and formally proves the linear space properties
for these operations.
Further Grassmann developed the theory of linear independence (similar to the
presentation found in the modern texts in algebra!), deﬁned the notions of sub-
space, independence, span, dimension, join and meet of subspaces, projections
of elements onto subspaces. He showed that any ﬁnite set has an independent
subset with the same span and that any independent set extends to a basis. He
obtained the formula for change of coordinates under change of basis, deﬁned el-
ementary transformations of basis and showed that every change of basis (equiv-
alently, in modern terms, every invertible linear transformation) is a product of
elementaries.
Ausdehnungslehre contains laws of vector spaces but, since Grassmann also
has a multiplication deﬁned, his structures satisfy the properties of what are
called today algebras. Grassmann deﬁned there the exterior product called also
combinatorial product (äußeres Produkt or kombinatorisches Produkt) – this is
the key operation of an algebra called now Grassmann algebra or exterior alge-
bra.2 In 1878 William Kingdom Clifford (1845–1879) joined this exterior alge-
bra to William Rowan Hamilton’s (1805–1865) quaternions.3
Among various important consequences of Grassmann’s approach in Aus-
dehnungslehre was the fact that once geometry has been put into the algebraic
form then the apparent restrictions of 3-dimensional space vanish – in fact the
number of possible dimensions is unbounded. Grassmann wrote in (1844):
If two different rules of change are applied, then the collection of elements produced [...]
forms a system of the second step. [. . . ] If still a third independent rule is added, then a
system of the third step is attained, and so forth. Space theory may serve here as an example.
[. . . ] The plane is the system of the second step. [. . .] If one adds a third independent
direction, then the whole inﬁnite space (system of the third step) is produced. [...] One
1A Grassmannian is a space which parameterizes all linear subspaces of a vector space V of a
given dimension.
2The Grassmann algebra or the exterior algebra of a given vector space V over a ﬁeld K is the uni-
tal associative algebra Λ(V) generated by the exterior product, where the exterior product (or wedge
product) of vectors is an algebraic construction generalizing certain features of the cross product
to higher dimensions. Grassmann algebras are widely used in contemporary geometry, especially
differential geometry and algebraic geometry through the algebra of differential forms, as well as in
multilinear algebra and related ﬁelds.
3Clifford algebras are used today in the theory of quadratic forms and in relativistic quantum
mechanics.

164
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
cannot here go further than up to three independent directions (rules of change), while in
the pure theory of extension their quantity can increase up to inﬁnity.
The reception of the Ausdehnungslehre was bad – the book was largely ig-
nored. Why? It was simply too revolutionary, far too much ahead of its time to
be appreciated. As Petsche writes in (2006, p. 42):
This book blew up the contemporary pictures of how geometry should be treated. Extensive
philosophical introductory considerations, presentation of an abstract theory of connections
that should provide a foundation for the whole of mathematics, spare usage of formulas,
rejection of the geometry as a mathematical discipline and the development of a theory of
mathematical varieties that is n-dimensional and free of any metric and many others were
“proposed” to the reader.4
Such ideas will appear later in Riemann’s (1826–1866) theory of n-dimensional
varieties and in the Hamilton’s concept of a quaternion.
On the other hand Grassmann – as autodidact – presented his ideas using
new notions and concepts invented by himself and having no tradition. His pre-
sentation was too abstract and not always well-phrased.5 One should remember
that in Grassmann’s days the general notion of an abstract algebra had yet to be
deﬁned and the only axiomatic theory was in fact Euclidean geometry. Möbius
(1790–1868) who was the only person in Germany being close to the mathe-
matics developed by Grassmann did not understand his approach and declined
to write a review. Gauss (1777–1855) answered the request of Grassmann say-
ing that he is too busy to learn the terminology of the Ausdehnungslehre. Notice
also that the slow reception of Grassmann’s works can have its source also in
the fact that they were published “in the mathematical steppes of Pomerania” as
Grattan-Guinness writes in (2000, p. 159).
On the other hand Augustin Louis Cauchy (1789–1857) and Adhémar Jean
de Saint-Venant (1797–1886) claimed that they have invented systems similar to
that of Grassmann. The claim of the latter is a fair one since he published in 1845
a work in which he multiplied line segments in an analogous way to Grassmann.
Saint-Venant claimed that he had developed his ideas already in 1832. Cauchy
4“Dieses Buch sprengte die zeitgenössischen Vorstellungen von der Behandlung der Geome-
trie. Umfangreiche philosophische Vorbetrachtungen, Darlegung einer abstrakten, als Grundlage
der gesamten Mathematik konzipierten Theorie der Verknüpfungen, spärlicher Formelgebrauch,
Ablehnung der Geometrie als mathematische Disziplin und Entwicklung einer n-dimensionalen,
metrikfreien Theorie der mathematischen Mannigfaltigkeit u.a.m. wurden dem Leser ‘zugemutet’.”
5A. Clebsch wrote in (1871, p. 8): “Unfortunately the beautiful works of that most important
geometer are still not widely known; the reason of this can be seen in the fact that in Grassmann’s
presentations the geometrical results are shown as consequences of much more general and very
abstract investigations which in their unusual form cause substantial problems for the reader.” (“Lei-
der sind die schönen Arbeiten dieses höchst bedeutsamen Geometers noch immer wenig gekannt;
was wohl hauptsächlich dem Umstande zuzuschreiben ist, dass in der Darstellung Graßmanns
diese geometrischen Resultate als Corollare viel allgemeinerer und sehr abstrakter Untersuchungen
auftreten, die in ihrer ungöhnlichen Form dem Leser nicht unerhebliche Schwierigkeiten bereiten.”)

Grassmann’s Contribution to Mathematics
165
published in 1853 in Comptes Rendus a paper “Sur clefs algébrique” in which he
described a formal symbolic method which coincides with that of Grassmann’s
method – but he made no reference to Grassmann. Grassmann complained to the
Académie des Sciences that his work had priority. He wrote6:
I recalled at a glance that the principles which are there established and the results which
are proved were exactly the same as those which I published in 1844, and of which I gave at
the same time numerous applications to algebraic analysis, geometry, mechanics and other
branches of physics.
Unfortunately he received no answer.
Not discouraged by those circumstances Grassmann went on to apply his
new concepts and methods with the hope that once people will saw that the
theory can be successfully applied they would take it seriously. He wrote “Neue
Theorie der Elektrodynamik” (1845) and various papers with applications to
algebraic curves and surfaces. One of those papers found a recognition – though
not full.
In 1846 Möbius invited Grassmann to enter a competition to solve a prob-
lem posed by Leibniz: to devise a geometric calculus devoid of coordinates
and metric properties (Leibniz used here the term analysis situs). Grassmann’s
work Geometrische Analyse geknüpft an die von Leibniz erfundene geometrische
Charakteristik (1847) has won (it was the only entry to the competition). On the
other hand Möbius, one of the judges, criticized the way in which Grassmann in-
troduced abstract ideas without giving no intuitions which would help the reader
to understand them.
Convinced of the value of his theory Grassmann planned in the ﬁfties to
write a second volume of the Ausdehnungslehre but he abandoned those plans
and decided to rewrite completely the work from 1844 in an attempt to have its
signiﬁcance recognized. In this way the book Die Ausdehnungslehre. Vollständig
und in strenger Form begründet published in 1862 appeared. In the preface he
wrote7:
I remain completely conﬁdent that the labour I have expanded on the science presented
here and which has demanded a signiﬁcant part of my life as well as the most strenuous
application of my powers, will not be lost. It is true that I am aware that the form which
I have given the science is imperfect and must be imperfect. But I know and feel obliged
to state (though I run the risk of seeming arrogant) that even if this work should again
remain unused for another seventeen years or even longer, without entering into the actual
development of science, still that time will come when it will be brought forth from the dust
of oblivion and when ideas now dormant will bring forth fruit. I know that if I also fail to
gather around me (as I have until now desired in vain) a circle of scholars, whom I could
fructify with these ideas, and whom I could stimulate to develop and enrich them further,
yet there will come a time when these ideas, perhaps in a new form, will arise anew and will
6Quotation after Fearnley-Sander (1979, p. 811).
7Translation after Fearnley-Sander (1979, p. 817).

166
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
enter into a living communication with contemporary developments. For truth is eternal and
divine.
In the introduction Grassmann defended his formal methods – he says that he
is setting up an axiomatic theory (this shows that he was ahead of his time). The
book was written in much better style than the Ausdehnungslehre from 1844 – in
fact the style is similar to the style of modern textbooks. Unfortunately the book
found no better reception than the ﬁrst version. Grassmann failed to convince his
contemporaries of the signiﬁcance and meaning of his theory.
At the beginning of the sixties Grassmann published one more work that
should be mentioned here. We mean his Lehrbuch der Mathematik für höhere
Lehranstalten. Erster Theil: Arithmetik (1861). It is important because the ﬁrst
axiomatic presentation of arithmetic was set out in it. It is worth noticing that
in Euclid’s Elements only geometry was presented in an axiomatic way and no
axioms for the arithmetic were given. Wang says in (1957) that “the application
of the axiomatic method in the development of numbers is not natural” (p. 146).
This can explain why the ﬁrst attempts to axiomatize the arithmetic appeared
so late. On the other hand it is clear that if one wants to have “a systematic
understanding of the domain of number theory, the axiomatic method suggests
itself” (Wang 1957, p. 146).
The introducing of the axiomatic for the arithmetic of natural numbers is usu-
ally associated with the name of Giuseppe Peano. But in fact the priority should
be granted to Grassmann. Peano made extensive use of Grassmann’s work in
his development of the arithmetic in his Arithmetices principia nova methodo
exposita from 1889 (cf. Peano 1889a) what he acknowledges writing explicitly
in the introduction8:
For proofs in arithmetic, I used Grassmann 1861.
Grassmann’s Lehrbuch der Arithmetik was probably the ﬁrst serious attempt
to provide a more or less axiomatic basis for the arithmetic. He dealt not with
natural numbers but with the totality of integers. However his approach can be
reformulated to characterize just natural numbers. Grassmann was probably the
ﬁrst to introduce recursive deﬁnitions for addition and multiplication. He proved
on the basis of those deﬁnitions ordinary laws of arithmetic using mathematical
induction. Unfortunately there are some defects in his presentation. There is, for
example, no mention of the fact that different numbers have different succes-
sors and that 1 is not the successor of any number. There are also no explicitly
given rules of inference. Nevertheless Lehrbuch der Arithmetik shows that – as
Hermann Hankel (1839–1873) said – Grassmann can be seen as the ﬁrst math-
ematician who tried to strictly observe the construction of a theory of quantity
8He referred also to the Dedekind’s work (1888) writing that it “was also most useful”.

Grassmann’s Contribution to Mathematics
167
from a pure theory of forms (Formenlehre). The basis of the method used in this
work can be seen in his Ausdehnungslehre from 1844.
∗∗∗
As mentioned above, Grassmann’s works and ideas did not ﬁnd an appropri-
ate appreciation by the contemporaries and were in fact largely ignored. But his
ideas and methods were so deep that they inspired several mathematicians and
inﬂuenced further developments in mathematics.
Hamilton has mentioned Grassmann and his Ausdehnungslehre in Lectures
on Quaternions from 1853 but this had no further consequences. The only math-
ematician who appreciated Grassmann’s ideas during his lifetime was H. Han-
kel. His work Theorie der complexen Zahlensysteme from 1867 helped to make
Grassmann’s ideas better known – he credited Grassmann’s Ausdehnungslehre
as giving the foundation for his work. Henkel’s Theorie called in 1869 Fe-
lix Klein’s (1849–1925) attention to the work of Grassmann. Klein told about
Grassmann his colleague Alfred Clebsch (1833–1872). Thanks to efforts of Cleb-
sch was Grassmann in 1871 elected to Göttinger Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften.
The ideas of Grassmann have been used and further developed by various
mathematicians, they were inspiration for many investigations. Let us indicate
some of them.
Grassmann’s work Lehrbuch der Mathematik für höhere Lehranstalten. Er-
ster Theil: Arithmetik (1861) was the main source for Ernst Schröder’s (1841–
1902) Lehrbuch der Arithmetik und Algebra published in 1873 in which he con-
sidered seven algebraical operations (adding, multiplying, raising to a power,
subtracting, dividing, extracting the roots and forming the logarithms) and de-
ﬁned (pure) mathematics as the “doctrine of numbers”9 (cf. 1873, p. 2). Its in-
ﬂuence on Peano and his axiomatic development of arithmetic is evident – as
indicated above, Peano acknowledged this inﬂuence in (1889a). It is worth not-
ing here that Peano – what was new – increased in his work the role of logic in
mathematics – more exactly, wished to show how logic could help mathematics.
The inﬂuence of Grassmann’s Ausdehnungslehre was really big. It inspired
Felix Klein and his Erlanger Program. In the latter one ﬁnds repeated references
to Grassmann. It inﬂuenced also Peano’s development of the theory of linear
spaces in his work Calcolo geometrico secondo l’Ausdehnungslehre di H. Graß-
mann preceduto dalle operazioni della logica deduttiva (1888). Peano credited
there Leibniz’, Möbius’ and Grassmann’s work as well as Hamilton’s work on
quaternions as providing ideas which led him to his formal calculus. Peano gave
in this book the basic calculus of set operation and introduced the modern nota-
tion. He also used and indeed popularized some notations of Grassmann. Like
9Notice that for Grassmann mathematics was the “science of the connection of quantities” (cf.
1861, p. 1). Note also that Schröder deﬁned the notion of number without determining what kind of
objects numbers are.

168
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Grassmann he stressed commutativity, distributivity and associativity where ap-
plicable. In Chapter IX Peano gave axioms for a linear space.
Grassmann’s work is indicated as one of the main sources of inspiration by
Walther von Dyck (1856–1934) in his abstract conception of groups. It inspired
also Alfred North Whitehead’s (1861–1947) A Treatise on Universal Algebra
(1898). This book included the ﬁrst systematic exposition in English of the the-
ory of extension and the exterior algebra. Whitehead acknowledged the inﬂuence
of Grassmann writing in (1898, p. 32):
The discussions of this chapter are largely based on the ‘Uebersicht der allgemeinen For-
menlehre’ which forms the introductory chapter to Graßmann’s Ausdehnungslehre from
1844.
The theory of extension led to the development of differential forms and to
the application of such forms to analysis and geometry. Differential geometry
makes use of the exterior algebra developed by Grassmann. He contributed also
to the development of the vector and tensor calculus. His works play also a role
in contemporary mathematical physics (cf. Penrose 2004, Chapters 11 and 12).
As we see, though not appreciated during his life, Hermann Günther Grass-
mann played a very important role – by his original ideas – in the development
of mathematics. As Fearnley-Sanders writes (cf. 1979, p. 816):
All mathematicians stand, as Newton said he did, on the shoulders of giants, but few have
come closer than Hermann Grassmann to creating, single-handedly, a new subject.
Grassmann’s name appeared not only in technical works but has the ﬁrm place
in textbooks in the history of mathematics. It remains also in some technical
terms named after him, in particular: Grassmann number, Grassmann algebra,
Grassmannian, Grassmann’s laws in phonology and optics.

12
GIUSEPPE PEANO AND SYMBOLIC LOGIC1
If we asked an average mathematician with what he associates the name
‘Peano’, he would probably answer: “With two things: axioms for natural num-
bers and with the curve ﬁlling a square”. It sounds rather unsatisfactory when
we compare it with the full attainments and merits of Peano. It shows that his
rôle in the development of mathematics and logic is not well known. This sit-
uation is perhaps a consequence of the fact that many of Peano’s achievements
and ideas have been acquired by mathematicians and are now commonly used.
In such situations one forgets the creator and thinks that all these things existed
from the very beginning and there was no need to discover them. On the other
hand the knowledge about those of Peano’s achievements which are a bit more
known is rather superﬁcial and inadequate.
In this paper I would like to discuss brieﬂy Peano’s scientiﬁc achievements
paying special attention to the rôle he has played in the development of mathe-
matical logic and the foundations of mathematics.
Giuseppe Peano was active and worked in three ﬁelds: analysis, logic and,
in the last period of his life, comparative linguistics and international language
(he has published 216 papers and 15 books, 193 of them were devoted to math-
ematics and logic, 38 to linguistics). Though he is known ﬁrst of all as a pioneer
of symbolic logic and as a creator and propagator of the axiomatic method, he
himself considered as most important his papers devoted to analysis. When he
published in 1915 a list of his publications he supplied it with the following re-
mark: “My papers are devoted mostly to analysis and they proved to be not quite
useless since, in the opinion of some competent persons, they have contributed
to the development of this part of mathematics” (cf. Kennedy 1973a, p. 15).
Talking about “the opinion of some competent persons” G. Peano thought here
1Originally published under the title “Giuseppe Peano – Pioneer and Promoter of Symbolic
Logic”, Komunikaty i Rozprawy Instytutu Matematyki UAM, Pozna´n 1985, 21 pp. Reprinted with
kind permission of Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Adam Mickiewicz University,
Pozna´n.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 169–182. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

170
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
about Enzyklopedie der mathematischen Wissenschaften where A. Pringsheim
quoted two books of Peano among 19 most important papers in analysis since
Euler and Cauchy.
The ﬁrst Peano’s paper in the ﬁeld of analysis was one devoted to the integra-
bility of functions published in 1883. He has introduced there original concepts
of an integral and of an area. In (1885–1886) he has proved the theorem on the
existence of a solution of the ﬁrst-order differential equation y′ = f(x, y) on the
condition that f is continuous. This result was generalized by him in (1890a)
to the case of a system of differential equations (he has used this time another
method). It is worth mentioning that just in this paper we ﬁnd the ﬁrst explicit,
if negative, allusion to the axiom of choice2 (of course Cantor and others were
using this axiom before Peano but they were not conscious of the fact that they
are using the principle which is not quite obvious and needs explanation).
Peano’s contributions to the analysis are not only his original results but
also the fact that he has explained and made precise many concepts which were
used imprecisely – he has done it mainly by providing various counterexamples.
Many such counterexamples can be found already in his book written on the
basis of A. Genocchi’s lectures (Peano was as assistant to and later substitute
for A. Genocchi at the University of Turin) and published under the title Cal-
colo differenziale e principii di calcolo integrale, publicato con aggiunte del Dr.
Giuseppe Peano (1884).
His best known counterexample is the example of a curve ﬁlling a square
given in the paper (1890b). The curve is given by continuous parametric func-
tions x = x(t) and y = y(t) and is such that as t varies throughout the unit interval
I, the graph of the curve includes every point of the unit square I×I. This was the
counterexample to the commonly accepted notion that an arc of a curve given by
continuous parametric functions could be enclosed in an arbitrary small region.3
Peano has published his result without any diagram (to avoid suspicions that his
proof is not complete and contains gaps). His proof was purely analytic. The ﬁrst
graphic representation of Peano’s curve was given by D. Hilbert. Nevertheless
we may suppose that Peano discovered the curve ﬁlling the unit square consid-
ering various diagrams. He was so proud of his discovery that, as H.C. Kennedy
writes in (1973a), “he has one of the curves in the sequence put on the terrace of
his house, in black tiles on white” (p. 13).
Let us turn now to the logical papers of Giuseppe Peano and consider his
contributions to mathematical logic and the foundations of mathematics. As his
2Peano wrote: “However, since one cannot apply inﬁnitely many times an arbitrary law which
one assigns (on fait correspondre) to a class an individual of that class, we have formed here a
deﬁnite law by which, under suitable assumptions, one assigns to every class of a certain system an
individual of that class” (see p. 210).
3S. Mardeši´c showed in (1960, p. 88, Theorem 4) that the only non-degenerate ordered continuum
C which admits a mapping f : C −→C × C being one-one and onto is the real line segment I.

Giuseppe Peano and Symbolic Logic
171
ﬁrst work in this domain one can treat his 20 page introductory chapter to the
book (1888). This chapter is quite independent and has no connections to the fol-
lowing ones. Peano’s considerations are based here on some works of G. Boole,
E. Schröder, C.S. Peirce and others. He notices, and he will repeat it later in
many places, the equivalence of the algebra of sets and of the propositional cal-
culus. Many symbols introduced in this paper will not be used later – they will
be replaced by better and more adequate ones.
Already in this paper we can see that G. Peano set great store by mathemat-
ical symbolism. He considers this problem in many of his papers. The propaga-
tion of a symbolic language in mathematics and the invention of a good symbol-
ism is just one of his greatest merits. The fact that we can read Peano’s papers
so easily today proves among others that many symbols he introduced and used
have been adopted directly or in a slightly modiﬁed form in the language of
modern mathematics and logic.
It is worth mentioning the connections of this activity of Peano with the
program of Leibniz. This program was well known to Peano. He often mentioned
Leibniz’s ideas. He also encouraged one of his students and latter an assistant
G. Vacca to study carefully the manuscripts of Leibniz in Hannover. This was a
fruitful project.
Leibniz, “from his childhood acquainted with the scholastic logic, was en-
chanted by the idea of a method which would reduce all notions used by human
beings to some primitive notions constituting in such a way ‘an alphabet of hu-
man thought’ and form combinations of them in a mechanical way to obtain all
true sentences” (cf. Bourbaki 1960). These dreams and plans were presented by
him in an attempt to design a universal symbolic language called characteris-
tica universalis. It was supposed to be a system of signs fulﬁlling the following
conditions (cf. Scholz 1959):
1. There is a one-one correspondence between the signs of the system (pro-
vided they are not signs of empty places) and thoughts (in the most broad
sense).
2. The signs must be chosen in such a way that if an idea (thought) can be
composed into components then the sign for this idea will have a parallel
decomposition.
3. One must devise a system of rules to operate on the signs such that if an
idea M1 is a logical consequence of an idea M2 then the “picture” of M2
can be interpreted as a consequence of the “picture” of M1.
Leibniz did not succeed in realizing this program. As a partial realization of it
one can consider the notion of a formalized language coming from the twentieth
century (it is only a partial realization because it concerns mainly the language
of mathematics and Leibniz dreamed about a universal language which would
enable us to express in a symbolic way any thought and to analyze any reason-

172
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
ing).4 The history of mathematics and logic, in particular their development in
the 19th and 20th centuries, show how difﬁcult it was to realize this program.
One must mention here works of G. Boole, E. Schröder, G. Frege and of course
G. Peano.
Peano considered the realization of Leibniz’s ideas as a main task of the
mathematical sciences. He has expressed this opinion in many of his papers.
Almost the whole of his activity in the ﬁeld of logic and foundations of mathe-
matics went in this direction.
Leibniz’s characteristica universalis is, as we have shown above, ﬁrst of all
a symbolic language in which one may formulate statements. And, as Peano
claims so often:
symbols represent not words but ideas. Therefore one must use the same symbol whenever
the same idea appears, even if in the colloqual language they were not represented by the
same expression. In this way we establish a one-one correspondence between ideas and
symbols – such a correspondence cannot be found in the colloquial speech. This ideography
is based on theorems of logic discovered since the time of Leibniz. The shape of symbols
can be changed, i.e., one can change some signs representing the basic ideas, but there
cannot exist two essentially different ideographies. (1896–1897, p. 573)
The symbolic language enables us not only to be more precise and clear but it
helps also to understand better some things, it “enables the pupils of a secondary
school to solve easily problems which in the past could be solved only by great
minds as Euclid or Diophantus” – as Peano wrote in (1915, p. 168).5 Just in this
paper Peano gives a historical review of introducing symbols to mathematics
and shows precisely the advantages which it brings: so ﬁrst of all the shortness
of expressions needed to state theorems and proofs, the small number of basic
symbols with the help of which one builds further more complicated expressions
(“in the colloquial language one needs about thousand words to express the log-
ical relations, in the symbolic language of mathematical logic ten symbols are
enough. [...] professor Padoa has reduced this number of necessary symbols to
three” – 1915, p. 169). Further, a symbolism facilitates reasoning, helps even to
obtain new results. Moreover, in some cases the usage of a symbolic language
is simply necessary because we have no suitable expressions in the colloquial
language to state some ideas or constructions (with such a necessity were con-
fronted for example, as Peano writes in (1915), A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell
when they were writing Principia Mathematica – “the greatest work written
completely with the help of symbols” – p. 167).
4It is worth mentioning that Leibniz hoped that characteristica universalis would help in partic-
ular to decide any philosophical problems. He wrote: “And when this will come [i.e., when the idea
of universal language will be realized – R.M.] then two philosophers wanting to decide something
will proceed as two calculators do. It will be enough for them to take pencils, to go to their tablets
and say: ‘Let us calculate!’.” (1875–1890, vol. VII, p. 200)
5Cf. also (1910) where he claims that this method ought to be more widely used in schools, for
it facilitates “the analysis of some difﬁcult mathematical problems” (p. 36).

Giuseppe Peano and Symbolic Logic
173
As we have shown above, the idea of Leibniz’s characteristica universalis
consists not only of a suitable symbolism but also of a method which would
enable us to investigate the relation of logical consequence, to prove theorems
about various mathematical objects on the basis of some axioms ﬁxed at the be-
ginning – hence an axiomatic-deductive method. G. Peano has done very much
also in this domain, particularly in axiomatizing arithmetic and geometry.
We must mention here ﬁrst of all his famous work Arithmetices principia
nova methodo exposita (1889a). This small booklet with a Latin title (to be pre-
cise, almost Latin – the word ‘arithmetices’ is only a transliteration of an appro-
priate Greek word, in Latin it ought to be ‘arithmeticae’), written also in Latin
(more exactly: in latino sine ﬂexione – see below) contains the ﬁrst formulation
of Peano’s postulates for natural numbers.
The work consists of a preface and a proper part. In the preface needed no-
tions are introduced and a symbolism is ﬁxed. G. Peano writes at the beginning:
I have represented by signs all ideas which appear in the foundations of arithmetic. With the
help of this representation all sentences are expressed by signs. Those signs belong either
to logic or to arithmetic. [. . . ] By this notation every sentence become a shape as precise as
an equation in algebra. Having sentences written in such a way we can deduce from them
other sentences – it is done by a process similar to a looking for a solution of an algebraic
equation. This was exactly the aim and the reason for writing this paper. (1889a, p. 3)
It is worth mentioning that it is just in Arithmetices principia that the symbol
ε was used for the ﬁrst time to denote the membership relation as well as the
symbol ⊃to denote inclusion6 (‘a ⊃b’ was read by Peano as: a is included in
b). There is also a remark that those two relations must be strictly distinguished.7
In the preface we ﬁnd also various theorems of the propositional calculus, of the
algebra of classes and of the predicate calculus. The symbolism introduced here
is much better than that which was used by G. Boole and E. Schröder. G. Peano
distinguishes also between the propositional calculus and the algebra of classes
treating them as two different calculi and not as two interpretations of one calcu-
lus. A new and useful notation for the universal quantiﬁer is introduced:8 namely
if a and b are two formulas containing free variables x, y, . . . then Peano writes
a ⊃x,y,... b to denote what we would write today as ∀x∀y . . . (a −→b).
After having introduced the symbolism and after some preliminary remarks
G. Peano begins the proper part of the paper, i.e., the development of arithmetic.
This part is written fully in the symbolic language! He starts from his famous ax-
6The same symbol was used by Peano to denote also a relation between sentences; namely if a
and b are sentences then “a ⊃b” means “b follows from a”. It seems that he did not distinguish yet
implication and logical consequence.
7Except 1-element classes. The distinction between x and {x} appears only in a paper written one
year later, namely in (1890a), p. 192.
8Let us notice that Peano was the ﬁrst who distinguished between free and bounded variables –
he called them, resp., real and apparent variables (cf. Boche´nski 1962, p. 409).

174
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
ioms for natural numbers. The arithmetical primitive notions are the following:
number (N), one (1), successor (x+1) and equality (=). He formulates four iden-
tity axioms (today we treat them as logical axioms) and ﬁve proper arithmetical
ones. In his original notation they look like this:
1 ε N,
a ε N . ⊃. a + 1 ε N,
a, b ε N . ⊃: a = b . = . a + 1 = b + 1,
a ε N. ⊃. a + 1−= 1,
k ε K ... 1 ε k ... x ε N . x ε k : ⊃x . x + 1 ε k : : ⊃. N ⊃k
where K denotes the family of all classes. In the notation used today they would
be written as follows:
1 ∈N,
a ∈N −→a + 1 ∈N,
a, b ∈N −→(a = b ←→a + 1 = b + 1),
a ∈N −→(a + 1  1),
[k ∈K & 1 ∈k & ∀x(x ∈N & x ∈k −→x + 1 ∈k)] −→N ⊂k.
He deduces from these axioms various arithmetical theorems introducing on the
way some new notions.9 He considers not only natural numbers and their arith-
metic but also fractions, reals and even a notion of a limit and some deﬁnitions
from set theory.10
Observe that Peano’s system is not exactly the system which we call today
Peano arithmetic. For the latter is a ﬁrst order system based on the ﬁrst order
predicate calculus and the original system of Peano was not of the ﬁrst order.
It was formulated in a language with sets, classes and the membership relation.
Hence it was a system based on set theory.
It would be good to pay here more attention to the way of deducing theorems
from the axioms used by Peano. It is not a deduction in a today’s sense of the
word. For Peano had in his system no explicitly formulated rules of inference.
Hence there are no formalized proofs. We have simply sequences of formulas
– sequences which we meet in usual, “normal” proofs used in mathematical
practice. This is perhaps a consequence of the fact that Peano was interested in
logic only as in a tool which helps us to order the mathematics and to make it
9It is worth mentioning that Peano uses deﬁnitions by recursion though they do not satisfy the
conditions he put on deﬁnitions – he claims namely that a deﬁnition must be of the form x = a or
α ⊃x = a where α is a certain condition, x is a notion being deﬁned and “a is a set of signs with a
known meaning” (1889a, p. 5). There is also no theorem similar to Theorem 126 from the paper of
R. Dedekind (1888) which would justify deﬁnitions by recursion.
10Peano proved that his axioms for natural numbers are independent in his later paper (1891a).

Giuseppe Peano and Symbolic Logic
175
more clear. He was not interested in logic itself. Hence he was satisﬁed, as all
“normal” mathematicians are, to rely on an intuitive notion of deduction from
the axioms. He did not reduce everything to subtle and precise considerations
of the formal logic where each step of the proof must be based on some rule of
inference ﬁxed at the beginning. Hence the works of Peano were not so valuable
for the logic itself as, for example, subtle and penetrating works of G. Frege,
the German logician living at the same time. But they were very important from
another point of view – namely they showed how to express, how to formulate
mathematical theories in a symbolic language. Peano believed also that this will
help to answer the question: “how to recognize a valid mathematical proof?”.11
The considerations of Peano in Arithmetices principia were based, of course,
on works of his predecessors. He used for example partially the logical symbol-
ism of G. Boole and E. Schröder. In writing down proofs of various theorems
of arithmetic he used some parts of H. Grassmann’s Lehrbuch der Arithmetik
(1861). But the most interesting things are the connections of Peano’s Arith-
metices principia with the work of R. Dedekind Was sind und was sollen die
Zahlen? (1888).
It is not clear whether Peano’s discovery of the axioms for natural numbers
was independent of the work of Dedekind. Peano wrote in Arithmetices prin-
cipia that the Dedekind’s work was “quite useful” for him. This sentence and an-
other one, namely: “The preceding primitive propositions are due to Dedekind”
(1891a, p. 99) serve as a basis for an argumentation that Peano took his axioms
from the work of Dedekind. In this way argue for example J. van Heijenoort
(who writes in (1967, p. 83): “Peano acknowledges that his axioms come from
Dedekind”) and Hao Wang (“It is rather well known through Peano’s own ac-
knowledgement [.. .] that Peano borrowed his axioms from Dedekind [...]”,
Wang 1957, p. 145). On the other hand H.C. Kennedy claims that Peano has ac-
knowledged only in the above sentences Dedekind’s priority of publication (cf.
Kennedy 1972). He cites the words of Peano who wrote in (1896–1899):
The composition of my work of 1889 was still independent of the publication of Dedekind
just mentioned; before it was printed I had moral proof of the independence of the primitive
propositions from which I started, in their substantial coincidence with the deﬁnitions of
Dedekind. Later I succeeded in proving their independence. (p. 76)
In this way H.C. Kennedy (1972, p. 135) comes to the conclusion that:
the reference to Dedekind’s work was added to the preface of Arithmetices principia just
11He wrote: “[. . . ] this question can be given an entirely satisfactory solution. In fact, reducing the
propositions [. . . ] to formulas analogous to algebraic equations and then examining the usual proofs,
we discover that these consists in transformations of propositions and groups of propositions, having
a high degree of analogy with the transformation of simultaneous equations. These transformations,
or logical identities, of which we make constant use in our argument, can be stated and studied.”
(1889b, p. 53).

176
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
before the pamphlet went to press, and we have an explanation of how Dedekind’s work
was “useful”.
Hence the problem of Peano’s or Dedekind’s priority seems to be rather un-
decidable. All we can do in this situation is to compare their sets of axioms for
natural numbers. Axioms of Peano were given above. Dedekind formulated his
axioms in a different language. A set K (Dedekind says: a system K) is called
by him a chain (eine Kette) if and only if there exists a mapping ϕ : K →K such
that ϕ(K) ⊂K, where ϕ(K) is the image of K with respect to ϕ. A chain of an
element a is the intersection of all chains containing a. We denote this chain by
a0. A set S is said to be inﬁnite (unendlich) if and only if there exists a one-one
mapping ϕ : S →S such that ϕ(S ) is a proper subset of S . A set N is said to
be simply inﬁnite (einfach unendlich) if and only if there is a one-one mapping
ϕ : N →N such that there exists an element a ∈N −ϕ(N) with the property
that N is the chain of the element a. In this case the element a will be denoted
by 1 and will be called the basic element (Grundelement) of N. Observe that ϕ
generates an ordering of N. It can be proved that any inﬁnite set S contains (as
a subset) a simply inﬁnite set N. Dedekind writes now (1888, p. 17):
If one studies a simply inﬁnite set N ordered by a mapping ϕ abstracting from its particular
features of its elements and takes into account only the fact that its elements are distinguish-
able and that they are ordered by ϕ, then one calls them natural numbers or ordinal numbers
or simply numbers and the basic element 1 is called the basic number of the sequence
of numbers N (die Grundzahl der Zahlenreihe N). Therefore (the process of abstraction!)
numbers can be called free creation of the human spirit (freie Schöpfung des menschlichen
Geistes).
Regardless of the solution of the problem of Peano’s or Dedekind’s priority
it remains Peano’s merit that he has given the axioms for natural numbers in a
nice, precise and clear form and – this is the most important thing – has shown
how to derive from them theorems of arithmetic.12
At the end of the introduction to Arithmetices principia Peano wrote:
My book ought to be considered as a sample of this new method. Using the notation which
we have introduced one can formulate and prove inﬁnitely many other theorems, in partic-
ular theorems about rational and irrational numbers.
He was convinced that with the help of the introduced symbols, perhaps supple-
mented by some new symbols denoting new primitive notions, one can express
in a clear and precise way theorems of every science.
In his succeeding papers G. Peano successively showed how to apply this
method to mathematics.13 He wrote various papers reducing to a minimum the
12It is interesting how Dedekind obtained his characterization of natural numbers. Some informa-
tion is contained in the very interesting letter of Dedekind to H. Keferstein of 27th February 1890 –
cf. Wang (1957) and Heijenoort (1967).
13Peano attempted also to treat logic according to the symbolic and axiomatic method. Cf. his

Giuseppe Peano and Symbolic Logic
177
usage of colloquial language. One should mention here the monograph I prin-
cipii di geometria logicamente esposti (1889b) – hence published in the same
year as Arithmetices principia. He used here logical and arithmetical symbols
and some additional special geometrical symbols. His system of geometry is
based on two primitive notions, namely on the notions of point and of interval. It
is similar to the approach of Pasch. Geometry is just the second domain of math-
ematics where Peano successfully applied his symbolic-axiomatic method. In-
vestigating the foundations of geometry G. Peano popularized the vector method
of H. Grassmann and brought it to the perfection. In this way he gave also a cer-
tain impulse to the Italian school of vector analysis.
The idea of presenting mathematics in the framework of an artiﬁcial sym-
bolic language and of deriving then all theorems from some fundamental axioms
was also the basic idea of Peano’s famous project “Formulario”. It was pro-
claimed in 1892 in the journal Rivista di Matematica. This journal was founded
by Peano in 1892 and here his main logical papers and papers of his students
were published. The aim of this project was to publish all known mathemat-
ical theorems. This plan was to be carried out using, of course, the symbolic
language introduced by Peano. A special journal Formulario Mathematico was
founded to publish the results of this project.14 It was edited by Peano and his
collaborators: Vailati, Castellano, Burali-Forti, Giudice, Vivanti, Betazzi, Fano
and others. Five volumes appeared: Introduction 1894, vol. I – 1895, vol. II –
1897–1899,15 vol. III – 1901, vol. IV – 1903, vol. V – 1908. The last volume
contained about 4200 theorems! Peano even bought a small printing ofﬁce (in
1898 from Faá di Bruno for 407 lira) and studied the art of printing. One of the
results of the project was a further simpliﬁcation of the mathematical symbol-
ism. Peano treated “Formulario” as a fulﬁlment of Leibniz’s ideas.16 He hoped
that it will be widely used by professors and students. He himself immediately
began to use it in his classes. But the response was very weak. One reason was
the fact that almost everything was written there in symbols, the other was the
usage of Latino sine ﬂexione for explanations and commentaries (instead of, for
example, French).
The most striking and remarkable feature of Peano’s symbolism is exactly its
simplicity. Just for this reason it has been accepted by almost all mathematicians
and became a common property. It was a result of Peano’s genius. One can see
it easily by comparing his symbolism with the symbolism of G. Frege. Works of
paper (1891b) which contains an analysis of the propositional calculus based on 4 primitive notions
and 12 axioms.
14More exactly the ﬁrst three volumes were published under the title Formulaire de Mathéma-
tiques, the forth one was titled Formulaire Mathématique (they were written in French) and the ﬁfth
volume (written in Latino sine ﬂexione – see below) – Formulario Mathematico.
15Vol. II was published in three parts, resp., in 1897, 1898 and 1899.
16He wrote: “After two centuries, this ‘dream’ of the inventor of the inﬁnitesimal calculus has
become a reality [. . . ]. We now have the solution to the problem proposed by Leibniz.” (1915, p. 168)

178
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Frege, though deeper, more systematic and precise were unknown during a long
time just because they were written in a very complicated and “hard” symbol-
ism.17 The superiority of Peano’s symbolism follows, among other things, from
the fact that it is linear as are the common writing and colloquial speech. Ac-
cording to Frege ﬂat (two-dimensional) pictures had to be drawn. Fore example
the implication “if a then b” was written by Peano as: a ⊃b, while Frege wrote:
b
a
In the case of a double implication “if a then if b then c” the notation by Peano
and Frege was, resp., the following:
a .⊃b⊃c,
and
c
b
a
(A point denotes here a parenthesis. Peano used a whole system of points as
parentheses – there is some analogy with the notation proposed by Leibniz.)
To be frank we must say that the idea of presenting the whole of mathematics
in an artiﬁcial symbolic language was not easily accepted by all mathematicians,
logicians and philosophers. There was certain resistance. There is known, for ex-
ample, the disdain of the great French mathematician Henri Poincaré. He wrote:
The essential part of this language consists of some algebraic symbols denoting connec-
tives: if, and, or. Maybe they are useful, but if they will help to renew the whole philosophy
is another question. It is hard to suppose that the word “if” as written in the form ⊃gains
some new power. This invention of Peano was called in former times a pasigraphy, i.e.,
the art of writing a mathematical treatise using no word of the colloquial language. This
name indicates very well the applicability of this art. Later on it became more digniﬁed by
being called logistic. This word is used in Military Schools to denote the art of guiding and
placing apart the army in the camp (in French: maréchal des logis); it is clear that the new
logistic had nothing to do with that, that the new name claims to do a “revolution in logic”.
(1908, pp. 166–167)
17It is worth noting here that Peano was one of the few before 1900 who gave serious recognition
to Frege’s work. They corresponded, sent each other copies of their papers, exchanged comments
and remarks on them. Their aims in creating an ideography were distinct. Frege was more interested
in investigations into the foundations of mathematics whereas Peano wished to create a symbolism
which will help to express mathematical theories. Frege has admitted that Peano’s symbolism was
easier for the typesetter and that it often took less room but simultaneously has written that “the
convenience of the typesetter is not the highest good” (cf. 1976, p. 246).

Giuseppe Peano and Symbolic Logic
179
We have stated that Peano was interested in logic only as a tool to investigate
mathematics and to order it and make it more clear according to the axiomatic-
deductive method. As a consequence almost all his logical papers contain many
examples of applications of logical methods in various parts of mathematics.
On the other hand this restriction has caused that his results in logic are not so
deep as, for example, the results of Frege whom we have mentioned already.
Nevertheless his inﬂuence on the development of mathematical logic was great.
In the last decade of the 19th century Peano and his school played ﬁrst ﬁddle.
Later the center was moved to England where Bertrand Russell was active – but
Peano played also here an important rôle. Russell met Peano at the International
Philosophical Congress in Paris in August 1900 and this meeting was described
then in his Autobiography as “a turning point in my intellectual life” (1967,
p. 178).18
Working on the project “Formulario” Peano paid great attention to deﬁni-
tions of new notions in terms of primitive notions. This was the reason of his
great interest in the problem of deﬁnitions. Between 1911 and 1915 Peano wrote
six papers having the word “deﬁnition” in the title. The paper (1921) contains
the basic rules and principles of deﬁning new concepts in mathematics which
were accepted by Peano. He states here ﬁrst of all that every deﬁnition should be
an equation or an equivalence (and that this rule can be found already by Aris-
totle), all deﬁnitions in mathematics ought to be nominal; Aristotle’s principle
“per genus proximum et differentiam speciﬁcam” is not applicable to them. He
writes, referring to Aristotle again, that the object which is being deﬁned has not
necessarily to exist. The condition of homogeneity of deﬁnitions is also formu-
lated – it says that deﬁniendum and deﬁniens must contain the same free vari-
ables. Deﬁnitions are useful though not necessary because deﬁniendum can be
always replaced by deﬁniens. Moreover, this elimination procedure gives a cri-
terion, coming already from Aristotle, of the usefulness of a deﬁnition: “if after
the elimination of deﬁniendum the expression is not longer and more compli-
18Russell (1967) wrote: “The Congress was a turning point in my intellectual life, because I met
there Peano. I already knew him by name and had seen some of his work, but had not taken the trou-
ble to master his notation. In discussions at the Congress I observed that he was always more precise
than anyone else, and that he invariably got the better of any argument upon which he embarked.
As the days went by, I decided that this must be owing to his mathematical logic. I therefore got
him to give me all his works, and as soon as the Congress was over I retired to Fernhurst to study
quietly every word written by him and his disciples. It became clear to me that his notation afforded
an instrument of logical analysis such as I had been asking for years, and that by studying him I was
acquiring a new and powerful techniques for the work I had long wanted to do.” (p. 178–179)
In 1912 B. Russell wrote in a letter to Jourdin (cf. Kennedy 1973b, p. 369): “Until I got hold of
Peano, it had never struck me that Symbolic Logic would be any use for the Principles of math-
ematics, because I knew the Boolean stuff and found it useless. It was Peano’s, together with the
discovery that relations could be ﬁtted into his system, that led me to adopt symbolic logic.”
It was also through Peano that Russell learned of Frege and his works – cf. Kennedy (1973b,
p. 370).

180
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
cated as it was before then there was in fact no need to introduce this deﬁnition”
(1921, 184).
Considering G. Peano’s logical works one cannot forget his interest in the
linguistics and in a project of an international language. His ﬁrst papers devoted
to this subject appeared in 1903. After 1908, when he was elected the presi-
dent of the Academy Volapük, called later Academia pro Interlingua, he devoted
himself completely to it.
Peano’s linguistic investigations grew out of his work in logic, especially
from his interests in mathematical and logical symbolism. They are also con-
nected with some ideas of Leibniz – in particular with characteristica univer-
salis. Peano has called the language which he created latino sine ﬂexione (Latin
without inﬂection). Its most striking feature is just the reduction of grammatical
rules to a minimum. It could be brieﬂy characterized as follows:
1. Every word which is common to European languages is accepted (this
postulate seems to be a bit imprecise and in fact it was understood in vari-
ous ways even by Peano – once (in 1915) he said that the whole vocabulary
of the new language must come from Latin, later (in 1927) he wrote that
the vocabularies of English, French, Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, German
and Russian must be accepted).
2. Every international word coming from Latin is given in a form of its Latin
root.
3. Plural is built by adding the ending -s.
4. Essentially only roots are used, there are almost no endings (except the
ending -s in plural); cases are built with the help of prepositions: de, ad,
pro, ab, in, etc.; there are no genders, no articles, there is no compliance
in number (singular and plural), case, person or gender; there is no conju-
gation – tenses and moods are described with the help of words: si, que,
ut, jam, etc.
In 1915 G. Peano published Vocabulario commune ad latino-italiano-fran-
çais-english-deutsch which was an important and signiﬁcant step in creating the
new language.
G. Peano did not claim that this language will replace national ones. That
was not the purpose. His aim was to build a language which could help in com-
municating in the international area. G. Peano himself wrote many mathematical
and lingustic papers in this language. As a sample of it let us quote a fragment of
Peano’s commentary concerning the foundations of arithmetic (cf. 1901, p. 27 –
we quote after Kneale 1962, pp. 473–474):
Quaestio si nos pote deﬁni N0 signiﬁca si nos pote scribe aequalitate de forma
N0 = expressione composito per signos noto, ∪, ∩, −, . . . , ı,
quod non es facile. Ergo nos sume tres idea N0, o, + ut idea primitivo per que nos deﬁni omni

Giuseppe Peano and Symbolic Logic
181
symbolo de Arithmetica. Nos determinata valore de symbolo non deﬁnito per systema de
proposito primitivo sequente.
The attempts to realize the idea of an interlingua failed. The lack of a precise
criterion which part of Latin and of other languages has to be adopted and which
part has to be rejected caused the existence of many “dialects” of it. They were
very different and it was difﬁcult to unify them. This was the reason that the lan-
guage was rejected even by its enthusiastic adherents. In the late forties A. Gode,
supported by the International Auxiliary Language Association, changed a bit
the idea of an interlingua and made it a bit more alive. He promoted it as a lan-
guage which is very useful in communication especially among scientists. But
the results of this activity are rather mediocre.
∗∗∗
Coming to conclusions, we see that Giuseppe Peano has played a great rôle
in the development of mathematical logic and the foundations of mathematics
– greater than one could judge taking into account how much attention is paid
to him in books devoted to the history of logic (cf. Boche´nski 1962 and Kneale
1962). The main idea which one can spot in his papers and which has directed
his whole activity was the demand for clarity and precision. Realizing this idea
he proposed a good and useful symbolism to be used in mathematics. How good
it was is proved by the fact that it has been adopted almost without changes
by modern mathematics. Peano has shown by many examples how to express
mathematics in the framework of this symbolic language. To clarify and to order
mathematical knowledge he promoted the axiomatic-deductive method (using
his symbolic language) and showed by many examples how to apply it in par-
ticular parts of mathematics (arithmetic, geometry). Logic was for him a tool
which helps to clarify and to make more precise mathematical reasonings. The
usage of a symbolism ought to help us to see better the logical connections and
interrelations between particular sentences in arguments and to analyze the re-
lation of logical consequence. It is worth noting that Peano made no attempts to
found mathematics on any discipline. As a consequence he has denied the va-
lidity of Russell’s logicism, i.e., the reduction of mathematics to logic. He was
interested only in reducing a given mathematical theory to a minimal number
of axioms expressed in a language with the minimal number of primitive terms
from which other theorems can be derived and other notions of the theory can
be deﬁned. Peano was also not a formalist in the sense of Hilbert. He believed
that mathematics can be and ought to be based on experience.19
19Peano wrote in the paper (1906): “But a proof that a system of postulates for arithmetic, or for
geometry, does not involve a contradiction, is not, according to me, necessary. For we do not create
postulates at will, but we assume as postulates the simplest propositions that are written, explicitly or
implicitly, in every text of arithmetic or geometry. Our analysis of the principles of these sciences is a

182
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Taking into account the further development of mathematical logic and the
foundations of mathematics we can surely call Giuseppe Peano the pioneer and
promoter of symbolic logic.
reduction of the ordinary afﬁrmations to a minimum number, that which is necessary and sufﬁcient.
The system of postulates for arithmetic and geometry is satisﬁed by the ideas of number and point
that every writer of arithmetic and geometry has. We think number, therefore number exists.
“A proof of consistency of a system of postulates can be useful, if the postulates are hypothetical
and do not correspond to real facts” (p. 364).
In 1923 Peano wrote (cf. Kennedy 1973a, p. 17): “Mathematics has a place between logic and
experimental sciences.”

13
E.L. POST AND THE DEVELOPMENT OF LOGIC1
In the paper the contribution of Emil L. Post (1897–1954) to mathematical
logic and recursion theory will be considered. In particular we shall study: (1)
the signiﬁcance of the results of his doctoral dissertation for the development
of the metamathematical studies of propositional calculus, (2) the signiﬁcance
of his studies on canonical systems for the theory of formal languages as well
as for the foundations of computation theory, (3) his anticipation of Gödel’s
and Church’s results on incompleteness and undecidability, (4) his results on the
undecidabiity of various algebraic formal systems and ﬁnally (5) his contribution
to establishing and to the development of recursion theory as an independent
domain of the foundations of mathematics. At the end some remarks on the
philosophical and methodological background of his results will be made.
1. Post’s Doctoral Dissertation
Most of scientiﬁc papers by Emil Leon Post were devoted to mathematical logic
and to the foundations of mathematics.2
His ﬁrst paper in logic was the doctoral dissertation from 1920 published
in 1921 in American Journal of Mathematics under the title “Introduction to a
General Theory of Elementary Propositions” (cf. Post 1921). It was written un-
der the inﬂuence of A.N. Whitehead’s and B. Russell’s Principia Mathematica
(cf. 1910–1913) on the one hand (Post participated in a seminar led by Keyser
at Columbia University devoted to Principia) and A Survey of Symbolic Logic
1Originally published under the title “E.L. Post and the Development of Mathematical Logic and
Recursion Theory”, Studies in Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric 2 (15) (1998), 17–30. Reprinted with
kind permission of Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu w Białymstoku (Publishing House of the University
in Białystok).
2Post published 14 papers and 19 abstracts (one of the papers was published after his death):
4 papers and 8 abstracts were devoted to algebra and analysis and 10 papers and 11 abstracts to
mathematical logic and foundations of mathematics.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 183–193. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

184
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
by C.I. Lewis (1918). Post’s doctoral dissertation contained the ﬁrst metamathe-
matical results concerning a system of logic. In particular Post isolated the part
of Principia called today the propositional calculus, introduced the truth table
method and showed that the system of axioms for the propositional calculus
given by Whitehead and Russell is complete, consistent and decidable (in fact
Post spoke about the ﬁniteness problem instead of decidability). He also proved
that this system is complete in the sense called today after him, i.e., that if one
adds to this system an unprovable formula as a new axiom then the extended
system will be inconsistent. It is worth mentioning here that the completeness,
the consistency and the independence of the axioms of the propositional calculus
of Prinicipia was proved by Paul Bernays in his Habilitationsschrift in 1918 but
this result has not been published until 1926 (cf. Bernays 1926) and Post did not
know it.
In Post’s dissertation one ﬁnds also an idea of many-valued logics obtained
by generalizing the 2-valued truth table to m-valued truth tables (m ⩾2). Post
proposed also a general method of studying systems of logic (treated as systems
for inferences) by ﬁnitary symbol manipulations (later he called such systems
canonical systems of the type A) – hence he considered formal logical systems
as combinatorial systems.
In his doctoral dissertation Post mentioned also his studies of systems of 2-
valued truth functions closed under superposition. In particular he showed that
every truth function is deﬁnable in terms of negation and disjunction.
Those latter considerations were developed in the monograph The Two-Valu-
ed Iterative Systems of Mathematical Logic from 1941 (cf. Post 1941). One ﬁnds
there among others the result called today Post’s Functional Completeness Theo-
rem. It gives a sufﬁcient and necessary condition for a set of 2-valued truth func-
tions to be complete, i.e., to have he property that any 2-valued truth function is
deﬁnable in terms of it. Post distinguished ﬁve properties of truth functions. His
theorem says that a given set X of truth functions is complete if and only if for
every of those ﬁve properties there exists in X a truth function which does not
have it. Did Post prove this theorem? In Post (1941) one ﬁnds no proof satisfying
the standards accepted today. The reason for that was Post’s baroque notation (it
was in fact an unprecise adaptation of the imprecise notation of Jevons from his
Pure Logic, cf. Jevons 1864), other reason was the fact that Post seemed to be
simultaneously pursuing several different topics. The proof of Post’s theorem
satisfying today’s standards can be found in the paper by Pelletier and Martin
(1990).
2. Canonical Systems
During a year stay at Princeton University 1920–21 (he was awarded the post-
doctoral Procter Fellowship) Post studied mainly canonical systems. Those sys-

E.L. Post and the Development of Logic
185
tems founded the theory of formal languages. Post’s results in this ﬁeld were the
anticipation of famous results by Gödel and Church on the incompleteness and
undecidability of ﬁrst-order logic.
The investigations mentioned above were connected with the following ideas:
the whole Principia Mathematica can be considered as a canonical system of
type A, i.e., as a system of signs in an alphabet which can be manipulated ac-
cording to a given set of rules. Post wanted to solve the decision problem (in
his terminology: the ﬁniteness problem) for canonical systems of type A. In his
way he wanted to ﬁnd a method which would decide for any given formula of
the system of Principia whether it is formally provable in it or not. Since Prin-
cipia are a formalization of the whole of mathematics, this method would give a
decision procedure for the whole of mathematics.
Besides canonical systems of type A Post introduced systems of type B and
C. Just the latter are known today as Post’s production systems. Let us deﬁne
them using the contemporary terminology and notation.
Let Σ be a ﬁnite alphabet. Its elements are called terminals. One uses also
non-terminal symbols P.. A canonical production has the form:
g11
Pi′
1
g12
Pi′
2
. . .
g1m1
Pi′
m1
g1(m1+1)
g21
Pi′′
1
g22
Pi′′
2
. . . g2m2
Pi′′
m2
g2(m2+1)
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .
gk1
Pi(k)
1
gk2
Pi(k)
2
. . .
gkmk
Pi(k)
mk
gk(mk+1)
⇓
g1
Pi1
g2
Pi2
. . .
gm
Pim
gm+1
where gk are strings on the alphabet Σ, Pk are variable strings (non-terminals)
and each of the P’s in the line following the ⇓also occurs as one of the P’s
above ⇓. A system in canonical form of type C consists of a ﬁnite set of strings
(Post called them initial assertions) together with a ﬁnite set of canonical pro-
ductions. It generates of course a subset of Σ∗(= the set of all ﬁnite strings over
Σ) which can be obtained from the initial assertions by the iterations of canonical
productions. Today it is known that such sets are exactly recursively enumerable
languages.
Post proved the equivalence of canonical systems of type A, B and C. He also
showed that this part of Principia which corresponds to the ﬁrst-order predicate
calculus can be formalized as a canonical system of type B and consequently also
of type C. Moreover the set of all provable formulas of the system of Principia
can be regarded as a set of strings of symbols which can be generated by certain
canonical system of type C.
Post proved also the important Normal Form Theorem for canonical systems
of type C. Let us say that a canonical system of type C is normal if and only if it
has exactly one initial assertion and each of its productions has the form
gP =⇒Pg.

186
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
A set of strings U ⊆Σ∗is said to be normal if and only if there exists a normal
system on an alphabet ∆containing Σ and generating a set N such that U =
N ∩Σ∗. Post’s Normal Form Theorem says now that if U ⊆Σ∗is a set of strings
generated by some canonical system of type C then U is normal – a proof can
be found in (1943) and (1965).
One of the consequences of Normal Form Theorem is that a decision proce-
dure for canonical systems of type C would induce a decision procedure for the
whole system of Principia.
Post started his researches in this direction by considering normal systems of
a special form, so-called tag systems. Tag systems are normal systems in which
all g’s in production rules are of the same length (but not necessarily the g’s) and
g’s depend only on the ﬁrst symbol of the appropriate string g. In particular Post
started by studying the following simple system:
agP =⇒Paa,
bgP =⇒Pbbab,
where g ∈{a, b}∗and |g| = 2. This case turned out to be difﬁcult (the question
whether such systems are decidable is open till today).
Post supposed that tag systems are recursively undecidable. This was proved
by M. Minsky in (1961).
Note that the procedure of generating expressions by a canonical system of
type C is similar to the process of generating computable functions from certain
given initial functions by iterations of certain given operations on functions.3
Hence those systems can be regarded as a formalism making precise the intu-
itive notion of effective computability. Consequently one can formulate a thesis
analogous to Church’s thesis and called Post’s thesis which says that any ﬁnitely
given language is generated by rules of some canonical normal system.
An application of Cantor’s diagonal method led Post to the conclusion that
the decision problem for normal systems has a negative solution. In 1921 Post
sketched a formal proof of this. He wrote in (1965, pp. 421–422):
We [. . . ] conclude that the ﬁniteness problem for the class of all normal systems is unsolv-
able, that is, there is no ﬁnite method which would uniformly enable us to tell of an arbitrary
normal system and arbitrary sequence on the letters thereof whether that sequence is or is
not generated by the operations of the system from the primitive sequence of the system.
Those considerations led him also to the conclusion about the incompleteness,
i.e., to the conclusion that (cf. Post 1943):
not only was every (ﬁnitary) symbolic logic incomplete relative to a certain ﬁxed class of
propositions [. . . ] but that every such logic was extendable relative to that class of propo-
sitions. (p. 215)
3It was shown later that the deﬁnition of effective computability by Post’s canonical systems is
equivalent to the deﬁnitions in the language of λ-deﬁnability, of recursive functions or by Turing
machines.

E.L. Post and the Development of Logic
187
In (1943) he also wrote:
No normal-deductive-system is equivalent to the complete logical system (if such there be);
better, given any normal-deductive-system there exists another which second proves more
theorems (to put it roughly) than the ﬁrst. (p. 200)
And he added
A complete symbolic logic is impossible. (p. 215)
Those results anticipated results by Gödel and Church on the incomplete-
ness and undecidability of systems of ﬁrst-order logic (cf. Gödel 1931a; Church
1936a and 1936b). Post knew of course that his results are, as he wrote, “frag-
mentary”. He never published them (though in 1941, hence already after the
publication of Gödel’s and Church’s results) he tried to publish results of his
investigations from 1920–1921).
What was his reaction to the appearance of the Gödel’s paper (1931a)? On
the one hand he was disappointed that not his name will be connected with re-
sults he anticipated and on the other he admired the genius and contribution of
Gödel. In a postcard to Gödel sent on 19th October 1938 Post wrote (cf. Davis
1994, p. xvii):
I am afraid that I took advantage of you on this, I hope but our ﬁrst meeting. But for ﬁf-
teen years I had carried around the thought of astounding the mathematical world with my
unorthodox ideas, and meeting the man chieﬂy responsible for the vanishing of that dream
rather carried me away.
Since you seemed interested in my way of arriving at these new developments perhaps
Church can show you a long letter I wrote to him about them. As for any claims I might
make perhaps the best I can say is that I would have proved Gödel’s Theorem in 1921 – had
I been Gödel.
And in the letter to Gödel from 30th October 1938 he wrote (cf. Davis 1994,
p. xvii):
[. . . ] after all it is not ideas but the execution of ideas that constitute a mark of greatness.
Considering decidability problem one should mention Post’s contribution
to making precise the notion of effective computability. Post was of the opin-
ion that Herbrand-Gödel’s and Church-Kleene’s deﬁnitions were both lacking
in that neither constituted a “fundamental” analysis of the notion of algorithmic
process. In (1936) he proposed a deﬁnition based on the operations of marking
an empty box and erasing the mark in a marked box. Note the similarity with the
deﬁnition given at the same time by A. Turing (1936–1937). The difference be-
tween both approaches consists is that Turing formulated his deﬁnition in terms
of an idealized computer while Post in terms of a program (a list of instructions
written in a given language).

188
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
At the beginning of the forties Post wrote a paper in which he tried to de-
scribe his studies on the incompleteness and undecidability from 1920–1921 an-
ticipating Gödel’s and Church’s results. It is the paper “Absolutely Unsolvable
Problems and Relatively Undecidable Propositions – Account of an Anticipa-
tion”. It was submitted in 1941 to American Journal of Mathematics. In a letter
to H. Weyl accompanying the manuscript Post explained why he did not publish
his results twenty years earlier and wants to do it now, i.e., after the publica-
tions by Gödel and Church. Among reasons he mentions problems he had with
publishing his earlier papers (in particular (1921 and (1941)) which did not ﬁnd
a recognition and appreciation by mathematicians as well as the problems with
the health which delayed the preparation of full detailed proofs. Though the ed-
itors appreciated the signiﬁcance of Post’s investigations and results, the paper
has been rejected. Communicating this decision H. Weyl wrote in a letter to Post
from 2nd March 1942 (cf. Davis 1994, p. xix):
[. . . ] I have little doubt that twenty years ago your work, partly because of its then revolu-
tionary character, did not ﬁnd its due recognition. However, we cannot turn the clock back;
in the meantime Gödel, Church and others have done what they have done, and the Ameri-
can Journal is no place for historical accounts; [. . . ]. (Personally, you may be comforted by
the certainty that most of the leading logicians, at least in this country, know in a general
way of your anticipation.)
Only a small part of Post’s paper has been published, i.e., the part containing
his Normal Form Theorem (cf. Post 1943). The full version of the paper “Abso-
lutely Unsolvable Problems and Relatively Undecidable Propositions – Account
of an Anticipation” was published posthumously in Davis’ book The Undecid-
able (1965).
3. Recursion Theory
Main Post’s results which found the recognition and appreciation belong to the
recursion theory. They were of course connected with his investigations de-
scribed above.
Considering Post’s results in the recursion theory one must tell ﬁrst of all
about his paper “Recursively Enumerable Sets of Positive Integers and Their
Decision Problems” (1944). It turned out to be the most inﬂuential of his pub-
lications and fundamental for the whole recursion theory. Recursion theory was
for the ﬁrst time presented in it as an autonomous branch of mathematics.
One ﬁnds there:
• a theorem called today Post’s Theorem and stating that a set X is re-

E.L. Post and the Development of Logic
189
cursive if and only if the set X and its complement −X are recursively
enumerable,4
• a theorem stating that (a) any inﬁnite recursively enumerable set has an
inﬁnite recursive subset and (b) there exists a recursively enumerable set
which is not recursive.
Main subject of the considered paper is the mutual reducibility of recursively
enumerable sets. Recall that a set X is said to be many-one reducible to a set Y
if and only if there exists a recursive function f such that
x ∈X ≡f(x) ∈Y.
If the function f is one-one then we say about one-one reducibility.
Post proved the existence of a recursively enumerable set K which is com-
plete with respect to many-one (one-one) reducibility, i.e., such that any recur-
sively enumerable set X is many-one (one-one) reducible to K. Hence K has a
maximal degree of unsolvability with respect to many-one (one-one) reducibil-
ity. Post constructed also a recursively enumerable set which is simple, i.e., has
the property that there exists no inﬁnite recursively enumerable subset of its
complement. Such a set cannot be of a maximal degree with respect to one-one
reducibility. This led Post to the formulation of the following problem called to-
day Post’s problem: does there exist a recursively enumerable but not recursive
set of a degree lower than the degree of the complete set K with respect to a
given type of reducibility?
Post did not succeed in solving this problem. Though he proved in (1948)
the existence of sets of a degree lower than the degree of the set K but those sets
were not recursively enumerable.
Post’s problem was solved independently by A.A. Muchnik (1956) and R.
Friedberg (1957) by a new method introduced by them – and called the priority
method. This method proved later to be really fruitful – many results in the
recursion theory, in particular in the theory of degrees, have been obtained by it.
They showed that there exist two recursively enumerable sets A and B such that
A is not recursive in B and B is not recursive in A.
As a consequence one obtains that degrees of unsolvability (even the degrees
of recursively enumerable sets) are not linearly ordered and that there are recur-
sively enumerable degrees other than the degree of recursive sets and the degree
of the complete set (sets A and B constructed by Friedberg and Muchnik are
examples of such sets).
Discussing here Post’s paper “Recursively Enumerable Sets of Positive In-
tegers and Their Decision Problems” one should mention the way in which Post
presented his results in it. This way became a norm and a standard in the recur-
sion theory. It consisted in giving rather informal proofs with a description of
4Recall that a set X is recursively enumerable if and only if there exists a recursive function f such
that X is the image of f if and only if there exists a recursive relation R such that x ∈X ≡∃yR(x, y).

190
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
intuitions. Post saw the need of providing formal proofs but on the other hand
he wrote:
[. . . ] the real mathematics involved must lie in the informal development. For in every
instance the informal “proof” was ﬁrst obtained; and once gotten, transforming it into the
formal proof turned out to be a routine chore. (1944, p. 284)
The considered paper had important long-term effects. It was the beginning
of extensive studies of recursively enumerable sets, in particular of various types
of reducibility. Here one can also see the source of such important notion as
polynomial time reducibility or of studies connected with NP–completeness.
Post continued his studies of degrees of unsolvability in the paper “Degrees
of Recursive Unsolvability (Preliminary Report)” (1948) where he generalized
the notion of a degree to the case of any sets (not necessarily recursively enu-
merable) and proved the existence of a pair of incomparable degrees (both were
lower than the degree of the complete recursively enumerable set K). He an-
nounced also a theorem (called today Post’s theorem) stating that a set X is
recursive in a set A ∈Σ0
n(Π0
n) if and only if X is a ∆0
n+1 set.
One should also mention here the joint paper by Post with S.C. Kleene “The
upper semi-lattice of degrees of recursive unsolvability” (cf. Kleene-Post 1954).
One ﬁnds there among others a theorem stating that the ordered set of degrees
of unsolvability contains a densely ordered subset.
4. Undecidability of Algebraic Combinatorial Systems
Discussing Post’s contribution to the recursion theory one should say about
his results on undecidability of algebraic combinatorial systems. They provided
“mathematical” examples of undecidable problems.
Let us start with the correspondence problem. It can be formulated as fol-
lows. A correspondence system is a ﬁnite set of ordered pairs (g1, h1), (g2, h2),
..., (gn, hn) such that gi, hi ∈Σ∗, Σ a given ﬁnite alphabet. Such a system is said
to be solvable if there exists a sequence i1, i2, . . . , ik such that 1 ⩽i1, i2, . . . , ik ⩽n
and
gi1gi2 . . . gik = hi1hi2 . . . hik.
The correspondence problem is to provide an algorithm for determining of a
given correspondence system whether it is solvable or not. Post proved in the
paper “A Variant of a Recursively Unsolvable Problem” (1946) that such an
algorithm does not exist, hence the correspondence problem is not recursively
solvable. This result plays an important role in the theory of formal languages.
Church suggested to Post to study also the decidability problem for Thue’s
systems known also as the word problem for monoids or semi-groups. It was
formulated by the Norwegian mathematician Axel Thue in 1914 and can be

E.L. Post and the Development of Logic
191
formulated as follows: Let Σ be a ﬁnite alphabet. Deﬁne an equivalence relation
≈in Σ∗by giving a ﬁnite set of pairs of words for which this equivalence holds,
i.e., by putting
u1 ≈v1, u2 ≈v2, . . . , un ≈vn,
and closing this under the substitution of vi for ui (i = 1, . . . , n). The prob-
lem consists now in providing an algorithm for determining of an arbitrary pair
(u, v) ∈Σ∗× Σ∗of strings whether or not u ≈v. In the paper “Recursive Un-
solvability of a Problem of Thue” (1947) Post gave an example of a set of initial
pairs deﬁning an equivalence relation ≈for which the word problem is unsolv-
able. In the proof Post used Turing machines (in fact he showed that the theory
of Turing machines can be interpreted in terms of the word problem in such a
way that an algorithm for the latter could be transformed into an algorithm for a
problem concerning Turing machines known to be unsolvable). Post also gave a
very careful technical critique of Turing’s paper (1936–1937).
It is worth adding that the recursive unsolvability of the word problem was
established independently by A.A. Markov in (1947) who based his proof on
Post’s normal systems.
5. Post’s Philosophical and Methodological Ideas
Discussing the works and results of Post in the ﬁeld of mathematical logic and
recursion theory one should consider their philosophical and methodological
background.
Like Gödel Post emphasized the signiﬁcance of the absoluteness and the
fundamental character of the notion of recursive solvability. He attempted also
to explain the notion of provability – more exactly, he wanted to ﬁnd a precise
notion which would explain the intuitive notion of provability in arithmetic in
such a way as the notion of recursiveness explains the notion of effective com-
putability and solvability. He hoped that this will enable us to ﬁnd absolutely
undecidable arithmetical propositions. Later (before the death) he added to this
also the problem of providing an absolute explication and explanation of the
general mathematical notion of deﬁnability (he was convinced that this should
be done even before giving the absolute explication of the notion of provability).
Post emphasized (cf. 1965, p. 64):
I study Mathematics as a product of the human mind and not as absolute.
He was convinced that mathematical thinking is in fact creative. He wrote in
(1965, p. 4):
[. . . ] mathematical thinking is, and must be, essentially creative.

192
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
He thought also that the human capacity to know cannot be closed and reduced
to a formal system. And added (cf. 1965, p. 4):
[. . . ] creativeness of human mathematics has a counterpart inescapable limitations thereof
– witness the absolutely unsolvable (combinatory) problems.
On the other hand he was convinced that the results on the undecidability and
incompleteness indicate that human capacity to know with respect to mathemat-
ics are in fact bounded in spite of the creativeness of the mathematical thinking.
He wrote in (1965, p. 56):
The unsolvability of the ﬁniteness problem for all normal systems, and the essential incom-
pleteness of all symbolic logics, are evidences of limitations in man’s mathematical powers,
creative though these be.
Post claimed that there exist absolutely undecidable (i.e., unsolvable by no
methods and means) propositions and that there is no complete system of logic.5
A consequence of this was in his opinion the fact that (1965, p. 55):
logic must not only in some parts of its description (as in the operations), but in its very
operation be informal. Better still, we may write
The Logical Process is Essentially Creative.
Consequently the human mind can never be replaced by a machine. He wrote in
(1965, p. 55):
We see that a machine would never give a complete logic; for once the machine is made we
could prove a theorem it does not prove.
6. The Signiﬁcance of Post’s Results for the Development of Mathematical
Logic and Foundations of Mathematics
The above considerations lead us to the conclusion that Post’s works and re-
sults contributed very much to the development of mathematical logic and the
foundations of mathematics. His works (together with works of J. Łukasiewicz)
initiated the investigations on many-valued logics and on the Post algebras con-
nected with them. His studies of the propositional calculus (the results of which
were included in his doctoral dissertation) were the ﬁrst metamathematical stud-
ies of a system of logic. Most signiﬁcant were probably his works and results
in the recursion theory. They contributed very much to establishing this ﬁeld as
an autonomous branch of the foundations of mathematics. They began inten-
sive studies on degrees of unsolvability, in particular of recursively enumerable
degrees, investigations on the (un)decidability of various systems, in particular
combinatorial systems in algebra and on the various types of recursive reducibil-
5In (1965, p. 54, original emphasis) he wrote: “A complete symbolic logic is impossible”.

E.L. Post and the Development of Logic
193
ity. They inﬂuenced also the researches in the computer science (though Post
showed no interest in computers). They were also very important for the theory
of formal languages.
Post’s investigations and results were in a sense ahead of his time, were
precursory (compare his anticipation of Gödel’s and Church’s results described
above). This had of course negative consequences as the fear of being not under-
stood properly and the delay of publication of the results. Problems with health,
in particular the illness under which he suffered almost the whole life, also hin-
dered him from publishing the results at proper time. Many of Post’s results were
left in an incomplete form. He tried the whole time to improve his results and
to ﬁnd the most general form which also caused some delay. Nevertheless his
contribution to the mathematical logic and to the foundations of mathematics
was really signiﬁcant.

14
JOHN VON NEUMANN AND HILBERT’S SCHOOL1
The aim of the paper is to describe main achievements of John von Neu-
mann in the foundations of mathematics and to indicate his connections with
Hilbert’s School. In particular we shall discuss von Neumann’s contributions to
the axiomatic set theory, his proof of the consistency of a fragment of the arith-
metic of natural numbers and his discovery (independent of Gödel) of the second
incompleteness theorem.
1. Introduction
Contacts of John (then still Janos, later Johann) von Neumann with David Hil-
bert and his school began in the twenties of the 20th century. Being formally
a student of the University of Budapest (in fact he appeared there only to pass
exams) he was spending his time in Germany and in Switzerland studying there
physics and chemistry as well as visiting Hilbert in Göttingen (to discuss with
him mathematics). After graduating in chemistry in ETH in Zurich (1925) and
receiving the doctorate in Budapest (1926) (his doctoral dissertation was devoted
to the axiomatization of set theory – cf. below), he became Privatdozent at the
University in Berlin (1927–1929), and next in Hamburg (1929–1930). In 1930
he left Germany and went to the USA.2
1Originally published under the title “John von Neumann and Hilbert’s School of Foundations of
Mathematics”, Studies in Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric 7 (20), 2004, 37–55. Reprinted with kind
permission of Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu w Białymstoku (Publishing House of the University in
Białystok).
2We are not describing further the life of von Neumann and stop at about 1930 because his dis-
appointment with the investigations in the foundations of mathematics led to the fact that after 1930
he lost interest in the foundational problems and turned his attention to other parts of mathematics,
in particular to its applications (see Section 4). Note only that in 1930–1931 von Neumann was a
visiting lecturer at Princeton University in New Jersey, later a professor there. Since 1933 he was a
professor at the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton. He died in 1957 at the age of 54.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 195–209. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

196
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Talking about Hilbert’s School we mean the group of mathematicians around
Hilbert working in the foundations of mathematics and in the metamathematics
(proof theory) in the frameworks of Hilbert’s program of justiﬁcation of the clas-
sical mathematics (by ﬁnitistic methods).3
Main works of von Neumann from the period from 1922 (the data of his ﬁrst
publication) till 1931 concern mainly metamathematics as well as the quantum
mechanics and the theory of operators (also Hilbert worked at that time in just
those domains). In this paper we shall be interested in the former, i.e., works
devoted to and connected with Hilbert’s metamathematical program.
Recall (to make clearer further considerations) that one of the steps in the
realization of Hilbert’s program was the formalization (and in particular the ax-
iomatization) of the classical mathematics (this was necessary for further inves-
tigations of mathematical theories by ﬁnitistic methods of the proof theory).
The main achievements of von Neumann connected with the ideology of
Hilbert’s School are the following:
• the axiomatization of set theory and (connected with that) elegant theory
of the ordinal and cardinal numbers as well as the ﬁrst strict formulation
of principles of deﬁnitions by the transﬁnite induction,
• the proof (by ﬁnitistic methods) of the consistency of a fragment of the
arithmetic of natural numbers,
• the discovery and the proof of the second incompleteness theorem (this
was done independently of Gödel).
The rest of the paper will be devoted just to those items.
2. Foundations of Set Theory
Contribution of von Neumann devoted to the set theory consisted not only of
having proposed a new elegant axiomatic system (extending the system of Zer-
melo-Fraekel ZFC) but also of having proposed several innovations enriching
the system ZFC, in particular the deﬁnition of ordinal and cardinal numbers and
the theory of deﬁnitions by transﬁnite induction.
The deﬁnition of ordinals and cardinals was given by von Neumann in the
paper “Zur Einführung der transﬁniten Zahlen” (1923) – it was his second pub-
lication. He has given there a deﬁnition of an ordinal number which could “give
unequivocal and concrete form to Cantor’s notion of ordinal number” (1923,
p. 199) in the context of axiomatized set theories (cf. von Neumann 1923). Von
Neumann’s ordinal numbers are – using the terminology of G. Cantor – repre-
3There is a rich literature on Hilbert’s program – see, e.g., Murawski (1999a) and the literature
indicated there.

John von Neumann and Hilbert’s School
197
sentatives of order types of well ordered sets. In (1923) von Neumann wrote:
What we really wish to do is to take as the basis of our considerations the proposition:
‘Every ordinal is the type of the set of all ordinals that precede it.’ But, in order to avoid the
vague notion ‘type’, we express it in the form: ‘Every ordinal is the set of the ordinals that
precede it.’ This is not a proposition proved about ordinals; rather, it would be a deﬁnition
of them if transﬁnite induction had already been established.4
In this way one obtains the sequence ∅, {∅}, {∅, {∅}}, {∅, {∅}, {∅, {∅}}}}, etc. – i.e.,
von Neumann’s ordinal numbers.
Those sets – as representatives – are in fact very useful, especially in the
axiomatic set theory because they can be easily deﬁned in terms of the relation
∈only and they are well order by the relation ∈. They enable also an elegant
deﬁnition of cardinal numbers. In the paper (1928) one ﬁnds the following def-
inition: a well ordered set M is said to be an ordinal (number) if and only if for
all x ∈M, x is equal to the initial segment of M determined by x itself (as von
Neumann wrote: x = A(x; M)). Elements of ordinal numbers are also ordinal
numbers. An ordinal number is said to be a cardinal number if and only if it is
not equipollent to any of its own elements.
In the paper (1923) von Neumann presupposed the notions of a well ordered
set and of the similarity and then proved that for any well ordered set there
exists a unique ordinal number corresponding to it. All that was done in a naïve
set theory but a remark was added that it can be done also in an axiomatic set
theory. And in fact von Neumann did it in papers (1928a) and (1928b). To be able
to do this in a formal way one needs the Axiom of Replacement (in the paper
(1923) von Neumann called it Fraenkel’s axiom). Since that time von Neumann
was an staunch advocate of this axiom.
The problem of deﬁnitions by transﬁnite induction was considered by von
Neumann in the paper “Über die Deﬁnition durch transﬁnite Induction, und ver-
wandte Fragen der allgemeinen Mengenlehre” (1928). He showed there that one
can always use deﬁnitions by induction on ordinal numbers and that such deﬁni-
tions are unequivocal. He proved that for any given condition ϕ(x, y) there exists
a unique function f whose domain consists of ordinals such that for any ordinal
α one has f(α) = ϕ(F(f, α), α) where F(f, α) is a graph of the function f for
arguments being elements of α.
Why is the discussed paper so important? For many years, in fact since the
axiomatization of set theory by Zermelo, there were no formal counterparts of
ordinal and cardinal numbers and this was the reason of avoiding them in the
axiomatic set theory. It became a custom to look for ways of avoiding trans-
4“Wir wollen eigentlich den Satz: ‘Jede Ordnungszahl ist der Typus der Menge aller ihr vorange-
henden Ordnungszahlen’ zur Grundlage unserer Überlegungen machen. Damit aber der vage Begriff
‘Typus’ vermieden werde, in dieser Form: ‘Jede Ordnungszahl ist die Menge der ihr vorangehenden
Ordnungszahlen.’ Dies ist kein bewiesener Satz über Ordnungszahlen, es wäre vielmehr, wenn die
tranﬁnite Induktion schon begründet wäre, eine Deﬁnition derselben.”

198
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
ﬁnite numbers and transﬁnite induction in mathematical reasonings (cf., e.g.,
Kuratowski 1921 and 1922). Von Neumann’s paper introduced a new paradigm
which works till today. The leading idea of the paper was the will to give set
theory as wide ﬁeld as possible.
The most important and known contribution of John von Neumann is un-
doubtedly a new approach and new axiomatization of set theory. The main ideas
connected with that appeared by von Neumann already in 1923 (he was then 20
(sic!)). He described them in a letter to Ernst Zermelo from August 1923.5 He
wrote there that the impulse to his ideas came from a work by Zermelo “Unter-
suchungen über die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre. I” (1908) and added that in
some points he went away from Zermelo’s ideas, in particular
• the notion of ‘deﬁnite property’ had been avoided – instead the “accept-
able schemas” for the construction of functions and sets had been pre-
sented,
• the axiom of replacement had been assumed – it was necessary for the
theory of ordinal numbers (later von Neumann emphasized, like Fraenkel
and Skolem, that it is needed in order to establish the whole series of
cardinalities – cf. von Neumann 1928b),
• sets that are “too big” (for example the set of all sets) had been admitted
but they were taken to be inadmissible as elements of sets (that sufﬁced to
avoid the paradoxes).
About 1922–1923 while preparing a paper in which those ideas should be
developed he contacted Abraham Fraenkel. The latter recalled this (already after
the death of von Neumann) in a letter to Stanisław Ulam in such a way (see letter
from Fraenkel to Ulam in Ulam 1958, p. 32):
Around 1922–23, being then professor at Marburg University, I received from Professor
Erhard Schmidt, Berlin (on behalf of the Redaktion of the Mathematische Zeitschrift) a
long manuscript of an author unknown to me, Johann von Neumann, with the title “Die
Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre”, this being his eventual doctor[al] dissertation which
appeared in the Zeitschrift only in 1928 (vol. 27). I was asked to express my views since it
seemed incomprehensible. I don’t maintain that I understood everything, but enough to see
that this was an outstanding work and to recognize ex ungue leonem. While answering in
this sense, I invited the young scholar to visit me (in Marburg) and discussed things with
him, strongly advising him to prepare the ground for the understanding of so technical an
essay by a more informal essay which should stress the new access to the problem and its
fundament consequences. He wrote such an essay under the title “Eine Axiomatisierung der
Mengenlehre” and I published it in 1925 in the Journal für Mathematik (vol. 154) of which
I was then Associate Editor.
Before continuing the story let us explain that ex ungue leonem – spotting
a lion from the claw – is an expression used by Daniel Bernoulli while talking
5This letter was partly reproduced in Meschkowski (1967, pp. 289–291).

John von Neumann and Hilbert’s School
199
about Newton two and a half centuries ago. Bernoulli was namely sent a mathe-
matical paper without a name of the author but he immediately recognized that
it has been written just by Newton.
Von Neuman wrote at the beginning of the paper “Eine Axiomatisierung der
Mengenlehre” (1925):
The aim of the present work is to give a logically unobjectionable axiomatic treatment
of set theory. I would like to say something ﬁrst about difﬁculties which make such an
axiomatization of set theory desirable.6
He stressed explicitly three points mentioned in the letter to Zermelo.
The characteristic feature of the system of set theory proposed by von Neu-
mann is the distinction between classes, “domains” (Bereiche) and sets (Men-
gen). Classes are introduced by the Principle of Comprehension – von Neu-
mann seems to have regarded this principle as the quintessence of what he called
“naïve set theory” (cf. von Neumann 1923; 1928a; 1929). His appproach to set
theory was strongly based on the idea of limitation of size according to which: a
class is a set if and only if it is not “too big”. The latter notion was described by
the following axiom:
(∗)
A class is “too big” (in the terminology of Gödel (1940)
– is a proper class) if and only if it is equivalent to the
class of all things.
Hence a class of the cardinality smaller than the cardinality of the class of
all sets is a set. Von Neumann states further that the above principle implies both
the Axiom of Separation and the Axiom of Replacement. It implies also the
well ordering theorem (he indicated it already in the letter to Zermelo). Indeed,
according to the reasoning used in the Burali-Forti paradox, the class On of all
ordinal numbers is not a set, hence by the above principle it is equipollent with
the class V of all sets. In this way one obtains a strengthened version of the well
ordering theorem, namely:
The class V of all sets can be well ordered.
In the paper “Die Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre” (1928a) (this was in
fact a “mathematical” version of the system of set theory announced in the paper
(1925)) von Neumann observed that the principle gives also a global choice
function F such that for any nonempty set A it holds: F(A) ∈A.
The Axiom of Choice, being a consequence of (∗), enabled von Neumann to
introduce ordinal and cardinal numbers without the necessity of introducing any
6“Das Ziel der vorliegenden Arbeit ist, eine logisch einwandfreie axiomatische Darstellung der
Mengenlehre zu geben. Ich möchte dabei einleitend einiges über die Schwierigkeiten sagen, die
einen derartigen Aufbau der Mengenlehre erwünscht gemacht haben.” (p. 34)

200
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
new primitive notions. It was in fact a realization of the idea he wrote about in
1923. He used here the Fraenkel’s Axiom of Replacement.
Observe that the distinction between classes and sets appeared already by
Georg Cantor – he wanted to eliminate in this way the paradox of the set of
all sets. Cantor used to call classes “absolutely inﬁnite multiplicities”. But he
gave no precise criterion of distinguishing classes and sets – it was given only
by von Neumann. The latter has also shown that Cantor was mistaken when
he claimed that the absolutely inﬁnite multiplicities (e.g., the multiplicity of all
ordinal numbers) cannot be treated as consistent objects.
In the original formulation of set theory by von Neumann there are no no-
tions of a set and a class. Instead one has there the primitive notion of a function
(and of the relation ∈). Von Neumann claimed that it is in fact only a technical
matter – indeed, the notions of a set and of a function are mutually deﬁnable, i.e.,
a set can be treated as a function with values 0 and 1 (the characteristic function
of the set) and, vice versa, a function can be deﬁned as a set of ordered pairs.
Add that in the von Neumann’s system of set theory there are no urelements –
there are only pure sets and classes. On the other hand among axioms there is the
Axiom of Foundation introduced by Dimitri Mirimanoff in (1917).7 This axiom
ensures that there are no inﬁnite decreasing ∈-sequences, i.e., such sequences
that . . . ∈xn ∈. . . ∈x1 ∈x0 and that there are neither sets x such that x ∈x
nor sets x and y such that x ∈y and y ∈x. This axiom implies that the system
of set theory containing it becomes similar to the theory of types: one can say
that the system ZF with the Axiom of Foundation can be treated as an extension
of the (cumulative) theory of types to the transﬁnite types described in a simpler
language than it was the case by Russell.
It should be noticed that von Neumann was one of the ﬁrst who investigated
metatheoretical properties of the axiomatic set theory. In particular he studied
his own system from the point of view of the categoricity (1925) and of the
relative consistency (1929). Probably he was also the ﬁrst author who called at-
tention to the Skolem paradox. According to von Neumann this paradox stamps
axiomatic set theory “with the mark of unreality” and gives reasons to “entertain
reservations” about it (cf. 1925, p. 53).
Von Neumann wrote about the proof of the relative consistency of his system
of set theory in the paper “Über eine Widerspruchsfreiheitsfrage der axiomatis-
chen Mengenlehre” (1929). He saw main difﬁculties in the axiom (∗). Therefore
he considered two axiomatic systems: system S which was his original system
(hence with the axiom (∗)) and the system S∗which was von Neumann’s sys-
tem but with the Axiom of Replacement and the Axiom of Choice instead of the
axiom (∗). In the paper (1929) he proved that:
7In fact it was for the ﬁrst time discussed by Mirimanoff and Skolem it was just von Neumann
who as the ﬁrst formulated it explicitly.

John von Neumann and Hilbert’s School
201
1. S∗will remain consistent if one adds the Axiom of Foundation and does
not admit urlements,
2. S∗is a subsystem of such a system.
Hence von Neumenn proved the relative consistency of the Axiom of Foundation
with respect to the system S∗. It was in fact the ﬁrst signiﬁcant metatheoretical
result on set theory.
It is worth saying that in (1929) von Neumann developed the cumulative
hierarchy in technical details. Using the Axiom of Foundation and the ordinal
numbers he showed that the universe of sets can be divided into “levels” indexed
by ordinal numbers. He introduced the notion of a rank of a set: a rank of a set
x is the smallest ordinal number α such that the set x appears at the level α.
This hierarchy is cumulative, i.e., lower levels are included in higher ones. The
hierarchy can be precisely deﬁned as follows:
V0
=
∅,
Vα+1
=
Vα ∪P(Vα),
Vλ
=

α<λ
Vα
for λ ∈lim,
V
=

α∈On
Vα,
rank(x)
=
µα(x ∈Vα).
It is worth adding here that von Neumann treated the Axiom of Foundation
rather as a tool in the metatheoretical investigations of set theory.
We are talking the whole time about axioms of set theory but no axioms have
been given so far. It is time to do it!
Let us start by stating that the main idea underlying von Neumann’s sys-
tem of set theory has been accepted with enthusiasm – in fact it provided a
remedium to too drastic restrictions put on objects of set theory by the system
ZF of Zermelo-Fraenkel (one was convinced that such strong restrictions are not
needed in order to eliminate paradoxes; on the other hand the restrictions put
by ZF made the development of mathematics within ZF very difﬁcult and un-
natural). Nevertheless the system of von Neumann was not very popular among
specialists – the reason was the fact that it was rather counter-intuitive and was
based on a rather difﬁcult notions (recall that the primitive notion of a function
instead of the notion of a set was used there). Hence the need of reformulating the
original system. That has been done by Paul Bernays: in (1937) he announced
the foundations, and in a series of papers published in the period 1937–1958 (cf.
1937, 1941a, 1942, 1958) he gave an extensive axiomatic system of set theory
which realized the ideas of von Neumann and simultaneously he succeeded to
formulate his system in a language close to the language of the system ZF.

202
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
In (1937, p. 65) he wrote:
The purpose of modifying the von Neumann system is to remain nearer to the structure
of the original Zermelo system and to utilize at the same time some of the set-theoretic
concepts of the Schröder logic and of Principia Mathematica which have become familiar
to logicians. As will be seen, a considerable simpliﬁcation results from this arrangement.
The universe of set theory consists by Bernays of two parts:
• sets denoted by x, y, z, . . .,
• classes denoted by A, B,C, . . .
Hence it is not an elementary system! There are two primitive notions: ∈(= to
be an element of (to belong to) a set) and η (= to be an element (to belong to)
a class). Hence one has two types of atomic formulas: x ∈y and xηA. There
are also two groups of axioms: axioms about sets (they are analogous to axioms
of Zermelo) and axioms characterizing classes. The very important feature of
Bernays’ axioms is the fact that there are only ﬁnitely many axioms and there
are no axiom schemes.
In a work devoted to the consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the
Generalized Continuum Hypothesis K. Gödel gave an axiomatic system of set
theory which is in fact a modiﬁcation of Bernays’ system. Its main advantage is
that it is an elementary system (i.e., it contains only one type of variables).8
Let us describe now in details the system NBG of Gödel. It is based on the
idea that the variables vary over classes. Among classes we distinguish those
classes that are elements of other classes. They are called sets and their totality
is denoted by V. The remaining classes are called proper classes.
Deﬁne the class V as follows
x ∈V ←→(∃y)(x ∈y).
Hence x is a set if and only if there exists a class y such that x ∈y. Deﬁne also
a notion of a function in the following way:
Func(r) ←→∀x∀y∀z[(x, y) ∈r ∧(x, z) ∈r −→y = z].
The system NBG is based on the following nonlogical axioms:
• (Extensionality)
∀x ∀y [∀z(z ∈x ←→z ∈y) −→x = y],
• (Axiom of Classes)
∃x ∀y [∃z(y ∈z) −→y ∈x],
• (Axiom of the Empty Set)
∃x [∀y (y  x) ∧∃z (x ∈z)],
8It is worth noting here that the idea of using in the system of von Neumann – Bernays only one
type of variables and one membership relation is due to Alfred Tarski – cf. Mostowski (1939, p. 208;
1949, p. 144).

John von Neumann and Hilbert’s School
203
• (Pairing Axiom)
∀x ∈V ∀y ∈V ∃z ∈V [∀u(u ∈z ←→u = x ∨u = y)],
• (Axiom Scheme of Class Existence) if Φ is a formula with free variables
v1, . . . , vn, then the following formula
∀v1, . . . , vn ∈V ∃z ∀x [x ∈z ←→
←→(x ∈V ∧Φ(V)(x, v1, v2, . . . , vn))]
is an axiom (note that one cannot quantiﬁer in Φ over class variables!);
Φ(V) denotes the relativization of Φ to the class V,
• (Axiom of Union)
∀x ∈V ∃y ∈V ∀u [u ∈y ←→∃v(u ∈v ∧v ∈x)],
• (Power Set Axiom)
∀x ∈V ∃y ∈V ∀u (u ∈y ←→u ⊆x),
• (Inﬁnity Axiom)
∃x ∈V [∅∈x ∧∀u ∈x ∀v ∈x (u ∪{v} ∈x)],
• (Axiom of Replacement)
∀x ∈V ∀r [Func(r) −→
−→∃y ∈V ∀u (u ∈y ←→∃v ∈x ((v, u) ∈r)],
• (Axiom of Foundation)
∀x[x  ∅−→∃y ∈x (x ∩y = ∅)].
We one adds to this system the following Axiom of Global Choice (in a
strong version):
∃x[Func(x) ∧∀y ∈V[y  ∅−→∃z(z ∈y ∧(y, z) ∈x)]]
then one obtains the system denoted as NBGC.
It has turned out that the axiom scheme of class existence can be replaced by
the following (ﬁnitely many!) axioms:
∃a ∀x, y ∈V[(x, y) ∈a ←→x ∈y]
(it says that a jest a graph of the membership relation ∈for sets),
∀a ∀b ∃c ∀x[x ∈c ←→(x ∈a ∧x ∈b)]
(it deﬁnes the intersection of classes),
∀a ∃b ∀x ∈V [x ∈b ←→x  a]
(it deﬁnes the complement of a class),
∀a ∃b ∀x ∈V [x ∈b ←→∃y ∈V((x, y) ∈a)]
(it deﬁnes the left domain of a relation),
∀a ∃b ∀x, y ∈V [(x, y) ∈b ←→x ∈a),
∀a ∃b ∀x, y, z ∈V [(x, y, z) ∈b ←→(y, z, x) ∈a],

204
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
∀a ∃b ∀x, y, z ∈V [(x, y, z) ∈b ←→(x, z, y) ∈a].
The systems NBG and NBGC have very nice metamathematical properties,
in particular:
• NBG (NBGC) is ﬁnitely axiomatizable (observe that the Zermelo-Fraenkel
system ZF is not ﬁnitely axiomatizable!),
• NBG is a conservative extension of ZF with respect to formulas saying
about sets, i.e., for any formula ϕ of the language of set theory:
ZF ⊢ϕ
if and only if
NBG ⊢ϕ(V)
where ϕ(V) denotes the relativization of ϕ to the class V of all sets (and
similarly for NBGC and ZFC where the latter symbol denotes the theory
ZF plus the Axiom of Choice AC),
• NBG is consistent if and only if ZF is consistent (and similarly for NBGC
and ZFC).
3. Consistency Proof for Arithmetic
One of the main aims of Hilbert’s program was the consistency proof (by save
ﬁnitary methods) for the whole classical mathematics. Students of Hilbert took
this task and soon ﬁrst partial results appeared. The ﬁrst work in this direction
was the paper by Wilhelm Ackermann (1924–1925) where he gave a ﬁnitistic
proof of the consistency of arithmetic of natural numbers without the axiom
(scheme) of induction.9
Next attempt to solve the problem of the consistency was the paper “Zur
Hilbertschen Beweistheorie” (1927) by von Neumann. He used another formal-
ism than that in Ackermann (1924–1925) and, similarly as Ackermann, proved
in fact the consistency of a fragment of arithmetic of natural numbers obtained
by putting some restrictions on the induction. We cannot consider here the (com-
plicated) technical details of von Neumann’s proof. It is worth mentioning that
in the introductory section of von Neumann’s (1927) a nice and precise formu-
lation of aims and methods of Hilbert’s proof theory was given. It indicated how
was at that time the state of affairs and how Hilbert’s program was understood.
Therefore we shall quote the appropriate passages.
Von Neumann writes that the essential tasks of proof theory are (cf. von
Neumann 1927, pp. 256–257):
I. First of all one wants to give a proof of the consistency of the classical mathematics.
Under ‘classical mathematics’ one means the mathematics in the sense in which
9In fact it was a much weaker system than the usual system of arithmetic but the paper provided
the ﬁrst attempt to solve the problem of consistency. Later in the paper (1940) Ackermann proved
the consistency of the full arithmetic of natural numbers by using methods from his paper (1924)
and the transﬁnite induction.

John von Neumann and Hilbert’s School
205
it was understood before the begin of the criticism of set theory. All set-theoretic
methods essentially belong to it but not the proper abstract set theory. [...]
II. To this end the whole language and proving machinery of the classical mathemat-
ics should be formalized in an absolutely strong way. The formalism cannot be too
narrow.
III. Then one must prove the consistency of this system, i.e., one should show that certain
formulas of the formalism just described can never be “proved”.
IV. One should always strongly distinguish here between various types of “proving”:
between formal (“mathematical”) proving in a given formal system and contents
(“metamathematical”) proving [of statements] about the system. Whereas the for-
mer one is an arbitrarily deﬁned logical game (which should to a large extent be ana-
logues to the classical mathematics), the latter is a chain of directly evident contents
insights. Hence this “contents proving” must proceed according to the intuitionis-
tic logic of Brouwer and Weyl. Proof theory should so to speak construct classical
mathematics on the intuitionistic base and in this way lead the strict intuitionism ad
absurdum.10
Note that von Neumann identiﬁes here ﬁnitistic methods with intuitionistic
ones. This was then current among members of the Hilbert’s school. The dis-
tinction between those two notions was to be made explicit a few years later –
cf. Hilbert and Bernays (1934, pp. 34 and 43) and Bernays (1934; 1935; 1941b),
see also Murawski (2001).
As an interesting detail let us add that on the paper (1927) by von Neu-
mann reacted critically Stanisław Le´sniewski publishing the paper “Grundzüge
eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik” (1929) in which he criti-
cally analyzed various attempts to formalize logic and mathematics. Le´sniewski
among others expresses there his doubts concerning the meaning and signiﬁ-
cance of von Neumann’s proof of the consistency of (a fragment of) arithmetic
and constructs – to maintain his thesis – a “counterexample”, namely he de-
10“I. In erster Linie wird der Nachweis der Widerspruchsfreiheit der klassischen Mathematik
angestrebt. Unter ‘klassischer Mathematik’ wird dabei die Mathematik in demjenigen Sinne ver-
standen, wie sie bis zum Auftreten der Kritiker der Mengenlehre anerkannt war. Alle mengentheo-
retischen Methoden gehören im wesentlichen zu ihr, nicht aber die eigentliche abstrakte Mengen-
lehre. [. . . ]
“II. Zu diesem Zwecke muß der ganze Aussagen- und Beweisapparat der klassischen Mathematik
absolut streng formalisiert werden. Der Formalismus darf keinesfalls zu eng sein.
“III. Sodann muß die Widerspruchsfreiheit dieses Systems nachgewiesen werden, d.h. es muß
gezeigt werden, daß gewisse Aussagen ‘Formeln’ innerhalb des beschriebenen Formalismus niemals
“bewiesen” werden können.
“IV. Hierbei muß stets scharf zwischen verschiedenen Arten des ‘Beweisens’ unterschieden wer-
den: Dem formalistischen (‘mathematischen’) Beweisen innerhalb des formalen Systems, und dem
inhaltlichen („metamathematischen“) Beweisen über das System. Während das erstere ein willkür-
lich deﬁniertes logisches Spiel ist (das freilich mit der klassischen Mathematik weitgehend ana-
log sein muß), ist das letztere eine Verkettung unmittelbar evidenter inhaltlicher Einsichten. Dieses
‘inhaltliche Beweisen’ muß also ganz im Sinne der Brouwer-Weylschen intuitionistischen Logik
verlaufen: Die Beweistheorie soll sozusagen auf intuitionistischer Basis die klassische Mathematik
aufbauen und den strikten Intuitionismus so ad absurdum führen.”

206
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
duces (on the basis of von Neumann’s system) two formulas a and ¬a, hence an
inconsistency.
Von Neumann answered to Le´sniewski’s objections in the paper “Bemerkun-
gen zu den Ausführungen von Herrn St. Le´sniewski über meine Arbeit ‘Zur
Hilbertschen Beweistheorie’ ” (1931a). Analyzing the objections of Le´sniewski
he came to the conclusion that there is in fact a misunderstanding resulting from
various ways in which they both understand principles of formalization. He used
also the occasion to fulﬁl the gap in his paper (1927).
Add also that looking for a proof of the consistency of the classical mathe-
matics and being (still) convinced of the possibility of ﬁnding such a proof (in
particular a proof of the consistency of the theory of real numbers) von Neumann
doubted whether there are any chances to ﬁnd such a proof for the set theory –
cf. his paper (1929).
4. Von Neumann and Gödel’s Second Incompleteness Theorem
How much von Neumann was engaged in the realization of Hilbert’s program
and how high was his position in this group can be judged from the fact that
just he has been invited by the organizers of the Second Conference on the
Epistemology of Exact Sciences (organized by Die Gesellschaft für Empirische
Philosophie)11 held in Königsberg, 5–7th September 1930, to give a lecture pre-
senting formalism – one of the three main trends in the contemporary philos-
ophy of mathematics and the foundations of mathematics founded by Hilbert.
The other two main trends: logicism and intuitionism were presented by Rudolf
Carnap and Arend Heyting, resp.
In his lecture “Die formalistische Grundlegung der Mathematik” (cf. 1931b)
von Neumann recalled basic presuppositions of Hilbert’s program and claimed
that thanks to the works of Russell and his school a signiﬁcant part of the tasks
put by Hilbert has already been realized. In fact the unique task that should be
fulﬁlled now is “to ﬁnd a ﬁnitistically combinatorial proof of the consistency of
the classical mathematics” (1931b, p. 237). And he added that this task turned
out to be difﬁcult. On the other hand, partial results obtained so far by W. Acker-
mann, H. Weyl and himself make possible to cherish hopes that it can be realized.
He ﬁnished his lecture by saying: “Whether this can be done for a more difﬁcult
and more important system of [the whole] classical mathematics will show the
future” (1931b, p. 239).
On the last day of the conference, i.e., on 7th September 1930, a young
Austrian mathematician Kurt Gödel announced his recent (not yet published)
11This conference was organized together with the 91st Convention of the Society of German
Scientists and Physicians (Gesellschaft deutscher Naturforscher und Ärzte) and the 6th Conference
of German Mathematicians and Physicists (Deutsche Physiker- und Mathematikertagung).

John von Neumann and Hilbert’s School
207
results on the incompleteness of the system of arithmetic of natural numbers and
richer systems.
It seems that the only participant of the conference in Königsberg who im-
mediately grasped the meaning of Gödel’s theorem and understood it was von
Neumann. After Gödel’s talk he had a long discussion with him and asked him
about details of the proof. Soon after coming back from the conference to Berlin
he wrote a letter to Gödel (on 20th November 1930) in which he announced that
he had received a remarkable corollary from Gödel’s First Theorem, namely a
theorem on the unprovability of the consistency of arithmetic in arithmetic it-
self. In the meantime Gödel developed his Second Incompleteness Theorem and
included it in his paper “Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Math-
ematica und verwandter Systeme. I” (cf. Gödel, 1931a). In this situation von
Neumann decided to leave the priority of the discovery to Gödel.
5. Concluding Remarks
Gödel’s incompleteness results had great inﬂuence on von Neumann’s views
towards the perspectives of investigations on the foundations of mathematics. He
claimed that “Gödel’s result has shown the unrealizability of Hilbert’s program”
and that “there is no more reason to reject intuitionism” (cf. his letter to Carnap
of 6th June 1931 – see Mancosu 1999, p. 39 and p. 41, resp.). He added in this
letter:
Therefore I consider the state of the foundational discussion in Königsberg to be outdated,
for Gödel’s fundamental discoveries have brought the question to a completely different
level. (I know that Gödel is much more careful in the evaluation of his results, but in my
opinion on this point he does not see the connections correctly). (Mancosu 1999, p. 42)
Incompleteness results of Gödel changed the opinions cherished by von Neu-
mann and convinced him that the program of Hilbert cannot be realized. In the
paper “The Mathematician”(1947) he wrote:
My personal opinion, which is shared by many others, is, that Gödel has shown that Hil-
bert’s program is essentially hopeless. (p. 189)
Another reason for the disappointment of von Neumann’s with the investiga-
tions in the foundations of mathematics could be the fact that he became aware of
the lack of categoricity of set theory, i.e., that there exist various non-isomorphic
models of set theory. The latter fact implies that it is impossible to describe the
world of mathematics in a unique way. In fact there is no absolute description,
all descriptions are relative.
Not only von Neumman was aware of this feature of set theory. Also Fraenkel
and Thoralf Skolem realized this. And they have proposed various measures. In
particular Fraenkel in his very ﬁrst article “Über die Zermelosche Begründung

208
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
der Mengenlehre” (1921) sought to render set theory categorical by introducing
his Axiom of Restriction, inverse to the completeness axiom that Hilbert had
proposed for geometry in 1899. Whereas Hilbert had postulated the existence of
a maximal model satisfying his other axioms, Fraenkel’s Axiom of Restriction
asserted that the only sets to exist were those whose existence was implied by
Zermelo’s axioms and by the Axiom of Replacement. In particular, there were
no urelements. One should add that Fraenkel did not distinguish properly a lan-
guage and a metalanguage and confused them.
The approach of Skolem was different – but we will not go into technical
details here (see, for example, Moore 1982, Section 4.9).
Von Neumann also examined the possible categoricity of set theory. In order
to render it as likely as possible that his own system was categorical, he went
beyond Mirimanoff and augmented it by the axiom stating that there are no
inﬁnite descending ∈-sequences. He recognized that his system would surely
lack categoricity unless he excluded weakly inaccessible cardinals (i.e., regular
cardinals with an index being a limit ordinal). Von Neumann rejected also the
Fraenkel’s Axiom of Restriction as untenable because it relied on the concept of
subdomain and hence on inconsistent “naïve” set theory. He was also aware of
the difﬁculties implied by Löwenheim-Skolem theorem.
Von Neumann treated the lack of categoricity of set theory, certain relativism
of it as an argument in favor of intuitionism (cf. his 1925). He stressed also the
distance between the naïve and the formalized set theory and called attention
to the arbitrariness of restrictions introduced in axiomatic set theory (cf. 1925,
1928a, 1929). He saw also no rescue and no hope in Hilbert’s program and his
proof theory – in fact the latter was concerned with consistency and not with
categoricity.
One should notice here that von Neumann’s analyses lacked a clear under-
standing of the difference and divergence between ﬁrst-order and second-order
logic and their effects on categoricity. Today it is known, e.g., that Hilbert’s
axioms for Euclidian geometry and for the real numbers as well as Dedekind-
Peano axioms for the arithmetic of natural numbers are categorical in second-
order logic and non-categoric in the ﬁrst-order logic. Only Zermelo (perhaps
under the inﬂuence of Hilbert12) claimed that the ﬁrst-order logic is insufﬁcient
for mathematics, and in particular for set theory. It became the dominant ele-
ment in Zermelo’s publications from the period 1929–1935. It is worth noting
here that he spoke about this for the ﬁrst time in his lectures held in Warsaw in
May and June 1929.
12Hilbert and Ackermann wrote in (1928, p. 100): “As soon as the object of investigation becomes
the foundation of [. . . ] mathematical theories, as soon as we went to determine in what relation
the theory stands to logic and to what extent it can be obtained from purely logical operations and
concepts, then second-order logic is essential.” In particular they deﬁned the set-theoretic concept of
well-ordering by means of second-order, rather than ﬁrst-order, logic.

John von Neumann and Hilbert’s School
209
After 1931 von Neumann ceased publishing on the mathematical logic and
the foundations of mathematics – he came to the conclusion that a mathemati-
cian should devote his attention to problems connected with the applications. In
(1947) he wrote:
As a mathematical discipline travels far from its empirical source, or still more, if it is a sec-
ond and third generation only indirectly inspired by ideas coming from “reality”, it is beset
with very grave dangers. It becomes more and more purely aestheticizing, more and more
purely l’art pour l’art. [. . . ] In other words, at a great distance from its empirical source,
or after much “abstract” inbreeding, a mathematical subject is in danger of degeneration.
(p. 196)

15
CONTRIBUTION OF POLISH LOGICIANS
TO DECIDABILITY THEORY1
1. Introduction
Researches on decidability problems have arisen from Hilbert’s program.2
To save the integrity of the classical mathematics and to overcome difﬁculties
disclosed by antinomies and paradoxes of set theory Hilbert proposed in a se-
rious of lectures in papers in the 1920s a special program. Its aim was to show
that classical mathematics is consistent and that actual inﬁnity, which seemed
to generate the difﬁculties, plays in fact only an auxiliary role and can be elim-
inated from proofs of theorems talking only about ﬁnitary objects. To realize
this program Hilbert suggested ﬁrst of all to formalize the mathematics, i.e.,
to represent its main domains (including classical logic, set theory, arithmetic,
analysis etc.) as a big formal system and investigate the latter (as a system of
sequences of symbols transformed according to certain ﬁxed formal rules) by
ﬁnitary methods. Such formalization should be complete, i.e., axioms should
be chosen in such a way that any problem which can be formulated in the lan-
guage of a given theory can also be solved on the base of its axioms. Formal-
ization yielded also another problem closely connected with completeness and
called decision problem or decidability problem or Entscheidungsproblem: one
could ask if a given formalized theory is decidable, i.e., if there exists a uni-
form mechanical method which enables us to decide in a ﬁnite number of steps
(prescribed ahead) if a given formula in the language of the considered theory
is or is not a theorem of it. Using notions from the recursion theory one can
1Originally published in Modern Logic 6 (1996), 37–66. c⃝Modern Logic Publishing, 1996.
Reprinted with kind permission of the editor of The Review of Modern Logic (formerly Modern
Logic).
2The upper bound of the period covered in the paper is ﬁxed as 1963, i.e., the year in which
A. Mostowski’s paper “Thirty Years of Foundational Studies”, Acta Philosophica Fennica 17 (1965),
1–180 was published.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 211–231. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

212
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
make this deﬁnition more precise. A formal theory T is said to be decidable if
and only if the set of (Gödel numbers of) theorems of T is recursive. Otherwise
T is called undecidable. If additionally every consistent extension of the the-
ory T (formalized in the same language as T) is undecidable then T is said to
be essentially undecidable. We should notice here that these deﬁnitions being
completely standard today come from Alfred Tarski and were formulated in his
paper A general method in proofs of undecidability published in the monograph
Tarski-Mostowski-Robinson (1953).
In the 1920s and the 1930s a lot of results in this direction was obtained.
Several general methods of proving completeness and decidability of theories
were proposed and many theories were shown to be complete and decidable.
Kurt Gödel’s results on incompleteness from 1931 (cf. Gödel 1931a) and
Alonzo Church’s result on undecidability (of the predicate calculus of ﬁrst or-
der and of Peano arithmetic and certain of its subtheories (cf. Church 1936a and
1936b) as well as results of J.B. Rosser on undecidability of consistent exten-
sions of Peano arithmetic (cf. Rosser 1936) from 1936 indicated some difﬁcul-
ties and obstacles in realizations of Hilbert’s program. One of their consequences
was the fact that since the end of the 1930s logicians’ and mathematicians’ in-
terests concentrated on proofs of undecidability rather than decidability of theo-
ries. General methods of proving undecidability were investigated and particular
mathematical theories were shown to be undecidable.
Those general trends and tendencies have their reﬂection also in the history
of logic in Poland. This is the subject of the present paper. It has the following
structure. Section 2 will be devoted to the contribution to the study of decid-
ability of theories due to Polish logicians and mathematicians. In particular the
method of quantiﬁer elimination studied by A. Tarski and his students together
with various applications of it will be presented. Section 3 deals with investiga-
tions of undecidability of theories. Again we shall discuss some general methods
of proving the undecidability of a theory developed by Polish logicians (in par-
ticular Tarski’s method of interpretation will be considered) as well as several
results on undecidability of particular theories. Section 4 will be devoted to the
presentation of (forgotten and underestimated) results of Józef Pepis on mutual
reducibility of decision problem for various classes of formulas. The ﬁnal Sec-
tion 5 will present generalizations and strengthenings of Gödel’s incompleteness
results due to Polish logicians.

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
213
2. Decidability of Theories
2.1. Effective Quantiﬁer Elimination
The seminar led by A. Tarski at Warsaw University in the period 1927–1929 was
devoted to the method of eliminating quantiﬁers. This method was initiated by
L. Löwenheim in (1915) and used in fully developed form by Th. Skolem (1919)
and C.H. Langford (1927a; 1927b). Skolem used it to show the decidability of
the theory T0 of the class of all “full” Boolean algebras, i.e., Boolean algebras of
the form ⟨P(A), ⊆⟩, where P(A) = {B : B ⊆A}. Langford applied it to establish
the decidability of the theory of a dense linear order: (a) without endpoints, (b)
with the ﬁrst element but no last element and (c) with ﬁrst and last elements
as well as the decidability (and completeness) of the theory of discrete orders
having a ﬁrst and no last element.
Elimination of quantiﬁers was studied at the seminar by Tarski and his stu-
dents. Tarski described it as “a frequently used method, which consists in reduc-
ing the sentences to normal form and successively eliminating the quantiﬁers”
(cf. Tarski 1936b; see also 1956d, p. 374 – this paper is the revised English
translation of 1935 and 1936b).
Generally speaking this method can be described as follows: Let T be a
ﬁrst-order theory in the language L(T). We are looking for a set Φ of formulas
in L(T), called the set of basic formulas for T, such that for every formula ϕ
of L(T) there exists a Boolean combination ϕ∗of formulas from Φ having the
same free variables as ϕ and such that T ⊢ϕ ≡ϕ∗. Of course one can always
take as the basic set Φ the set of all formulas of the language L(T). But we are
looking for “good” basic sets consisting of “simple” formulas. Unfortunately
there is no precise criterion for being “good” or “simple”. Usually the following
conditions are required: (1) Φ should be reasonably small and indispensable, (2)
every formula in Φ should have some straightforward mathematical meaning,
(3) there should exist an algorithm for reducing every formula ϕ of the language
L(T) to its corresponding Boolean “representation”. From the point of view of
the decidability problems the set Φ should have one more property: (4) there
should exist an algorithm which would tell us, given any basic sentence ψ, either
that ψ is a theorem of T or that ψ is refutable from T. If conditions (3) and (4)
are met then we have both a completeness proof and a decision procedure for
the theory T. Let us add that a method fulﬁlling the conditions (3) and (4) is
sometimes called ‘effective quantiﬁer elimination’ to distinguish it from other
types of the elimination of quantiﬁers where there are no algorithms.
It seems that Tarski found this method adequate for his purposes and he did
not try to generalize it but (together with his students) simply applied it to the
study of various theories. In this way it became in his school really the method
and a paradigm of how a logician should study an axiomatic theory.

214
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
What aims did Tarski and his students want to achieve using the method of
quantiﬁer elimination?
First they used it to characterize deﬁnability. Suppose namely that a structure
M and a set of ﬁrst-order sentences T which are true in M are given. Suppose
also that one has found a basic set Φ for the theory T. Then relations on M
which are deﬁnable by ﬁrst-order formulas (with or without parameters) are ex-
actly Boolean combinations of the relations which are deﬁned by formulas in Φ.
It seems that the ﬁrst who made this point was Tarski in (1931). This paper intro-
duces the decision procedure for the theory of reals but it does it in the guise of
the way of describing the ﬁrst-order deﬁnable relations on the reals. Tarski was
greatly interested in the notion of a deﬁnable relation in a structure but his papers
on decidability or completeness rarely mentioned this aspect of the results.
The second reason for using the method of quantiﬁer elimination by Tarski
and his collaborators was the fact that it could contribute to the study of de-
cidability problems. One should notice here that in his papers published before
the World War II Tarski seldom mentioned effective decidability. Describing his
results he put emphasis on completeness proofs rather than on algorithmic de-
cidability. On the other hand it was clear for him by 1930 that effective quantiﬁer
elimination could give (cf. p. 134 of 1956b, the English translation of 1931):
a mechanical method which enables us to decide in each particular case whether a given
sentence (of order 1) is provable or disprovable.
In (1939a) he refers to:
The “effective” character of all positive proofs of completeness so far given – not only the
problem of completeness but also the decision problem is solved in the positive sense for
all the deductive systems mentioned above. (p. 176)
One can observe a very noticeable change of emphasis in Tarski’s writings
after the war. Now he stresses the importance of decidability results and gives
them priority. On the ﬁrst page of (1953) he speaks about the decision problem
as “one of the central problems of contemporary metamathematics”. Both of his
abstracts (1949a) and (1949b) are opened by saying that he has found a decision
procedure – and only later it is added that various consequences follow from the
procedure. In his writings before the World War II it was just vice versa – the
results on completeness were stressed at the ﬁrst place and only at the end it was
added that the proofs involve solving the decision problem.
In the monograph (1967) written in 1939 (and published in 1967) he says:
It should be emphasized that the proofs sketched below have (like all proofs of completeness
hitherto published) an “effective” character in the following sense: it is not merely shown
that every statement of a given theory is, so to speak, in principle provable or disprovable,
but at the same time a procedure is given which permits every such statement actually to be
proved or disproved by means of proof of the theory. By the aid of such a proof not only the
problem of completeness but also the decision problem is solved for the given system in a

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
215
positive sense11. In other words, our results show that it is possible to construct a machine
which would provide the solution of every problem in elementary algebra and geometry (to
the extent described above). (p. 5)
And in Note 11 of (1967) we ﬁnd the following words:
It is possible to defend the standpoint that in all cases in which a theory is tested with respect
to its completeness the essence of the problem is not in the mere proof of completeness but
in giving a decision procedure (or in the demonstration that it is impossible to give such a
procedure).
What were the reasons for this change? The ﬁrst reason can be the fact that
till the mid-1930s there was no precise deﬁnition of the term ‘algorithm’ and
mathematicians doubted if there ever would be one. Hence it was impossible to
state a theorem in the form “there is an algorithm for so-and-so”. The works of
A. Church, A. Turing, S.C. Kleene and J.B. Rosser and others and the develop-
ment of recursion theory changed the situation. Tarski recognized it immediately
and began to apply this theory in his papers.
The second source of Tarski’s new perspective on his work on complete-
ness/decidability problems was that he had become interested in proofs of un-
decidability publishing a lot of results during the years 1949–1953 (we discuss
them in the next section).
Coming back to the aims Tarski and his students wanted to achieve using
the method of quantiﬁer elimination one should add one thing more. They saw
namely that this method yielded much information not only on completeness
and decidability but that it can be used to describe and classify all complete
extensions of a given ﬁrst-order theory T. In connection with this Tarski intro-
duced in his seminar some key notions of model theory, in particular the notion
of elementary equivalence.
To ﬁnish the general discussion of the method of quantiﬁer elimination we
want to consider the connection between completeness of a theory and its de-
cidability (it was already mentioned above). We mean here the theorem stating
that if a ﬁrst-order theory T based on a recursive set of axioms (in fact the term
‘recursive’ can be replaced by ‘recursively enumerable’) is consistent and com-
plete then T is decidable. The explicit formulation of it can be found in the paper
by Antoni Janiczak (1950). He proved there the following
THEOREM 1. A complete, consistent theory T satisfying the conditions
(a’)–(d’) is decidable.
The conditions (a’)–(d’) say, resp., that the set of (Gödel numbers of) sentences
of the language L(T) of the theory T should be recursive, the set of (Gödel num-
bers of) the axioms of T should be recursively enumerable, that the arithmetized
counterpart of the (metamathematical) relation: “a formula χ results from for-
mulas ϕ and ψ by the deduction rule R” is recursive and ﬁnally that there exists

216
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
a recursive function Neg such that if x is a Gödel number of a formula ϕ then
Neg(x) is the Gödel number of the negation of ϕ.
The key fact used in the proof of this theorem is the negation theorem stating
that a relation is recursive if and only if it and its complement are recursively
enumerable. One ﬁnds this result in Kleene’s paper (1943) (Theorem V) and in
the paper by Janiczak (1955a) (being a posthumous work prepared by A. Grze-
gorczyk from the notes left by the author who died prematurely in Warsaw on
5th July 1951).
At the end of Janiczak’s paper (1950) it is written: “It is worth remarking,
in connection with our theorem, that each decidable and consistent theory can
be enlarged to a decidable, complete and consistent theory by the method of
Lindenbaum [...]. This result is due to Tarski.” And Janiczak refers here to
Theorem II of Tarski’s abstract On essential undecidability (1949c).
2.2. Applications: Decidability of Particular Theories
The ﬁrst decidability results of Tarski came from 1926–1928 (cf. Tarski 1935 and
1936b). They were based on the work of Langford mentioned at the beginning
of this section. More exactly Tarski proved the following theorems.
THEOREM 2. If T is the theory of dense linear orders then for any ﬁrst-
order sentence ϕ in the language of T we can compute a Boolean com-
bination of the sentences “There is a ﬁrst element” and “There is a last
element” which is equivalent to ϕ modulo T.
THEOREM 3. Let T be the theory of linear orders where every element
except the ﬁrst element has an immediate predecessor, and every ele-
ment except the last element has an immediate successor. Then for any
ﬁrst-order sentence ϕ in the language of T we can compute a Boolean
combination of the sentences “There is a ﬁrst element”, “There is a last
element” and “There are at most n elements” (for positive integers n)
which is equivalent to ϕ modulo T.
In the Appendix to (1936b) Tarski listed all the complete theories of dense
linear orders: they are the theories of the orders η, 1 + η, η + 1 and 1 + η + 1,
where η is the natural ordering of the rational numbers. The complete theories
of linear orders are: theories of ﬁnite orders and the theories of the orders ω, ω∗,
ω∗+ ω and ω + ω∗(where ω is the natural ordering of the natural numbers and
ω∗is its inverse). Those classiﬁcations were obtained with the help of the above
quoted theorems.
Having solved the problem of completeness and decidability of the theory of
dense linear orders and of the theory of discrete orders one should ask about the
theory of well-orderings. The study of this problem has a long and interesting
history.

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
217
In the late 1930s A. Tarski and his student Andrzej Mostowski developed
the outline of a proof of the decidability of this theory described semantically as
the set of sentences true in all well-ordered structured. They used the method of
the elimination of quantiﬁers and by the summer of 1939 they reached a clear
idea of the basic formulas. Their main aim was to prove the adequacy of certain
axiom systems and to classify the complete extensions of the theory (decidability
would be then a by-product of it). Many technical details remained to be worked
out. The work was interrupted by World War II. Tarski escaped the German
occupation of Poland and stayed in the USA, Mostowski spent the war time in
Poland. Each began to work out the technical details. Unfortunately Mostowski’s
notes were destroyed in Warsaw in 1944 and Tarski’s ones lost in the course of
his many moves. Hence the work had to be started from the very beginning. They
published the abstract (1949a) and made plans to reconstruct the proof. This was
not realize and nothing more was done than writing down the speciﬁcation of the
basic formulas.
In 1964 Tarski assigned his student John Doner a task to work out some
of the details. This was done in a rough form and again nothing happened till
1975. In this year Mostowski and Tarski met and made plans to ﬁnish the paper.
Unfortunately Mostowski’s unexpected death in August 1975 upset the plans.
In this situation Tarski invited Doner to take up the work. The ﬁnal result was
the joint paper of Doner, Mostowski and Tarski The elementary theory of well-
ordering. A metamathematical study (1978). One ﬁnds there a number of results
not mentioned in Mostowski-Tarski (1949a).
The next theory studied by Tarski by the method of quantiﬁer elimination
was the theory of Boolean algebras. Tarski never published either the deci-
sion procedure or a proof of the classiﬁcation of complete ﬁrst-order theories
of Boolean algebras. One can reconstruct the essential elements of them from
his abstract (1949a). Tarski announced there that he had a decision procedure
for the theory of Boolean algebras and he used it to classify all the complete
ﬁrst-order theories of Boolean algebras in terms of countably many algebraic
invariants. Each invariant was expressible as a single ﬁrst-order sentence. In the
monograph (1948) he mentions on page 1 that he found this decision procedure
in 1940.
In connection with these results one should note that already in the paper
(1936b) Tarski published the analogue of Theorem 3 for atomic Boolean alge-
bras. He even claimed that if we drop the assumption of atomicity, then there
are just countably many completions of the axioms of “the algebra of logic”.
He seems to mean here that there are just countably many complete ﬁrst-order
theories of Boolean algebras. But it is not clear how could he have proved this
result without having the full classiﬁcation.
One should also stress that the proofs of the classiﬁcation we have today
(they are model-theoretic), i.e., proofs by Yu.L. Ershov and H.J. Keisler do not

218
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
give unlike Tarski’s a primitive recursive decision procedure (though they imply
the decidability of the theory of Boolean algebras).
Discussing the problem of the decidability of the theory of Boolean algebras
one should also mention the paper by S. Ja´skowski (1949).
The method of quantiﬁer elimination was applied by Tarski also to the study
of geometry. M. Presburger writes in the (1930) (footnote on p. 95) that in 1927–
1928 Tarski proved the completeness of a set of axioms for the concept of be-
tweeness (“b lies between a and c”) and that of the equidistance (“a is as far
from b as c is from d”). The method used by him was quantiﬁer elimination.
Tarski himself saw this result as “a partial result tending in the same direction”
as his later theorem on real-closed ﬁelds (cf. 1948, footnote 4).
Discussing Tarski’s results on decidability of geometry one should also men-
tion his paper (1959). Using the results on real-closed ﬁelds (cf. Tarski 1948)
(we shall discuss them later) he studied various theories of elementary geome-
try deﬁning the latter by the words: “we regard as elementary that part of Eu-
clidean geometry which can be formulated and established without the help of
any set-theoretical devices” (p. 16). In particular he considered there the sys-
tem E2 in the language containing predicates for the betweeness relation and for
the equidistance relation and based on the following axioms: identity, transitiv-
ity, connectivity for betweeness, reﬂexivity, identity and transitivity for equidis-
tance, Pasch’s axiom, Euclid’s axiom, ﬁve-segment axiom, axiom of segment
construction, lower and upper dimension axioms and elementary continuity ax-
iom. It is proved that the theory E2 is complete, decidable and is not ﬁnitely
axiomatizable. It is also shown that a variant E
′′
2 of E2 (it is a theory obtained
from E2 by replacing the elementary continuity axiom, which is in fact a scheme
of axioms, by a weaker single axiom) is decidable with respect to the set of its
universal sentences.
Another domain where Tarski applied the method of quantiﬁer elimination
were ﬁelds. In the paper (1931) Tarski wrote that he had a complete set of axioms
for the ﬁrst-order theory of the reals in the language with primitive nonlogical
notions 1, ⩽and +. The paper contains a sketch of the quantiﬁer elimination
procedure for this theory and the description of those relations on the reals which
are ﬁrst-order deﬁnable in the language with the indicated primitive notions.
The most important and most famous result of Tarski for ﬁelds concerns the
theory in the richer language with 0, 1, +, ·, ⩽as nonlogical primitive notions.
We mean here his fundamental theorem.
THEOREM 4. To any formula ϕ(x1, . . . , xm) in the language with 0, 1, +,
·, ⩽one can effectively associate: a quantiﬁer free formula ϕ∗(x1, . . . , xm)
in the same language and a proof of the equivalence ϕ ≡ϕ∗that uses
only the axioms for real closed ﬁelds.

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
219
The ﬁrst announcement of this result can be found in Tarski’s abstract (1930a)
where he wrote:
In order that a set of numbers A be arithmetically deﬁnable it is necessary and sufﬁcient
that A be a union of ﬁnitely many (open or closed) intervals with algebraic endpoints
(English translation – L. van den Dries 1988). This follows immediately from
Theorem 4 for m = 1. No information on the proof can be found in the abstract.
One should notice that the emphasis was put on deﬁnability (cf. our earlier re-
marks).
A precise formulation of the fundamental theorem and a clear outline of its
proof were given in the monograph The Completeness of Elementary Algebra
and Geometry (1967). This work was written in 1939 but the war made its pub-
lication impossible then (the paper reached the stage of page proofs but publica-
tion was interrupted by wartime developments). The title of it suggests a change
of emphasis from deﬁnability to problems of completeness.
A full and detailed proof of Theorem 4 ﬁnally appeared in Tarski’s work
A Decision Method for Elementary Algebra and Geometry (1948) prepared for
publication by J.C.C. McKinsey. The title of it reveals a second change of em-
phasis – this time from completeness to decidability. In the Preface to the second
edition (from 1951) Tarski wrote:
As was to be expected it reﬂected the speciﬁc interests which the RAND corporation found
in the results. The decision method [. . . ] was presented in a systematic and detailed way,
thus bringing to the fore the possibility of constructing an actual decision machine. Other,
more theoretical aspects of the problems discussed were treated less thoroughly, and only
in notes. (p. 3)
Note that the results in Tarski (1948) were formulated in terms of the ﬁeld of real
numbers but they hold generally for real-closed ﬁelds – the latter are mentioned
only in footnotes.
Real-closed ﬁelds and algebraically closed ﬁelds were discussed by Tarski in
his abstract (1949b). One ﬁnds there a description (in an algebraic language) of
each class of the form: all models of some complete ﬁrst-order theory T which
are algebraically closed (or real-closed) ﬁelds. Tarski remarks also that he found
a decision procedure for the theory of algebraically closed ﬁelds and says that
his classiﬁcation follows from this procedure. A decision procedure for real-
closed ﬁelds based on an extension of Sturm’s theorem to arbitrary systems of
algebraic equations and inequalities in many unknowns is also mentioned. It
implies that the theory of real-closed ﬁelds is consistent and complete and that
any two models of this theory are elementarily equivalent.
As we mentioned earlier the method of effective quantiﬁer elimination was
used not only by Tarski but also by his students. Among results obtained by the
latter one should mention here Moj˙zesz Presburger’s result on decidability of

220
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
the arithmetic of addition and Wanda Szmielew’s result on decidability of the
theory of abelian groups.
In the school year 1927/28 A. Tarski gave a course of lectures on ﬁrst-order
theories. During this course he presented a set of axioms for the theory of addi-
tion of natural numbers. It is formalized in a ﬁrst-order language with 0, S and +
as the only nonlogical primitive notions (hence there is no multiplication). One
calls it today Presburger arithmetic. Tarski formulated a problem of showing
that the axioms were complete. It was solved by Presburger in May 1928 and
published in (1930). The result was presented also as his master thesis.
The method used by Presburger was effective quantiﬁer elimination of course.
It was shown that as a set of basic formulas one can take the set consisting of
formulas of the form: αx + a = b, αx + a ⩽b, b < αx + a, αx + a ≡n b, where a
and b are terms in which the variable x does not occur free, α is a natural num-
ber, the symbol αx is an abbreviation for x + . . . + x
	

α times
, the relations < n and ⩽are
deﬁned in the usual way and the relation ≡n is deﬁned as follows:
x ≡n y ≡∃z (x = y + (z + . . . + z
	

n
) ∨y = x + (z + . . . + z
	

n
)).
In this way one obtains the completeness and the decidability of the considered
theory (notice that Presburger, like Tarski at that time, formulated his result in
terms of completeness and did not mention decidability).
One should also add here that similar results for the theory of the successor
(in the ﬁrst-order language with the primitive nonlogical notions 0 and S only)
and for the theory of the multiplication (in the ﬁrst-order language with 0, S and
· only) of natural numbers were obtained by J. Herbrand (1928) and Th. Skolem
(1930), resp. They used the method of quantiﬁer elimination as well.
The second important result obtained in Tarski’s school by the method of the
effective elimination of quantiﬁers was the result of Wanda Szmielew on decid-
ability of the theory of Abelian groups (cf. Szmielew 1949a, 1949b and 1955).
She gave a classiﬁcation of all complete ﬁrst-order theories of Abelian groups.
It was done by describing a set of algebraic invariants which were expressible
by ﬁrst-order sentences. Those results have various consequences (noted by the
author, e.g., in Szmielew 1955). Using them one can obtain many examples of
non-elementarily deﬁnable (the author says, non-arithmetical) classes, e.g., the
class of all ﬁnite groups, the class of all simple groups, the class of all torsion
groups and that of all torsion-free groups. The fundamental result on the exis-
tence of the basic set for the theory of Abelian groups implies also that there ex-
ist two inﬁnite groups of the same power (for instance two denumerable groups)
which are elementarily equivalent but non-isomorphic.

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
221
3. Undecidability of Theories
As we mentioned above the results of K. Gödel, J.B. Rosser and A. Church
on undecidability and essential undecidability shifted the interests of logicians
towards undecidability of theories. Polish logicians followed this shift and con-
tributed to those researches as well. This section is devoted just to this. First,
the work of Tarski on the general methods of establishing the (essential) unde-
cidability of ﬁrst-order theories will be discussed. Second, some applications of
those methods (due to Polish logicians) will be indicated.
3.1. General Methods of Proving Undecidability
The most important work in this respect is the paper by A. Tarski A General
Method in Proofs of Undecidability published as part one of the monograph
Tarski-Mostowski-Robinson (1953) (cf. Tarski 1953a). It contains his results ob-
tained during 1938–1939 (and summarized in the abstract 1949c).
Tarski distinguishes there two types of methods of proving undecidability:
the direct method and the indirect one. The ﬁrst one was applied by Gödel,
Church and Rosser (in the above quoted papers). It uses the notion of recur-
sive function and relation and is based on the fact that all recursive functions
and relations are strongly representable in a considered theory. Hence it may be
applied only to theories in which a sufﬁcient number-theoretical apparatus can
be developed.
The second method, indirect one, “consists in reducing the decision problem
for a theory T1 to the decision problem for some other theory T2 for which the
problem has previously been solved” (cf. Tarski 1953a, p. 4). This reduction can
take place in two ways: to establish the undecidability of a theory T1 one can try
to show that either (1) T1 can be obtained from some undecidable theory T2 by
deleting ﬁnitely many axioms (and not changing the language) or that (2) some
essentially undecidable theory T2 is interpretable in T1.
Just the second way was elaborated by Tarski. Before describing Tarski’s
results let us notice here that the notion of interpretability, i.e., of deﬁnability
of the fundamental notions of one theory in another theory , is a key ingredient
in Tarski’s investigations. Recall what has been said above on Tarski’s motiva-
tions behind his work on the effective quantiﬁer elimination. It should be added
that the results on undecidability of theories were very often only one kind of
consequences of Tarski’s results on deﬁnability and interpretability.
In the paper (1953a) Tarski distinguishes interpretability and relative inter-
pretability, each of them in two forms: full (in this case he is speaking simply
about the appropriate interpretability without any adjectives) and weak.
Let T1 and T2 be two ﬁrst-order theories. Assume that they have no nonlogi-
cal constants in common (by the appropriate change of symbols this assumption

222
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
can always be fulﬁlled). The theory T2 is said to be interpretable in the theory
T1 if and only if we can extend T1 by adding to its axioms some possible def-
initions of nonlogical primitive notions of T2 in such a way that the extension
turns out to be an extension of T2 as well. The theory T2 is weakly interpretable
in the theory T1 if and only if T2 is interpretable in some consistent extension
of T1 formalized in the same language L(T1). The main theorem concerning the
undecidability is now the following one (cf. Tarski 1953a, Theorem 8):
THEOREM 5. Let T1 and T2 be two theories such that T2 is weakly inter-
pretable in T1 or in some inessential extension of T1. If T2 is essentially
undecidable and ﬁnitely axiomatizable then (i) T1 is undecidable and ev-
ery subtheory of T1 which has the same constants as T1 is undecidable;
(ii) there exists a ﬁnite extension of T1 which has the same constants as
T1 and is essentially undecidable.
Recall that an extension S of a theory T is called inessential if and only if
every constant of S which does not occur in T is an individual constant and if
every theorem of S is provable in S on the bases of theorems of T.
Weak interpretability and the above Theorem 5 widen in a considerable way
the range of applications of the method of interpretations in proving the undecid-
ability of theories. A further widening is provided by the notion of the relative
interpretability and weak relative interpretability. They are deﬁned in the fol-
lowing way: A theory T2 is said to be relatively interpretable (weakly relatively
interpretable) in a theory T1 if and only if there exists a unary predicate P which
does not occur in T2 and such that the theory T (P)
2
(obtained by relativizing T2
to the predicate P) is interpretable (weakly interpretable) in T1 in the sense ex-
plained above. It can be shown that for any theory T and any unary predicate
P which is not a constant of T, the theory T (P) is essentially undecidable if and
only if the theory T is essentially undecidable.
It happens very often that one can easily show that a certain theory T2 known
to be essentially undecidable is relatively interpretable (or weakly relatively in-
terpretable) in a given theory T1, while the proof of interpretability or weak
interpretability of T2 in T1 is either impossible or much more difﬁcult. Hence
the combination of (weak) relative interpretability and Theorem 3.1 is a proper
strengthening of the method of interpretation.
3.2. Applications: Undecidability of Particular Theories
To apply the method of interpretation described above one has to have a ﬁnitely
axiomatizable, essentially undecidable theory which is weak enough to be inter-
preted in theories even quite distant from it. Peano arithmetic and its extensions
as well as various versions of set theory which were known in the late 1930s

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
223
to be essentially undecidable could not play this role. Peano arithmetic is not
ﬁnitely axiomatizable and set theory is too rich.
The problem was solved by A. Mostowski, A. Tarski and Raphael M. Robin-
son. In 1939 Mostowski and Tarski constructed a ﬁnitely axiomatizable and es-
sentially undecidable subtheory Q of the arithmetic of natural numbers. It was
closely related to the theory of non-densely ordered rings (cf. Mostowski-Tarski
1949b) where an analogous theory is described). Around 1949/50 R.M. Robin-
son and A. Tarski simpliﬁed this system and ﬁnally a simple, ﬁnitely axiomatiz-
able and essentially axiomatizable theory Q arose. It was described in the paper
by A. Mostowski, R.M. Robinson and A. Tarski Undecidability and Essential
Undecidability in Arithmetic (1953). It is the ﬁrst-order theory in the language
with S, 0, + and · as nonlogical primitive notions and based on the following
axioms:
S x = S y −→x = y,
0  S x,
x  0 −→∃y (x = S y),
x + 0 = x,
x + S y = S (x + y),
x · 0 = 0,
x · S y = (x · y) + x.
It is shown in Mostowski-Robinson-Tarski (1953) that Q is essentially unde-
cidable and that no axiomatic subtheory of Q obtained by removing any one of
its axioms is essentially undecidable. Essential undecidability of Q was proved
by a direct method based on ideas found in Tarski (1933a) and (1936a) as well
as in Gödel (1931a). The result of Tarski stating that the diagonal function and
the set of Gödel numbers of theorems of Q cannot be both strongly represented
in Q was used (in fact this result holds for any consistent and axiomatizable ex-
tension of a fragment of Q denoted in Mostowski-Robinson-Tarski (1953) by R).
Since the diagonal function is recursive and hence strongly representable in Q,
it follows that Q is essentially undecidable.
It is worth noticing here that the key step in the proof of the above theorem
is to show that all recursive functions and sets are strongly representable. It is
based on a characterization of recursive functions found by Julia Robinson in
(1950). And again the construction of the theory Q arose by a keen insight into
the semantical notion of deﬁnability (strong representability is a kind of deﬁn-
ability).
Another example of a theory with properties similar to those of Q, i.e.,
ﬁnitely axiomatizable and essentially undecidable was constructed by Andrzej

224
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Grzegorczyk in (1962a). In fact two theories F and F∗are given there. The the-
ory F is a ﬁrst-order theory formalized in a language with two individual con-
stants 0 and S and one binary function symbol |. Its nonlogical axioms are the
following:
(F1) ∀x (0  S | x),
(F2) ∀x ∀y (S | x = S | y −→x = y),
(F3) ∀x (x = 0 ∨∃y (x = S | y)),
(F4) ∀x ∀y ∃z {z | 0 = x & [z | (S | u) = y | (z | u)]}.
The theory F∗is formalized in the same language as F and the set of its
nonlogical axioms consists of (F1)–(F3) plus the following axioms:
(F∗4) ∀f ∀a ∃g {g | 0 = a & ∀x (g | (S | x) = f | x)},
(F∗5) ∃g ∀x (g | x = 0).
The theories F and F∗have common extensions but they are independent,
i.e., (F∗5) is not a theorem of F and (F4) is not a theorem of F∗. Now using
the fact that all recursive functions are strongly representable in F it is proved
that F is essentially undecidable (hence the direct method is applied here). The
essential undecidability of F∗is proved by showing that a weak essentially un-
decidable set theory of R.L. Vaught can be interpreted in it (the theory of Vaught
is obtained by a simpliﬁcation of the theory considered by Szmielew and Tarski
in (1952).
After the publication of the paper (1953) by Mostowski, Robinson and Tarski
the research activity concerning undecidable theories sharply increased. There
were at least three centers of them: Berkeley (where researches were led under
the leadership of Tarski), Princeton (where Gödel was a member of the Institute
for Advanced Study and where Church, Rosser and Kleene had done their pi-
oneering work in the theory of recursive functions) and Novosibirsk (under the
leadership of A.I. Mal’cev). The reason for this increase of interest was the fact
that the method of interpretation together with the ﬁnitely axiomatizable and
essentially undecidable system Q opened the way for various applications. We
shall indicate here some of them restricting ourselves – according to the subject
of this paper – only to those due to Polish logicians.
Some applications were mentioned already in the paper by Mostowski, Robin-
son and Tarski (1953). In particular it was shown there that certain theories of
integers as well as various algebraical theories are undecidable. More precisely
it was proved (Theorem 12) that the arithmetic J of arbitrary integers (in the
language with + and · only) and all its subtheories (in the same language) are
undecidable and that there are ﬁnitely axiomatizable subtheories of J which are
essentially undecidable. The same holds for the theory J< of integers formalized
in the language with +, · and <. Both theories J and J< are deﬁned semanti-

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
225
cally as the set of all sentences (in the indicated languages) true in the structure
⟨I, +, ·⟩(or, resp., ⟨I, <, +, ·⟩), where I is the set of all integers and the functions
and relation have their usual meaning.
Another group of results in Mostowski-Robinson-Tarski (1953) concerns un-
decidability of various algebraical theories. In particular it is proved that the el-
ementary theories of rings, commutative rings, integral domains, ordered rings
and ordered commutative rings, without or with unit, are undecidable (Corol-
lary 13) and that the elementary theories of non-densely ordered rings and non-
densely ordered commutative rings, without or with unit, are essentially unde-
cidable (Theorem 14).
A. Tarski proved in 1946 the undecidability of the elementary theory of
groups – this result was announced in (1949d) and expounded fully in the paper
Undecidability of the Elementary Theory of Groups published in Tarski-Mos-
towski-Robinson (1953) (cf. Tarski 1953b). Using (relative) interpretability of
various systems of arithmetic of integers it is proved that the theory of groups
G (formalized in the language with · as the only nonlogical constant) as well as
every subtheory of G (in the same language as G) are undecidable and that there
exists a ﬁnitely axiomatizable extension of G which has the same nonlogical
constant as G and which is essentially undecidable.
It should be noticed here that a weaker result in the same direction was an-
nounced by S. Ja´skowski in (1948).
A. Tarski proved in (1949e) the undecidability of the following theories: the
theory of modular lattices, the theory of arbitrary lattices, the theory of comple-
mented modular lattices and the theory of abstract projective geometries. Again
the method of interpretation was used. It was also notice that the indicated the-
ories are not essentially undecidable since the theories of Boolean algebras and
of real projective geometry are decidable (cf. previous section).
A. Tarski and W. Szmielew considered undecidability of various weak frag-
ments of set theory (cf. Szmielew-Tarski 1952 and Tarski 1953a). In particular
they proved (by interpreting the system Q) that a small fragment S of set theory
is essentially undecidable. The theory S is formalized in the language with two
nonlogical constants: E (= being a set) and the membership relation ∈, and based
on the set of axioms stating that: (i) any two sets with the same elements are iden-
tical, (ii) there is a set with no elements and (iii) for any two sets a and b there
is a set c consisting of those and only those elements which are elements of a
or are identical with b. From the theorem of Tarski and Szmielew it follows that
every consistent theory which is an extension of S is essentially undecidable,
hence all axiomatic systems of set theory (with E and ∈as nonlogical constants)
which are known from the literature are essentially undecidable. The result can
be extended to systems of set theory formulated in the language with ∈only.
A. Tarski and Lesław W. Szczerba considered undecidability of various ge-
ometrical theories. In particular in Tarski’s paper (1959) it is shown that the

226
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
system E
′
2 of geometry obtained from the system E2, described in the previous
section, by supplementing it with a small fragment of set theory is essentially
undecidable. In (1979) Szczerba and Tarski studied among others undecidability
of various systems of afﬁne geometry.
Using the general method of interpretability of Tarski together with results
of Mostowski, Robinson and Tarski on the theory Q, A. Grzegorczyk considered
in (1951) the undecidability of some topological theories. In particular he proved
that:
(1) there exists an elementary theory T of closure algebra which is unde-
cidable and ﬁnitely axiomatizable and such that each theory of closure algebra
consistent with T is undecidable (the undecidability of the closure algebra was
also proved by another methods by S. Ja´skowski in 1939, cf. Ja´skowski 1948),
(2) there exists an elementary theory T of the algebra of closed sets such
that T is essentially undecidable and ﬁnitely axiomatizable and such that every
Brouwerian algebra consistent with T is undecidable (one of consequences of
this theorem is the undecidability of the abstract algebra of projective geometry
and of the general lattice-theory – those results were obtained by another method
by Tarski in 1949e),
(3) the algebra of bodies is undecidable,
(4) every algebra of convexity true in an Euclidean space En, for n ⩾2, is
undecidable,
(5) every semi-projective algebra true in the Euclidean space En, n ⩾2, is
undecidable.
The main idea of proofs of the above theorems is that the arithmetic Q can
be interpreted as an arithmetic of ﬁnite sets.
Applying the method of interpretability and using the undecidability of the
theory of non-densely ordered rings (see above) Antoni Janiczak proved the un-
decidability of some simple theories of relations and functions. These results
were contained in his master thesis submitted, shortly before his unexpected
death in July 1951, to the Faculty of Mathematics of the University of Warsaw.
They were published in the paper (1953) prepared for print by A. Mostowski
with the assistance of A. Grzegorczyk. Janiczak proved the undecidability of
the theory of two equivalence relations, of the theory of two equivalence re-
lation such that their intersection is the identity relation, of the theory of one
equivalence relation and one bijection and of the theory of 1–1 relation and one
function (one-many relation). It is also mentioned in Janiczak’s paper (1953)
that the theory of one equivalence relation is decidable (this can be shown by the
method of quantiﬁer elimination).

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
227
4. Reducibility Results
Another approach to decidability problems (Entscheidungsproblem) was repre-
sented by Józef Pepis (a mathematician active at the University of Lvov, killed by
the Gestapo in August 1941). He distinguishes explicitly three aspects of it (cf.
Pepis 1937): tautology decision problem (Allgemeingültigkeitsproblem), satisﬁ-
ability decision problem (Erfüllbarkeitsproblem) and deducibility decision prob-
lem (beweistheoretisches Entscheidungsproblem). The ﬁrst problem consists of
ﬁnding a uniform mechanical method – or proving that there is no such method
– which would enable us to decide in a ﬁnite number of steps if a given formula
is a tautology. In the second case one asks if there exists a uniform and mechan-
ical method of deciding in a ﬁnite number of steps if a given formula can be
realized, i.e., if it has a model. Hence this aspect has a semantical character. The
last case concerns syntactical properties – one asks here if there exists a method
with the indicated properties which would enable us to decide in a ﬁnite num-
ber of steps if a given formula is a theorem of a considered theory, i.e., it it can
be deduced from the set of its axioms. Observe that so far we were interested
and we discussed mainly the third aspect. Note also that all those aspects are
equivalent, i.e., a positive (or negative) solution to one of them yields a positive
(or negative) solution to the others. Hence one can speak here simply about the
decidability problem. Pepis says in (1937) that the most convenient approach to
Entscheidungsproblem is just the second one, i.e., the decidability problem for
satisﬁability – and therefore he concentrates himself just on it.
On the other hand one can distinguish between a direct approach and an in-
direct one. The ﬁrst one consists of solving the decision problem for a given
particular theory, the latter – in reducing of a given general decision problem to
the decision problem in some particular cases. Pepis was interested just in the
second approach and all his papers are devoted to the study of various reducibil-
ity procedures.
He published four papers on decidability and reducibility. In all of them the
ﬁrst-order predicate calculus (formalized in a language with propositional vari-
ables and identity relation) (enger logischer Funktionenkalkül as Pepis used to
call it) was studied from the point of view of reducibility of the satisﬁability
decision problem for one class of formulas to the satisﬁability decision problem
for another class of formulas.
The ﬁrst paper was published in 1936 (cf. Pepis 1936). Results contained
in it were generalized in Pepis’ doctoral dissertation (1937) submitted to the
Jan Kazimierz University in Lvov. The third paper (1938a) contains new results
on reducibility which generalize the results of Ackermann (1936) and Kalmár
(1936). The fourth paper (1938b) is devoted to the introduction and discussion
of a certain new, simple and general reduction procedure.

228
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
It is impossible to quote here all the results of Pepis. We shall only indicate
– as a sample – some examples to show of what type they are. The phrase:
‘By considering the satisﬁability decision problem for the ﬁrst-order predicate
calculus we can restrict ourselves without the loss of generality to formulas with
the given property E’ means that any formula of the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus
is equivalent – from the point of view of satisﬁability – to a formula with the
property E.
Pepis proved among others that by considering the satisﬁability decision
problem for the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus we can restrict ourselves without
the loss of generality to the following formulas:
1. formulas in the prenex normal form in which a unique 3-ary predicate
occurs and which possess the Skolem preﬁx of the following form
∀x1 ∀x2 ∀x3 ∀x4 ∃y1 ∃y2 . . . ∃yn,
2. formulas in the prenex normal form with the preﬁx
∀x ∀y ∃z ∀x1 . . . ∀xn
and such that the matrix contains only two (one unary and one 3-ary)
predicates,
3. formulas in the prenex normal form with the preﬁx
∀x1 ∀x2 . . . ∀xn ∃y
and such that the metrix contains only two (one unary and one 3-ary)
predicates,
4. formulas in the prenex normal form with the preﬁx
∃x ∀y ∃z ∀u1 ∀u2 . . . ∀un
and such that the metrix contains only one unary, one binary and one 3-ary
predicates,
5. formulas of the form
∀y ∀z ∃x Φ(x, y, z) & ∀x1 ∀x2 . . . ∀xn A(x1, x2, . . . , xn)
where Φ is a predicate and the formula A contains, besides Φ, one further
(unary) predicate,
6. formulas of the form
∀y ∀z ∃x (R1(x, y) & R2(x, y))&
& ∀x1 ∀x2 . . . ∀xn A(x1, x2, . . . , xn)
where R1 and R2 are predicates and the formula A contains, besides R1
and R2, one further (unary) predicate and symbols R1 and R2 occur in A
only negatively.
Results of Pepis lost partially their meaning in the light of the theorem of
Church (cf. 1936b) which showed that the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus is un-
decidable and in this way gave the negative solution to its decision problem.

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
229
Nevertheless their value consists in the indication of reducibility properties for
various classes of formulas. On the other hand it seems that Pepis did not ac-
cept the Church thesis and he did not share the opinion that recursive functions
comprise all effective methods (see his paper 1937, p. 169–170). Hence he was
convinced that the results of Church did not solve deﬁnitely the problem and
treated the decidability problem for the predicate calculus as still opened.
Reducibility methods similar to those used by J. Pepis were applied by Sta-
nisław Ja´skowski to study decision problem for various mathematical theories.
In particular in (1948) certain reductions of the decision problem for the ﬁrst-
order predicate calculus to decision problems for various topological and group-
theoretical expressions are announced. In the paper (1954) Ja´skowski proved
that the decision problem for the predicate calculus is equivalent to the problem
whether or not for every Θ of the interval (−1, 1), the system of ten ordinary
differential equations given by him explicitly possesses a real solution over the
interval (−1, 1) satisfying the particular initial condition. At the end of the pa-
per it is stated that the negative solution to the former (which follows from the
theorem of Church) yields the negative solution to the latter.
In the paper Ja´skowski (1956) some generalizations of Pepis’ results to alge-
braic structures can be found. A short proof of one of the reducibility theorems
of Pepis is also given. The algebraic structures considered by Ja´skowski are free
groupoids. It is shown in particular that in the case of a free groupoid F : (1) the
satisﬁability problem for the class of elementary sentences is reducible to the
decision problem for the class of ﬁrst-order sentences with the preﬁx
∃E ∀x1 . . . ∀xn
in F , where E is a unary predicate, (2) the tautology problem for the class of
elementary sentences is reducible to the decision problem for the class of ﬁrst-
order sentences with the preﬁx
∀E ∃x1 . . . ∃xn
in F .
5. New Proofs of the Incompleteness Theorem
Discussing the contribution of Polish logicians to decidability problems one
should also mention works devoted to generalizations of Gödel’s classical theo-
rems on incompleteness as well as scientiﬁc articles for the general public pre-
senting results on decidability.
We start with a paper by A. Tarski (1939b). An enlarged system of logic is
considered there, the enlargement being obtained by adding rules of inference
of a “non-ﬁnitary” (“non-constructive”) character. The existence of undecidable
statements in such systems is shown. The author emphasizes the part played by

230
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
the concept of truth in relation to problems of this nature. One should also note
certain kinship of those results with the results of Rosser (1936).
Another author whose contribution to the classical incompleteness theorems
should be mentioned here is A. Mostowski. In his paper (1949a) one ﬁnds an
interesting construction of a new undecidable sentence. The main property of
this sentence is that it is set-theoretical in nature, is stronger than Gödel’s sen-
tence and is not effective. Nevertheless its content is distinctly mathematical
and intuitive. Its construction does not use the arithmetization of syntax and
the diagonal process – as it was the case by Gödel and other authors. Instead
of them Mostowski uses some set-theoretical lemmas and Skolem-Löwenheim
theorem. Mostowski’s undecidable sentence is stronger than Gödel’s one in the
sense that the latter ceases to be undecidable if one adds to the system the inﬁ-
nite ω-rule. The former has not this property – there is no “reasonable” rule of
inference which, added to the considered system, would decide it. The proof of
its undecidability is non-ﬁnitary – it rests on the axioms of the Zermelo-Fraenkel
set theory including the axiom of choice (in fact it can be eliminated from the
proof) and an axiom ensuring the existence of at least one inaccessible cardinal.
Mostowski’s undecidable statement expresses a fact concerning real numbers,
more precisely, it states that a CA-set is not empty.
Another contribution of Mostowski to the discussed domain is his paper
(1961). A notion of a free formula is introduced there. If ϕ is a formula with
one numerical free variable then ϕ is said to be free for a system S if for every
natural number n, the formulas ϕ(0), . . . , ϕ(n) are completely independent, i.e.,
every conjunction formed of some of those formulas and of the negations of the
remaining ones is consistent with S (n denotes here the nth numeral, i.e., 0 is the
term 0 and n + 1 is the term S n). It is proved that free formulas exist for certain
systems S and some of their extensions. Even a more general result is obtained:
given a family of extensions of S satisfying certain very general assumptions
there exists a formula which is free for every extension of this family. It should
be noted here that the method of the proof applies not only to systems based on
usual ﬁnitary rules of inference but also to systems with the inﬁnitary ω-rule.
Mostowski wrote also two important popular papers devoted to the incom-
pleteness results. One was published in Polish in 1946 (cf. Mostowski 1946), the
other in English in 1952 (cf. Mostowski 1952). Both enjoyed considerable popu-
larity. Its aim was to present “as clearly and as rigorously as possible the famous
theory of undecidable sentences created by Kurt Gödel in 1931” (cf. Mostowski
1952, p. v). Though based on a classical material they brought some new ideas.
In particular in the book (1952) the theory of R-deﬁnability was developed. It
presents a simultaneous generalization of the theory of deﬁnability and that of
the general recursiveness of functions and relations. This theory proves to be
a very convenient tool – one can express in it in a clear way the assumptions

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Decidability Theory
231
which are the common source of the various proofs of Gödel’s incompleteness
theorem.
To ﬁnish this section we want to mention a paper by Andrzej Ehrenfeucht
(1961). The notion of a separable theory is studied there and some interrelations
between separability and essential undecidability of theories are established. To
be more precise, a theory T is said to be separable if and only if there exists a
recursive set X of formulas such that (1) if ϕ is a theorem of T then ϕ ∈X and
(2) if ¬ϕ is a theorem of T then ϕ  X. It can be easily seen that every insepa-
rable theory is essentially undecidable but not vice versa. In fact an essentially
undecidable but separable theory is constructed in the paper. It is also shown that
an axiomatizable theory T is inseparable if and only if for any recursive family
{Ti} of axiomatizable consistent extensions of T there is a closed formula ϕ un-
decidable in each Ti. This result establishes the relation between the theorem
of Grzegorczyk, Mostowski and Ryll-Nardzewski (cf. Grzegorczyk-Mostowski-
Ryll-Nardzewski 1958) stating the inseparability of Peano arithmetic and the
result of Mostowski (cf. Mostowski 1961) which shows the existence of an un-
decidable sentence for any recursively enumerable family of extensions of Peano
arithmetic.
6. Conclusions
In this way we came to the end of our survey of the results due to Polish logicians
and devoted to the decidability theory. One can easily see that Polish mathemati-
cians and logicians were from the very beginning in the main stream of investi-
gations devoted to the Entscheidungsproblem. Moreover, they contributed to the
development of this ﬁeld in a signiﬁcant way. Especially Tarski and his students
(and later students of his students) were active here. They not only solved the
problem of decidability in the case of many particular theories by establishing
their decidability or undecidability, but they also developed general methods for
such proofs, which became classical and standard.
Though decidability problems have also a philosophical character and re-
search in this ﬁeld can be described in terms of the study of the “cognitive
power” pertaining to logical means of proof, it seems that such a philosophical
motivation was not the main factor stimulating the activity of Polish logicians.
Tarski and his students were advocates of the separation of logical research from
philosophical studies. For them logic and foundations of mathematics consti-
tuted a separate ﬁeld with its own problems and methods, a ﬁeld developing
independently of other branches of mathematics and philosophy.

16
CONTRIBUTION OF POLISH LOGICIANS
TO PREDICATE CALCULUS
The paper is devoted to the presentation of the main contributions of Pol-
ish logicians to the classical predicate calculus.1 The following subjects will be
discussed: works of M. Wajsberg on formulas satisﬁed in ﬁnite domains and on
degrees of completeness of various calculi, the natural deduction of S. Ja´skow-
ski, algebraic methods in proofs of the completeness theorem and Mostowski’s
work on generalized quantiﬁers. We shall not present studies on the theory of
satisfaction and truth and on the general theory of deduction systems.
1. Wajsberg’s Work on the Predicate Calculus
Logicians belonging to the Lvov-Warsaw school did not pay much attention in
their investigations directly to the classical predicate calculus. An exception here
was Mordechaj Wajsberg (1902– ?). He wrote two papers devoted to this calcu-
lus. They were written in 1932 and 1933 during his stay in Kowl (in Volhynia)
where he was working as a teacher.
In the ﬁrst of those papers, i.e., in the paper Untersuchungen über den Funk-
tionenkalkül für endliche Individuenbereiche (1933) Wajsberg considered for-
mulas of the restricted functional calculus satisﬁed in ﬁnite domains.2 A formula
is said to be k-true if and only if it is valid in a domain of individuals with ex-
actly k elements (this notion was introduced by P. Bernays). If the formula is
1The upper bound of the period covered in the paper is ﬁxed as 1963, i.e., the year in which
A. Mostowski’s paper “Thirty Years of Foundational Studies”, Acta Philosophica Fennica 17 (1965),
1–180 was published.
2The restricted functional calculus is simply the functional calculus of the ﬁrst order, i.e., the ﬁrst-
order logic with function symbols and individual variables only. The terminology was introduced by
D. Hilbert and W. Ackermann in Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik (1928). They considered also
the extended functional calculus, i.e., the functional calculus of higher order in which one can use
quantiﬁers not only over individual variables but also over functional variables.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 233–243. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

234
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
exactly k-true, it implies that it is not at the same time k + 1-true. A formula is
called a class formula if and only if it contains at most one free variable. The
main theorem proved in (1933) states that any k-true formula results from some
exactly k-true formula. It is a consequence of the following lemmas:
(1) There is a certain exactly k-true class formula from which each k-true
formula derives.
(2) From any exactly k-true class formula each k-true class formula derives.
(3) From each exactly k-true formula a certain exactly k-true class formula
derives.
In the paper (1933–1934) Wajsberg studied the degree of completeness of
certain mathematical and logical theories, in particular of the restricted func-
tional calculus, the extended functional calculus and the calculus of Principia
Mathematica (with the axiom of inﬁnity and the axiom of reducibility for all
types) as presented by K. Gödel in (1931a). By a degree of completeness of a
given theory Wajsberg understands the number of super-systems of this theory.
It is shown that the degree of completeness of the three above mentioned theo-
ries is equal to the continuum. Wajsberg proves it by constructing countable sets
of formulas with the property that no element of such a set is derivable from the
set of the remaining elements.
2. Natural Deduction
A system of natural deduction of Stanisław Ja´skowski was an answer to the
problem raised in 1926 by J. Łukasiewicz. Ja´skowski formulates this problem in
the following way (cf. Ja´skowski 1934, p. 5):
In 1926 Prof. J. Łukasiewicz called attention to the fact that mathematicians in their proofs
do not appeal to the theses of the theory of deduction, but make use of other methods of
reasoning. The chief means employed in their method is that of an arbitrary supposition. The
problem raised by Mr. Łukasiewicz was to put those methods under the form of structural
rules and to analyze their relation to the theory of deduction.
The ﬁrst results towards the solution of this problem were obtained by S. Ja´s-
kowski in 1926 at Łukasiewicz’s seminar. They were presented at the First Polish
Mathematical Congress in Lvov in 1927 (and mentioned in the proceedings of
the Congress). The full solution was contained in the booklet On the rules of
suppositions in formal logic published in 1934 as the ﬁrst volume of the new
series of books “Studia Logica” (Publications devoted to logic and its history.
Editor Prof. Dr. J. Łukasiewicz).

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Predicate Calculus
235
Ja´skowski developed in this work a system of natural deduction. The main
idea of it is formulated and explained by him in the following way (1934, p. 6)3:
We intend to analyze a practical proof by making use of the method of suppositions. How
can we convince ourselves of the truth of the proposition “CpCCpqq”? We shall do it as
follows.
Suppose p. This supposition being granted suppose Cpq. Thus we have assumed “p” and
“if p, then q”. Hence q follows. We then observe that “q” is a consequence of the suppo-
sition “Cpq”, and obtain as a deduction: “if p implies q, then q”, i.e. CCpqq. Thus having
proposed “p”, we have deduced this last proposition; from this fact, we can infer CpCCpqq.
To increase the clarity of such reasonings Ja´skowski introduces preﬁxes de-
noting which propositions are consequences of a given supposition. They con-
tain numbers classifying the suppositions. The number 1 corresponds to the ﬁrst
supposition (in the example given above – to the supposition p). One writes the
number before the supposition to which it corresponds and before all expressions
which are assumed under the conviction that this supposition is true. If within
the scope of validity of a given supposition an expression appears then its preﬁx
must begin with the number of that supposition. The supposition itself obtains
its own number and consequently its preﬁx is a sequence of numbers separated
by dots. Hence in our example the preﬁx of the supposition Cpq is 1.1. The
word “suppose” is symbolized by the letter “S ” written down immediately after
the preﬁx. Thus the sketch of demonstration given in the above quotation can be
written symbolically as follows4:
1.S p
1.1.SCpq
1.1.q
1.CCpqq
CpCCpqq
We should stress that Ja´skowski (following Le´sniewski, cf. Le´sniewski 1929,
p. 59) speaking about expressions, theses etc. treated always a given inscription
as a material object. Hence two inscriptions having the same appearance but
written down in different places are never taken as identical. They can only be
said to be equiform with each other.
To formulate the structural rules of his system Ja´skowski introduced the no-
tion of a domain. A domain of a supposition α is the class consisting of the
supposition α and of all expressions which in other theses are preceded by ini-
tial part equiform to the preﬁx of α. The absolute domain (shortly: domain) is
3Ja´skowski used in his work Łukasiewicz’s bracket-free symbolism. Hence in particular he writes
Cpq for the formula p →q, CCpqq for the formula (p →q) →q and CpCCpqq for the formula
p →[(p →q) →q].
4It should be noted that in the ﬁrst presentation of the system in 1926 Ja´skowski used another
symbolism.

236
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
the class of all theses belonging to the system. Note that at the beginning the
absolute domain is empty. It grows when the system is being developed. This
conception also reveals the inﬂuence of Le´sniewski.
If two domains D and D′ are given and D is the domain of a supposition
α and D′ either the absolute domain or the domain of a supposition β whose
preﬁx is equiform with an initial part of the preﬁx of α, then we say that D is
a subdomain of D′. A proposition belonging to a domain is said to be valid in
every subdomain of that domain. A given subdomain D of a domain D′ is called
an immediate subdomain if and only if D is not the subdomain of any subdomain
of D′.
The rules are now the following:
• Rule I. To every domain D, it is allowed to subjoin an expression com-
posed successively:
1. of a number not equiform with the initial number of any other ele-
ment of the domain D,
2. of a dot,
3. of a symbol “S ”,
4. of a proposition.
• Rule II. If in the domain D of a supposition α, a proposition β is valid,
it is allowed to subjoin a proposition of the form “Cαβ” to the domain
whereof D is an immediate subdomain.
• Rule III. Given a domain D in which two propositions are valid, one of
them being α and the other being composed successively:
1. of a symbol “C”,
2. of a proposition equiform with α,
3. of a proposition β,
it is allowed to subjoin to the domain D a proposition equiform with β.
• Rule IV. Given a subdomain D of a proposition composed successively
of a symbol “N” and of a proposition α, if two propositions β and γ are
valid in D such that γ is composed successively of a symbol “N” and
of a proposition equiform with β, it is allowed to subjoin a proposition
equiform with α to that domain whereof D is an immediate subdomain.
The system deﬁned in this way has no axioms. To explain how we proceed
in this formalism we give some examples following Ja´skowski (1934, p. 12–13).
The theses are marked by numbers. To the right of each thesis, the number of the
rule used in obtaining it and the number of theses to which we appeal are given.

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Predicate Calculus
237
1
1.S p
I
2
1.1.SCpq
I
3
1.1.q
III 2, 1
4
1.CCpqq
II 2, 3
5
CpCCpqq
II 1, 4
6
2.SCNpNq
I
7
2.1.S q
I
8
2.1.1.S Np
I
9
2.1.1.Nq
III 6, 8
10
2.1.p
IV 8, 7, 9
11
2.Cqp
II 7, 10
12
CCNpNqCqp
II 6, 11
13
1.2.S q
I
14
1.Cqp
II 13, 1
15
CpCqp
II 1, 14
16
1.3.S Np
I
17
1.3.1.S Nq
I
18
1.3.q
IV 17, 1, 16
19
1.CNpq
II 16, 18
20
CpCNpq
II 1, 19
21
3.SCpq
I
22
3.1.SCqr
I
23
3.1.1.S p
I
24
3.1.1.q
III 21, 23
25
3.1.1.r
III 22, 24
26
3.1.Cpr
II 23, 25
27
3.CCqrCpr
II 22, 26
28
CCpqCCqrCCpr
II 21, 27
29
4.SCpCqr
I
30
4.1.SCpq
I
31
4.1.1.S p
I
32
4.1.1.Cqr
III 29, 31
33
4.1.1.q
III 30, 31
34
4.1.1.r
III, 32, 33
35
4.1.Cpr
II 31, 34
36
4.CCpqCpr
II 30, 35
37
CCpCqrCCpqCpr
II 29, 36
38
5.SCNpp
I
39
5.1.S Np
I
40
5.1.p
III 38, 39
41
5.p
IV 39, 40, 39
42
CCNppp
II 38, 41

238
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
43
6.SCCpqp
I
44
6.1.S Np
I
45
6.1.1.S p
I
46
6.1.1.CNpq
III 20, 45
47
6.1.1.q
III 46, 44
48
6.1.Cpq
II 45, 47
49
6.1.p
III 43, 48
50
6.p
IV 44, 49, 44
51
CCCpqpp
II 43, 50
The system of natural deduction for the propositional calculus can be ex-
tended to the predicate calculus. One does it by extending the formalism de-
scribed above. Thus in particular in any domain D, any term whose preﬁx is
equiform to an initial part of the preﬁx of the thesis containing the supposition
or the term belonging to D is called valid. A proposition α is said to be signiﬁ-
cant in the domain D if every free variable of α is equiform with some term valid
in D. The symbol “T” is analogous to the symbol of supposition “S ”. The rules
are now the following:
• Rule Ia. Given a domain D, it is allowed to subjoin to it any expression
composed successively:
1. of a number not equiform with the initial number of any element of
the domain D,
2. of a dot,
3. of the symbol “S ”,
4. of a proposition signiﬁcant in the domain D.
Rules IIa, IIIa, IVa are the same as Rules II, III and IV, resp., formulated
above but they are applied now to the language of the predicate calculus.
• Rule Va. It is allowed, to any domain D in which
1. a term ζ and
2. a proposition composed of a quantiﬁer “Π”, of a variable η and of a
proposition α
are valid, to subjoin a proposition which differs, as to its form, from α
only in this respect that all variables bounded in η are replaced by sym-
bols equiform with ζ no one of which is a bounded variable (this rule
corresponds to the rule of omitting of the universal quantiﬁer),
• Rule VIa. If in the domain D of a term ζ a proposition α is valid, it is al-
lowed to subjoin a proposition of the form “Πζα” to that domain whereof
the domain D is an immediate subdomain (this rule correspond to the rule
of generalization).

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Predicate Calculus
239
• Rule VIIa. Given a domain D, it is allowed to subjoin to it any expression
composed successively:
1. of a number not equiform with the initial number of any element of
the domain,
2. of a dot,
3. of the symbol “T” and
4. of a term not equiform with any term valid in the domain D.
Again the system has no axioms. We provide an example of a deduction in
it (to the right of each thesis the number of the rule used in obtaining it and the
numbers of theses to which we appeal are given) (cf. Ja´skowski 1934, p. 30–31):
1
1.S ΠxΠyϕxy
Ia
2
1.1.Tz
VIIa
3
1.1.Πyϕzy
Va 1, 2
4
1.1.ϕzz
Va 2, 3
5
1.Πzϕzz
VIa 2, 4
6
CΠxΠyϕxyΠzϕzz
IIa 1, 5
7
1.1.1.Tv
VIIa
8
1.1.1.ϕzv
Va 3, 7
9
1.1.Πvϕzv
VIa 7, 8
10
1.ΠzΠvϕzv
VIa 2, 9
11
1.2.T x
VIIa
12
1.2.1.Ty
VIIa
13
1.2.1.Πvϕyv
Va 10, 12
14
1.2.1.ϕyx
Va 13, 11
15
1.2.Πyϕyx
VIa 12, 14
16
1.ΠxΠyϕyx
VIa 11, 15
17
CΠxΠyϕxyΠxΠyϕyx
II 1, 16
18
2.S ΠxCϕxψx
Ia
19
2.1.S Πxϕx
Ia
20
2.1.1.T x
VIIa
21
2.1.1.Cϕxψx
Va 18, 20
22
2.1.1.ϕx
Va 19, 20
23
2.1.1.ψx
III 21, 22
24
2.1.Πxψx
VIa 20, 23
25
2.CΠxϕxΠxψx
II 19, 24
26
CΠxCϕxψxCΠxϕxΠxψx
II 18, 25
27
3.S p
Ia
28
3.1.T x
VIIa
29
3.Πxp
VIa 28, 27
30
CpΠxp
IIa 27, 29

240
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
The Ja´skowski type systems can be developed for different logical calculi,
e.g., for systems with additional connectives, for positive logic, for intuitionistic
logic, etc.
It can be proved that the formalization given by the system of natural de-
duction is equivalent to the classical one, i.e., one can prove that a formula is a
tautology of the classical axiomatic propositional (predicate) logic if and only if
it is a thesis of the system of natural deduction for the propositional (predicate)
logic.
The system of natural deduction of Ja´skowski belongs certainly to the most
important achievements of Polish logic. It is a pity that it is – in a sense – forgot-
ten and not used. Instead of it another formalism is applied today. We mean the
formalism of natural deduction elaborated independently by Gerhard Gentzen in
(1935). Nevertheless the natural deduction of Ja´skowski was used in the Warsaw
School by A. Tarski and S. Le´sniewski in their works written in the twenties.
3. Algebraic Methods in the Classical Predicate Calculus
The algebraic modeling for the ﬁrst-order calculi was introduced by Andrzej
Mostowski in (1948b). The main purpose of this paper was to outline a gen-
eral method which permits one to prove the intuitionistic non-deducibility of
many formulas. The method consists in using the connections between intu-
itionistic logic and the so-called Brouwerian lattices (introduced and examined
by J.C.C. McKinsey and A. Tarski in 1946).
Mostowski’s work initiated the algebraic approach to classical as well as to
non-classical logic. Since our paper is devoted to the classical predicate calculus
we shall discuss only the former one.
One should mention here ﬁrst of all papers by Helena Rasiowa and Roman
Sikorski. In the paper (1950) they gave a new proof of the completeness theorem
of Gödel stating that if a formula ϕ of the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus is valid
in the domain of positive integers then it is provable.
As it was usual at that time, Rasiowa and Sikorski formulated their theorems
for the functional calculus in which we have individual variables, functional
variables and constants (connectives, quantiﬁers and technical signs). Today one
uses rather the full predicate calculus with individual variables, predicates, func-
tion symbols and constants. The results formulated for one case can be of course
reformulated for the other (and the choice of the type of calculus is the matter of
convenience and taste only).
Three ideas were used in the Rasiowa-Sikorski’s proof of the completeness
theorem: Mostowski’s algebraic interpretation of a formula ϕ as a functional the
values of which belong to a Boolean algebra, Lindenbaum’s construction of a

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Predicate Calculus
241
Boolean algebra from formulas of the functional calculus and a theorem on the
existence of prime ideals in Boolean algebras.
Let I be the set of positive integers and B0 the two-element Boolean algebra
(with elements 0 and 1). Let ϕ = ϕ(xi1, . . . , xin, Fk1
j1, Fkm
jm ) be a formula of the
ﬁrst-order functional calculus. It can be interpreted as an (I, B0) functional, i.e.,
as a function whose values belong to B0 and which has n arguments running over
I and m arguments running over the set F (where F is the set of all functions
whose arguments run over I and whose values belong to B0). The interpretation
is deﬁned as follows: (1) the individual variables xip are interpreted as variables
running over I, (2) the functional variables F
kp
jp are interpreted as variables run-
ning over F kp (= the set of k-argument functions from F ), (3) the operations
of disjunction, negation and existential quantiﬁer are interpreted as the Boolean
operations in the algebra B0. The functional obtained in this way will be denoted
as Φϕ. One can show that:
(1) For every formula ϕ from the functional calculus the (I, B0) functional
Φϕ assumes the value 1 (0) if and only if ϕ (¬ϕ) is satisﬁable.
(2) A formula ϕ is valid in the set I of all positive integers if and only if the
(I, B0) functional Φϕ is identically equal 1 ∈B0.
The second idea used in the proof is the Lindenbaum’s construction of a
Boolean algebra from formulas of the functional calculus. It consists of equiv-
alence classes of formulas with respect to the following relation: ϕ ∼ψ if and
only if ϕ −→ψ and ψ −→ϕ are provable (in the functional calculus).
The third idea is the existence of prime ideals in Boolean algebras preserv-
ing appropriate sums and containing appropriate elements. The proof of this is
topological and uses the well-known category method.
Applying those three ideas Rasiowa and Sikorski proved the following the-
orem: if a formula ϕ is not provable then the (I, B0) functional Φϕ assumes the
value 0 (the zero element of B0). They proceeded as follows: suppose that ϕ is
not provable. Let p∗be a prime ideal of the Lindenbaum’s algebra B∗preserving
appropriate sums and such that the equivalence class E(ϕ) of ϕ belongs to p∗.
The existence of such an ideal follows from the general theorem on the exis-
tence and from the fact that the unit of B∗is the class of all provable formulas
and that the set of appropriate sums is countable. Then B0 = B∗/p∗is a two-
element Boolean algebra and one can ﬁnd arguments for which the functional
Φϕ assumes the value 0.
The algebraical method was also used by Rasiowa and Sikorski to give a
simpler proof of the Skolem-Löwenheim theorem (cf. Rasiowa-Sikorski 1951).
It can also be generalized to the case of other functional calculi, e.g., to the
functional calculi of Heyting and Lewis (cf. Rasiowa 1951).

242
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
The general applicability of the algebraic treatment of the notion of satisﬁ-
ability was shown in the paper by Rasiowa and Sikorski (1953). They studied
there systematically the notion of satisﬁability and validity in the general case,
i.e., for a functional calculus S∗which is not exactly speciﬁed (only the fulﬁl-
ment of some general assumptions is required).
4. Generalized Quantiﬁers
The language of the ﬁrst-order predicate calculus is a useful tool for mathemat-
ics. Many of mathematical notions and objects can be expressed in this language
– but not all of them. In this situation one of the solutions can be provided by
higher order logics. Unfortunately this approach has some serious defects. Those
logics are extremely difﬁcult to investigate. This is because one uses in them the
notion of set and membership and in this way gets involved in all the difﬁculties
connected with set theory. Hence higher order logics cannot be complete in any
sense.
Another solution is to strengthen the ﬁrst-order logic. A. Mostowski pro-
posed in (1957b) to do it by adding generalized quantiﬁers.
Let T be a function deﬁned on pairs of cardinal numbers and with values in
the set {0, 1}. To every such function Mostowski adjoins a quantiﬁer QT deﬁned
semantically in the following way: if ϕ is a formula (for simplicity assume that
it has only one free variable) and A is a structure then the formula QT x ϕ is
satisﬁed in A if and only if T(card(ϕA), card(¬ϕA)) = 1, where ϕA = {a ∈|A|:
A |= ϕ[a]} and card(A) denotes the cardinality of the set A. The deﬁnition is a
generalization of the classical notion of quantiﬁer. If T is a function such that
T(κ, λ) = 1 if and only if κ ⩾1 then QT is the existential quantiﬁer. Similarly for
the function T such that T(κ, λ) = 1 if and only if λ = 0 describes the universal
quantiﬁer. New quantiﬁers which can be obtained in the indicated general way
are for example the quantiﬁers Qα and the Chang quantiﬁer Qc. They are deﬁned
as follows. If α is an ordinal number then the quantiﬁer Qα is described by the
function Tα such that Tα(κ, λ) = 1 if and only if κ ⩾ℵα. The Chang quantiﬁer is
determined by the function Tc satisfying the condition Tc(κ, λ) = 1 ≡κ + λ = κ.
Let LQ denote the ﬁrst-order language enriched by the quantiﬁer Q. The main
problem which should be solved is the problem of axiomatizability of the new
quantiﬁer. Mostowski proved in (1957b) that the logic LQ0 cannot be axioma-
tized by a recursively enumerable set of axioms. The proof is based on the idea
that in the language LQ0 one can give a categorical description of the standard
model of arithmetic. The theorem on non-axiomatizability remains true even for
the set of sentences true in all countable structures.
Mostowski proved also in (1957b) that if the ﬁrst-order logic is enriched by
a generalized quantiﬁer which is not deﬁnable by means of classical quantiﬁers

Contribution of Polish Logicians to Predicate Calculus
243
then the Löwenheim-Skolem theorem no longer holds. This result was strength-
ened ten years later by Lindström who gave in (1969) an interesting characteri-
zation of the ﬁrst-order logic.
Despite of the above negative result Mostowski showed in (1957b) that every
structure contains – elementarily in the sense of LQ0 – a countable structure.
He also proved that for countable structures there exists only one non-trivial
generalized quantiﬁer.
Problems raised by Mostowski in (1957b) were studied by numerous logi-
cians: G. Fuhrken and A. Slomson investigated the compactness of languages
with additional quantiﬁers, R.L. Vaught showed that LQ1 can be axiomatized,
H.J. Keisler gave a ﬁnite system of axioms for LQ1 and proved the axiomatiz-
ability of LQc.
Mostowski returned to the study of languages with generalized quantiﬁers
in the paper (1968). He considered there the Craig interpolation lemma and
the Beth deﬁnability theorem for certain extensions of the ﬁrst-order logic and
proved that: (1) for logics with additional quantiﬁers the interpolation lemma is
false, (2) for the logic LQ0 the deﬁnability lemma is false.
Discussing Mostowski’s researches on the generalizations of the ﬁrst-order
logic one should stress a fact which is very important from the methodological
point of view. In the comment on the theorem on non-axiomatizability he says
in (1957b, p. 12):
In spite of this negative result we believe that some at least of the generalized quantiﬁers
deserve a closer study and some deserve even to be included into systematic expositions of
symbolic logic. This belief is based on the conviction that the construction of formal calculi
is not the unique and even not the most important goal of symbolic logic.
We must remember that in those days the tradition of the Hilbert school was still
very strong. Hence Mostowski’s opinion could give rise to a serious controversy.
His attitude which allows non-effective and inﬁnitistic methods (demonstrated
not only in the case of generalized quantiﬁers but also in introducing the op-
eration of β-consequence in the second order arithmetic) opened ways for new
ﬁelds of study in the foundations of mathematics.

17
THE ENGLISH ALGEBRA OF LOGIC
IN THE 19TH CENTURY1
The aim of this essay is to study works and achievements of English logicians
of the 19th century. We shall consider the role they played in the development of
mathematical logic, in particular their contribution to the formalization of logic
and to the mechanization of reasoning. We shall present and discuss ﬁrst of all
works of A. De Morgan, G. Boole, W. S. Jevons and J. Venn indicating their
meaning and signiﬁcance for the development of mathematical logic.
Works of English logicians of the 19th century grew out of earlier ideas and
attempts of G. W. Leibniz, G. Ploucquet, J. H. Lambert, L. Euler. The idea of the
mathematization of logic and the development of the formal algebra in the 19th
century were sources of the algebra of logic established by De Morgan, Boole
and Jevons. It was in fact the beginning of the mathematical logic. The old idea
of a logical calculus which would enable the analysis of logical reasoning with
the help of a procedure similar to the procedure of solving equations in algebra
was realized.
1. De Morgan’s Syllogistic and the Theory of Relations
We shall begin the discussion of the development of logic in England in 19th
century by studying the idea of quantiﬁcation of the predicate.
In traditional logic (since Aristotle) the most important role was played by
syllogisms. Aristotle deﬁned them as formal arguments in which the conclusion
follows necessarily from the premises. His analysis centered on a very speciﬁc
type of argument. He considered namely statements of the form: all S is P (uni-
versal afﬁrmative), no S is P (universal negative), some S is P (particular af-
1Originally published in Studies in Logic, Grammar and Rhetoric 9 (1990), 15–45. Reprinted
with kind permission of Wydawnictwo Uniwersytetu w Białymstoku (Publishing House of the Uni-
versity in Białystok).
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 245–269. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

246
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
ﬁrmative), and some S is not P (particular negative), abbreviated later, resp., as
follows: S aP, S iP, S eP, S oP and called the categorical sentences. Aristotle ob-
served that one can build valid schemas of inference consisting of two premises
and a conclusion being categorical sentences – they are called categorical syllo-
gisms. If we assume that every term in a syllogism stands for a nonempty class
then we get that 24 of 256 possible combinations are valid inferences.
Aristotle and his medieval followers greatly exaggerated the importance of
the syllogism. Nevertheless syllogism formed the main part of logic until the
beginning of mathematical logic in the 19th century. Various attempts to reshape
and to enlarge the Aristotelian syllogism were undertaken. Let us mention here
attempts of F. Bacon, Ch. von Sigwart and W. Schuppe. The most famous of
those attempts was the “quantiﬁcation of the predicate” by the Scottish philo-
sopher Sir William Hamilton (1788–1856) presented in his book Lectures on
Metaphysics and Logic published in 1860. He noticed that the predicate term in
each of Aristotle’s four basic assertions S aP, S iP, S eP, S oP is ambiguous in
the sense that it does not tell us whether we are concerned with all or part of
the predicate. Hence one should increase the precision of those four statements
by quantifying their predicates. In this way we get eight assertions instead of
Aristotle’s four, namely:
all S is all P ,
all S is some P ,
no S is all P ,
no S is some P ,
some S is all P ,
some S is some P ,
some S is not all P ,
some S is not some P .
Using those eight basic propositions we can combine them to form 512 possible
moods of which 108 prove to be valid. The usage of statements with quantiﬁed
predicates allows us higher precision than it was possible before. For example,
the old logic would treat “All men are mortal” and “All men are featherless
bipeds” as identical in form; whereas in the new system we see at once that the
ﬁrst statement is an example of “All S is some P” and the second is an example
of “All S is all P”. But there arose some problems. It was difﬁcult to express
those new statements with quantiﬁed predicates in a common speech. Without
developing a really complete and precise system of notation one ﬁnds oneself
forced to apply words in a clumsy and barbarous way. Hamilton was aware of it
and attempted to remedy the obscurity of phrasing by devising a curious system
of notation. Though it was really curious and rather useless in practice it was
important for two reasons: it had the superﬁcial appearance of a diagram and it
led Hamilton to the idea that by transforming the phrasing of any valid syllogism

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
247
with quantiﬁed predicates it may be expressed in statements of equality. The
latter suggested that logical statements might be reduced to something analogous
to algebraic equations and so gave encouragement to those who were seeking
a suitable algebraic notation. Some logicians are of the opinion that this was
Hamilton’s only signiﬁcant contribution to logic (cf. Gardner 1958).
The idea of quantiﬁcation of the predicate in the syllogism can be found also
in papers of another English logician Augustus De Morgan (1806–1871). He
was a mathematician (contrary to W. Hamilton) and worked not only in logic
but also in algebra and analysis. We shall not discuss his mathematical works
here but concentrate on his logical achievements. Nevertheless we want to men-
tion that it was just De Morgan who introduced the notion of “mathematical
induction” which was popularized later thanks to the book on algebra written by
I. Todhunter (1820–1884).
A. De Morgan’s earlier logical works (i.e., works written before 1859) were
devoted to the study of the syllogism. He introduced independently a system
more elaborated than Hamilton’s one. Hamilton accused him of plagiarism and
for many years the two men argued with each other in books and magazine
articles. It was, as M. Gardner (1958) writes “perhaps the bitterest and funniest
debate about formal logic since the time of the schoolmen, though most of the
humor as well as insight was on the side of De Morgan” (p. 134). This debate
had also serious consequences. Namely it caused G. Boole’s renewed interest in
logic which led him to write the book Mathematical Analysis of Logic published
in 1847 (we shall discuss it in the next section).
Trying to reshape and to enlarge the Aristotelian syllogism (cf. the book
Formal Logic, or the Calculus of Inference Necessary and Probable, 1847) De
Morgan observed that in almost all languages there are so called positive and
negative terms. Even if in a language there are no special words indicating this
dichotomy, nevertheless every notion divides the universe of discourse into two
parts: elements having properties indicated by the given term and those which
do not have those properties. Hence if X denotes a certain class of objects then
all elements of the universe which are not X can be described as not-X. The
latter is denoted by De Morgan by x. In this way the difference between positive
and negative terms disappears and they possess equal rights. This enabled De
Morgan to consider – instead of two terms of the traditional syllogistic X, Y –
four pairs of terms: X, Y; x, y; X, y; x, Y which give 16 logical combinations, 8 of
which are different. He introduced various types of notation for them. The ﬁrst
two consisted of letters and resembled the traditional notation: a, i, e, o; the latter
two consisted of systems of parentheses. We shall present them in the following
table (the notation in the last column was introduced in De Morgan 1856, p. 91):

248
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
all X is Y
A
A1
X)Y
X))Y
no X is Y
E
E1
X.Y
X).(Y
or X)y
or X))y
some X is Y
I
I1
XY
X()Y
some X is not Y
O
O1
X : Y
X(.(Y
or Xy
or X()y
all x is y
a
A′
x)y
x))y
or Y)X
or X((Y
no x is y
e
E′
x)Y
x))Y
or x.y
or x(.)Y
some x is y
i
I′
xy
x()y
or X)(Y
some x is not y
o
O′
xY
x()Y
or x : y
or x).)Y
or Y : X
We see that De Morgan’s symbols introduced to express the old and new types
of syllogism were not algebraic. But he found that his symbols can be manipu-
lated in a way that resembled the familiar method of manipulation of algebraic
formulae (cf. De Morgan’s letter to Boole from 16 October 1861 – Letter 70 in
Smith 1982, pp. 87–91).
The above statements were called by De Morgan simple. He established the
following connections between them:
X)Y = X.y = y)x ;
X.Y = X)y = Y)x ;
XY = X : y = Y : x ;
X : Y = Xy = y : x ;
x)y = x.Y = Y)Y ;
x.y = x)Y = y)X ;
xy = x : Y = y : X ;
x : y = xY = Y : x .
The sign = was used by De Morgan in two meanings. Here it means “equivalent”
but in other contexts it was used also as a symbol for “implies”.
Denoting by + the conjunction De Morgan established the following com-
plex statements:
D = A1 + A′ = X)Y + x)y ;
D1 = A1 + O′ = X)Y + x : y ;
D = A′ + O1 = xy + X : Y ;
P = I1 + I′ + O1 + O′ ;
C = E1 + E′ = X.Y + x.y ;
C1 = E1 + I′ = X.Y + xy ;
C′ = E′ + I1 = x.y + XY.

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
249
Using the contemporary set-theoretical symbolism we see that D is simply X =
Y, D1 is X ⊂Y, D′ is X ⊃Y, C is X = y, C1 is X ⊂y, C′ is X ⊃y, P means that
neither X ∩Y, nor X ∩y, nor x ∩Y nor x ∩y is empty.
Having introduced those fundamental relations De Morgan developed his
theory of syllogism. He considered not only syllogism with simple premises but
also with complex ones (which he called complex syllogism).
We shall not present here all details of De Morgan’s syllogistic. Let us note
only that he used simple terms X, Y etc. as syllogistic terms as well as complex
ones: PQ (being P and Q; P∩Q in set-theoretical terms), P∗Q (being P or Q or
both; P∪Q), U (the universe), u (empty set). He stated the following properties:
XU = X ;
Xu = u ;
X ∗U = U ;
X ∗u = X .
Having introduced operations which we call today the negation of a product and
sum he established the following connections (called today De Morgan’s laws):
negation of PQ is p ∗q,
negation of P ∗Q is pq.
He noted also the law of distributivity:
(P ∗Q)(R ∗S ) = PR ∗PS ∗QR ∗QS .
We see that developing the theory of syllogism De Morgan came to the idea of
what we call today Boolean algebra. He did it independently of G. Boole (in
the next section we shall discuss in details connections and interdependencies of
their works and compare their achievements).
De Morgan not only extended the traditional syllogistic but introduced also
new types of syllogisms. In Budget of Paradoxes (1872) he summarized his
work under six heads, each propounding a new type of syllogism: relative, un-
decided, exemplar, numerical, onzymatic and transposed (cf. also De Morgan
1860). Since those considerations did not lead to new developments in mathe-
matical logic we shall not go into details here.
De Morgan’s considerations of syllogism were not very original. Much more
original were his later works – and it is perhaps his most lasting contribution to
logic. In the paper “On the Syllogism no IV, and on Logic in General” (De
Morgan 1861) from 1859 (published in 1864) he moved beyond the syllogism to
investigate the theory of relations. Although he was not the ﬁrst to study relations
in logic, he was probably the ﬁrst who gave this subject a concentrated attention.
He may be considered as a real founder of the modern logic of relations. His
ideas and conceptions were later on developed by various logicians, ﬁrst of all
by Ch. S. Peirce, E. Schröder, G. Peano, G. Cantor, G. Frege and B. Russell.
Ch.S. Peirce wrote that De Morgan “was one of the best logicians of all time
and undoubtedly a father of the logic of relatives” (cf. Ch.S. Peirce 1933–1934,
vol. 3, p. 237).

250
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
In “On the Syllogism no IV” (1864b) De Morgan noted that the doctrine of
syllogism, which he had discussed in his Formal Logic of 1847 (cf. De Morgan
1847) and in earlier papers was only a special case in the theory of the compo-
sition of relations. Hence he went to a more general treatment of the subject. He
stated that the canons of syllogistic reasoning were in effect a statement of the
symmetrical (De Morgan called it convertible) and transitive character of the re-
lation of identity. He suggested symbols for the converse and the contradictory
(he said “contrary”) of a relative and for three different ways in which a pair
of relatives may be combined (by “relative” he meant what some logicians had
called a relative term, i.e., a term which applies to something only in respect of
its being related to something else). Those ways can be expressed by the follow-
ing phrases: (i) x is an l of an m of y (e.g., “John is a lover of a master of Peter”),
(ii) x is an l of every m of y, (iii) x is an l of none but an m of y. De Morgan
showed that the converse of the contradictory and the contradictory of the con-
verse are identical. He set out in a table the converse, the contradictory and the
converse of the contradictory of each of the three combinations and proved that
the converse or the contradictory or the converse of the contradictory of each
such combination is itself a combination of one of the kinds discussed.
Papers of De Morgan, though containing new and interesting ideas were not
easy to read. They were full of ambiguities and technical details which made
them difﬁcult to study. Nevertheless they contributed in a signiﬁcant way to the
development of mathematical logic. We shall come back to De Morgan and his
works in the next section comparing his achievements with those of Boole.
2. Boole and His Algebra of Logic
One of the most important ﬁgures in the history of mathematical logic (not only
in England) was George Boole (1815–1864). He was interested in logic already
in his teens, working as un usher in a private school at Lincoln and educating
himself by extensive reading. From that time came his idea that algebraic formu-
lae might be used to express logical relations. His renewed interest in logic was
caused by the publication (in periodicals) of letters on the controversy between
Sir William Hamilton and Augustus De Morgan on the priority in adoption of
the doctrine of the quantiﬁcation of predicates (cf. the previous section). Boole
and De Morgan were in correspondence over a long period (1842–1864). They
exchanged scientiﬁc ideas and discussed various problems of logic and mathe-
matics.
The main logical works of G. Boole are two books: The Mathematical Anal-
ysis of Logic, Being an Essay Toward a Calculus of Deductive Reasoning (1847)
and An Investigation of the Laws of Thoughts, on which are Founded the Math-
ematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities (1854).

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
251
While
working
on
the
pamphlet
Mathematical
Analysis
of
Logic
G. Boole knew already A. De Morgan and they were exchanging letters. De
Morgan was working then on his Formal Logic. He was meticulous in ensur-
ing that neither could be placed in a position in which he could be accused of
plagiarism. He wrote to Boole in a letter of 31st May 1847:
[. . . ] I would much rather not see your investigations till my own are quite ﬁnished; which
they are not yet for I get something new every day. When my sheets are printed, I will ask
for your publication: till then please not to sent it. I expect that we are more likely to have
something in common than Sir W.H. (= William Hamilton) and myself.
I should have sent my paper on syllogism [. . . ] to you by this post: but I remembered that
you might have the same fancy as myself – to complete your own ﬁrst. Therefore when you
choose to have it, let me know (cf. Smith 1982, Letter 11, p. 22).
Hence we may conclude that they wrote their works completely independently.
There is a story that their books reached the shop on the same day (in November
1847).
The second book of G. Boole An Investigation of the Laws of Thought was
not very original. It was the result of Boole’s studies of works of philosophers
on the foundations of logic. The chief novelty of the book was the application of
his ideas to the calculus of probabilities. There was no important change on the
formal side in comparison with Mathematical Analysis of Logic.
We should mention here also his paper “On the Calculus of Logic” (1848)
which contained a short account of his ideas from the pamphlet from 1847.
It may be supposed that it was more widely read among mathematicians than
Mathematical Analysis of Logic.
Boole was not satisﬁed with the exposition of his ideas in his books. He was
working towards the end of his life on the new edition of the Laws of Thought
preparing various improvements. From the drafts published in (Boole 1952) it
follows that what he had in mind was a development of his epistemological
views rather than any alteration of the formal side of his work. He mentions in
particular a distinction between the logic of class (i.e., his calculus of logic) and
a higher, more comprehensive, logic that cannot be reduced to a calculus but
may be said to be “the Philosophy of all thought which is expressible in signs,
whatever the object of that thought” (cf. Boole 1952, p. 14).
Coming now to the detailed analysis of Boole’s achievements we must start
from the observation that what stimulated his interest in mathematical logic was
not only the dispute between De Morgan and Hamilton but also the discussion
of the nature of algebra shortly before he wrote his papers (let us mention here
the papers of Peacock, Sir William Rowan Hamilton, De Morgan or Gregory
– a personal friend of Boole and the editor of “Cambridge Mathematical Jour-
nal”). Boole’s aesthetic interest in mathematics led him to value very highly all
attempts to achieve abstract generality.

252
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Boole started from the following ideas (which were at least implicitly in pa-
pers of his contemporaries): (i) there could be an algebra of entities which are
not numbers in any ordinary sense, (ii) the laws which hold for types of numbers
up and including complex numbers need not all be retained in an algebraic sys-
tem not applicable to such numbers. He saw that an algebra could be developed
as an abstract calculus capable of various interpretations. The view of logic he
had can be seen from the opening section of his Mathematical Analysis of Logic:
They who are acquainted with the present state of the theory of Symbolical Algebra, are
aware that the validity of the processes of analysis does not depend upon the interpretation
of the symbols which are employed, but solely upon the laws of their combination. Every
system of interpretation which does not affect the truth of the relations supposed, is equally
admissible, and it is thus that the same processes may, under one scheme of interpretation,
represent the solution of a question on the properties of numbers, under another, that of a
geometrical problem, and under a third, that of a problem of dynamics or optics [...] We
might justly assign it as the deﬁnitive character of a true Calculus, that it is a method resting
upon the employment of Symbols, whose laws of combination are known and general, and
whose results admit of a consistent interpretation. That to the existing forms of Analysis a
quantitative interpretation is assigned, is the result of circumstances by which those forms
were determined, and is not to be construed into a universal condition of Analysis. It is upon
the foundation of this general principle, that I purpose to establish the Calculus of Logic,
and that I claim for it a place among the acknowledged forms of Mathematical Analysis,
regardless that in its objects and in its instruments it must at present stand alone. (p. 9)
What is really new in Boole’s works is not the idea of an unquantitative
calculus – it was already by Leibniz and Lambert – but a clear description of the
essence of the formalism in which the validity of a statement “does not depend
upon the interpretation of the symbols which are employed, but solely upon the
laws of their combination” (Boole 1847, p. 11). Boole indicates here that a given
formal language may be interpreted in various ways. Hence he sees logic not as
an analysis of abstracts from real thoughts but rather as a formal construction
for which one builds afterword an interpretation. This is really quite new in
comparison with the whole tradition including Leibniz. Boole summerizes his
position in the last paragraph of the paper “On the Calculus of Logic” (Boole
1848) as follows:
The view which these enquires present of the nature of language is a very interesting one.
They exhibit it not as a mere collection of signs, but as a system of expressions, the elements
of which are subject to the laws of the thought which they represent. That these laws areas
rigorously mathematical as the laws which govern the purely quantitative conceptions of
space and time, of number and magnitude, is a conclusion which I do not hesitate to submit
to the most exact scrutiny. (p. 185)
One can say that the relation of Boole to Leibniz is the same as was the
relation of Aristotle to Plato. In fact, we ﬁnd by Boole, as it was by Aristotle, not
only the ideas, but also a concrete implementation of them, a concrete system.
We are going to describe it now.

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
253
First of all we must mention that what was built by Boole was not a system
in our nowadays meaning – he did not distinguish between properties of oper-
ations which are assumed and properties which can be proved or derived from
the assumptions.
Symbols x, y, z etc. denoted classes in Boole’s papers. He did not distinguish
very sharply between class symbols and adjectives. Sometimes he called the
letters x, y, z etc. elective symbols thinking of them as symbols which elect (i.e.,
select) certain things for attention. The symbol = between two class symbols
indicated that the classes concerned have the same members. He introduced three
operations on classes: (i) intersection of two classes denoted by xy (i.e., the class
consisting of all the things which belong to both those classes), (ii) the exclusive
union of two classes, i.e., if x and y are two mutually exclusive classes then x+y
denotes the class of things which belong either to the class denoted by x or to the
class denoted by y, (iii) subtraction of two classes, i.e., if every element of the
class y is an element of the class x then x −y denoted the class of those elements
of x which are not elements of y. He introduced also special symbols for two
classes which form, so to say, limiting cases among all distinguishable classes,
namely the universe class, or the class of which everything is a member (denoted
by 1) and the null class, or the class of which nothing is a member (denoted by 0).
The introduction of those classes involves an interesting novelty with respect to
the tradition coming from Aristotle who conﬁned his attention to general terms
which were neither universal in the sense of applying to everything nor yet null
in the sense of applying to nothing. Boole denoted by 1 what De Morgan called
the universe of discourse, i.e., not the totality of all conceivable objects of any
kind whatsoever, but rather the whole of some deﬁnite category of things which
are under discussion.
Having introduced the universe class Boole wrote 1 −x for the complement
of the class x and abbreviated it as x.
The operation of intersection of classes resembles the operation of multi-
plication of numbers. But there is an important peculiarity observed by Boole.
Namely if x denotes a class then xx = x and in general xn = x. Boole says in
Mathematical Analysis of Logic that it is the distinguishing feature of his calcu-
lus. The analogy between intersection and multiplication suggests also the idea
of introducing to the calculus for classes on operation resembling division of
two numbers. Boole writes that this analogue may be abstraction. Let x, y, z de-
note classes related in the way indicated by the equation x = yz. We can write
z = x/y expressing the fact that z denotes a class we reach by abstracting from
the membership of the class x the restriction of being included in the class y. But
this convention has two limits. First the expression x/y can have no meaning at
all in the calculus of classes if the class x is not a part of the class y and sec-
ondly, the expression x/y is generally indeterminate in the calculus of classes,

254
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
i.e., there may be many different classes whose intersections with the class y are
all coextensive with the class x.
The introduced system of notation sufﬁces to express the A,
E,
I and O propositions of traditional logic (provided that A and E propositions are
taken without existential import). If the symbol x denotes the class of X things
and the symbol y the class of Y things, then we have the following scheme:
all X is Y
x(1 −y) = 0,
no X is Y
xy = 0,
some X is Y
xy  0,
some X is not Y
x(1 −y)  0.
Observe that the ﬁrst two propositions are represented by equalities while the
other two by inequalities. Boole preferred to express all the traditional types of
categorical propositions by equations and therefore he wrote
some X is Y
as
xy = v,
some X is not Y
as
x(1 −y) = v .
The letter v seems to correspond to the English word “some”. It is said to stand
for a class “indeﬁnite in all respects but one” – namely that it contains a member
or members. But this convention is unsatisfactory. In Boole’s system the letter v
can be manipulated in some respects as though it were a class symbol. This may
suggest mistaken inferences. For example one may be tempted to infer from
the equations: ab = v and cd = v that ab = cd. Boole himself did not fall
into such fallacies by putting restrictions on the use of the letter v which are
inconsistent with his own description of it as a class symbol. It seems that a
reason and purpose of introducing the symbol v is the desire to construct a device
for expressing all Aristotelian inferences, even those depending on existential
import.
We ﬁnd by Boole the following formulae indicating the connections between
various operations on classes (those formulae were assumed by him, explicitly
or implicitly, as premises):
(1)
xy = yx,
(2)
x + y = y + x,
(3)
x(y + z) = xy + xz,
(4)
x(y −z) = xy −xz,
(5)
if x = y then xz = yz,
(6)
if x = y then x + z = y + z,
(7)
if x = y then x −z = y −z,
(8)
x(1 −x) = 0.
The formulae (1)–(7) are similar in form to rules of ordinary numerical al-
gebra. The formula (8) is different. But Boole pointed out that even it can be

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
255
interpreted numerically. He wrote (Boole 1854, pp. 37–38):
Let us conceive, then, of an Algebra in which the symbols x, y, z etc. admit indifferently
of the values 0 and 1, and of these values alone. The laws, the axioms, and the processes,
of such an Algebra will be identical in their whole extent with the laws, the axioms, and
the processes of an Algebra of Logic. Differences of interpretation will alone divide them.
Upon this principle the method of the following work is established.
Those words (and similar in other places) may suggest that Boole’s system
is a two-valued algebra. But this is a mistake. In fact Boole did not distinguish
sharply between his original system (fulﬁlling rules (1)–(8)) and a narrower sys-
tem satisfying additionally the following principle:
(9)
either x = 1 or x = 0.
If we interpret the system in terms of classes then the principle (9) is not
satisﬁed and if we interpret it numerically then the system satisﬁes even (9).
In both his books The Mathematical Analysis of Logic and An Investigation
of the Laws of Thought Boole suggested a convention that the equations x = 1
and x = 0 may be taken to mean that the proposition X is true or false, resp.
Consequently the truth-values of more complicated propositions can be repre-
sented by combinations of small letters, e.g., the truth-value of the conjunction
of the propositions X and Y by xy and the truth-value of their exclusive dis-
junction by x + y. This enables us to interpret the Boole’s system in terms of
the truth-values of propositions with symbols 1 and 0 for truth and falsity re-
spectively. This interpretation was worked out by Boole himself (without use of
the phrase ‘truth-value’ which was invented later by G. Frege). He wrote in The
Mathematical Analysis of Logic (pp. 49–50):
To the symbols X, Y, Z representative of Propositions, we may appropriate the elective
symbols x, y, z in the following sense. The hypothetical Universe, 1, shall comprehend
all conceivable cases and conjectures of circumstances. The elective symbol x attached
to any subject expressive of such cases shall select those cases in which the Proposition
X is true, and similarly for Y and Z. If we conﬁne ourselves to the contemplation of a
given Proposition X, and hold in abeyance any other consideration, then two cases only are
conceivable, viz. ﬁrst that the given Proposition is true, and secondly that it is false. As these
two cases together make up the Universe of Proposition, and as the former is determined
by elective symbol x, the latter is determined by the elective symbol 1 −x. But if the other
considerations are admitted, each of these cases will be resoluble into others, individually
less extensive, the number of which will depend on the number of foreign considerations
admitted. Thus if we associate the Propositions X and Y, the total number of conceivable
cases will be found as exhibited in the following scheme.
Cases
Elective expressions
1st
X true, Y true
xy
2nd
X true, Y false
x(1 −y)
3rd
X false, Y true
(1 −x)y
4th
X false, Y false
(1 −x)(1 −y)

256
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
[. . . ] And it is to be noted that however few or many those circumstances may be, the sum
of the elective expressions representing every conceivable case will be unity.
In Laws of Thought Boole abandoned this interpretation and proposed that the
letter x should be taken to stand for the time during which the proposition X is
true. This resembles opinions of some ancient and medieval logicians.
In Boole (1847) and, in a more clear way, in Boole (1854) we ﬁnd also
another interpretation. In Mathematical Analysis of Logic Boole says that the
theory of hypothetical propositions could be treated as part of the theory of prob-
abilities and in Laws of Thought we have an interpretation according to which
the letter x stands for the probability of the proposition X in relation to all the
available information, say K. Hence we have:
(10)
if X and Y are independent then
ProbK(X and Y) = xy,
(11)
if X and Y are mutually exclusive then
ProbK(X or Y) = x + y.
We see that Boole’s system may have various interpretations and Boole him-
self anticipated that fact. The essence of his method is really the derivation of
consequences in abstract fashion, i.e., without regard to interpretation. He made
this clear in the opening section of Mathematical Analysis of Logic. If he some-
times allows himself to think of his symbols as numerical, that is merely a con-
cession to custom.
The fundamental process in the formal elaboration of Boole’s system is so
called development. Let f(x) be an expression involving x and possibly other
elective symbols and algebraic signs introduced above. Then we have f(x) =
ax + b(1 −x). It can be easily seen that a = f(1) and b = f(0). Hence
f(x) = f(1)x + f(0)(1 −x) .
It is said that this formula gives the development of f(x) with respect to x.
If we have an expression g(x, y) with two elective symbols x, y (and the usual
symbols of operations), then according to this method we obtain the following
development of it:
g(x, y) = g(1, y)x + g(0, y)(1 −x),
g(1, y) = g(1, 1)y + g(1, 0)(1 −y),
g(0, y) = g(0, 1)y + g(0, 0)(1 −y),
and consequently using the rule (3):
g(x, y) = g(1, 1)xy + g(1, 0)x(1 −y) + g(0, 1)(1 −x)y + g(0, 0)(1 −x)(1 −y).
Factors x, 1 −x in the development of f(x) and xy, x(1 −y), (1 −x)y, (1 −
x)(1 −y) in the development of g(x, y) are called constituents. We see that for
one class x we have 2 constituents, for two classes x, y we have 4 constituents,
and in general for n classes we have 2n constituents. The sum of all constituents

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
257
of any development is equal 1, their product is equal 0. Hence they may be
interpreted as a decomposition of the universe into a pairwise disjoint classes.
The development of an expression is treated by Boole (cf. Boole 1847, p. 60) as
a degenerate case under Maclaurin’s theorem about the expansion of functions in
ascending powers (he relegates this notion to a footnote in Boole (1854, p. 72)).
The development of elective expressions served Boole to deﬁne two other
operations, namely solution and elimination. Assume that we have an equation
f(x) = 0 where f(x) is an expression involving symbol x and maybe other elec-
tive symbols. We want to write x in terms of those other symbols. Using devel-
opment of f (x) one has:
f(1)x + f (0)(1 −x) = 0,
[f(1) −f(0)]x + f(0) = 0,
x =
f(0)
f(0) −f(1) .
Observe that Boole introduces here the operation of division to which he has
assigned no ﬁxed interpretation. But he suggests here a special method of elim-
ination of this difﬁculty. Developing the expression
f (0)
f(0) −f(1)
we get a sum of products in which the sign of division appears only in the various
coefﬁcients, each of which must have one of the four forms: 1
1, 0
0, 0
1, 1
0. The ﬁrst
is equal 1 and the third 0. The fourth can be shown not to occur except as coefﬁ-
cient to a product which is separately equal 0, hence it is not very troublesome.
The second 0
0 is curious. Boole says that it is a perfectly indeterminate symbol
of quantity, corresponding to “all, some, or none”. Sometimes he equates it with
the symbol v but it is not quite correct. It is better to use another letter, say w.
Hence we have
x = 1
1 p + 0
0q + 0
1r + 1
0 s,
x = p + wq.
We can interpret it saying that the class x consists of the class p together with
an indeterminate part (all, some, or none) of the class q. In an unpublished draft
(cf. Boole 1952, pp. 220–226) Boole wrote that the coefﬁcients 1
1, 0
0, 0
1, 1
0 should
be taken to represent respectively the categories of universality, indeﬁniteness,
non-existence and impossibility.
To describe now the rules for elimination assume that an equation f(x) = 0
is given. We want to know what relations, if any, hold independently between x
and other classes symbolized in f (x). Solving this equation we get
x =
f(0)
f(0) −f(1) .

258
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Hence
1 −x = −
f(1)
f(0) −f(1) .
But x(1 −x) = 0, hence
−
f (0)f(1)
[f(0) −f(1)]2 = 0 ,
i.e.,
f(0)f(1) = 0 .
We have now two cases: (i) the working out of the left side of this equation
yields 0 = 0, (ii) it yields something of the form g(y, z, . . .) = 0. In the case (i)
we conclude that the original equation covers no relations independent of x, in
the case (ii) we establish that the full version of the equation f (x) = 0 covers
some relation or relations independent of x.
In all those reasonings we see that they involve expressions for which there
is no logical interpretation. But Boole has adopted a rule according to which
if one is doing some calculations in a formal system then it is not necessary
that all formulas in this calculating process have a meaning according to a given
interpretation – it is enough that the ﬁrst and the last ones have such a meaning.
Boole’s calculations were sufﬁcient to represent all kinds of reasonings of
traditional logic. In particular syllogistic reasonings might be presented as the
reduction of two class equations to one, followed by elimination of the middle
term and solution for the subject term of the conclusion. Consider, for example,
the following reasoning: every human being is an animal, every animal is mortal,
hence every human being is mortal. Let h denote the class of human beings, m
the class of mortals and a the class of animals. We have by our premises:
h(1 −a) = 0 ,
a(1 −m) = 0 .
Hence
h −ha + a −am = 0 .
Developing this with respect to a we get
(h −h1 + 1 −1m)a + (h −h0 + 0 −0m)(1 −a) = 0,
(1 −m)a + h(1 −a) = 0 .
Eliminating now a we have
(1 −m)h = 0 .
This means that every human being is mortal.
What was the meaning and signiﬁcance of Boole’s ideas for the development
of mathematical logic? First of all we must note that he freed logic from the dom-
ination of epistemology and so brought about its revival as an independent sci-
ence. He showed that logic can be studied without any reference to the processes

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
259
of our minds. On the other hand Boole’s work can be seen as “one of the ﬁrst im-
portant attempts to bring mathematical methods to bear on logic while retaining
the basic independence of logic from mathematics” (cf. Evra 1977, p. 374). The
chief novelty in his system is the theory of elective functions and their devel-
opment. Those ideas can be met already by Philo of Megara but Boole was the
ﬁrst who treated these topics in a general fashion. What more, Boole’s methods
can be applied in a mechanical way giving what is called today a decision pro-
cedure. Note also that the symbolism was by him only a tool – we ﬁnd here no
overestimation of the role of a symbolic language. Despite of all imperfections
of Boole’s methods (e.g., the usage of logically uninterpretable expressions) one
must admit that Boole was an important ﬁgure in the transitional epoch between
the traditional, purely syllogistic logic and the contemporary post-Fregean logic.
To give the full account of the development one should mention here also Hugh
McColl (1837–1909) who in the paper “The Calculus of Equivalent Statements”
(1878–1880) has put forward suggestions for a calculus of propositions in which
the asserted principles would be implications rather than equations (as it was by
Boole). He proposed an algebraic system of the propositional calculus in the
spirit of Boole. This was an attempt to overcome the lacks of Boole’s systems
and may be treated as a climax in the development of mathematical logic before
Frege (who proposed a complete calculus of propositions).
We ﬁnish this section with some remarks comparing works and achieve-
ments of Boole with those of De Morgan. As we have mentioned above they
were in contact over a long time and exchanged scientiﬁc ideas. Boole’s Math-
ematical Analysis of Logic and De Morgan’s Formal Logic were written and
published simultaneously. Though they worked on their books independently
(cf. remarks on this at the beginning of this chapter) their ideas were similar. De
Morgan wrote on 27 November 1847 in a draft of a letter to Boole (not sent):
“Some of our ideas run so near together, that proof of the physical impossibility
of either of us seeing the other’s work would be desirable to all those third par-
ties who hold that where plagiarism is possible 1 = a whenever a is 0” (cf. Smith
1982, p. 24). In a version sent to Boole we ﬁnd the following words indicating
what was the similarity of their approaches: “There are some remarkable simi-
larities between us. Not that I have used the connection of algebraical laws with
those of thought, but that I have employed mechanical modes of making transi-
tions, with notation which represents our head work” (cf. Smith 1982, p. 25).
Studying their correspondence we come to the conclusion that while in the
earlier years the inﬂuence ﬂowed from De Morgan to Boole, later the direction
has changed. We see nearly always De Morgan reacting to Boole’s ideas, rather
that vice versa. The inﬂuence of De Morgan on Boole was either slight or de-
layed. G.C. Smith (1982) states explicitly that “it was Boole who had the most
original ideas and most vigorous intellect” (p. 123). Nevertheless the most im-

260
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
portant fact was that they both stimulated each other by a steady interaction of
ideas.
De Morgan estimated very highly Boole’s works. He wrote: “When the ideas
thrown out by Mr Boole shall have borne their full fruit, algebra, though only
founded on ideas of number in the ﬁrst instance, will appear like a sectional
model of the whole form of thought” (cf. De Morgan 1861, p. 346).
3. The Logical Works of Jevons
Boole’s works were rather ignored by most contemporary British logicians or
damned with faint praise (cf. Gardner 1958). One of persons who saw their im-
portance was William Stanley Jevons (1835–1882), a logician and economist.
He regarded Boole’s achievements as the greatest advance in the history of logic
since Aristotle. But he noticed also defects of Boole’s system. He believed that
it was a mistake that Boole tried to make his logical notation resemble algebraic
notation. “I am quite convinced that Boole’s forms [...] have no real analogy to
the similar mathematical expressions” – as he stated in a letter (cf. The Letters
and Journals of W. Stanley Jevons, 1886b, p.350). He saw also the weakness in
Boole’s preference for the exclusive rather than the inclusive interpretation of
“or”.
His own system was supposed to overcame all those defects. Jevons devised
a method called by him the “method of indirect inference”. He wrote: “I have
been able to arrive at exactly the same results as Dr. Boole without the use of any
mathematics; and though the very simple process which I am about to describe
can hardly be said to be strictly Dr. Boole’s logic, it is yet very similar to it and
can prove everything that Dr. Boole proved” (cf. Jevons 1870a, p. 247).
We shall describe now the system of Jevons. He introduced the following
operations performed on classes: intersection, complement and the inclusive
union + (denoted by him originally by ·|· to distinguish it from Boole’s exclu-
sive union). The null class was denoted by 0 and the universe class by 1. The
expression X = Y indicated the equality of the classes X and Y, i.e., the fact that
they have the same elements. To express the inclusion of X in Y Jevons wrote
X = XY. He noted the following properties of those operations:
XY = YX ,
X + Y = Y + X ,
X(YZ) = (XY)Z ,
X + (Y + Z) = (X + Y) + Z ,
X(Y + Z) = XY + XZ .
He used also the principle of identity X = X, of contradiction Xx = 0 (Jevons
symbolized a complement using a lower-case letter – he borrowed this conven-

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
261
tion from De Morgan, cf. section 1) as well as tertium non datur X + x = 1 and
the rule of substitution of similars. The last rule is used by him to veriﬁcation of
inferences. Take for example the following reasoning (known in the traditional
logic as the mood Barbara):
All
S
is
M
All
M
is
P
All
S
is
P
or symbolically
S aM
MaP
S aP
The ﬁrst premise is written by Jevons as S = S M, the second as M = MP.
Substituting M for MP in the ﬁrst premise we get S = S (MP) = (S M)P. But
S = S M, hence S = S P, i.e., S aP.
Jevons developed his logic using properties of operations and Boole’s idea
of constituents. The easiest way to explain it is to give an example. Consider the
following syllogistic premises: “All A is B” and “No B is C”. First we write a
table exhausting all possible combinations of A, B, C and their negations (cf.
Boole’s constituents):
ABC
ABc
AbC
Abc
aBC
aBc
abC
abc .
Jevons called such a list an “abecedarium” and later a “logical alphabet”. The
premise “All A is B” tells us that the classes Abc and AbC are empty, similarly
from “No B is C” it follows that ABC and aBC are empty. The ﬁnal step is now
to inspect the remaining classes, all consistent with the premises, to see what
we can determine about the relation of A to C. We note that “No A is C” (there
are no remaining combinations containing both A and C). In this way we got a
reasoning known in the traditional logic as the mood Celarent. Similarly, under
the additional assumption that none of the three classes A, B, C is empty, we
can conclude that “Some A is not C”, “Some not-A is C” etc. What is important
here is the fact that Jevons’ system was not limited to the traditional syllogistic
conclusions (and he was very proud of it).

262
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Jevons, as most of other logicians of that time, conﬁned his attention al-
most exclusively to class logic. He combined statements of class inclusion with
conjunctive or disjunctive assertions but almost never worked with truth-value
relations alone. He preferred also, like Boole, to keep his notation in the form of
equations (writing for example A = AB to express the fact that all A is B). This
preference for “equational logic” – as Jevons called it – was one of the reasons
of the fact that he did not consider problems of a truth-value nature (though his
method operates very efﬁciently with such problems).
The methods of Boole and of Jevons were suitable for a mechanization.
Jevons devised a number of laborsaving devices to increase the efﬁciency of
his method. The most important were his “logical abacus” and his “logical ma-
chine”. The ﬁrst, described in Jevons (1869) “consisted of small rectangular
wooden boards, all the same size, and each bearing a different combination of
true and false terms. The boards were lined up on a rack. An arrangement of
pegs on the side of each board was such that one could insert a ruler under the
pegs and quickly pick out whatever group of boards one wished to remove from
the rack” (Gardner 1958, p. 167).
Jevons’ logical machine was described by him in (Jevons 1870b) and in
(Jevons 1874). It was built for him by a young clockmaker in Salford in 1869. In
1870 Jevons demonstrated his machine at a meeting of the Royal Society of Lon-
don. In 1914 his son gave it to the Science Museum, South Kensington, London
but in 1934 it was transferred to the Oxford Museum of the History of Science,
Old Ashmolean Building, Oxford, where it is now on display.
Jevons’ logical machine resembles a miniature upright piano about 3 feet
high. On the face of it are openings through which one can see letters repre-
senting the 16 possible combinations of four terms and their negations (the con-
stituents). Each combination forms a vertical row of four terms. The keyboard
consists of 21 keys arranged in the following way:
F
I
N
I
S
·|·
d
D
c
C
b
B
a
A
C
O
P
U
L
A
A
a
B
b
C
c
D
d
·|·
F
U
L
L
S
T
O
P
We have 5 “operational keys” and 16 keys representing terms, positive and
negative. The “copula” is pressed to indicate the sign of equality connecting
left and right sides of an equation. The “full stop” is pressed after a complete
equation has been fed to the machine. The “ﬁnis” key restores the machine to
its original condition. The keys “·|·” represent the inclusive “or”. They are used

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
263
whenever the “or” relation occurs within either the left or right sides of an equa-
tion.
The machine is operated by pressing keys in the order indicated by the terms
of an equation. If we have for example an equation A = AB (i.e., “All A is B”)
then we press keys in the following order: A (on the left), copula, A (on the right),
B (on the right), full stop. This action automatically eliminates from the face of
the machine all combinations of terms inconsistent with the proposition just fed
to the machine. Additional equations are handled exactly in the same manner.
After all premises have been fed to the machine, its face is then inspected to
determine what conclusions can be drawn.
Jevons’ machine had no practical use. One of the reasons was the fact that
complex logical questions seldom arise in everyday life. It could be used, say,
as a classroom device for demonstrating the nature of logical analysis. The ma-
chine itself had also several defects (what is quite understandable for it was the
ﬁrst of its kind): (1) since statements should be fed to the machine in a clumsy
equational form, it is made unnecessarily complicated, (2) there was no efﬁcient
procedure of feeding “some” propositions to it, (3) it was impossible to extend
the mechanism to a large number of terms (Jevons planed to build a machine for
ten terms but abandoned the project when it became clear that the device would
occupy the entire wall space of one side of his study), (4) the machine merely
exhibits all the consistent lines of the logical alphabet but it does not perform the
analysis of them to indicate the desired conclusion.
The Jevons’ idea of building a logical machine was developed after him. Sev-
eral other devices were proposed. We want to mention here only Allan Marquand
(1853–1924) and his machine from 1881–1882, Charles P. R. Macaulay whose
machine (built in 1910) combined the best features of both Jevons’ and Mar-
quand’s machines being an extremely compact and easily operated device and
Annibale Pastore (1868–1956) and his machine constructed in 1903. They were
all mechanical devices and ancestors of modern electrical machines. The ﬁrst
electrical analogue of Jevons’ machine was suggested by A. Marquand in 1885
and in 1947 an electrical computer was constructed at Harvard by T.A. Kalin and
W. Burkhart for the solution of Boolean problems involving up to twelve logical
variables (i.e., propositions or class letters).
What was the import of Jevons’ contribution to the development of logic?
First of all he developed the ideas and methods of Boole removing some of their
defects, e.g., introducing the inclusive interpretation of “or” what made possible
a great simpliﬁcation and what was welcome by all later writers on the algebra
of logic. He did also very much to mechanize Boole’s methods inventing various
devices which facilitated the practical usage of them.

264
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
4. Venn and Logical Diagrams
Talking about the mechanization of Boole’s methods and about Jevons we must
pay some attention to John Venn (1834–1923) and to the idea of logical di-
agrams. Venn did not have a high opinion of Jevons as a logician. He wrote
(1881): “Excellent as much of Jevons’ work is, I cannot but hold that in the
domain of logic his inconsistencies and contradictions are remarkable” (p. 78).
There was a strong rivalry between the two men. Venn dismissed Jevons’ logic
machine as essentially trivial. He developed an idea of logical diagrams which
were, in his opinion, a better and more efﬁcient device to solve logical problems.
Before discussing Venn’s diagrams in detail we say some words about his
logic in general.
In Venn’s opinion the aim of symbolic logic was to build a special language
which would enable “to extend possibilities of applying our logical processes
using symbols” (cf. Venn 1881, p. 2).
He used Latin letters as symbols of classes, 0 and 1 as symbols of the null and
universe classes, resp., introduced complement, intersection, union, subtraction
and division of classes. By x −y he meant the class remaining after elimination
from the class x the elements of the class y provided that y is a part of x. Subtrac-
tion was a converse operation to the union. Similarly division was considered as
a converse to the intersection. It was not determined uniquely. The expression
x > 0 denoted the fact that the class x is not empty. It was a negation of the
expression x = 0. The equation x = y was understood by Venn as the sentence
“there are no entities which belong to x but do not belong to y and there are no
entities belonging to y but not to x”. He wrote it as xy+ xy = 0. Venn formulated
also several properties of operations (not proving them at all).
As one of the main aims of symbolic logic Venn considered solution of logi-
cal equations and elimination of variables. Contrary to Boole and Jevons he con-
sidered not only equations but also inequalities. Solving such problems he used
algebraical methods as well as diagrams. The latter is one of his main achieve-
ments in symbolic logic and we want now to study it carefully.
One can deﬁne a logical diagram as a two-dimensional geometric ﬁgure with
spatial relations that are isomorphic with the structure of a logical statement.
Historically the ﬁrst logic diagrams probably expressed statements in what today
is called the logic of relations. The tree ﬁgure was certainly known to Aristotle,
in medieval and Renaissance logic one ﬁnds the so called tree of Porphyry which
is another example of the type of diagram. We meet trees also by Raymond Lull,
we see diagrams in various “squares of opposition” (showing certain relations of
immediate inference from one class proposition to another), in “pons asinorum”
of Petrus Tartaretus.
As a ﬁrst important step toward a diagrammatic method sufﬁciently iconic
to be serviceable as a tool for solving problems of class logic we may consider

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
265
the use of a simple closed curve to represent a class. It is impossible to say who
used it as ﬁrst. We must mention here J.Ch. Sturm and his Universalia Euclidea
(1661), G. W. Leibniz (who used circles and linear diagrams), J.Ch. Lange (and
his Nucleus logicae Weisianae (1712), J.H. Lambert (and his linear method of
diagramming explained in Neues Organon 1764) and L. Euler. The latter intro-
duced them into the history of logical analysis (cf. Euler 1768–1772).
J. Venn’s method is a modiﬁcation of Euler’s. It has elegantly overcome all
limitations of the latter. Venn ﬁrst published his method in an article from 1880
and then discussed it more fully in his book from 1881.
To describe the Venn’s method let us show ﬁrst how does it apply to a syllo-
gism. Consider for example the following reasoning (the mood Celarent):
All S is M
No M is P
No S is P.
Draw three circles intersecting each other and representing, resp., S (sub-
ject), M (middle term), P (predicate). All the points inside a given circle are re-
garded as members of the class represented by the given circle, all points outside
it – as members of the complement of this class. We get the following picture:
It represents simply the decomposition of the universe (represented by the
plane) into 8 constituents (we use the symbol ¬ to denote the negation). If we
wish now to show that a given compartment is empty we shade it. If we wish
to show that it has members, we place a small x inside it. If we do not know
whether an element belongs to one compartment or to an adjacent one, we put x
on the border between the two areas. Hence to diagram our ﬁrst premise “All S
is M” we must shade all compartments in which we ﬁnd S and ¬M (because we
interpret it to mean the class of things which are S and ¬M is empty), i.e., com-
partments S ¬M¬P and S ¬MP. The second premise “No M is P” says that all
compartments containing MP are empty. Hence we shade compartments S MP
and ¬S MP. We get the following diagram:

266
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
One sees that all areas containing both S and P are empty; hence we may
conclude “No S is P”. Consequently our scheme is correct. If we assume that S
is not an empty class, we may also conclude that “Some S is not P”.
Simply modiﬁcation of Venn’s diagram allow us to take care of numerical
syllogism in which terms are quantiﬁed by “most” or by numbers. We must
change at least one of the circles to a rectangle. Here is an example indicating
how one can diagram the syllogism: there are ten A’s of which four are B’s; eight
A’s are C’s; therefore at least two B’s are C’s.
One of the merits of Venn’s system of diagrams is that it can be extended
in principle to take care of any number of terms, but, of course, as the number
of terms increases, the diagram becomes more involved. For four terms we use
ellipses to diagram all the constituents:

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
267
For ﬁve terms Venn proposed the following diagram:
The diagram has a defect that the class Z has a shape of a doughnut – the
small ellipse in the center being outside Z but inside W and Y. Beyond ﬁve
terms Venn proposed to divide a rectangle into the desired number of subcom-
partments, labelling each with a different combination of the terms.
The method of Venn’s diagrams has been developed and improved. We men-
tion here only diagrams of Allan Marquand (lying on the border line between
a highly iconic system of Venn and a noniconic system of notation) (cf. Mar-
quand 1881), Alexander Macfarlane (cf. Macfarlane 1885, 1890), W.J. Newlin
(and his method of deviding a square) (cf. Newlin 1906), W.S. Hocking (cf.
Hocking 1909) and diagrams of an English logician and mathematician Lewis
Carroll (whose proper name was Dodgson Charles Lutwidge; 1832–1898). He
explained his method in two books: The Game of Logic (1886) and Symbolic
Logic (1896). It was similar to Marquand’s divisions of a square – apparently
Carroll was not familiar with Marquand’s work. Carroll’s method easily took
care of syllogisms with mixtures of positive and negative forms of the same
term, it could be extended to n terms (in Symbolic Logic Carroll pictured a num-
ber of these extensions including a 256-cell graph for eight terms).
Venn’s diagrams can be used for solving problems not only in the class logic
but also in the propositional calculus. We must only interpret them in a different
way: each circle stands now for a proposition which may be either true or false,
the labels in the various compartments indicate possible or impossible combina-
tions of true and false values of the respective terms, we shade a compartment
to indicate that it is an impossible combination of truth values (an unshaded
compartment indicates a permissible combination). Using this procedure we can
solve with the help of diagrams various problems of propositional logic which
concern simple statements without parentheses. In the latter case some insolv-
able difﬁculties arise.
Nevertheless diagrams developed by J. Venn (and later improved by others)
proved to be a fruitful and useful method in the algebra of logic. It is not true
that J. Venn only improved slightly Euler’s method by changing shapes of ﬁg-
ures. The main difference between Euler and Venn lies in the fact that Venn’s
method was based on the idea of decomposition of the universe into constituents

268
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
(which we do not have by Euler). Diagrams served Venn not only to illustrate so-
lutions obtained in another way but they were in fact a method of solving logical
problems.
5. Conclusions
Having presented the ideas and works of English logicians of 19th century we
come now to the conclusions. What was the meaning and signiﬁcance of their
achievements, what was their contribution to the development of mathematical
logic?
Mathematical logic of the 19th century was developed in connection with
mathematics, i.e., mathematics was a source of patterns, a model for logic,
served as an ideal which was imitated. Mathematical methods – mainly the meth-
ods of formal algebra – were applied to logic. Therefore the main form of logic
in the 19th century was the algebra of logic. The analogy between logic and
algebra which led to the origin of the algebra of logic was the following: a solu-
tion of any problem by solving an appropriate equation is in fact a derivation of
certain consequences from the initial conditions of the problem. Hence the idea
of extending this method to problems of unquantitative character. This tendency
had a source and a good motivation also in Leibniz’s works and ideas (cf. his
project characteristica universalis).
In this way, starting from the traditional syllogistic logic, developing the
ideas of Leibniz and applying some ideas of formal algebra, the logicians of the
19th century came to the idea of the algebra of logic. Those ideas were devel-
oped ﬁrst of all just by English logicians. De Morgan may be treated here as
a forerunner and Boole was the man who established the main principles and
tools. The problem was to develop, in analogy to the algebra, a method of ex-
pressing unquantitative information in the form of equations and to establish
rules of transformation of those equations. This led to the construction of sys-
tems called today Boolean algebras. They were formulated in the language of
classes as extension of concepts. Later another interpretation – namely the logic
of propositions – was developed. In this way logic was freed from the domina-
tion of epistemology and so it became an independent science. It was shown that
logic can be studied without any reference to the processes of our mind.
The idea of the algebraization of logic led also to the search for mechanical
methods of solving logical problems. Various methods based on the usage of
logical machines and diagrams were proposed (Jevons, Venn, Carroll and oth-
ers). Considerations of Boole and De Morgan led also to the development of the
general theory of relations.
We may say that English logicians played the ﬁrst ﬁddle in mathematical
logic in the 19th century. Of course their contributions did not contain the ideas

The English Algebra of Logic in the 19th Century
269
in a perfect and ﬁnal form. They had various drawbacks and defects. Later logi-
cians developed them removing the imperfections (let us mention here the works
of Peirce, Gergonne and Schröder). Nevertheless the works of English logicians
formed the main step in the transition epoch between the traditional syllogistic
logic and the prehistory of mathematical logic on the one hand and the Fregean
period on the other. In the former the very idea of mathematical logic arose,
mainly due to Leibniz. The latter was characterized by new aims of logic – it was
then developed to build foundations of mathematics as a science, mathematics
and mathematical methods were the subject of logical studies. The transitional
period, called in the literature the Boolean (!) period (cf. Boche´nski 1962) was
necessary to create mathematical logic as an independent science. It was done
by using mathematics as a template and by applying mathematical, in particular
algebraic, methods. This period was started with De Morgan’s Formal Logic and
Boole’s The Mathematical Analysis of Logic (1847) and ended with Schröder’s
Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (1890–1905). Works of English logi-
cians pointing out the directions of research and establishing the fundamental
ideas and methods were crucial in this period.

18
THE DEVELOPMENT OF SYMBOLISM IN LOGIC
AND ITS PHILOSOPHICAL BACKGROUND1
(Co-authored by Thomas Bedürftig)
1. Introduction
The aim of the paper is to give an overview of the development of sym-
bolism in logic. The turning point in this development were the 19th and 20th
centuries – we will indicate the most important moments in this process. The
development of the logical symbolism cannot be treated independently of the
development of symbols in mathematics and both are strictly connected with the
symbolic culture which is one of the elements distinguishing human beings and
animals. Therefore we shall start with some general remarks on the rôle played
by symbols in the development of culture. Then we shall brieﬂy analyze the im-
portance of symbols in the development of mathematics. This will enable us to
indicate some general rules of introducing and developing mathematical sym-
bols as well as reciprocal inﬂuences between the development of mathematics
and the development of symbolism. Similar interdependencies can be observed
also in logic which is our main subject.
We shall start by considerations concerning the beginnings of logical sym-
bolism in the antiquity and in the Middle Ages. Then the idea of characteristica
universalis of G.W. Leibniz and the idea of algebraization of logic of G. Boole
will be discussed. Both those ideas were crucial in the process of developing a
modern logical notation which was done mainly by G. Peano and B. Russell. We
shall mention also the system notation of G. Frege and J. Łukasiewicz. At the
end the system of notation used in logic nowadays will be considered.
1Originally published as a joint paper with Th. Bedürftig under the title “Die Entwicklung der
Symbolik in der Logik und ihr philosophischer Hintergrund”, Mathematische Semesterberichte 42
(1995), 1–31. c⃝Springer-Verlag 1995. Translated into English by Th. Bedürftig and R. Murawski.
Published with kind permission of Springer Science and Business Media.
In: Roman Murawski, Essays in the Philosophy and History of Logic and Mathematics (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities, vol. 98), pp. 271–299. Amsterdam/New
York, NY: Rodopi, 2010.

272
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
We will be interested not so much in particular systems of symbols proposed
by various authors as in philosophical background of the process of introducing
symbolic language into logic. We would like both to stress the crucial moments
of the process and to exhibit the philosophical motivations behind the search by
various logicians and mathematicians for a good and adequate symbolism.
We will restrict ourselves to the development of the symbolic language of
logic and we will not consider the metalogical symbolism. We understand here
logic in the narrower sense, i.e., as propositional calculus and predicate calculus
and not in the broader sense as, e.g., Russell did (logica magna).
2. Culture and Symbols
The culture created and developed by human beings is symbolic, i.e., the com-
munication within it is based on the usage of symbols. Observe that the ability to
use symbols, to call things and events and to represent them by names, is charac-
teristic for human beings. Only a human being possesses the so called symbolic
initiative, i.e., she/he can associate certain symbols with things and ideas as well
as establish relations between them and operate on them on the level of con-
cepts. Animals do not have this ability – they have only a symbolic reﬂex, i.e.,
they have the ability to react on speciﬁc symbolic impulses. It is clear that only a
human being can build symbols and use them consciously. Thanks to this ability
she/he can – by using appropriate notions – structure and convey her/his obser-
vations, experiences and considerations. It is just symbolization that makes the
whole culture not only possible but that creates also conditions necessary to its
persistence and development.
Any natural language can serve as an example of a symbolic system. In logic
and mathematics language plays not only the role of communication but it en-
ables us to make statements shorter and clearer and this consequently helps to
make reasoning more precise and clear.
3. The Development of Mathematical Symbolism
In mathematics, which is one of the products of cultural activity of human be-
ings, one can spot similar tendencies as in other cultural systems. Hence the great
rôle played here by symbols and symbolization. We see them already at the very
beginnings of mathematics. The ﬁrst efforts to write down numbers (what was
connected with the process of counting) are just examples of using symbols.
One can distinguish three important steps on the way to obtain a good and
useful notation: (1) the occurrence of the idea of a place-value system, (2) the
invention of zero, and (3) the cipherization. The idea of a place-value system,

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
273
i.e., of a system in which the value of a symbol depends on the place on which it
stand, can be seen for the ﬁrst time in Babylonian (about 2100 B.C.) and Mayan
cultures. The special symbol for zero was necessary to indicate that at a given
place of a number written in a place-value system there is nothing and no value
should be associated with it. At the beginning one left simply the appropriate
place empty. But this method could not be applied in the case of the last place
in a number. Therefore there was a necessity of introducing a special symbol.
This appeared in Babylon about 400–300 B.C. and about the beginning of the
Christian era by Mayan. Note that this symbol for zero denoted only an empty
place and not a number! Only some centuries later zero became the status of a
number (as one, two, three, etc.). By cipherization we mean the introduction of
symbols denoting numbers which form the base of a given system. Hindu-arabic
numerals used today are the ﬁnal stage of a long process (cf. Ifrah 1989) leading
from complicated systems of signs on clay tablets in Mesopotamia through sys-
tems of combining sticks in China and the idea of using letters of Greek alphabet
as signs for numbers.
One can say that a place-value system of notation for numbers is an achieve-
ment of human beings which may be compared with the introduction of an alpha-
bet. Both those inventions replaced complicated symbolisms by an easy method
understandable for everybody. A useful notation system for numbers was impor-
tant ﬁrst of all for practical reasons – it made counting and calculations easier
what was signiﬁcant, e.g., in business and land survey. On the other hand it was
important also in theoretical studies developed especially in Greece. It helped
for example to achieve greater precision in formulating problems and to perform
various calculating operations. All that stimulated further development of num-
ber theory and arithmetic what then inspired search for still better symbolism.
One should mention here Diophantus, the Greek mathematician from the 3rd
century B.C. One ﬁnds by him the ﬁrst systematic usage of algebraic symbols. In
his work Arithmetica he used symbols for variables (similarly as by Aristotle and
Euclid) and their powers, there appears a power with a negative exponent as well
as notation for constant coefﬁcients in an equation. Diophantus used also two
new symbols – for an identity and for the subtraction (it is not clear whether the
latter symbol denoted an operation or symbolized minus by a negative number).
Note that his symbols were rather abbreviations than symbols in our sense of
the word but they made possible for him to use formulas and to transform them
almost mechanically without laborious mental operations They enabled him also
to consider more complicated and difﬁcult problems.
The next milestone in introducing symbols in mathematics formed works by
F. Viète (1540–1603), a French lawyer. As one of the ﬁrst he replaced in the
theory of equations numbers by letters – they denoted arbitrary coefﬁcients. He
used also signs + and −in our present meaning and “A quadratum” for A2. All
this stimulated the development of algebra and enabled René Descartes (1596–

274
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
1650) to apply algebraic methods to geometrical considerations (analytic geom-
etry) unifying those two branches of mathematics. One ﬁnds by Descartes a lot
of modern symbols, e.g., the formula
1
2 a +

1
4 aa + bb .
The only difference between this and our present notation is aa instead of our
a2.
The mathematician and logician who not only introduced many symbols
used today (e.g., symbols for derivatives and differential dx, dy, dy
dx, the sym-
bol for integral

as well as symbols = and ·) but who as ﬁrst considered the
problem of symbolization of mathematics and logic in a general setting was
Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz (1646–1716) – we return to him later.
4. Some General Remarks on the Regularities in the Development
of Mathematical Symbolism
Considering the development of the mathematical symbolism one notice some
regularities – they can be seen also in the development of the symbolism in logic.
Therefore we would like to indicate them now.
In the whole history of mathematics one can see the tendency to ﬁnd (to
construct) an appropriate and universal symbolism. One of the reasons was the
growing abstractness of considerations as well as the complexity of considered
problems. And new symbols could be introduced only when the domain has
been developed enough. Moreover, the dependencies are here reciprocal: the
growth of a domain enables and forces new and more adequate symbolism and
vice versa, a good symbolism enables the further development of the domain. A
good example is here the algebraic notation of Viète and the evolution of modern
algebra in the 16th and 17th centuries. Bell writes in (1945, p. 123):
Unless elementary algebra had become “a purely symbolic science” by the end of the six-
teenth century, it seems unlikely that analytic geometry, the differential and integral calcu-
lus, the theory of probability, the theory of numbers, and dynamics could have taken root
and ﬂourished as they did in the seventeenth century. As modern mathematics stems from
these creation of Descartes, Newton and Leibniz, Pascal, Fermat and Galileo, it may not be
too much to claim that the perfection of algebraic symbolism was a major contributor to the
unprecedented speed with which mathematics developed after the publication of Descartes’
geometry in 1637.
Another example (that became classical today) of the reciprocal inﬂuence of
a good symbolism and the development of mathematics is Leibniz’s d-notation
for the differential and integral calculus. Symbols dx, dy, dy
dx as well as the sym-
bol

were better and more suggestive than the Newton’s notation ˙x, ¨x, etc. and

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
275
,x,
,,x, etc. for derivatives and integrals, resp. The notation of Leibniz has been
adopted on the continent and the notation of Newton in Britain. And this was
one of the reasons of the weak development of the English mathematics in the
18th century in comparison with the development of mathematics in France and
Germany.
Observe that Leibniz’s notation as well as his calculus in general had no ade-
quate theoretical foundations and background. What should the differentials dx,
dy in fact be? Leibniz treated them on the one hand as ﬁxed quantities and on
the other as quantities that are smaller than any given quantity and simultane-
ously are not equal zero. Though this was in fact contradictory, it did not stop
him to apply them and to use the d-notation because it was useful. Hence there
arose the necessity to clear those inconsistencies – and it has been done in the
so called nonstandard analysis of Abraham Robinson in the sixties of 20th cen-
tury! In this way a useful though not fully justiﬁed symbolism led to the new
domain of mathematics. One can see on this example that a convenient symbol-
ism can overlive even in the case when there fails a sufﬁcient mathematical and
philosophical justiﬁcation.
As a good and adequate symbolism stimulates the growth of a domain, in
the same way a bad one can hamper its development. As an example of this
phenomenon can serve the calculus of fractions in the ancient Egypt and its
symbolism. It hampered the development of mathematics there for a long time.
Introducing and manipulating on symbols leads to the evolution of mathe-
matics and in particular force the introduction of new symbols. As an example
recall here the history of the symbol for zero and of the concept of the number
zero. It emerged from the sign for an empty place in a place-value representation
of numbers and was a symbol for nothing. Another example is the history of in-
troducing complex numbers, in particular of
√
−1. This symbol appeared by the
solution of equations of 6th degree and denoted a non-existing number, some-
thing “unreal”, ﬁctive, imaginary. Further researches and in particular the fact of
recognition of an object like
√
−1 and its status as a number made possible, e.g.,
the recognition of the fundamental theorem of algebra according to which any
equation of the nth degree has exactly n roots. In this way the complex numbers
have been introduced – they are today a convenient instrument being taken for
granted.
The choice of this or that symbolism depends on individual as well as on
general cultural factors. The acceptance of symbols proposed by a given math-
ematician depends not only on their usefulness and soundness but also on the
position of him/her in the world of mathematicians. One can ﬁnd many exam-
ples of this phenomenon in the history of mathematics. For example, the symbols
π, e and i have been introduced by the great and highly estimated mathematician
of the 18th century Leonhard Euler (1707–1783). In fact other letters could be
chosen here. The fact that just those symbols have been generally accepted was a

276
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
consequence not only of their usefulness but also of the position of Euler among
mathematicians.
5. The Beginnings of Logical Symbolism
We can move now to the proper subject of our considerations, i.e., to the de-
velopment of symbolism of logic. There are three kinds of motivation inspiring
the development of symbolism in logic (and mathematics): (1) the attempt to
create an ideal artiﬁcial language as a substitute for an imprecise colloquial lan-
guage; (2) a tendency to reduce logic to the study of properties of language or,
in extreme cases, to the theory of signs; (3) a nominalistic tendency according to
which abstract terms do not denote something but are only empty signs. One or
more of those tendencies can be seen by all mathematicians and logicians trying
to create a symbolism in mathematics or logic.
The ﬁrst tendency can be seen, e.g., by Aristotle (384–322 B.C.). In Analyt-
ics he used simple symbols – in fact letters of the Greek alphabet – to replace
sentences or properties in his syllogistic reasonings. His aim was the precision
of expressions. Observe that for Aristotle symbolism was not connected with
nominalistic ideas.
By the Stoics we see clearly linguistic tendencies. Their formal logic (in
which they used ordinals as symbols of propositions) was the study of the formal
structure of language. They treated expressions of the language as instruments
connecting intellectual acts on the one hand and objects of the world on the
other. Relations between symbols were considered as being necessary – they
saw in them the reﬂection of the necessary relations between objects.
In medieval logic – which ﬁrst developed the ideas of Aristotle and which
was restricted mainly to syllogistic – one can see some semiotic tendencies
– compare, e.g., Abelard (1079–1142), the later nominalists, Ockham (about
1300–1349). One considered there ﬁrst of all the classical categorical proposi-
tions and the logical connections between them. From that time come the abbre-
viations a, e, i, o for the afﬁrmative and negative universal and particular cases
that led to the traditional notation of categorical propositions:
instead of
all S is P
one wrote
S aP,
instead of
no S is P
one wrote
S eP,
instead of
some S are P
one wrote
S iP,
instead of
some S are not P
one wrote
S oP.
The abbreviations a, e, i, o are letters that occur in the words ‘afﬁrmo’ (I state)
and ‘nego’ (I deny). For the general afﬁrmative proposition all S is P one took
the ﬁrst vowel of the word ‘afﬁrmo’ and in the particular afﬁrmative proposition

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
277
some S are P the second one. Similarly by the negative propositions and the
word ‘nego’.
In later medieval logic one ﬁnds the opinion that the foundations of grammar
and logic can be found in the general theory of signs.
While considering medieval logic one should mention an attempt by Ray-
mond Lull (about 1235 – about 1315) to create an ideal symbolic language.
Unfortunately the level of science, and of mathematics in particular, was too law
at that time – for example there was still no algebra – and this attempt failed.
We see here the concrete illustration of a general rule which can be observed in
the development of symbolism in logic: this or that symbolism cannot appear
until the general situation is mature enough, i.e., the proper domain and related
domains must achieve an appropriate level. The relations here are reciprocal.
The development of a domain enables and forces a search for a new adequate
symbolism and, vice versa, a good symbolism affords possibilities for the devel-
opment of the domain itself.
6. Leibniz and the Idea of characteristica universalis
It was not until the 17th century, with the intense development of natural sci-
ences and mathematics, that appropriate conditions for the development of logi-
cal symbolism were created. The general principles of a symbolism were explic-
itly formulated for the ﬁrst time by G.W. Leibniz and expressed in his project
characteristica universalis.
Leibniz’s broad scientiﬁc interests were strongly connected with his rational-
ism and concern for precision and ﬁrmness of knowledge. It led him eventually
to a general theory of a logical language. As Bourbaki (1960, pp. 13–14) writes
(cf. also Leibniz 1875–1890, Bd. 7, p. 185):
[Leibniz] from his childhood acquainted with scholastic logic, was enchanted by the idea
(due to Raymond Lull) of a method which would reduce all notions used by human beings
to some primitive notions constituting in such a way “an alphabet of human thoughts”, and
form combinations of them in a mechanical way, to obtain true sentences.
He presented those dreams and plans in his attempt to design a universal sym-
bolic language characteristica universalis. The universality of this language
should be twofold – it should make possible to write down all scientiﬁc con-
cepts and should enable scientists of all nationalities to communicate with each
other.
Characteristica universalis was supposed to be a system of signs fulﬁlling
the following conditions:
1. There is to be a one-one correspondence between the signs of the system

278
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
(provided they are not signs of empty places for variables) and ideas or
concepts (in the broadest sense).
2. Signs must be chosen in such a way that if an idea (thought) can be de-
composed into components then the sign for this idea (thought) will have
a parallel decomposition.
3. One must devise a system of rules for operating on the signs such that if
an idea M1 is a logical consequence of an idea M2 then the “picture” of
M1 can be interpreted as a consequence of the “picture” of M2. (This is a
sort of completeness condition.)
According to these conditions all simple concepts corresponding to simple
properties ought to be expressed by single graphical signs, complex concepts –
by combinations of signs. This was based on a fundamental general assumption
that the whole possible vocabulary of science can be obtained by combinations
of some simple concepts. The method of constructing concepts Leibniz called
ars combinatoria. It was a part of a more general method – of a calculus – which
should enable people to solve all problems in a universal language. It was called
mathesis universalis, calculus universalis, logica mathematica, logistica.
Leibniz hoped that characteristica universalis would, in particular, help to
decide any philosophical problem. He wrote (cf. Leibniz 1875–1890, Bd. 7,
pp. 198–201):
And when this comes [i.e., when the idea of a universal language is realized – R.M.] then
two philosophers wanting to decide something will proceed as two calculators do. It will be
enough for them to take pencils, go to their tablets and say: Calculemus! (Let us calculate!).
Leibniz claimed that (cf. Couturat 1901, pp. 84–85):
he owed all his discoveries in mathematics exclusively to his perfect way of applying sym-
bols, and the invention of the differential calculus was just an example of it.
Leibniz did not succeed in realizing his idea of characteristica universalis.
One of the reasons was that he treated logical forms intentionally rather than
extensionally. This could not be reconciled with the attempt to formalize logic
completely and to transform it into a universal mathematics of utterly unquanti-
ﬁed generality. Another source of difﬁculty was his conviction that the combi-
nation of symbols must be a necessary result of a detailed analysis of the whole
of human knowledge. Hence he did not treat the choice of primitive fundamen-
tal notions as a matter of convention. His general metaphysical conceptions in-
duced a tendency to search for an absolutely simple and primitive concepts (an
analogue of monads), the combinations of which would lead to the rich variety
of notions.

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
279
7. Boole and De Morgan and the Idea of an Algebraization of Logic
Real progress in the development of symbolism in logic begins with the works of
two 19th century English mathematicians George Boole (1815–1864) and Au-
gustus De Morgan (1806–1871). Their main achievement was the initiation of
the so called algebraization of logic. G. Boole in his books Mathematical Anal-
ysis of Logic (1847) and An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on which are
Founded the Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities (1854) realized
for the ﬁrst time the idea (found already in Leibniz) that algebraical formulas
can be used to express some logical relations. He wrote in (1847):
One mustn’t any longer connect logic with metaphysics but with mathematics. [...] The
domain which comes into being as a result of the study of logic as an exact science is in
fact the same as that which results from the study of analysis. (p. 34)
What was really new in Boole’s approach was not the attempt to apply the idea
of a calculus to logic, nor the idea of a “non-quantitative calculus” – those ideas
were already by Leibniz – but the clear description of the essence of this calcu-
lus, i.e., of formalism. According to Boole it is a procedure the validity of which
does not depend upon the interpretation of the symbols which are employed, but
solely upon the laws of their combination. His leading idea was that transforma-
tions of expressions of the language depend not on the meaning (interpretation)
of symbols but only on laws of combining them which are independent of any
interpretations. Boole stressed clearly the possibility of interpreting the same
formal system in different ways.
But he was far from exaggerating the rôle of a symbolic language. He wrote
explicitly that (cf. 1847, pp. 4–5):
logic is possible thanks to the existence of general concepts in our mind – thanks to our
ability to imagine some classes and to describe particular elements of them by common
names. Hence the theory of logic is strongly connected with the theory of language. An
attempt to express logical theorems by symbols, which are combined according to laws
based on the laws of mental processes which they represent, would be in this sense a step
towards establishing a philosophical language.
In the books mentioned above Boole developed a theory which was an exten-
sion of syllogistic. Its theoretical signiﬁcance and range of applications turned
out to be considerably greater. Its current version is called Boolean algebra.
Systems of Boole can be interpreted both as the calculus of classes (algebra
of sets) and as a propositional calculus. The classical categorical propositions of
syllogistic can be written there as follows:
Let x and y be classes of things which fall under the concepts X and Y, resp.
Then

280
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
every X is Y
is written as
x(1 −y) = 0,
no X is Y
is written as
xy = 0,
some X are Y
is written as
xy = v,
some X are not Y
is written as
x(1 −y) = v,
where 1 denotes the universal class, 0 – the empty class and V – a class “indef-
inite in all respects but one” (Boole 1847, pp. 48–49) and it is assumed that v
contains at least one element. The symbol v is used for the word ‘some’.
Boole used this a bit strange and inconsistent symbolic in order to write
down all classical categorical propositions as equations. The symbol v was used
in this symbolism in such a way as it would denote a class. But this could lead
to errors. For example, from the equations ab = v and cd = v one could come to
the false conclusion that ab = cd. Boole eliminated such errors by putting some
restrictions on the usage of the symbol v. But those restrictions were inconsistent
with the thesis that v is a symbol of a class.
If X and Y denote propositions then Boole writes down in his symbolism the
four cases of combinations of ‘true’ and ‘false’ in an appropriate way. He writes
(1847, p. 49):
To the symbols X, Y, Z, representative of Propositions, we may appropriate the elective sym-
bols x, y, z, in the following sense. The hypothetical Universe, 1, shall comprehend all con-
ceivable cases and conjectures of circumstances. The elective symbol x attached to any
subject expressive of such cases shall select those cases in which the Proposition X is true,
and similarly for Y and Z.
We get the following four cases:
1. X true and Y true
is written as
xy,
2. X true and Y false
is written as
x(1 −y),
3. X false and Y true
is written as
(1 −x)y,
4. X false and Y false
is written as
(1 −x)(1 −y).
It is characteristic that we do ﬁnd by Boole neither a symbol for implication
(if . . . then . . .) nor for negation. Both are deﬁned (by composed formulas). The
symbol + is used to denote disjunction (in the exclusive sense).
De Morgan published in 1847 the book Formal Logic. This was in the same
year as Boole published his Mathematical Analysis of Logic – a legend says
that both appeared in bookshops on the same day! In Formal Logic De Morgan
developed the syllogistic, formulated some ideas of the algebra of logic and the
theory of relations. He proposed symbols to denote the converse of a relation, the
contradictory relation and three ways in which two relations can be composed.
Charles Saunders Peirce in America and Ernst Schröder in Germany ex-
tended and developed further the algebraic tradition in logic whose formalization
began with Boole and De Morgan.

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
281
8. Peano and the Development of Logical Symbolism
The most important steps in the development of symbolism in logic were taken
by the Italian mathematician Giuseppe Peano (1858–1932) at the turn of the
century. He considered the problem of symbolism several times, advocated the
use of symbolic language in mathematics and proposed a very good and clear
symbolism. Many of his symbols were adopted, sometimes in a slightly modiﬁed
form, by modern logic and mathematics.
Peano’s work was strongly inﬂuenced by Leibniz’s characteristica univer-
salis. Peano knew the works of Leibniz and often mentioned his ideas. He also
encouraged one of his students and later an assistant, G. Vacca, to study care-
fully the manuscripts of Leibniz in Hannover which was a fruitful project. Peano
treated the realization of Leibniz ideas as one of the main aims of mathematical
sciences.
In the creation of a symbolic language of mathematics and logic Peano often
claimed that (cf. 1896-1897):
symbols represent not words but ideas. Therefore one must use the same symbol when-
ever the same idea appears, even if in colloquial language they are not represented by the
same expression. In this way we establish a one-one correspondence between ideas and
symbols; such a correspondence cannot be found in colloquial speech. This ideography is
based on theorems of logic discovered since the time of Leibniz. The shape of symbols can
be changed, i.e., one can change some signs representing the basic ideas, but there cannot
exist two essentially different ideographies. (p. 573)
Symbolic language enables us not only to be more precise and clear, but it helps
us also to understand things better, it
enables the pupils of a secondary school to solve easily problems which in the past could
be solved only by great minds such as Euclid or Diophantus
– as Peano wrote in (1915, p. 168). The other advantages of symbolism he saw
are: (1) the shortness of expressions needed to state theorems and proofs, (2)
the small number of basic expressions with the help of which one builds further
more complicated expressions (he wrote in (1915, p. 169) that “in colloquial
language one needs about a thousand words to express the logical relations;
in the symbolic language of mathematical logic ten symbols are enough. [...]
Professor Padoa has reduced the number of necessary symbols to three.”), (3) the
symbolism facilitates reasonings, helps even to obtain new results. Moreover, in
some cases the usage of a symbolic language is simply necessary because we
have no suitable expressions in the colloquial language to state some ideas or
constructions. (With such a necessity were confronted for example, according to
Peano (1915), A.N. Whitehead and B. Russell when they were writing Principia
Mathematica – “the greatest work written completely with the help of symbols”
– p. 167).

282
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Peano needed a symbolic language to express theorems clearly and precisely.
It enabled him also to order various parts of mathematics by supplying them
with suitable axiomatizations. We must mention here ﬁrst of all his famous work
Arithmetices principia nova methodo exposita (1889a). This small booklet with
a Latin title (to be precise one should say: with almost Latin title – the word
arithmetices is only a transliteration of an appropriate Greek word; in Latin it
should be arithmeticae), written also in Latin (more precisely: in Latino sine
ﬂexione – an artiﬁcial language invented by Peano) contained the ﬁrst formula-
tion of Peano’s postulates for natural numbers. Peano wrote at the beginning of
the work:
I have represented by signs all ideas which appear in the foundations of arithmetic. With the
help of this representation all sentences are expressed by signs. Those signs belong either
to logic or to arithmetic. [. . . ] By this notation every sentence become a shape as precise as
an equation in algebra. Having sentences written in such a way we can deduce from them
other sentences – it is done by a process similar to a looking for a solution of an algebraic
equation. This was exactly the aim and the reason for writing this paper. (p. 3)
Another domain of mathematics in which Peano used his symbolism and the
axiomatic-deductive method was geometry – his most important work here was
the booklet I principii di geometria logicamente esposti (1889b).
The idea of presenting mathematics in the framework of an artiﬁcial sym-
bolic language and of deriving then all theorems from some fundamental axioms
was also basic to Peano’s famous project Formulario. It was announced in 1892
in the journal Rivista di Matematica. Peano founded this journal in 1892 and
here his main logical papers and those of his students were published. The aim
of this project was to publish all known mathematical theorems. This plan was to
be carried out by using, of course, the symbolic language introduced by Peano.
A special journal Formulario Matematico was founded to publish the results of
this project. It was edited by Peano and his collaborators: Vailanti, Castellano,
Burali-Forti, Giudice, Vivanti, Betazzi and others. Five volumes appeared: In-
troduction 1894, vol. I – 1895, vol. II – 1897–1899, vol. III – 1901, vol. IV –
1903, vol. V – 1908. The last volume contained about 4200 theorems! Peano
even bought a small printing ofﬁce (in 1898 from Faa di Bruno for 407 lire) and
studied the art of printing. One of the results of the project was a further simpliﬁ-
cation of the mathematical symbolism. Peano treated Formulario as a fulﬁllment
of Leibniz’s ideas. He wrote:
After two centuries, this “dream” of the inventor of the inﬁnitesimal calculus has become a
reality [. . . ]. We have the solution to the problem posed by Leibniz. (1915, p. 168)
Let us consider now Peano’s symbolism in detail. In the calculus of classes
the expression A = B meant that the classes A and B are equal. The symbol
A ∩B denoted the product (common part) of A and B, the symbol A ∪B their

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
283
sum (union) and −A or A the complement of the class A. The symbol • denoted
the universal class and the symbol ◦the empty class.
At the beginning Peano made no distinction between the propositional cal-
culus and the calculus of classes. Hence the sign ∩was read by him as “and”,
was called conjunction or logical multiplication and simultaneously A ∩B was
the product of classes A and B. Similarly for ∪– it was meant as disjunction
or logical addition “or” and simultaneously A ∪B was called the sum of A and
B. The sign −was read as “not” and was called the negation. Only later, in the
work Arithmetices principia (1889) one ﬁnds the distinction between both cal-
culus though the same symbols are still used. The proper meaning became clear
by distinguishing classes and propositions. In Arithmetices principia there ap-
peared signs  and  which denote – as Peano explains – “truth or identity”
and “falsehood or absurdity”, resp. The symbol ⊃denoted consequence: when a
and b are sentences then the symbol a ⊃b denotes “b follows from a”. The same
symbols denoted also inclusion. In this case Peano read the expression a ⊃b as
“b is a subset of a”.
In the work Arithmetices principia one ﬁnds for the ﬁrst time the symbol ε
as a sign for “being an element of”. The letter ε is the ﬁrst letter of the Greek
word
,εστ´ι which means “to be”. Later this symbol has been transformed and
today one writes ∈. If p is a sentence then the expression x ϶ p denotes the class
of all those x’s that fulﬁl p. If one denotes this class by a then we get:
x ϶ (xεa) = a,
xε(x ϶ p) = p.
The class consisting of a single element x was denoted by Peano by ιx and
deﬁned in the following way:
ιx = y ϶ (y = x).
Peano used also a convenient notation for the universal quantiﬁer. If a and
b were two formulas with free variables x, y, . . . then the expression a ⊃x,y,... b
meant “for all x, y, . . . if a then b”.
One should notice that Peano was the ﬁrst who distinguished between free
and bounded variables – he called then, resp., “effective” (effetivo) and “appar-
ent” (apparente).
Peano applied an interesting system of signs for parentheses. Instead of
brackets (, ), [, ] etc. Peano used a system of dots: ., :, ..., ::, etc. He explains
the application of those dots in the following way (cf. 1889a):
To understand a formula one should take into account that the signs that are not separated by
dots are connected. Further one should connect expressions separated by one dot, then those
separated by two dots etc. For example: let a, b, c, . . . be expressions. Then ab.cd should be
understood as (ab)(cd) and the expression ab.cd : ef.gh...k as (((ab)(cd))((e f)(gh)))k.

284
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
As an example of Peano’s notation let us give his axioms for the theory of
natural numbers. They were written as follows:
1 ε N,
a ε N . ⊃. a + 1 ε N,
a, b ε N . ⊃: a = b . = . a + 1 = b + 1,
a ε N. ⊃. a + 1−= 1,
k ε K ... 1 ε k ... x ε N . x ε k : ⊃x . x + 1 ε k : : ⊃. N ⊃k.
The sign N denotes here “positive integral”, 1 denotes “one”, a+1 – the successor
of a and K the domain of all classes. Today we would write those axioms in the
following way:
1 ∈N,
(a ∈N) −→(a + 1 ∈N),
(a, b ∈N) −→[(a = b) ≡(a + 1 = b + 1)],
(a ∈N) −→(a + 1  1),
[(k ∈K) & (1 ∈k) & ∀x(x ∈N & x ∈k −→x + 1 ∈k)] −→(N ⊂k).
[Remark: As a symbol for equivalence we have chosen the sign ≡and we use
the universal quantiﬁer ∀x that was used by Peano only in connection with the
symbol of implication (consequence) ⊃x.]
9. Russell and the Problem of a Symbolic Language
The symbolism proposed by Peano was simple, clear and transparent. As already
mentioned above, it was adopted almost without changes by modern logic (and
mathematics). This was mainly due to the English mathematician, logician and
philosopher Bertrand Russell (1872–1970) who applied it in the fundamental
work – written together with the English-American mathematician and philoso-
pher Alfred North Whitehead (1861–1947) – Principia Mathematica (vol. I –
1910, vol. II – 1912, vol. III – 1913). This work was in a sense the beginning
of modern formal logic. Russell’s inﬂuence and the signiﬁcance of Principia as
well as features of Peano’s symbolism were the factors which made Peano’s
symbolism commonly adopted and used. Slight modiﬁcations introduced by
Russell and other logicians consisted of small changes in the shape of some
symbols.
Russell saw in symbolism not only a useful tool which enables us to express
logical and mathematical ideas in short, precise and clear way but was also aware
of the deeper signiﬁcance of the rôle it plays in logic and mathematics. In (1949)
he wrote:

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
285
It is not easy for the lay mind to realize the importance of symbolism in discussing the
foundations of mathematics, and the explanation may perhaps seem strangely paradoxical.
The fact is that symbolism is useful because it makes things difﬁcult. (This is not true of the
advanced parts of mathematics, but only of the beginnings.) What we wish to know is what
can be deduced from what. Now, in the beginnings, everything is self-evident; and it is very
hard to see whether one self-evident proposition follows from another or not. Obviousness
is always the enemy to correctness. Hence we invent some new and difﬁcult symbolism in
which nothing seems obvious. Then we set up certain rules for operating on the symbols
and the whole thing becomes mechanical. In this way we ﬁnd out what must be taken as
premiss and what can be demonstrated or deﬁned. For instance, the whole of arithmetic
and algebra has been shown to require three indeﬁnable notions and ﬁve non-demonstrable
propositions. But without a symbolism it would have been very hard to ﬁnd this out. It is so
obvious that two and two are four, that we can hardly make ourselves sufﬁciently sceptical
to doubt whether it can be proved. And the same holds in other cases where self-evident
things are to be proved. (pp. 4–5)
Russell’s attitude towards logical symbolism was more complicated than one
would judge by the above words. We mean here he problem of relations between
symbols and reality. In an earlier work The Principles of Mathematics (1903) he
claimed that all symbols have meaning and express an objective existence of ob-
jects (which he identiﬁed, in a Platonic way, with concepts). He wrote in (1903):
“Every word occurring in a sentence must have a meaning” (p. 17). Later he
changed his mind somewhat allowing for example classes which may be “in-
complete symbols, which needn’t have any meaning” (1910–1913, vol. I, p. 67).
In Principia he wrote also: “Hence the classes, if we introduce them, are sim-
ply symbolical and linguistical conventions and not real objects” (1910–1913,
vol. I, p. 187). But he always returned to the position of realism. In the lectures
of 1918 he claimed: “In correct symbolism there will always be a fundamen-
tal identity between the structure of a fact and its symbol; the complexity of a
symbol exactly corresponds to the complexity of the fact which it symbolizes”
(1918–1919, p. 504).
10. Symbolism of Frege
Contemporarily with Peano and Russell lived the German logician Gottlob Frege
(1848–1925). He was a creator of another symbolism, different from that of
Peano and Russell. ‘Different’ means here not only the fact that it used other
signs and symbols but that it was based on a completely different ideas. Frege’s
symbolism, unlike Boole’s or Peano’s, was not based on that of mathematics.
For Frege the aim of logic was to provide foundations for arithmetic and in this
way for the whole of mathematics. In this situation the use of an arithmetical
symbolism in logic would create an ambiguity of symbolic expressions. Hence
the logical symbolism should be based on another principles.

286
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
According to Frege all symbols have meaning. The meaning of a sign which
is a subject in the linguistical sense is an object. In a symbolic language every
expression must denote an object and one cannot introduce any symbol without
meaning. Expressions of such a language denote either objects or functions. The
word ‘object’ (Gegenstand) must be understood here in a narrower sense – it
denotes a described individual, a class or the logical value (which means here
“truth” (das Wahre) and “falsity” (das Falsche)). But sometimes Frege used the
word ‘object’ more generally speaking about “saturated objects” (i.e., objects
in a proper sense) and about “unsaturated objects” (i.e., functions). By calling
functions “unsaturated objects” he meant that they are not completely deﬁned.
They have one or more unsaturated places. In particular, functions with one log-
ical place whose values are truth values he called concepts, and functions with
more unsaturated places – relations. Those functions were for him timeless and
spaceless ideal objects.
The starting point of Frege’s semantical considerations was the analysis of
sentences in the logical sense, more exactly, analysis of signs for sentences. The
sense of such a sign is the idea that something is so or not so. “Idea” is here for
Frege not an individual act or result of an individual psychic operation. The idea
does not need – as Frege writes – any human supporter. “Ideas are independent
of thinking [...], they are not generated by thinking but grasped by it” (1879,
p. 4). They exist in a similar way as real objects but – contrary to them – they
are timeless and spaceless.
A sign for a sentence is an expression containing names, i.e., “saturated
signs”, in a predicative symbol. This predicative symbol (Frege says about “part”
(Theil)) has its own meaning. Frege writes that this part being unsaturated has
its counterpart in the world of meanings and this counterpart is called concept
(Begriff). Hence according to Frege a concept is a truth-value function that is
given by “unsaturated meaning” of the predicative part of a sentence.
Using the general notions of function and argument in his logical analysis
of sentences Frege resigns from the old distinction between subject and pred-
icate. Predicates are functions whose values are truth-values and subjects are
their arguments – and according to this idea his formal language of arithmetic is
constructed.
Frege introduced his symbolism in the book Begriffsschrift, eine der arith-
metischen nachgebildete Formelsprache des reinen Denkens (1879). It contained
the ﬁrst formalized axiomatic system, namely the propositional calculus based
on implication and negation (as the only connectives) and the ﬁrst complete anal-
ysis of quantiﬁers as well as axioms for them. This work opened a new period
in the history of formal logic; the year 1879 – the year of its publication – is
considered as the most important date in the history of logic. The reception of
the work by Frege’s contemporaries was poor – they did not take it seriously or
misunderstood it. Its meaning was recognized by Peano and Russell.

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
287
Frege’s symbolism was two-dimensional. This was a departure from the
usual practice – previously people have expressed (and we are doing so in our
colloquial speech) their thoughts in a linear one-dimensional form. The idea of
using a two-dimensional symbolism was revolutionary. It considerably extended
the ways of expressing thoughts. But it turned out to be too revolutionary – and
consequently it was not understood properly and not accepted.
Since in the modern logic the Peano-Russell symbolism is commonly used
today it may be useful to give here some account of Frege’s notational ideas.
Frege begins the description of his symbolism by introducing a sign of con-
tents and a sign of judgement. If A is a sign or a combination of signs indicating
the contents of the judgement then the expression — A means: “the circum-
stance that A” or “the proposition that A”, and the symbol
A expresses
the judgement that A. In (1879) Frege wrote:
Let
stand for (bedeutet) the judgement “opposite magnetic poles attract each
other”; then —A will not express (ausdrücken) this judgement; it is to produce in the reader
merely the idea of the mutual attraction of opposite magnetic poles, say in order to derive
consequences from it and to test by means of these whether the thought is correct. (p. 2)
Hence the sign
is the common predicate for all judgements.
The symbol
A
B
means: “the circumstance that the possibility that A is denied and B is afﬁrmed
does not take place”. If we add to it the vertical stroke then we get
A
B
which stands for the judgement “the possibility that that A is denied and B is
afﬁrmed does not take place”. Hence it is the symbol of the material implication
“if B then A”.
Negation was expressed by Frege by adding a small vertical stroke to the
sign of contents —, hence by the symbol
and
.
In Frege’s symbolism there are no special symbols for further connectives.
They were expressed by combinations of symbols for implication and negation.
So in particular the disjunction “or” and the conjunction “and” were expressed,
resp., as follows:
A
B
and
A
B

288
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
The equivalence is symbolized as follows:
A
B
B
A
Let us write some more formulas in this symbolic language:
1. tertium non datur A ∨¬A:
A
A
2. law of contradiction ¬(A ∧¬A):
A
A
3. law of Duns Scottus ¬A →(A →B):
B
A
A
4. modus ponens (A →B) ∧A →B:
B
A
B
A
To indicate how much space does one need to write down formulas in Frege’s
symbolism and how complicated it sometimes is, let us write down in this lan-
guage one of De Morgan’s laws, namely the formula ¬(A ∧B) ←→(¬A ∨¬B):

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
289
B
A
B
A
B
A
B
A
A further symbol introduced by Frege in (1879) was the symbol ≡for the
identity. The expression
(A ≡B) means that the signs A and B have the
same conceptual contents and consequently in any context A can be replaced by
B and B by A. Hence the sign ≡symbolizes the equivalence between sentences
or the identity of objects.
Frege introduced the universal quantiﬁer ∀aΦ(a) in the following way:
Φ(a)
a
and
Φ(a) .
a
The existential quantiﬁer is deﬁned by the universal one and the negation in the
following way:
Φ(a)
a
.
As an example let us write the classical categorical propositions in Frege’s sym-
bolic language:
All Φ are Ψ:
Ψ(x)
Φ(x)
x
No Φ is
Ψ:
Ψ(x)
Φ(x)
x
Some Φ are Ψ:
Ψ(x)
Φ(x)
x

290
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Some Φ are not Ψ:
Ψ(x)
Φ(x)
x
As we mentioned above Frege’s idea of a two-dimensional notation turned
out to be too revolutionary. One must admit that in fact this symbolism, in com-
parison with Peano’s notation, was complicated and “hard”. Frege himself (he
had been in correspondence with Peano) acknowledged that Peano’s symbolism
was really simpler, more concise and convenient but simultaneously he wrote in
a letter to him that this convenience “is not the highest good and aim” (1976,
p. 246).
As indicated above Frege introduced symbols only for negation and impli-
cation as well as for the universal quantiﬁer. In consequence one had to translate
in an appropriate way propositions containing other connectives or the existen-
tial quantiﬁer and by this translation their sense was usually obscured. Many
symbols proposed by Frege did not emphasize and stress the sense of an expres-
sion, moreover, they often obscured it. As an example let us quote the following
expressions:
α
δ
F(α)
f (δ, α)
β
γ
f(xγ, yβ)
which were read by Frege, resp., as: “the circumstance that the property F is
hereditary in an f-sequence” and “y follows x in an f-sequence”.
It is clear today that Frege’s symbolism could not survive – it was simply too
monstrous. And we can only wonder that despite all the criticism Frege stood by
it obstinately. Being convinced that he has invented things really new and much
better than anything done so far by other logicians he depreciated them and
disregarded their achievements (for example not referring to them). The result
was that his own works had a very bad reception and were not accepted by his
contemporaries. He was dismissed as a “gifted ignoramus” (as John Venn called
him). As a consequence the symbolism proposed by Peano and Russell won and
is used today.
11. Łukasiewicz’s Notation
Some decades after Peano and Russell, new notation for the propositional cal-
culus was proposed by Polish logician Jan Łukasiewicz (1878–1956). Its char-
acteristic feature is that one does not use any parentheses in it and one writes

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
291
connectives before their arguments. This notation is called today bracket-free or
Łukasiewicz’s notation, in USA one calls it Polish notation.
Łukasiewicz came to the idea of this notation – as he confessed – in 1924.
The very idea to write connectives before their arguments came not from him
but from Leon Chwistek (1884–1944) – Polish logician working in Cracow and
Lvov. He talked about this idea in a lecture held in Warsaw at the beginning of
the twenties. The principles of Łukasiewicz’s notation go beyond the ideas of
Chwistek and this justiﬁes its name.
In Łukasiewicz’s notation one denotes the connectives by capital Latin let-
ters. In particular: N denotes negation, C – implication, K – conjunction, A –
disjunction and E – equivalence. So we write Np instead of the usual ¬p, Cpq
instead of p →q, Kpq instead of p ∧q, etc.
A translation of expressions with parentheses into Łukasiewicz’s notation is
not difﬁcult. We explain this on two examples. Consider the law of Duns Scottus
p →(¬p →q). One starts from the smallest subformula and moves step by step
to longer subformulas. So we have: Np for ¬p and CNpq for ¬p →q. The law
of Duns Scottus can be written now as:
CpCNpq.
As another example consider the formula
(¬p ∨q) →[q →¬(r ∧¬p)].
We write:
¬p ∨q
as
ANpq,
r ∧¬p
as
KrNp,
¬(r ∧¬p)
as
NKrNp,
q →¬(r ∧¬p)
as
CqNKrNp
and ﬁnally we obtain
CANpqCqNKrNp
as the translation of the whole formula.
It is clear that an expression in the Łukasiewicz’s notation should begin by
a capital letter denoting the main connective of it. Its argument(s) is (are) a vari-
able or an expression that begins with a capital, etc. One can easily formulate
a procedure deciding whether a given expression written in Łukasiewicz’s nota-
tion is a well-founded formula or not.
The translation of expressions written in Łukasiewicz’s notation into the
usual notation using parentheses is also easy. Let us explain this again on an
example. Consider the expression CKCpqCqrCpr. One starts from the right
hand side and looks for the ﬁrst connective. In our case it is C whose arguments
are p and r. Hence we get p →r for Cpr. Moving to the left of the considered

292
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
expression we have C as the next connective – its arguments are q and r. Hence
we get q →r. Similarly we get p →q for Cpq. Next connective to the left is
K. Its arguments are two formulas that stand to the right of it, i.e., Cpq and Cqr.
Hence KCpqCqr can be translated as: (p →q) ∧(q →r). Finally we obtain
[(p →q) ∧(q →r)] →(p →r)
as the translation of the formula CKCpqCqrCpr.
What are the advantages of Łukasiewicz’s notation? First of all the small
number of signs needed to write formulas – one needs no parentheses, commas,
dots nor special symbols for connectives as well as no rules deciding how is the
structure of a formula. In fact in this notation the structure of a formula is simply
determined by positions of letters denoting connectives. Łukasiewicz’s notation
have found also applications in the programming languages.
On the other hand this notation is rather clumsy and unhandy from the di-
dactic point of view. Is this a consequence of our habits and of the fact that we
use notation with parentheses in mathematics and treat it as a natural notation?
Well, in the case of expressions of a short length both notation systems seem
to be good, but when we consider expression of a “middle” length then usual
notation using parentheses is better and in the case of very long expressions –
Łukasiewicz’s notation is better.
Notice that using Łukasiewicz’s notation one can easily formulate prob-
lems concerning the propositional calculus – in fact this was just the reason
why this notation was constructed. Logicians from the Warsaw Logic School
(Łukasiewicz was one of its founder and main ﬁgure) studied various systems of
the propositional calculus and formulated several conditions that should be satis-
ﬁed by a good system. In particular a system was considered to be better when its
axioms were independent from each other. Also other criteria were formulated,
for example criteria concerning the number of axioms, their length (as formu-
las), they should be also “organic”, i.e., no part (subformula) of an axiom could
be a theorem of the considered system. All those conditions and demands can
be formulated and studied easily and in an elegant way just using Łukasiewicz’s
notation.
12. Notations of Schönﬁnkel and Le´sniewski
In this section we shall present two systems of notation that did not achieve ac-
ceptance but that are very interesting. We mean the notation proposed by Moses
Iljitsch Schönﬁnkel (Scheinﬁnkel) (1884–1941?) and the notation of Stanisław
Le´sniewski (1886–1939).
Schönﬁnkel’s proposal was formulated by him in a lecture held in Göttingen
in 1920 – it has been prepared for publication by H. Behmann (cf. Schönﬁnkel

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
293
1924) who completed it. The aim of Schönﬁnkel was to reduce the number of
logical constants. H.M. Sheffer has shown in (1913) that all propositional con-
nectives can be deﬁned by a single connective called today Sheffer’s stroke and
denoted as |, i.e., by the connective “not p or not q”. Schönﬁnkel has shown that
all connectives and quantiﬁers of the predicate calculus can be in fact reduced to
the formula ∀x(¬ f(x) ∨¬g(x)). He wrote
f(x)|xg(x)
for
∀x(¬ f(x) ∨¬g(x))
and introduced the function U for properties f, g by the following deﬁnition:
U(f, g) = U fg = f (x)|xg(x).
So for example ¬a = a|xa and
∀x f(x) = ¬f (x)|x¬ f(x) = ( f(x)|y f (x))|x(f (x)|y f (x)).
For ∃xp(x) we get
(p(x)|xp(x))|y(p(x)|xp(x)).
One can see that even “logically simple” expressions will appear in this nota-
tion rather difﬁcult and unhandy. But the aim of Schönﬁnkel was not to propose
a simple and handy notation system for mathematical usage but to construct a
notation system which would make possible the development of logical expres-
sions on the basis of few components. His considerations – and consequently
also his symbolism – are going in this direction still further being led by (Schön-
ﬁnkel 1924, pp. 306–307):
the idea, which at ﬁrst glance certainly appears extremely bold, of attempting to eliminate
by suitable reduction the remaining fundamental notions those of proposition, propositional
function, and variable, from those contexts in which we are dealing with completely arbi-
trary, logically general propositions (for others the attempt would obviously be pointless).
[. . . ] It seems to be remarkable in the extreme that [. ..] it can be done by a reduction to
three fundamental signs.
This is really worth of noting and has a fundamental meaning for the construc-
tion of logical symbolism.
Schönﬁnkel stars by constructing a functional calculus with the aim to apply
it later to expressions of the predicate calculus. He treats predicates – as Frege
did – as functions. His calculus describes the basic relations and operations be-
tween functions (including constants) through “individual functions of a very
general nature” – as he says in (1924, p. 309).
I is the “identity function” given by Ix = x. Its aim is to enable us to treat
any constant x as a value of a function Ix. C is the “constancy function” which
associates with any constant a the constant function Ca having constant value a:
Ca(y) = a.
For any x one has Cx(y) = x. Schönﬁnkel adopts the rule that if there are no
parentheses then functions are applied from left to right. Hence
Cxy = x.

294
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
Its aim is to introduce y “as a ‘blind’ variable” in expression in which y does not
occur. The “interchange function” T is introduced by the following deﬁnition:
(Tϕ)xy = ϕyx.
The “composing function” Z is deﬁned in the following way:
Zϕχx = ϕ(χx).
It makes possible to move parentheses in expressions in which functions occur.
Finally S is the “merging function”:
Sϕχx = ϕx(χx)
where ϕx is again a function. As an example Schönﬁnkel gives here a binary
function ϕxy in which for the second argument one puts the value χx of another
function on the same argument x. The function S makes possible to reduce the
number of occurrences of a variable in an expression.
We shall apply those “individual functions” on a simple example and show
the interesting result. Before this we notice – following Schönﬁnkel – that all
indicated individual functions can be developed using only two of them. For
example
Ix = x = Cx(Cx) = SCCx,
I = SCC.
Or
Zfgx = f(gx) = C f x(gx) = S(C f)gx = CS f(Cf)gx = S(CS)Cfgx,
i.e.,
Z = S(CS)C.
In a similar way one gets
T = S(ZZS)(CC).
Consider now the following example:
∀x(¬p(x) ∨∃xp(x)) =
= ∀x(¬p(x) ∨¬∀x(¬p(x) ∨¬p(x)) = ∀x(¬p(x) ∨¬(p(x)|xp(x))) =
= p(x)|x(p(x)|xp(x)) = Up(Upp) = Up(Up(Ip)) = Up(SUIp) =
= SU(SUI)p.
If one expresses I by C and S then in the considered expression only U,C and S
will occur. The variable p can be disregarded. Schönﬁnkel says that “a variable
in a proposition of logic is, after all, nothing but a token (Abzeichen) that char-
acterizes certain argument places and operators as belonging together” (1924,
p. 307). At the end of an expression one does not need this “token”. Moreover,
one can further transform logical expression in such a way that U will occur at

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
295
the very end. This was observed by H. Behman at the end of (1924) – we show
this on our example. One gets:
SU(SUI)p = SU(SU(CIU))p = SU(SS(CI)U)p =
= SS(SS(CI))Up.
By an appropriate transformation one can eliminate also U. In this way one sees
that any formula can be written using only two signs, namely S and C. In our
example one gets:
SS(SS(CI)) = SS(SS(C(SCC))).
This reduction is – according to Schönﬁnkel – really “noteworthy” and charac-
teristic for logical expressions and the operating in logical systems. One obtains
a reduction solely by manipulations and combinations of signs and sequences of
signs which do not occur themselves and in this way discover the purely formal
character of objects of logical operations.
Schönﬁnkel’s work was the beginning of the so called combinatorial logic
developed by H.B. Curry (cf. Curry 1930). This logic describes and explains in
an axiomatic way how one should operate on combinators – as Curry calls the
“individual functions”.
Finally let us consider the notation system proposed by Polish logician and
philosopher Stanisław Le´sniewski – it is of quite different nature and was de-
veloped to fulﬁl quite different aims. It should provide us with an ideographical
notation for propositional connectives.
Le´sniewski proposed as a symbol for a unary connective a horizontal line
with an appropriate vertical one:
for afﬁrmation
,
for negation
,
for tautology
,
for contradiction
.
Symbols for binary connectives are constructed by using a circle and radius
arms. In particular one has:
c
denotes conjunction (and),
c
denotes disjunction (or),
c
denotes implication (if ... then ... ),
c
denotes equivalence (if and only if),
c
denotes the contradictory (always false),
c
denotes tautology (always true).
The main principle of this system of notation can be described as follows:
suppose that the combinations of truth-values t (true) and f (false) or, resp. 1

296
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
and 0 of the arguments of a binary propositional connective are written in the
following matrix:
00
01
d
10
11
One adds now a radius arm at the places where the given connective has value
1. So for example the connective
c
indicates that its value is 0 only in the case when both its arguments are 1. Hence
it is Sheffer’s stroke:
a
c b = ¬a ∨¬b = a|b.
The notation of Le´sniewski is called “hun-and-spoke-notation”, “wheel-notation”
or “o clock notation”. It could be also called “slice-notation”, “matrix-notation”
or “signal-notation”. One can easily see that every symbol of a propositional
connective represents here its own matrix just by a semaphore-code or signal-
code. The basic truth-value properties of a connective are directly indicated by
the symbol. Hence this notation system makes possible to solve immediately any
problem which can be solved using truth-value schemes. This system is didac-
tically skillful as any other system which connects the symbolic level and the
level of meaning.
13. Symbolic Mania and Pragmatic Phobia
Having discussed Łukasiewicz and Le´sniewski (two important representatives
of Polish logic) and their contribution to the development of logical symbolism
we should not forget Kazimierz Twardowski (1866–1938), the founder of the
Lvov-Warsaw philosophical school. Though he was not a logician but it is worth
presenting here his general remarks concerning the logical and mathematical
symbolism.
Twardowski appreciated the rôle and signiﬁcance of a good symbolism in
logic but simultaneously warned against its overestimation. Though he himself
was not a logician and did not work in logic he knew the works of his students
and followers, Łukasiewicz and Le´sniewski, and their attempts to identify clar-
ity with the use of a symbolic language. He was not against the “new logic” but
stood in opposition to attitudes which were genetically connected to symbolic
logic, which he described as symbolic mania and pragmatic phobia. According
to him a symbol represents an object but cannot replace it. On the contrary, a

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
297
symbol is always only a tool. If we forget these two things we have the attitude
Twardowski called symbolic mania. It is characterized by a faith in the infalli-
bility of symbolism, in an autonomy of operations on symbols and by a con-
demnation of opinions which are independent of any symbolism. This attitude
is strongly connected with another, which Twardowski called pragmatic phobia.
It consists of bias against objects denoted by symbols. Both tendencies can be
found in logic and mathematics. Twardowski quotes in (1927) a vivid picture of
a mathematician (taken from Bouasse 1920) suffering under them.
The development of symbolic mania and pragmatic phobia is stimulated by
the fact that symbolism is a good tool which affords possibilities for clarity
and precision; and by the fact that in mathematics and logic the objects which
are studied, hence “things” denoted by logical and mathematical symbols, are
usually mental constructions. These attitudes can have negative consequences.
Twardowski wrote in (1927):
The tendency of putting symbols above objects can lead to the situation that one claims
about objects only that which follows from assumptions about symbolic operations regard-
less of what things say about themselves or even in the face of facts. (p. 398)
One should stress that Twardowski was not averse to the use of symbolic
language in logic and mathematics. On the contrary – he estimated it at its proper
value but warned against overestimation of it. Twardowski’s views were fully
accepted by the Lvov-Warsaw logical school. Its representatives proclaimed the
thesis that a symbol represents an object and the thesis on semantic intension
and semantic transparency of a symbol.
14. A Survey of Nowadays Used Notation Systems
The symbolic used today is in fact that proposed by Peano with some small
changes made by Russell. It is the consequence of its clarity, clearness and sim-
plicity. Important was also the fact that Whitehead and Russell used it in their
monumental work Principia Mathematica – it was written almost exclusively
(with the exception of some necessary explanations in English) in a symbolic
language.
Changes in Peano’s symbolic proposed by Russell and other logicians con-
sisted in changing of the shape of particular symbols. To provide the reader with
some information about symbols used nowadays in logic we give a survey of
symbols applied in the propositional calculus and in the predicate logic.

298
Part II: History of Logic and Mathematics
connective
PM
HA, HB
HS
DIN
other symbols
negation
∼p
p
p
¬p
p′, −p
conjunction
p · q, pq
p&q
p ∧q
p ∧q
disjunction
p ∨q
p ∨q, pq
p ∨q
p ∨q
p + q
implication
p ⊃q
p →q
p →q
p →q
equivalence
p ≡q
p ∼q
p ↔q
p ↔q
PM is an abbreviation for Principia Mathematica, HA and HB denote, resp.,
Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik by Hilbert and Ackermann (1928) and Grund-
lagen der Mathematik by Hibert and Bernays (1934, 1939), HS denotes the
Münster school around Hermes and Scholz and DIN – Deutsche Institut für
Normierung (DIN 5473, 1992 – ISO 31 – 11:1978 International Organization
for Standardization).
In the predicate logic (of the ﬁrst and higher orders) the following symbols
are used:
universal quantiﬁer
existential quantiﬁer
Whitehead, Russell
(x)
(∃x)
Hilbert, Ackermann
(x)
(Ex)
Hilbert, Bernays
(x)
(Ex)
Kleene
∀x
∃x
Quine
(x)
(∃x)
Rosser
(x)
(Ex)
others

x, 
x ,  x,

x, 
x ,  x,

x,  x, 
x

x,  x, 
x
DIN
∀x
∃x
most often used
∀x, 
x
∃x, 
x
[Source: Whitehead/Russell 1910–1913, Hilbert/Ackermann 1928, Hilbert/Ber-
nays 1934 and 1939, Kleene 1952, Quine 1940, Rosser 1953.]
Note that Russell and Whitehead beside (x) used – in the case when a univer-
sal quantiﬁer stood at the very beginning of a formula which was an implication
– Peano’s notation . . . ⊃x . . .
In our opinion the most consequent is the following notation system: ¬, ∧, ∨,
→, ↔, , . It comes from Alfred Tarski (1901–1983). The symbol ∨for dis-
junction is similar to the ﬁrst letter of Latin vel (that means “or”), the symbol ∧
is the inverse of ∨(as conjunction is the inverse of disjunction). In this way the
duality between disjunction and conjunction is stressed. The symbols for quan-
tiﬁers  and  indicate that the universal quantiﬁer is a generalization (in a
certain sense) of the conjunction and the existential quantiﬁer – a generalization
of the disjunction.

The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical Background
299
As indicated above symbols for quantiﬁers used most often nowadays are
∀x and ∃x (they are used also in LATEX, the most popular editor for logicians and
mathematicians). Those signs resemble, resp., letters A (all) and E (exists).
15. Conclusions
To conclude we can state that the development of a symbolic language for logic
was always connected with some philosophical assumptions concerning lan-
guage (in particular the language of science). We can say that one of the most
important aims which was a guiding principle for logicians, mathematicians and
philosophers in constructing such a symbolism was the idea of establishing an
exact, ideal and precise language which would replace the unclear and impre-
cise colloquial language. There arose problems about the connections between
language and reality. We see here a rich variety of solutions. One can also spot
a tendency which – starting from the linguistical inclination to reduce logic to
the study of properties of a language – leads at the very end to the identiﬁcation
of logic with the theory of signs. (One observes this clearly comparing ideas of
Russell, Wittgenstein and Carnap.)
Notice at the end that a logical symbolism is an example of an ideography
(i.e., of a writing in which symbols denote concepts and not sounds). In such
a system expressions are understood in the same way by all knowing the basic
signs though they can be read in different way by various people. So is the case
in logic and mathematics. For example the formula ¬p →q is understood in the
same way by all who know the elements of the propositional calculus though it
will be read in a different way by people of various nations: in particular a Polish
logician will read it as “je˙zeli p, to q”, an English logician – as “if p then q”, a
German logician – as “wenn p dann q”, etc.
The symbolic language of logic (and mathematics) is an example of an (al-
most uniform) ideographical system accepted all over the world. It not only fa-
cilitates communication among logicians and mathematicians but is also a sign
of the universal character of those disciplines.

REFERENCES
Ackermann, W. (1924–1925). Begründung des tertium non datur mittels der Hilbert-
schen Theorie der Widerspruchsfreiheit. Mathematische Annalen 93, 1–36.
Ackermann, W. (1936). Beiträge zum Entscheidungsproblem der mathematischen Logik.
Mathematische Annalen 112, 419–432.
Ackermann, W. (1940). Zur Widerspruchsfreiheit der Zahlentheorie. Mathematische An-
nalen 117, 162–194.
Aristoteles (1924). Metaphysik. Ins Deutsche übertragen von A. Lasson. Jena: Eugen
Diederichs. Also in: The Complete Works of Aristotle, revised Oxford translation
(2 vol.), edited by J. Barnes, Princeton, NJ, 1984.
Aristoteles (1960). Aristotelis opera ex recensione Immanuelis Bekkeri edidit Academia
Regia Borussica. Editio altera. Edited by O. Gigon. Berlin: Walter de Gruyter.
Atten, M. van, ed. (2007). Gian-Carlo Rota’s Lectures on Being and Time. The New
Yearbook for Phenomenology and Phenomenological Philosophy 7, 1–99.
Banach, S. (1939). Über das ‘Loi Suprême’ von J. Hoene-Wro´nski. Bulletin Interna-
tional de l’Académie Polonaise des Sciences et des Lettres, Classes des Sciences
Mathématiques et Naturelles, série A: Sciences Mathématiques, 1–10. Reprinted
in: S. Banach, Oeuvres, vol. II: Travaux sur l’Analyse Fonctionnelle, pp. 450–457.
Warszawa: PWN – Éditions Scientiﬁques de Pologne, 1979.
Banach, S. and S. Mazur (1937). Sur le fonctions calculables. Annales de la Société Po-
lonaise de Mathématique 16, 223.
Barwise, J. (1980). Inﬁnitary Logics. In: E. Agazzi (ed.) Modern Logic – A Survey, pp.
3–112. Dordrecht: D. Reidel Publ. Comp.
Batóg, T. and R. Murawski (1996). Stanisław Pi ˛atkiewicz and the Beginnings of Mathe-
matical Logic in Poland. Historia Mathematica 23, 68–73.
Becker, O., ed. (1927). Mathematische Existenz. Untersuchungen zur Logik und Ontolo-
gie mathematischer Phänomene. Jahrbuch für Philosophie und phänomenologi-
sche Forschung 9, 439–809.
Becker, O. (1965). Zur Geschichte der griechischen Mathematik. Darmstadt: Wiss. Buch-
gesellschaft.
Bedürftig, Th. and R. Murawski (2001). Zählen – Grundlage der elementaren Arithmetik.
Hildesheim: Verlag Franzbecker.
Beisswanger, P. (1965). Die Phasen in H. Weyls Beurteilung der Mathematik. Mathema-
tisch-Physikalische Semesterberichte 12, 132–156.
Bell, E. T. (1945). The Development of Mathematics. New York and London: McGraw-
Hill Book Company.

302
References
Benacerraf, P. and H. Putnam, eds. (1964). Philosophy of Mathematics. Selected Read-
ings. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall, Inc. Second edition: Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
Berka, K. and L. Kreiser (1983). Logik-Texte. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell-
schaft.
Bernays, P. (1926). Axiomatische Untersuchungen des Aussagenkalküls der Principia
Mathematica. Mathematische Zeitschrift 25, 305–320.
Bernays, P. (1934). Quelques points essentiels de la métamathématiques. L’Enseigne-
ment mathématique 34, 70–95.
Bernays, P. (1935). Hilberts Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Arithmetik. In:
Hilbert (1935), pp. 196–216.
Bernays, P. (1937). A System of Axiomatic Set Theory: I. Journal of Symbolic Logic 2,
65–77.
Bernays, P. (1941a). A System of Axiomatic Set Theory: II. Journal of Symbolic Logic
6, 1–17.
Bernays, P. (1941b). Sur les questions méthodologiques actuelles de la théorie hilber-
tienne de la démonstration. In: F. Gonseth (ed.), Les entretiens de Zurich sur
les fondements et la méthode des sciences mathématiques, 6–9 décembre 1938,
pp. 144–152. Zurich: Leemann. Discussion, pp. 153–161.
Bernays, P. (1942). A System of Axiomatic Set Theory: III. Journal of Symbolic Logic
7, 65–89, 133–145.
Bernays, P. (1958). Axiomatic Set Theory. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Com-
pany.
Bernays, P. (1967). Hilbert David. In: P. Edwards (ed.), Encyclopedia of Philosophy,
vol. 3, pp. 496–504. New York: Macmillan and Free Press.
Bernays, P. (1970). On the Original Gentzen Consistency Proof for Number Theory. In:
J. Myhill, A. Kino and R.E.Vesley (eds.), Intuitionism and Proof Theory, pp. 409–
417. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Bernays, P. (1976). Abhandlungen zur Philosophie der Mathematik. Darmstadt: Wis-
senschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Bigalke, H.-G. (1983). Rekonstruktionen zur geschichtlichen Entwicklung des Begriffs
der Inkommensurabilität. Journal für Mathematik-Didaktik 4, 307–354.
Boche´nski, I.M. (1962). Formale Logik. Freiburg und München: Alber.
Bolzano, B. (1851). Paradoxien des Unendlichen. Edited by F. Prihonsky. Leipzig: C.H.
Reclam Sen. Reprinted: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darmstadt 1964.
Bondecka-Krzykowska, I. (2002). Koncepcje strukturalistyczne we współczesnej ﬁlozoﬁi
matematyki. Analiza krytyczno-porównawcza [Structuralistic Conceptions in the
Modern Philosophy of Mathematics. A Critical-Comparative Analysis]. Unpub-
lished Ph.D. thesis, Uniwersytet im. Adama Mickiewicza, Pozna´n.
Bondecka-Krzykowska, I. (2007). Matematyka w uj˛eciu strukturalnym. Pozna´n: Wydaw-
nictwo Naukowe Uniwersytetu im. Adama Mickiewicza.
Boole, G. (1847). The Mathematical Analysis of Logic, being an Essay toward a Calcu-
lus of Deductive Reasoning. Cambridge: Macmillan, Barclay, and Macmillan and
London: George Bell.

References
303
Boole, G. (1848). On the Calculus of Logic. Cambridge and Dublin Mathematical Jour-
nal 3, 183-198.
Boole, G. (1854). An Investigation of the Laws of Thought on which are Founded the
Mathematical Theories of Logic and Probabilities. London: Walton & Maberly.
Boole, G. (1952). Studies in Logic and Probability. Edited by R. Rhees. London: Watts
& Co.
Boolos, G.S. (1985). Nominalist Platonism. Philosophical Review 94, 327-344.
Boolos, G.S. and R.C. Jeffrey (1980). Computability and Logic. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Bouasse, H. (1920). De la formation des théories et de leur transformation pragmatique.
Scientia 14, 264–265.
Bourbaki, N. (1960). Éléments d’histoire des mathématiques. Paris: Hermann.
Bowie, G.L. (1973). An Argument Against Church’s Thesis. The Journal of Philosophy
70, 66–76.
Bowie, G.L. (1982). Lucas’ Number Is Finally Up. Journal of Philosophical Logic 11,
279–285.
Brouwer, L.E.J. (1907). Over de Grondslagen der Wiskunde. Amsterdam: Mass en van
Suchtelen.
Brouwer, L.E.J. (1912). Intuitionisme en formalisme. Groningen: Noordhoff. Also in:
Wiskundig Tijdschrift 9 (1912), 180–211. English translation: Intuitionism and
Formalism, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 20 (1913), 81–96.
Brouwer, L.E.J. (1948). Consciousness, Philosophy and Mathematics. In: E.W. Beth,
H.J. Pos and H.J.A. Hollak (eds.), Library of the Tenth International Congress in
Philosophy, vol. 1, pp. 1235–1249. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Com-
pany.
Brown, J.R. (1999). Philosophy of Mathematics. An Introduction to the World of Proofs
and Pictures. London and New York: Routledge.
Cantor, G. (1883). Grundlagen einer allgemeinen Mannigfaltigkeitslehre. Mathemati-
sche Annalen 21, 545–586. Also in: Cantor (1932), pp. 165–204.
Cantor, G. (1895). Beiträge zur Begründung der transﬁniten Mengenlehre. Mathemati-
sche Annalen 46, 481–512, 49, 207–246. Also in: Cantor (1932), pp. 281–351.
English translation: Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transﬁnite
Numbers, translated and edited by Ph.E.B. Jourdain, Dover Publications, Inc., New
York 1955.
Cantor, G. (1932). Gesammelte Abhandlungen mathematischen und philosophischen In-
halts mit erläuternden Anmerkungen sowie mit Ergänzungen aus dem Briefwech-
sel Cantor–Dedekind. Edited by E. Zermelo. Berlin: Verlag von Julius Springer.
Reprinted: Springer-Verlag, Berlin–Heidelberg–New York 1980.
Cantor, G. (1991). Briefe. Edited by H. Meschkowski and W. Nilson. Berlin: Springer
Verlag.
Capelle, W. (1968). Die Vorsokratiker – Die Fragmente und Quellenberichte. Translated
and introduced by Wilhelm Capelle. Stuttgart: A. Kröner Verlag.
Carnap, R. (1934a). Die Antinomien und die Unvollständigkeit der Mathematik. Mo-
natshefte für Mathematik und Physik 41, 263–284.
Carnap, R. (1934b). Logische Syntax der Sprache. Wien: Julius Springer.

304
References
Carnap, R. (1963). Intellectual Autobiography. In: P.A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philosophy of
Rudolf Carnap, pp. 3–84. La Salle, Ill.: Open Court Publishing Co.
Carroll, L. (1886). The Game of Logic. London and New York: Macmillan & Co.
Carroll, L. (1896). Symbolic Logic. London and New York: Macmillan.
Cauchy, A. (1879). Sur clefs algébrique. Comptes Rendus de l’Académie des Sciences
36, 70–75 and 129–136.
Chaitin, G. (1974). Information-Theoretic Computational Complexity. IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Theory IT-20, 10–15. Reprinted in: Th. Tymoczko (ed.),
New Directions in the Philosophy of Mathematics. An Anthology, pp. 289–299.
Boston–Basel–Stuttgart: Birkhäuser, 1985.
Chaitin, G. (1982). Gödel’s Theorem and Information. International Journal of Theoret-
ical Physics 21, 941–954. Reprinted in: Th. Tymoczko (ed.), New Directions in the
Philosophy of Mathematics. An Anthology, pp. 300–311. Boston–Basel–Stuttgart:
Birkhäuser, 1985.
Chaitin, G. (1998). The Limits of Mathematics. A Course on Information Theory and the
Limits of Formal Reasoning. Singapore: Springer Verlag Singapore Pte. Ltd.
Chihara, Ch.S. (1990). Constructibility and Mathematical Existence. Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Church, A. (1935). An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory. Preliminary
Report (abstract). Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 41, 332–333.
Church, A. (1936a). An Unsolvable Problem of Elementary Number Theory. American
Journal of Mathematics 58, 345–363.
Church, A. (1936b). A Note on the Entscheidungsproblem. Journal of Symbolic Logic
1, 40–41. Correction: 101–102.
Church, A. (1941). The Calculi of Lambda-Conversion. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Clebsch, A. (1871). Zum Gedächtnis an Julius Plücker. Abhandlungen der Königlichen
Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften zu Göttingen 16, 1–40.
Cohen, P.J. (1971). Comments on the Foundations of Set Theory. In: D. Scott (ed.), Ax-
iomatic Set Theory (Proceedings of Symposia in Pure Mathematics, vol. XIII, Part
1), pp. 9–16. Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical Society.
Couturat, L. (1901). La logique de Leibniz d’apres des documents inédits. Paris: Alcan.
Couturat, L. (1905). L’algèbre de la logique. Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
Curry, H.B. (1930). Grundlagen der kombinatorischen Logik. American Journal of Math-
ematics 52, 509–531, 789–834.
Curry, H.B. (1951). Outlines of a Formalist Philosophy of Mathematics. Amsterdam:
North-Holland Publishing Company.
Damerow, P. (1994). Vorüberlegungen zu einer historischen Epistemologie der Zahlbe-
griffsentwicklung. In: Dux and Wenzel (1994), pp. 248–322.
Damerow, P. (1999). The Material Culture of Calculation. A Conceptual Framework for
an Historical Epistemology of the Concept of Number. Berlin: Max-Planck-Institut
für Wissenschaftsgeschichte. Preprint 117.
Damerow, P. (2001). Evolution of Number Systems. In: International Encyclopedia of
Social & Behavioral Sciences, vol. 16, pp. 10753–10756. Amsterdam: Elsevier.

References
305
Damerow, P., R.K. Englund and H. J. Nissen (1988). Die ersten Zahldarstellungen und
die Entwicklung des Zahlbegriffs. Spektrum der Wissenschaft 3, 46–55.
Dauben, J.W. (1979). Georg Cantor. His Mathematics and Philosophy of the Inﬁnite.
Cambridge, Mass., and London: Harvard University Press.
Davis, M., ed. (1965). The Undecidable: Basic Papers on Undecidable Propositions,
Unsolvable Problems, and Computable Functions. Hewlett, N.Y.: Raven Press.
Davis, M., ed. (1994). Solvability, Provability, Deﬁnability: The Collected Works of Emil
L. Post. Boston–Basel–Berlin: Birkhäuser.
Davis, M. (2004). The Myth of Hypercomputation. In: Ch. Teuscher (ed.), Alan Turing:
Life and Legacy of a Great Thinker, pp. 195–211. Berlin–Heidelberg: Springer-
Verlag.
Dawson, J.W., Jr. (1985a). The Reception of Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems. In: P.D.
Asquith and Ph. Kitcher (eds.), PSA 1984: Proceedings of the 1984 Biennial Meet-
ing of the Philosophy of Science Association, vol. 2, pp. 253–271. Reprinted in:
S.G. Shanker (ed.), Gödel’s Theorem in Focus, pp. 74–95 (1988). London: Croom
Helm.
Dawson, J.W., Jr. (1985b). Completing the Gödel–Zermelo Correspondence.
Historia
Mathematica 12, 66–70.
Dawson, J.W., Jr. (1997). Logical Dilemmas. The Life and Work of Kurt Gödel. Welles-
ley, Mass.: A.K. Peters.
Dawson, J.W., Jr. (1998). What Hath Gödel Wrought? Synthese 114, 3–12.
Dedekind, R. (1872). Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen. Braunschweig: Friedrich Vieweg
und Sohn. 7th edition: 1967. English translation: Continuity and Irrational Num-
bers, in: Essays on the Theory of Numbers, translated by W.W. Beman, pp. 1–27.
New York: Dover Publications, Inc., 1963.
Dedekind, R. (1888): Was sind und was sollen die Zahlen? Braunschweig: Friedrich
Vieweg und Sohn. 10th edition: 1969. English translation: What Are Numbers
and What Should They Be?, revised, edited and translated by H. Pogorzelski,
W. Ryan and W. Snyder, Orono, Maine: Research Institute for Mathematics, 1995.
Reprinted in: The Nature and Meaning of Numbers, in: Essays on the Theory of
Numbers, translated by W.W. Beman, pp. 31–115. New York: Dover Publications,
Inc., 1963.
De Morgan, A. (1847). Formal Logic, or the Calculus of Inference, Necessary and Prob-
able. London: Taylor and Walton.
De Morgan, A. (1856). On the Symbols of Logic, the Theory of Syllogism, and in par-
ticular of the Copula, and the Application of the Theory of Probabilities to some
Questions of Evidence. Transactions of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 9,
79-127.
De Morgan, A. (1860). Syllabus of a Proposed System of Logic. London: Walton and
Maberly.
De Morgan, A. (1861). Logic. In: English Cyclopedia, vol. 5, cols. 340-354.
De Morgan, A. (1864a). On the Syllogism, no III, and on Logic in General. Transactions
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 10, 173-230.
De Morgan, A. (1864b). On the Syllogism, no IV, and on Logic in General. Transactions
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 10, 331-358.

306
References
De Morgan, A. (1864c). On the Syllogism no V, and on Logic in General. Transactions
of the Cambridge Philosophical Society 10, 428-488.
De Morgan, A. (1872). Budget of Paradoxes. Edited by S. E. De Morgan. London: Long-
mans, Green, and Co.
Descartes, R. (1637) Géométrie. In: Discours de la Methode. Pour bien conduire sa rai-
son, chercher la verité dans la sciences. Plus la Dioptrique. Les Meteores. Et la
Geometrie. Qui sont des essais de cete Methode. Leyden: Ian Marie. Reprinted in:
Oeuvres de Descartes. Edited by Charles Adam and Paul Tannery, vol. 6: Discours
de la Méthode, Essais. Paris: Léopold Cerf, 1902.
Detlefsen, M. (1979). On Interpreting Gödel’s Second Theorem. Journal of Philosophi-
cal Logic 18, 297–313.
Detlefsen, M. (1986). Hilbert’s Program. An Essay on Mathematical Instrumentalism.
Dordrecht–Boston–Lancaster–Tokyo: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Detlefsen, M. (1990). On the Alleged Refutation of Hilbert’s Program Using Gödel’s
First Incompleteness Theorem. Journal of Philosophical Logic 19, 343–377.
Detlefsen, M. (1993a). The Kantian Character of Hilbert’s Formalism. In: J. Czermak
(ed.), Philosophy of Mathematics. Proceedings of the 15th International Wittgen-
stein-Symposium. Part 1, pp. 195–205. Wien: Verlag Hölder-Pilcher-Tempsky.
Detlefsen, M. (1993b). Hilbert’s Formalism. Revue Internationale de Philosophie 47,
285–304.
Detlefsen, M. and M. Luker (1980). The Four-Color Theorem and Mathematical Proof.
Journal of Philosophy 77, 803–820.
Dickstein, S. (1896a). Katalog dzieł i r˛ekopisów Hoene-Wro´nskiego [Catalogue of Works
and Manuscripts by Hoëne-Wro´nski]. Kraków: Nakładem Akademii Umiej˛etno´sci.
Dickstein, S. (1896b). Hoene-Wro´nski. Jego ˙zycie i prace [Hoene-Wro´nski. His Life and
Works]. Kraków: Nakładem Akademii Umiej˛etno´sci.
Doner, J. and W. Hodges (1988). Alfred Tarski and Decidable Theories. Journal of Sym-
bolic Logic 53, 20–35.
Doner J., A. Mostowski and A. Tarski (1978). The Elementary Theory of Well-Ordering.
A Metamathematical Study. In: A. Macintyre, L. Pacholski and J. Paris (eds.),
Logic Colloquium’77, pp. 1–54. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Dries, L. van den (1988). Alfred Tarski’s Elimination Theory for Real Closed Fields.
Journal of Symbolic Logic 53, 7–19.
Dummett, M. (1978). Wittgenstein’s Philosophy of Mathematics. In: M. Dummett, Truth
and Other Enigmas, pp. 166–185. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Dux, G. and U. Wenzel, eds. (1994). Der Prozeß der Geistesgeschichte, Studien zur on-
togenetischen und historischen Entwicklung des Geistes. Frankfurt am Main: Suhr-
kamp Verlag.
Ehrenfeucht, A. (1961). Separable Theories. Bulletin de l’Académie Polonaise des Sci-
ences, Série des sciences mathématiques, astronomiques et physiques, 9, 17–19.
Engels, F. (1878). Herrn Eugen Dühring’s Umwälzung der Wissenschaft. Philosophie.
Politische Ökonomie. Sozialismus. Verlag der Genossenschafts: Leipzig.

References
307
Euklid. Die Elemente. Buch I–XII. Translated and edited by Clemens Thaer. Friedrich
Vieweg und Sohn, Braunschweig and Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, Darm-
stadt 1991 (8th edition). English text: The Thirteen Books of Euclid’s Elements.
Translated from the text of Heiberg, with Introduction and Commentary by Sir
Th.L. Heath. New York: Dover Publishers, Inc., 1956.
Euler, L. (1768–1772). Lettrès à une princesse d’Allemagne sur divers sujects de phy-
sique et de philosophie. Vols. 1, 2 and 3, St. Petersburg: Academie impériale des
sciences.
Evra, J.W. van (1977). A Reassessment of George Boole’s Theory of Logic. Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic 18, 363-377.
Fearnley-Sander, D. (1979). Hermann Grassmann and the Creation of Linear Algebra.
American Mathematical Monthly 86, 809–817.
Feferman, S. (1960). Arithmetization of Metamathematics in a General Setting. Funda-
menta Mathematicae 49, 35–92.
Feferman, S. (1962). Transﬁnite Recursive Progressions of Axiomatic Theories. Journal
of Symbolic Logic 27, 259–316.
Feferman, S. (1964). Systems of Predicative Analysis. Part I: Journal of Symbolic Logic
29, 1–30.
Feferman, S. (1968) Systems of Predicative Analysis. Part II: Journal of Symbolic Logic
33, 193–220.
Feferman, S. (1984). Kurt Gödel: Conviction and Causation. In: P. Weingartner et al.
(eds.), Philosophy of Science – History of Science. A Selection of Contributed
Papers of the 7th International Congress of Logic, Methodology and Philosophy
of Science, Salzburg, 1983. Meisenheim/Glan: Verlag Anton Hain. Reprinted in:
S.G. Shanker (ed.), Gödel’s Theorem in Focus, pp. 96–114. London: Croom Helm,
1988.
Feferman, S. (1988a). Turing and the Land of O(z). In: R. Herken (ed.), The Universal
Turing Machine — A Half-Century Survey, pp. 113–147. New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Feferman, S. (1988b). Hilbert’s Program Revisited: Proof-Theoretical and Foundational
Reductions. Journal of Symbolic Logic 153, 364–384.
Felscher, W. (1978–1979). Naive Mengen und abstrakte Zahlen. Vols. I–III. Mannheim–
Wien–Zürich: Bibliographisches Institut.
Feys, R. and F.B. Fitch (1969). Dictionary of Symbols of Mathematical Logic. Amster-
dam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Field, H. (1980). Science without Numbers. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Field, H. (1989). Realism, Mathematics, and Modality. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Floyd, J. (1995). On Saying What You Really Want to Say: Wittgenstein, Gödel, and
the Trisection of the Angle. In: J. Hintikka (ed.), From Dedekind to Gödel. Essays
on the Development of the Foundations of Mathematics, pp. 373–425. Dordrecht:
Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Folina, J. (1998). Church’s Thesis: Prelude to a Proof. Philosophia Mathematica 6, 302–
323.

308
References
Føllesdal, D. (1995a). Gödel and Husserl. In: J. Hintikka (ed.), Essays on the Develop-
ment of the Foundations of Mathematics, pp. 427–446. Dordrecht: Kluwer Aca-
demic Publishers.
Føllesdal, D. (1995b). Introductory Note to *1961/?. In: K. Gödel, Collected Works,
vol. III, edited by S. Feferman, J.W. Dawson, Jr., W. Goldfarb, Ch. Parsons and
R.M. Solovay, pp. 364–373. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Fraenkel, A. (1920). Zahlbegriff und Algebra bei Gauss. Erster Teil. Materialien für eine
wissenschaftliche Biographie von Gauss. Edited by F. Klein, M. Brendel and L.
Schlesinger. Vol. 8 Nachrichten der Königlichen Gesellschaft der Wissenschaften
Göttingen, Mathematisch-physikalische Klasse Beiheft. Leipzig: Verlag von B. G.
Teubner.
Fraenkel, A. (1921). Über die Zermelosche Begründung der Mengenlehre. Jahresbericht
der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung (Angelegenheiten) 30, 97–98.
Fraenkel, A. (1932). Das Leben Georg Cantors. In: Cantor (1932), pp. 452–483.
Frege, G. (1879). Begriffsschrift, eine der arithmetischen nachgebildete Formelsprache
des reinen Denkens. Halle: Louis Nebert.
Frege, G. (1884). Die Grundlagen der Arithmetik – Eine logisch-mathematische Unter-
suchung über den Begriff der Zahl. Breslau: Wilhelm Koebner.
Frege, G. (1891). Function und Begriff. Unveänderter Nachdruk eines Vortrages, Sitzung
v. 9.1.1891 der Jenaischen Gesellschaft für Medizin und Naturwissenschaft. Jena.
Frege, G. (1893). Grundgesetze der Arithmetik – Begriffschriftlich abgeleitet, vol. I. Jena:
H. Pohle.
Frege, G. (1894). Rezension von Dr. E.G. Husserl: Philosophie der Arithmetik. Psychol-
ogische und logische Untersuchung. Erster Band. Leipzig, 1891. C.E.M. Pfeffer.
Zeitschrift für Philosophie und philosophische Kritik 103, 313–332.
Frege, G. (1903). Grundgesetze der Arithmetik – Begriffschriftlich abgeleitet, vol. II.
Jena: H. Pohle.
Frege, G. (1976). Wissenschaftlicher Briefwechsel. Edited by G. Gabriel, H. Hermes,
F. Kambartel, Ch. Thiel and A. Veraart. Hamburg: Felix Meiner Verlag.
Friedberg, R. (1957). Two Recursively Enumerable Sets of Incomparable Degrees of
Unsolvability (Solution of Post’s Problem). Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences (USA) 43, 236–238.
Friedman, H. (1998). Finite Functions and the Necessary Use of Large Cardinals. Annals
of Mathematics 148, 803-893.
Fuson, K. C. (1988). Children’s Counting and the Concept of Number. New York: Springer
Verlag.
Gandy, R. (1988). The Conﬂuence of Ideas in 1936. In: R. Herken (ed.), The Universal
Turing Machine — A Half-Century Survey, pp. 55–111. New York and Oxford:
Oxford University Press.
Gardner, M. (1958). Logic, Machines and Diagrams. New York – Toronto – London:
McGraw-Hill.
Gauss, C. F. (1973). Gesammelte Werke Vols. I–XII. Hildesheim: Georg Olms Verlag.
Gauss, C. F. (2002). Gauss’ Werke in Kurzfassung. Edited by Karin Reich. Reihe Algo-
rismus vol. 39. Augsburg: Erwin Rauner Verlag.
Gauss, C. F., Wolfgang Bolyai (1899). Briefwechsel. Edited by Franz Schmidt and Paul

References
309
Stäckel. Leipzig: Verlag von B. G. Teubner. (Carl Friedrich Gauss, Werke, Ergän-
zungsreihe, vol. II, Hildesheim–Zürich–New York: Georg Olms Verlag, 1987).
Gawecki, B.J. (1958). Wro´nski i o Wro´nskim. Katalog dzieł ﬁlozoﬁcznych Hoene-Wro´n-
skiego oraz literatury dotycz ˛acej jego osoby i ﬁlozoﬁi [Wro´nski and about Wro´n-
ski. Catalogue of Philosophical Works of Hoene-Wro´nski and of the Literature on
Him and His Philosophy]. Warszawa: Pa´nstwowe Wydawnictwo Naukowe.
Gelman, R. and C.R. Gallistel (1978). The Child’s Understanding of Number. Cambrid-
ge, Mass. and London: Harvard University Press.
Gentzen, G. (1935). Untersuchungen über das logische Schliessen. Mathematische Zeit-
schrift 39, Part I: 176–210, Part II: 405–443.
Gentzen, G. (1936). Die Widerspruchsfreiheit der reinen Zahlentheorie. Mathematische
Annalen 112, 493–565. English translation: The Consistency of Elementary Num-
ber Theory. In: M.E. Szabo (ed.), The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen,
pp. 132–213. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1969.
Gentzen, G. (1938). Neue Fassung des Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweises für die reine Zah-
lentheorie. Forschung zur Logik und zur Grundlagen der exakten Wissenschaften,
New Series 4, 19–44. English translation: New Version of the Consistency Proof
for Elementary Number Theory. In: M.E. Szabo (ed.), The Collected Papers of
Gerhard Gentzen, pp. 252–286. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company,
1969.
Gentzen, G. (1969). On the Relation Between Intuitionistic and Classical Arithmetic. In:
M.E. Szabo (ed.), The Collected Papers of Gerhard Gentzen, pp. 53–67. Amster-
dam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1969.
Gentzen, G. (1974). Der erste Widerspruchsfreiheitsbeweis für die klassische Zahlenthe-
orie. Archiv für mathematische Logik und Grundlagenforschungen 116, 97–112.
Gericke, H. (1984). Mathematik in Antike und Orient. Berlin–Heidelberg: Springer-Ver-
lag.
Gericke, H. (1990). Mathematik im Abendland – von den römischen Feldmessern bis zu
Descartes. Berlin–Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.
Givant, S.R. (1991). A Portrait of Alfred Tarski. The Mathematical Intelligencer 13, 16–
32.
Gödel, K. (1929). Über die Vollständigkeit des Logikkalküls. Doctoral dissertation, sub-
mitted in 1929. Published and translated in: Gödel (1986), pp. 60–101.
Gödel, K. (1930a). Die Vollständigkeit der Axiome des logischen Funktionenkalküls.
Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 37, 349–360. Reprinted with English
translation: The Completeness of the Axioms of the Functional Calculus of Logic,
in: Gödel (1986), pp. 102–123.
Gödel, K. (1930b). Einige metamathematische Resultate über Entscheidungsdeﬁnitheit
und Widerspruchsfreiheit. Anzeiger der Akademie der Wissenschaften in Wien, 67,
214–215. Reprinted with English translation: Some Metamathematical Results on
Completeness and Consistency, in: Gödel (1986), pp. 140–143.
Gödel, K. (1931a). Über formal unentscheidbare Sätze der Principia Mathematica und
verwandter Systeme. I. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 38, 173–198.
Reprinted with English translation: On Formally Undecidable Propositions of Prin-
cipia Mathematica and Related Systems, in: Gödel (1986), pp. 144–195.

310
References
Gödel, K. (1931b). Diskussion zur Grundlegung der Mathematik. English translation:
Discussion on Providing a Foundation for Mathematics. In: Gödel (1986), pp.
200–203.
Gödel, K. (1931c). Über unentscheidbare Sätze; ﬁrst published (German text and En-
glish translation: On Undecidable Sentences) in: Gödel (1995), pp. 30–35.
Gödel, K. (1932). Über Vollständigkeit und Widerspruchsfreiheit. Ergebnisse eines ma-
thematischen Kolloquiums 3, 12–13.
Gödel, K. (1933a). The Present Situation in the Foundations of Mathematics. First pub-
lished in: Gödel (1995), pp. 45–53.
Gödel, K. (1933b). Zur intuitionistischen Arithmetik und Zahlentheorie. Ergebnisse ei-
nes mathematischen Kolloquiums 14, 34–38. Reprinted with English translation:
On Intuitionistic Arithmetic and Number Theory, in: Gödel (1986), pp. 286–295.
Gödel, K. (1934). On Undecidable Propositions of Formal Mathematical Systems (mi-
meographed lecture notes, taken by S.C. Kleene and J.B. Rosser), Princeton. Re-
printed with revisions in: Davis (1965), pp. 39–74. Reprinted also in Gödel (1986),
pp. 346–371.
Gödel, K. (193?). Undecidable Diophantine Propositions. For the ﬁrst time published in:
Gödel (1995), pp. 164–175.
Gödel, K. (1940). The Consistency of the Axiom of Choice and of the Generalized Con-
tinuum Hypothesis with the Axioms of Set Theory. Lecture notes taken by George
W. Brown. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. Reprinted with additional
notes in 1951 and with further notes in 1966. Reprinted in: Gödel (1990), pp. 33–
101.
Gödel, K. (1944). Russell’s Mathematical Logic. In: P.A. Schilpp (ed.), The Philoso-
phy of Bertrand Russell, pp. 123–153. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern University.
Reprinted in: Gödel (1990), pp. 119–141.
Gödel, K. (1946). Remarks before the Princeton Bicentennial Conference on Problems
in Mathematics, 1–4. First published in: Davis (1965), pp. 84–88. Reprinted in:
Gödel (1990), pp. 150–153.
Gödel, K. (1947). What is Cantor’s Continuum Problem? The American Mathematical
Monthly 54, 515–525. Second revised version in: P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam
(eds.), Philosophy of Mathematics. Selected Readings, pp. 258–273 (1964). En-
glewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, Inc. Reprinted in: Gödel (1990), pp. 176–187.
Gödel, K. (1951). Some Basic Theorems on the Foundations of Mathematics and Their
Implications. First published in: Gödel (1995), pp. 304–323.
Gödel, K. (1953). Is Mathematics Syntax of Language? (unﬁnished contribution). First
published in: K. Gödel, Collected Works, vol. III, edited by S. Feferman, J.W. Daw-
son, Jr., W. Goldfarb„ Ch. Parsons and R.M. Solovay, pp. 334–362 (1995). New
York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gödel, K. (1958). Über eine bisher noch nicht benützte Erweiterung des ﬁniten Stand-
punktes. Dialectica 12, 280–287. Reprinted with English translation: On a Hith-
erto Unutilized Extension of the Finitary Standpoint, in: Gödel (1990), pp. 240–
251.

References
311
Gödel, K. (1961). The Modern Development of the Foundations of Mathematics in the
Light of Philosophy. First published (German text and English translation) in:
Gödel (1995), pp. 374–387.
Gödel, K. (1972). On an Extension of Finitary Mathematics Which Has Not Yet Been
Used. Revised and expanded English version of Gödel (1958). First published in:
Gödel (1990), pp. 271–280.
Gödel, K. (1986). Collected Works. Vol. I. Edited by S. Feferman, J.W. Dawson, Jr.,
S.C. Kleene, G.H. Moore, R.M. Solovay and J. van Heijenoort. New York: Oxford
University Press and Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gödel, K. (1990). Collected Works. Vol. II. Edited by S. FefermanJ.W. Dawson, Jr.,
S.C. Kleene, G.H. Moore, R.M. Solovay and J. van Heijenoort. New York and
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Gödel, K. (1995). Collected Works. Vol. III. Edited by S. Feferman, J.W. Dawson, Jr.,
W. Goldfarb„ Ch. Parsons and R.M. Solovay. New York and Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press.
Gödel, K. (2003a). Collected Works. Vol. IV. Edited by S. Feferman, J.W. Dawson, Jr.,
W. Goldfarb, Ch. Parsons and W. Sieg. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gödel, K. (2003b). Collected Works. Vol. V. Edited by S. Feferman, J.W. Dawson, Jr.,
W. Goldfarb, Ch. Parsons and W. Sieg. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Goodman, N.D. (1984). The Knowing Mathematician. Synthese 60, 21–38.
Grassmann, H.G. (1840). Theorie der Ebbe und Flut. Prüfungsarbeit. Published for the
ﬁrst time in: Grassmann (1894–1911), vol. 3, Part 1, pp. 8–203.
Grassmann, H.G. (1844). Die Wissenschaft der extensiven Größe oder die Ausdehnungs-
lehre, eine neue mathematische Disciplin dargestellt und durch Anwendungen er-
läutert. Erster Theil: Die lineale Ausdehnungslehre, ein Zweig der Mathematik,
dargestellt und durch Anwendungen auf die übrigen Zweige der Mathematik, wie
auch auf die Statik, Mechanik, die Lehre vom Magnetismus und die Kristallonomie
erläutert. Leipzig: Verlag von Otto Wigand. Second edition: Leipzig 1878: Verlag
von Otto Wigand. English translation: A New Branch of Mathematics, translated
by L. Kannenberg, Chicago: Open Court, 1995.
Grassmann, H.G. (1845). Neue Theorie der Elektrodynamik. Poggendoff’s Annalen der
Physik und Chemie 64, 1–18.
Grassmann, H.G. (1847). Geometrische Analyse geknüpft an die von Leibniz erfundene
geometrische Charakteristik. Gekrönte Preisschrift. Mit einer erläuternden Ab-
handlung von A.F. Moebius. Leipzig: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung.
Grassmann, H.G. (1861). Lehrbuch der Mathematik für höhere Lehranstalten. Erster
Theil: Arithmetik. Berlin: Verlag von Th. Chr. Fr. Enslin (Adolph Enslin).
Grassmann, H.G. (1862). Die Ausdehnungslehre. Vollständig und in strenger Form be-
gründet. Berlin: Verlag von Th. Chr. Fr. Enslin (Adolph Enslin). English transla-
tion: Extension Theory, translated by L. Kronnenberg, Providence, R.I.: American
Mathematical Society, 2000.
Grassmann, H.G. (1894–1911). Gesammelte mathematische und physikalische Werke. 3
volumes. Edited by F. Engel. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner. Reprinted: New York: John-
son, 1971.

312
References
Grattan-Guinness, I. (1979). In Memoriam Kurt Gödel: His 1931 Correspondence with
Zermelo on his Incompletability Theorem. Historia Mathematica 6, 294–304.
Grattan-Guinness, I. (2000). The Search for Mathematical Roots 1870–1940. Logics,
Set Theories and the Foundations of Mathematics from Cantor through Russell
to Gödel. Princeton and London: Princeton University Press.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1951). Undecidability of Some Topological Theories. Fundamenta Ma-
thematicae 38, 137–152.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1953a). Some Classes of Recursive Functions. Rozprawy Matematycz-
ne IV, 1–46.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1953b). Elementarily Deﬁnable Analysis. Fundamenta Mathematicae
41, 311–338.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1953c). On the Deﬁnition of Computable Functionals. Fundamenta
Mathematicae 42, 232–239.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1955). Computable Functionals. Fundamenta Mathematicae 42, 168–
202.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1957). On the Deﬁnitions of Computable Real Continuous Functions.
Fundamenta Mathematicae 44, 61–71.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1959). Some Approaches to Constructive Analysis. In: A. Heyting
(ed.), Constructivity in Mathematics. Proceedings of the Colloquium Held at Am-
sterdam, 1957, pp. 43–61. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1962a). An Example of Two Weak Essentially Undecidable Theories
F and F∗. Bulletin de l’Académie Polonaise des Sciences, Série des sciences math-
ématiques, astronomiques et physiques, 10, 5–9.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1962b). A Theory Without Recursive Models. Bulletin de l’Acadé-
mie Polonaise de Sciences, Série des sciences mathématiques, astronomiques et
physiques 10, 63–69.
Grzegorczyk, A. (1964). Recursive Objects in All Finite Types. Fundamenta Mathema-
ticae 54, 73–93.
Grzegorczyk, A., A. Mostowski and Cz. Ryll-Nardzewski (1958). The Classical and the
ω-Complete Arithmetic. Journal of Symbolic Logic 23, 188–206.
Hamilton, W. (1859–1866). Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic. Edited by H.L. Mansel
and J. Veitch, vol. 1–4. Edinburgh–London: William Blackwood and Sons.
Hamilton, W.R. (1853). Lectures on Quaternions: containing a systematic statement of
a New Mathematical Method, of which the principles were communicated in 1843
to the Royal Irish Academy; and which has since formed the subject of succes-
sive courses of lectures, delivered in 1848 and subsequent years, in the halls of
Trinity College. Dublin: Hodges and Smith; London: Whittare & Co.; Cambrige:
Macmillan & Co.
Hankel, H. (1867). Vorlesungen über die complexen Zahlen und ihre Functionen. 1.
Theil: Theorie der complexen Zahlensysteme insbesondere der gemeinen imag-
inären Zahlen und der Hamiltonschen Quaternionen nebst ihrer geometrischen
Darstellungen. Leipzig: Leopold Voss.
Hart, W.D., ed. (1996). The Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Hartimo, M. (2006). Mathematical Roots of Phenomenology: Husserl and the Concept
of Number. History and Philosophy of Logic 27, 319–337.

References
313
Heijenoort, J. van (1967). From Frege to Gödel. A Source Book in Mathematical Logic
1879–1931. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Hellman, G. (1989). Mathematics without Numbers. Towards a Modal-Structured Inter-
pretation. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hellman, G. (1996). Structuralism without Structures. Philosophia Mathematica (Se-
ries III) 4, 100-123.
Hellman, G. (2001). Three Varieties of Mathematical Structuralism. Philosophia Math-
ematica (Series III) 9, 184-211.
Herbrand, J. (1931). Sur la non-contradiction de l’arithmétique. Journal für die reine
und angewandte Mathematik 166, 1–8; English translation: On the Consistency of
Arithmetic. In: Heijenoort (1967), pp. 618–628.
Hersh, R. (1979). Some Proposals for Reviving the Philosophy of Mathematics. Ad-
vances in Mathematics 31, 31–50.
Heyting, A. (1966). Intuitionism. An Introduction. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publish-
ing Company.
Hilbert, D. (1899). Grundlagen der Geometrie. Festschrift zur Feier der Enthüllung des
Gauss-Weber-Denkmals, pp. 3–92. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner.
Hilbert, D. (1900). Über den Zahlbegriff. Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematikerver-
einigung 8, 180–184.
Hilbert, D. (1901) Mathematische Probleme. Archiv der Mathematik und Physik 1, 44–
63 and 213–237. Reprinted in: Hilbert (1935), pp. 290–329. English translation:
Mathematical Problems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 8 (1901–
2), 437–479. Also in: F. Browder (ed.), Mathematical Developments Arising from
Hilbert’s Problems. Proceedings of the Symposia in Pure Mathematics 28, pp. 1–
34 (1976). Providence, R.I.: American Mathematical Society.
Hilbert, D. (1902–1903). Über den Satz von der Gleichheit der Basiswinkel im gleich-
schenkligen Dreieck. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society 35, 50–68.
Hilbert, D. (1903). Grundlagen der Geometrie. Second edition. Leipzig: Teubner.
Hilbert, D. (1905a). Logische Principien des mathematischen Denkens. Lecture notes
by Ernst Hellinger, Mathematisches Institut, Georg-August-Universität Göttingen,
Sommer-Semester 1905. Unpublished manuscript.
Hilbert, D. (1905b). Über die Grundlagen der Logik und der Arithmetik. In: A. Krazer
(ed.), Verhandlungen des dritten Internationalen Mathematiker-Kongresses in Hei-
delberg vom 8. bis 13. August 1904, pp. 174–185. Leipzig: Teubner. English trans-
lation: On the Foundations of Logic and Arithmetic. In: Heijenoort (1967), pp. 129–
138.
Hilbert, D. (1917–1918). Prinzipien der Mathematik. Lecture notes by Paul Bernays.
Mathematisches Institut,
Georg–August–Universität Göttingen, Wintersemester
1917–1918. Unpublished typescript.
Hilbert, D. (1918). Axiomatisches Denken. Mathematische Annalen 78, 405–415. Re-
printed in: Hilbert (1935), pp. 146–177.
Hilbert, D. (1919–1920). Natur und mathematisches Erkennen. Vorlesungen, gehalten
1919–1920 in Göttingen. Nach der Ausarbeitung von Paul Bernays, herausgegeben
von D.E. Rowe. Basel–Boston–Berlin: Birkhäuser, 1992.
Hilbert, D. (1922). Neubegründung der Mathematik. Erste Mitteilung. Abhandlandlun-

314
References
gen aus dem Mathematischen Seminar der Hamburger Universität 1, 157–177.
Reprinted in: Hilbert (1935), pp. 157–177. Also in: Hilbertiana, fünf Aufsätze von
David Hilbert. 1964. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft.
Hilbert, D. (1922–1923). Wissen und mathematisches Denken. Vorlesungsskript Winter-
semester 1922–1923. Ausgearbeitet von W. Ackermann. Mathematisches Institut
der Universität Göttingen. Überarbeiteter Nachdruck 1988.
Hilbert, D. (1923). Die logischen Grundlagen der Mathematik. Mathematische Annalen
88, 151–165. Reprinted in: Hilbert (1935), pp. 178–191.
Hilbert, D. (1926). Über das Unendliche. Mathematische Annalen 95, 161–190. English
translation: On the Inﬁnite, translated by S. Bauer-Mengelberg. In: Heijenoort
(1967), pp. 369–392.
Hilbert, D. (1927). Die Grundlagen der Mathematik. Abhandlungen aus dem mathema-
tischen Seminar der Hamburgischen Universität 6, 65–85. Reprinted in: D. Hil-
bert, Grundlagen der Geometrie, 7th edition, Leipzig 1930. English translation:
The Foundations of Mathematics. In: Heijenoort (1967), pp. 464–479.
Hilbert, D. (1929). Probleme der Grundlegung der Mathematik. In: Atti del Congresso
Internationale dei Mathematici, Bologna 3–10 September 1928, Bologna, vol. I,
pp. 135–141. Also in: Mathematische Annalen 102, 1–9.
Hilbert, D. (1930a). Probleme der Grundlegung der Mathematik. Mathematische Anna-
len 102, 1–9.
Hilbert, D. (1930b). Naturerkennen und Logik. Naturwissenschaften 18, 959–963. Re-
printed in: Hilbert (1935), pp. 378–387.
Hilbert, D. (1931). Die Grundlegung der elementaren Zahlentheorie. Mathematische An-
nalen 104, 485–494. Reprinted in: Hilbert (1935), pp. 192–195.
Hilbert, D. (1935). Gesammelte Abhandlungen, Bd. 3. Berlin: Verlag von Julius Springer.
Hilbert, D. and W. Ackermann (1928). Grundzüge der theoretischen Logik. Berlin: Ver-
lag von Julius Springer. English translation of the second edition: Principles of
Mathematical Logic. 1950. New York: Chelsea Publishing Company.
Hilbert, D. and P. Bernays (1934). Grundlagen der Mathematik. Band I. Berlin: Sprin-
ger–Verlag.
Hilbert, D. and P. Bernays (1939). Grundlagen der Mathematik. Band II. Berlin: Sprin-
ger–Verlag.
Hintikka, J., ed. (1969). The Philosophy of Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press.
Hlawka, E. (1982). Zum Zahlbegriff. Philosophia naturalis 19 (3–4), 413–470.
Hocking, W.S. (1909). Two Expansions of the Use of Graphs in Elementary Logic. Uni-
versity of California Publications in Philosophy 2, 31.
Hofstadter, D.R. (1979). Gödel, Escher, Bach: An Eternal Golden Briad. New York: Ba-
sic Books.
Husserl, E. (1891). Philosophie der Arithmetik. Husserliana, 1970.
Husserl, E. (1970). Philosophie der Arithmetik. Mit Ergänzenden Texten (1890–1901).
Husserliana Band XII. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff.
Husserl, E. (1994). Edmund Husserl Briefwechsel. Vol. VII: Wissenschaftskorrespon-
denz. Edited by K. Schuhmann. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Husserl, E. (2003). Philosophy of Arithmetic. Psychological and Logical Investigations
with Supplementary Texts from 1887–1901. Collected Works, vol. X. Translated

References
315
by D. Willard. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Ifrah, G. (1991). Universalgeschichte der Zahlen. Frankfurt–New York: Campus Verlag.
English translation: The Universal History of Numbers. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1999.
Jahnke, H.N. (1990). Hilbert, Weyl und die Philosophie der Mathematik. Mathematische
Semesterberichte 37, 157–179.
Janiczak, A. (1950). A Remark Concerning Decidability of Complete Theories. Journal
of Symbolic Logic 15, 277–279.
Janiczak, A. (1953). Undecidability of Some Simple Formalized Theories. Fundamenta
Mathematicae 40, 131–139.
Janiczak, A. (1955a). On the Reducibility of Decision Problems. Colloquium Mathe-
maticum 3, 33–36.
Janiczak, A. (1955b). Some Remarks on Partially Recursive Functions. Colloquium Ma-
thematicum 3, 37–38
Ja´skowski, S. (1934). On the Rules of Suppositions in Formal Logic. Studia Logica,
Wydawnictwo po´swie¸cone logice i jej historii, Redaktor Prof. Dr. Jan Łukasiewicz,
Nr. 1. Warszawa: Nakładem Seminarjum Filozoﬁcznego Wydziału Matematyczno-
Przyrodniczego Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego.
Ja´skowski, S. (1948). Sur le problème de décision de la topologie et de la théorie de
groupes. Colloquium Mathematicum 1, 176–179.
Ja´skowski, S. (1949). Z bada´n nad rozstrzygalno´sci ˛a rozszerzonej algebry Boole’a [Stud-
ies on the Decidability of the Extended Boolean Algebra]. ˇCasopis pro pˇestováni
matematiky a fysiky 74, 136–137.
Ja´skowski, S. (1954). Example of a Class of Systems of Ordinary Differential Equa-
tions Having no Decision Method for Existence Problems. Bulletin de l’Académie
Polonaise des Sciences, Classe III, 2, 155–157.
Ja´skowski, S. (1956). Undecidability of First Order Sentences in the Theory of Free
Groupoids. Fundamenta Mathematicae 43, 36–45.
Jevons, W.S. (1864). Pure Logic, or the Logic of Quality apart from Quantity with re-
marks on Boole’s System and the Relation of Logic and Mathematics. London–
New York: E. Stanford.
Jevons, W.S. (1869). The Substitution of Similars, the True Principle of Reasoning, De-
rived from a Modiﬁcation of Aristotle’s Dictum. London: Macmillan and Co.
Jevons, W.S. (1870a). Elementary Lessons in Logic: Deductive and Inductive. London:
Macmillan and Co.
Jevons, W.S. (1870b). On the Mechanical Performance of Logical Inference. Philosoph-
ical Transactions of the Royal Society 160, 497-518.
Jevons, W.S. (1874). The Principles of Science. 2 volumes. London: Macmillan and Co.
Jevons, W.S. (1886a). Logika. Obja´sniona ﬁgurami i pytaniami [Logic. Explained by
Figures and Questions]. Trans. Henryk Wernic. Warszawa: Nakładem Ksi˛egarni
Teodora Paprockiego i S-ki.
Jevons, W.S. (1886b). Letters & Journals of W. Stanley Jevons. Edited by his wife. Lon-
don: Macmillan and Co.

316
References
Jordan, Z. (1945). The Development of Mathematical Logic and of Logical Positivism in
Poland between the Two Wars. London: Oxford University Press.
Kalmár, L. (1936). Zurückführung des Entscheidungsproblems auf den Fall von Formeln
mit einer einzigen, binären, Funktionsvariablen. Compositio Mathematica 4, 137–
144.
Kalmár, L. (1943). Egyszerü példa eldönthetetlen aritmetikai problémára. Matematikai
és Fizikai Lapok 50, 1–23.
Kalmár, L. (1959). An Argument Against the Plausibility of Church Thesis. In: A. Heyt-
ing (ed.), Constructivity in Mathematics. Proceedings of the Colloquium Held at
Amsterdam 1957, pp. 72–80. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Kant, I. (1781). Critik der reinen Vernunft. Riga: Johann Friedrich Hartknoch.
Kant, I. (1787). Critik der reinen Vernunft. 2nd edition. Riga: Johann Friedrich Hart-
knoch. Im Nachdruck des Felix Meiner Verlages, in der Ausgabe besorgt von
Raymund Schmidt, 2. Auﬂage 1930. Reprint: Hamburg 1956.
Kaufmann, F. (1930). Das Unendliche in der Mathematik und seine Ausschaltung. Leip-
zig and Vienna: Franz Deuticke.
Kennedy, H.C. (1972). The Origins of Modern Axiomatics: Pasch to Peano. American
Mathematical Monthly 79, 133–136.
Kennedy, H.C. (1973a). Selected Works of Giuseppe Peano. Toronto and Buffalo: Uni-
versity of Toronto Press.
Kennedy, H.C. (1973b). What Russell learned from Peano. Notre Dame Journal of For-
mal Logic 14, 367–372.
Ketelsen, Ch. (1994). Die Gödelschen Unvollständigkeitssätze. Zur Geschichte ihrer Ent-
stehung und Rezeption. Stuttgart: Franz Steiner Verlag.
Kleene, S.C. (1936). General Recursive Functions of Natural Numbers. Mathematische
Annalen 112, 727–742.
Kleene, S.C. (1943). Recursive Predicates and Quantiﬁers. Transactions of the American
Mathematical Society 53 (1), 47–73.
Kleene, S.C. (1952). Introduction to Metamathematics. Ansterdam: North-Holland Pub-
lishing Company and Groningen: P. Noordhoff N.V.
Kleene, S.C. (1955). Arithmetical Predicates and Function Quantiﬁers. Transactions of
the American Mathematical Society 79, 312–340.
Kleene, S.C. (1959). Recursive Functionals and Quantiﬁers of Finite Types. I. Transac-
tions of the American Mathematical Society 91, 1–52.
Kleene, S.C. and E.L. Post (1954). The Upper Semi-Lattice of Degrees of Recursive Un-
solvability. Annals of Mathematics 59, 379–407. Reprinted in: Davis (1994), pp.
514–542.
Kline, M. (1980). Mathematics. The Loss of Certainty. New York: Oxford University
Press.
Kneale, W. (1948). Boole and the Revival of Logic. Mind 57, 149–175.
Kneale, W. and M. Kneale (1962). The Development of Logic. Oxford: Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
Knobloch, E. (1980). Einﬂuß der Symbolik und des Formalismus auf die Entwicklung
des mathematischen Denkens. Berichte zur Wissenschaftsgeschichte 3, 77–94.

References
317
Knobloch, E. (1981). Symbolik und Formalismus im mathematischen Denken des 19.
und beginnenden 20. Jahrhunderts. In: J.W. Dauben (ed.), Mathematical Perspec-
tives. Essays on Mathematics and Its Historical Development. New York: Aca-
demic Press.
Koerner, S. (1968). Philosophie der Mathematik – Eine Einführung. München: Nym-
phenburger Verlagsbuchhandlung.
Köhler, E. (1991). Gödel und der Wiener Kreis. In: P. Kruntorad (ed.), Jour Fixe der Ver-
nunft, pp. 127–158. Wien: Hölder-Pichler-Tempsky. Also in: E. Köhler, P. Weibel,
M. Stöltzner, B. Buldt, C. Klein and W. Depauli-Schimanovich-Göttig (eds.), Kurt
Gödel. Wahrheit und Beweisbarkeit. Vol 1: Dokumente und historische Analysen,
pp. 83–108 (2002). Wien: öbt & hpt.
Kowalewski, G. (1950). Bestand und Wandel: meine Lebenserinnerungen zugleich ein
Beitrag zur neueren Geschichte der Mathematik. München: Oldebourg.
Krakowski, I. (1980). The Four-Color Problem Reconsidered. Philosophical Studies 38,
91–96.
Kreisel, G. (1953). Note on Arithmetic Models for Consistent Formulae of the Predicate
Calculus. II. In: Proceedings of the XIth International Congress of Philosophy,
vol. XIV, pp. 39–49. Amsterdam–Louvain.
Kreisel, G. (1958). Hilbert’s Programme. Dialectica 112, 346–372. Revised with Post-
script in: P. Benacerraf and H. Putnam (eds.) (1964), pp. 157–180.
Kreisel, G. (1959). Interpretation of Analysis by Means of Constructive Functionals of
Finite Types. In: A. Heyting (ed.), Constructivity in Mathematics. Proceedings
of the Colloquium Held at Amsterdam, 1957, pp. 101–128. Amsterdam: North-
Holland Publishing Company.
Kreisel, G. (1968). A Survey of Proof Theory. Journal of Symbolic Logic 133, 321–388.
Kreisel, G. (1969). Some Reasons for Generalizing Recursion Theory. In: Logic Collo-
quium’69, pp. 138–198. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Kreisel, G. (1970). Church’s Thesis: A Kind of Reducibility Axiom for Constructive
Mathematics. In: J. Myhill, A. Kono and R.E. Vesley (eds.), Intuitionism and Proof
Theory, pp. 121–150. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Kreisel, G. (1976). What Have We Learned from Hilbert’s Second Problem? In: F. Brow-
der (ed.), Mathematical Developments Arising from Hilbert Problems. Proceed-
ings of the Symposia in Pure Mathematics 28, pp. 93–130. Providence, R.I.: Amer-
ican Mathematical Society.
Kreisel, G. (1980). Kurt Gödel 1906–1978. Biographical Memoires of Fellows of the
Royal Society 26, 149–224.
Kreisel, G. and G. Takeuti (1974). Formally Self-Referential Propositions for Cut-Free
Analysis and Related Systems. Dissertationes Mathematicae 118, 4–50.
Kronecker, L. (1887). Über den Zahlbegriff. Journal für die reine und angewandte Ma-
thematik 101, 337–355.
Kuratowski, K. (1922). Sur la notion de l’ordre dans la théorie des ensembles. Funda-
menta Mathematicae 2, 161–171.
Kuratowski, K. (1923). Une méthode d’elimination des nombres transﬁnis des raison-
nements mathématiques. Fundamenta Mathematicae 3, 76–108.
Ladrière, J. (1957). Les limitations internes des formalismes. Étude sur la signiﬁcation

318
References
du théorème de Gödel et des théorèmes apparenté dans la théorie des fondements
des mathématiques. Louvain: E. Nauwelaerts and Paris: Gauthier-Villars.
Lakatos, I. (1963a). Proofs and Refutations (I). British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 14, 1–25.
Lakatos, I. (1963b). Proofs and Refutations (II). British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 14, 120–139.
Lakatos, I. (1963c). Proofs and Refutations (III). British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 14, 221–245.
Lakatos, I. (1964). Proofs and Refutations (IV). British Journal for the Philosophy of
Science 14, 296–342.
Lakatos, I. (1976). Proofs and Refutations. The Logic of Mathematical Discovery. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press.
Lakatos, I. (1967). A Renaissance of the Empiricism in the Recent Philosophy of Mathe-
matics? In: I. Lakatos (ed.), Problems in the Philosophy of Mathematics, pp. 199–
202. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company. Extended version in: I. La-
katos, Philosophical Papers. Volume 2: Mathematics, Science and Epistemology,
J. Worall and G. Currie (eds.), pp. 24–42 (1978). Cambridge–London–New York–
Melbourne: Cambridge University Press.
Lambert, J.H. (1764). Neues Organon oder Gedanken über die Erforschung und Beze-
ichnung des Wahren. Leipzig.
Langford, C.H. (1927a). Some Theorems on Deducibility. Annals of Mathematics (2nd
series) 28, 16–40.
Langford, C.H. (1927b). Theorems on Deducibility. (Second Paper). Annals of Mathe-
matics (2nd series) 28, 459–471.
Leibniz, G.W. (1875–1890). Philosophische Schriften. Edited by C.I. Gerhardt. 7 vol-
umes. Berlin: Weidmannsche Buchhandlung.
Le´sniewski, S. (1929). Grundzüge eines neuen Systems der Grundlagen der Mathematik.
Fundamenta Mathematicae 14, 1–81.
Levin, M. (1981). On Tymoczko’s Arguments for Mathematical Empiricism. Philoso-
phical Studies 39, 79–86.
Lewis, C.I. (1918). A Survey of Symbolic Logic. Berkeley: University of California Press.
Lindström, P. (1969). On Extensions of Elementary Logic. Theoria 35, 1–11.
Löwenheim, L. (1915). Über Möglichkeiten im Relativkalkül. Mathematische Annalen
76, 447–470.
Macfarlane, A. (1885). The Logical Spectrum. The London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philo-
sophical Magazine 19, 286.
Macfarlane, A. (1890). Adaptation of the Method of the Logical Spectrum to Boole’s
Problem. Proceedings of the American Association for the Advancement of Sci-
ence 39, 57.
Maddy, P. (1980). Perception and Mathematical Intuition. Philosophical Review 89, 163–
196.
Maddy, P. (1990a). Realism in Mathematics. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Maddy, P. (1990b). Physicalistic Platonism. In: A.D. Irvine (ed.), Physicalism in Mathe-
matics, pp. 259–289. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Maddy, P. (1997). Naturalism in Mathematics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

References
319
Majer, U. (1993a). Hilberts Methode der Idealen Elemente und Kants regulativer Ge-
brauch der Ideen. Kant-Studien. Philosophische Zeitschrift der Kant-Gesellschaft
84, 51–77.
Majer, U. (1993b). Das Unendliche – eine blosse Idee? Revue Internationale de Philoso-
phie 47, 319–341.
Mancosu, P. (1999). Between Vienna and Berlin: The Immediate Reception of Gödel’s
Incompleteness Theorems. History and Philosophy of Logic (Series III) 20, 33–45.
Mancosu, P. and T.A. Ryckman (2002). Mathematics and Phenomenology. The Corre-
spondence between O. Becker and H. Weyl. Philosophia Mathematica 10, 130–
202.
Mardeši´c, S. (1960). Mapping ordered continua onto product spaces. Glasnik mat.-ﬁz.
astr. drustvo mat. ﬁz. hrvatske (2) 15, 85–89.
Markov, A.A. (1947). Nievazmoznost’ niekatorych algoritmov v teorii asotiativnych sis-
tem [On the Impossibility of Certain Algorithms in the Theory of Associative Sys-
tems]. Doklady Akademii Nauk SSSR 55, 587–590; English translation in: Comptes
rendus de l’academie des Sciences de l’URSS 55 (1947), 583–586.
Markov, A.A. (1955). Teorya algorifmov. Trudy Matem. Inst. AN SSSR im. W.A. Ste-
klova 42, Moscow, pp. 1–375. English translation: The Theory of Algorithms.
Ofﬁce of Technical Services, U.S. Department of Commerce, Washington, D.C.,
1962.
Markovi´c, M. (1957). Formalizam u savremenoj logici [Formalism in Contemporary Lo-
gic]. Beograd: Kultura.
Marquand, A. (1881). A Logical Diagram for n Terms. The London, Edinburgh and
Dublin Philosophical Magazine 12, 266.
Mays, W. and D.P. Henry (1958). Jevons and Logic. Mind 62, 484–505.
McColl, H. (1878). The Calculus of Equivalent Statements. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society 9, 9–10, 177–186.
McColl, H. (1879). The Calculus of Equivalent Statements. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society 10, 16–28.
McColl, H. (1880). The Calculus of Equivalent Statements. Proceedings of the London
Mathematical Society 11, 113–121.
McNulty, G.F. (1986). Alfred Tarski and Undecidable Theories. Journal of Symbolic
Logic 51, 890–898.
Mendelson, E. (1964). Introduction to Mathematical Logic. Princeton–Toronto–New
York–London: D. Van Nostrand Company, Inc.
Mendelson, E. (1990). Second Thoughts about Church’s Thesis and Mathematical Proofs.
The Journal of Philosophy 87, 225–233.
Menger, K. (1978). Selected Papers in Logic and Foundations, Didactics, Economics.
Dordrecht-Boston-London: D. Reidel Publishing Company.
Menninger, K. (1934). Zahlwort und Ziffer – Aus der Kulturgeschichte unserer Zahlspra-
che, unserer Zahlschrift und des Rechenbretts. Breslau: Ferdinand Hirt.
Meschkowski, H. (1962–1966). Aus dem Briefwechsel Georg Cantors. Archive for His-
tory of Exact Sciences 2, 503–519.
Meschkowski, H. (1967). Probleme des Unendlichen. Werk und Leben Georg Cantors.
Braunschweig: Friedrich Vieweg & Sohn. Reproduced with additions as Georg

320
References
Cantor. Leben, Werk und Wirkung. Mannheim 1983: Bibliographisches Institut.
Meschkowski, H. (1973). Mathematiker-Lexikon. 2nd edition. Mannheim: Bibliographi-
sches Institut.
Mill, J. S. (1843). System of Logic Ratiocinative and Inductive, Being a Connected View
of the Principles of Evidence and the Method of Scientiﬁc Investigation. 2 volumes.
London: J.W. Parker.
Ministerium für Volksbildung (ed.) (1985). Lehrmaterial zur Ausbildung an Instituten
für Lehrerbildung. Mathematik Lehrtexte. Potsdam: Wissenschaftlich-Technisches
Zentrum der Pädagogischen Hochschule “Karl Liebknecht”.
Minsky, M. (1961). Recursive Unsolvability of Post’s Problem of Tag and Other Topics
in the Theory of Turing Machines. Annals of Mathematics 74, 437–455.
Mirimanoff, D. (1917). Les antinomies de Russell et de Burali-Forti et le probléme fon-
damental de la théorie des ensembles. L’Enseignement Mathématique 19, 37–52.
Moore, G.H. (1980). Beyond First-Order Logic: The Historical Interplay Between Math-
ematical Logic and Axiomatic Set Theory. History and Philosophy of Logic 1,
95–137.
Moore, G.H. (1982). Zermelo’s Axiom of Choice. Its Origins, Development, and Inﬂu-
ence. New York–Heidelberg–Berlin: Springer Verlag.
Moore, G.H. (1991). Sixty Years After Gödel. The Mathematical Intelligencer 13, 6–11.
Mostowski, A. (1939). Über die Unabhängighkeit des Wohlordnungssatzes vom Ord-
nungsprinzip. Fundamenta Mathematicae 32, 201–252.
Mostowski, A. (1946). O zdaniach nierozstrzygalnych w sformalizowanych systemach
matematyki [On Undecidable Sentences in Formalized Systems of Mathematics].
Kwartalnik Filozoﬁczny 16, 223–277.
Mostowski, A. (1947). On Deﬁnable Sets of Positive Integers. Fundamenta Mathemati-
cae 34, 81–112.
Mostowski, A. (1948a). On a Set of Integers Not Deﬁnable by Means of One-Quantiﬁer
Predicate. Annales de la Société Polonaise de Mathématique 21, 114–119.
Mostowski, A. (1948b). Proofs of Non-Deducibility in Intuitionistic Calculi. Journal of
Symbolic Logic 13, 204–207.
Mostowski, A. (1949a). An Undecidable Arithmetical Statement. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae 36, 143–164.
Mostowski, A. (1949b). Sur l’interpretation géométrique et topologique des notions lo-
giques. In: Actes du X-ème Congres International de Philosophie (Amsterdam 11–
18 aoôt 1948), pp. 610–617. Amsterdam.
Mostowski, A. (1951). A Classiﬁcation of Logical Systems. Studia Philosophica 4, 237–
274.
Mostowski, A. (1952). Sentences Undecidable in Formalized Arithmetic. An Exposition
of the Theory of Kurt Gödel. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Mostowski, A. (1953). On a System of Axioms Which Has No Recursively Enumerable
Arithmetical Model. Fundamenta Mathematicae 40, 56–61.
Mostowski, A. (1955a). Examples of Sets Deﬁnable by Means of Two and Three Quan-
tiﬁers. Fundamenta Mathematicae 42, 259–270.
Mostowski, A. (1955b). A Formula With No Recursively Enumerable Model. Funda-
menta Mathematicae 42, 125–140.

References
321
Mostowski, A. (1957a). On Recursive Models of Formalized Arithmetic. Bulletin de
l’Académie Polonaise de Sciences (Classe III), 5, 705–710.
Mostowski, A. (1957b). On a Generalization of Quantiﬁers. Fundamenta Mathematicae
44, 12–36.
Mostowski, A. (1959). On Various Degrees of Constructivism. In: A. Heyting (ed.), Con-
structivity in Mathematics. Proceedings of the Colloquium Held at Amsterdam,
1957, pp. 178–194. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Mostowski, A. (1961). A Generalization of the Incompleteness Theorem. Fundamenta
Mathematicae 49, 205–232.
Mostowski, A. (1965). Thirty Years of Foundational Studies. Acta Philosophica Fennica
17, 1–180.
Mostowski, A. (1967). Tarski, Alfred. In: P. Edwards (ed.), The Encyclopedia of Philos-
ophy, vol. 8, pp. 77–81. New York: Macmillan.
Mostowski, A. (1968). Craig’s Interpolation Theorem in Some Extended Systems of
Logic. In: B. van Rootselaar and J.F. Staal (eds.), Proceedings of the Third Inter-
national Congress for Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science, pp. 87–103.
Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Mostowski, A. (in collaboration with A. Grzegorczyk, S. Ja´skowski, J. Ło´s, S. Mazur,
H. Rasiowa and R. Sikorski) (1955). The Present State of Investigations on the
Foundations of Mathematics. Rozprawy Matematyczne 9, 1–48.
Mostowski, A., R.M. Robinson and A. Tarski (1953). Undecidability and Essential Un-
decidability in Arithmetic. In: Tarski, Mostowski, Robinson (1953), pp. 38–74.
Mostowski, A. and A. Tarski (1949a). Arithmetical Classes and Types of Well Ordered
Systems. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 55, 65. Errata 1192.
Mostowski, A. and A. Tarski (1949b). Undecidability in the Arithmetic of Integers and
in the Theory of Rings. Journal of Symbolic Logic 14, 76.
Muchnik, A.A. (1956). Nerazreshimost’ problemy svodimosti algoritmov [Negative An-
swer to the Problem of Reducibility of the Theory of Algorithms]. Doklady Aka-
demii Nauk SSSR 108, 194–197.
Murawski, R. (1976a). On Expandability of Models of Peano Arithmetic. I. Studia Log-
ica 35, 409–419.
Murawski, R. (1976b). On Expandability of Models of Peano Arithmetic. II. Studia Log-
ica 35, 421–431.
Murawski, R. (1977). On Expandability of Models of Peano Arithmetic. III. Studia Log-
ica 36, 181–188.
Murawski, R. (1984a). Expandability of Models of Arithmetic. In: G. Wechsung (ed.),
Proceedings of Frege Conference 1984, pp. 87–93. Berlin: Akademie-Verlag.
Murawski, R. (1984b). G. Cantora ﬁlozoﬁa teorii mnogo´sci [G. Cantor’s Philosophy of
Set Theory]. Studia Filozoﬁczne 11–12, 75–88. English translation: G. Cantor’s
Philosophy of Set Theory, this volume, pp. 15–28.
Murawski, R. (1985). Giuseppe Peano – Pioneer and Promoter of Symbolic Logic. Ko-
munikaty i Rozprawy Instytutu Matematyki UAM. Pozna´n: Uniwersytet im. Ada-
ma Mickiewicza. Also in this volume, pp. 169–182.

322
References
Murawski, R., ed. (1986). Filozoﬁa matematyki. Antologia tekstów klasycznych [Philo-
sophy of Mathematics. Anthology of Classical Texts]. Pozna´n: Wydawnictwo Na-
ukowe UAM. Second revised edition: 1994. Third revised edition: 2003.
Murawski, R. (1987). Generalizations and Strengthenings of Gödel’s Incompleteness
Theorem. In: J. Srzednicki (ed.), Initiatives in Logic, pp. 84–100. Dordrecht–
Boston–Lancaster: Martinus Nijhof Publishers.
Murawski, R. (1988a). Rozwój symboliki logicznej [The Development of Logical Sym-
bolism]. Pozna´n: Wydawnictwo Naukowe Uniwersytetu im. Adama Mickiewicza.
Murawski, R. (1988b). The Development of Symbolism in Logic and Its Philosophical
Background. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 89, 65–78.
Murawski, R. (1990). Philosophical Aspects of Symbolism in Mathematics and Logic.
In: A. Diez, J. Echeverria and A. Ibarra (eds.), Structures in Mathematical The-
ories. Raports of the San Sebastian International Symposium, September 25–29,
1990, pp. 289–293. San Sebastian: Servicio Editorial Universidad del Pais Vasco,
1990.
Murawski, R. (1993). Rozwój programu Hilberta [The Development of Hilbert’s Pro-
gramme]. Roczniki Polskiego Towarzystwa Matematycznego, Seria II: Wiadomo´sci
Matematyczne 30, 51–72.
Murawski, R. (1994). Hilbert’s Program: Incompleteness Theorems vs. Partial Realiza-
tions. In: J. Wole´nski (ed.), Philosophical Logic in Poland, pp. 103–127. Dor-
drecht–Boston–London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Murawski, R. (1995). Filozoﬁa matematyki. Zarys dziejów [Philosophy of Mathematics.
An Outline of History]. Warszawa: Wydawnictwo Naukowe PWN. Second revised
edition: 2001. Third revised edition: 2008.
Murawski, R. (1997a). Satisfaction Classes – A Survey. In: R. Murawski and J. Pogo-
nowski (eds.), Euphony and Logos, pp. 259–281. Amsterdam–Atlanta, GA: Edi-
tions Rodopi.
Murawski, R. (1997b). Gödel’s Incompleteness Theorems and Computer Science. Foun-
dations of Science 2 (1997), 123–135.
Murawski, R. (1998a). Undeﬁnability of Truth. The Problem of the Priority: Tarski vs
Gödel. History and Philosophy of Logic 19, 153–160.
Murawski, R. (1998b). Contribution of Polish Logicians to Recursion Theory. In: K. Ki-
jania-Placek and J. Wole´nski (eds.), The Lvov-Warsaw School and Contemporary
Philosophy, pp. 265–282. Dordrecht–Boston–London: Kluwer Academic Publish-
ers.
Murawski, R. (1999a). Recursive Functions and Metamathematics. Problems of Com-
pleteness and Decidability, Gödel’s Theorems. Dordrecht–Boston–London: Klu-
wer Academic Publishers.
Murawski, R. (1999b). Undeﬁnability vs. Deﬁnability of Satisfaction and Truth. In: J.
Wole´nski and E. Köhler (eds.), Alfred Tarski and the Vienna Circle. Austro-Polish
Connections in Logical Empiricism, pp. 203–215. Dordrecht-Boston-London: Klu-
wer Academic Publishers.
Murawski, R. (2000). Funkcje rekurencyjne i elementy metamatematyki. Problemy zu-
pełno´sci, rozstrzygalno´sci, twierdzenia Gödla [Recursive Functions and Elements

References
323
of Metamathematics. Problems of Completeness, Decidability, Gödel’s Theorems].
3rd edition. Pozna´n: Wydawnictwo Naukowe UAM.
Murawski, R. (2001). On Proofs of the Consistency of Arithmetic. Studies in Logic,
Grammar and Rhetoric 4 (17), 41–50.
Murawski, R. (2002a). On the Distinction Proof-Truth in Mathematics. In: P. Gärden-
fors, J. Wole´nski and K. Kijania-Placek (eds.), In the Scope of Logic, Methodol-
ogy and Philosophy of Science, vol. I, pp. 287–303. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Murawski, R. (2002b). Leibniz’s and Kant’s Philosophical Ideas and the Development of
Hilbert’s Programme. Logique et Analyse 179–180, 421–437. Also in this volume,
pp. 29–39.
Murawski, R. (2003). Reactions to the Discovery of the Incompleteness Phenomenon.
In: J. Hintikka et al. (eds.), Philosophy and Logic. In Search of the Polish Tradi-
tion, pp. 213–227. Dordrecht–Boston–London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Murawski, R. (2004a). Mathematical Knowledge. In: I. Niiniluoto, M. Sintonen and
J. Wole´nski (eds.), Handbook of Epistemology, pp. 571–606. Dordrecht–Boston–
London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Murawski, R. (2004b). Philosophical Reﬂection on Mathematics in Poland in the Inter-
war Period. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 127, 325–337.
Nagel, E. and J.R. Newman (1958). Gödel’s Proof. London: Routledge & Kegan Paul,
Ltd.
Neumann, J. von (1923). Zur Einführung der transﬁniten Zahlen. Acta Szeged 1, 199–
208. Reprinted in: Neumann (1961a), pp. 24–33.
Neumann, J. von (1925). Eine Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre. Journal für Mathema-
tik 154, 219–240. Reprinted in: Neumann (1961a), pp. 34–57.
Neumann, J. von (1927). Zur Hilbertschen Beweistheorie. Mathematische Zeitschrift 26,
1–46. Reprinted in: Neumann (1961a), pp. 256–302.
Neumann, J. von (1928a). Über die Deﬁnitionen durch transﬁnite Induktion, und ver-
wandte Fragen der allgemeinen Mengenlehre. Mathematische Annalen 99, 373–
391. Reprinted in: Neumann (1961a), pp. 320–338.
Neumann, J. von (1928b). Die Axiomatisierung der Mengenlehre. Mathematische Zeit-
schrift 27, 669–752. Reprinted in: Neumann (1961a), pp. 339–422.
Neumann, J. von (1929). Über eine Widerspruchsfreiheitsfrage der axiomatischen Men-
genlehre. Journal für Mathematik 160, 227–241. Reprinted in: Neumann (1961a),
pp. 494–508.
Neumann, J. von (1931a). Bemerkungen zu den Ausführungen von Herrn St. Le´sniewski
über meine Arbeit “Zur Hilbertschen Beweistheorie”. Fundamenta Mathematicae
17, 331–334. Reprinted in: Neumann (1961b), pp. 230–233.
Neumann, J. von (1931b). Die formalistische Grundlegung der Mathematik. Erkenntniss
2, 116–121. Reprinted in: Neumann (1961b), pp. 234–239.
Neumann, J. von (1947). The Mathematician. In: R.B. Heywood (ed.), The Works of the
Mind, pp. 180–196. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. Reprinted in: Neumann
(1961a), pp. 1–9.
Neumann, J. von (1961a). Collected Works. Vol. I: Logic, Theory of Sets and Quantum
Mechanics. Oxford–London–New York–Paris: Pergamon Press.

324
References
Neumann, J. von (1961b). Collected Works. Vol. II: Operators, Ergodic Theory and Al-
most Periodic Functions in a Group. Oxford–London–New York–Paris: Pergamon
Press.
Neumann, J. von (1966). Theory of Self-Reproducing Automata. Edited by A.W. Burks.
Urbana, Ill.: University of Illinois.
Newlin, J.W. (1906). A New Logical Diagram. Journal of Philosophy, Psychology and
Scientiﬁc Methods 3, 539.
Newman, J.R. (1960). The World of Mathematics. Volume III. London: George Allen
and Unwin Ltd.
Nicolaus von Kues (1514). Liber de mente. In: Nicolai Cusae Cardinalis Opera. Parisiis.
Parsons, Ch. (1980). Mathematical Intuition. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 80,
145–168. Reprinted in: Resnik, M.D. (ed.), Mathematical Objects and Mathemat-
ical Knowledge, 1995, pp. 589–612. Aldershot, Brookﬁeld USA, Singapore, Syd-
ney: Darmouth.
Parsons, Ch. (1990). The Structuralist View of Mathematical Objects. Synthese 84, 303-
346.
Parsons, Ch. (1997). Structuralism and the Concept of Set. In: E. Agazzi and G. Dar-
vas (eds.), Philosophy of Mathematics Today, pp. 171-194. Dordrecht–Boston–
London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Pasch, M. (1882). Vorlesungen über neuere Geometrie. Leipzig und Berlin: B.G. Teub-
ner.
Peano, G. (1882–1883). Sulla integrabilità delle funzioni. Atti Accademiae dei Scienci
Torino 18, 439–446.
Peano, G. (1884). Calcolo differenziale e principii di calcolo integrale, publicato con
aggiunte del Dr. Giuseppe Peano. Torino: Bocca.
Peano, G. (1885–1886). Sull’integrabilità delle equazioni differenziali del primo ordine.
Atti Accademiae dei Scienci Torino 21, 677–685.
Peano, G. (1888). Calcolo geometrico secondo l’Ausdehnungslehre di H. Graßmann pre-
ceduto dalle operazioni della logica deduttiva. Torino: Bocca.
Peano, G. (1889a). Arithmetices principia nova methodo exposita. Torino: Bocca.
Peano, G. (1889b). I principii di geometria logicamente esposti. Torino: Bocca. En-
glish translation: The Principles of Arithmetic, Presented by a New Method, in:
Kennedy (1973a), pp. 101–134.
Peano, G. (1890a). Démonstration de l’intégrabilité des equations différentialles ordi-
naires. Mathematische Annalen 37, 182–228.
Peano, G. (1890b). Sur une courbe qui remplit toute une aire plane. Mathematische An-
nalen 36, 157–160.
Peano, G. (1891a). Sul concetto di numero. Rivista di Matematica 1, 87–102 and 256–
267.
Peano, G. (1891b). Formule di logica matematica. Rivista di Matematica 1, 24–31 and
182–184.
Peano, G. (1896-1897). Studii di logica matematica. Atti Academiae dei Scienci Torino
32, 568–583. English translation: Studies in Mathematical Logic, in: Kennedy
(1973a), pp. 190–205.

References
325
Peano, G. (1896-1899). Sul §2 del Formulario vol. II: Aritmetica. Rivista di Matematica
6, 75–89.
Peano, G. (1901). Formulario Mathematico. Vol. III. Torino: Bocca.
Peano, G. (1906). Super theorema de Cantor-Bernstein. Rendiconti del Circolo Matem-
atico di Palermo 21, 360–366.
Peano, G. (1910). Sui fondamenti dell’Analisi. “Mathesis” societa italiana di Matemat-
ica Bollettino 2, 31–37. English translation: On the Foundations of Analysis, in:
Kennedy (1973a), pp. 219–226.
Peano, G. (1915). Importanza dei simboli in matematica. Scientia 18, 165–173. English
translation: The Importance of Symbols in Mathematics, in: Kennedy (1973a),
pp. 227–234.
Peano, G. (1921). Le deﬁnizioni in matematica. Periodoco di Matematica 1, 175–189.
English translation: Deﬁnitions in Mathematics, in: Kennedy (1973a), pp. 235–
246.
Peckhaus, V. (1990). Hilbertprogramm und Kritische Philosophie. Das Göttinger Model
interdisziplinärer Zusammenarbeit zwischen Mathematik und Philosophie. Göt-
tingen: Vandenhoeck & Ruprecht.
Peirce, Ch.S. (1885). On the Algebra of Logic. A Contribution to the Philosophy of No-
tation. The American Journal of Mathematics 7, 180–202. Reprinted in Peirce
(1933–1934), vol. 3, pp. 210–249 [contains a “Note” which was unpublished ear-
lier].
Peirce, Ch.S. (1933–1934). Collected Papers. Edited by C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Pelletier, F.J. and N.M. Martin (1990). Post’s Functional Completeness Theorem. Notre
Dame Journal of Formal Logic 31, 462–475.
Penrose, R. (2004). The Road to Reality: A Complete Guide to the Laws of the Universe.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Pepis, J. (1936). Beiträge zur Reduktionstheorie des logischen Entscheidungsproblems.
Acta Sc[ientiarum] Math[ematicarum] (Szeged) 8, Heft 1, 7–41.
Pepis, J. (1937). O zagadnieniu rozstrzygalno´sci w zakresie w˛e˙zszego rachunku funk-
cyjnego [On the Problem of Decidability of the Restricted Functional Calculus].
Archiwum Towarzystwa Naukowego we Lwowie, Dział III [matematyczno-przy-
rodniczy], tom VII, zeszyt 8, 1–172.
Pepis, J. (1938a). Untersuchungen über das Entscheidungsproblem der mathematischen
Logik. Fundamenta Mathematicae 30, 257–348.
Pepis, J. (1938b). Ein Verfahren der mathematischen Logik. Journal of Symbolic Logic
3, 61–76.
Petsche, H.-J. (2006). Graßmann. Basel–Boston–Berlin: Birkhäuser Verlag.
Péter, R. (1951). Rekursive Funktionen. Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó.
Péter, R. (1959). Rekursivität und Konstruktivität. In: A. Heyting (ed.), Constructivity in
Mathematics. Proceedings of the Colloquium Held at Amsterdam 1957, pp. 226–
233. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Piaget, J. (1947). Psychologie der Intelligenz. Zürich: Rascher Verlag.
Piaget, J. and A. Szeminska (1965). Die Entwicklung des Zahlbegriffs beim Kinde. Trans-
lated by H.K. Weinert. Stuttgart: Klett.

326
References
Platon (1957). Sämtliche Werke. Translated by F. Schleiermacher. Edited by W.F. Otto,
E. Grassi and G. Plamböck. Hamburg: Rowohlt.
Platon (1990a). Politeia. Edited by D. Kurz. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell-
schaft.
Platon (1990b). Werke. Edited by G. Eigler. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesell-
schaft.
Poincaré, H. (1902). La science et l’hypotèse. Paris: Flammarion.
Poincaré, H. (1908). Science et Méthode. Paris: Flammarion.
Porte, J. (1960). Quelques pseudo-paradoxes de la ‘calculabilité effective’. In: 2e Con-
grès Internationale de Cybernétique, Namur, 3–10 Septembre 1958, Actes, pp. 332–
334. Namur.
Post, E.L. (1921). Introduction to a General Theory of Elementary Propositions. Ameri-
can Mathematical Journal 43, 163–185. Reprinted in: Heijenoort (1967), pp. 264–
283; also in Davis (1994), pp. 21–43.
Post, E.L. (1936). Finite Combinatory Processes. Formulation I. Journal of Symbolic
Logic 1, 103–105. Reprinted in Davis (1994), pp. 103–105.
Post, E.L. (1941). The Two-Valued Iterative Systems of Mathematical Logic. Princeton:
Princeton University Press. Reprinted in Davis (1994), pp. 249–374.
Post, E.L. (1943). Formal Reductions of the General Combinatorial Decision Problem.
American Journal of Mathematics 65, 197–215. Reprinted in Davis (1994), pp. 442–
460.
Post, E.L. (1944). Recursively Enumerable Sets of Positive Integers and Their Decision
Problem. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, 50, 284–316. Reprinted
in Davis (1994), pp. 461–494.
Post, E.L. (1946). A Variant of a Recursively Unsolvable Problem. Bulletin of the Amer-
ican Mathematical Society 52, 264–268. Reprinted in Davis (1994), pp. 495–500.
Post, E.L. (1947). Recursive Unsolvability of a Problem of Thue. Journal of Symbolic
Logic 21, 1–11. Reprinted in Davis (1994), pp. 503–513.
Post, E.L. (1948). Degrees of Recursive Unsolvability (Preliminary Report). Bulletin
of the American Mathematical Society 54, 641–642. Reprinted in Davis (1994),
pp. 549–550.
Post, E.L. (1965). Absolutely Unsolvable Problems and Relatively Undecidable Propo-
sitions. Account of an Anticipation. In: Davis (1965), pp. 340–433.
Prawitz, D. (1981). Philosophical Aspects of Proof Theory. In: G. Fløistad (ed.), Con-
temporary Philosophy. A New Survey, pp. 235–277. The Hague–Boston–London:
Martinus Nijhoff Publishers.
Presburger, M. (1930). Über die Vollständigkeit eines gewissen Systems der Arithmetik
ganzer Zahlen, in welchem die Addition als einzige Operation hervortritt. In:
Sprawozdanie z I Kongresu matematyków krajów słowia´nskich, Warszawa 1929
– Comptes-Rendus du I Congrès des Mathématiciens des Pays Slaves, Varsovie
1929, Warszawa, pp. 92–101 and 395.
Proclus (1873). Procli Diadochi in Primum Elementorum Librum Comentarii. Edited by
G. Friedlein. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner. Reprinted: G. Olms, Hildesheim 1967.
Putnam, H. (1965). Trial and Error Predicates and the Solution to a Problem of Mostow-
ski. Journal of Symbolic Logic 30, 49–57.

References
327
Putnam, H. (1967). Mathematics without Foundations. Journal of Philosophy 64, 5–22.
Revised version in: H. Putnam, Mathematics, Matter and Method. Philosophical
Papers, vol. I. Cambridge–London–New York–Melbourne: Cambridge University
Press, 1975, pp. 43–59.
Putnam, H. (1975). What Is Mathematical Truth? In: H. Putnam, Mathematics, Matter
and Method. Philosophical Papers, vol. I, pp. 60–78. Cambridge–London–New
York–Melbourne: Cambridge University Press. Reprinted in: Th. Tymoczko (ed.),
New Directions in the Philosophy of Mathematics. An Anthology. Boston–Basel–
Stuttgart: Birkhäuser, 1985, pp. 50–65.
Quine, W.V.O. (1940). Mathematical Logic. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Univ. Press.
Quine, W.V.O. (1948–1949). On What There Is. Review of Metaphysics 2, 21 - 38. Re-
printed in: W.V.O. Quine, From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge, Mass.: Har-
vard University Press, 1964, pp. 1–19.
Quine, W.V.O. (1951a). Two Dogmas of Empiricism. Philosophical Review 60 (1), 20–
43. Also in: W.V.O. Quine, From a Logical Point of View. Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1964, pp. 20–46.
Quine, W.V.O. (1951b). On Carnap’s Views on Ontology. Philosophical Studies 2, 65–
72.
Radbruch, K. (1999). Mathematische Spuren in der Philosophie. Mathematische Seme-
seterberichte 46, 135–153.
Rasiowa, H. (1951). Algebraic Treatment of the Functional Calculi of Heyting and Lewis.
Fundamenta Mathematicae 38, 99–126.
Rasiowa, H. and R. Sikorski
(1950). A Proof of the Completeness Theorem of Gödel.
Fundamenta Mathematicae 37, 193–200.
Rasiowa, H. and R. Sikorski
(1951). A Proof of the Skolem-Löwenheim Theorem. Fun-
damenta Mathematicae 38, 230–232.
Rasiowa, H. and R. Sikorski
(1953). Algebraic Treatment of the Notion of Satisﬁability.
Fundamenta Mathematicae 40, 62–95.
Raymundus Lullus (1617). Ars magna et ultima. In: Raymundi Lulli opera ea quae ad
adinventam ab ipso artem universalem ... pertinent, pp. 218–663. Argentorati.
Reid, C. (1970). Hilbert. Berlin-Heidelberg-New York: Springer-Verlag.
Resnik, M.D. (1974). On the Philosophical Signiﬁcance of Consistency Proofs. Journal
of Philosophical Logic 13, 133–147.
Resnik, M. D. (1975). Mathematical Knowledge and Pattern Cognition. Canadian Jour-
nal of Philosophy 5, 25-39.
Resnik, M.D. (1981). Mathematics as a Science of Patterns: Ontology and Reference.
Noûs 15, 529–550.
Resnik, M.D. (1982). Mathematics as a Science of Patterns: Epistemology. Noûs 16, 95–
105.
Resnik, M. D. (1988). Mathematics from the Structural Point of View. Revue Interna-
tionale de Philosophie 42, 400-424.
Resnik, M.D., ed. (1995). Mathematical Objects and Mathematical Knowledge. Alder-
shot-Brookﬁeld, USA–Singapore–Sydney: Dartmouth.
Resnik, M.D. (1997). Mathematics as Science of Patterns. Oxford: Clarendon Press.

328
References
Riedel, R. (1979). Biologie der Erkenntnis – Die stammesgeschichtlichen Grundlagen
der Vernunft. Berlin and Hamburg: Verlag Paul Parey.
Robinson, J. (1950). General Recursive Functions. Proceedings of the American Mathe-
matical Society 1, 703–718.
Rogers, H. (1967). Theory of Recursive Functions and Effective Computability. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Rosser, J.B. (1936). Extensions of Some Theorems of Gödel and Church. Journal of
Symbolic Logic 11, 87–91.
Rosser, J.B. (1937). Gödel Theorems for Non-Constructive Logics. Journal of Symbolic
Logic 2, 129–137.
Rosser, B. (1939). An Informal Exposition of Proofs of Gödel’s Theorems and Church’s
Thesis. Journal of Symbolic Logic 4, 53–60.
Rosser, B. (1953). Logic for Mathematicians. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Rowe, D.E. (1989). Klein, Hilbert, and the Göttingen Mathematical Tradition. Osiris 5
(2), 186–213.
Rucker, R. (1982). Inﬁnity and the Mind, Boston–Basel–Stuttgart: Birkhäuser.
Russell, B. (1903). The Principles of Mathematics. Cambridge: The University Press.
Russell, B. (1918–1919). The Philosophy of Logical Atomism. Monist 28 (4), 495–527;
29 (1), 32–63; 29 (2), 190–222; 29 (3), 345–380.
Russell, B. (1919). Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy. London: George Allen &
Unwin, Ltd., and New York: The Macmillan Co.
Russell, B. (1937). On Veriﬁcation. Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 38, 1–20.
Russell, B. (1949). Mathematics and the Metaphysicians. In: Mysticism and Logic. Lon-
don: George Allen and Unwin Ltd., pp. 74–96. For the ﬁrst time published un-
der the title: “Recent Works on the Principles of Mathematics”. The International
Monthly 4 (1901), 83–101.
Russell, B. (1959). My Philosophical Development. London: George Allen & Unwin
Ltd.
Russell, B. (1967). The Autobiography: 1872–1914. Boston: Little, Brown and Com-
pany.
Schilpp, P., ed. (1944). The Philosophy of Bertrand Russell. Evanston, Ill.: Northwestern
University.
Scholz, H. (1959). Abriss der Geschichte der Logik. Freiburg und München.
Schönﬁnkel, M. (1924). Über die Bausteine der mathematischen Logik. Mathematische
Annalen 42, 305–316. English translation: On the Building Blocks of Mathemati-
cal Logic. In: Heijenoort (1967), pp. 357–366.
Schröder, E. (1873). Lehrbuch der Arithmetik und Algebra, vol. 1 [no further volume
published]: Die sieben algebraischen Operationen. Leipzig: B.G. Teubner.
Schröder, E. (1877). Der Operationskreis des Logikkalkuls. Leipzig: Teubner.
Schröder, E. (1890–1905). Vorlesungen über die Algebra der Logik (Exakte Logik). Vol. I:
1890. Vol. II/1: 1891. Vol. III: 1895. Vol. II/2: 1905. Leipzig.
Schultze, F. (1881). Philosophie der Naturwissenschaften. Eine philosophische Einlei-
tung in das Studium der Natur und ihrer Wissenschaften. Leipzig: Günthers.
Schütte, K. (1960). Beweistheorie. Berlin: Springer-Verlag. English translation: Proof
Theory, Berlin–Heidelberg–New York: Springer-Verlag, 1977.

References
329
Shapiro, S. (1981). Understanding Church’s Thesis. Journal of Philosophical Logic 10,
353–365.
Shapiro, S. (1985a). Epistemic and Intuitionistic Arithmetic. In: Shapiro (1985a), pp. 11–
46.
Shapiro, S. (1985b). Intensional Mathematics. Amsterdam–New York–Oxford: North-
Holland Publishing Company.
Shapiro, S. (1989). Structure and Ontology. Philosophical Topics 17, 145–171.
Shapiro, S. (1991). Foundations without Foundationalism. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Shapiro, S. (1993). Understanding Church’s Thesis, Again. Acta Analytica 11, 59–77.
Shapiro, S. (1996). Space, Number and Structure: A Tale of Two Debates. Philosophia
Mathematica (Series III) 4, 148-173.
Shapiro, S. (1997). Philosophy of Mathematics. Structure and Ontology. New York: Ox-
ford University Press.
Shapiro, S. (2000). Thinking about Mathematics. The Philosophy of Mathematics. Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press.
Sheffer, H.M. (1913). A Set of Five Independent Postulates for Boolean Algebras with
Application to Logical Constants. Transactions of American Mathematical Society
14, 481–488.
Sieg, W. (1985). Fragments of Arithmetic. Annals of Pure and Applied Logic 128, 33–
71.
Sieg, W. (1988). Hilbert’s Program Sixty Years Later. Journal of Symbolic Logic 53,
338–348.
Sigmund, K. (1995). A Philosopher’s Mathematician: Hans Hahn and the Vienna Circle.
The Mathematical Intelligencer 17, 16–29.
Skolem, Th. (1919). Untersuchungen über die Axiome des Klassenkalküls und über Pro-
duktions- und Summationsprobleme, welche gewisse Klassen von Aussagen betr-
effen. Videnskapsselskapets skrifter, I, Matematik-naturvidenskabeling klasse, no.
3, 30–37.
Sleszy´nski, J. (1925–1929). Teorja dowodu. [Wykłady uniwersyteckie oprac. S.K. Za-
remba]. Kraków: Kółko Matematyczno-Fizyczne Uczniów UJ. Vol. I: 1925. Vol. II
1929.
Smith, G.C. (1982). The Boole – De Morgan Correspondence 1842–1864. Oxford: Cla-
rendon Press.
Smory´nski, C. (1977). The Incompleteness Theorems. In: J. Barwise (ed.), Handbook of
Mathematical Logic, pp. 821–865. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Com-
pany.
Smory´nski, C. (1981). Fifty Years of Self-Reference in Arithmetic. Notre Dame Journal
of Formal Logic 122, 357–374.
Smory´nski, C. (1985). Self-Reference and Modal Logic. New York–Berlin–Heidelberg–
Tokyo: Springer-Verlag.
Smory´nski, C. (1988). Hilbert’s Programme. CWI Quarterly 1, 3–59.
Spengler, O. (1918). Der Untergang des Abendlandes. Umrisse einer Morphologie der
Weltgeschichte. Vol. I. Wien. English translation: The Decline of the West. Vol. I.
Translated by Ch.F. Atkinson. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1926.
Spengler, O. (1922). Der Untergang des Abendlandes. Umrisse einer Morphologie der

330
References
Weltgeschichte. Vol. II. München. English translation: The Decline of the West.
Vol. II. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1928.
Swart, E.R. (1980). The Philosophical Implications of the Four-Color Problem. Ameri-
can Mathematical Monthly 87, 697–707.
Szczerba, L.W. and A. Tarski (1979). Metamathematical Discussion of Some Afﬁne Ge-
ometries. Fundamenta Mathematicae 104, 155–192.
Szmielew, W. (1949a). Decision Problem in Group Theory. In: Proceedings of the Xth
International Congress of Philosophy, vol. 1, Fascicule 2, pp. 763–766. Amster-
dam.
Szmielew, W. (1949b). Arithmetical Classes and Types of Abelian Groups. Bulletin of
the American Mathematical Society 55, 65 and 1192.
Szmielew, W. (1955). Elementary Properties of Abelian Groups. Fundamenta Mathema-
ticae 41, 203–271.
Szmielew, W. and A. Tarski (1952). Mutual Interpretability of Some Essentially Unde-
cidable Theories. In: Proceedings of the International Congress of Mathemati-
cians, Cambridge, Mass., August 30–September 6, 1950, vol. 1, p. 734. Provi-
dence, R.I.: American Mathematical Society.
Takeuti, G. (1975). Proof Theory. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Takeuti, G. (1978). Two Applications of Logic to Mathematics. Tokyo: Iwanami Shoten
Publishers and Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Tarski, A. (1930a). Fundamentale Begriffe der Methodologie der deduktiven Wissen-
schaften. I. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 37, 361–404. English trans-
lation: Fundamental Concepts of the Methodology of the Deductive Sciences. In:
Tarski (1956a), pp. 60–109.
Tarski, A. (1930b). Über deﬁnierbare Mengen reeller Zahlen. Rocznik Polskiego Towa-
rzystwa Matematycznego 9 (published 1931), 206–207.
Tarski, A. (1931). Sur les ensembles déﬁnissables de nombres réels. I. Fundamenta Ma-
thematicae 17, 210–239.
Tarski, A. (1933a). Poj˛ecie prawdy w j˛ezykach nauk dedukcyjnych [The Notion of Truth
in Languages of Deductive Sciences]. Warszawa: Nakładem Towarzystwa Nauko-
wego Warszawskiego. English translation: Tarski (1956a).
Tarski, A. (1933b). Einige Betrachtungen über die Begriffe der ω-Widerspruchsfreiheit
und der ω-Vollständigkeit. Monatshefte für Mathematik und Physik 40, 97–112.
English translation: Some Observations on the Concept of ω-Consistency and ω-
Completeness. In: Tarski (1956a), pp. 279–295.
Tarski, A. (1935). Grundzüge des Systemenkalküls. Erster Teil. Fundamenta Mathema-
ticae 25, 503–526.
Tarski, A. (1936a). Der Wahrheitsbegriff in den formalisierten Sprachen. Studia Philo-
sophica 1, 261–405 (offprints dated 1935).
Tarski, A. (1936b). Grundzüge des Systemenkalküls. Zweiter Teil. Fundamenta Mathe-
maticae 26, 283–301.
Tarski, A. (1939a). New Investigations on the Completeness of Deductive Theories. Jour-
nal of Symbolic Logic 4, 176.
Tarski, A. (1939b). On Undecidable Statements in Enlarged Systems of Logic and the
Concept of Truth. Journal of Symbolic Logic 4, 105–112.

References
331
Tarski A. (1944). The Semantic Conception of Truth and the Foundations of Semantics.
Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 4, 341–375.
Tarski, A. (1948). A Decision Method for Elementary Algebra and Geometry. (Prepared
for publication by J.C.C. McKinsey). U.S. Air Force Project RAND, R-109, the
RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, California.
Tarski, A. (1949a). Arithmetical Classes and Types of Boolean Algebras. Bulletin of the
American Mathematical Society 55, 64 and 1192.
Tarski, A. (1949b) Arithmetical Classes and Types of Algebraically Closed and Real-
Closed Fields. Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society 55, 64 and 1192.
Tarski, A. (1949c). On Essential Undecidability. Journal of Symbolic Logic 14, 75–76.
Tarski, A. (1949d). Undecidability of Group Theory. Journal of Symbolic Logic 14, 76–
77.
Tarski, A. (1949e). Undecidability of the Theories of Lattices and Projective Geometries.
Journal of Symbolic Logic 14, 77–78.
Tarski, A. (1953a). A General Method in Proofs of Undecidability. In: Tarski, Mostow-
ski and Robinson (1953), pp. 1–35.
Tarski, A. (1953b). Undecidability of the Elementary Theory of Groups. In: Tarski, Mos-
towski and Robinson (1953), pp. 75–91.
Tarski, A. (1954). Contributions to the Discussion of P. Bernays, ‘Zur Beurteilung der
Situation in der beweistheoretischen Forschung’. Revue Internationale de Philoso-
phie 8, 16–20.
Tarski, A. (1956a). The Concept of Truth in Formalized Languages. In: Tarski (1956b),
pp. 152–278.
Tarski, A. (1956b). Logic, Semantics, Metamathematics. Papers From 1923 To 1938.
Oxford: Clarendon Press. Second edition with corrections and emendations, edited
by J. Corcoran, Indianapolis, IN: Hackett, 1983.
Tarski, A. (1956c). On Deﬁnable Sets of Real Numbers. In: Tarski (1956b), pp. 110–142.
[Translation of Tarski 1931]
Tarski, A. (1956d). Foundations of the Calculus of Systems. In: Tarski (1956b), pp. 342–
383. [Translation of Tarski 1935 and 1936a]
Tarski, A. (1959). What is Elementary Geometry? In: L. Henkin, P. Suppes and A. Tarski
(eds.), The Axiomatic Method, with Special Reference to Geometry and Physics,
pp. 16–29. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Tarski, A. (1967). The Completeness of Elementary Algebra and Geometry. Paris: Insti-
tut Blaise Pascal.
Tarski, A., A. Mostowski and R.M. Robinson (1953). Undecidable Theories. Amster-
dam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Thiel, Ch. (ed.) (1982). Erkenntnistheoretische Grundlagen der Mathematik. Hildesheim:
Gerstenberg Verlag.
Thiel, Ch. (1995). Philosophie und Mathematik. Eine Einführung in ihre Wechselwirkun-
gen und in die Philosophie der Mathematik. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchge-
sellschaft.
Tieszen, R. (1988). Phenomenology and Mathematical Knowledge. Synthese 75, 373–
403. Reprinted in: M.D. Resnik (ed.), Mathematical Objects and Mathemtical

332
References
Knowledge, pp. 613–643. Aldershot, Brookﬁeld USA, Singapore, Sydney: Dar-
mouth, 1995.
Tieszen, R. (1992) Kurt Gödel and Phenomenology. Philosophy of Science 59, 176–194.
Reprinted in: R. Tieszen, Phenomenology, Logic and the Philosophy of Mathemat-
ics, pp. 93–111. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Tieszen, R. (1994). The Philosophy of Arithmetic: Frege and Husserl. In: L. Haaparanta
(ed.), Mind, Meaning and Mathematics, pp. 85–112. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic
Publishers. Reprinted in: R. Tieszen, Phenomenology, Logic and the Philosophy
of Mathematics, pp. 314–336. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Tieszen, R. (1998). Gödel’s Path from the Incompleteness Theorems (1931) to Phe-
nomenology (1961). The Bulletin of Symbolic Logic 4, 181–203. Reprinted in:
R. Tieszen, Phenomenology, Logic and the Philosophy of Mathematics, pp. 125–
148. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.
Toeplitz, O. (1931). Das Verhältnis von Mathematik und Ideenlehre bei Plato. In: Quellen
und Studien zur Geschichte der Mathematik, Astronomie und Physik. Abteilung B:
Studien 1, pp. 3–33. Also in: O. Becker (ed.), Zur Geschichte der griechischen
Mathematik. Darmstadt: Wissenschaftliche Buchgesellschaft, 1965.
Tropfke, J. (1980). Geschichte der Mathematik. 4. Auﬂage. Bd.1 Arithmetik und Alge-
bra. Berlin–New York: Verlag Walter de Gruyter.
Turing, A. (1936–1937). On Computable Numbers, with an Application to the Entschei-
dungsproblem. Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (Series 2) 42,
230–265. Correction: Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society (Series 2)
43, 544–546. Reprinted in: Davis (1965), pp. 116–154, and in: Turing (2001),
pp. 18–56.
Turing, A. (1939). Systems of Logic Based on Ordinals. Proceedings of London Mathe-
matical Society (Series 2) 45, 161–228.
Turing, A. (1950). Computing Machinery and Intelligence. Mind 59, 433–460. Reprinted
in: A.R. Anderson (ed.), Minds and Machines, pp. 4–42 (1964). Englewood Cliffs,
N.J.: Prentice Hall.
Turing, A. (2001). Collected Works: Mathematical Logic. Edited by R.O. Gandy and
C.E.M. Yates. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company.
Twardowski, K. (1927). Symbolomania i pragmatofobia [Symbolic Mania and Pragmatic
Phobia]. In: Rozprawy i artykuły ﬁlozoﬁczne. Lwów, pp. 394–406.
Tymoczko, Th. (1979). The Four-Color Problem and Its Philosophical Signiﬁcance. The
Journal of Philosophy 76, 57–83.
Tymoczko, T., ed. (1985). New Directions in the Philosophy of Mathematics. Boston-
Basel-Stuttgart: Birkhäuser.
Ulam, S. (1958). John von Neumann, 1903–1957. Bulletin of the American Mathematical
Society 64 (May Supplement), 1–49.
Venn, J. (1866). The Logic of Chance. An Essay of the Foundations and Province of the
Theory of Provability, with Especial Reference to Its Application to Moral and
Social Science. Landon–Cambridge: Macmillan & Co.
Venn, J. (1880a). On the Diagrammatic and Mechanical Representation of Propositions
and Reasonings. The London, Edinburgh and Dublin Philosophical Magazine and
Journal of Science (Series 5) 10, 1–18.

References
333
Venn, J. (1880b). On the Forms of Logical Propositions. Mind 5, 336.
Venn, J. (1881). Symbolic Logic. London: Macmillan & Co.
Wagner, R. (1975). Gespräche mit Carl Friedrich Gauss in den letzten Monaten seines
Lebens. Edited by Heinrich Rubner. Göttingen: Vandenhoek & Ruprecht.
Wajsberg, M. (1933). Untersuchungen über den Funktionenkalkül für endliche Indivi-
duenbereiche. Mathematische Annalen 108, 216–228.
Wajsberg, M. (1933–1934). Beitrag zur Metamathematik. Mathematische Annalen 109,
200–229.
Wang, Hao (1957). The Axiomatization of Arithmetic. Journal of Symbolic Logic 22,
145–158.
Wang, Hao (1974). From Mathematics to Philosophy. London: Routledge and Kegan
Paul.
Wang, Hao (1981). Some Facts About K. Gödel. Journal of Symbolic Logic 46, 653–659.
Wang, Hao (1987). Reﬂections on Kurt Gödel. Cambridge, Mass.: The MIT Press.
Wang, Hao (1991a). Imagined Discussions with Gödel and with Wittgenstein. Address
to the Kurt Gödel Society Meeting at Kirchberg am Wechsel, Austria.
Wang, Hao (1991b). To and From Philosophy – Discussions with Gödel and Wittgen-
stein. Synthese 88 (2), 229–277.
Wang, Hao (1996). A Logical Journey. From Gödel to Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.,
and London, England: The MIT Press.
Weniger, G.-Chr. (2001). Projekt Menschwerdung – Streifzüge durch die Entwicklungs-
geschichte des Menschen. Heidelberg–Berlin: Spektrum Akademischer Verlag.
Weyl, H. (1918). Das Kontinuum. Kritische Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der
Analysis. Leipzig: Veit.
Weyl, H. (1921). Über die neue Grundlagenkrise der Mathematik. Mathematische Zeit-
schrift 10, 39–79. Reprinted in: H. Weyl, Gesammelte Abhandlungen, vol. 2, pp.
143–180. Berlin-New York: Springer Verlag, 1968.
Weyl, H. (1922). Raum, Zeit, Materie. Vorlesungen über allgemeine Relativitätstheorie.
5th edition. Wien: Springer. 8th edition: 1993.
Weyl, H. (1928). Philosophie der Mathematik und der Naturwissenschaft. 2nd edition.
Edited by M. Schröter and R. Oldenbourg. München and Berlin: Oldenbourg.
Weyl, H. (1940). The Mathematical Way of Thinking. Science 92, 437-446.
Weyl, H. (1966). Philosophie der Mathematik und Naturwissenschaft. 3rd edition. Edited
by G. Kirschmer and R. Oldenbourg. München–Wien: Oldenbourg.
Whitehead, A.N. (1898). A Treatise on Universal Algebra. With Applications. Vol. I.
Cambridge: The University Press.
Whitehead, A. N. and Russell, B. (1910–1913). Principia Mathematica. Vol. I: 1910. Vol.
II: 1912. Vol. III: 1913. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Wilder, R.L. (1968). Evolution of Mathematical Concepts. An Elementary Study. New
York: John Wiley & Sons.
Wilder, R.L. (1981). Mathematics as a Cultural System. Oxford: Pergamon Press.
Wittgenstein, L. (1953). Philosophical Investigations. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.
Wittgenstein, L. (1956). Remarks on the Foundations of Mathematics. Oxford: Basil
Blackwell.

334
References
Wole´nski, J. (1989). Logic and Philosophy in the Lvov-Warsaw School. Dordrecht: Klu-
wer Academic Publishers.
Wole´nski, J. (1991). Gödel, Tarski and the Undeﬁnability of Truth. In: Yearbook 1991 of
the Kurt Gödel Society (Jahrbuch 1991 der Kurt-Gödel-Gesellschaft), pp. 97–108.
Wien: Kurt Gödel Gesellschaft. Reprinted in: J. Wole´nski, Essays in the History
of Logic and Logical Philosophy, pp. 134–138. Kraków: Jagiellonian University
Press, 1999.
Wole´nski, J. (1993). Tarski as a Philosopher. In: F. Coniglione, R. Poli and J. Wole´n-
ski (eds.), Polish Scientiﬁc Philosophy: The Lvov-Warsaw School (Pozna´n Stud-
ies in the Philosophy of the Sciences and the Humanities), vol. 28, pp. 319–338.
Amsterdam–Atlanta, GA: Editions Rodopi.
Wole´nski, J. (1995a). Mathematical Logic in Poland 1900–1939: People, Circles, Insti-
tutions, Ideas. Modern Logic 5, 363–405.
Wole´nski, J. (1995b). On Tarski’s Background. In: J. Hintikka (ed.), Essays on the De-
velopment of the Foundations of Mathematics, pp. 331–341. Dordrecht: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Wynn, K. (1990). Children’s Understanding of Counting. Cognition 36, 155–193.
Zermelo, E. (1908). Untersuchungen über die Grundlagen der Mengenlehre. I. Mathe-
matische Annalen 65, 261–281. Reprinted with English translation: Investigations
in the Foundations of Set Theory, in: Zermelo (2010), pp. 188–229.
Zermelo, E. (1932). Über Stufen der Quantiﬁkation und die Logik des Unendlichen.
Jahresbericht der Deutschen Mathematiker-Vereinigung 41 (2), 85–88. Reprinted
with English translation: On Levels of Quantiﬁcation and the Logic of the Inﬁnite,
in: Zermelo (2010), pp. 542–549.
Zermelo, E. (2010). Collected Works. Vol. I: Set Theory, Miscellanea. Edited by H.-
D. Ebbinghaus and A. Kanamori. Berlin and Heidelberg: Springer-Verlag.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank all who helped me in the work on this book. First
of all I thank the co-authors who agreed to include into the volume our joint
papers, in particular Professor Thomas Bedürftig and Doctor Izabela Bondecka-
Krzykowska. I thank also Professor Th. Bedürftig for his help in translating our
joint papers into English, and Doctor I. Bondecka-Krzykowska for making pic-
tures included into the paper on the English algebra of logic as well as Doctor
Marcin Borkowski for his help in preparing the camera-ready version of the
book. Some of the translations of the papers from German and Polish into En-
glish were made during my stays at Leibniz University in Hannover (Germany)
– I would like to thank Deutsche Akademische Austauschdienst as well as Pro-
fessor Th. Bedürftig for making those stays possible. I thank also the Foundation
for Polish Science [Fundacja na rzecz Nauki Polskiej] for the ﬁnancial support
which enabled me the work on this volume.
Last but not least I wish to express my gratitude to the editors and publishers
of the original versions of my papers for permission to include them here.
Roman Murawski
Pozna´n, June 2009

NAME INDEX
Abel N.H. 157
Abelard P. 276
Ackermann W. 30, 35, 49, 204, 208, 227,
297–298, 301, 313–314
Adam Ch. 316
Agazzi E. 301, 324
Alexander I 150
Anderson A.R. 332
Aristotle 41, 99–100, 104, 117, 245–246,
273, 276, 301, 315
Arson P.J. 150, 158
Asquith P.D. 305
Atten M. 146, 301
Augustine 16
Bacon F. 104, 246
Baire R.L. 61
Balas Y. 48, 50, 52
Banach S. 160, 301
Barwise I. 57, 300, 329
Batóg T. 301
Becker O. 135, 140–141, 301
Bedürftig Th. 95, 117, 120–121, 271, 301
Beisswanger P. 110, 301
Behmann H. 292, 294
Bell E.T. 80, 103, 274, 301
Benacerraf P. 146, 302, 310
Beppo-Levi 82
Berka K. 302
Bernays P. 30, 35, 44, 54, 67, 72, 76,
184, 201–202, 205, 233, 297–
298, 302, 313, 331
Bernoulli D. 199
Berry G.D. 42, 60
Betazzi 177, 282
Beth E. 303
Bigalke H.-G. 98, 302
Bishop E. 66
Boche´nski I.M. 174, 269, 302
Boehme J. 152
Boëthius 16
Bolayi J. 42, 60, 79, 103, 308
Bolzano B. 104, 106, 136–137, 160, 302
Bondecka-Krzykowska I. 72, 85, 302, 333
Boole G. 42, 60, 171–172, 174–175, 245,
247, 250–260, 262, 268–269,
271, 277, 279–280, 302–303,
307, 315, 329
Boolos G. 91, 125, 303
Borel E. 61
Borkowski M. 333
Bouasse H. 296, 303
Bourbaki N. 72, 171, 276, 303
Bowie G.L. 129, 303
Brendel M. 308
Brentano F. 135–136, 138
Briggs H. 79
Brouwer L.E.J. 29, 61–62, 76, 108, 139,
303
Browder F. 313, 317
Brown G.W. 310
Brown J.R. 92, 303
Bukaty A. 151
Buldt B. 317
Burali-Forti C. 19, 42, 59, 177, 199, 282,
319
Bürgi J. 79
Burkhart W. 263
Burks A.W. 52, 323
Cantor G. 9, 15–30, 42, 59–60, 66, 81,
102–104, 106–107, 111, 117,
136–137, 186, 197, 200, 249,
303, 305, 308, 319, 320
Capelle W. 303
Cardano G. 158

338
Name Index
Carnap R. 42, 51, 53, 56, 132, 142, 206–
207, 299, 303–304
Carnot L.N.M. 157
Carroll L. 267–268, 304
Castellano 177, 282,
Cauchy A. 42, 60, 133, 160, 164, 170, 304
Chaitin G. 72, 304
Chihara Ch.S. 146, 304
Church A. 9, 123–126, 128–134, 183, 185,
187–188, 192, 215, 221, 224,
227, 304, 307, 317, 319, 327–
328
Chwistek L. 290
Cieszkowski A. 152
Clebsch A. 167, 304
Clifford W.K. 163
Cohen P.J. 68, 304
Coniglione F. 333
Conseillant B. 152
Corcoran J. 331
Couturat L. 304
Craig W. 243, 320
Crozals L. 152
Curry H.B. 76, 294–295, 304
Czermak J. 306
Damerow P. 112–114, 117, 119, 303–305
Darvas G. 324
Dauben J.W. 25, 27, 305
Davis M. 51, 128, 305, 310, 324–326
Dawson J.W., Jr. 305
D ˛abrowski H. 150
Dedekind R. 19–20, 32, 42, 60, 72, 102,
104–107, 111–112, 117, 120,
137, 160, 166, 174–177, 305,
307
Democritus 42
De Morgan A. 42, 60, 245, 247–250, 253,
260–261, 268–269, 277, 280,
288, 305, 329
De Morgan S.E. 306
Depauli-Schimanovich-Göttig W. 317
Descartes R. 16, 77, 100, 273, 306, 309
Detlefsen M. 29, 30–31, 71, 306
Dickstein S. 152, 306
Diez A. 321–322
Dillingham B. 79
Diophantus 172, 273
Doner J. 217, 306
Dries L. van den 219, 306
Drobisch M. 103
Dummett M. 306
Durutte K. 152
Dühring E. 306
Dux G. 111, 115, 304, 306
Dyck W. van 168
Działy´nski J. 152
Ebbinghaus H.-D. 334
Echeverria J. 322
Edwards P. 302, 321
Ehrenfeucht A. 231, 306
Eigler G. 325
Engels F. 102, 306
Englund R.K. 305
Erdmann B. 33
Ershov Yu.L. 217
Esser Th. 24–26
Euclid 41, 98, 102, 117, 172, 218, 273, 307
Eudoxus 81, 98
Eulenberg A. 21
Euler L. 77, 81, 170, 245, 265, 267–268,
273, 307
Evra J.W. van 259, 307
Faá di Bruno 282
Fano G. 177
Fearnley-Sanders D. 163, 165, 168, 307
Feferman S. 52, 56, 307–308, 311
Felscher W. 307
Fermat P. 158
Feys R. 307
Field H. 88, 307
Fitch F.B. 307
Floyd J. 307
Fløistad G. 326
Folina J. 141, 307
Føllesdal D. 143, 307–308
Fourier J. 42
Fraenkel A. 17, 104, 134, 196, 198, 200–
201, 207–208, 308
Franzelin J. 24–26

Name Index
339
Frege G. 29, 32, 34, 42–43, 45, 59–60,
81, 106–107, 112, 117, 136–
137, 139, 160, 172, 178, 249,
255, 271, 285–290, 308, 312,
320, 331
Friedberg R. 189, 308
Friedlein G. 325
Friedman H. 91–92, 308
Frobenius F.G. 27
Fucks 27
Fuhrken G. 243
Fuson K.C. 308
Gallistel C.R. 309
Gandy R. 154, 308, 332
Gardner M. 247, 260, 308
Gauss C.F. 42, 60, 79, 102–103, 166, 308,
332
Gawecki B.J. 308
Gärdenfors P. 322
Gelman R. 309
Genocchi A. 170
Gentzen G. 38, 240, 309
Gergonne J.D. 79, 156, 269
Gerhardt C.I. 317
Gericke H. 309
Gibbs J.W. 142
Giudice 177, 282
Goldscheider F. 23
Gołuchowski J. 153
Gonseth F. 302
Goodman N.D. 75, 83, 311
Gödel K. 9–10, 29–30, 35–39, 48–57, 63–
68, 72, 111, 124–125, 128, 131,
135, 141–146, 183, 185, 187–
188, 191–192, 195–196, 202,
206–207, 212, 221, 225, 229–
231, 234, 305–312, 316–320,
322, 327, 331–333
Grassi E. 325
Grassmann H.E. 136
Grassmann H.G. 136, 161–168, 171, 175,
307, 311, 325
Grassmann J.G. 161
Grattan-Guinness I. 136, 164, 311
Grelling K. 42, 60
Grzegorczyk A. 10, 216, 224, 226, 231,
311–312, 321
Gutberlet C. 26
Haaparanta L. 331
Hahn H. 327
Hamilton W. 103, 246–248, 251, 312
Hamilton W.R. 163–164, 167, 251, 312
Hankel H. 166–167, 312
Harrington L. 92
Hart W.D. 312
Hartimo M. 312
Hartshorne C. 325
Heath Th.L. 307
Hegel G.W.F. 153–154
Heiberg J.L. 307
Heijenoort J. van 37, 54, 175, 312–313,
328
Hellinger E. 313
Hellman G. 72–73, 86, 90, 111, 312
Helmholtz H. von 33
Hempel C. 132
Henkin L. 157, 331
Henry D.P. 319
Herbrand J. 30, 128, 187, 312
Herken R. 307–308
Hermes H. 297
Hermite C. 27
Hersh R. 71, 75, 82, 313
Heyting A. 53, 62, 75–76, 108, 206, 241,
312–313, 317, 320, 325
Heywood R.B. 324
Hilbert D. 9–11, 29–36, 38–39, 42–49, 60,
63–64, 66–67, 72, 76, 91, 108–
111, 117, 124, 136, 139, 182,
195–196, 204–208, 211, 243,
297–298, 302, 306–307, 313–
314, 321–323, 327, 329
Hintikka J. 307, 314, 323
Hlawka E. 314
Hocking W.S. 267, 314
Hodges W. 306
Hoene A. 149
Hoene-Wro´nski J.M. 10, 149–156, 301,
306, 308
Hofstadter D.R. 126, 314

340
Name Index
Hollak H.J.A 303
Hontheim J. 26
Hölder O. 140
Hume D. 137
Husserl E. 30, 65, 135–141, 307–308, 314,
331
Iberra A. 322
Ifrah G. 314
Irvine A.D. 317
Jahnke H.N. 108, 314
Jamblichos 97
Janiczak A. 215, 216, 226, 314–315
Ja´skowski S. 218, 225–226, 229, 233–226,
239–240, 335, 320–321
Jeffrey R.C. 125, 303
Jeiler I. 26–27
Jevons W.S. 245, 260–264, 268, 315
Jordan Z. 315
Kalin T.A. 263
Kalmár L. 126, 128–129, 227, 315
Kanamori A. 334
Kant I. 9, 16, 29, 31–34, 39, 61–62, 65, 78,
100–101, 104, 117, 150, 153–
154, 306, 315, 322
Karp C. 57
Kaufmann F. 141, 316
Keferstein H. 177
Keisler H.J. 217, 243
Kennedy H.C. 170, 184, 179, 316, 324–325
Kepler J. 158
Ketelsen Ch. 30, 316
Kijania-Placek K. 322
Kirby L.A.S. 92
Kirschmer G. 333
Kitcher Ph. 71, 305
Kleene S.C. 51, 124–125, 128, 132, 187,
190, 216, 224, 298, 310, 316
Klein C. 317
Klein F. 27, 167, 308, 327
Kline M. 64, 103, 316
Kneale M. 181, 316
Kneale W. 181, 316
Knobloch E. 316
Koerner S. 316
Kono A. 317
Kowalewski G. 27, 316
Köhler E. 53, 316–317, 322
Königsberger L. 135
Krakowski I. 71, 316
Krazer A. 313
Kreisel G. 126, 130, 316–317
Kreiser L. 302
Kremer J. 153
Kronecker L. 15, 29, 61, 104, 108, 135, 317
Kummer E. 161
Kuratowski K. 198, 317
Kurz D. 325
Ladrière J. 317
Lagrange J.L. 157, 160, 162
Lakatos I. 69, 75, 77–78, 82, 317
Lambert J.H. 245, 252, 265, 317
Lange J.Ch. 265
Langford C.H. 213, 317
Laplace P.S. 156–157, 162
Lebesgue H. 61
Legendre A.-M. 79
Leibniz G.W. 9, 16, 29, 33, 35–37, 39,
42, 79, 100, 104, 137, 158, 165,
171–172, 178, 180, 245, 252,
265, 271, 274, 276–277, 279,
281, 304, 317, 322
Leo XII 151
Le´sniewski S. 10, 205–206, 235–236, 240–
241, 292, 295–296, 317, 324
Levin M. 318
Lewis C.I. 184, 241, 318
Libelt K. 153
Lindenbaum A. 216, 240
Lindström P. 318
Lobachevsky N.I. 42, 60, 79
Locke J. 16
Lorenz K. 115
Lorenzen P. 108, 110, 117
Lotze R.H. 137
Löwenheim L. 49, 53, 90–91, 213, 243,
318
Ludwik Napoleon 152
Luker M. 71, 306

Name Index
341
Lull R. 264, 276, 327
Lutwidge D.Ch. 267
Luzin N.N. 61
Ło´s J. 321
Łukasiewicz J. 10, 192, 234, 290–292, 296,
315
Macaulay P.R. 263
Macfarlane A. 267, 318
Maddy P. 68, 146, 318
Majer U. 32, 318
Mal’cev A.I. 224
Malinowski J. 59
Mancosu P. 318–319
Mardeši´c S. 170, 319
Markov A.A. 125, 127–129, 191, 319
Markovi´c M 319
Marquand A. 263, 267, 319
Martin N.M. 184, 325
Mays W. 319
Mazur S. 301, 321
McColl H. 259, 319
McKinsey J.C.C. 219, 240, 330
McNulty G.F. 319
Mehlberg H. 67
Mendelson E. 133, 319
Menger K. 319
Menninger K. 319
Meschkowski H. 18, 23–24, 27, 198, 319
Mickiewicz A. 151–152
Mill J.S. 101–102, 319
Minsky M. 186, 320
Mirimanoff D. 200, 208, 320
Mittag-Lefﬂer G. 17–18, 104
Molnár I. 77
Montferrier W.S. de 150
Moore G.H. 57, 208, 320
Moore R.L. 78
Mostowski A. 10, 202, 211–212, 217,
221, 223–226, 230–231, 242–
243, 306, 312, 320–321, 331
Möbius A.F. 165, 167
Muchnik A.A. 189, 321
Muir Th. 160
Murawski R. 9–11, 35, 38, 50, 64, 67, 91–
92, 95, 117, 120–121, 123, 196,
205, 271, 301, 321–323
Myhill J. 317
Nagel E. 323
Napier J. 79
Neumann J. von 10, 30, 35, 38, 52, 195–
209, 323, 332
Neumann O. 103
Newlin J.W. 267, 323
Newman J.R. 323
Newton I. 17, 42, 79, 104, 158, 274
Nicolaus of Kues 100, 104, 117, 323
Nied´zwiecki L. 151–152
Niiniluoto I. 323
Nissen H.J. 305
Ockham W. 276
Oldenbourg R. 333
Orłowska E. 75
Otto W.F. 325
Pacholski L. 306
Padoa A. 281
Paris J.B. 92, 306
Parsons Ch. 86, 146, 324
Pasch M. 42, 60, 218, 324
Pastore A. 263
Peacock G. 251
Peano G. 10, 34, 42, 60, 81–82, 92, 106,
117, 120, 137, 166–182, 212,
231, 249, 271, 280–284, 286,
288, 297, 316, 321, 324
Peckhaus V. 30, 325
Peirce C.S. 171, 249, 269, 280, 325
Pelletier F.J. 184, 325
Penrose R. 168, 325
Pepis J. 212, 227–229, 325
Pesch T. 26
Péter R. 129, 325
Petsche H.-J. 164, 325
Philo of Megara 259
Philolaos 97
Piaget J. 112–114, 117, 325
Pi ˛atkiewicz S. 301

342
Name Index
Pietruszczak A. 59
Pio IX 25
Plamböck G. 325
Plato 41, 76, 96, 98–99, 117, 325, 331
Ploucqet G. 245
Plücker J. 79
Pogonowski J. 322
Pogorzelski H. 305
Poincaré H. 29, 61, 179, 325
Poli R. 333
Poncelet J.V. 79
Popper K. 70, 77, 82
Porte J. 129, 325
Pos H.J. 303
Post E.L. 10, 124, 128, 130, 132, 183–193,
308, 316, 325–326
Prawitz D. 326
Presburger M. 218–220, 326
Pringsheim A. 170
Proclus 326
Putnam H. 64, 67, 70, 302, 310, 326
Pythagoras 44, 97, 117
Quine W.O.V. 64, 68, 130, 298, 326–327
Radbruch K. 100, 327
Rasiowa H. 85, 240–242, 321, 327
Raymundus Lullus – see Lull R.
Reid C. 327
Resnik M. 72, 86, 89–90, 92, 111, 327, 331
Riedel R. 327
Riemann B. 164
Robinson A. 274
Robinson J. 223, 327
Robinson R.M. 212, 221, 223–226, 321,
331
Rogers H. 126, 327
Rohn K. 140
Rootselaar B. van 321
Rosser J.B. 51, 212, 215, 221, 223, 230,
298, 310, 327
Rota G.-C. 146, 301
Rowe D.E. 327
Rucker R. 328
Rufﬁni P. 157
Russell B. 29, 34, 36, 42, 59–60, 64, 68,
72, 81, 107, 160, 173, 179, 183–
184, 200, 249, 281, 284–286,
290, 297–299, 328, 333
Ryan W. 305
Ryckman T.A. 319
Ryll-Nardzewski Cz. 231, 312
Saint-Martin L.C. 152
Saint-Venant A.J. de 164
Schelling F.W.J. 153
Schilpp P. 304, 310, 328
Schleiermacher F. 161
Schlesinger L. 308
Schmidt F. 308
Schmidt R. 315
Scholz H. 171, 297, 328
Schönﬁnkel M. 30, 292–294, 328
Schröder E. 167, 171–172, 174–175, 249,
269, 280, 328
Schröter M. 333
Schultze F. 33, 328
Schupe W. 246
Schütte K. 38, 328
Schwarz H. 16, 27
Scott D. 304
Shanker S.G. 305
Shapiro S. 72, 75, 83–84, 86–87, 111, 132,
328
Sheffer H.M. 292, 295, 329
Sieg W. 38, 329
Sigmund K. 329
Sigwart Ch. von 246
Sikorski R. 240–242, 321, 327
Simpson S.G. 91
Sintonen M. 323
Skolem T. 49, 53, 90–91, 198, 200, 207–
208, 213, 243, 329
Sleszynski J. 329
Slomson A. 243
Smith G.C. 248, 258, 329
Smory´nski C. 30, 35, 329
Spengler O. 80, 329
Spinoza B. 16
Srzednicki J. 321
Staal J.F. 321

Name Index
343
Stäckel P. 308
Steiner M. 146
Stöltzner M. 317
Stumpf C. 136
Suppes P. 331
Suvorov A.W. 149
Swart E.R. 70, 329
Swedenborg E. 152
Szabo M.E. 309
Szczerba L. 225, 329
Szeminska A. 325
Szmielew W. 220, 225, 329
Takeuti G. 38, 91, 317, 330
Tannery P. 306
Tarski A. 9–10, 48, 50–52, 54, 57, 66, 133,
202, 212–226, 229, 227, 240,
271, 298, 306, 318, 320–322,
329–331, 333
Teuscher Ch. 305
Thaer C. 307
Thayer E. 151–152
Thiel Ch. 99, 109–110, 117, 331
Tieszen R. 145–146, 331
Thomas of Aquinas 16
Thue A. 190–191
Todhunter I. 247
Toeplitz O. 99, 331
Towia´nski A. 151–152
Trentowski B. 153
Tropfke J. 332
Turing A. 37, 56, 124–126, 130–131, 186–
187, 215, 332
Twardowski K. 296–297, 332
Tymoczko Th. 71, 326, 332
Ulam S. 332
Vacca G. 171, 281
Vailati G. 177, 282
Vaught R.L. 243
Venn J. 245, 264–268, 290, 332–333
Vesley R.E. 317
Viète F. 273–274
Vivanti S.G. 22–23, 282
Wagner R. 103, 332
Wajsberg M. 233–234, 332
Wallis J. 158
Wang Hao 36, 48, 50, 52, 142, 166, 176,
332–333
Weber H. 27
Wechsung G. 321
Weibel P. 317
Weierstrass K. 23, 42, 60, 133, 135–137,
160
Weinert H.K. 325
Weingartner P. 307
Weiss P. 325
Weniger G.-Chr. 333
Wenzel U. 304, 306
Wernic H. 315
Weyl H. 29, 108, 110, 117, 135, 139–141,
188, 206, 301, 319, 333
Whitehead A.N. 60, 107, 160, 168, 173,
183, 281, 284, 298, 333
Wi˛esław W. 149
Wilder R.L. 69–70, 75, 78–80, 82, 333
Wittgenstein L. 64–65, 299, 306–307, 332–
333
Wole´nski J. 11, 50, 322–323, 333
Wro´nski J. – see Hoene-Wro´nski J.M.
Wynn K. 334
Yates C.E.M. 332
Young T. 151
Zermelo E. 57, 82, 134, 136, 196, 198–199,
201, 208, 305, 308, 334

