
CONTENTS I  
 
ETHICS 
“There have been many introductions to ethics but none comes close to the 
clarity and student-friendliness that characterize Gensler’s Ethics: A Contempo-
rary Introduction. The content is not only informative but also a pleasure to read. 
Gensler’s resourcefulness keeps producing engaging questions that hold the 
reader’s attention from cover to cover. Thoroughly researched and rigorously 
argued, this revised and amplified second edition will prove very valuable to 
lecturers of ethics and students for many years to come.” 
Louis Caruana, S.J., Reader in Philosophy, 
Heythrop College, University of London 
 
 
“Gensler’s Ethics affords a concise and coherent account of the most significant 
frameworks of ethical thinking in contemporary ethics. It also offers readers a 
consistent and rigorous mode of analysis of each position. The text is replete 
with study questions and bibliographical resources. This second edition also 
adds a helpful new section on virtue ethics.” 
James Swindal, Associate Professor and 
Chair of Philosophy, Duquesne University 
 
 
 
 
 
Ethics introduces the issues and controversies of contemporary moral philoso-
phy. It relates these to practical issues, especially racism, moral education, and 
abortion. It gives a practical method for thinking about moral issues, a method 
based largely on the golden rule. This second edition adds chapters on virtue 
ethics and natural law. It also updates the companion EthiCola instructional 
program, which can be downloaded from either of these two Web addresses: 
http://www.jcu.edu/philosophy/gensler/ec 
http://www.routledge.com/textbooks/gensler 
 
 
Harry J. Gensler, S.J., is Professor of Philosophy at John Carroll University in 
Cleveland. Some of his other books include Formal Ethics (1996), Ethics: 
Contemporary Readings (2004), Anthology of Catholic Philosophy (2005), Historical 
Dictionary of Logic (2006), Historical Dictionary of Ethics (2008), and Introduction to 
Logic, Second Edition (2010). 

ii Ethics 
Routledge Contemporary Introductions to Philosophy 
Series Editor: Paul K Moser, Loyola University of Chicago 
 
 
This innovative, well-structured series is for students who have already com-
pleted an introductory course in philosophy. Each book introduces a core 
general subject in contemporary philosophy and offers students an accessible 
but substantial transition from introductory to higher level college work in  
that subject. The series is accessible to nonspecialists, and each book clearly 
motivates and expounds the problems and positions introduced. An orientating 
chapter briefly introduces its topic and reminds readers of any crucial material 
they need to have retained from a typical introductory course. Considerable 
attention is given to explaining the central philosophical problems of a subject 
and the main competing solutions and arguments for those solutions. The 
primary aim is to educate students in the main problems, positions, and 
arguments of contemporary philosophy rather than to convince students of a 
single position. 
 
 
Classical Modern Philosophy 
Jeffrey Tlumak 
 
Classical Philosophy 
Christopher Schields 
 
Continental Philosophy 
Andrew Cutrofello 
 
Epistemology 
Third edition 
Robert Audi 
 
Ethics 
Second edition 
Harry J. Gensler 
 
Metaphysics 
Third Edition 
Michael J. Loux 
 
Philosophy of Art 
Noël Carroll 
 
Philosophy of Biology 
Alex Rosenberg and 
Daniel W. McShea 
Philosophy of Language 
Second edition 
William G. Lycan 
 
Philosophy of Mathematics 
Second edition 
James R. Brown 
 
Philosophy of Mind 
Second Edition 
John Heil 
 
Philosophy of Perception 
William Fish 
 
Philosophy of Psychology 
José Luis Bermudez 
 
Philosophy of Religion 
Keith E. Yandell 
 
Philosophy of Science 
Second edition 
Alex Rosenberg 
 
Social and Political Philosophy 
John Christman 
 
 

CONTENTS III  
ETHICS 
A Contemporary Introduction 
Second Edition 
Harry J. Gensler 
 
 
 
 

First published 1998 
by Routledge 
This edition published 2011 
by Routledge 
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY10016 
Simultaneously published in the UK 
by Routledge 
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN 
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group 
© 2011 Harry J. Gensler 
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilized in any form or by any electronic, 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from the publishers. 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Gensler, Harry J., 1945– 
Ethics: A Contemporary Introduction / Harry J. Gensler.—2nd ed. 
p. cm.—(Routledge contemporary introductions to philosophy) 
Includes bibliographical references and index. 
1. Ethics—Textbooks. I. Title. 
BJ1012.G43 2011 
170—dc22 
2010031951 
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library. 
ISBN: 978–0–415–80386–1 (hback: alk. paper) 
ISBN: 978–0–415–80388–5 (pback: alk. paper) 
ISBN: 978–0–203–83167–0 (ebook)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2011.
To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.
ISBN 0-203-83167-5 Master e-book ISBN

 
Contents v 
Contents 
Preface ix 
Introduction 1 
Philosophy 1 
Study suggestions 4  
Logical reasoning 2 
Chapter summary 6 
Moral philosophy 3 
Study questions 6 
Why study ethics?  4 
For further study 7 
Chapter 1: Cultural Relativism 8 
Ima Relativist 8 
Social science 13 
Objections to CR 9 
Chapter summary 14 
Moral diversity 11 
Study questions 15 
Objective values 12 
For further study 16 
Chapter 2: Subjectivism 17 
Ima Subjectivist 17 
Chapter summary 24 
Objections to SB 19 
Study questions 24 
Ima Idealist 21 
For further study 25 
Objections to IO 23 
 
Chapter 3: Supernaturalism 26 
Ima Supernaturalist 26 
Ethics and religion 33 
Knowing God’s will 28 
Chapter summary 34 
Ethics and atheists 30 
Study questions 34 
Socrates’s question 31 
For further study 35 
SN arguments 32 
Chapter 4: Intuitionism 36 
Ima Intuitionist 36 
Reconstruction 43 
Objective truths 38 
Chapter summary 43 
Self-evident truths 39 
Study questions 44 
Objections 41 
For further study 44 
 

vi Ethics 
Chapter 5: Emotivism 46 
Ima Emotivist  46 
Moderate emotivism 52 
“Good” is emotional 47 
Chapter summary 53 
Moral reasoning 49 
Study questions 54 
Positivism problems 50 
For further study 55 
Other objections 51 
Chapter 6: Prescriptivism 56 
Ima Prescriptivist 56 
Objections 61 
Freedom and reason 57 
Chapter summary 63 
Moral reasoning 58 
Study questions 64 
Against Nazis 60 
For further study 65 
Chapter 7: Consistency 66 
Avoiding an impasse 66 
Why be consistent? 77 
Consistency in beliefs 67 
Chapter summary 78 
Consistency in will 69 
Study questions 79 
Racist arguments 71 
For further study 80 
Impartiality 73 
Chapter 8: The Golden Rule 81 
A GR theorem 81 
Why follow GR? 93 
The literal rule 83 
Chapter summary 95 
Masochists 87 
Study questions 95 
GR questions 88 
For further study 96 
Chapter 9: Moral Rationality 97 
Rationality conditions 97 
Rationality questions 106 
Rational desires 99 
Chapter summary 107 
GR and racism 100 
Study questions 108 
Moral education 104 
For further study 109 
Chapter 10: Consequentialism 110 
Normative ethics 110 
RU problems 121 
Ima Utilitarian 111 
Chapter summary 122 
Consequentialisms 113 
Study questions 123 
Bizarre implications 115 
For further study 124 
Ima Rule-Utilitarian 117 

 
Contents vii 
Chapter 11: Nonconsequentialism 125 
Ima Rossian 125 
Ten commandments  134 
Our basic duties 127 
Chapter summary 136 
Exceptionless norms 128 
Study questions 138 
Rights 131 
For further study 138 
Distributive justice 132 
Chapter 12: Virtue 139 
Socrates and Plato 139 
Virtue and duty 149 
Aristotle 141 
Chapter summary 150 
Virtue and Imas 144 
Study questions 150 
Virtue and GR 147 
For further study 151 
Chapter 13: Natural Law 152 
Aquinas overview 152 
Sexual morality 158 
Aquinas’s axioms 154 
Chapter summary 159 
Controversies 155 
Study questions 160 
Double effect 156 
For further study 161 
Chapter 14: Synthesis Chapter 162 
Nonconsequentialism 162 
GR consistency 168 
Consequentialism 164 
Some questions 170 
Metaethical views 166 
Chapter summary 174 
Virtue 167 
Study questions 174 
Natural law 167 
For further study 175 
Suggested Works 176 
Bibliography 177 
Glossary/Index 182 
 
 

viii Ethics 
 
 
 

 
Preface 
Ethics: A Contemporary In
contemporary moral phil
normative views. It relat
education, and abortion. 
issues, a method based lar
I wrote this book for u
struggles. I aimed at stud
courses. But the book sho
is a brief introduction, I’v
beginners; teachers can ela
I tried to relate the va
While children are expe
whether by parents or b
themselves. But how can
rational way? I take this to
 
A typical chapter begi
fictional student. The rea
stand it on its own terms
trying to encourage the re
problems, instead of just a
 
I’ve tried to be concise
examples. And I’ve tried t
While I’ve argued strongly
concerned not that stude
more deeply and arrive at 
 
The book contains v
headings, boxes for key i
readings, and a glossary
Contemporary Readings (Rou
 
I’m happy with how w
I’ve got much positive fe
And I’ve been very grat
倫理學入門 (Zhoubahen
Désorcy), into Thai as 
into Persian as
Contents ix 
ntroduction introduces the issues and controversies of 
osophy. It covers many of the basic metaethical and 
tes these to practical issues, especially racism, moral 
It gives a practical method for thinking about moral 
rgely on the golden rule. 
undergraduate college students, with their interests and 
dents who have had one or two previous philosophy 
ould also be of interest to the general reader. Since this 
ve avoided complications that I thought would confuse 
aborate further on particular points. 
arious views to the student’s growth into adulthood. 
ected to parrot the moral views they were taught, 
by society, adults need to think out moral issues for 
n we think out moral issues in the wisest and most 
o be the central question of moral philosophy. 
ins with a clear and forceful defense of a view by a 
ader is invited to take the view seriously and under-
s. Problems and objections come later. In all this, I’m 
eader to think critically—to clarify a view and look for 
accepting what sounds good. 
e, clear, and nontechnical. I’ve tried to use meaningful 
to show how different approaches can affect our lives. 
y against many views, I’ve tried to be fair-minded. I’m 
ents agree with me but that they think out the issues 
approaches that they can live by in a consistent way. 
various study aids: bolded technical terms, section 
ideas, chapter summaries, study questions, suggested 
/index. I co-edited a companion anthology, Ethics: 
utledge 2004), with Earl Spurgin and James Swindal. 
well the first edition (1998) of this book was received. 
eedback from teachers, students, and general readers. 
tified that the book was translated into Chinese as 
ng Danshile), into French as Questions d’éthique (M.-C. 
 (Jakaew Tanunath), and 
 (Mehdi Akhavan). Several  

x Ethics 
selections are in the Portuguese reader A Arte de Pensar (Desidério Murcho) and 
the synthesis chapter was put into Turkish (Muhammet Enes Kala). 
I improved this second edition. In response to suggestions, I added a chap-
ter on virtue (which deals with Plato, Aristotle, the golden rule, and related 
controversies) and a chapter on natural law (which deals with Aquinas, double 
effect, sexual morality, and related controversies). I tweaked existing chapters, 
especially the ones on the golden rule (which now is clearer on key points), 
nonconsequentialism (which now has a expanded coverage of human rights, 
libertarianism, and socialism—and uses the right to health care as an example), 
and the final synthesis (which now has sections relating virtue and natural law 
to abortion). I expanded the bibliography and added a one-page appendix that 
suggests works for readers to pursue after mastering this book. I cut two things 
that got little use: the appendix on how to download and use the computer 
instructional program (the program is now so easy to download and use that 
this appendix isn’t needed) and the chapter outlines at the beginning of each 
chapter. So the book is about the same length as before. Finally, I rewrote and 
renamed the companion Windows-based instructional program, which has 
exercises on each chapter; the new EthiCola is easier to install and update, 
easier to use, and improved in many other ways. EthiCola (with a score-
processing program, teacher manual, and class slides) can be downloaded for 
free from either of these Web addresses: 
 
 
http://www.jcu.edu/philosophy/gensler/ec 
http://www.routledge.com/textbooks/gensler
The teacher manual and class slides are conveniently accessible from EthiCola’s 
HELP menu; so I suggest that you just install EthiCola (teachers should check 
the option to install the score processor too). 
I wish to thank all who have somehow contributed to this second edition: 
the Routledge editorial staff and reviewers, my ethics students, and the many 
teachers, students, and self-learners who have e-mailed me over the years. 
I hope you enjoy the book. I hope it deepens your appreciation of the  
golden rule. And I hope it helps you to think more clearly about one of life’s 
central questions: “How can we form our moral beliefs in the wisest and most 
rational way?” 
 
 
Harry J. Gensler 
Philosophy Department 
John Carroll University 
Cleveland, OH 44118, USA 
 
http://www.jcu.edu/philosophy/gensler 
 

 
 1 
 
Introduction 
 
When we do moral philosophy, we reflect on how we ought to live. We ask 
what principles we ought to live by and why we should follow these principles 
instead of others. We study various views and try to sort through them 
rationally. 
 
In this chapter, we’ll first consider the general nature of philosophy. Then 
we’ll focus on the main issues of moral philosophy and why we should be 
concerned about them. 
A. Philosophy 
To do philosophy is to reason about the ultimate questions of life—questions 
such as these: 
• 
Is there a God? 
• 
Are our actions free or determined? 
• 
Are humans completely explainable in material terms? 
• 
How and what can we know? 
• 
What is the nature and methodology of moral judgments? 
• 
What principles ought we to live by? 
Such questions are difficult and controversial; we struggle with them. Often our 
answers are confused or implicit. Our answers, whether good or bad, give us a 
perspective for thinking and acting—a “world view.” 
 
Philosophy deals with ultimate questions by reasoning about them. We first 
try to get clear on what the question is asking. Then we consider the range of 
possible answers. We criticize each one as brutally as we can, trying to uncover 
problems; we eliminate views that lead to absurdities. We look for the most 
adequate of the remaining views. If we can’t completely resolve the issue, at 
least we can hope to arrive at a well thought-out answer. 
 
Other disciplines can deal with beliefs about ultimate questions. We can 
study the history of such beliefs, their psychological causes or stages, or how they 
relate to literature or religion. These approaches are valuable but don’t replace 
philosophy—which reasons and debates about the ultimate questions of life. 
 

2 Ethics 
B. Logical reasoning 
Before we discuss moral philosophy, we’d do well to consider a few ideas about 
reasoning and logic. 
Reasoning in philosophy resembles reasoning in other areas. We often rea-
son about things like who committed the murder, what car to buy, whether 
there’s a greatest prime number, or how to cure cancer. As we approach these 
issues, we clarify the question and gather background information. We review 
what others have said. We consider alternative views and objections to them. 
We make distinctions and weigh pros and cons. We sometimes do experiments. 
The climax of the process is when we take a stand and try to justify it. We 
explain that the answer must be such and such, and we point to other facts to 
justify our answer. This is logical reasoning, where we go from premises to a 
conclusion. 
To reason logically is to conclude something from something else. For 
example, we conclude that the butler committed the murder from the beliefs 
that (1) either the butler or the maid did it, and (2) the maid didn’t do it. If we 
put reasoning into words, we get an argument—a set of statements consisting 
of premises and a conclusion: 
 
Either the butler or the maid did it. 
 
The maid didn’t do it. 
Á  The butler did it. 
 
B or M 
 
Not-M 
Á  B 
(Here “Á” is short for “therefore.”) This argument is valid, which means that 
the conclusion follows logically from the premises. If the premises are true, 
then the conclusion must be true. So if we can be confident of the premises, 
then we can be confident that the butler did it. 
 
Calling an argument valid claims that the conclusion follows from the 
premises; it doesn’t say that the premises are true. To prove something, we also 
need true premises. If we give clearly true premises from which our conclusion 
logically follows, then we’ve proved our conclusion. 
 
Philosophy involves much logical reasoning. The most common form of 
logical reasoning in philosophy attacks a view P by arguing that it leads to an 
absurdity Q: 
 
If P is true, then Q would be true. 
 
Q is false. 
Á  P is false. 
As we examine a view, we consider its logical implications and look for flaws. If 
we find clearly false implications, then we’ve shown that the view is false. And 
if we find highly doubtful implications, then we’ve cast doubt on the view. 
Either way, we’ve made progress. 
 
As we develop our philosophical views, reasoning and personal commitment 
are both important. Reasoning alone won’t resolve all the disputes. After 

 
Introduction 3 
considering the arguments on both sides, we have to make up our own minds. 
But if we pick a view with strong objections, then we have to respond to these. 
C. Moral philosophy 
To do moral philosophy (or ethics) is to reason about the ultimate questions 
of morality. We’ve mentioned the two central questions: 
Metaethics: 
What is the nature and metho-
dology of moral judgments? 
 
Normative Ethics: 
What principles ought 
we to live by? 
Moral philosophy accordingly has two main branches. 
 
Metaethics studies the nature and methodology of moral judgments. It asks 
questions like: What do “good” and “ought” mean? Are there moral truths? 
How can we justify or rationally defend beliefs about right and wrong? 
 
A metaethical view often has two parts. One part is about the nature of 
moral judgments; this is often a definition of “good.” The other part is about 
methodology; this tells how to select moral principles. For example, cultural 
relativism has two parts: 
• 
“Good” means “socially approved.” 
• 
Pick your moral principles by following what your society approves 
of. 
Cultural relativism bases morality on social conventions. Other views may base 
it on personal feelings, God’s will, or self-evident truths. 
 
Normative ethics studies principles about how we ought to live. It asks 
questions like: What are the basic principles of right and wrong? What things in 
life are ultimately worthwhile? What would a just society be like? What makes 
someone a good (virtuous) person? What are the basic virtues and rights? Is 
abortion right or wrong? 
 
Normative ethics has two levels. Normative ethical theory looks for very 
general moral principles, like “We ought always to do whatever maximizes the 
total pleasure for everyone.” Applied ethics studies specific moral issues like 
abortion or lying, or moral questions in areas like business or medicine. Both 
levels formulate and defend moral principles. They say things like “We ought to 
do such and such …” 
 
Metaethics is the more basic branch of moral philosophy, since it studies 
how to select moral principles and thus how to do normative ethics. So we’ll 
start with metaethics. We’ll first talk about method and then later use this 
method to arrive at principles about how we ought to live. Our remaining 
chapters divide into four main groups: 

4 Ethics 
• 
Chapters 1 to 3 consider three views popular among ordinary 
people: that morality is based on social conventions, personal feel-
ings, or God’s will. 
• 
Chapters 4 to 6 consider three views popular among philosophers: 
that morality is based on self-evident truths, emotional exclama-
tions, or rational imperatives. 
• 
Chapters 7 to 9 give a practical approach to moral rationality that 
stresses consistency and the golden rule. 
• 
Chapters 10 to 13 consider four normative approaches: consequen-
tialism, nonconsequentialism, virtue ethics, and natural law. 
Chapter 14 is a synthesis chapter. It tries to unify our understanding of the 
views in this book, and what difference they make, by applying them to the 
hotly disputed topic of abortion. 
D. Why study ethics? 
I can think of three reasons to study moral philosophy—besides the fact that, 
for many of us, it’s very interesting. 
First, moral philosophy can deepen our reflection on the ultimate questions 
of life. This is of value in itself, regardless of its practical benefits. If you 
haven’t wrestled with some of life’s deeper questions, then you aren’t a well-
educated person. 
 
Second, moral philosophy can help us to think better about morality. As we 
make moral judgments, we implicitly assume an approach to morality, or 
perhaps a confused mixture of approaches. Our approach, whether good or 
bad, whether defensible or not, gives us a perspective for thinking and acting. 
Moral philosophy can improve our perspective and make it more reflective and 
better thought out. So ethics is important because our choices are important. 
As we grow up, we’re continually told what is good or bad, or what we 
ought or ought not to do. Our parents tell us this—as do our teachers, our 
friends, and the wider society. Eventually, we have to sort through these values 
and form our own moral beliefs. But how can we do this in the wisest and best 
way? That’s the central issue of moral philosophy. 
A third goal is to sharpen our general thinking. When we do philosophy, we 
learn important intellectual skills. We learn to think rigorously about fundamen-
tal questions, to understand and evaluate conflicting points of view, to express 
ideas clearly, and to reason in a careful way. These skills are valuable in real life, 
and philosophy can help to develop them like nothing else can. 
E. Study suggestions 
You’ll learn better if you grasp the structure of the chapters: 
• 
Each chapter begins with a brief overview; then there are several 
content sections. 

 
Introduction 5 
• 
Important terms are introduced in bold type. Learn each term and 
be able to give a definition. The Glossary/Index at the end of the 
book has a collection of definitions. 
• 
A chapter summary reviews what you’ve read. 
• 
Study questions ask about key ideas. Write out the answers and 
keep them in an “ethics folder.” Your teacher may want to collect 
these, to check your work and make suggestions. 
• 
The last section of each chapter talks about computer exercises and 
further readings. 
You’ll find that the study questions and computer exercises are useful tools to 
help you to learn the material. 
Most chapters feature a presentation by a fictional student. In the next 
chapter, you’ll listen to the fictional “Ima Relativist” explain and defend 
cultural relativism. Take her view seriously and try to understand it. Make sure 
that you can explain it without distortion or slanted language. A good motto 
for doing philosophy is “Understand before you criticize.” After you under-
stand the view, reflect on how plausible you find it and how well it accords 
with your own thinking. Then look for problems and objections. 
 
Read the fictional presentation several times, from various perspectives. 
First read to get the general idea. Read it again to get the details; be sympathet-
ic, as if you were listening to a friend explain her views. Read it again in a 
critical way; try to uncover weak points and objections. Finally, after you’ve 
discussed the view in class, read it again to see where you stand. 
 
After each fictional presentation, I’ll bring up objections. Consider these 
carefully, and try to formulate them in your own words. Ask whether they are 
good objections, or whether they misunderstand the view or can be answered. 
You may have further objections yourself. 
Practically every view, even a false one, can teach us something. If you reject 
a view, you may still want to incorporate some of its ideas into your own 
thinking. Or you may want to use the rejected view to help you to develop a 
sharply opposed perspective. 
 
Relate the views to practical issues. Ask how a view would help you to argue 
against racist actions—or how it would lead you to teach morality to your 
children. Concrete applications can help us to understand philosophical views 
and see their practical relevance. 
 
This book is an introduction to moral philosophy and isn’t meant to be the 
last word on the subject. There’s much more to say about all this; a more 
advanced book would be more complicated. The end of each chapter mentions 
further readings, in case you want to pursue matters further. 
 
Moral philosophy is difficult and controversial. As you study it, you may at 
times feel perplexed and overwhelmed; this is a normal reaction. Radically 
opposed views can seem equally plausible, and a view that seems convincing at 
first can sometimes be demolished by a few well-placed objections. Don’t be 
discouraged; instead, try to make progress. You may not arrive at the final 
answers, but you can hope to improve your understanding of morality and to 
arrive at answers that are more adequate and better thought out. 

6 Ethics 
F. Chapter summary 
To do philosophy is to reason about the ultimate questions of life—questions 
like “Is there a God?” and “Are our actions free or determined?” 
Philosophy reasons about such questions. We first try to get clear on what 
the question is asking. Then we consider the range of possible answers. We 
criticize each answer as brutally as we can; and we eliminate views that lead to 
absurdities. We look for the most adequate of the remaining views. If we can’t 
completely resolve the issue, at least we can hope to arrive at a well thought-out 
belief. 
Reasoning about philosophical questions involves constructing arguments, 
which consist in premises and a conclusion. We aim for clearly true premises 
from which our conclusion logically follows. The most common way to reason 
attacks a view by showing that it logically implies things that are false or 
doubtful. 
Moral philosophy reasons about the ultimate questions of morality. Moral 
philosophy has two parts: 
• 
Metaethics studies the nature and methodology of moral judg-
ments. It deals with what “good” means, whether there are moral 
truths, and how we can justify or rationally defend beliefs about 
right and wrong. 
• 
Normative ethics studies principles about how we ought to live. It 
looks for norms about what is right or wrong, worthwhile, virtuous, 
or just. 
Metaethics is more basic, since it studies how to select moral principles and 
thus how to do normative ethics. 
In this book we’ll first consider various views about the nature and metho-
dology of ethics. Then we’ll consider a practical approach to moral rationality 
that stresses consistency and the golden rule. Then we’ll deal with some issues 
of normative ethics. In studying moral philosophy, we’ll be wrestling with some 
of the great questions of life, refining our thinking about morality, and sharpen-
ing our general thinking processes. 
G. Study questions 
Write out the answers in your ethics folder. If you don’t know an answer, go 
back to the section that deals with it. 
1. What is philosophy? Give two examples of questions that philosophy 
deals with. (A) 
2. If you had a previous philosophy course, what explanation or definition 
of “philosophy” did you learn? Give two philosophical issues that you 
dealt with. 
3. What other subjects deal with ultimate questions? How does their 
approach differ from that of philosophy? 

 
Introduction 7 
4. Philosophy reasons about ultimate questions. Explain what this “reason-
ing” in a general sense involves. (B) 
5. What is logical reasoning? What is an argument? What two things do we 
need to do to prove something? 
6. What is the most common way to argue against a philosophical view? 
7. What is moral philosophy? (C) 
8. Explain the two basic questions of moral philosophy—and the difference 
between metaethics and normative ethics. 
9. Why should we study moral philosophy? (D) 
10. Who is Ima Relativist and how should we approach her view? (E) 
H. For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 00—Introduction.” 
 
For a longer discussion of the nature of philosophy, see Audi’s “Philoso-
phy.” For a more thorough introduction to logic, see Chapter 1 of Gensler’s 
Introduction to Logic. 
 
You may at times want to consult other works and what they say about the 
various views; the Suggested Works appendix at the back of the book has some 
general suggestions. You may want to consult my Historical Dictionary of Ethics 
(Gensler and Spurgin) on particular points. My Ethics: Contemporary Readings 
(Gensler, Spurgin, and Swindal), which is intended to be a companion for this 
present book, gives related primary-source readings. The Bibliography at the 
end of the book has information on how to find these works. 
 
 

8 Ethics 
1 Cultural Relativism 
 
Cultural Relativism (CR): 
“Good” means “socially approved.” 
Pick your moral principles by following 
what your society approves of. 
Cultural relativism (CR) says that good and bad are relative to culture. What is 
“good” is what is “socially approved” in a given culture. Our moral principles 
describe social conventions and must be based on the norms of our society. 
 
We’ll begin by listening to the fictional Ima Relativist explain her belief in 
cultural relativism. As you read this and similar accounts, reflect on how 
plausible you find the view and how well it harmonizes with your own thinking. 
After listening to Ima, we’ll consider various objections to CR. 
1.1 Ima Relativist 
My name is Ima Relativist. I’ve embraced cultural relativism as I’ve come to 
appreciate the deeply cultural basis for morality. 
 I was brought up to believe that morality is about objective facts. Just as 
snow is white, so also infanticide is wrong. But attitudes vary with time and 
place. The norms that I was taught are the norms of my own society; other 
societies have different ones. Morality is a cultural construct. Just as societies 
create different styles of food and clothing, so too they create different moral 
codes. I’ve learned about these in my anthropology class and experienced them 
as an exchange student in Mexico. 
Consider my belief that infanticide is wrong. I was taught this as if it were an 
objective standard. But it isn’t; it’s just what my society holds. When I say 
“Infanticide is wrong,” this just means that my society disapproves of it. For 
the ancient Romans, on the other hand, infanticide was all right. There’s no 
sense in asking which side here is “correct.” Their view is true relative to their 
culture, and our view is true relative to ours. There are no objective truths 
about right or wrong. When we claim otherwise, we’re just imposing our 
culturally taught attitudes as the “objective truth.” 
 
“Wrong” is a relative term, and thus needs a further reference to complete 
its sense. Let me explain what this means. Something isn’t “to the left” 
 

 
Cultural Relativism 9 
absolutely, but only “to the left ofx” this or that. So “to the left” is a relative 
term. Similarly, something isn’t “wrong” absolutely, but only “wrong in” this or 
that society. Infanticide might be wrong in one society but right in another. 
 
We can express CR most clearly as a definition: “X is good” means “The 
majority (of the society in question) approves of X.” Other moral terms, like 
“bad” and “right,” can be defined in a similar way. Note the reference to a 
specific society. Unless otherwise specified, the society in question is that of the 
person making the judgment. When I say “Hitler acted wrongly,” I mean 
“according to the standards of my society.” 
 
The myth of objectivity says that things can be good or bad “absolutely”—
not relative to this or that culture. But how can we know what is good or bad 
absolutely? And how can we argue about this without just presupposing the 
standards of our own society? People who speak of good or bad absolutely are 
absolutizing the norms of their own society. They take the norms that they 
were taught to be objective facts. Such people need to study anthropology, or 
to live for a time in another culture. 
 
As I’ve come to believe in cultural relativism, I’ve grown in my acceptance 
of other cultures. Like many exchange students, I used to have this “we’re right 
and they’re wrong” attitude. I struggled against this. I came to realize that the 
other side isn’t “wrong” but just “different.” We have to see others from their 
point of view; if we criticize them, we’re just imposing the standards of our 
own society. We cultural relativists are more tolerant. 
 
Through cultural relativism I’ve also come to be more accepting of the 
norms of my own society. CR gives a basis for a common morality within a 
culture—a democratic basis that pools everyone’s ideas and insures that the 
norms have wide support. So I can feel solidarity with my own people, even 
though other groups have different values. 
Before going on, reflect on your reaction to cultural relativism. 
What do you like or dislike about it? Do you have objections? 
1.2 Objections to CR 
Ima has given us a clear formulation of an approach that many find attractive. 
She’s beginning to think about morality, and we can learn from her. Yet I’m 
convinced that her basic perspective on morality is wrong. Ima will likely come 
to agree as she gets clearer in her thinking. 
 
Let me point out the biggest problem. CR forces us to conform to society’s 
norms—or else we contradict ourselves. If “good” and “socially approved” 
meant the same thing, then whatever was one would have to be the other. So 
this reasoning would be valid: 
 
Such and such is socially approved. 
Á  Such and such is good. 
 
 

10 Ethics 
If CR were true, then we couldn’t consistently disagree with our society’s 
values. But this is an absurd result. We surely can consistently disagree with our 
society’s values. We can consistently affirm that something is “socially ap-
proved” but deny that it is “good.” This would be impossible if CR were true. 
 
Ima could bite the bullet (accept the implausible consequence), and say that 
it is self-contradictory to disagree morally with the majority. But this would be a 
difficult bullet for her to bite. She’d have to hold that civil rights leaders 
contradicted themselves when they disagreed with accepted views on segrega-
tion. And she’d have to accept the majority view on all moral issues—even if 
she sees that the majority is ignorant. 
Suppose Ima learned that most people in her society approve of displaying 
intolerance and ridicule toward people of other cultures. She’d then have to 
conclude that such intolerance is good (even though this goes against her new 
insights): 
 
Intolerance is socially approved. 
Á  Intolerance is good. 
She’d have to either accept the conclusion (that intolerance is good) or reject 
cultural relativism. Consistency would require that she change at least one of 
her views. 
 
Here’s a bigger bullet for Ima to bite. Imagine that Ima meets a figure skater 
named Lika Rebel, who is on tour from a Nazi country. In Lika’s homeland, 
Jews and critics of the government are put in concentration camps. The major-
ity of the people, since they are kept misinformed, support these policies. Lika 
dissents; she says these policies are supported by the majority but are wrong. If 
Ima applied CR to this case, she’d have to say something like this to Lika: 
Lika, your word “good” refers to what is approved in your culture. 
Since your culture approves of racism and oppression, you must 
accept that these are good. You can’t think otherwise. The minority 
view is always wrong—since what is “good” is by definition what 
the majority approves. 
CR is intolerant toward minority views (which are automatically wrong) and 
would force Lika to accept racism and oppression as good. These results follow 
from CR’s definition of “good” as “socially approved.” Once Ima sees these 
results, she’ll likely give up CR. 
 
Racism is a good test case for ethical views. A satisfying view should give 
some way to attack racist actions. CR fails at this, since it holds that racist 
actions are good in a society if they’re socially approved. If Lika followed CR, 
she’d have to agree with a racist majority, even if they’re misinformed and 
ignorant. CR is very unsatisfying here. 
 
Moral education gives another test case for ethical views. If we accepted CR, 
how would we bring up our children to think about morality? We’d teach them 
to think and live by the norms of their society—whatever these were. We’d 
teach conformity. We’d teach that these are examples of correct reasoning: 

 
Cultural Relativism 11 
• 
“My society approves of A, so A is good.” 
• 
“My peer-group society approves of getting drunk on Friday night 
and then driving home, so this is good.” 
• 
“My Nazi society approves of racism, so racism is good.” 
CR would make us uncritical about the norms of our society. These norms 
can’t be in error—even if they come from stupidity and ignorance. Likewise, 
the norms of another society (even Lika’s Nazi homeland) can’t be in error or 
be criticized. CR goes against the critical spirit that characterizes philosophy. 
1.3 Moral diversity 
CR sees the world as neatly divided into distinct societies. Each one has little or 
no moral disagreement, since the majority view determines what is right or 
wrong in that society. But the world isn’t like that. Instead, the world is a 
confusing mixture of overlapping societies and groups; and individuals don’t 
necessarily follow the majority view. 
 
CR ignores the subgroup problem. We all belong to overlapping groups. I’m 
part of a specific nation, state, city, and neighborhood. And I’m also part of 
various family, professional, religious, and peer groups. These groups often 
have conflicting values. According to CR, when I say “Racism is wrong” I 
mean “My society disapproves of racism.” But which society does this refer to? 
Maybe most in my national and religious societies disapprove of racism, while 
most in my professional and family societies approve of it. CR could give us 
clear guidance only if we belonged to just one society. But the world is more 
complicated than that. We’re all multicultural to some extent. 
 
And CR doesn’t try to establish common norms between societies. As 
technology shrinks the planet, moral disputes between societies become more 
important. Nation A approves of equal rights for women (or for other races or 
religions), but nation B disapproves. What is a multinational corporation that 
works in both societies to do? Or societies A and B have value conflicts that 
lead to war. Since CR helps very little with such problems, it gives a poor basis 
for life in the twenty-first century. 
 
How do we respond to moral diversity between societies? Ima rejects the 
dogmatic “we’re right and they’re wrong” attitude. And she stresses the need to 
understand the other side from their point of view. These are positive ideas. 
But Ima then says that neither side can be wrong. This limits our ability to 
learn. If our society can’t be wrong, then it can’t learn from its mistakes. 
Understanding the norms of another culture can’t then help us to correct errors 
in our own norms. 
 
Those who believe in objective values see the matter differently. They might 
say something like this: 
There’s a truth to be found in moral matters, but no culture has a 
monopoly on this truth. Different cultures need to learn from each 
other. To see the errors and blind spots in our own values, we need 
to see how other cultures do things, and how they react to what we 

12 Ethics 
do. Learning about other cultures can help us to correct our cultur-
al biases and move closer to the truth about how we ought to live. 
1.4 Objective values 
We need to talk more about the objectivity of values. This is a large and 
important topic, and we’ll often return to it in later chapters. 
The objective view (also called moral realism) claims that some things are 
objectively right or wrong, independently of what anyone may think or feel. Dr. 
Martin Luther King, for example, claimed that racist actions were objectively 
wrong. The wrongness of racism was a fact. Any person or culture that 
approved of racism was mistaken. In saying this, King wasn’t absolutizing the 
norms of his society; instead, he disagreed with accepted norms. He appealed 
to a higher truth about right and wrong, one that didn’t depend on human 
thinking or feeling. He appealed to objective values. 
 
Ima rejects this belief in objective values and calls it “the myth of objectivi-
ty.” On her view, things are good or bad only relative to this or that culture. 
Things aren’t good or bad objectively, as King thought. But are objective values 
really a “myth”? Let’s examine Ima’s reasoning. 
Ima had three arguments against objective values. There can’t be objective 
moral truths, she thought, because 
1. 
morality is a product of culture, 
2. 
cultures disagree widely about morality, and 
3. 
there’s no clear way to resolve moral differences. 
But these arguments fall apart if we examine them carefully. 
(1) “Since morality is a product of culture, there can’t be objective moral 
truths.” The problem with this reasoning is that a product of culture can 
express objective truths. Every book is a product of culture; and yet many 
books express some objective truths. So too, a moral code could be a product 
of culture and yet still express some objective truths about how people ought 
to live. 
(2) “Since cultures disagree widely about morality, there can’t be objective 
moral truths.” But the mere fact of disagreement doesn’t show that there’s no 
truth of the matter, that neither side is right or wrong. Cultures disagree widely 
about anthropology or religion or even physics. Yet there may still be a truth of 
the matter about these subjects. So a wide disagreement on moral issues 
wouldn’t show that there’s no truth of the matter on moral issues. 
We might also question whether cultures differ so deeply about morality. 
Most cultures have fairly similar norms against killing, stealing, and lying. Many 
moral differences can be explained as the application of similar basic values to 
differing situations. The golden rule, “Treat others as you want to be treated,” 
is almost universally accepted across the world. And the diverse cultures that 
make up the United Nations have agreed to an extensive statement on basic 
human rights. 

 
Cultural Relativism 13 
(3) “Since there’s no clear way to resolve moral differences, there can’t be 
objective moral truths.” But there may be clear ways to resolve at least many 
moral differences. We need a way to reason about ethics that would appeal to 
intelligent and open-minded people of all cultures and that does for ethics what 
scientific method does for science. We’ll work on this later, in Chapters 7 to 9. 
Even if there were no solid way to know moral truths, it wouldn’t follow 
that there are no such truths. There may be truths that we have no solid way of 
knowing about. Did it rain on this spot 500 years ago today? There’s some 
truth about this, but we’ll never know it. Only a small percentage of all truths 
are knowable. So there could be objective moral truths, even if we had no solid 
way to know them. 
 
So Ima’s attack on objective values fails. But this isn’t the end of the matter, 
for there are further arguments on the issue. The dispute over objective values 
is important, and we’ll talk more about it later. But before leaving this section, 
let me clarify some related points. 
 
The objective view says that some things are objectively right or wrong, 
independently of what anyone may think or feel; but it still could accept much 
relativity in other areas. Many social rules clearly are determined by local 
standards: 
• 
Local law: “Right turns on a red light are forbidden.” 
• 
Local rule of etiquette: “Use the fork only in your left hand.” 
We need to respect such local rules; otherwise, we may hurt people, either by 
crashing their cars or by hurting their feelings. On the objective view, the 
demand that we not hurt people is a rule of a different sort—a moral rule—and 
not determined by local customs. Moral rules are seen as more authoritative and 
objective than government laws or rules of etiquette; they are rules that any 
society must follow if it is to survive and prosper. If we go to a place where 
local standards permit hurting people for trivial reasons, then the local stan-
dards are mistaken. Cultural relativists would dispute this. They insist that local 
standards determine even basic moral principles; so hurting others for trivial 
reasons would be good if it were socially approved. 
Respecting a range of cultural differences doesn’t make you a cultural rela-
tivist. What makes you a cultural relativist is the claim that anything that is 
socially approved must thereby be good. 
1.5 Social science 
A popular stereotype says that all social scientists are cultural relativists. This is 
a false stereotype. Social scientists in fact hold a wide range of views on the 
foundations of ethics. Many reject CR. For example, the moral psychologist 
Lawrence Kohlberg saw CR as a relatively immature approach to morality, 
typical of teenagers and young adults. 
Kohlberg claimed that we all, regardless of our culture, develop in our moral 
thinking through a series of stages. The first four go as follows: 

14 Ethics 
1. 
Punishment/obedience: “bad” is what brings punishment. 
2. 
Rewards: “good” is what brings you what you want. 
3. 
Parental approval: “good” is what pleases Mommy and Daddy. 
4. 
Social approval: “good” is what is socially approved. 
Young children first think of morality in terms of punishment and obedience. 
Later they think more of rewards, and then parental approval. Still later, often 
in the teenage or early adult years, comes the CR stage. Here “good” is what is 
socially approved, first by the peer group, and then later by the larger society. 
Here it’s important to wear the right kind of clothes and listen to the right kind 
of music—where the “right kind” is whatever is socially approved. Many 
beginning college students struggle with these issues. This may be why they 
take CR so seriously—even though the view is implausible when we study it 
carefully. 
 
What comes after cultural relativism, according to Kohlberg? Sometimes 
confusion and skepticism follow; indeed, an ethics course may promote these. 
Then we may move into stage 5 (which resembles the rule utilitarian view of 
Chapter 10) or stage 6 (which resembles the golden-rule consistency view of 
Chapters 7 to 9). Both stages try to evaluate conventional norms rationally. 
 
I don’t bring up Kohlberg to argue that, since his descriptive account is 
correct, hence CR is wrong. His account is controversial. Many psychologists 
propose a different sequence of moral stages or reject the idea of stages. And 
we’ve adequately demolished CR; we don’t need help from psychology. I 
mention Kohlberg, rather, because many people are pressured into accepting 
CR by the myth that all social scientists accept CR. But there’s no such 
consensus. Kohlberg and many other social scientists emphatically reject CR. 
They see it as an immature stage of moral thinking in which we just conform to 
society. 
 
Kohlberg’s approach raises a problem about the meaning of “good.” People 
may mean different things at different stages; a young child by “good” may 
mean “what pleases Mommy and Daddy.” So we should see our quest in terms 
of what morally mature people mean by “good.” If our objections to CR are 
correct, then morally mature people by “good” don’t mean “socially ap-
proved.” 
1.6 Chapter summary 
Cultural relativism holds that “good” means what is “socially approved” by the 
majority in a given culture. Infanticide, for example, isn’t good or bad objec-
tively; rather it’s good in a society that approves of it but bad in one that 
disapproves of it. 
Cultural relativists see morality as a product of culture. They think that 
societies disagree widely about morality and that we have no clear way to 
resolve the differences. They conclude that there are no objective values. 
Cultural relativists view themselves as tolerant; they see other cultures not as 
“wrong,” but as “different.” 

 
Cultural Relativism 15 
 
Despite its initial plausibility, CR has many problems. For example, CR 
makes it impossible to disagree with the values of our society. We all at times 
want to say that something is socially approved but not good. But this is self-
contradictory if CR is true. 
In addition, CR entails that intolerance and racism would be good if society 
approved of them. And it leads us to accept the norms of our society in an 
uncritical way. 
Cultural relativism attacks the idea of objective values. But these attacks fall 
apart if we examine them carefully. 
Many social scientists oppose CR. The psychologist Lawrence Kohlberg, for 
example, claimed that people of all cultures go through the same stages of 
moral thinking. CR represents a relatively low stage in which we simply 
conform to society. At more advanced stages, we reject CR; we become critical 
of accepted norms and think for ourselves about moral issues. How to do that 
is the topic of this book. 
1.7 Study questions 
Write out the answers in your ethics folder. If you don’t know an answer, go 
back to the section that deals with it. 
1. How does cultural relativism define “good”? What method does it follow 
for arriving at moral beliefs? 
2. Ima grew up believing in objective values. What two experiences led her 
to embrace cultural relativism? (1.1) 
3. When Ima rejected “objective values” or “the myth of objectivity,” what 
exactly did she reject? What does it mean to say that “good” is a relative 
term? 
4. Why does cultural relativism supposedly make us more tolerant of other 
cultures? 
5. What benefits does CR supposedly have for Ima’s society? 
6. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to cultural relativism. 
Does it seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike about it? Can 
you think of any way to show that it’s false? 
7. Why does CR make us conform to society’s values? Does CR seem 
plausible here? (1.2) 
8. According to CR, what does “Tolerance is good” mean? Why doesn’t CR 
necessarily imply that tolerance is good? 
9. Explain the story about “Lika Rebel”—and how it presents a problem for 
Ima’s approach. 
10. How does CR apply to racism and to moral education? 
11. Explain the subgroup problem. (1.3) 
12. Can CR establish common norms between societies? 
13. Sketch how a cultural relativist and a believer in objective values would 
answer this question: “Can learning about other cultures help us to cor-
rect errors in the values of our own culture?” 

16 Ethics 
14. What was Dr. Martin Luther King’s view about objective values? How 
did it differ from Ima’s? (1.4) 
15. Explain and criticize Ima’s three arguments for rejecting objective values. 
16. On the objective view, how do basic moral rules differ from rules of law 
and etiquette? 
17. Are all social scientists cultural relativists? How did the psychologist 
Kohlberg view cultural relativism? (1.5) 
18. Sketch Kohlberg’s stages of moral development. 
1.8 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 01—Cultural Relativism.” 
 
What we call “cultural relativism” is sometimes called ethical relativism; the 
claim that different societies in fact disagree about basic moral norms is 
sometimes called descriptive relativism. To sort out the different types of “relativ-
ism” in ethics, see Brandt’s “Ethical relativism.” For defenses of cultural 
relativism by prominent anthropologists, see Benedict’s brief “A defense of 
cultural relativism” or Sumner’s longer Folkways. Section 1.4 raised the problem 
of how to distinguish morality from other action guides, such as law and 
etiquette, which also say how we ought to live; Frankena’s “Two concepts of 
morality” discusses this further. For Kohlberg’s approach, see his brief “A 
cognitive-developmental approach to moral education” or his longer Essays on 
Moral Development. The Bibliography at the end of the book has information on 
how to find these works. 
 
 

 
Subjectivism 17 
2 Subjectivism 
 
Subjectivism (SB): 
“X is good” means “I like X.” 
Pick your moral principles by following your feelings. 
Subjectivism (SB) says that moral judgments describe how we feel. To call 
something “good” is to say that we have a positive feeling toward it. The ideal-
observer view is a further refinement; it says that moral judgments describe 
how we’d feel if we were fully rational. 
 
In this chapter, we’ll listen to two fictional roommates, both named “Ima,” 
and both different from Ima Relativist of the previous chapter. Ima Subjectivist 
will defend subjectivism, and Ima Idealist will defend the ideal-observer view. 
We’ll also consider objections to the two views. 
2.1 Ima Subjectivist 
My name is Ima Subjectivist; but since my roommate is also named “Ima,” I 
usually go by the name “Sub.” I’ve embraced subjectivism as I’ve come to see 
that morality is deeply emotional and personal. 
 
I took an anthropology course last year with some friends. We all came to 
believe in cultural relativism (CR)—the view that good and bad are relative to 
culture, that “good” means “socially approved.” Later I saw a big problem with 
CR, namely that it denies us the freedom to form our own moral judgments. 
Moral freedom is very important to me. 
 
CR would force me to accept all of society’s values. Suppose that I found 
out that most people approve of racist actions; then I’d have to conclude that 
such actions are good. I’d contradict myself if I said “Racism is socially 
approved but not good.” Since CR imposes the answers from the outside and 
denies my freedom to think for myself on moral issues, I find CR repulsive. 
 
Growing up requires that we question our inherited values. Yes, we do get 
our values from society, at least initially. As children, we get values mostly 
through our parents and peer groups. But then we grow into adulthood. As we 
do so, we question the values that we’ve learned. We might accept these values, 
or we might reject them, or we might partly accept them and partly reject them. 
The choice is up to us. 
 

18 Ethics 
 
Cultural relativists are correct in saying that “good” is a relative term; but it’s 
relative not to society but to the individual. When I say “This is good,” I’m 
talking about my own feelings—I’m saying “I like this.” My value judgments 
are about how I feel, not about how society feels. My value judgments describe 
my own emotions. 
 
I see moral freedom as part of the process of growing up. We expect 
children to parrot the values they were taught; but adults who do this are 
stunted in their growth. We expect adults to think things out and form their 
own values. CR doesn’t let us do this. Instead, it makes us conform to society. 
 
Let me give an example of how subjectivism works. My family taught me a 
strict prohibition against drinking. In my family, any drinking was “socially 
prohibited.” But my college friends think it’s cool to drink heavily. In this 
group, heavy drinking is “socially demanded.” CR tells me to do what my 
society tells me—but which society? Should I follow my family or my friends? 
 
SB tells me to follow my feelings. So I sat down and thought about the 
conflicting norms and the reasons behind them. My family wanted to guard 
against the excesses of drinking, while my friends used drinking to promote fun 
and sociability. I have positive feelings about both goals, and I thought about 
how best to promote them. After reflection, my feelings became clear. My 
feelings said to drink moderately. 
 
Heavy drinking may be “cool” (socially approved), but it often leads to 
fights, hangovers, alcoholism, unwanted pregnancies, and traffic deaths. I don’t 
like these consequences—and so I’m emotionally against heavy drinking. I say 
it’s bad. Many of my friends drink too much because this is socially approved. 
They behave like children. They blindly follow group values instead of thinking 
things out for themselves. 
 
Let me explain some further points about SB. I said that “X is good” means 
“I like X.” Some subjectivists prefer another emotional term—such as “feel 
positively about,” “feel approval toward,” or “desire.” I won’t worry about 
which term is the most accurate. 
 
The truth of SB is obvious from how we speak. We often say things like “I 
like it—it’s good.” The two phrases mean the same thing. And we ask “Do you 
like it?—Do you think it’s good?” Both ask the same question but in different 
words. 
 
My roommate objects that we can say that we like things that aren’t good. 
For example, I say “I like smoking but it isn’t good.” But here I shift between 
evaluating the immediate satisfaction and evaluating the consequences. It would be 
clearer to say “I like the immediate satisfaction that I get from smoking (= the 
immediate satisfaction is good); but I don’t like the consequences (= the 
consequences aren’t good).” 
 
SB holds that moral truths are relative to the individual. If I like X but you 
don’t, then “X is good” is true for me but false for you. We use “good” to talk 
about our positive feelings. Nothing is good or bad in itself, apart from our 
feelings. Values exist only in the preferences of individual people. You have 
your preferences and I have mine; no preference is objectively correct or 
incorrect. Believing this has made me more tolerant toward those who have 
different feelings and thus different moral beliefs. 

 
Subjectivism 19 
 
My roommate protests that moral judgments make an objective claim about 
what is true in itself, apart from our feelings, and that subjectivism leaves this 
out. But objectivity is an illusion that comes when we objectify our subjective 
reactions. We laugh at a joke and call it “funny”—as if funniness were an 
objective property of things. We have a feeling of strangeness about something 
and call it “weird”—as if weirdness were an objective property. Similarly, we 
like something and call it “good”—as if goodness were an objective property of 
the thing. We subjectivists aren’t fooled by this grammatical illusion. The 
objectivity of values is a myth and needs to be rejected. 
 
In practice, everyone follows their feelings in moral matters. But only we 
subjectivists are honest enough to admit this and avoid the pretense of 
objectivity. 
Reflect on how you react to this view. Do you have objections? 
2.2 Objections to SB 
Sub (Ima Subjectivist) has given us a clear formulation of an important 
approach to morality. I agree with his stress on moral freedom and his rejection 
of cultural relativism (and of any other view that denies our moral freedom). 
But I disagree with his analysis of “good.” And I think he needs to develop his 
thinking about moral rationality. 
 
The biggest problem is that subjectivism makes goodness depend complete-
ly on what we like. If “X is good” and “I like X” mean the same thing, then this 
reasoning is valid: 
 
I like X. 
Á  X is good. 
Suppose that Sub’s irresponsible friends like to get drunk and hurt people. 
Then they can deduce that such actions are good: 
 
I like getting drunk and hurting people. 
Á  Getting drunk and hurting people is good. 
But this reasoning isn’t correct: the conclusion doesn’t follow. SB gives a very 
crude approach to morality, whereby we simply do as we like. 
 
Even worse, my likes and dislikes would make things good or bad. Suppose 
that I liked hurting people; that would make it good to hurt people. Or suppose 
that I became a teacher who likes to flunk students just for fun; that would 
make it good to flunk students just for fun. Whatever I liked would thereby 
become good—even if my liking came from stupidity and ignorance. 
Racism is a good test case for ethical views. SB is unsatisfying here, since it 
says that hurting other races is good if I like to do it. And SB implies that Hitler 
spoke the truth when he said “The killing of Jews is good” (since his statement 

20 Ethics 
just meant that he liked the killing of Jews). So SB has bizarre implications 
about racism. 
 
Moral education gives another test case. If we accepted SB, how would we 
bring up our children to think about morality? We’d teach them to follow their 
feelings, to go by their likes and dislikes. We’d teach children that “I like 
hurting people—therefore hurting people is good” is correct reasoning. So SB 
has bizarre implications about moral education. 
 
So it’s easy to poke holes in subjectivism. Why then does the view seem so 
plausible? One reason is that what we like tends to correspond with what we 
think good. SB explains this: calling something “good” just means that we like it. 
But other explanations are possible. Maybe we’re motivated to like what our 
minds discover (perhaps through reason or religion) to be good. So other views 
can explain the close connection between what we like and what we think 
good. 
 
If we’re morally immature, as we often are, the correspondence may fail. We 
may like things that we think bad, such as hurting other people. Morality is 
supposed to constrain our likes and dislikes. The thought that hurting others is 
bad can keep us from doing it, although we’d like to do it. So we can’t identify 
what is good with what we like—even though the two would correspond 
closely if we were morally mature. 
 
Not many philosophers today hold subjectivism. Some who have SB 
tendencies have moved to emotivism, which differs in a subtle way. These two 
views interpret “good” as follows: 
• 
Subjectivism: “X is good” means “I like X.” 
• 
Emotivism: “X is good” means “Hurrah for X!” 
Emotivism (which we’ll take in Chapter 5) says that moral judgments are 
emotional exclamations and not truth claims; this is much like SB but harder to 
refute. Others with SB tendencies have moved to the ideal-observer view, 
which takes “good” to refer not to our actual feelings but to how we’d feel if 
we were fully rational; this approach combines reason and feeling. We’ll hear 
about this view in the next section. 
Sub talked about our freedom to form our own moral beliefs. But he didn’t 
say how to use this freedom in a responsible way. He said we need to follow 
our feelings. But he didn’t say how to develop wise feelings. Our next view tries 
to deal with these deficiencies by bringing in a richer view of moral rationality. 
Ideal-Observer View (IO): 
“X is good” means “We’d desire X if we were fully 
informed and had impartial concern for everyone.” 
Pick your moral principles by trying to become as 
informed and impartial as possible, and then seeing 
what you desire. 

 
Subjectivism 21 
2.3 Ima Idealist 
My name is Ima Idealist. I’ve embraced the ideal-observer view as I’ve come to 
see the need to combine feelings with reason in our moral thinking. 
 
Feelings and reason are both part of life; they should work together in 
everything we do. Take the example of grammar. Before I turn in an essay, I 
read it over looking for grammatical errors. My feelings alert me to such errors; 
when a sentence causes me distress, that tips me off that it may be ungrammat-
ical. Of course, my feelings about grammar have been trained over the years by 
reason—by rules and examples. So my sense of grammar combines feelings 
with reason. Every aspect of life should combine these two. 
You might know my roommate, Ima Subjectivist. Since we both have the 
same first name, which gets confusing, I just call him “Sub.” Now Sub has 
some fine ideas, but they lack balance. He preaches “Follow your feelings” all 
the time. Now this advice isn’t bad if you have wise and rational feelings. But 
the advice is very bad if your feelings are foolish. 
I followed Sub’s advice, and it led to problems. I followed my feelings about 
eating—and I gained fifty pounds. I followed my feelings about when to attend 
class—and I nearly flunked out of school. I insulted people when I felt like 
doing so—and I alienated myself from others. Now I don’t like what I did. In 
retaliation against Sub for his bad advice, I put this sign on our wall: 
If we just do as we like, we soon won’t 
like what we’ve made of our lives. 
We need to train our feelings instead of following them blindly. For example, I 
used to like smoking, overeating, and insulting people. But I saw that these 
weren’t good things to like—and so eventually I came to dislike them. 
We need to combine feelings with rationality. My motto now is “Develop 
rational moral feelings first—and then follow your feelings.” But how, you may 
ask, do we develop rational moral feelings? I have two suggestions: 
1. 
Be informed: Base your feelings and decisions on a correct assess-
ment of the situation. 
2. 
Be impartial: Make your moral judgments from an impartial stand-
point that shows concern for everyone. 
Rational moral feelings are feelings that are informed and impartial. 
Moral judgments don’t describe our actual feelings, our momentary im-
pulses, what we happen to like at the moment. Instead, moral judgments 
describe how we’d feel if we were fully rational in our feelings. “X is good” 
means “We’d desire X if we were fully informed and impartial.” This approach 
is called the ideal-observer view. On this approach, we pick our moral 
principles by trying to be as informed and impartial as possible, and then seeing 
how we feel. 
My friend Sub was puzzled that we can say “I like smoking but it isn’t good.” 
He had a convoluted explanation of why this statement makes sense. My 

22 Ethics 
explanation is better. “Liking” is about our actual feelings; “good” is about how 
we’d feel if we were rational. Here our pro-smoking impulses conflict with 
what we’d feel from a rational perspective (which includes knowing and taking 
account of the harmful consequences of smoking). 
Let me explain my view in another way. An ideal observer is an imaginary 
person of supreme moral wisdom—a person who is fully informed and has 
impartial concern for everyone. To call something “good” means that we’d 
desire it if we were ideal observers. Of course, we’ll never be ideal observers, 
since we’ll always have some ignorance and bias. But the notion of an ideal 
observer is useful, since it gives a vivid picture of moral wisdom and a way to 
understand the meaning and methodology of moral judgments. 
Let me explain how to make moral judgments in a rational way. First, we 
need to be informed. We need to know about circumstances, alternatives, and 
consequences. We need to avoid factual errors. Our moral judgments are less 
rational if they aren’t based on a correct understanding of the situation. Of 
course, we can’t know everything; but we can strive for greater knowledge. 
The second element of rational moral thinking is impartiality. Moral judg-
ments involve impartial feelings. When we make moral judgments, we take an 
impartial perspective that shows concern for everyone. We need this perspec-
tive to regulate our selfish inclinations, so that we can try to live together in 
peace and harmony. 
Impartiality shows the errors in subjectivism further. On subjectivism, “X is 
good” means “I like X”—so this way of reasoning is correct: 
 
I like getting drunk and hurting people. 
Á  Getting drunk and hurting people is good. 
But this reasoning is incorrect. The conclusion misuses “good,” since this word 
describes what we’d desire if we were fully informed and impartial. The conclu-
sion clearly doesn’t show an impartial concern for everyone. Society would fall 
apart if everyone followed the subjectivist model of moral reasoning—where 
we just do what we like, regardless of how this affects other people. 
 
Here’s an example of how to apply my view. Suppose that you are elected to 
Congress. On what basis do you appraise a proposed law as “good,” and thus 
as worthy of your vote? Cultural relativism tells you to go with what the 
majority favors; but the majority can be ignorant, or swayed by propaganda and 
lies. Subjectivism tells you to follow your feelings; but your feelings can be 
ignorant or biased. My view tells you to form your values in a way that is 
factually informed and impartially concerned for everyone. This would give a 
better basis for democracy. 
 
My view gives objective ways to criticize racist moral beliefs. Suppose that 
we’re evaluating the moral rationality of a Nazi who believes that he ought to 
put Jews in concentration camps. The Nazi likely violates our “Be informed” 
condition, since he likely bases his attitudes on factual errors or ignorance: 
• 
His attitudes may be based on factual errors. Maybe he falsely 
believes that his own race is superior or racially pure. Or maybe he 

 
Subjectivism 23 
falsely believes that racist policies will greatly benefit his own race. 
We can objectively criticize such errors. 
• 
His attitudes may be based on ignorance. Maybe he doesn’t under-
stand the suffering that his actions cause his victims. Or maybe he 
doesn’t understand how diverse races in some other societies have 
learned to live together in peace and harmony. Or maybe he 
doesn’t understand how his hatred of Jews came from indoctrina-
tion (including lies and false stereotypes). 
We also could criticize his attitudes on the basis of impartiality. Since his actions 
don’t show an impartial concern for everyone, it makes no sense for him to 
defend these actions using moral language. He might like to persecute Jews, but 
he can’t plausibly hold that these actions are good. 
 
On my approach, some value systems are more rational than others. A 
system of values is “rational”—and thus worthy of our respect—if it’s based on 
a correct understanding of the facts and an impartial concern for everyone. 
Nazism, slavery, and apartheid are irrational—since they’re based on ignorance 
or violations of impartial concern. 
 
My view has several advantages over cultural relativism and subjectivism. It 
adds a rational element while also recognizing the role of feelings. It gives 
stronger ammunition for attacking racism. It provides a firmer basis for moral 
education, since it guides us on how to develop wise and responsible feelings. 
And it accords with how we form our moral beliefs when we try to be rational. 
Reflect on how you react to this view. Do you have objections? 
2.4 Objections to IO 
The ideal-observer view is a vast improvement over cultural relativism and 
subjectivism. But unfortunately the view, at least as we’ve developed it so far, 
still has problems. 
 
The “impartiality” condition is unclear. Does it require that we have an 
equal concern for everyone, regardless of whether the person is our child or a 
complete stranger? Would this be a good thing? If impartiality doesn’t require 
this, then what exactly does it require? 
 
The condition to be “fully informed” seems too idealized. Would it require 
an infinite amount of knowledge, and thus an infinite brain? If humans are 
incapable of being fully informed, does it even make sense to ask what we’d 
desire if we were fully informed? 
The view arbitrarily gives us just two rationality conditions. Are there others 
besides these two? For example, do we also need to be consistent? Do we also 
need to have empathy (a vivid awareness of what it would be like to be in 
another’s place)? Some philosophers include these or other conditions. How do 
we decide which rationality conditions to include? 

24 Ethics 
 
Ideal observers might disagree on some issues. If they disagree, then should 
we take “good” to be what “most” (not “all”) ideal observers would desire? Or 
should we each follow what we as individuals would desire if we were an ideal 
observer? 
 
So the ideal-observer view, while a huge step forward, isn’t yet the end of 
our journey. Its ideas need to be developed further. But any better view would 
likely build on its insights. 
2.5 Chapter summary 
Subjectivism says that our moral judgments describe our personal feelings:  
“X is good” means “I like X.” We are to pick our moral principles by following 
our feelings. 
Subjectivism has problems. It holds, implausibly, that the mere fact that we 
like something (such as getting drunk and hurting others) would make it good. 
It gives a weak basis for dealing with practical areas like racism and moral 
education. And it tells us to follow our feelings but gives us no guide on how to 
develop rational and wise feelings. 
The ideal-observer view tries to combine feelings with rationality. It says 
that “X is good” means “We’d desire X if we were fully informed and had 
impartial concern for everyone.” We are to pick our moral principles by first 
trying to develop rational moral feelings (by striving to become informed and 
impartial), and then following our feelings. 
The ideal-observer view, while a vast improvement over cultural relativism 
and subjectivism, still has problems, at least as we’ve developed the view so far. 
For example, it arbitrarily gives us just two rationality conditions—and it’s 
unclear what “impartial” means. 
2.6 Study questions 
If you don’t know an answer, go back to the section that deals with it. 
1. How does subjectivism define “good”? What method does it follow for 
arriving at moral beliefs? 
2. Sub (Ima Subjectivist) once believed in cultural relativism. Why did he 
convert to subjectivism? (2.1) 
3. How did Sub relate moral freedom to the process of growing up? 
4. How did Sub apply SB to the issue of drinking? 
5. How is the truth of SB supposed to be obvious from how we speak 
about “good” and about “what I like”? 
6. Does SB see values as relative? What are they relative to? 
7. How did Sub handle the objection that moral judgments make an 
objective claim about what is true in itself, apart from our feelings? 
8. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to subjectivism. Does it 
seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike about it? Can you 
think of any way to show that it’s false? 
9. Give some objections to subjectivism. (2.2) 

 
Subjectivism 25 
10. In actual fact, do our moral judgments necessarily correspond to our likes 
and dislikes? 
11. How does SB apply to racism and moral education? 
12. How does the ideal-observer view define “good”? What method does it 
follow for arriving at moral beliefs? (2.3) 
13. What was Ima Idealist’s major objection to subjectivism? 
14. How do we develop rational moral feelings? Explain the two rationality 
conditions. 
15. What is an “ideal observer”? Do any ideal observers exist? If not, then 
what is the point of the idea? 
16. How would we apply the ideal-observer view if we were elected to 
Congress? 
17. How does the ideal-observer view apply to racism? 
18. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to the ideal-observer 
view. Does it seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike about 
it? Can you think of any way to show that it’s false? 
19. Sketch two problems with the ideal-observer view. (2.4) 
2.7 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 02—Subjectivism.” 
Hume’s eighteenth-century A Treatise of Human Nature (especially Part 1 of 
Book 3) is the classic defense of subjectivism. Hume had further arguments for 
the view; for example, he argued that, since moral judgments influence our 
actions and feelings, they must be emotional and not just judgments of reason. 
His later Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals (especially Section 9 and 
Appendix 1) incorporated elements of the ideal-observer view. For more recent 
defenses of this view, see Firth’s brief “Ethical absolutism and the ideal 
observer” or Carson’s longer The Status of Morality. The Bibliography at the end 
of the book has information on how to find these works. 
 
 

26 Ethics 
3 Supernaturalism 
 
Supernaturalism (SN): 
“X is good” means “God desires X.” 
Pick your moral principles by following God’s will. 
Supernaturalism (SN) says that moral judgments describe God’s will. Calling 
something “good” means that God desires it. Ethics is based on religion. 
 
We’ll begin by listening to the fictional Ima Supernaturalist explain her belief 
in supernaturalism. After considering some objections, we’ll see how religion 
and ethics might connect even if SN is wrong. 
3.1 Ima Supernaturalist 
My name is Ima Supernaturalist. I’ve embraced supernaturalism as I’ve come to 
appreciate the deeply religious basis for morality. 
 
In Sunday School, I learned that God gave us the ten commandments: 
01. Thou shalt not worship false gods. 
02. Thou shalt not take God’s name in vain. 
03. Keep holy the Sabbath. 
04. Honor thy father and thy mother. 
05. Thou shalt not kill. 
06. Thou shalt not commit adultery. 
07. Thou shalt not steal. 
08. Thou shalt not bear false witness. 
09. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s wife. 
10. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s goods. 
The ten commandments are from the Old Testament (Exodus 20 and Deute-
ronomy 5). They express God’s will, and thus form the practical rules for 
morality. Jesus later taught that the deeper idea behind the commandments was 
to love God above all things and love our neighbor as ourselves (Matthew 
22:37–40). He also summed up the commandments in the golden rule, which 
says “Treat others as you want to be treated” (Matthew 7:12). 
 

 
Supernaturalism 27 
 
I must admit that religion didn’t mean much to me for many years. For a 
time, I was a “lost soul.” I did drugs and I stole money to support my drug 
habit. My life was going down the drain. But then I connected with a Christian 
group and had a religious conversion. Now God is a strong force in my life. To 
do the right thing is to follow his will. I believe this—and it helped me to get 
my life back in order. 
 
In my ethics course last semester, we took three secular approaches to 
morality. The first two based ethics on social approval and on personal feelings. 
These were the same things that led me into my drug habit; so I can testify, 
based on personal experience, that these two views can lead us to ruin. My 
teacher proposed, instead, that we do whatever a perfectly rational “ideal 
observer” would want us to do. This view is fine, but only if we add that God 
is the perfectly rational “ideal observer.” Otherwise, we’re only appealing to a 
vague hypothetical construct. 
 
My view, supernaturalism, sees moral judgments as religious statements: 
“X is good” means “God desires X.” 
 
What does “God” here mean? The usual definition is “the all-good, all-
powerful, all-knowing Creator of the world.” But this would make my defini-
tions circular (since I’d use “God” to define “good,” and then “good” to define 
“God”). It would also suggest that there are standards of goodness prior to 
God’s will (instead of God’s will creating the standards). So it’s better to define 
“God” as simply “the all-powerful, all-knowing Creator of the world.” 
 
I have three arguments for my view. My first argument presumes belief in 
the Bible. Given this belief, supernaturalism has to be true—because the Bible 
teaches it. The Bible always uses “good” as interchangeable with “what God 
desires.” And the account of God writing the ten commandments on stone 
tablets teaches SN in a vivid way. 
My second argument presumes belief in God. If you believe in God, then 
you believe that all basic laws of every sort depend on God’s will. But then all 
basic moral laws must depend on God’s will. So God created the moral order, 
and his will distinguishes right from wrong. 
 
My third argument presumes belief in an objective morality. If you accept 
that objective moral duties bind you, then you must admit a source of this 
obligation. This source could only be a non-person, or you, or other individu-
als, or society, or God. But the non-religious alternatives won’t work. The 
source of obligation can’t be: 
• 
a non-person—since these are inferior to persons and thus can’t 
impose obligations on persons; 
• 
you—since then you could release yourself from any obligation at 
will, and so you wouldn’t have binding obligations; 
• 
other individuals or society—since these have no moral authority over 
us if they tell us to do what is wrong. 
The only source of obligation that works is God. Thus belief in objective moral 
duties requires belief in God. This argument doesn’t presume belief in God, 
but it might lead to this belief. 

28 Ethics 
 
My three arguments presume, respectively, that you believe in the Bible, or 
in God, or in an objective morality. If you don’t believe in any of these, then I 
can’t argue with you. But you’re going to have a difficult time living your life if 
you don’t decide to believe in something! 
 
How does believing in the divine origin of values influence my life? I see 
three main influences. First, I regard morality as objective, and so I take it very 
seriously. Racist actions, for example, are objectively wrong, since God forbids 
them. So the duty to oppose racism is serious. Many supernaturalists are 
prepared to die in defense of their moral beliefs. I can’t see how you could take 
morality seriously if it were based only on personal feelings or social approval. 
 
Second, I connect morality closely with religion. So I have a strong religious 
motivation to be moral, and I follow a religious approach to moral education. 
One of the problems with the world today is that people try to teach morality 
without teaching religion—which won’t work. So people grow up without any 
firm values. 
 
Finally, I see atheists as confused about morality. At first I was perplexed 
that some atheists can accept morality and try to live moral lives. But someone 
explained to me that atheists first got their values from a religious source. They 
lost their religion but kept the values—even though the values make sense only 
on a religious basis. So atheists who accept morality are confused. Clearheaded 
atheists like Jean-Paul Sartre reject morality, saying that everything is permissi-
ble if there is no God. 
 
What are we supernaturalists like? My parish paper mentioned a survey 
where people described us. Some talked about us as “intolerant judgmental 
fundamentalists” who look for clear-cut answers from above instead of 
struggling with moral issues. Others described us as “deeply religious people” 
who see morality not as a set of abstract truths but as part of our personal 
relationship with a loving God. 
 
You shouldn’t overly generalize about us. Yes, some supernaturalists are 
judgmental—even though Jesus forbade this (see Matthew 7:1–5). But others 
see that, as sinners ourselves, we should avoid “casting the first stone” against 
another (see John 8:7). And yes, some have selfish motives, obeying God just 
to avoid punishment and gain reward. But others, responding in gratitude to 
God’s love, strive for an unselfish love toward God and neighbor. Since the 
Bible has to be understandable to a wide range of people, it appeals to both 
higher and lower motives. 
3.2 Knowing God’s will 
This is still Ima. I need another section to tell you how we can know God’s 
will. I’m sorry, but my view is more complicated than just doing what is socially 
approved or doing what you like. 
 
So how can we know God’s will? Supernaturalists differ on this. Four 
popular views say we can know God’s will through (1) the Bible, (2) the 
church, (3) prayer, or (4) reason. Another view says we can’t know God’s will. 

 
Supernaturalism 29 
 
First, there’s the Bible. I was brought up to believe that the Bible teaches 
clear-cut answers on all moral issues. But I’ve learned that there are many gray 
areas where people interpret the Bible differently. 
 
My grandfather had been a pacifist during the Vietnam War. He believed 
that it was wrong to kill a human for any reason, even self-defense. He took 
“Thou shalt not kill” and “Turn the other cheek” literally. But many of his 
friends thought it their duty to fight the “godless Communists.” They quoted 
Biblical passages urging the Israelites to conquer their enemies. So which side is 
right? Should a follower of the Bible be a pacifist or a militarist? And how do 
we decide this? I believe that we need to understand individual passages in the 
light of the Bible’s general message. People who try to do this may end up 
interpreting things differently. So the Bible leaves us with gray areas. And of 
course the Bible doesn’t directly address many issues. 
 
There’s also the problem of which religion and bible to follow. My Jewish, 
Islamic, and Mormon friends recognize different books as part of their scrip-
tures. But all religions have the same general message about God’s will, that 
God wants us to have concern and love for each other, and to treat others as 
we want to be treated. The details vary, but the general message is the same. 
 
Second, there’s the church. Many see their church as a moral authority. 
Some think that their church teaches an unchanging and infallibly true moral 
system, and that we must accept everything that it says. But history shows that 
church teaching has evolved over the years and sometimes has blind spots that 
need correction. My church mostly recognizes this. And so I don’t take my 
church as an infallible guide on right and wrong. Instead, I look at my church 
as I look at a wise teacher: I listen and try to learn—but in the end I may 
disagree on some details. 
 
Third, there’s prayer. Many pray to God for guidance, and then take their 
feelings as a sign of God’s will. I do this myself. But there’s a danger of 
confusing my likes and dislikes with God’s will. We’ve all seen religious fanatics 
who think God wants things that in fact are crazy and hateful. So we need 
input from the Bible and the church to help us to form our conscience. 
 
Fourth, there’s reason. Some follow their moral intuitions, which they see as 
implanted by God to help us to know his will. Others follow an ideal-observer 
method, where we try to become as God-like as possible (striving for know-
ledge and love) and then see what we desire; this gives us an idea of what God 
would desire. These approaches can be helpful, particularly if we add input 
from the Bible and the church. 
 
A final view is that we can’t know God’s will at all, since God is mysterious-
ly above our little minds. As Romans 11:34 asks, “Who has known the mind of 
the Lord?” I think there’s some truth here, but it’s horribly overstated. Surely 
we know some things about God’s will, even though we can’t be sure about all 
the details. I get angry with people who think they know all the details and 
won’t listen to anyone else. 
 
So how can we know God’s will? We need to combine all four sources: the 
Bible, the church, prayer, and reason. Where the sources speak clearly and in 
unison, our belief is very solid. So it’s clear that God wants us to have concern 
and love for each other, and to treat others as we want to be treated. It’s also 

30 Ethics 
clear that God opposes killing, stealing, and lying—and racism (which violates 
“Love thy neighbor”). But there are gray areas, like pacifism. Here we have to 
follow our prayer and reason as best we can, while we gain insight from the 
Bible and the church. In these gray areas, we should be less confident of our 
beliefs and more tolerant of opposing views. 
 
Let me highlight SN’s attractions. SN is popular among ordinary people; so 
it’s not a view that only a philosopher could love. It explains morality in a clear 
way. It makes morality objective; human values have to conform to a higher 
law. It can appeal to higher motives (unselfish love and gratitude to God) or to 
lower ones (punishments and rewards). And it makes morality part of our 
personal relationship with God. 
Reflect on how you react to this view. Do you have objections? 
3.3 Ethics and atheists 
Ima has given us a clear formulation of an important approach to morality. As 
a religious person, I agree with much of what she says. But I don’t think ethics 
and religion connect as closely as she claims. I don’t think that moral judg-
ments require belief in God, or that “X is good” means “God desires X.”  
One problem is that Ima’s view makes it impossible for atheists to make 
positive moral judgments. 
 
Imagine an atheist who says the following: 
Kindness is good, but there is no God. 
If “X is good” meant “God desires X,” then the claim in the box would be self-
contradictory (since it would mean “God desires kindness, but there is no 
God”). But the claim in the box isn’t self-contradictory. So “X is good” doesn’t 
mean “God desires X.” Or we might argue this way: 
 
If supernaturalism were true, then atheists couldn’t consistently 
make positive moral judgments. 
 
But atheists can consistently make positive moral judgments. 
Á  Supernaturalism isn’t true. 
My argument doesn’t presume any alternative view about what “good” means. 
But it does presume that our atheist friends aren’t contradicting themselves 
when they make positive moral judgments. 
 
Ima thinks that atheists with moral beliefs are contradicting themselves. 
Their moral beliefs presume God’s existence, which they reject. Her explana-
tion makes this seem more believable: “Atheists first got their values from a 
religious source. They lost their religion but kept the values—even though the 
values make sense only on a religious basis.” But not all atheists got their values 
from religion. Morality can grow up in an atheist society that has never taken 

 
Supernaturalism 31 
the existence of God seriously. It’s difficult to believe that such atheists by 
“good” mean “desired by God.” 
 
It’s also difficult to believe that our atheist friends use “good” this way. 
Imagine that you’re discussing a moral issue with an atheist friend. In the 
middle of the discussion, you suggest that you both stop using “good” and in 
its place use “desired by God.” Would this substitution change the discussion? 
It would probably end the discussion. The atheist surely doesn’t use the two 
expressions as equivalent in meaning. 
This suggests a somewhat different response to my argument. Ima might 
claim that believers and atheists mean different things by “good.” Believers 
mean “desired by God,” while atheists mean something else. On this response, 
atheists could make moral judgments even if they deny God’s existence. 
 
But this second response makes it difficult to see how believers and atheists 
can have fruitful moral discussions. If both sides mean something different by 
“good,” then they can’t really agree or disagree morally. If I say “This is good” 
(meaning “God desires this”) and the atheist says “This is good” (meaning 
something else), then we aren’t agreeing—other than verbally. 
 
I can have fruitful moral discussions with people even if I know nothing 
about their religion. For the most part, the discussion will go the same way 
regardless of religious beliefs. So believers and atheists seem to mean the same 
thing by “good.” But atheists surely don’t use “good” to mean “desired by 
God.” So, presumably, neither believers nor atheists mean this by “good.” 
 
So there are strong objections to SN—and we’ll see further objections in the 
next section. From a practical standpoint too, it would be better not to base 
ethics on something as controversial as religion. But a sufficiently determined 
supernaturalist could bite the bullet and hold to SN despite these objections. 
3.4 Socrates’s question 
Socrates, the first major philosopher of ancient Greece, was a religious person 
who tried to follow God’s will. He saw ethics as closely connected with 
religion. But he rejected SN, largely on the basis of a penetrating question. I’ll 
express his question in my own words. 
 
Let’s suppose that there is a God and that he desires all good things. We can 
ask this question: 
Is a good thing good because God desires it? 
Or does God desire it because it is good? 
Let’s assume that kindness is good and that God desires it. Which is based on 
which? Is kindness good because God desires it? Or does God desire kindness 
because it’s already good? 
 
Socrates and most other people take the second alternative. God desires 
kindness because he knows that it’s good. His desires don’t make it good. 
Instead, he wouldn’t desire it if it weren’t already good. But then kindness is 

32 Ethics 
good prior to and independently of God’s will. It would presumably be good 
even if there were no God. This alternative involves giving up SN. 
 
SN must take the first alternative. Here kindness is good because God desires 
it. Kindness wouldn’t be good if God didn’t desire it. Prior to God’s desires, 
kindness is neither good nor bad. This answer, while possible, seems to make 
ethics arbitrary. 
 
Here’s another example. Let’s assume that hatred is bad, and that God 
forbids it. Is hatred bad because God forbids it (so if he didn’t forbid it then it 
wouldn’t be bad)? Or does God forbid it because it’s already bad? This second 
alternative is more plausible, but it involves giving up supernaturalism. 
 
This point is subtle but important. If you don’t get the point, I suggest that 
you reread the last few paragraphs a few times until the idea comes through. 
 
This might surprise you, but relatively few Christian philosophers take a 
clear stand in favor of SN (that God’s will makes things good or bad). William 
of Ockham of the late Middle Ages was the most famous defender of SN. 
 
Suppose that we take the SN alternative (that God’s will makes things good 
or bad). We might then ask, “What if God desired hatred; would hatred then be 
good?” Ockham would have shouted, “Yes, if God desired hatred then hatred 
would be good!” But this is implausible. 
 
Imagine that an all-powerful and all-knowing being created a world and 
desired that its people hate each other. Would hatred then be good? Surely not! 
Such a creator would have an evil will. But then we can’t say that “good” by 
definition is what the creator desires. 
 
Some respond that God, being loving, wouldn’t desire hatred. The mere 
desires of a creator wouldn’t make a thing good; but the desires of a loving creator 
would make things good. But then wouldn’t the loving act be good regardless 
of whether the creator desired it? If so, then again we must reject SN. 
3.5 SN arguments 
Ima had three arguments for SN. Supernaturalism must be true, she thought, 
because 
1. 
the Bible teaches it, 
2. 
all basic laws of every sort depend on God’s will, and 
3. 
God is the only plausible source of objective moral duties. 
But these arguments fall apart if we examine them carefully. 
(1) “Supernaturalism must be true, because the Bible teaches it.” The prob-
lem here (even if we assume that what the Bible teaches must be true) is that 
the Bible doesn’t really teach SN. The Bible, properly understood, doesn’t take 
a stand for or against SN. 
 
Years ago, my Bible teacher cautioned me against using the Bible to answer 
questions that the Biblical authors didn’t ask and that wouldn’t have made 
immediate sense to them. The Biblical authors weren’t concerned with 
Socrates’s question. Nor would it have made immediate sense to them. Thus it 
seems illegitimate to use the Bible to prove SN. 

 
Supernaturalism 33 
 
The Bible teaches that we ought to obey God; but this is compatible with 
other approaches to ethics. Maybe we ought to obey God because his com-
mands reflect a deeper knowledge of an independent moral order. On this non-
SN view, stealing isn’t bad because God forbids it; instead, God forbids it 
because it’s already bad. This non-SN approach is consistent with the Bible; 
nothing in the Bible contradicts it. If so, then believing in the Bible doesn’t 
require that we be supernaturalists. 
(2) “Supernaturalism must be true, because all basic laws of every sort de-
pend on God’s will.” The problem here (even if we assume that there is a God) 
is that it’s doubtful that all basic laws depend on God’s will. Is “x = x” true 
because of God’s will, so it would have been false if God had willed otherwise? 
The law seems true of its very nature, and not true because God made it true. 
Maybe basic moral laws are the same. Maybe hatred is evil in itself, and not just 
evil because God made it so. 
(3) “Supernaturalism must be true, because God is the only plausible source 
of objective moral duties.” The problem here (even if we assume that there are 
objective moral duties) is that it’s doubtful that such duties need a source. To 
say that they need a source assumes that “A ought to be done” means some-
thing of the form “X legislates A.” But why accept this? Maybe basic moral 
truths (like the logical truth “x = x”) are true in themselves, and not true 
because someone made them true. Then they wouldn’t need a “source.” 
3.6 Ethics and religion 
How do ethics and religion connect? SN connects them with a definition: “X is 
good” means “God desires X.” But SN has problems, even from a religious 
standpoint. Most religious thinkers reject SN but still want a close connection 
between ethics and religion. Let me sketch one possible approach to this—an 
approach close to that of St Thomas Aquinas (an important Christian philoso-
pher of the Middle Ages—see Chapter 13). 
 
On the proposed view, God is a supremely good being. Calling God “good” 
doesn’t mean that he fulfills his own desires. Instead, it means that his life 
accords with inherent truths about goodness—for example, that love is good in 
itself and hatred is bad in itself. 
 
This view sees our origin and purpose in moral and religious terms. God 
created us so that our minds can know the good and our wills can freely choose 
it. God intends that our moral struggles purify us and lead us toward our 
ultimate goal, which is eternal happiness with him. In contrast, the atheistic 
view says that humans sprang up in a universe that’s ultimately indifferent to 
moral concerns—and that human life has no ultimate moral purpose. 
 
On this religious view, basic moral truths are true in themselves. Believers 
and atheists both can use their God-given reason to know these truths. But 
divine revelation about morality can be useful, since our minds are often 
clouded. And so God commands us, “Thou shalt not steal.” His command 
doesn’t make stealing wrong; rather, he commands us because stealing is already 
wrong. While reason can tell us that stealing is wrong, we also can learn this 

34 Ethics 
through the Bible, the church, or prayer. Atheists as well as believers can know 
moral truths; but believers have additional ways to arrive at the same truths. 
 
Believers also have additional motives for doing the right thing. An impor-
tant motive is gratitude to God and love for his creatures. Doing the right thing 
is thus linked to our personal relationship to God. 
 
Believers and non-believers will mostly come to the same moral beliefs, for 
example that stealing is wrong. But there may be differences. Believers will 
recognize a duty to worship God while non-believers won’t. And there may be 
differences about issues like mercy killing, based on differences in beliefs about 
the origin and destiny of our lives. 
 
This proposed view links ethics and religion closely, but it doesn’t base 
ethics totally on religion. Ethics could exist without religion, but it would be 
incomplete. My purpose here isn’t to defend or attack this view, but only to 
present it as an alternative to supernaturalism that is plausible from a religious 
standpoint. 
3.7 Chapter summary 
Supernaturalism holds that moral judgments describe God’s will: “X is good” 
means “God desires X.” God’s will creates the moral order. Ethics is based on 
religion. 
SN is defended as a Biblical teaching, as a consequence of belief in God 
(who is the source of all basic laws), and as the only plausible source of 
objectively binding duties. We can best know God’s will through combining 
four sources: the Bible, the church, prayer, and reason. 
 
SN, despite being initially plausible (at least to religious people), has some 
deep problems. SN seems to make it impossible for atheists to make positive 
moral judgments—an implausible result. And Socrates’s question raises further 
problems: “Is a good thing good because God desires it? Or does God desire it 
because it is good?” 
 
The arguments for SN fail if we examine them carefully. The Bible doesn’t 
teach SN; rather, it teaches that we ought to obey God—which might be 
defended on a non-SN basis. SN isn’t a consequence of belief in God; basic 
moral principles might be like the logical truth “x = x,” which is true in itself, 
and not true because God decided to make it true. Finally, there are ways to 
defend the objectivity of ethics that don’t base ethics on God’s will. 
 
Some are led to SN because they believe that ethics connects closely to 
religion. But it’s possible to connect the two closely, even without SN. 
3.8 Study questions 
If you don’t know an answer, go back to the section that deals with it. 
1. How does supernaturalism define “good”? What method does it follow 
for arriving at moral beliefs? 
2. How did Ima sum up Biblical teaching about God’s will? (3.1) 

 
Supernaturalism 35 
3. What did Ima think of the three secular approaches to ethics (cultural 
relativism, subjectivism, and the ideal-observer view) that she studied in 
her ethics course? 
4. How did Ima define “God”? How did she avoid the danger of circular 
definitions? 
5. What were Ima’s three arguments for accepting SN? 
6. In what three ways did SN affect Ima’s life? 
7. Some think supernaturalists are “intolerant judgmental fundamentalists.” 
How did Ima respond to this charge? 
8. What problems did Ima mention about taking the Bible as the sole source 
of our knowledge about God’s will? (3.2) 
9. What problems did she mention about taking the church as the sole 
source of our knowledge about God’s will? 
10. How did Ima say that we might know God’s will by appealing to prayer 
or reason? 
11. How did Ima think we can best know God’s will? 
12. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to supernaturalism. 
Does it seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike about it? Can 
you think of any way to show that it’s false? 
13. Explain the argument against SN based on the idea that atheists can make 
positive moral judgments? How could Ima respond? (3.3) 
14. What was Socrates’s question about supernaturalism? Explain the two 
possible answers. (3.4) 
15. How could Ima’s three arguments for supernaturalism be criticized? (3.5) 
16. The book sketches a non-SN view about how ethics and religion connect. 
On this view, how would believers and atheists differ on (a) our origin 
and purpose, (b) our knowledge of moral truths, and (c) our motivation 
for leading moral lives? (3.6) 
3.9 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 03—Supernaturalism.” Also do “Ethics 03v—Vocabulary for 0–3” and 
“Ethics 03r—Review of 0–3.” 
 
For a short discussion of Ockham’s supernaturalist ethics, see pages xlviii–l 
of Philosophical Writings of William of Ockham. For a contemporary defense of 
supernaturalism, see Quinn’s Divine Commands and Moral Requirements. For a 
debate between myself and a colleague, see my “Is God the source of morali-
ty?” (I say no). Socrates’s question about supernaturalism is in Plato’s Euthyphro 
dialogue. Sartre (in his Existentialism and Human Emotions) and Mackie (in his 
Ethics) are atheists who think an objective ethics is possible only if it’s based on 
God’s will. For St Thomas Aquinas’s view, see his Treatise on Law (Questions  
90–97 of Part I–II of his Summa Theologica). For a good sourcebook for 
Christian philosophy, see my The Sheed & Ward Anthology of Catholic Philosophy. 
The Bibliography at the end of the book has information on how to find these 
works. 
 
 

36 Ethics 
4 Intuitionism 
 
Intuitionism: 
“Good” is indefinable. There are objective moral truths. 
Pick your moral principles by following your basic moral 
intuitions. 
Intuitionism says that “good” is an indefinable notion. There are objective 
moral truths that don’t depend on human thinking or feeling. And the basic 
truths of morality, like the basic truths of mathematics, are self-evident to a 
mature mind. 
 
We’ll begin by listening to the fictional Ima Intuitionist explain his belief in 
intuitionism. Then we’ll consider objections. 
4.1 Ima Intuitionist 
My name is Ima Intuitionist. I’ve embraced intuitionism as I’ve come to see 
that morality is objective and that the basic moral truths are already present 
inside of us, in our own minds. 
 
I’m a philosophy major and intend to go to law school. So I’m interested in 
ethics and reasoning. While I’ve read much philosophy, I’ve also found much 
wisdom in the simple truths of common sense. 
 
My favorite philosophers are the early twentieth-century British thinkers, 
G.E. Moore and W.D. Ross. They explained and defended commonsense 
morality. Their view, and mine, is called intuitionism. It makes three claims: 
• 
“Good” is indefinable, 
• 
there are objective moral truths, and 
• 
the basic moral truths are self-evident to a mature mind. 
I’ll try to explain what these mean and why we should accept them. 
 
Moore started with a simple question: What does the word “good” mean? 
This question is the key to understanding morality. If we answer it wrongly, 
we’ll get everything wrong. So what does “good” mean? The answer, simply, is 
that “good” means “good.” We can’t define “good.” “Good” is a simple idea, 
and we can’t break it down into simpler ideas. 

 
Intuitionism 37 
 
You may be thinking, “Surely all ideas are definable—and so ‘good’ must be 
definable.” But, sorry, that’s wrong. There must be indefinable ideas; we can’t 
define every term without circularity. Suppose that we look up a word in the 
dictionary, and the word is defined using other words, and these are defined 
using still other words, and so on. Now there’s only a limited number of words. 
So if we exclude circular definitions, then we’ll eventually find words that we 
can’t define further. 
 
A nice example of an indefinable idea is the term “not.” We can’t define 
“not” using anything simpler. “Not” is a simple building block that we use to 
define other ideas. Saying that an idea is indefinable doesn’t mean that it’s 
difficult or obscure (“not” is neither of these), but just that it can’t be broken 
down further. 
 
I claim that “good,” like “not,” is a simple indefinable idea. Some philoso-
phers disagree with this, and try to define “good.” Some say that “good” means 
“socially approved.” Others say that it means “liked,” “pleasant,” or even 
“desired by God.” But these ideas are different from “good.” “Good” simply 
means “good.” 
 
Moore had an argument to refute any proposed definition of “good.” Let 
me show how it works. Some of my superficial friends are attracted to this 
definition: 
“Good” means “socially approved.” 
Every definition has two parts—the left part (the term defined) and the right 
part (the equivalent expression). A definition claims that the two parts are 
interchangeable in normal speech: we can substitute one for the other without 
changing the meaning. We can test a definition by asking if one part necessarily 
applies whenever the other does. Here we’d ask, “Are socially approved things 
necessarily good?” The answer is a clear “no”—which refutes the definition. 
It’s easy to imagine some bad things being socially approved. For our argu-
ment, it need only be consistent to imagine things that aren’t good being socially 
approved. Since this clearly is consistent, the definition is wrong. 
Moore’s argument can refute any definition of “good.” Suppose that some-
one defines “X is good” as “I desire X.” We should ask, “Are things that I 
desire necessarily good?” The answer clearly is “no,” which refutes the 
definition. We can refute other definitions of “good” in a similar way. The 
general strategy is this: if someone claims that “good” means “such and such” 
(where this represents some descriptive term), ask “Are things that are such 
and such necessarily good?” Since the answer is “no,” the definition is refuted. 
 
Naturalism is the view that “good” can be defined using ideas from sense 
experience (like “socially approved” or “desired”). Moore’s argument refutes 
naturalism; but it also works against supernaturalism. All these views confuse 
evaluative with non-evaluative terms. Calling a thing “socially approved” (or 
whatever) puts it in a descriptive category; asking whether it’s “good” asks 
about its value, which is different. 

38 Ethics 
Since “good” is indefinable, we can’t prove moral conclusions from non-
moral premises alone. This result is called Hume’s law (after the eighteenth-
century philosopher David Hume). It says that we can’t deduce an “ought” 
from an “is.” In other words, we need a moral premise to deduce a moral 
conclusion. So this reasoning is incorrect (since it would work only if we could 
define “ought” using social approval): 
 
Society demands that you do such and such. 
Á  You ought to do such and such. 
This is bad reasoning, because it’s consistent to affirm the premises and deny 
the conclusion. And the same thing goes if we substitute other descriptive 
premises. 
 
Hume’s law shows that we can’t prove moral truths from descriptive facts 
alone. We can’t give facts about society (or evolution, or God, or desires, or 
whatever)—and then from these alone logically deduce a moral conclusion. We 
could always consistently accept the facts and yet reject the moral conclusion. It 
follows that neither science nor religion can establish the basic principles of 
morality. 
4.2 Objective truths 
This is still Ima. I need another section to explain my claim that there are 
objective moral truths—moral truths that don’t depend on human thinking or 
feeling. 
 
“Hatred is wrong” is an example of an objective moral truth. The wrongness 
of hatred doesn’t depend on what anyone may think or feel. Hatred is wrong in 
itself. It would still be wrong even if everyone approved of it. “Hatred is 
wrong” is a necessary truth, just like “x = x” or “2+2 = 4.” 
 
The belief in objective values is common sense. In our lives, we all assume 
that there’s a correct answer to moral questions, that there’s a truth to be 
discovered about right and wrong. But some, in their theories, deny objective 
values. They say, for example, that good and bad depend on what we like 
(subjectivism) or on what is socially approved (cultural relativism). But Moore’s 
arguments refute their views. 
 
I can’t prove to you that values are objective any more than I can prove to 
you that there’s a real world out there (and that we aren’t just dreaming or 
hallucinating). Both beliefs are part of common sense, are clearly true, and need 
no proof. Let those who deny objective moral truths try to prove their case; I 
will refute their arguments. 
 
And so I contend that the basic moral truths are necessary truths—things 
that are true of their very nature and that couldn’t have been false. Let me add 
that this objective approach, while philosophically traditional, is politically 
radical. People who start revolutions are usually convinced of the objective 
wrongness of the current situation. 

 
Intuitionism 39 
4.3 Self-evident truths 
This is still Ima. I need another section to explain how we can know moral 
truths. My explanation is simple: we look within and follow the principles that 
seem most clearly self-evident to our minds. In a dispute, we defend our moral 
judgments by appealing to moral principles that are more basic. When we get 
to a rock-bottom principle, we can’t defend it further. At this point, we see the 
principle or we don’t. 
Intuitionism is the commonsense approach. Relatively few people speak 
explicitly of “moral intuitions” or “self-evident moral truths.” But many people 
appeal to moral principles that they take to be objective but not further 
provable or justifiable. Such people assume an intuitionist approach to 
morality, even though they might not call it that. 
 
As a future lawyer, I admire the American Declaration of Independence, 
which started the American Revolution and lays down a firm and objective 
foundation for government. This document appeals to self-evident truths as 
the foundation for morality: 
We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created 
equal, that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unaliena-
ble Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of 
Happiness. 
Note the objective language. The right to liberty is a self-evident truth. It isn’t 
just something that we personally like, or that our culture approves of. Morality 
is based on objective truths that are present inside of us, in our own minds and 
reason. Any mature person should be able to grasp the basic moral truths. 
 
A self-evident truth (or first principle) is a known truth that requires no 
further proof or justification. If you think about it, you’ll see that morality has 
to be based on self-evident truths. Let’s assume that (1) some moral truths are 
known, (2) we can only prove a moral truth by appealing to a more basic moral 
truth, and (3) our proofs can’t continue forever. It follows that (4) the basic 
moral truths are known but not provable—they are self-evident truths. 
I see only two ways to evade this reasoning. Premise (1) would be rejected 
by skeptics; they deny moral knowledge just as they deny our knowledge of the 
external world. But sensible people believe in common sense rather than in 
skeptics. Premise (2) would be denied by those who define “good” using 
descriptive ideas like “socially approved”; they say we can deduce moral truths 
from descriptive facts alone. But Moore’s argument refutes such views and 
establishes Hume’s law, which shows that we need a moral premise to deduce a 
moral conclusion. 
 
Our opponents often misinterpret intuitionism. Some of them picture us as 
claiming that all moral truths are self-evident, that to resolve a moral issue you 
just sit down and have a moral intuition. But nothing could be further from the 
truth. We hold that only basic moral principles are self-evident. To apply these 
basic principles to concrete problems requires further information. It’s never 
just self-evident what we ought to do in a concrete situation. 

40 Ethics 
 
What moral truths are self-evident? The great intuitionists Moore and Ross 
accepted two kinds of self-evident moral truth. First, there are truths about 
what is intrinsically good (good in itself, abstracting from further conse-
quences). Here Moore and Ross agreed: it’s self-evident that pleasure, know-
ledge, and virtue are intrinsically good—while pain, ignorance, and vice are 
intrinsically bad. A specific pleasure might have painful consequences, and so 
be bad in the final account; but still the pleasure aspect of it is good. “Pleasure 
is intrinsically better than pain” is as self-evident as anything could ever be. 
 
Moore and Ross also accepted self-evident truths about duty; but here they 
disagreed. Moore thought it self-evident that we ought to do whatever max-
imizes good consequences for everyone. To determine our duty in a concrete 
case, we have to (1) determine our options, (2) determine the consequences of 
each option, and (3) evaluate which consequences are best. Steps (1) and (2) 
involve ordinary knowledge. Step (3) applies self-evident truths about intrinsic 
goodness—for example, that pleasure is intrinsically good. So we can’t just sit 
down and have a self-evident intuition about what we ought to do. Instead, we 
must study options and consequences, and then appraise the consequences. 
 
Ross rejected Moore’s consequentialist approach. Ross claimed as self-
evident a whole set of moral rules; other things being equal, we ought to keep 
our promises, not harm others, and so forth. I don’t want to discuss this 
dispute now. [It will be dealt with in Chapters 10 and 11.] I’ll just note that 
intuitionists sometimes disagree about what moral principles are self-evident. 
The final appeal is to our intuition—to what seems true to us; but we must first 
carefully examine the alternatives. On the basis of moral intuitions, I’d argue 
that Ross’s view is better than Moore’s. 
 
Some of our opponents oppose intuitionism, because they think self-evident 
truths would have to be present from birth and universally agreed upon—while 
moral principles are neither. But this is a misunderstanding. 
 
Let’s see how self-evident principles work in math. Consider this principle: 
x+y = y+x 
This is plausible initially and remains plausible if we try concrete values for “x” 
and “y.” For example, if we substitute “2” and “5” for “x” and “y,” then we get 
“2+5 = 5+2,” which simplifies to the true “7 = 7.” So we find, after examina-
tion, that the formula fits our mathematical intuitions. So we regard it as a self-
evident truth. 
This principle also is plausible initially: 
−(x Â y) = (−x Â −y) 
But we get wrong results if we substitute “2” for “x” and “y.” We get “−(2 Â 2) 
= (−2 Â −2),” which simplifies to the false “−4 = +4.” So we reject the 
formula, since it clashes with our mathematical intuitions. 

 
Intuitionism 41 
 
These examples teach us two things. First, we can be mistaken in taking 
something to be a self-evident truth. We need to investigate whether a principle 
that sounds good has absurd implications. 
 
Second, self-evident truths needn’t be present from birth or universally 
agreed upon. Our formula “x+y = y+x” is neither of these. Babies and the 
uneducated won’t grasp it, since they lack mathematical sophistication. Moral 
principles work the same way. 
To arrive at self-evident principles, whether in math or in morality, requires 
reflection and intellectual maturity. The test of such principles isn’t their initial 
plausibility, but whether a careful examination uncovers implications that clash 
with our intuitions. 
 
And so I claim that we have self-evident principles in ethics just as we have 
them in math. To the mature mind, “Pleasure is intrinsically better than pain” is 
as self-evident as “x+y = y+x.” Both are clear to almost any reflective, 
intelligent adult who has studied the matter. So there’s no reason to trust our 
minds in one area but not the other. 
 
Before closing, I should say something about moral education. We take a 
commonsense approach. Parents and other adults should know the basic truths 
about right and wrong. They should teach these truths to children by their own 
example, by verbal instruction, by praise and blame, and by reward and 
punishment. Moral education is difficult because children are swayed so easily 
by their feelings and by peer pressures; we have to struggle against these. 
Eventually, we hope, our children will grow up and become mature enough to 
recognize in their own hearts and minds the truth of the principles that we 
taught them. 
Reflect on how you react to this view. Do you have objections? 
4.4 Objections 
Ima has given us a clear formulation of an important approach to morality. I 
agree with much of what he says. Along with most philosophers today, I agree 
that “good” can’t be defined using descriptive ideas. I also agree that there are 
objective moral truths—even though this is more disputed; we’ll consider 
contrary views in the next two chapters. But the weakest part of Ima’s view, in 
my opinion, is how he bases moral knowledge on moral intuitions and self-
evident truths. 
 
Ima says that we know the basic principles of math and of morality in the 
same way. Both are evident to the mature mind but need no proof. Is there any 
reason to trust our minds in one area but not the other? Unfortunately, there is. 
In math, the principles are precise and largely agreed on by the experts. In ethics, 
the principles are vague and widely disputed. 
 
First, consider precision. The mathematical “x+y = y+x” uses precise, 
abstract terms and is exceptionless. By contrast, the moral “Pleasure is intrinsi-
cally good” uses vague ideas and has many exceptions. What exactly is plea-
sure? To see that the idea is vague, set the timer on your watch to go off every 

42 Ethics 
hour. When it goes off, ask yourself “Am I experiencing pleasure now, and, if 
so, how much?” Often you’ll be perplexed on how to answer. Also, the 
principle needs qualifications. Is pleasure over the misfortune of another 
intrinsically good? Surely not. We can only say that pleasure is normally intrinsi-
cally good. So most moral principles are vague and have exceptions. In this 
they are very unlike mathematical principles. 
 
Next consider agreement. Reflective, intelligent people who have studied 
math almost universally accept “x+y = y+x.” By contrast, reflective, intelligent 
people who have studied ethics disagree widely about basic moral principles. In 
ethics, what seems self-evident to one person may seem absurd to another. 
 
Intuitionists themselves disagree about which moral principles are self-
evident. (1) Some accept one big rule about duty. Of these, some prefer a rule 
like Moore’s, that we ought to do whatever maximizes good consequences for 
everyone. Others take egoism to be self-evident, that we ought to do whatever 
maximizes good consequences for ourselves. (2) Some take a set of rules about 
duty to be self-evident. Some hold exceptionless rules—for example, that 
killing a human fetus is always wrong, or that killing a human fetus is always 
permissible. Ross takes as self-evident only weaker principles that hold other 
things being equal; he rejects exceptionless principles. There are many disputes 
about these principles. (3) Some take as self-evident only concrete judgments of 
duty, that in this concrete situation I ought to do such and such. 
Moral intuitions come largely from social conditioning. The norms we were 
taught as children become our “moral intuitions” later on. If we’re brought up 
in a racist society, then we’ll likely have racist intuitions. Since moral intuitions 
vary so much between cultures, it’s hard to imagine that they’re a reliable guide 
to an objective moral truth. The situation is different in math, since reflective, 
intelligent people of all cultures who have studied math almost universally 
accept principles like “x+y = y+x” and “x = x.” 
 
Intuitionism can lead to an early stalemate on moral issues. Consider people 
who were brought up in a Nazi society. It may seem “self-evident” to them that 
Jews ought to be treated poorly—while it seems “self-evident” to us that all 
people ought to be treated with respect. Intuitionism can’t carry the argument 
any further. How is this better than subjectivism? Despite the appearance of 
rationality, intuitionism isn’t much different in practice from subjectivism. 
 
Consider Ima’s approach to moral education. He wants us to teach our 
children whatever principles seem self-evident to us. We can teach principles by 
parental example, verbal instruction, and reward and punishment. This is fine 
but incomplete, since the same methods can teach bigotry. Our parental 
example can teach that Jews are to be hated; and we can praise our children 
when they follow our example and punish them when they act kindly toward 
Jews. If such moral training succeeds, our children will end up internalizing 
Nazi values. It will seem “self-evident” to them that Jews ought to be hated. 
 
We need some rational way to criticize our inherited moral intuitions. 
Intuitionism doesn’t tell us how to do this—or how to distinguish “genuine” 
from “apparent” moral intuitions. 

 
Intuitionism 43 
4.5 Reconstruction 
Intuitionism tells us to pick our moral principles by following our basic moral 
intuitions. We saw problems with this. But suppose that we still believe in 
irreducible, objective moral truths. Is there any other way that we could know 
such truths—a way that doesn’t just appeal to moral intuitions? Could perhaps 
some other approach help us to criticize our inherited moral intuitions and to 
arrive at objective moral knowledge? 
 
I can suggest two possibilities. We could search more deeply for moral 
principles that are precise and almost universally accepted among intelligent 
people who have studied ethics. Or we could get help from the method used in 
the ideal-observer view (see Chapter 2). We’ll explore both possibilities later, in 
Chapters 7 to 9. 
 
Or perhaps we should throw out the idea of objective moral truths—and 
instead try to build ethics on a different basis. The next two chapters suggest 
ways to do this. 
4.6 Chapter summary 
Intuitionism makes three claims: (1) “Good” is indefinable, (2) there are 
objective moral truths, and (3) the basic moral truths are self-evident to a 
mature mind. Let me explain these claims. 
(1) “Good” is a simple, indefinable notion. Suppose that someone defines 
“good” as “socially approved.” We should ask, “Are socially approved things 
necessarily good?” The answer clearly is “no,” which refutes the definition. We 
can refute other definitions of “good” in a similar way. Since “good” is 
indefinable, we can’t prove moral conclusions from non-moral premises alone. 
(2) There are objective moral truths—moral truths that don’t depend on 
human thinking or feeling. “Hatred is wrong” is an example. Hatred is wrong 
in itself. It would still be wrong even if everyone approved of it. It’s an 
objective truth that hatred is wrong. 
 
(3) The basic moral principles are self-evident truths—known truths that 
require no further proof or justification. To apply these to concrete actions 
requires further information; it’s never self-evident what we ought to do in a 
concrete situation. To arrive at the self-evident principles of morality requires 
reflection and intellectual maturity. The test of such principles isn’t their initial 
plausibility, but whether a careful examination uncovers implications that clash 
with our intuitions. 
 
Intuitionism, despite its initial plausibility, has some problems. In math, 
principles claimed to be self-evident are precise and largely agreed on by the 
experts. In ethics, principles claimed to be self-evident are vague and widely 
disputed. Intuitionists themselves disagree widely about what is self-evident. 
Moral intuitions come largely from social conditioning and vary greatly 
between cultures. So it’s hard to believe that such intuitions are a reliable guide 
to objective moral truths. And appealing to intuitions can lead to an early 
stalemate on moral issues—as when we argue with someone who has racist 
intuitions. 

44 Ethics 
4.7 Study questions 
If you don’t know an answer, go back to the section that deals with it. 
1. How does intuitionism define “good”? What method does it follow for 
arriving at moral principles? 
2. Why must there be indefinable terms? What example did Ima give of an 
indefinable term? (4.1) 
3. Consider the subjectivist definition, that “X is good” means “I like X.” 
How would Moore argue against it? 
4. Consider the supernaturalist definition, that “X is good” means “The 
creator of the world desires X.” How would Moore argue against it? 
5. What is Hume’s law? Why would it show that neither science nor religion 
can establish basic moral principles? 
6. Explain Ima’s claim that there are objective moral truths. Why does he 
believe in such truths? (4.2) 
7. What is a self-evident truth? How did Ima argue that morality must be 
based on self-evident truths? (4.3) 
8. Why can’t we decide what we ought to do in a concrete situation by just 
sitting down and having a moral intuition? 
9. Give an example of a principle about intrinsic goodness that Moore and 
Ross both took to be self-evident. 
10. What principles of duty did Moore take to be self-evident? What 
principles of duty did Ross take to be self-evident? 
11. Do self-evident principles have to be present from birth and universally 
agreed upon? Talk about “x+y = y+x.” 
12. Should we accept as self-evident any principle that seems initially 
plausible to us? Talk about “−(x Â y) = (−x Â −y).” 
13. What approach did Ima take to moral education? 
14. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to intuitionism. Does it 
seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike about it? Can you 
think of any way to show that it’s false? 
15. In what two ways are basic principles of math claimed to be unlike basic 
principles of morality? (4.4) 
16. Do intuitionists agree about what moral principles are self-evident? Give 
some examples of such disagreements. 
17. Explain how moral intuitions are claimed to come from social condition-
ing—and how appealing to moral intuitions can lead to a stalemate in  
arguing with a racist. 
18. What objection is made to Ima’s approach to moral education? 
19. What two ways are suggested for reconstructing intuitionism? (4.5) 
4.8 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 04—Intuitionism.” 
This chapter discusses descriptive naturalism (the view that “good” is definable 
using ideas from sense experience). Some instead defend reforming naturalism 

 
Intuitionism 45 
(that our ordinary “good” is confused and ought to be redefined using ideas 
from sense experience) or metaphysical naturalism (that goodness is identical to 
some property that comes from sense experience). 
The classic defenses of intuitionism are Moore’s Principia Ethica (especially 
the preface and first chapter) and Ross’s The Right and the Good. Some philoso-
phers of a broadly intuitionist perspective think we grasp moral truths by a kind 
of perception that resembles sense experience; Werner’s “Ethical realism” is an 
example. An exact statement of Hume’s law requires various qualifications; see 
page 67 of Gensler’s Formal Ethics. The Bibliography at the end of the book has 
information on how to find these works. 
 
 

46 Ethics 
5 Emotivism 
 
Emotivism: 
“X is good” is an emotional exclamation (not a truth 
claim), and means “Hurrah for X!” 
Pick your moral principles by following your feelings. 
Emotivism says that moral judgments express positive or negative feelings. “X 
is good” is equivalent to the exclamation “Hurrah for X!”—and hence can’t be 
true or false. So there can’t be moral truths or moral knowledge. 
 
We’ll begin by listening to the fictional Ima Emotivist explain her belief in 
emotivism. Then we’ll take objections. 
5.1 Ima Emotivist 
My name is Ima Emotivist. I’ve embraced emotivism as I’ve learned that moral 
judgments express only feelings, and not true or false judgments. 
Let me tell you how I came to emotivism. I’m a double-major in philosophy 
and chemistry, with a special interest in philosophy of science. The British A.J. 
Ayer is my favorite philosopher. Like Ayer, I respect the scientific method, 
which I see as the only way to gain knowledge about the world. Scientific 
method has you propose a view and then do experiments to see if your view is 
correct. A view must be testable by sense experience—or else it makes no 
sense. This is the idea behind Ayer’s logical positivism philosophy. 
I’m oversimplifying here. To be more precise, I must bring in technical 
terms; I hope I don’t bore you. Logical positivism holds that only two types of 
statement make genuine truth claims (claims that are true or false). First, there 
are empirical statements; these can in principle be shown by our sense expe-
rience to be true or at least highly probable. Second, there are analytic state-
ments; these are true because of the meaning of words. Here are examples: 
Empirical (testable by 
sense experience): 
“It’s snowing outside.” 
Analytic (true by defini-
tion): 
“All bachelors are single.” 

 
Emotivism 47 
The empirical statement can be tested by sense experience; you go outside and 
look for snow. The analytic statement is true by definition, since we use 
“bachelor” to mean “single man”; so we don’t need to study bachelors to see 
that the statement is true. In general, science is empirical while mathematics is 
analytic. I hope you get the idea. 
Logical positivism claims that any genuine truth claim is either empirical 
(testable by sense experience) or analytic (true by definition). If your statement 
isn’t one of these, then it’s meaningless. Let me give an example. Suppose that 
you say “True reality is spiritual”—but your claim isn’t empirical (testable by 
sense experience) or analytic (true by definition). Then you aren’t saying 
anything that could be true or false. You may perhaps be expressing feelings. 
But you aren’t making a truth claim if what you say isn’t empirical or analytic. 
How would logical positivism apply to ethics? Is ethics empirical? Can “X is 
good,” like chemistry statements, be tested by sense experience? It seems not. 
We should perhaps slow down here. Naturalism claims that “good” can be 
defined using ideas from sense experience. For example, cultural relativism 
defines “good” as “socially approved.” If this definition worked, then “X is 
good” would be a genuine empirical statement; we could test its truth by testing 
whether X was socially approved. So this definition would make ethics a 
branch of sociology. Unfortunately, however, such definitions don’t work. 
“Good” in our language doesn’t mean “socially approved,” since it’s consistent 
to say that some socially approved things aren’t good. This point should be 
familiar if you know about Moore’s famous refutation of naturalism. 
So moral judgments aren’t empirical; moral principles can’t be proved or 
disproved by sense experience. Are they analytic (true by definition)? It seems 
not. So moral judgments are neither empirical nor analytic. It follows that they 
express not genuine truth claims but at most our feelings about things. 
This is Ayer’s reasoning, and I think it’s solid. If we have a scientific attitude, 
then we’re inescapably led to the emotivist approach to ethics. 
However, the scientific attitude isn’t the only road to emotivism. My boy-
friend is an English major and cares nothing about science. But he loved 
emotivism when I explained it to him. He said that making “good” emotional 
brought it closer to the realm of poetry (his true love) and away from “cold, 
impersonal science.” He liked emotivism right away and didn’t even want to 
hear my reasoning in defense of it. 
5.2 
 “Good” is emotional 
This is still Ima. I need another section to clarify what emotivism holds. 
Emotivism sees a moral judgment as an expression of feeling, not a state-
ment that’s literally true or false. Moral judgments are exclamations: “X is 
good” means “Hurrah for X!”—and “X is bad” means “Boo on X!” An 
exclamation doesn’t state a fact, and isn’t true or false. Since moral judgments 
are exclamations, there can’t be moral truths or moral knowledge. 
Don’t take “hurrah” and “boo” literally. English has many words to express 
positive or negative feelings. Instead of “boo,” we could say “hiss,” “yeech,” or 
“tsk tsk”; or we might shake our finger in disapproval. These express different 

48 Ethics 
shades of feeling and fit different contexts. There might not be any English 
exclamation exactly equivalent to “bad” (although we could invent one if we 
wished). The main point is that “bad” expresses negative feelings, as does 
“boo,” and functions like an exclamation. 
Don’t confuse our view with subjectivism. We hold that moral judgments 
express feelings but don’t assert truths about feelings. These examples may 
make my distinction clearer: 
Just express feelings (emotivism): 
“Brrr!” 
“Ha, ha!” 
“Wow!” 
“Hurrah for X!” 
Truths about feelings (subjectivism): 
“I feel cold.” 
“I find that funny.” 
“I’m impressed.” 
“I like X.” 
Suppose that you say “Brrr!” as you shiver in the cold. Your “Brrr!” isn’t 
literally true or false; it would be out of place to respond to it by saying “That’s 
true.” Now suppose that you say “I feel cold.” Here you’re saying something 
true—since you do feel cold. A moral judgment is like “Brrr!” (which just 
expresses your feelings), and not like “I feel cold” (which is a truth claim about 
your feelings). 
This distinction lets us avoid some problems that subjectivism has. Suppose 
that Hitler, who likes the killing of Jews, says “The killing of Jews is good.” On 
subjectivism, Hitler’s statement is true (since it just means that he likes the 
killing of Jews). This is bizarre. We think Hitler’s statement is an exclamation 
(“Hurrah for the killing of Jews!”), and thus not true or false. We can’t say that 
Hitler’s moral judgment is false; but at least we don’t have to say that it’s true. 
While moral judgments express our personal feelings, they also have social 
functions. We often use moral judgments to influence people’s emotions and to 
stimulate action. For example, I say to my baby sister, “It’s good to pick up our 
toys.” I’m trying to get her to have positive feelings about picking up her 
toys—and to act accordingly. 
Sometimes we use moral judgments to influence ourselves. When the alarm 
went off this morning, I had to get up for chemistry lab; but I felt like staying 
in bed. So I said to myself, “It’s good to get up now!” This is like saying, 
“Hurrah for getting up now!” Part of me is a cheerleader, trying to influence 
the other part. Deep inside of me, different emotions fight for supremacy. To 
take another example, I sometimes feel like being nasty to someone, but part of 
me says “That’s bad—boo!” 
Before closing this section, let me give you another strong argument for my 
approach. Emotivism is better than the other views because it’s simpler and 
explains more of the facts. In philosophy, as in science, a view is better if it’s 
simpler and explains more. 
First, emotivism explains morality more simply. Evaluative judgments ex-
press positive or negative feelings. What could be simpler? We don’t bring in 
things that are difficult to defend. Supernaturalists have to defend belief in 
God—with all the difficulties that that has. And intuitionists have to defend 

 
Emotivism 49 
objective, irreducible moral facts. Suppose that you’re a materialist; you hold 
that all facts about the universe are ultimately expressible in the language of 
physics and chemistry. How do objective, irreducible moral facts fit into such a 
universe? Are moral facts composed of chemicals, or what sort of weird thing 
are they? And how could we ever know such mysterious facts? Emotivism 
avoids these problems and thus explains morality more simply. 
Second, emotivism explains more of the facts about morality. The reason we 
can’t define “good” in purely descriptive terms is that “good” is emotional. The 
reason we can’t resolve basic moral differences intellectually is that these 
differences are emotional (and so not purely intellectual). The reason we differ 
so much in our moral beliefs is that we feel differently about things. Once we 
accept emotivism, morality becomes more understandable. 
Finally, emotivism accurately explains what we mean by “good” and “bad.” 
Yesterday I was at a restaurant with my boyfriend. Just for fun, we switched 
from “good” to “hurrah,” and from “bad” to “boo.” It felt funny at first, but it 
made sense. We could express everything that we wanted to say. And we didn’t 
feel that we changed what we were talking about (as we would if we switched 
from “good” to “socially approved” or “desired by God”). So emotivism is 
accurate linguistically. If you doubt this, try the same experiment yourself; but 
don’t be surprised if the waiter gives you a funny look. 
5.3 Moral reasoning 
This is still Ima. I need a third section to explain to you how emotivism handles 
moral reasoning. 
We can reason about moral issues if we assume a system of norms. We can 
then appeal to empirical facts to show that, given these norms and these 
empirical facts, such and such a moral conclusion follows. Suppose that we all 
feel that lying is wrong; we can then appeal to empirical facts (that the president 
lied) to establish a moral conclusion (that the president acted wrongly). This 
kind of reasoning can be useful within a group that shares common norms. 
We can’t reason about basic moral principles. We can use emotional means at 
this point—but not reason. Imagine that you’re arguing with a Nazi. You’ll 
likely disagree on some basic moral principle. Maybe you hold that all races are 
to be treated with respect, while he thinks his race is to be treated better. We 
see this as a difference in feelings, while intuitionists see it as a difference in 
moral intuitions. But neither view can progress further by reasoning. So 
intuitionism has no practical advantage over emotivism. Instead, emotivism has 
the advantage, since it shows that we can go further by appealing not to reason 
but to emotion. To convince the Nazi, we have to make him feel differently 
about other races. We have to change his hatred and hostility into feelings of 
friendship or toleration. 
Reason in ethics has the role of helping us to get our facts straight; then our 
feelings take over. This is how everyone makes moral judgments anyway, 
regardless of the person’s theory. So to influence someone’s basic moral beliefs 
requires emotional means. 

50 Ethics 
With moral education too, we take the same approach as intuitionists, except 
that we talk about feelings instead of truths. As parents, we should first get 
clear on our feelings about how to live; then we can teach these to our children 
by personal example, verbal instruction, praise and blame, and reward and 
punishment. If our teaching succeeds, our children will share our feelings about 
how to live. But nothing prevents them from changing their feelings later on. 
People sometimes claim that emotivism would destroy morality and the 
moral life. But this is mistaken. We emotivists for the most part live out our 
values in the same way as do intuitionists. The difference is that we don’t think 
there’s anything objective behind our values. We see morality as about feelings, 
not about truths. But we can still feel strongly about our values. 
Reflect on how you react to this view. Do you have objections? 
5.4 Positivism problems 
Ima Emotivist has given a clear formulation of an important approach to 
morality. Her view presents a challenge for those of us who want to believe in 
moral truths and moral knowledge, and who hope for a stronger role for 
reason in ethics. 
 
Ima’s belief in logical positivism led her to emotivism. We can formulate her 
argument as follows: 
 
Any genuine truth claim is either empirical (testable by 
sense experience) or analytic (true by definition). 
 
Moral statements aren’t either empirical or analytic. 
Á  Moral statements aren’t genuine truth claims. 
The problem here is that the first premise, the central claim of logical positiv-
ism, is self-refuting. Let’s assume that the first premise is true. Is the premise 
empirical (testable by sense experience)? It seems not. Is it analytic (true by 
definition)? Again, it seems not. So, on its own terms, it isn’t a genuine truth 
claim—and thus can’t be true. So the premise is self-refuting; if we assume that 
it’s true, we can show that it isn’t true. 
 
To see the objection more clearly, consider Ima’s rough formulation of 
logical positivism: 
A view must be testable by sense  
experience—or else it makes no sense. 
This claim itself can’t be tested by sense experience. But then, on its own terms, 
it makes no sense. So the claim is self-refuting. 
 
Philosophers who worship science often contradict themselves. They make 
claims, which can’t be based on science, about science being the only path to 
the truth. Such philosophers violate our first duty as rational beings, which is 

 
Emotivism 51 
not the impossible demand that we prove all our claims, but the humble 
demand that our claims be consistent with each other. 
 
Ayer and the other logical positivists were logical people. They gave up their 
view when they saw it was self-refuting. Their view had other problems too; for 
example, it proved impossible to give a clear definition of “empirical.” Few 
philosophers today accept logical positivism. 
5.5 Other objections 
Even though logical positivism died many years ago, emotivism still prospers. 
Ima explains emotivism’s main attraction: 
Emotivism is better than the other views because it’s simpler and 
explains more of the facts. In philosophy, as in science, a view is 
better if it’s simpler and explains more. 
I grant that emotivism explains morality in a simple way. But truth isn’t always 
simple, and emotivism seems to water down what morality is. In denying moral 
knowledge and moral truth, it goes against common sense. But we’ve done 
poorly so far in defending our knowledge of basic moral truths. Are such truths 
self-evident? The wide variation in moral intuitions casts doubt on this. Or are 
they provable from descriptive facts? Moore seems to have destroyed this 
approach. As long as we can’t find a better way to defend our knowledge of 
moral truths, views that deny such knowledge will remain plausible. 
In view of this, we might look for problems with emotivism’s positive 
claims. I find three such problems. 
First, moral judgments aren’t always emotional. We all have some moral 
beliefs that are emotional for us (maybe about racism) and others that are 
unemotional (maybe about the wrongness of some tax exemptions). Since 
moral judgments may be very unemotional, it’s implausible to equate them all 
with exclamations—like “Boo!” and “Hurrah!”—whose main purpose is to 
express emotion. 
 
Since Ima Emotivist likes science so much, she might do an experiment to 
see if moral judgments are always emotional. She could interview people, hook 
up some gismo to measure their emotions, and then test whether moral 
judgments are always emotional (as emotivism holds) or go from highly 
emotional to highly unemotional (as I hold). I have no doubt about how the 
experiment would turn out. 
A second problem is that “good” and “bad” don’t always translate plausibly 
into exclamations. Consider these examples: 
1. 
Do what is good. 
2. 
Hurrah for good people! 
3. 
Either it’s good to go or it’s bad to go. 
4. 
This is neutral (neither good nor bad). 
Here’s what we get if we replace “good” and “bad” with exclamations: 

52 Ethics 
1a. 
Do what is hurrah! 
2a. 
Hurrah for hurrah! people! 
3a. 
Either hurrah for going! or boo on going! 
4a. 
Neither hurrah for this! nor boo on this! 
If we use exclamations in the normal way, none of these translations make 
sense. So some sentences using “good” and “bad” seem to have no plausible 
“hurrah” and “boo” equivalents. 
 
Subjectivists can plausibly translate my four sentences. For example, they’d 
translate sentence 1 into “Do what I like” or “Do what I’d say ‘Hurrah!’ to.” 
But this makes “X is good” into a truth claim about feelings—and emotivists 
reject this. Emotivists claim that “good” translates into an exclamation. 
 
There’s a third problem. In defending emotivism, Ima appeals to this 
principle, which is an important part of scientific method: 
• 
A view is better if it’s simpler and explains more. 
Now “better” is the comparative of “good.” So if “good” translates into an 
exclamation, then Ima’s principle means something like this: 
• 
Hurrah for a view that’s simpler and explains more! 
So Ima’s principle would be a mere expression of feeling—and thus not true or 
false. And the same would go for other norms of scientific method: 
• 
We ought normally to believe our sense experience. 
• 
In our scientific theories, we ought to be consistent. 
These too, if they’re just exclamations, wouldn’t be true or false; so they’d be 
no more correct than these two norms: 
• 
A view is better if it accords with my horoscope. 
• 
We ought to decide between scientific views by flipping a coin. 
So emotivism, besides destroying the objectivity of ethics, would also seem to 
destroy the objectivity of scientific method. 
5.6 Moderate emotivism 
What disturbs me most about emotivism is its claim that we can’t reason about 
basic moral principles. Suppose that we disagree with a Nazi on a basic moral 
principle. Emotivism says that we can’t progress further by reasoning; but we 
can try to change the Nazi’s feelings. However, the Nazi can also try to change 
our feelings; historically, Nazis were very good at manipulating feelings. So the 
emotivist model of moral thinking would seem to lead to propaganda wars, in 
which each side, unable to resort to reason, simply tries to manipulate the 
feelings of the other side. I find this disturbing. 

 
Emotivism 53 
Ima says that intuitionism can’t reason about basic moral principles either. 
We can’t argue about basic intuitions any more than we can about basic feelings. 
She concludes that emotivism and intuitionism are in the same boat. If so, I’d 
like to be in a different boat from both of them; I want some method whereby 
both sides could sit down and reason together, instead of just trying to 
manipulate each other’s emotions. 
Some emotivists try to bring more rationality into ethics. They move to 
moderate emotivism. This view still sees moral judgments as emotional 
exclamations and not truth claims. But it insists that feelings can be rationally 
appraised to some degree: rational feelings are ones that are informed and 
impartial. On these grounds, we could argue that the Nazi’s principles are 
irrational. This approach works much like the ideal-observer view (see Chapter 
2). We’d pick our moral principles by following our feelings—but we’d first 
develop rational feelings (ones that are informed and impartial). 
 
Moderate emotivism gives a larger role to rationality in ethics. Hare’s 
prescriptivism, which we’ll consider in the next chapter, goes further in the 
same direction. 
5.7 Chapter summary 
Emotivism says that moral judgments express positive or negative feelings. “X 
is good” means “Hurrah for X!”—and “X is bad” means “Boo on X!” 
Since moral judgments are exclamations, they can’t be true or false. So there 
can’t be moral truths or moral knowledge. We can reason about moral issues if 
we assume a system of norms; but we can’t reason about basic moral principles. 
Some emotivists base their view on logical positivism, which holds roughly 
that any genuine truth claim must be able to be tested by sense experience. 
Since moral judgments can’t be tested by sense experience, they aren’t genuine 
truth claims. So moral judgments only express feelings. Thus logical positivism 
leads to emotivism. 
One problem with this argument is that logical positivism is self-refuting. It 
claims (roughly), “Any genuine truth claim must be able to be tested by sense 
experience.” But this claim itself can’t be tested by sense experience. So, by its 
own standard, logical positivism can’t be a genuine truth claim. 
Some argue that emotivism is better than the other approaches because it’s 
simpler and explains more of the facts. They appeal to this principle, which is 
an important part of scientific method: “A view is better if it’s simpler and 
explains more.” 
However, it isn’t clear that emotivism explains morality adequately; by deny-
ing moral knowledge and moral truth, it seems to water down what morality is. 
Another problem is that moral judgments, instead of being essentially emotion-
al, go from “very emotional” to “not very emotional.” And moral judgments 
don’t always translate plausibly into exclamations. 
Emotivism also would seem to destroy the objectivity of scientific meth-
od—since it would translate “A scientific view is better if it’s simpler and 
explains more” into the exclamation “Hurrah for scientific views that are 
simpler and explain more!” 

54 Ethics 
Emotivism claims that, in disputes about basic moral principles, we can’t 
appeal to reason but only to emotion. This would seem to lead to propaganda 
wars in which each side, unable to resort to reason, simply tries to manipulate 
the feelings of the other side. 
Moderate emotivism tries to add a stronger rationality component. While 
admitting that ethics is based on feelings, it insists that our feelings can be more 
or less rational to the extent that we’re informed and impartial. 
5.8 Study questions 
1. How does emotivism define “good”? What method does it follow for 
arriving at moral beliefs? 
2. Define these terms: “truth claim,” “empirical statement,” and “analytic 
statement.” (5.1) 
3. Explain what logical positivism is and how it led Ima to emotivism. 
4. Why did Ima reject definitions of “good” that use empirical language 
(such as “socially approved”)? 
5. Why did Ima’s boyfriend accept emotivism? 
6. Explain how emotivism and subjectivism differ. (5.2) 
7. Suppose that Hitler, who likes the killing of Jews, says “The killing of 
Jews is good.” Would subjectivism say that Hitler’s statement is true? 
Would emotivism say that it is true? 
8. What social functions do moral judgments have? 
9. Suppose that you don’t feel like doing X. On emotivism, why might it 
still make sense for you to say to yourself, “It’s good for me to do X”? 
10. Why did Ima think emotivism gives a simple explanation of morality? 
11. According to emotivism, why can’t we define “good” in descriptive 
terms? 
12. What evidence did Ima give that emotivism is accurate linguistically? 
13. In what ways can we reason on moral issues? How does the Nazi 
example show the limits of moral reasoning? (5.3) 
14. How did Ima apply emotivism to moral education? Did she think 
emotivism would destroy morality? 
15. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to emotivism. Does it 
seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike about it? Can you 
think of any way to show that it’s false? 
16. What objection is given to logical positivism? (5.4) 
17. Explain the objection that moral judgments aren’t always emotional. (5.5) 
18. Give some examples of sentences with “good” or “bad” that don’t seem 
to translate into exclamations. 
19. Explain the objection that emotivism would destroy the rationality of 
science. 
20. How might the emotivist model of moral thinking lead to propaganda 
wars? (5.6) 
21. What is moderate emotivism? 

 
Emotivism 55 
5.9 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 05—Emotivism.” 
 
Classic defenses of emotivism include Chapter 6 of Ayer’s Language, Truth 
and Logic and Stevenson’s longer Facts and Values. Recent defenses of emotivism 
include Blackburn’s Essays in Quasi-Realism and Gibbard’s Wise Choices, Apt 
Feelings. Also of interest is the related view in the first chapter of Mackie’s 
Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong. Frankena defends moderate emotivism in the 
last chapter of his Ethics. 
Ayer’s book mentioned above gives a classic defense of logical positivism. 
Also helpful are Passmore’s brief “Logical positivism” and Ashby’s brief 
“Verifiability principle.” The Bibliography at the end of the book has informa-
tion on how to find these works. 
 
 
 

56 Ethics 
6 Prescriptivism 
 
Prescriptivism: 
“You ought to do this” is a universalizable prescription (not 
a truth claim); it means “Do this and let everyone do the 
same in similar cases.” 
Pick your moral principles by first trying to be informed and 
imaginative, and then seeing what you can consistently hold. 
Prescriptivism sees ought judgments as a type of prescription (or imperative). 
“You ought to do A,” like “Do A,” doesn’t state a fact and isn’t true or false. 
Instead, it expresses our will, or our desires. But unlike simple imperatives, 
ought judgments are universalizable. This means that they logically commit us 
to making similar evaluations about similar cases. This leads to a useful form of 
golden rule reasoning. 
 
We’ll begin by listening to the fictional Ima Prescriptivist explain his belief in 
prescriptivism. Then we’ll consider objections. 
6.1 Ima Prescriptivist 
My name is Ima Prescriptivist. I’ve embraced prescriptivism as I’ve come to see 
that moral judgments express our impartial desires about how people are to 
live. 
 
I’m taking a moral philosophy course right now. Until last month, I hadn’t 
found any of the views to be very attractive. Then we started R.M. Hare’s 
prescriptivism. Hare’s view makes more sense to me than all the others put 
together. I’ll try to explain his view; but you’ll have to bear with me, because it’s 
complicated. You won’t see its attractiveness until we get far into it. 
 
Let me start at the beginning. An ought judgment is a type of prescription, 
or imperative. Compare these two examples: 
Indicative: 
The door is open. 
 
Imperative: 
Close the door. 
 

 
Prescriptivism 57 
The indicative tries to state a fact about the world and is true or false. To 
accept the indicative is to have a belief. But the imperative doesn’t state a fact 
and isn’t true or false. Instead, it tells what to do—it expresses our will or 
desire that the person close the door. Moral judgments are like the imperative. 
They don’t state facts and aren’t true or false. Instead, they express our will or 
desire about how people are to live. To accept a moral judgment isn’t to have a 
belief about an external fact. Instead, it’s to commit yourself to a way of life. 
 
You’re probably thinking, “Oh no, Ima rejects moral truths; so his view is 
going to be just like emotivism.” But don’t judge so quickly. My view makes 
ethics rational, and so is very unlike emotivism. It doesn’t matter that moral 
judgments aren’t literally true or false. What matters is that we can refute Nazi 
racists and teach our children how to think rationally about moral issues. 
Imperatives can be highly rational and needn’t be very emotional. Many 
impressive achievements of human reason are systems of imperatives. Consider 
a cookbook with complicated recipes, our country’s laws, the rules for chess, 
and the directions for using a complex computer program. A computer 
program itself consists of instructions that tell the computer what to do under 
various conditions. Imperatives can have a sophisticated logical structure and 
needn’t be very emotional. By contrast, exclamations are primitive grunts. 
Moral judgments in our ordinary speech are closer to imperatives than to 
exclamations. In discussing ethics, we often shift between imperatives (“Don’t 
kill”) and ought judgments (“You ought not to kill”); the two seem similar. It 
would be strange to use exclamations (“Boo on killing!”). 
6.2 Freedom and reason 
This is still Ima. Let me explain why I like prescriptivism. 
 
To satisfy me, an ethical theory has to do two things. First, it has to allow 
me the freedom to form my own moral beliefs. Sure, I need factual information 
and advice from others. But these alone won’t give me the answer. To think 
otherwise would compromise my freedom as a moral agent. In the end, I have 
to answer my own moral questions. 
 
The worst approach to ethics is cultural relativism. This view gives you no 
freedom to think for yourself on moral issues. You have to go along with the 
crowd—with whatever the majority approves of. I can’t accept this. I’m a free 
person, and I can think for myself about ethics. 
In addition, a satisfying view has to show us how to be rational in forming 
our moral beliefs. Morality is important. It shouldn’t be an arbitrary thing, like 
picking a postage stamp. Answering moral questions should engage our rational 
powers to their limits. 
 
Subjectivism is an example of an irrational approach. Here you can say, “I 
like it—so it must be good.” How idiotic! Don’t we have minds? Can’t we 
reason about morality? 
But how can we reason about morality? None of the earlier views has been 
very helpful on this. Do we just go with our basic moral intuitions? What if our 
society has taught us racist intuitions? The ideal-observer view gives the 
beginning of a rational approach, but it’s too vague. 

58 Ethics 
So a satisfying view should show us how to form our moral beliefs in a free 
and rational way. This reminds me of my younger brother, Brian. His girlfriend 
got him involved in a Nazi group that preaches racial hatred. So he talked with 
me about how we ought to treat other races. Brian asked, “Ima, don’t just force 
your principles on me, but instead teach me how to think out my own moral 
views.” He was confused on how to think out moral questions. He said that the 
alternative to thinking was to just go along with the side that most sways your 
emotions. Later I’ll say how I answered his question. 
So how can we be both free and rational in forming our moral beliefs? Hare 
struggled with this question and came up with a remarkably innovative answer. 
He sees moral language as the key. What do we mean by “ought”? Once we 
understand this term, we can discover the logical rules for its use. Then we can 
understand how to reason for ourselves about moral issues. 
Hare sees ought judgments as universalizable prescriptions. “You ought to 
do this” is equivalent to “Do this and let everyone do the same in similar 
cases.” Our moral beliefs express our desire that a kind of act be done in the 
present case and in all similar cases. Moral beliefs can be free because they 
express our own desires and aren’t provable from facts. They can be rational 
because the logic of “ought” leads to a method of moral reasoning that engages 
our rational powers to their limits. 
6.3 Moral reasoning 
This is still Ima. I need to give the logical rules for “ought” and then show how 
moral thinking can be rational. 
 
There are two basic logical rules for “ought”: 
U. 
To be logically consistent, we must make similar evalua-
tions about similar cases. 
P. 
To be logically consistent, we must keep our moral beliefs 
in harmony with how we live and want others to live. 
These rules are based on the meaning of “ought,” which is a word for express-
ing universalizable prescriptions. Rule U holds because ought judgments are 
universalizable: it’s part of their meaning that they apply to similar cases. Rule P 
holds because ought judgments are prescriptions (imperatives), and thus 
express our will, or our desires, about how we and others are to live. 
 
Rules U and P are consistency rules. They aren’t imperatives or moral 
judgments. They don’t say “We ought to do such and such …” Instead, they tell 
us what we must do if we’re to be logically consistent in our moral beliefs. 
These rules, despite their abstractness, are very useful. They lead to a golden 
rule (GR) consistency condition, which is the most important element in 
rational moral thinking. 
Suppose that Detra has a nice bicycle. I say to myself: 
(a) 
I believe that I ought to steal Detra’s bicycle. 

 
Prescriptivism 59 
By rule U, this logically commits me to making the same evaluation about an 
imagined reversed situation: 
(b) 
I believe that, if the situation were exactly reversed, then Detra ought 
to steal my bicycle. 
By rule P, this in turn logically commits me to willing something about the 
imagined reversed situation: 
(c) 
I desire that, if the situation were exactly reversed, then Detra 
would steal my bicycle. 
So believing that I ought to steal Detra’s bicycle logically commits me to 
desiring that my bicycle be stolen if I were in her place. If I don’t desire this, 
then I’m inconsistent in holding my original ought judgment. 
Here’s a general formulation of this idea—which is somewhat like the tradi-
tional golden rule (“Treat others as you want to be treated”): 
The GR consistency condition claims that this combination is 
logically inconsistent: 
• 
I believe that I ought to do something to another. 
• 
I don’t desire that this be done to me in the same situation. 
This consistency condition holds because ought judgments are universalizable 
prescriptions. To accept an ought judgment in a consistent way is to desire that 
a kind of act be done in all similar cases, including ones where we imagine 
ourselves in the place of the other person. 
To apply the GR consistency condition, we’d imagine ourselves in the exact 
place of the other person on the receiving end of the action. If we think we 
ought to do something to another, but don’t desire that this be done to us in 
the same situation, then we violate GR consistency. Suppose that we think we 
ought to enslave others because of their skin color, but we don’t desire that we 
be enslaved if we were in the same situation (including the same skin color). 
Then we’re inconsistent—and we’re breaking the logical rules built into the 
term “ought.” 
To apply our GR consistency condition most adequately, we need know-
ledge and imagination. We need to know what effect our actions have on the 
lives of others. And we need to imagine ourselves, vividly and accurately, in the 
other person’s place on the receiving end of the action. GR consistency, when 
combined with knowledge and imagination, is an important tool for refuting 
Nazi racists and for teaching our children to think rationally about moral issues. 
To think rationally about ethics, we need to be informed, imaginative, and 
consistent. Moral reasoning doesn’t deduce moral conclusions from facts. 
Instead, it tests our consistency. The most important kind of moral consistency 
is GR consistency. If we think we ought to do something to another, but don’t 

60 Ethics 
desire that this be done to us in an imagined identical situation, then we’re 
inconsistent. 
6.4 Against Nazis 
This is still Ima. I need another section to tell you how I answered my younger 
brother’s question. 
Recall that my brother Brian got involved with a Nazi group that preached 
racial hatred. He was perplexed about how we ought to treat other races. He 
asked, “Ima, don’t just force your principles on me, but instead teach me how 
to think out my own moral views.” He was confused on how to reason about 
moral questions. 
How did I answer? First I praised Brian for wanting to reason instead of just 
following his emotions. Emotions are great—but not Nazi emotions divorced 
from reason. Many Nazis don’t want to be rational, and prefer violence or 
emotional rhetoric. 
Then I told Brian that he had to make up his own mind on moral issues. 
Moral principles can’t be proved or disproved by appealing to facts. The 
principles he accepted would be his own free choice, and would express how 
he wanted people to live. 
Brian broke in, “Are you saying that we can’t reason about basic moral 
principles?” I replied that I was not saying this. I told him that many philoso-
phers had claimed that we can’t reason about basic moral principles, but that 
Hare had shown them wrong. We can reason by appealing to consistency. 
Even though we’re free to form our own moral beliefs, our beliefs can be more 
or less rational. To think rationally about ethics is to think in a way that is 
informed, imaginative, and consistent. 
To be informed is to understand the facts correctly. So we talked about the 
facts. We talked about differences between races and whether these are genetic 
or cultural. We talked about how Nazism develops and spreads. We talked 
about alternatives to Nazi views, and how other societies deal with racial 
diversity. And we talked about the probable consequences of the Nazi strategy, 
and alternative strategies, on people’s lives—including the lives of the Jews 
who would suffer under Nazi policies. 
I told Brian that it wasn’t enough just to know the facts; we also need to 
appreciate the human significance of the facts on people’s lives. We need what 
Hare calls “imagination.” So I told Brian to imagine himself and his family in 
the place of the victims, those who would suffer from Nazi policies. 
I told Brian that we also need to be consistent, and I explained GR consis-
tency. Brian saw right away that this would exclude Nazi policies. He said, 
“Surely I don’t desire that I and my family be treated so badly if we were in the 
place of the Jews. So I can’t consistently hold that I ought to treat them this 
way.” He concluded that Nazi moral beliefs were irrational—since Nazis 
wouldn’t hold these beliefs consistently if they knew the facts of the case and 
exercised their imagination. 

 
Prescriptivism 61 
Brian then asked if there were any ways for a Nazi to evade the GR reason-
ing. I told him that Hare had sketched several escape strategies, but that none 
were very satisfactory. Let me give four of these: 
1. 
The Nazi could use “ought” in a way that doesn’t express a 
universalizable prescription. Then he could reject the GR consis-
tency condition. 
In this case, the Nazi’s use of “ought” would be peculiar and misleading. He’d 
do better to avoid moral language and just say that he wants to mistreat Jews. 
2. 
The Nazi could refuse to make moral judgments on the issue. 
Then we couldn’t refute his moral views, because he doesn’t have any. We can’t 
beat him at the game of morality if he doesn’t play the game. Note that our 
consistency condition applies only if you make an ought judgment about how 
you ought to treat the other person. 
3. 
The Nazi could say that he doesn’t care about being inconsistent 
and irrational. 
Then he’s admitted that we’ve refuted him. 
4. 
The Nazi could desire that he and his family be put in concentra-
tion camps and killed if they were Jewish. 
Such a Nazi could be consistent. But only a crazy person has such desires. 
So the GR argument is strong but not inescapable. The argument becomes 
decisive for a person who wants to make genuine moral judgments on the case 
(1 and 2) in a consistent way (3) and doesn’t have crazy desires (4). Thus 
prescriptivism gives a strong way to reason. With most other views, we can’t 
argue further when we run into a difference on a basic moral principle. 
Prescriptivism goes further because it appeals to consistency. 
Let me sum up my approach to moral rationality. To think rationally about 
ethics is to think in a way that is informed, imaginative, and consistent. And the 
most important part of consistency is to follow the golden rule. 
Reflect on how you react to this view. Do you have objections? 
6.5 Objections 
Ima’s approach to ethics has many virtues. It does a fine job in showing how 
moral thinking can be both free and rational. It gives a brilliant analysis of the 
golden rule. And it gives useful tools for reasoning about moral issues. While 
its approach to moral rationality resembles that of the ideal-observer view (see 
Chapter 2), it works out the details more clearly and adds a powerful consisten-

62 Ethics 
cy component. The most questionable part of the view, however, seems to be 
its analysis of “ought.” 
 
Ima’s view divides into two parts: 
(1) 
Rules of moral reasoning: To be logically consistent, we must make 
similar evaluations about similar cases, live in harmony with our 
moral beliefs, and follow the golden rule. 
(2) 
Analysis of “ought”: Ought judgments are universalizable prescrip-
tions—not truth claims. 
Some critics object to formulating (1) in terms of logical consistency. They say we 
commit no logical inconsistency if we make conflicting judgments about similar 
cases, violate our moral beliefs, or violate the golden rule. Some such critics 
think the so-called logical rules in (1) are better seen as very general moral rules: 
(1a) We ought to make similar evaluations about similar cases, live in 
harmony with our moral beliefs, and follow the golden rule. 
The logical rules in (1) are based on the analysis of “ought” in (2). But this 
analysis has further problems, since it implies that ought judgments aren’t truth 
claims, and so aren’t literally true or false. This seems to conflict with how we 
approach ethics in our daily lives. 
 
When we deliberate about a moral issue, we generally assume that there’s a 
truth of the matter that we’re trying to discover. We’re not just trying to 
develop rational desires; we’re also trying to discover the truth about how we 
ought to live. And we speak as if there are moral truths. We use words like 
“true,” “false,” “correct,” “mistaken,” “discover,” and “know” of moral judg-
ments—but not of imperatives. When we use such objective language, we can’t 
plausibly substitute a universalizable prescription for an ought judgment. 
Suppose that I say this: 
(a) 
I know that you ought to do this. 
Prescriptivism claims that the italicized part is a universalizable prescription, 
and means “Do this and let everyone do the same in similar cases.” But we 
can’t substitute the latter for the former: 
(b) 
I know that do this and let everyone do the same in similar cases. 
Here (a) makes sense but (b) doesn’t. So prescriptivism seems to clash with 
how we use moral language. 
 
Ima could reply that our moral practice is wrong when it speaks of moral 
knowledge and moral truths. Or he could accept these notions but water them 
down; maybe calling an ought judgment “true” just endorses the judgment (and 
doesn’t make an objective claim). While these responses are possible, the 
presumption lies with our moral practice. If so, then we should accept moral 
truths and moral knowledge unless we have strong arguments to the contrary. 

 
Prescriptivism 63 
Ima says it doesn’t matter that moral judgments aren’t true or false. What 
matters is that we can refute Nazi racists and teach our children to think 
rationally about moral issues. Prescriptivism does a good job on these. For 
example, it gives powerful ways to show that Hitler’s moral beliefs were 
irrational—even though these beliefs wouldn’t be literally false. Prescriptivism 
gives strong moral arguments but not moral truths. But I’d like to have both. 
I’d like to use GR reasoning to discover moral truths—for example, that 
Hitler’s moral beliefs were false. 
Ima’s rejection of moral truths makes it easier for Nazis to escape the GR 
argument. Ima’s consistency conditions tell us what we have to do, if we choose 
to use “ought” consistently. But we might avoid using “ought.” If we do so, we 
don’t violate any moral truths and don’t violate GR consistency. On Ima’s 
view, none of these is a moral truth: 
• 
We ought to make moral judgments about our actions. 
• 
We ought to be consistent. 
• 
We ought to follow the golden rule. 
Moral truths would make it more difficult to escape the GR argument. 
 
Where do we go from here? We might try to combine ideas from intuition-
ism and prescriptivism—so we’d have both moral truths and strong ways of 
reasoning about morality. Or we might try to develop prescriptivism’s tools of 
moral reasoning in a neutral way that could be defended from various views on 
the foundations of ethics. We’ll work on both ideas in the next three chapters. 
6.6 Chapter summary 
Prescriptivism sees moral judgments as a type of prescription, or imperative. 
Moral judgments, like the simple imperative “Close the door,” don’t state facts 
and aren’t true or false. Instead, they express our will, or our desires. 
Ought judgments are universalizable prescriptions. “You ought to do this” is 
equivalent to “Do this and let everyone do the same in similar cases.” So moral 
beliefs express our desire that a kind of act be done in the present case and in 
all similar cases—including ones where we imagine ourselves in someone else’s 
place. 
Prescriptivism shows how can we be both free and rational in forming our 
moral beliefs. Moral beliefs can be free because they express our desires and 
aren’t provable from facts. They can be rational because the logic of “ought” 
leads to a method of moral reasoning that engages our rational powers to their 
limits. 
Moral beliefs are subject to two basic logical rules: 
U. 
To be logically consistent, we must make similar evaluations about 
similar cases. 
P. 
To be logically consistent, we must keep our moral beliefs in 
harmony with how we live and want others to live. 

64 Ethics 
Rule U holds because moral judgments are universalizable: it’s part of their 
meaning that they apply to similar cases. Rule P holds because moral judgments 
are prescriptions (imperatives), and thus express our will, or our desires, about 
how we and others are to live. 
Prescriptivism’s GR consistency condition, which follows from these two 
logical rules, claims that this combination is inconsistent: 
• 
I believe that I ought to do something to another. 
• 
I don’t desire that this be done to me in the same situation. 
This consistency condition is a more precise version of the traditional golden 
rule (“Treat others as you want to be treated”). We violate it if we think we 
ought to do something to another but don’t desire that this be done to us in the 
same situation. 
 
To think rationally about ethics, we need to be informed, imaginative, and 
consistent; the most important part of consistency is to follow the golden rule. 
This approach can show that Nazi moral beliefs are irrational—since Nazis 
wouldn’t be consistent in their moral beliefs if they knew the facts of the case 
and exercised their imagination. 
 
However prescriptivism, while it has important insights, seems to rest on a 
questionable foundation. It says that ought judgments are universalizable 
prescriptions (or imperatives) and not truth claims. This leads it to deny the 
possibility of moral knowledge and moral truths—which seems to conflict with 
how we approach ethics in our daily lives. 
6.7 Study questions 
1. How does prescriptivism define “ought”? What method does it follow 
for arriving at moral beliefs? 
2. What is a “prescription”? What does it mean to say that ought judgments 
are “universalizable” prescriptions? 
3. How do imperatives differ from indicatives? (6.1) 
4. Did Ima reject the idea of moral truths? Did this make his view “just like 
emotivism”? 
5. Are imperatives necessarily emotional? Give some examples to show that 
imperatives can be highly rational. 
6. Explain what Ima said about moral freedom and rationality. (6.2) 
7. What was Brian’s problem? What did he want from Ima? 
8. How is the meaning of “ought” the key to how we can be both free and 
rational in our moral thinking? 
9. What are the two logical rules about moral consistency? What are they 
based on? (6.3) 
10. Explain the GR consistency condition. Does it say how we ought to live? 
11. Explain (using the example of stealing Detra’s bicycle) how the GR 
consistency condition follows from the idea that moral judgments are  
universalizable prescriptions. 
12. What three elements do we need in order to think rationally about ethics? 

 
Prescriptivism 65 
13. How did Ima answer Brian’s question? How did he say that we can 
reason about basic moral principles? (6.4) 
14. How did Ima argue against Nazi moral beliefs? In what four ways could 
Nazis evade the GR reasoning? 
15. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to prescriptivism. Does 
it seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike about it? Can you 
think of any way to show that it’s false? 
16. What do some critics say about prescriptivism’s consistency rules? 
17. Explain the objection to Ima’s analysis of “ought.” How might Ima reply 
to this objection? (6.5) 
18. How does the rejection of moral truths make it easier for Nazis to escape 
the golden rule reasoning? 
6.8 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 06—Prescriptivism.” Also do “Ethics 06v—Vocabulary for 4–6,” 
“Ethics 06r—Review of 4–6,” and “Ethics 06z—Review of 0–6.” 
 
For more on prescriptivism, see Hare’s Freedom and Reason; I especially 
recommend Chapters 1, 6, and 11. His earlier The Language of Morals focuses on 
imperatives and moral language; his later Moral Thinking defends utilitarianism. 
For some technical criticisms of Hare’s approach, see Section 6.5 of Gensler’s 
Formal Ethics. The Bibliography at the end of the book has information on how 
to find these works. 
 
 

66 Ethics 
7 Consistency 
Avoid inconsistencies between: 
• 
your beliefs (logicality), 
• 
your ends and means (ends–means consistency), 
• 
your moral judgments and how you live (con-
scientiousness), and 
• 
your evaluations of similar actions (impartiality). 
Our next three chapters sketch a practical approach to moral rationality. Since 
the approach stresses consistency and the golden rule, I call it the “GR 
consistency view.” It develops tools of moral reasoning that practically any 
ethical theory could use. 
This chapter gives four basic consistency principles. The following two 
chapters discuss the golden rule and then other elements of moral rationality. 
The resulting moral methodology is like prescriptivism, except that it’s devel-
oped further and doesn’t rest on a prescriptivist analysis of moral terms. 
7.1 Avoiding an impasse 
How should we select a method for picking our moral principles? The usual 
approach builds on what we take moral judgments to mean. So we follow a 
religious method if we take moral judgments to be about God’s will; we get 
other methods if we take them to be about social conventions, personal 
feelings, or independent objective truths. The problem here is that people 
continue to disagree on how to understand moral judgments. This would seem 
to lead to a stalemate on how to reason about morality. 
I’d like to suggest a way out of the difficulty. There may be consistency 
principles that make sense from various perspectives and give powerful tools 
for moral reasoning. I have in mind principles like “Be logically consistent in 
your beliefs,” “Follow your conscience,” “Make similar evaluations about 
similar cases,” and “Treat others as you want to be treated.” These ideas are 
already widely accepted. Here we need to formulate them more clearly, see how 
to use them in moral reasoning, and show how to defend them from various 
perspectives (as self-evident truths, God’s will, social conventions, or whatev-
er). So this chapter will examine four basic consistency principles. 
 

 
Consistency 67 
 
Here’s a parallel. Most of the principles of math and logic are clear and 
uncontroversial. Few would dispute claims like “x+y = y+x” or “If all As are 
Bs, and all Bs are Cs, then all As are Cs.” But the basis for such principles is 
disputed. Are they true because of language conventions? Or do they express 
independent, objective truths? Or did God make them true? Or are they 
empirical? Philosophers disagree on these foundational questions; but they 
accept much the same principles of math and logic. Maybe moral consistency 
principles can work the same way. Maybe these too can be widely shared tools 
for moral reasoning even though people disagree about their ultimate basis. 
7.2 Consistency in beliefs 
Logicality is the requirement that we be logically consistent in our beliefs. We 
violate this if we accept incompatible beliefs—or if we accept a belief without 
also accepting its logical consequences. 
Suppose that Ima Relativist begins her philosophy paper like this: 
Since morality is relative, no duties bind universally. What’s right in 
one culture is wrong in another. Universal duties are a myth. Rela-
tivism should make us tolerant toward others; we can’t say that 
we’re right and they’re wrong. So everyone ought to respect the 
values of others. 
Here Ima’s first statement is incompatible with her last: 
• 
No duties bind universally. 
• 
Everyone ought to respect the values of others. 
If everyone ought to respect the values of others, then some duties bind universal-
ly. And if no duties bind universally, then neither does the duty to respect 
others. Ima is deeply confused and inconsistent. This often happens when we 
first try to formulate our philosophical views. 
 
Logicality forbids inconsistent belief combinations. Consistency would 
require that Ima give up one belief or the other of her inconsistent pair. But it 
doesn’t tell her which one to give up. This is an important feature of consisten-
cy principles: they forbid inconsistent combinations but don’t tell us specifically 
what to believe or what to do. 
Logicality also requires that we accept the logical consequences of our be-
liefs. Suppose that we accept a principle, but then someone points out its 
implausible consequences. Do we accept these consequences? If we accept a 
principle but reject its consequences, then we’re inconsistent—and we have to 
change something. Thus we can argue about first principles by appealing to 
consistency. Later we’ll see how this can be useful in attacking racist arguments 
and principles. 
Here’s a more formal statement of the logicality requirement: 

68 Ethics 
If A and B are logically incon-
sistent with each other, then 
don’t combine these two: 
• 
I believe A. 
• 
I believe B. 
 
If A logically entails 
B, then don’t com-
bine these two: 
• 
I believe A. 
• 
I don’t believe B. 
These use “don’t combine.” We also could say “we ought not to combine.” I’ll 
assume that we ought to be consistent; later in this chapter we’ll discuss why we 
ought to be consistent. 
Let me end this section by answering some questions about logicality. 
(Q1)  Does logicality tell us to prove all our beliefs? 
No, it only requires that our beliefs be consistent with each other. We can’t 
prove all our beliefs, since this would require an infinite chain of arguments, 
where each premise is proved by some further argument. 
(Q2)  Does logicality tell us to shun emotions? 
 
No, it only requires that we be consistent. This has little to do with how 
emotional we are. Some highly emotional people have consistent belief 
systems, while some unemotional people have inconsistent beliefs. 
(Q3)  Is logicality about metaethics or about normative ethics? 
 
It’s about both. Since it tells us that we ought to be consistent in our beliefs, 
it’s part of normative ethics. Since it gives us a condition that we need to fulfill 
to be rational in our moral beliefs, it’s also part of metaethics. All our consisten-
cy conditions have this dual aspect. 
(Q4)  Does the consistency duty have exceptions? 
 
Yes. It wouldn’t apply, for example, if we’re psychologically unable to be 
consistent (perhaps because of some mental defect) or if some stronger duty 
interferes (perhaps Dr. Evil will destroy the world unless we’re inconsistent in 
some minor way). All our consistency duties are subject to implicit qualifica-
tions (see Gensler 1996: 15–39). 
(Q5)  Does consistency guarantee truth? 
 
No. We might be consistent but wrong. However, consistency often points 
us toward the truth. Suppose that you murder your roommate and then make 
up a story to cover your tracks. If a clever detective investigates and questions 
you, you’ll find it hard to keep your story consistent. Uncovering inconsisten-
cies may be the best way to discover the truth about the murder. So consisten-
cy, while not guaranteeing truth, can point us toward the truth. 

 
Consistency 69 
7.3 Consistency in will 
Besides inconsistency in beliefs, there’s also inconsistency in will. This leads to 
two further consistency requirements: ends–means consistency and conscien-
tiousness. 
 
Ends–means consistency is the requirement that we keep our means in 
harmony with our ends. I violate this if I (a) have an end, (b) believe that to 
fulfill this end I need to carry out certain means, and (c) don’t carry out the 
means. For example: 
• 
I want to lose weight. 
• 
I believe that to lose weight I need to eat less or exercise more. 
• 
I don’t eat less or exercise more. 
If I combine these three, then consistency requires that I change something—
that I give up my goal, or that I give up my belief, or that I follow through on 
the means. 
 
Ends–means inconsistency, like inconsistency in beliefs, is common. We 
humans have a strong tendency to do what is easy or brings immediate 
satisfaction (like eat a big desert), instead of what is needed to fulfill our deeper 
goals. Aristotle defined a “human” as a “rational animal”; but we’re imperfectly 
rational, and our rational and animal dimensions can fight each other. 
 
Inconsistency of will can occur in other ways. For example, I might make a 
firm resolution (to run every day), but then act against it (I keep putting it off 
and don’t do it). Or I might have goals (to become a doctor and to party all the 
time) that I realize are incompatible. Or I might violate conscientiousness. 
Conscientiousness is the requirement that we keep our actions, resolu-
tions, and desires in harmony with our moral beliefs. We violate this if our 
moral beliefs clash with how we live and want others to live. 
Suppose that I hold the pacifist belief that one ought never to kill a human 
being for any reason. If I’m conscientious, then (a) I never intentionally kill a 
human being myself, (b) I resolve not to kill for any reason (even to protect my 
life or the lives of my family), and (c) I don’t want others to kill for any reason. 
While my pacifist example is about an “ought” belief, similar requirements 
cover beliefs about what is “all right” (“permissible”). If I’m conscientious, 
then I won’t believe that something is all right without consenting to (approving 
of) the idea of it being done. And I won’t do something without believing that 
it would be all right for me to do it. 
Expressed as an imperative, conscientiousness says “Avoid inconsistencies 
between your moral judgments and how you live.” Here’s a more specific 
conscientiousness imperative: 
Don’t combine these two: 
• 
I believe that I ought to do A now. 
• 
I don’t act to do A now. 

70 Ethics 
If we combine these (as we often do), then our moral belief clashes with how 
we live—and consistency requires that we change one or the other. 
“We ought to follow our conscience” could be taken in two ways: 
1. 
We ought to avoid inconsistencies between our moral beliefs and 
our actions. 
2. 
Our conscience is always correct: if we believe that we ought to do 
something, then this is really what we ought to do. 
The second interpretation has bizarre implications. It entails “If we believe that 
we ought to commit mass murder, then this is really what we ought to do.” The 
first interpretation, which follows our approach, is better. It simply forbids an 
inconsistency between our beliefs and our actions. If the two clash, then 
something is wrong with one or the other. 
Here’s a consistency analogue of “Practice what you preach”: 
Don’t combine these two: 
• 
I believe that everyone ought to do A. 
• 
I don’t act to do A myself. 
This is a specific case of the general requirement to avoid inconsistencies. It 
doesn’t presume that our principles are correct—so that if we preach universal 
hatred then it becomes our duty to hate. Instead, it tells us to avoid inconsis-
tencies between our principles and our actions. If the two clash, then some-
thing is wrong with one or the other. 
I’ve spoken of conscientiousness as a type of “consistency” between our 
moral beliefs and our lives. I’m leaving it open whether to take this “consisten-
cy” in the specific sense of “logical consistency,” or in the more generic sense 
of “agreement” (or “harmony”). 
Suppose my moral beliefs conflict with how I live. Prescriptivism says that I 
violate logical consistency (since I misuse the term “ought”). Other views might say 
that I violate a conscientiousness duty to keep my life in harmony with my moral 
beliefs; this duty might rest on a social convention, a personal ideal, a divine 
command, or a self-evident truth. On these views, violating conscientiousness 
would involve an objectionable clash between my moral beliefs and how I live, 
but not necessarily a logical inconsistency or self-contradiction. 
Consistency is often useful in attacking flawed moral principles. Suppose 
that I accept the principle, “All short people ought to be beat up, just because 
they’re short.” My principle commits me to other things: 

 
Consistency 71 
If I hold this: Î
All short people ought to be beat 
up, just because they’re short. 
Then, to be consistent, I must believe that if I were short 
then I ought to be beat up. 
And I must desire that if I were short then I be beat up. 
If I don’t believe and desire these things, then I’m inconsistent and my moral 
thinking is flawed. 
7.4 Racist arguments 
To see further how to use consistency, let’s imagine that we’re disputing with 
Ima Racist, who holds that all blacks ought to be treated poorly. Here “treat X 
poorly” is a shorthand description that might be filled in differently for 
different sorts of racism—as, for example, “enslave X” or “insult X and keep X 
in low-paying jobs.” 
Ima Racist tells us, “Blacks ought to be treated poorly, because they’re infe-
rior.” How do we respond to his argument? Should we dispute his factual 
premise, and say “All races are genetically equal”? Or should we counter with 
our own moral principle, and say “People of all races ought to be treated 
equally”? Either strategy will likely lead to a stalemate, where Ima has his 
premises and we have ours, and neither side can convince the other. 
I suggest instead that we formulate Ima’s argument clearly and then watch it 
explode in his face. Ima’s conclusion, presumably, is about how all blacks ought 
to be treated. So his premise needs to say that all blacks are inferior. And he 
needs another premise that all inferior people ought to be treated poorly. His 
argument then goes this way: 
 
All blacks are inferior. 
 
All who are inferior ought to be treated poorly. 
∴ All blacks ought to be treated poorly. 
To clarify this further, we need to see what Ima means by “inferior.” What puts 
someone into the “inferior” group? Is it IQ, education, wealth, physical 
strength, or what? Let’s suppose that Ima decides on an IQ criterion. For him, 
let us suppose, “inferior” = “of IQ less than 80.” Then his argument goes: 
 
All blacks have an IQ of less than 80. 
 
All who have an IQ of less than 80 ought to be treated poorly. 
∴ All blacks ought to be treated poorly. 
Once he assigns this meaning to “inferior,” it becomes clear that his inferior/ 
non-inferior division cuts across racial lines. Every race has some members 
with an IQ of less than 80, and some with an IQ of greater than 80. So the first 

72 Ethics 
premise is clearly false. And we can remind Ima that his second premise also 
applies to whites:  
 
All who have an IQ of less than 80 ought to be treated poorly. 
∴ All whites who have an IQ of less than 80 ought to be treated poorly. 
To be consistent, Ima must believe that he ought to treat low-IQ whites poorly 
(as he treats blacks). And he has to treat these whites poorly himself, and desire 
that others do so too. As a racist, Ima will reject these consequences of his 
principle. So he’ll be inconsistent. To restore consistency, he must either give 
up his principle or accept its consequences about whites. 
 
Our strategy for criticizing racist arguments has three steps: 
1. 
Formulate the argument. The premises must be clearly stated, and 
the conclusion must clearly follow from the premises. 
2. 
Criticize the factual premises if necessary. 
3. 
See if the racist applies his moral premise consistently, especially to 
his own race. 
If the racist’s conclusion is about how all blacks (or Jews) are to be treated, 
then he needs a criterion to separate the races cleanly, so all blacks will be on 
one side and all whites on the other. An IQ number doesn’t do this—and 
neither does any other plausible criterion. These considerations of logic and 
consistency will destroy most racist arguments. (For further considerations, see 
Gensler 1996: 158–65.) 
Suppose that Ima gives up his “inferiority” argument but still wants to treat 
blacks poorly. He now claims that the mere difference in skin color merits a 
difference in treatment. So he insists on the principle: “All blacks ought to be 
treated poorly, just because of their skin color.” 
Again, we can appeal to consistency. Does Ima consistently discriminate by 
skin color? He’d have to treat albino blacks well (since they have light skin), 
while he’d treat poorly any whites who have deep, dark tans. And if someone 
invented a cosmetic called Skin So Pale that turned black skin permanently 
white, he’d have to discriminate only against blacks who didn’t use it. 
Ima also would have to desire that if he and his family were black then 
they’d be treated poorly. To dramatize the idea, we could tell him Hare’s (1963: 
218) delightful story about the color-changing germ that is about to infect the 
world. The germ turns originally white skin permanently black and originally 
black skin permanently white. Does Ima really desire that if this happened then 
the newly white people be treated well, and the newly black people (including 
himself and his family) be treated poorly? With questions like these, we can 
show Ima that his moral thinking is inconsistent and thus flawed. 
Appealing to consistency is often useful in moral disputes. The appeal is 
powerful, since it doesn’t presume material moral premises (which the other 
party may reject) but just points out problems in someone’s belief system. But 
at times, of course, consistency won’t do the job by itself and we need other 
ways to carry the argument further. 

 
Consistency 73 
Let me distinguish between racist arguments, principles, and actions: 
1. 
Argument: “Blacks are inferior and inferior people ought to be 
treated poorly; therefore, blacks ought to be treated poorly.” 
2. 
Principle: “Blacks ought to be treated poorly, just because they’re 
black.” 
3. 
Actions: Ima treats blacks poorly. 
So far, we know how to use consistency to attack the first two but not the 
third. We haven’t yet talked about how to use consistency against a racist who 
won’t defend his actions in a principled way. We’ll return to this problem later, 
in Chapter 9. 
 
This section focused on the quaint argument that blacks ought to be treated 
poorly because they’re inferior. Other pro-discrimination arguments have a 
similar pattern: we ought to treat members of a group (Jews, Native Americans, 
Tutsis, women, Catholics, Muslims, gays, the disabled, etc.) in an unfavorable 
way because they have such and such a defect. For example, women ought to 
be kept from voting (as they were in the US prior to 1920) because they’re less 
intelligent. Again, we can appeal to logic (if all women ought to be kept from 
voting, we need the premises that all women are less intelligent and that all who 
are less intelligent ought to be kept from voting), facts (clearly some women are 
more intelligent than most men), and consistency (does the sexist think that 
men who are less intelligent ought to be kept from voting too?). 
7.5 Impartiality 
Impartiality is the requirement that we make similar evaluations about similar 
actions, regardless of the individuals involved. If we’re impartial, then we’ll 
evaluate an act based on what the act is like—and not based on who plays what 
role in the situation. If we judge that an act is right (or wrong) for one person 
to do, then we’ll judge that the same act would be right (or wrong) for anyone 
else to do in the same situation. 
 
I violate impartiality if I make conflicting evaluations about actions that I 
regard as exactly similar or relevantly similar. Two actions are exactly similar if 
they have all the same properties in common. They are relevantly similar if 
the reasons why one fits in a given moral category (good, bad, right, wrong, or 
whatever) also apply to the other. 
In the actual world, no two actions are ever exactly similar (have all the same 
properties in common). But the notion applies usefully to hypothetical cases. 
To test my impartiality, I can imagine an exactly similar action in which the 
parties are in different places—in which, for example, I am on the receiving 
end of the action. 
Here’s an example adapted from the Good Samaritan parable (Luke 10:30–
5). Suppose that, while I’m jogging, I see a man who’s been beaten, robbed, 
and left to die. Should I help him, perhaps by running back to make a phone 
call? I think of excuses why I shouldn’t. I’m busy, don’t want to get involved, 
and so on. I say to myself, “It would be all right for me not to help him.” But 

74 Ethics 
then I consider an exactly reversed situation. I imagine myself in his place; I’m 
the one who’s been beaten, robbed, and left to die. And I imagine him being in 
my place; he’s jogging and sees me in my sad state. I ask myself, “Would it be 
all right for this man not to help me in this situation? Surely not!” But then I’m 
inconsistent. What is all right for me to do to another has to be all right for the 
other to do to me in an imagined exactly reversed situation. 
In the actual world, no two acts are exactly similar. But we can always imagine 
an exactly similar act. If I’m about to do something to another, I can imagine 
what it would be like for this to be done to me in an exactly similar situation. I 
violate impartiality if I combine these two beliefs: 
• 
It would be all right for me to do such and such to X. 
• 
In an exactly similar situation, it would be wrong for X to do this to me. 
This sounds like the golden rule. But it’s really about impartiality, since it deals 
with making similar evaluations about similar actions; it deals with beliefs about 
right and wrong. The genuine golden rule of the next chapter is about actions 
and desires (“Treat others as you want to be treatedx”), not about evaluations. 
My Good Samaritan example refers to an imagined “exactly reversed situa-
tion” in which all my properties are switched with those of the other person. 
Let me explain this idea further. Suppose that we list my properties and those 
of the other person (whom we will call “X”): 
My properties: 
jogging 
very busy 
has blue eyes … 
 
X’s properties: 
beaten and robbed 
needs a doctor 
has brown eyes … 
Imagine that the list contains all our properties, even complex ones. The list 
would be too long to write out—perhaps infinitely long. When I imagine an 
exactly reversed situation, I imagine a situation where the list of properties is 
reversed: 
X’s properties: 
jogging 
very busy 
has blue eyes … 
 
My properties: 
beaten and robbed 
needs a doctor 
has brown eyes … 
Here X is the jogger, and I’m beaten and robbed. We also have to reverse 
relationships. So if X helped me in the past, then in the reversed situation I’d 
imagine that I helped X in the past. 
Instead of switching all the properties in my mind, I could switch just the 
ones relevant to evaluating the act. If I’m not sure if a property is relevant, I 

 
Consistency 75 
could switch it anyway—just to be on the safe side. This approach has me 
imagine a “relevantly similar” reversed situation. 
Here’s another example. I’m driving and see a hitchhiker. Should I pick him 
up? If I don’t, he may spend a long and frustrating time waiting; I know what 
this is like from when I’ve hitchhiked to backpacking trailheads. On the other 
hand, people who pick up hitchhikers are sometimes robbed or hurt. Impartial-
ity tells me that whatever judgment I make on my-picking-up-the-hitchhiker 
(that it’s obligatory, or wrong, or neutral), I must make the same judgment on 
the imagined reversed-situation act. Impartiality doesn’t tell me what to do; and 
here it doesn’t push me toward an obvious answer. Rather, it encourages me to 
reflect on the act from both perspectives (mine and the hitchhiker’s). And it 
emphasizes that, whatever I decide, I must apply the same standards to myself 
that I apply to others. 
These examples test our impartiality by seeing how we evaluate an imagined 
second case. The following example uses an actual second case that’s recognized 
to be relevantly similar. This example also shows how this sort of reasoning can 
help us to recognize duties toward ourselves. 
In the movie Babe, the athlete Babe Didrikson Zaharias (1914–56) needed a 
colostomy operation to save her life. Out of fear, she decided that she 
shouldn’t have it. But her husband, thinking that she should have it, had her 
talk with another woman in similar circumstances, who also had to choose 
between dying and having the operation. Babe instinctively told the other 
woman, “You ought to take courage and have the operation—for life is the 
greatest gift there is.” But then Babe realized that she had to apply the same 
principles to herself that she applied to others. So she decided that she too 
ought to have the operation. 
Let’s consider the case more carefully. Babe combined three beliefs: 
(a) 
I ought not to have the operation. 
(b) 
You ought to have the operation. 
(c) 
Our cases are relevantly similar. 
She held (a) because she feared the results of the operation, she held 
(b) because of the value of life (“the greatest gift there is”), and she held (c) 
because she thought any reasons that would justify one operation would justify 
the other. She saw that her beliefs were inconsistent and that she had to change 
something. She could reject (a), (b), or (c). She in fact rejected (a), saying that 
she too ought to have the operation, just as the other woman in her similar 
situation should have it. She could have rejected (b), saying that neither should 
have the operation; she didn’t do this, because she so strongly believed that the 
other woman ought to have it. Or she could have rejected (c), saying that the 
operation was right in one case but not the other, because of such and such 
differences; she didn’t do this, because she couldn’t think of any reason that 
would justify one operation but not the other. So consistency, while not telling 
her what to believe, helped her to form her beliefs. 
 
Consistency norms respect our moral freedom, since they don’t tell us 
specifically what to do or what to believe. At the same time, they promote the 

76 Ethics 
rationality of ethics, since they guide us on how to work out our views in a 
consistent way. 
I’ve spoken of impartiality as a type of “consistency” between our evalua-
tions. I’m leaving it open whether to take this in the specific sense of “logical 
consistency,” or in the more generic sense of “uniformity.” Suppose that I 
make conflicting evaluations about similar actions. Prescriptivism says that I 
then violate logical consistency (since I misuse the term “ought”). Other views 
might say that I violate an impartiality duty to make similar evaluations about 
similar actions; this duty might rest on a social convention, a personal ideal, a 
divine command, or a self-evident truth. On these views, violating impartiality 
would involve an objectionable clash between my moral evaluations but not 
necessarily a logical inconsistency or self-contradiction. 
Let me end this section by raising some questions about impartiality.  
Remember that, as we’re using the term, impartiality requires that we make 
similar evaluations about actions that we take to be exactly or relevantly similar. 
(Q1)  Do we violate impartiality if we say “It’s all right for you to 
drive but wrong for your brother to drive?” 
No. We might point out differences between the cases (for example, that 
you have a license but he doesn’t) that we take to justify the difference in 
evaluations. Impartiality must include a clause about the acts being relevantly or 
exactly similar. 
(Q2)  Does impartiality require that we treat everyone the same? 
No. We might give extra help to someone who needs it (as in the Good 
Samaritan case). This needn’t involve making conflicting evaluations about 
similar actions. 
(Q3)  Does impartiality require that we love everyone equally? 
No. It would destroy friendships and families if we had to love everyone 
equally. Suppose that we love our children more that we love strangers—and 
we think it would be all right for any parent in similar cases to do the same thing. 
Then we’re making similar evaluations about similar actions, and we satisfy 
impartiality. 
(Q4)  Does impartiality require that we always act the same way in 
the same kind of situation? 
No. Life would be very boring if we had to do this. Suppose that we have a 
Coke one time, and then later in a similar situation have a Pepsi. We might 
regard both actions as neutral (all right either to do or to omit doing)—and 
thus evaluate them the same way. Remember that we only violate impartiality 
(as I use the term) if we make conflicting evaluations about actions that we 
regard as relevantly or exactly similar. 

 
Consistency 77 
(Q5)  Isn’t the appeal to relevantly similar actions slippery? What pre-
vents me from appealing to trivial differences? Suppose that I’m 
the only person with six toes. What keeps me from saying, “It’s all 
right for me to kill you but wrong for you to kill me, because I have 
six toes and you don’t”? 
If you pick trivial differences, we can defeat you by appealing to a hypotheti-
cal case. Imagine a case where I have six toes (instead of you). Do you really 
think that in this case it would be all right for me to kill you? No one would 
believe this. 
In appealing to relevant differences between cases, we have to be factually 
accurate (that the factor applies in one case but not the other) and consistent 
(giving the factor equal weight regardless of which side is imagined to have it). 
These conditions aren’t so easy to satisfy. 
At times, though, the appeal to relevantly similar cases can get slippery. It’s 
often cleaner to appeal to imagined exactly similar cases. 
7.6 Why be consistent? 
We’ve proposed four consistency norms: logicality, ends–means, conscientious-
ness, and impartiality. These norms would get very wide (but perhaps not 
universal) support from thinkers of different perspectives. These thinkers, 
however, may accept the consistency norms for quite different reasons. To 
dramatize this, I’ll let my Ima characters explain why they endorse consistency. 
 
Ima Relativist: “I accept all four consistency norms as social conventions. 
These norms are needed for a society to function and so are accepted by 
practically every society.” 
 
Ima Subjectivist: “I accept the consistency norms because they fit my 
feelings. I’m an idealistic person and thus am emotionally attracted to being 
impartial, conscientious, and so forth. And I welcome these norms, since they 
add a rational structure to my subjectivist view. 
 
“When I’m in my selfish mood, as I sometimes am, I can justify consistency 
by appealing to self-interest. I note that: 
1. 
Inconsistency leads to confusion and the frustration of our desires. 
To see this, imagine how miserable our lives would be if whenever 
we believed (or wanted) something we also believed (or wanted) the 
opposite thing. We’d go crazy! 
2. 
Inconsistency is inherently painful; psychologists speak here of 
cognitive dissonance. Perhaps evolution programmed our minds to 
avoid inconsistencies, as it programmed our bodies to spit out 
many poisons. 
3. 
Inconsistency brings social penalties. It cuts us off from rational 
discussion, since it leads people to dismiss our ideas. Society is  
especially harsh on us when we violate conscientiousness or  

78 Ethics 
impartiality; it trains us to feel guilt, anxiety, and the loss of self-
respect in these cases. 
For these reasons, self-interest supports consistency.” 
 
Ima Emotivist: “I accept the consistency norms because they accord with 
my feelings. I agree fully with Ima Subjectivist.” 
 
Ima Idealist: “I support consistency because it’s an important part of being 
rational. And I’d like to add that an ‘ideal observer’ must be consistent in the 
ways sketched in this chapter.” 
 
Ima Supernaturalist: “Inconsistency is bad because God is against it. The 
Bible often condemns inconsistency. For example, Jesus (in Luke 13:14–17) 
criticized hypocritical Pharisees whose actions clashed with their words. The 
Bible says much to support conscientiousness and impartiality.” 
 
Ima Prescriptivist: “When we violate conscientiousness or impartiality, we’re 
logically inconsistent since we misuse the term ‘ought.’ My view presupposes 
that we ought to be logically consistent. I see this not as a truth but as an 
imperative that we choose to live by.” 
 
Ima Intuitionist: “Consistency is the first duty of a rational being. In any area 
of thought, inconsistency is a defect. The consistency duty is a self-evident 
truth. It’s immediately obvious, and further investigations reveal no absurd 
implications. 
 
“The duty to be consistent can’t be proved by any truth that’s more basic. 
That consistency is socially approved (or promotes your self-interest, or what-
ever) doesn’t show that it’s right. Every argument presupposes the value of 
consistency (since the essence of valid reasoning is that accepting the premises 
forces you, under pain of inconsistency, to accepting the conclusion). So if you 
don’t already see the value of consistency, then I’m wasting my time if I try to 
reason with you. So we can’t argue for the value of consistency without 
circularity. Thus the duty to be consistent is a basic presupposition of reason. 
 
“People object that moral principles are vague and widely disputed, and 
hence can’t be self-evident. But the consistency norm is precise and widely 
held. In fact, you can’t do science or mathematics without it. So I see no reason 
to doubt that it’s a basic self-evident truth.” 
 
I’ll assume our consistency norms in the chapters that follow; but I won’t 
assume any particular way to defend them. I myself agree with Ima Intuitionist. 
For the reasons given in Chapter 4, I think that “good” is indefinable and that 
there are objective moral truths. I differ from classical intuitionism in that I 
accept only one basic self-evident moral truth—that we ought to be consistent 
(in the ways sketched in this chapter). The rest of ethics can be derived from 
this in ways that I’ll sketch in the next two chapters. 
7.7 Chapter summary 
How should we reason about ethics? There seems to be a permanent impasse 
(or stalemate) on this, since people continue to disagree on how to understand 
moral judgments. 

 
Consistency 79 
I’d like to suggest a way out of the difficulty. There may be moral consis-
tency principles that make sense from various perspectives and give powerful 
tools for moral reasoning. We’ll develop this idea in this chapter and the next 
two. We’ll start with four basic consistency requirements: logicality, ends–
means consistency, conscientiousness, and impartiality. 
Logicality says “Avoid inconsistent beliefs.” I violate this if I accept incom-
patible beliefs—or if I accept a belief without also accepting its logical conse-
quences. 
Ends–means consistency says “Keep your means in harmony with your 
ends.” I violate this if I (a) have an end, (b) believe that to fulfill this end I need 
to carry out certain means, and (c) don’t carry out the means. 
Conscientiousness says “Keep your actions, resolutions, and desires in har-
mony with your moral beliefs.” This forbids inconsistencies between my moral 
judgments and how I live. 
Consistency can be useful in arguing about ethics—for example, in arguing 
against a racist who says that blacks ought to be treated poorly because they’re 
inferior. Our strategy for criticizing racist arguments has three steps: (1) 
Formulate the argument. The premises must be clearly stated, and the conclu-
sion must clearly follow from the premises. (2) Criticize the factual premises if 
necessary. (3) See if the racist applies his moral premise consistently, especially 
to his own race. 
Impartiality says “Make similar evaluations about similar actions, regardless 
of the individuals involved.” I violate this if I make conflicting evaluations 
about actions that I regard as exactly or relevantly similar. To test my impartiali-
ty, it can be useful to ask whether I’d make the same evaluation about a similar 
case in which the parties are in different places—in which, for example, I’m on 
the receiving end of the action. 
We could base these consistency norms on practically any approach to 
ethics. For example, we might see them as based on social conventions, 
personal feelings, self-interest, God’s will, or self-evident truths. 
7.8 Study questions 
1. What is the usual approach to selecting a method for picking moral 
principles? Why does it lead to an impasse? (7.1) 
2. What solution is suggested for arriving at ways of reasoning about ethics? 
How will these ways of reasoning be justified? 
3. Do philosophers accept roughly the same principles of math and logic? 
Do they justify these principles the same way? 
4. What is logicality? In what two ways could we violate it? (7.2) 
5. Explain the example about Ima Relativist. 
6. Does consistency guarantee truth? If not, then of what use is it? 
7. What is the ends–means consistency requirement? Give a concrete 
example of how we might violate it. (7.3) 
8. What is the conscientiousness requirement? How would a conscientious 
pacifist live? 
9. Explain two ways to take “You ought to follow your conscience.” 

80 Ethics 
10. How could we use consistency to criticize the belief that all short people 
ought to be beat up? 
11. How could we criticize Ima Racist’s argument: “Blacks ought to be 
treated poorly, because they’re inferior”? Explain the three steps for criti-
cizing racist arguments. (7.4) 
12. How could we criticize Ima’s principle: “All blacks ought to be treated 
poorly, just because of their skin color”? 
13. Explain the impartiality requirement. What does it mean to call two acts 
“exactly similar” and “relevantly similar”? (7.5) 
14. Explain the Good Samaritan example and how it illustrates one way to 
test our impartiality. 
15. Explain the example about Babe and her operation. 
16. Give two misinterpretations of impartiality and explain why they are 
wrong. 
17. How could we criticize a person who says: “It’s all right for me to kill you 
but wrong for you to kill me, because I have six toes and you don’t”? 
18. How might one defend consistency using cultural relativism, sub-
jectivism, supernaturalism, and intuitionism? (7.6) 
19. How might one defend consistency by self-interest? 
7.9 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 07—Consistency.” 
 
This chapter is a condensed and simplified version of Chapters 1 to 4 of 
Gensler’s Formal Ethics; see this for further details. Gensler’s “Ethics is based 
on rationality” had an earlier version of the view. Many of the ideas were 
inspired by Hare’s Freedom and Reason and Kant’s Groundwork of the Metaphysics of 
Morals. The Bibliography at the end of the book has information on how to 
find these works. 
 
 

 
The Golden Rule 81 
8 The Golden Rule 
 
GR Theorem: 
Treat others only as you 
consent to being treated 
in the same situation. 
GR forbids this combination: 
• 
I do something to another. 
• 
I’m unwilling that this be done 
to me in the same situation. 
The golden rule requires that we treat others only as we consent to being 
treated in the same situation. GR is the most important principle in this book 
and perhaps the most important rule of life. GR follows from the consistency 
requirements of our previous chapter. Applying GR requires further elements, 
like knowledge and imagination, that we’ll discuss in the next chapter. 
8.1 A GR theorem 
Our GR theorem is expressed in two ways at the top of the page. To apply GR, 
you imagine yourself in the other person’s place on the receiving end of the 
action. If you act in a given way toward another and yet are unwilling to be 
treated that way in the same situation, then you violate the rule. 
Here’s an example. President Kennedy appealed to the golden rule in an 
anti-segregation speech during the first black enrollment at the University of 
Alabama. He asked whites to consider what it would be like to be treated as 
second-class citizens because of skin color. They were to imagine themselves 
being black—and being told that because of this they couldn’t vote, go to the 
best public schools, eat at most public restaurants, or sit in the front of the bus. 
Would whites be content to be treated that way? He was sure they wouldn’t; yet 
this is how they treated others. He said the “heart of the question is whether we 
are going to treat our fellow Americans as we want to be treated.” 
To apply the golden rule, we need to know what effect our actions have on 
the lives of others. And we need to imagine ourselves, vividly and accurately, in 
the other person’s place on the receiving end of the action. When combined 
with knowledge and imagination, GR is a powerful tool of moral thinking. 
GR is a consistency principle. It doesn’t replace regular moral norms. It isn’t 
an infallible guide on what is right or wrong. It only prescribes consistency—
that we not have our actions (toward another) be out of harmony with our 
desires (about a reversed-situation action). 

82 Ethics 
GR follows from conscientiousness and impartiality. Suppose that you want 
to steal Detra’s bicycle. And suppose that you’re conscientious (keep your 
actions and desires in harmony with your moral beliefs) and impartial (make 
similar evaluations about similar actions). Then you won’t steal her bicycle 
unless you’re also willing that your bicycle be stolen in the same situation. This 
chart shows the steps in the derivation: 
 
You steal 
Detra’s 
bicycle 
Î 
conscientious 
You believe it would 
be all right for you 
to steal her bicycle 
 
Ð impartial      
You’re willing 
that your bicycle 
be stolen in the 
same situation 
Í 
conscientious 
You believe it would 
be all right for your 
bicycle to be stolen in 
the same situation 
Here’s a less graphical version of the argument. If we’re conscientious and 
impartial, then: 
 
We won’t do something to another unless we believe that this act 
would be all right. 
 
We won’t believe that this act would be all right unless we believe that 
it would be all right for this to be done to us in the same situation. 
 
We won’t believe that it would be all right for this to be done to us in 
the same situation unless we’re willing that this be done to us in the 
same situation. 
Á  We won’t do something to another unless we’re willing that this be 
done to us in the same situation. 
So if we’re conscientious and impartial, then we’ll follow GR: we won’t do 
something to another unless we’re willing that it be done to us in the same 
situation. But we’ve assumed (Chapter 7) that we ought to be conscientious and 
impartial. It follows that we ought to follow GR: we ought to treat others only as 
we consent to being treated in the same situation. 
So our GR isn’t a basic principle. Instead, it’s provable from the conscien-
tiousness and impartiality requirements. Our GR is a theorem—something 
provable from principles that are more basic. 
Let’s compare our GR with prescriptivism’s GR (Section 6.3), which also 
holds on our approach: 
Prescriptivism’s GR says that this combination is inconsistent: (a) I 
believe that I ought to do something to another, and (b) I don’t  
desire that this be done to me in the same situation. 

 
The Golden Rule 83 
Our GR is stronger in three ways. First, we can violate it even if we don’t use 
“ought”; so we can’t escape it by refusing to make moral judgments. Second, 
we can defend our GR using practically any approach to ethics; so it doesn’t 
assume a controversial prescriptivist analysis of moral terms. Third, views that 
accept moral truths could accept that our GR expresses an important moral 
truth about how we ought to live. 
8.2 The literal rule 
People usually formulate the golden rule in simple ways, like “Treat others as 
you want to be treated.” If we take this formulation literally, we get the literal 
golden rule (LR): 
Literal Golden Rule: 
If you want X to do something to 
you, then do this same thing to X. 
LR has no same-situation clause and tells what specific act to do (instead of 
forbidding an action–desire combination). 
LR often works well. Suppose you want Suzy to be kind to you; then LR 
tells you to be kind to her. Or suppose you want Tom not to hurt you (or rob 
you, or be inconsiderate to you); then you are not to do these things to him. 
These applications seem sensible. But LR can lead to absurdities in two types 
of case. First, you may be in a different situation from X: 
• 
To a patient: If you want the doctor to remove your appendix, then 
remove the doctor’s appendix. 
• 
To a violent little boy who loves to fight: If you want your sister to 
fight with you, then fight with her. 
• 
To a parent: If you want your child not to punish you, then don’t 
punish him. 
Second, you may have defective desires about how you are to be treated: 
• 
To one who desires to be hated: If you want others to hate you, 
then hate them. 
LR leads to absurdities because its wording is wrong. 
 
GR’s same-situation clause avoids the first kind of objection. Consider this 
case. I speak loudly to my father (who is hard of hearing); but I don’t want him 
to speak loudly to me (since my hearing is normal). While this is sensible, it 
violates the literal golden rule. LR says if I want my father to speak normally 
(not loudly) to me, then this is how I am to speak to him. LR ignores differenc-
es in situation. LR says: “If you want others to treat you in a given way in your 
present situation, then this is how you are to treat them—even if their situation 
is very different.” 

84 Ethics 
With GR, I’d ask how I desire that I’d be treated if I were in the same situa-
tion as my father (and thus hard of hearing). I desire that if I were in his same 
situation then people would speak loudly to me. So I’d speak loudly to him. 
We can take “same situation” here as “exactly similar situation” or “rele-
vantly similar situation.” In the first case, I’d imagine myself in my father’s exact 
place (with all his properties). In the second, I’d imagine myself having those 
properties of my father (such as being hard of hearing) that I think are or might 
be relevant to deciding how loudly one should speak to him. Either approach 
works fine. 
The same-situation clause is also important for the appendix case. Recall 
that LR told the patient to remove the doctor’s appendix. The same-situation 
clause would block this, since the patient clearly doesn’t desire that if he were in 
the place of his doctor (with a healthy appendix), then his appendix be 
removed by a sick patient ignorant of medicine. In applying GR, we need to 
ask the first question, not the second: 
Am I now willing that if I 
were in the same situation 
then this be done to me? 
Am I now willing that 
this be done to me (in 
my present situation)? 
The other person’s situation includes likes and dislikes. So if you’re a waiter 
who hates spinach, but whose customer likes and orders it, you imagine being 
served spinach in an imagined situation where you like and order it. 
In the fighting case, LR told the violent little boy to fight with his sister. The 
same-situation clause would block this. The little boy should imagine himself in 
the place of his sister (who is terrorized by fighting) and ask “Am I willing that 
if I were in her place then I be fought with in this way?” Since the answer is 
“no,” he wouldn’t fight with his sister. 
We need to be careful about something else. GR is about our present reaction to 
a hypothetical case. It isn’t about how we would react if we were in the hypotheti-
cal case. Again, we have to ask the first question, not the second: 
Am I now willing that if I 
were in the same situation 
then this be done to me? 
If I were in the same situa-
tion, would I then be willing 
that this be done to me? 
The difference here is important but subtle. Let me try to clarify it. 
Suppose I have a two-year-old son, little Willy, who keeps putting his fingers 
into electrical outlets. I try to discourage him from doing this, but nothing 
works. Finally, I decide that I need to spank him when he does it. I want to see 
if I can spank him without violating GR. In determining this, I should ask the 
first question, not the second: 

 
The Golden Rule 85 
Am I now willing that 
if I were in Willy’s place 
in the same situation 
then I be spanked? 
If I were in Willy’s place 
in the reversed situation, 
would I then be willing 
to be spanked? 
This has “willing that if.” It’s 
about my present adult desire 
toward a hypothetical case.
 
This has “if” before “willing.” 
It’s about the desire I’d 
have as a small child.
With the first question, I imagine the case in the following box: 
I’m a two-year-old child. I put my fingers into 
electrical outlets, and the only thing that will stop 
me is a spanking. As a two-year old, I don’t under-
stand electricity and so I desire not to be spanked. 
As an adult, I say “I now desire that if I were in this situation then I be 
spanked.” I might add, “I’m thankful that my parents spanked me in such 
cases, even though I wasn’t pleased then.” Thus I can spank my child without 
breaking GR, since I’m willing that I would have been treated the same way in 
the same situation. 
 
On the other hand, if I were in Willy’s place and thus judged things from a 
two-year-old mentality, then I’d desire not to be spanked. That’s what the 
crossed-out question is about. If we formulated GR using this, then I’d break 
GR if I spanked Willy. But this is absurd. We need to formulate GR correctly, 
in terms of my present reaction to a hypothetical case. I can satisfy GR because 
I’m now (as an adult) willing that I would have been spanked in this situation. 
 
This point is subtle but of central importance. If you don’t get the idea, I 
suggest you reread the last few paragraphs a few times until it comes through. 
This distinction is crucial when we deal with someone who isn’t very ration-
al—such as one who is drunk, senile, or in a coma. Suppose that a friend at a 
party wants to drive home despite being drunk, confused, and incapable of 
driving. You tell him he can’t drive home—and you’re willing that if the 
situation were reversed (and you were drunk and confused) then you be told 
the same thing. In applying GR to this case, you need to ask the first question, 
not the second: 
 
Am I now willing that  
if I were drunk and con-
fused then I be told that 
I cannot drive home? 
If I were drunk and con-
fused, then would I then 
be willing to be told that 
I cannot drive home? 
With the second question, drunk and confused desires provide the norm of 
how to treat your friend. Properly understood, GR is about our present attitude 

86 Ethics 
toward a hypothetical case. To use GR correctly, say “I am willing that if”; 
don’t say “I would be willing.” 
Let me sum up. Recall that the literal golden rule LR can lead to absurdities 
in two ways. First, you might be in a different situation from the other person. We 
can get around this by including a same-situation clause and being careful to 
ask the correct question. Second, you may have defective desires about how you 
are to be treated. LR can tell a person with defective desires to do evil things. 
For example, it can tell someone who desires hatred to hate others. Here we’ll 
consider a simpler case that shows why we need to take GR not as a direct 
guide to action but rather as prescribing consistency between our actions 
(toward another) and our desires (about a reversed-situation action). 
Imagine this case. We own a very profitable coal mine but act wrongly in 
paying our workers only a miserly $1 a day. People ask if we’re willing to be 
paid only $1 a day in their place. We answer “yes” and thus are consistent. But 
we answer “yes” only because we think (incorrectly) that our workers can live 
tolerably on this amount. If we knew how little $1 buys, we wouldn’t answer 
“yes.” So our action isn’t flawed because it’s inconsistent; instead it’s flawed 
because it’s misinformed. So we need to correct our view of the facts. 
 
In the coal-mine case, we satisfy GR-consistency but act wrongly, because 
we’re misinformed. This shows that we shouldn’t take GR by itself as an 
infallible guide on right and wrong. Properly understood, GR doesn’t tell us 
what specific action to take; instead, it forbids inconsistent combinations. 
Formally, GR is a consistency principle that forbids a certain combination: 
• 
I do something to another. 
• 
I’m unwilling that this be done 
to me in the same situation. 
Í 
Í 
Don’t 
combine 
these. 
If we take the golden rule to be an if-then, telling us to do a specific action if 
we have a given desire about how we are to be treated, then it may command 
bad actions when we have defective desires. 
 
Here’s another example. Electra gives other people severe electrical shocks. 
And she’s willing that she be shocked that way in their place—because she 
ignorantly thinks that these shocks are very pleasant. She can’t be faulted for 
violating GR consistency; but she can be faulted for not getting her facts 
straight. To lead reliably to right action, GR needs to be combined with factual 
knowledge and imagination. But even if we’re misinformed, GR doesn’t tell us 
to do specific wrong actions—because GR doesn’t tell us to do specific actions 
at all; instead, it forbids certain inconsistent combinations. 
Our GR formulation has three key features: 
• 
a same-situation clause, 
• 
a present attitude toward a hypothetical situation, and 
• 
a don’t-combine form. 

 
The Golden Rule 87 
We need these features to avoid absurd implications and to insure that GR is 
derivable from conscientiousness and impartiality. 
8.3 Masochists 
The literal golden rule LR can tell a person with defective desires to do evil 
things. For example, it can tell a masochist who wants to be tortured to torture 
another: “If you want X to torture you, then torture X.” This is perhaps the 
most difficult objection to the golden rule. 
 
In dealing with masochist cases, we need a three-fold attack: 
1. 
We need to have the masochist imagine himself in the same situation 
as the other person (who typically isn’t a masochist). 
2. 
We need some way to criticize irrational desires. 
3. 
We need to recall that our GR forbids an inconsistent action–desire 
combination—and doesn’t tell us what specific act to do. 
1. Suppose that Ima Masochist is considering whether to torture X, who is 
not a masochist. To apply GR, Ima should ask: 
“Am I willing that if I were in the exact place 
of nonmasochist X then I be tortured?” 
Typical masochists desire physical or emotional pain because this brings some 
sort of satisfaction (perhaps of a sexual, religious, or athletic nature). Let’s 
suppose that Ima Masochist is a boxer and considers himself to be a “tough 
guy”; he gets satisfaction from how much abuse he can endure, whether in the 
boxing ring or elsewhere. Now Ima wouldn’t get this satisfaction if he were in 
the place of nonmasochist X. So to be tortured in nonmasochist X’s place 
would bring unwanted pain. So very likely Ima won’t be willing that he be 
tortured if he were in nonmasochist X’s place. Thus it’s important to insist on 
the “same-situation” clause. 
2. But let’s suppose that Ima isn’t a typical masochist, as described above. 
Instead, Ima is filled with irrational self-hatred. He hates himself so much that 
he wants to be tortured in his present situation and in any imagined situation. 
Ima is deranged. Maybe we could use rational means to counter his self-hatred: 
we try to get Ima to understand himself better (including the source of his 
hatred), appreciate his self-worth, and experience positive ways of living. If he 
developed a love for himself, then GR could extend this love-of-self to love-of-
others. (The next chapter says more about how to criticize irrational desires.) 
3. Let’s now suppose that Ima Masochist resists having his self-hatred  
rationally criticized. Ima, perhaps because he has been given a self-hatred drug, 
wants to be tortured in his present situation and in any imagined situation—
and he totally resists rational criticism of his self-hatred. Ima tortures X and 
desires that if he were in X’s place then he be similarly tortured; so he satisfies 
GR consistency. Now GR doesn’t tell him to torture. GR, let us recall, doesn’t 
command specific actions but only forbids an inconsistent combination: 

88 Ethics 
• 
I do something to another. 
• 
I’m unwilling that this be done 
to me in the same situation. 
Í 
Í 
Don’t 
combine 
these. 
Unlike the literal golden rule, GR doesn’t assume that our desires about how 
we are to be treated are fine and give us a good guide on how to treat others. 
GR only forbids inconsistencies and so doesn’t tell Ima to torture X. 
 
Our coal-mine and Electra cases also showed that we can be consistent and 
follow GR, but still act wrongly. This can happen if we’re ignorant about how 
our actions affect others or if our desires are defective. So consistency isn’t 
enough. GR gives a useful tool for criticizing certain inconsistent attitudes. But 
we may also need other tools of criticism. GR works best when combined with 
other factors, such as knowledge, imagination, and rationalized desires. 
8.4 GR questions 
(Q1)  Is the golden rule widely accepted? 
 
Yes. Many endorse GR and put it at the heart of their moral thinking. For 
example, professionals often use GR to explain their responsibilities toward 
others. So a thoughtful nurse might say, “I try to treat my patients as I’d want 
to be treated in their place.” Many in education, business, or government say 
similar things. 
The golden rule has wide support among the various religions and cultures 
of the world. Jesus Christ, Confucius, and Rabbi Hillel all used the rule to 
summarize their teachings. Bahá’í, Buddhism, Christianity, Confucianism, 
Hinduism, Islam, Judaism, Taoism, and other world religions support GR, as 
do secular thinkers from diverse cultures. Many of these give the rule a central 
status in moral thinking. GR is close to being a global principle—a norm 
common to all peoples of all times. 
GR, with roots in a wide range of world cultures, is well suited to be a stan-
dard that different cultures can appeal to in resolving conflicts. As the world 
becomes more and more a single interacting global community, the need for 
such a common standard is becoming more urgent. 
(Q2)  How does “Love your neighbor” relate to GR? 
“Love your neighbor” is about motivation, while GR is a key element in 
rational (consistent-informed-imaginative) moral thinking. The two ideas, while 
not equivalent, work well together. 
“Love your neighbor” tells us to act out of a genuine concern for others. If 
we love others, we’re motivated to care about them for their own sake. We seek 
to do good and not harm to them—and don’t do this for ulterior reasons. 
We might follow GR out of lower motives (like habit, conformity, or self-
interest) or higher motives (like genuine love for others). Love is the highest 
motive for following GR. If we follow GR out of love, then we follow it 

 
The Golden Rule 89 
because we care about others for their own sake. This brings us closer to moral 
perfection. In this way, GR needs love. 
But love also needs GR. Let’s say that you love others; this is fine, but how 
do you apply this love? GR gives a workable way to translate love into action. 
To love your neighbor in the GR way, follow these three steps: 
1. 
Know your neighbor as well as you can. 
2. 
Imagine yourself in the place of your neighbor, as vividly and 
accurately as you can. 
3. 
Act toward your neighbor only in ways that you’re willing to be 
treated in the same situation. 
If you love your children in the GR way, for example, you’ll make a great effort 
to know and understand them (including their needs and desires). You’ll put 
yourself in their place and try to imagine what their lives are like for them. And 
you’ll treat them only in ways that you’re willing to be treated yourself by a 
parent in the same situation. 
 
Or suppose that the coal-mine owner becomes a convert to “love your 
neighbor” and decides to run his mine by the golden rule. What would he do? 
First he’d learn about how his company impacts the lives of other people—
especially the workers, but also neighbors and customers. What are their 
problems and issues, and how are they affected by how the company is run? 
Then he’d apply imagination. He’d imagine himself as a worker (laboring under 
certain conditions for a certain salary), or perhaps as a next-door neighbor 
(with black smoke coming into his house). And then he’d ask the GR question: 
“Am I willing that if I were in that situation then I’d be treated that way?” 
(Q3)  Is the golden rule the summary of all morality? 
This depends on how we take the question. Are we looking for a single 
principle that always tells us what specific act we ought to do? Our GR won’t 
do this. Forms that directly guide action, like the literal golden rule, can lead to 
absurdities when we have defective desires. 
Properly interpreted, the golden rule doesn’t say what specific act to do. 
Instead, it forbids inconsistent action–desire combinations. Thus GR doesn’t 
compete with principles like “It’s wrong to steal” or “One ought to do 
whatever maximizes enjoyment.” GR operates at a different level. 
The golden rule captures the spirit behind morality. It helps us to see the 
point behind moral rules. It engages our reasoning, instead of imposing an 
answer. It counteracts self-centeredness. And it concretely applies ideals like 
fairness and concern. So GR makes a good one-sentence summary of what 
morality is about. 
(Q4)  Is GR the same as “Treat others as they treat you”? 
No, although the two are often confused. “Treat others as they treat you” 
tells you to do good to those who do good to you—and to harm those who 

90 Ethics 
harm you. This can lead to revenge and retaliation. Young children, when they 
learn the golden rule, often misunderstand it to say “Treat others as they treat 
you. If someone hits you, then hit him back.” They regard this approach as fair. 
Wiser people see that this leads to endless revenge—and so they prefer the 
golden rule. 
(Q5)  Is GR the same as “Treat others as they want to be treated” 
(the platinum rule)? 
No. The platinum rule can prescribe evil actions. Suppose that Dr. Evil 
wants me to help him to destroy the world; then platinum tells me to help Dr. 
Evil to destroy the world. And platinum can prescribe self-contradictions. 
Suppose that the Democrat wants me to vote for her and not for the Republi-
can—and the Republican wants me to vote for her and not for the Democrat; 
then platinum tells me to vote for both and for neither. 
GR, if formulated properly, is a much better principle. GR sometimes per-
mits us to act against the will of another—as in the case of two-year-old Willy 
of Section 8.2, who doesn’t want to prevented from putting his fingers in the 
electrical outlet. 
(Q6)  Isn’t the GR theorem too subtle and difficult for normal 
people to understand? 
 
It does have subtle aspects. We need these to avoid the objections and to 
show that the golden rule is defensible. Less sophisticated people can always 
fall back on the very simple literal golden rule. 
(Q7)  Suppose you live in a ruthless “dog-eat-dog” society, where 
everyone takes advantage of everyone else. Wouldn’t people take 
advantage of you if you followed the golden rule? 
Not necessarily. GR permits self-defense. You can defend yourself against 
the attacks of evil people in ways that you consent to others defending 
themselves against you in a similar case. So you can eat the other dog (who tries 
to eat you) if you consent to your being eaten in a similar case (where you try to 
eat another). Even in a dog-eat-dog world, however, GR would limit how 
harshly we could treat others. And it may lead us to work toward a better 
society in which everyone follows GR. 
(Q8)  What is the scope of the golden rule? Does it apply just to 
human beings—or perhaps just to our tribe or group? Does it apply 
to animals or things? 
GR says that you [agent] are to treat another [recipient] only as you consent 
to being treated in the same situation. So there are two questions. First, what 
agents does “you” apply to? Second, what recipients does “another” apply to? 

 
The Golden Rule 91 
First, GR governs the actions of rational agents. GR forbids inconsistent 
action–desire combinations. GR wouldn’t apply to beings who can’t act 
intentionally or can’t consent to hypothetical actions. 
Second, GR deals with how to treat sentient recipients—beings capable of 
experiences (past, present, or future). GR is vacuous when we apply it to 
nonsentient objects. Consider this instance of GR (which leaves unspecified 
what kind of being X is): 
Don’t step on X without consenting to the idea of 
your being stepped on if you were in X’s exact place. 
We can derive this instance from the general duties to be conscientious (to live 
in harmony with our moral beliefs) and impartial (to make similar evaluations 
about similar actions); neither of these duties is restricted to how we treat 
humans. The instance works normally if X is a sentient being—like a friend, a 
stranger, or a dog. I care about whether I be stepped on if I were in the place of 
any of these, since then being stepped on would hurt me. But the instance is 
vacuous for practical purposes if X is a rock or other nonsentient being. I don’t 
care about whether I be stepped on if I were in the place of a rock. Rocks feel 
no pain. So I step freely on rocks—but not on friends, strangers, or dogs. 
Consider this GR instance about torturing your dog: 
Don’t torture your dog without consenting to the idea of 
your being tortured if you were in your dog’s place. 
This works like GR as applied to humans. Of course, it’s more difficult to 
understand the dog’s life and to imagine yourself in the dog’s place. Those who 
deal with canines may find this easier; but this example doesn’t demand a subtle 
knowledge of dogs. So I see no reason not to apply GR to animals. 
I’m reminded of a traditional African proverb: “One who is going to take a 
pointed stick to pinch a baby bird should first try it on himself to feel how it 
hurts.” This suggests that we are to apply GR to baby birds and to all other 
sentient creatures. 
(Q9)  GR helps us to see our duties toward others. Are there any 
similar principles that can help us to see our duties toward our-
selves? 
Yes. We violate consistency if we treat others as we aren’t willing to be 
treated. But we also violate consistency if we treat ourselves as we aren’t willing 
to have others treat themselves in the same situation. This is the self-regard 
principle. To use it effectively, we must imagine someone we care about acting 
as we propose to act. 
Here are examples. Maybe you have so much concern for your children that 
you never think of your own needs; but you aren’t willing that your children 
live in a similar way when they grow up. Or you go through college without 
putting much effort into it; but you don’t consent to the idea of a daughter of 

92 Ethics 
yours doing this in the same situation. Or, because you lack courage and a 
sense of self-worth, you refuse to seek treatment for a drug habit that’s ruining 
your life; but you aren’t willing that your younger brother do this in a similar 
situation. In all these cases, you’re inconsistent and violate self-regard. 
We tend to think of people as too selfish and too little concerned for others. 
But people often don’t have much concern for themselves either. Various 
factors (laziness, fear, habit, lack of self-appreciation, lack of discipline, and so 
forth) can drive us into ways of living that benefit neither ourselves nor others. 
Our consistency requirements recognize the importance of both concern for 
others and concern for ourselves. 
GR and the self-regard principle imaginatively shift the persons in the situa-
tion. But we also can shift the time—and imagine that we now experience the 
future consequences of our actions. We violate consistency if we treat ourselves 
(in the future) as we aren’t willing to have been treated by ourselves (in the 
past). This is the future-regard principle. More crudely: “Don’t do what you’ll 
later regret.” 
Here are examples. Maybe you cause yourself a future hangover by your 
drinking; but, when you imagine yourself experiencing the hangover now, you 
don’t consent to the idea of your having treated yourself this way. Or you cause 
yourself a future jail sentence by stealing; but when you picture yourself suf-
fering these consequences now because of your past actions, you don’t consent 
to these actions. In both cases, you’re inconsistent and violate future-regard. 
(Q10)  The golden rule is about your treatment of X. What if your 
action affects two others, X and Y? 
I must satisfy the golden rule toward both. Suppose that I own a store and 
need to hire just one worker. X and Y apply, and I have to choose between 
them. Both are qualified, but X more than Y. The one I don’t pick will be 
disappointed. To make a choice consistently, I must be willing for anyone to 
make that choice in that situation—regardless of which place in the situation I 
imagine myself in. So if I pick X (who is more qualified) instead of Y, then I 
have to be willing that I not be picked if I were in Y’s situation. 
The formula of universal law expresses this idea more elegantly: 
Formula of Universal Law: 
Act only as you’re willing for anyone to 
act in the same situation, regardless of 
imagined variations of time or person. 
These “imagined variations” include cases where you’re in the place of 
someone affected by your action (GR), where someone you care about is in 
your place (self-regard), or where you’re at a future time experiencing the 
consequences of your action (future-regard). The formula of universal law is a 
generalization of the golden rule; it also includes the self-regard and future-

 
The Golden Rule 93 
regard ideas. We can also express it as “Act only in ways that you find accepta-
ble, regardless of where or when you imagine yourself in the situation.” 
 
My “formula of universal law” is named after a famous (but somewhat 
different) formula of the eighteenth-century philosopher Immanuel Kant. In 
many ways, my GR consistency view is a contemporary restatement of Kant’s 
approach to ethics. 
(Q11)  Could you sum up your consistency principles? 
 
Our last chapter specified four basic consistency principles: 
• 
Logicality: Avoid inconsistent beliefs. 
• 
Ends–means: Keep your means in harmony with your ends. 
• 
Conscientiousness: Keep your actions, resolutions, and desires in 
harmony with your moral beliefs. 
• 
Impartiality: Make similar evaluations about similar actions, 
regardless of the individuals involved. 
This present chapter presented four derivative principles: 
• 
Golden rule: Treat others only as you consent to being treated in 
the same situation. 
• 
Self-regard: Treat yourself only as you’re willing to have others treat 
themselves in the same situation. 
• 
Future-regard: Treat yourself (in the future) only as you’re willing to 
have been treated by yourself (in the past). 
• 
Universal law: Act only as you’re willing for anyone to act in the 
same situation, regardless of imagined variations of time or person. 
My former student Elizabeth Murphy suggested that we remember these by 
thinking of CELI FUGS (pronounced “silly fugs”). She says that fugs are little 
creatures that don’t practice conscientiousness, ends–means, logicality, and 
impartiality (CELI)—or future-regard, universal law, golden rule, and self-
regard (FUGS). That’s why they’re silly. 
8.5 Why follow GR? 
This section is redundant, since GR follows from consistency duties that we 
already defended. However, some views support GR more firmly and directly 
than how they support consistency in general. And GR is so important that it’s 
useful to see how it fits into different approaches to ethics. So I’ll now let the 
Ima characters explain why they endorse GR. 
 
Ima Relativist: “I accept the golden rule as a social convention. Practically 
every society accepts GR, since this rule helps us to resolve social conflicts in a 
way that people find acceptable. A society without GR (or something equiva-
lent) wouldn’t survive very long.” 

94 Ethics 
 
Ima Subjectivist: “I accept GR because it fits my feelings. I’m an idealistic 
person, and thus care about people for their own sake. And I feel that the 
world would be a better place if we all followed GR. So I have an emotional 
attraction toward GR. 
 
“When I’m in my selfish mood, as I sometimes am, I can justify following 
GR by appealing to self-interest. I note that: 
1. 
People mostly treat us as we treat them. So it generally pays in 
terms of self-interest to treat others well. 
2. 
Following GR promotes cooperation, which benefits everyone 
(including myself). Selfishness promotes conflict, which ultimately 
hurts everyone (including myself). 
3. 
Following GR makes us feel good about ourselves and brings us 
the respect and admiration of others. 
4. 
Violating GR brings penalties, including social disapproval and 
alienation from others. And society trains us to feel guilt and lose 
self-respect when we violate GR. 
So self-interest can justify GR fairly well. 
“Some people think intelligent crooks might promote their self-interest 
better by only pretending to follow GR. But this strategy usually fails. Most 
crooks are caught, or live in the fear of being caught, and end up living very 
unsatisfying lives. 
 
“An experiment by Rimland (1982) gives further evidence that self-interest 
supports GR. Many groups were asked to list the persons that they knew best, 
and then label them as ‘happy’ or ‘unhappy,’ and as ‘altruistic’ or ‘selfish.’ When 
the responses are analyzed, ‘happy’ people are almost always ‘altruistic’ and 
almost never ‘selfish.’ So, judging by people’s perceptions, self-interest seems to 
support GR.” 
 
Ima Emotivist: “I accept the golden rule because it accords with my feelings. 
I agree fully with Ima Subjectivist.” 
 
Ima Idealist: “I support GR because it’s required by consistency and hence 
by rationality. And I’d like to add to my definition of ‘ideal observer’ that such 
a being would follow GR.” 
 
Ima Supernaturalist: “We ought to follow the golden rule because it’s God’s 
law. Christianity endorses GR (see Matthew 7:12 and Luke 6:31), as do all the 
other major world religions. We are all brothers and sisters, created by a loving 
Father, a God who wants us to love one another and follow the golden rule.” 
 
Ima Prescriptivist: “I see GR as built into our moral language. And I choose 
to use moral language, and thus follow GR, because I value the kind of life, for 
myself and for others, that this leads to.” 
 
Ima Intuitionist: “Our GR is a self-evident truth—a known truth that 
requires no further proof or justification. Almost everyone will see its correct-
ness right away; and further investigations uncover no absurd consequences, so 
long as we formulate GR correctly. Of course, our GR can be proven by more 
basic consistency requirements. This is useful to do, as a way of organizing our 

 
The Golden Rule 95 
moral consistency principles into a system. But GR is clearly true in itself—
even without such a proof.” (I agree with Ima Intuitionist.) 
8.6 Chapter summary 
Our golden rule theorem says: “Treat others only as you consent to being 
treated in the same situation.” To apply GR, I’d imagine myself in the other 
person’s place on the receiving end of the action. GR forbids this combination: 
(a) I do something to another, and yet (b) I’m unwilling that this be done to me 
in the same situation. 
GR doesn’t tell us what specific act to do. And it doesn’t replace regular 
moral norms. It only prescribes consistency—that we not have our actions 
(toward another) be out of harmony with our desires (about a reversed-
situation action). To apply GR adequately, we need knowledge and imagination. 
If we’re conscientious and impartial, then we’ll follow GR—since then we 
won’t do something to another unless we believe it would be all right—and 
thus believe it would be all right to do to us in the same situation—and thus are 
willing that it be done to us in the same situation. 
The literal GR says: “If you want X to do something to you, then do this 
same thing to X.” This can lead to absurdities if we are in a different situation 
from X or have defective desires about how we are to be treated. To avoid these, 
our GR uses a same-situation clause, a present attitude toward a hypothetical 
situation, and a don’t-combine form. 
The golden rule is close to being a global principle—a norm common to all 
peoples of all times. It makes a good summary of morality and a good way to 
operationalize the idea of “loving your neighbor.” Closely related to GR are the 
self-regard and future-regard principles, and the formula of universal law: “Act 
only as you’re willing for anyone to act in the same situation—regardless of 
imagined variations of time or person.” 
We could base the golden rule on practically any approach to ethics. For 
example, we might base GR on social conventions, personal feelings, self-
interest, God’s will, or self-evident truths. 
8.7 Study questions 
1. Give the two formulations of the golden rule theorem. 
2. Explain Kennedy’s use of the golden rule. What two further factors do 
we need to apply GR? (8.1) 
3. Explain, using the example about stealing Detra’s bicycle, how GR 
follows from conscientiousness and impartiality. 
4. In what three ways does our GR theorem differ from prescriptivism’s 
GR? 
5. What is the literal golden rule? Give some objections to it. (8.2) 
6. Explain the “hard of hearing” case—and how our GR formulation deals 
with it. 
7. Explain the “punishing your child” case—and how our GR formulation 
deals with it. What do we have to be careful about here? 

96 Ethics 
8. A murderer tells the judge: “If you were in my place, you wouldn’t want 
to be sent to jail. Hence by the golden rule you can’t send me to jail.” 
Show how this misunderstands the golden rule. How could the judge  
answer using a better understanding of the rule? 
9. Could we follow GR and yet still act wrongly? Use the “coal mine” or 
“Electra” example in your answer. 
10. What are the three key features of our GR formulation? 
11. Explain the “masochist” objection to the golden rule—and how our view 
deals with it. (8.3) 
12. How widely accepted is the golden rule? (8.4) 
13. What motivation would “Love your neighbor” give to GR? What three 
steps does GR use to apply “Love your neighbor”? 
14. Children sometimes interpret GR as saying “Treat others as they treat 
you.” How does this formula differ from the golden rule? 
15. In a dog-eat-dog world, would people who follow GR necessarily be 
taken advantage of? 
16. What is GR’s scope? Does GR apply to our treatment of animals? 
17. Explain the self-regard and future-regard principles. 
18. How does GR apply if your action affects two other people? What is the 
formula of universal law? 
19. What does “CELI FUGS” stand for? 
20. How might one defend GR using cultural relativism, subjectivism, 
supernaturalism, and intuitionism? (8.5) 
21. How might one defend GR by self-interest? 
8.8 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 08—The Golden Rule.” 
 
This chapter is a condensed and simplified version of Chapters 5 and 6 of 
Gensler’s Formal Ethics; see this book for further details and references. GR 
books include Wattles’s The Golden Rule (historical and religious) and Terry’s 
Golden Rules and Silver Rules of Humanity (scientific aspects). Neusner and Chilton 
have two anthologies on the golden rule (I have an essay in the analytical 
volume, see Gensler 2009a). Carson’s Lying and Deception has two chapters (6 
and 7) that deal with GR. For shorter discussions, see Hertzler’s “On golden 
rules,” Singer’s “The golden rule,” and Cadoux’s “The implications of the 
golden rule.” Many of the ideas in this chapter were inspired by Hare’s Freedom 
and Reason and Kant’s Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. The Bibliography at 
the end of the book has information on how to find these works. 
 
After finishing this present book, I plan to write a comprehensive book on 
the golden rule, perhaps to be called The GOLDEN RULE Book. 
 
 

 
Moral Rationality 97 
9 Moral Rationality 
 
Moral Rationality: 
We’re rational in our moral judgments to 
the extent that we’re consistent, informed, 
imaginative, and a few more things. 
What does moral rationality require? How can we pick our moral principles in 
the wisest and most rational way? How can we reason about moral issues? The 
last two chapters gave part of the answer. Moral rationality requires consis-
tency, which includes the golden rule. But it also requires other elements, like 
knowledge and imagination. We now need to complete the picture. 
9.1 Rationality conditions 
I suggest that we’re rational in our moral thinking to the extent that we’re 
(1) consistent, (2) informed, (3) imaginative, and (4) a few more things. While 
we’ll never be completely rational, we can strive for greater rationality. 
(1) Consistent. We need to be consistent in ways that we’ve sketched in the last 
two chapters. These include logicality, ends–means consistency, conscientious-
ness, impartiality, the golden rule, self-regard, future-regard, and the formula of 
universal law. 
(2) Informed. As far as possible, we need to know the situation, alternative 
moral views, and ourselves. 
First, we need to know the situation: circumstances, alternatives, conse-
quences, and so on. To the extent that we’re misinformed or ignorant, our 
thinking is flawed. (An exception to this is that it may be desirable to eliminate 
information that may bias or cause cognitive overload.) 
Second, we need to know alternative moral views and arguments for or 
against them. Our thinking is less rational if we’re unaware of opposing views. 
Finally, we need self-knowledge. We can to some degree neutralize our 
biases through understanding how they originated. For example, some people 
are hostile toward a group because they were taught this when they were young. 
Their attitudes might change if they understood the source of their hostility and 
broadened their experience. If so, then their attitudes are less rational—since 
they exist because of ignorance. 

98 Ethics 
Of course, we can never know all the facts; and we often have no time to 
research a problem and must act quickly. But we can act out of greater or lesser 
knowledge. Other things being equal, a more informed judgment is a more 
rational one. 
(3) Imaginative. As far as possible, we need a vivid and accurate awareness of 
what it would be like to be in the place of those affected by our actions. This 
differs from just knowing facts. So in dealing with poor people, besides 
knowing facts about them, we also need to appreciate and envision what these 
facts mean to their lives. Movies, literature, and personal experience can help us 
to visualize another’s life. 
Imagining another’s perspective is a common human experience. A child 
pretends to be a mother or a soldier. A chess player asks, “If I were in my 
opponent’s place, how would I respond to this move?” A writer dialogues with 
an imagined reader who misunderstands and raises objections. A teacher asks, 
“How would I respond to this assignment if I were a student?” The ability to 
take another’s perspective (empathy) is especially important for applying the 
golden rule. 
We also need to appreciate the future consequences of our actions on our-
selves. Knowing that drugs have harmful effects differs from being able to 
imagine these effects in a vivid and accurate way. An essay about drug addic-
tion might give us the facts, while a story or movie about drug addicts might 
bring these facts to life for us. 
(4) A few more things. Here are five additional suggestions (Gensler 1996: 
151–2 has a longer list): 
• 
Feel free to think for yourself (instead of just conforming). 
• 
Develop feelings that support the rational principles—especially 
feelings of concern for yourself and for others. Feelings can guide 
us when we don’t have time to think things out. 
• 
Dialogue with others in your society and in other societies. Other 
people can point out our inconsistencies and make us aware of fac-
tors to which we’d otherwise be blind. 
• 
In areas where you don’t have the time or ability to be very rational, 
give weight to the views of those who are more rational—especially 
if there’s a consensus. 
• 
Don’t be dogmatic on areas where rational people differ. 
Keep in mind that many of our rationality conditions are idealized and that 
only God could satisfy them completely. 
Our rationality conditions link up in various ways. Ends–means rationality 
requires that we harmonize our ends and our means; but it’s also about 
understanding our goals, how they originated, and how to achieve them. 
Impartiality requires that we make similar evaluations about similar actions; but 
it’s also about taking account of facts and arguments on both sides of an issue. 
Concern for others relates to the golden rule; but it’s also about understanding 
others, imagining ourselves in their place, and having feelings of concern. 

 
Moral Rationality 99 
We’re rational in our moral beliefs to the extent that in holding them we 
satisfy the rationality conditions—and thus are consistent, informed, imagina-
tive, and a few more things. This gives a criterion not of what is “true,” but of 
what is “rational.” Someone might satisfy the rationality conditions to a high 
degree but still have moral beliefs that are incorrect. This wouldn’t disprove our 
principles. 
Our rationality conditions are principles about how we ought (ideally) to 
form our moral beliefs. Most of our conditions aren’t very controversial. But 
we can still ask why we should follow these conditions and not others. How can 
we justify our rationality conditions? 
The short answer is that these rationality conditions grow out of the consis-
tency requirements that we’ve already defended. Consider the “Be informed” 
condition. Since we demand that others try to be informed when they delibe-
rate about how to act toward us, we will, if consistent, demand this of ourselves 
too—and hold that we and others ought to be so informed. So consistency will 
lead us to accept “Be informed” as a rationality condition. In a similar way, 
consistency will lead us to accept “Be imaginative” and the other conditions. 
Since our rationality conditions are ought judgments, their status is contro-
versial. Are they objective, irreducible truths about how we ought to do our 
moral thinking? Are they demands of society, of ideal observers, or of God? Or 
are they exclamations or imperatives, instead of truths? People will disagree on 
the status of the conditions; but they may still largely agree on their content. 
Indeed, I think the most plausible content is much the same, regardless of how 
we view the nature of moral judgments. 
9.2 Rational desires 
We noted earlier that golden-rule reasoning can be less effective if people have 
flawed desires about how they are to be treated. People may then satisfy GR 
consistency and yet act wrongly. Recall: 
• 
the Nazi of Section 6.4, who desires (out of hatred for Jews) that he 
and his family be put in concentration camps and killed if they were 
found out to be Jewish. 
• 
the coal-mine owner of Section 8.2, who is willing to be paid only 
$1 a day because he thinks one can live well on this amount. 
• 
Electra of Section 8.2, who is willing to be given severe electrical 
shocks because she thinks these are very pleasant. 
• 
the masochist of Section 8.3, who desires (out of self-hatred) that 
he be tortured if he were in the place of a nonmasochist. 
For golden-rule reasoning to work properly, we need some way to criticize such 
desires. We suggested that the desires of the coal-mine owner, of Electra, and 
of the masochist are irrational if they came from ignorance and would be given 
up if the person understood things correctly. 

100 Ethics 
We can use the rationality conditions of the previous section to criticize 
desires. Irrational desires have flaws like inconsistency, ignorance, or lack of 
imagination. Our desires might be: 
• 
inconsistent with our actions, other desires, or moral beliefs. 
• 
based on current false beliefs. Maybe our desire to become a doctor 
rests on false beliefs about our abilities. 
• 
based on previous false beliefs. Maybe we avoid yogurt only because 
we once believed it was poisonous. Our desire to avoid yogurt re-
mains, even though we gave up this false belief. 
• 
based on a faulty generalization. Maybe we avoid a certain group 
because of non-typical personal experiences. But this would change 
if we broadened our experiences. 
• 
based on social conditioning. Maybe we avoid a certain group 
because we were taught to do so. But our desire would change if we 
understood this and broadened our experiences. 
• 
based on lack of imagination. Maybe we’d stop wanting to be a 
doctor if we imagined the life of a doctor more vividly and accu-
rately. 
So our desires might be irrational for various reasons. 
My favorite example of an irrational desire used to be my father’s desire not 
to eat yogurt. His desire came from misinformation (“Yogurt contains bad 
germs”), his association of yogurt with weird people (his children), and his anti-
yogurt upbringing. But he later broadened his knowledge and experience, and 
changed his desires. So he came to eat yogurt regularly. 
My current favorite example is my own desire not to eat worms. My desire is 
irrational because it’s based on social conditioning and would diminish or 
disappear if I broadened my knowledge and experience. I know that my society 
conditioned me to shudder at the idea of eating worms—even though worms 
can be prepared in healthy and appetizing ways, are easy to farm, and are a 
delicacy in some cultures. But I lack experience. Someday I may visit a distant 
land and enjoy a delicious ver de terre (earthworm) meat loaf. With an openness 
to new experiences, I could change my irrational desire not to eat worms. 
My anti-worm desire is trivial. But it isn’t trivial when people are condi-
tioned to hate those of another group. It’s important that socially taught desires 
can be rationally criticized. To apply GR adequately may involve rationally 
criticizing our desires—as we’ll see in the next section. 
9.3 GR and racism 
Applying the golden rule to racism will show how our view on rationality 
applies to an important issue. As before, I’ll imagine that we’re arguing with 
Ima Racist, who defends extreme racist policies like Nazism, South African 
apartheid, or Southern slavery or segregation. I’ll use “treat X poorly” as a 
shorthand description that might be filled in differently—for example, as 
“enslave X” or “insult X and keep X in low-paying jobs.” In Section 7.4, we 

 
Moral Rationality 101 
distinguished between racist arguments, principles, and actions—and showed 
how to demolish the first two: 
1. 
Argument: “Blacks are inferior and inferior people ought to be 
treated poorly; therefore, blacks ought to be treated poorly.” 
2. 
Principle: “Blacks ought to be treated poorly, just because they’re 
black.” 
3. 
Actions: Ima treats blacks poorly. 
Now we have the ammunition to mount a GR attack against someone who 
performs racist actions but won’t defend his actions in a principled way. 
 
Before going into details, I note that various people in pro-slavery societies 
have used GR reasoning to conclude that slavery is wrong. Historical examples 
include the ancient stoic philosopher Epictetus (90 AD: 33), the Pennsylvania 
Quakers in 1688 (see Phipps 1982: 195), and Harriet Beecher Stowe (1852: 126) 
and Abraham Lincoln (see Phipps 1982: 195) in the 1800s. 
Our GR attack on racist actions (which also works against other forms of 
discrimination—see Section 7.4) has four steps: 
1. 
Get Ima to understand the facts. In particular, have him understand 
how his actions affect people of the other race. 
2. 
Get Ima to imagine himself, vividly and accurately, in the place of 
his victims, on the receiving end of the action. 
3. 
If needed, try to make Ima’s desires (about how he be treated in the 
place of his victims) more rational. 
4. 
If Ima acts in a given way toward those of another race but doesn’t 
consent to himself being treated that way in the same situation, 
then he’s inconsistent and violates GR. 
Don’t go to the golden rule (step 4) too quickly. GR builds on understanding, 
imagination, and desires—each of which may be flawed. After working on 
these, we can apply GR more rationally and effectively. 
Step 1 is to get Ima to understand the facts—circumstances, alternatives, 
consequences, and so on. When President Kennedy applied GR to racism, he 
first tried to get whites to understand what segregation was doing to black 
people. Blacks were treated as second-class citizens because of skin color. They 
couldn’t vote, go to the best public schools, eat at most public restaurants, or 
sit in the front of the bus. These practices brought further poverty and 
frustration, and a decreased sense of self-worth. 
We can learn about another’s situation by observation and testimony. So we 
might have Ima observe blacks—how they live and how segregation affects 
them. And we might have him listen to the testimony of blacks about how they 
are treated. 
Step 2 tries to get Ima to realize the human significance of the facts. Ima needs 
a vivid and accurate awareness of the situation of blacks, and what it would be 
like to be in that situation. Accordingly, he might read a novel or watch a movie 
that portrays their lives. Or he might act out the role of a person who is 

102 Ethics 
discriminated against. Or he might relive, in his imagination, cases where he 
himself was treated poorly because of his background. Or he might just explore 
in his imagination what it would be like to receive such treatment. 
Step 4 involves applying the golden rule. If we sense that steps 1 and 2 have 
prepared Ima sufficiently, we might ask him: 
Now you can better understand the situation of blacks and imagine 
what it would be like to be treated as you treat them. Do you con-
sent to the idea of yourself and your family being treated this way in 
their place? 
Ima likely won’t consent to this; so he’ll likely violate GR consistency. But let’s 
suppose that he consents to himself being treated as a second-class citizen in 
their place, and thus satisfies GR. This only could happen if he has a disinter-
ested hatred for blacks and thus desires that all blacks suffer—including 
himself and his family if they were black (or found to have black ancestry). 
 
Such hatred is possible. There’s a story about a Nazi who hated Jews and 
put them in concentration camps. One day he discovered that he himself had 
Jewish ancestry. Since he hated Jews in a disinterested way, he came to hate 
himself and his family. So he had himself and his family put in concentration 
camps and killed. This Nazi was consistent. Ima Prescriptivist (in Section 6.4) 
thought we couldn’t carry the argument further against such a fanatical racist. 
But we can go further if we criticize the racist’s desires. 
Step 3 tries to point out flaws (like ignorance or inconsistencies) in Ima’s 
hateful desires. Ima’s desires may be based on: 
• 
current false beliefs. Ima may think Aryans are superior and racially 
pure. We can criticize this on factual grounds. 
• 
previous false beliefs. Ima may hate blacks because of previous false 
beliefs (about blacks or about race). He’s given up these beliefs. His 
hatred of blacks, however, remains. 
• 
social conditioning. Ima may hate blacks because he was taught this 
as a child. Maybe his family and friends hated blacks, called them 
names, and promoted false stereotypes about them. And maybe 
Ima met only a few atypically nasty blacks. Then Ima’s hateful de-
sires would diminish if he understood the origin of his hatred and 
broadened his experience of blacks in an open way. 
Ima’s anti-black desires remind me of my irrational desire not to eat worms 
(even when prepared in healthy and appetizing ways). Both desires came from 
false beliefs or social conditioning. Both would diminish with greater know-
ledge and experience. Both desires are hard to change. Both are irrational. 
We also might have Ima consider other socially taught stereotypes and 
prejudices. All over the world, people in one group are taught to dislike people 
in another group. We teach young children: 

 
Moral Rationality 103 
Be suspicious of those other people. They’re of a different race (or reli-
gion, or ethnic background, or sexual preference, or caste). They 
aren’t our kind. They have strange customs, and do strange things. 
They’re evil and inferior. 
When we broaden our knowledge and experience, we conclude, “They’re 
people too, much like us, with many of the same virtues and vices.” 
Hatreds programmed into us from our youth may never disappear com-
pletely; but a wider knowledge and experience will reduce them. That’s all that 
GR needs. Only a very strong hatred of blacks can make Ima desire to be 
treated as a second-class citizen if he were black. Only with such a hatred could 
Ima repeat these words and mean them: “I really desire that if I were black then 
I’d be treated as a second-class citizen.” And we can criticize such desires on 
rational grounds. 
So I conclude that Ima won’t be a consistent racist if he understands the 
situation of blacks, vividly and accurately imagines what it would be like to be 
treated as a second-class citizen in their place, and has his desires rationalized 
by a wider knowledge and experience. In short: racism is irrational. 
But if racism is irrational, why did so many otherwise normal people em-
brace it? Haas (1988) explained the historical rise of Nazism. Haas talked about 
the gradual build-up of ancient racial animosities; about nationalism, charis-
matic leaders, powerful organizations, and social pressures; about fear, greed, 
hatred, and blind obedience; about lies, stereotypes, ignorance, and uncritical-
ness; and about how people can get used to killing when their friends find it 
acceptable. Also, the Nazis compartmentalized their thinking. They applied 
empathy and the golden rule to their own families but not to Jews. They were 
rational in choosing means to ends but not in appraising their ends. This 
combination of forces was powerful and overcame the weak voice of reason. 
The scientist Charles Darwin expressed surprise at how people can be blind 
to the evil of their racist actions (1839: 35, slightly edited): 
I nearly witnessed an atrocious act that could take place only in a 
slave country. The slave owner was about to take the women and 
children from the male slaves, and sell them separately at a public 
auction at Rio. The inhumanity of separating thirty families never 
occurred to him. Yet in humanity and good feeling he was superior 
to most men. There exists no limit to the blindness of selfish habit. 
Darwin traced this blindness, in people who professed to be trying to love their 
neighbor and do God’s will, to a lack of empathetic imagination (1839: 526–7, 
slightly edited): 
Those who look with a cold heart at the slave never put themselves 
into the position of the latter. Picture your wife and your little 
children being torn from you and sold like beasts to the first bidder! 

104 Ethics 
As the scientist Darwin stressed empathetic imagination, so the novelist Harriet 
Beecher Stowe stressed factual accuracy in this dialogue from Uncle Tom’s Cabin 
(1852: 125, slightly edited): 
A: 
“The most dreadful part of slavery is its outrages on the affec-
tions—the separating of families, for example.” 
B: 
“That’s a bad thing,” said the other lady. “But it doesn’t occur 
often.” 
A: 
“Oh, it does,” said the first lady. “I’ve lived many years in Kentucky 
and Virginia, and I’ve seen enough to make one’s heart sick. Sup-
pose, ma’am, that your two children be taken from you and sold?” 
B: 
“We can’t reason from our feelings to those of this class of 
persons,” said the other lady. 
So black slaves don’t feel the pain that whites would feel? To rebut this idea, 
the novel later described how a young slave woman, whose young son was 
taken from her and sold, was heartbroken and drowned herself. 
To prevent racist atrocities, we need knowledge (instead of ignorance and 
lies), empathetic imagination (instead of insensitivity), and the golden rule 
(instead of treating others just as a means to our own ends). 
9.4 Moral education 
Moral education involves teaching moral rules and moral rationality. Ima 
Intuitionist in Section 4.3 sketched how to teach the former: 
Parents and other adults should teach moral rules to children by 
their own example, by verbal instruction, by praise and blame, and 
by reward and punishment. 
This is fine but incomplete, since the same methods can teach bigotry. Our 
parental example can teach that Jews are to be hated; and we can praise our 
children when they follow our example and punish them when they act kindly 
toward Jews. If such training succeeds, our children will end up internalizing 
Nazi values. It will seem “self-evident” to them that Jews ought to be hated. 
Besides teaching moral rules, we also need to teach moral rationality. The last 
section claimed that guarding against racist atrocities requires knowledge, 
imagination, and the golden rule. We can teach these, and other aspects of 
moral rationality, by personal example and by encouraging certain skills and 
attitudes. Let me focus on six key commandments of rational moral thinking. 
(1) Make informed decisions. 
Personal example: Follow this yourself, especially in actions affecting your 
children. Get to know your children before making decisions about them. This 
requires communication. 

 
Moral Rationality 105 
Skills/attitudes: Talk with children about their decisions, and get them to ask 
questions like: “What are my alternatives?”—“What effect would this have on 
myself and on others?”—“What are the pros and cons?” Encourage children to 
get and reflect on the information needed to make their own decisions. 
(2) Be consistent in your beliefs. 
Personal example: Be consistent in dealing with children—who should be 
given clear, stable rules that are well thought out and don’t have absurd 
implications. 
Skills/attitudes: Children should be encouraged to develop their logical 
skills, to reason things out for themselves, to coordinate ends and means, to 
raise objections to proposed rules, and to avoid inconsistencies. 
(3) Live in harmony with your moral beliefs. 
 
Personal example: Take your moral beliefs seriously and put them into 
practice in your own life. Don’t teach your children by your own example to 
say, “Yes, it’s wrong, but I don’t care.” 
Skills/attitudes: Encourage children to take their moral beliefs seriously and 
follow them conscientiously. Stress the importance of doing the right thing. 
(4) Make similar evaluations about similar actions. 
 
Personal example: Apply the same standards to everyone and give reasons 
for differences in treatment. Respond carefully when you’re asked things like, 
“Mom, why can Jimmy do this but not me?” Don’t answer, “Just shut up and 
do what I say!” 
Skills/attitudes: Challenge children to think through moral issues that affect 
them and to propose principles or reasons (applicable to everyone alike) why 
actions are right or wrong. Encourage them to apply the same principles to 
themselves that they apply to others. 
(5) Put yourself in the other person’s place. 
 
Personal example: Follow this yourself, especially toward your children. 
Listen sympathetically to them, and try to imagine what their lives are like. This 
teaches by example how important it is to understand another person’s 
perspective. 
Skills/attitudes: Encourage children to listen to others and to reflect on what 
an action would look like from another person’s perspective. Get children to 
ask questions like, “What would it feel like if I were Suzy and this happened to 
me?” And have them read stories or watch movies that portray people’s lives in 
a realistic way. 

106 Ethics 
(6) Treat others as you want to be treated. 
 
Personal example: Follow the golden rule yourself, especially toward your 
children. Reflect on how your actions affect them, imagine yourself in their 
place, and treat them only as you’re willing to be treated by a parent in their 
place. Don’t be seen treating them or others in mean or thoughtless ways—in 
ways that you don’t want to be treated yourself. 
Skills/attitudes: Encourage your children to follow the golden rule. Chal-
lenge them, when they do something rude or vicious, by asking, “How would 
you like it if people did that to you?” Help them to think out moral problems in 
a GR manner. 
For those of a religious perspective, these elements would be integrated with 
religious beliefs and attitudes. And our attempt to grow wiser in our moral 
thinking would be seen as an attempt to draw closer to God’s supreme wisdom. 
In these ways and others that I haven’t mentioned, children can be taught to 
be wiser and more rational in their choices and moral beliefs. This teaching is 
difficult—but there are many concrete ways to do it. Judging from the low state 
of moral thinking in the world today, it’s a task of great importance. Teaching 
your children to make wise decisions and moral judgments may be one of the 
most important things that you’ll ever do. 
9.5 Rationality questions 
(Q1)  How do we deal with people who say “Yes, I’m inconsistent 
and irrational; but I don’t care about this”? 
Some logicians suggest that we hit such people with a stick. A better idea is 
to pretend to agree: whenever you assert something, also assert the opposite. 
Soon the irrationalists will want to hit you with a stick. 
It’s hard to imagine sane people who totally reject reason. Such people 
couldn’t drive a car, keep a job, or cook breakfast—since these require reason. 
So people who say “I don’t care at all about rationality” probably do care. 
Many who say they “reject reason” only partly reject it. They may accept 
reason in part of their life (maybe in their work) but reject it in another part 
(maybe in their attitudes about other races—where they don’t care if they’re 
inconsistent and irrational). In this case, we can at least try to reason with them 
along the lines of Section 7.6. We can defend consistency by appealing to self-
interest, personal feelings, social conventions, God’s will, or self-evident truths. 
They might listen to the self-interest part, especially if we can show that they’re 
likely to lose out in the end by being irrational about their values. 
(Q2)  Your approach emphasizes rationality. Do you really think 
you’ve eliminated all non-rational aspects of our moral thinking? 
No, that wasn’t my intention. It’s clear that there are many cultural and 
emotional influences on our moral thinking. It isn’t so clear how we can reason 

 
Moral Rationality 107 
about moral issues. I’m content to clarify some ways that we can do this—but 
without denying the cultural and emotional influences. 
When people ask how “reason” fits into ethics, they’re often asking how 
thinking (as opposed to feeling) can contribute. This isn’t my question. Instead, 
I’m asking how we ought to make moral judgments. My answer brings in 
elements like feelings, desires, and imagination. 
Reason and morality are weak forces in us; they need powerful allies like 
feelings, habits, and social approval. We’ll have difficulty following the golden 
rule, for example, unless we develop strong feelings and habits about fairness 
and concern for others, and have these reinforced by the society around us. 
(Q3)  But, ideally, don’t you think morality should depend just on 
reason in some narrow sense? 
No. We oversimplify if we make morality depend on just one thing—like 
feeling, thinking, or religion. Morality ideally involves various “parts” of the self 
working together, parts such as these: 
heart
eyes
right brain
ears and mouth
soul
hands and feet
left brain
↔ 
↔ 
↔ 
↔ 
↔ 
↔ 
↔ 
desires and feelings 
empirical knowledge 
imagination (especially empathy) 
dialogue with others 
religious perspective 
moral action 
consistency (especially GR) 
As we live our moral lives, we have desires for ourselves and for others. We have 
feelings of loving concern. We have empirical knowledge of the world. We imagine 
ourselves in the place of another. We dialogue with people who challenge our 
moral thinking. We sense the higher purpose of morality in religious or quasi-
religious terms. We try to act morally. We look for principles we can support in 
a consistent way. And we process our thinking and willing for inconsistencies of 
various sorts—and especially for golden-rule violations. 
Because we tend to be self-centered, GR is especially important. GR has a 
critical function, telling us when our action (toward another) conflicts with our 
desires (about how we be treated). GR filters out inconsistencies. For the output 
of the filter to be of high value, the inputs (knowledge, imagination, desires) 
have to be of high value; otherwise, we have “junk in and junk out.” Consis-
tency is important, and especially GR consistency; but consistency is only one 
element of rational moral thinking. What we really need is various elements 
working together. The golden rule is a team player. 
9.6 Chapter summary 
We’re rational in our moral judgments to the extent that we’re consistent, 
informed, imaginative, and a few more things. 

108 Ethics 
(1) To be consistent includes satisfying things like ends–means consistency, 
conscientiousness, impartiality, the golden rule, and the formula of universal 
law. 
(2) To be informed is to know the situation (circumstances, alternatives, 
consequences, and so on); alternative moral views (including arguments for or 
against them); and ourselves (including how we developed our feelings and 
moral beliefs). 
(3) To be imaginative is to have a vivid and accurate awareness of the situa-
tion of another (or of our own situation at a future point of time) and what it 
would be like to be in that situation. This differs from just knowing facts. It 
also involves an appreciation of what these facts mean to people’s lives. 
(4) The “few more things” cover, for example, feeling free to think for 
ourselves (instead of just conforming), having feelings of concern for ourselves 
and for others, and dialoging with others. 
These rationality conditions (which describe how we ought ideally to form 
our moral beliefs) grow out of our consistency requirements. For example, 
since we demand that others try to be informed when they deliberate about 
how to act toward us, we will, if consistent, demand this of ourselves too. So 
we’ll hold the general principle that people ought to be informed when making 
moral judgments. 
These same rationality conditions also apply to desires. Irrational desires 
have flaws like inconsistency, ignorance, or lack of imagination. Accordingly, 
racist desires are irrational if they’re based on social conditioning and would 
diminish if we broadened our knowledge and experience. 
Our GR attack on racist actions has four steps: (1) Make sure that the racist 
has a clear understanding of the facts. (2) Have him imagine himself, vividly 
and accurately, in the place of his victims. (3) If needed, rationalize his desires 
(about how he’d be treated if he were in their place). (4) See if he treats his 
victims only as he’s willing to be treated in the same situation. The racist will 
likely fail the GR test. 
Helping children to be more rational in their moral thinking is a key part of 
moral education. It’s especially important to teach these six commandments of 
rational moral thinking: “Make informed decisions,” “Be consistent in your 
beliefs,” “Live in harmony with your moral beliefs,” “Make similar evaluations 
about similar actions,” “Put yourself in the other person’s place,” and “Treat 
others as you want to be treated.” Adults can teach these by personal example 
and by promoting the corresponding skills and attitudes in children. 
9.7 Study questions 
1. How can we judge how rational our moral thinking is? 
2. Can we ever be fully rational in our moral thinking? (9.1) 
3. What does the consistency condition require? 
4. What does the information condition require? 
5. What does the imagination condition require? 
6. Which of the “few more things” strikes you as most important? What 
might you want to add? 

 
Moral Rationality 109 
7. What is a “rationality condition?” How can we defend our set of 
rationality conditions? 
8. Give an example where defective desires can block the effectiveness of 
golden-rule reasoning. How can we criticize such desires? (9.2) 
9. Why is the desire not to eat worms held to be irrational? What is the 
point of this example? 
10. Explain the four steps in our GR attack on racism. How can we criticize 
the desires of a racist who is willing to be treated badly in the place of his 
victims? (9.3) 
11. How does Haas explain why otherwise rational Germans committed 
racial atrocities against the Jews? 
12. How does Darwin explain how ordinary people can be blind to the evil 
of their racist actions? 
13. What three things do we need in order to guard against racist atrocities? 
14. How can we teach children to be more rational in their moral thinking? 
(9.4) 
15. How can we deal with someone who professes not to care about being 
consistent and rational? (9.5) 
16. Does the view of moral rationality in the text eliminate all non-rational 
aspects of our moral thinking? 
17. List a few of the dimensions of moral thinking that strike you as particu-
larly important. Are there any further dimensions that you’d like to add? 
9.8 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 09—Moral Rationality.” Also do “Ethics 09v—Vocabulary for 7–9,” 
“Ethics 09r—Review of 7–9,” and “Ethics 09z—Review of 0–9.” 
 
This chapter is a simplified version of Chapter 7 of Gensler’s Formal Ethics; 
see this book for further details and references. Schulman and Mekler’s Bringing 
Up a Moral Child has useful suggestions for teaching the golden rule (pages 90–
117) and empathetic imagination (pages 52–89); their approach to moral 
education is in harmony with my approach. Many of the key ideas behind this 
chapter were inspired by Hare’s Freedom and Reason and Kant’s Groundwork of the 
Metaphysics of Morals. The Bibliography at the end of the book has information 
on how to find these works. 
 
 

110 Ethics 
10 Consequentialism 
 
Consequentialism says that we have only one basic duty: to do whatever has the 
best consequences. In this chapter, we’ll first note a few general points about 
normative ethics and consequentialism. Then we’ll consider two important 
forms of consequentialism: classical utilitarianism and rule utilitarianism. We’ll 
also consider objections to these approaches. 
10.1 Normative ethics 
So far, we’ve focused on the nature and methodology of moral judgments 
(metaethics). We’ve considered whether morality is based on social conven-
tions, personal feelings, God’s will, or self-evident truths. I’ve argued that, 
however we view these issues, we should pick our moral principles in a way 
that’s consistent (which involves the golden rule), informed, imaginative, and so 
forth. This gives a method for selecting and arguing about moral principles. 
Once we have a method, we can use it to arrive at principles about how we 
ought to live (normative ethics). There are two basic approaches: 
• 
Consequentialism (teleology) says that we ought to do whatever 
maximizes good consequences. It doesn’t in itself matter what kind 
of thing we do. 
• 
Nonconsequentialism (deontology) says that some kinds of 
action (such as killing the innocent) are wrong in themselves, and 
not just wrong because they have bad consequences. 
We’ll consider these two approaches in this chapter and the next. 
Here’s an example to illustrate the difference. Suppose that your wife is 
diagnosed as having terminal cancer; but she doesn’t know about this. She asks 
you about the diagnosis. What should you do? Should you tell her the truth—
or should you lie? 
 
If you’re a consequentialist, you’ll think that you should lie if this has better 
consequences. So you’d consider whether your wife would be happier knowing 
or not knowing about her illness. You wouldn’t think that it’s wrong in itself to 
lie. Instead, you’d think that lying is right if it has better consequences. 
 
If you’re a nonconsequentialist, you’ll probably think that it’s wrong in itself 
to lie in such cases. Your wife has a right to know, and you’d be treating her 
 

 
Consequentialism 111 
wrongly if you lied to her—even if lying would make her happier and thus 
bring about better consequences. 
 
So should you lie, or shouldn’t you? More generally, do consequences alone 
determine right and wrong? Or are some kinds of action wrong in themselves, 
and not just wrong because they have bad consequences? This is the most basic 
issue of normative ethics. How we stand on it will make a big difference to 
every moral issue that we face (including, for example, issues like abortion or 
euthanasia). 
 
We’ll begin by listening to Ima Utilitarian explain her belief in classical 
utilitarianism—which is a popular kind of consequentialism. 
Classical Utilitarianism: 
We ought always to do whatever brings 
about the greatest balance of pleasure over 
pain for everyone affected by our action. 
10.2 Ima Utilitarian 
My name is Ima Utilitarian; but since my boyfriend also has the same first 
name, I usually go by the name “Util.” I’ve embraced classical utilitarianism as 
I’ve come to see that the proper aim of morality is to promote happiness and 
diminish misery. 
 
I was brought up to believe in strict rules. I was taught, for example, that it 
was always wrong to steal, lie, break promises, or disobey your parents. For a 
long time I never questioned these things. 
 
Cultural relativism shook up my thinking. The world has many cultures with 
diverse norms. CR says that we can’t objectively evaluate the norms of another 
culture—since, if we try, then we just evaluate their norms using ours. My first 
impression was that CR was wrong; we can evaluate norms by their conse-
quences. Suppose that the norms of society A lead to happiness, while those of 
society B lead to misery. Society A clearly has better norms. 
Further study confirmed that happiness was crucial. I learned that enligh-
tened moral thinking is informed, imaginative, and consistent—where consis-
tency involves the golden rule. When we follow GR, we’re concerned about the 
consequences of our actions on others. We try to make others happier and 
prevent their misery. So GR leads to utilitarianism. The utilitarian John Stuart 
Mill (1861: 22) put it this way: 
In the golden rule of Jesus of Nazareth, we read the complete spirit 
of the ethics of utility. To do as you would be done by, and to love 
your neighbor as yourself, constitute the ideal perfection of utilita-
rian morality. 
So enlightened moral thinking leads us, first to the golden rule, and then to 
utilitarianism. 

112 Ethics 
The golden rule isn’t the only path to utilitarianism. My best friend bases 
utilitarianism on God’s will, since she thinks God desires our greatest happi-
ness. Others accept the principle as a self-evident truth, or as reflecting their 
personal feelings. 
Precisely stated, classical utilitarianism says that we ought always to do 
whatever brings about the greatest balance of pleasure over pain for everyone 
affected by our action. We can apply it in two ways: directly or indirectly. 
To apply utilitarianism directly, I do three things: 
1. 
I figure out my options. Maybe I could do A or B. 
2. 
I estimate the likely pleasure and pain consequences of each option 
on the affected parties. Maybe A would make me a little happier 
but make two others very miserable. 
3. 
I decide which option brings about the greatest balance of pleasure 
over pain. This option is my duty. 
These steps require a lot of thinking. Step 2 is difficult, since it involves trying 
to discover the future consequences of our actions. While we can never be sure 
about these, we can base our judgments on better or worse estimates. 
Step 3 can be difficult too, since it involves “adding up” benefits and harms. 
Some utilitarians talk as if we could put pleasure and pain into numerical units. 
If this were possible, then we could add up the numbers, using positive ones 
for pleasure and negative ones for pain, and go with the highest total: 
Options  Î 
A 
B 
 
 
Tom 
Dick 
Harry 
+1 
−3 
+4 
−3 
+1 
+5 
 
 
Total 
+2 
+3 
 
Utilitarianism 
says to do B.
Such calculations would sharpen our moral thinking. But as yet we don’t know 
how to put numbers on pleasure and pain. Instead, we weigh them in our 
minds, and see intuitively which option maximizes the balance of one over the 
other. Our opponents say that it’s impossible to do this. But we can do it in a 
rough way; and our opponents have the same problem, since they admit that 
maximizing good consequences is one of our duties (although they recognize 
other basic duties as well). 
 
It isn’t useful to do such direct utilitarian calculations on every action. As I 
pass each item in the shopping mall, should I do a direct calculation on 
whether I should steal it? Surely not! It’s more useful to apply utilitarianism 
indirectly, by applying a “rule of thumb” about what kinds of action tend to have 
good or bad results. “Don’t steal” is a useful rule of thumb, since stealing tends 
to have bad results. So, unless circumstances are peculiar, I’ll just assume that I 
ought not to steal. 

 
Consequentialism 113 
 
When should we apply utilitarianism directly? It’s useful to do this when we 
face big decisions. When I chose a college, for example, I listed various schools 
with their pros and cons; then I picked the place with the biggest balance of 
pros over cons. 
A direct application is also useful when the moral rules conflict. Last week 
my mother ordered me to reveal what my brother told me in confidence. Here 
“Obey your parents” and “Don’t break confidences” tell me to do opposite 
things. So I applied utilitarianism directly. I judged that silence would have 
better consequences, since it would do less harm to the personal relationships. 
It’s also useful to apply utilitarianism directly to arrive at moral rules. If we 
examine particular cases of stealing, we find that stealing usually has bad 
consequences. So “Don’t steal” is a useful rule of thumb. Unless we know that 
a particular act of stealing will maximize good consequences, it’s best not to 
steal. 
So yes, I believe in rules; but I don’t worship rules. And I don’t believe in 
exceptionless rules. One problem with exceptionless rules is that they some-
times conflict. When I was a child, I was taught “Always obey your parents” 
and “Never break confidences”; both were exceptionless. But these prescribed 
conflicting actions when my mother ordered me to break a confidence. A 
consistent moral system can’t have more than one exceptionless norm; 
otherwise, it’ll lead to contradictions. So the requirement to be consistent in 
our beliefs eliminates the approach that I was taught as a child. 
Another problem is that exceptionless norms can lead to inhumane results 
in unusual cases. I was taught that stealing is always wrong. But suppose that 
your family will starve unless your father steals a loaf of bread from one who 
won’t miss it. Is stealing then wrong? Do you desire that your father not steal in 
this case? If you say “yes,” then you care more about rules than about human 
beings. The Pharisees, whom Jesus denounced, insisted on Sabbath rules even 
when these were harmful to people (see Mark 2:23–7). Do you want to be like 
the Pharisees? 
If you still believe in exceptionless norms, let me give my “Dr. Evil” objec-
tion. Suppose that, unless you disobey your allegedly exceptionless norm, Dr. 
Evil will torture everyone and then destroy the world. Shouldn’t we break 
your rule in this case? Almost everyone would say “yes.” So almost no one 
could consistently hold exceptionless norms. 
Since I think duty depends on the situation, some accuse me of cultural 
relativism. But this is confused. I see our duty as depending not on what our 
culture tells us but on what has better consequences. So smoking is wrong if it 
causes great misery and pain—regardless of whether society approves of it. 
10.3 Consequentialisms 
This is still Ima (or “Util”). I need to explain why I picked classical (hedonistic) 
utilitarianism over other forms of consequentialism. 
 
Consequentialism is the general view that we ought to do whatever 
maximizes good consequences. Consequentialism comes in various flavors. 
These differ on whether to maximize good results for ourselves only (egoism) 

114 Ethics 
or for everyone affected by our action (utilitarianism)—and on whether to 
evaluate consequences solely in terms of pleasure and pain (hedonism) or in 
terms of a variety of goods (pluralism). 
 
First, whose good should we maximize? Should we do whatever has the best 
consequences for: 
1. 
ourselves (egoism), 
2. 
our group (family or city or nation or race or …), 
3. 
all humans, or 
4. 
all sentient beings (utilitarianism)? 
Since I base my view on the golden rule and the golden rule applies to our 
treatment of any sentient being [see Q8 in Section 8.4], I pick option 4—the 
utilitarian option. 
Consistency gives a solid basis for rejecting egoism. Egoism says “Everyone 
ought to do whatever maximizes their own self-interest, regardless of how this 
affects others.” To hold this consistently, we’d have to want other people to 
live that way toward us. So we’d have to desire that X harm us greatly (even 
paralyze us for life) if this would maximize X’s self-interest. But we can’t desire 
this. So we can’t consistently accept the principle. So egoism, even though it 
may remain a temptation, can’t be accepted as a rational view about how we 
ought to live. Similar objections are fatal to options 2 and 3. 
Another problem is that egoism is self-defeating. While egoists care much 
about their own happiness, the egoistic approach is almost guaranteed to make 
them miserable. If we follow egoism, others will despise us and we’ll probably 
end up despising ourselves. We’ll pursue our own happiness better if we strive 
to promote the good of everyone. 
While I reject egoism, I think there’s less conflict between my good and the 
general good than many people think. Normally I gain happiness when I do 
good for others, and I suffer when I harm others. And utilitarianism says that I 
ought to promote my own good when this doesn’t clash with another’s good. 
 
A second issue is how to gauge the value of consequences. I accept hedon-
ism, which holds that only pleasure is intrinsically good (good in itself, 
abstracting from further consequences) and only pain is intrinsically bad. On 
hedonism, a thing is good to the extent that: 
• 
it is itself pleasant, 
• 
it produces future pleasure, or 
• 
it prevents future pain. 
Painful things, like going to the dentist, can be good if they lead to future 
pleasure or prevent future pain. Of course, we must consider the long-range 
consequences of our actions, insofar as we can predict them. 
Some people find hedonism shocking. They don’t understand that we he-
donists use “pleasure” in a wide sense, to include not just physical pleasures but 
any kind of contentment or happiness. Higher pleasures (from friendship, 
knowledge, and virtue) are more satisfying and enduring than physical pleasures 

 
Consequentialism 115 
(like eating). It might be less scandalous if we spoke of “promoting happiness”; 
but the idea would be the same. 
 
Not all utilitarians evaluate consequences by pleasure and pain. Some say 
that we should maximize: 
1. 
whatever people desire for its own sake (preference view); or 
2. 
many things, like knowledge, virtue, and pleasure (pluralism). 
I reject option 1, because people can have bad or foolish desires; some people 
desire revenge for its own sake. I reject option 2, because I doubt that mere 
knowledge or virtue in itself, apart from the enjoyment of it, has any intrinsic 
value. So I accept hedonism. 
 
I should mention moral education. Besides moral rationality [which you read 
about in the last chapter], we also need to teach moral content. Young children 
need simple exceptionless rules—for example, that it’s always wrong to steal or 
disobey your parents. Older children should learn that such rules have excep-
tions and that we need to do whatever maximizes happiness and minimizes 
misery for everyone. So we should teach older children a love for humanity 
(and other sentient life), rules of thumb for promoting good results, and how 
to apply utilitarianism directly (by determining options and consequences). 
 
Let me end by listing some advantages of utilitarianism. This view gives a 
simple and yet flexible way to determine all our duties. It accords with enligh-
tened moral thinking (being informed, imaginative, consistent, and following 
the golden rule). And it expresses a positive concern for the happiness of all 
sentient beings. 
Reflect on how you react to this view. Do you have objections? 
10.4 Bizarre implications 
Util (Ima Utilitarian) has given us a clear formulation of an important approach 
to morality. Her view is simple and intuitive, and it expresses a positive concern 
for everyone’s happiness. But it has bizarre implications that are difficult to 
accept. So I’ll argue that enlightened moral thinking would reject utilitarianism. 
 
Util gave a solid consistency argument against egoism. A similar argument 
works against utilitarianism. Imagine a town where the lynch mob enjoys 
hangings so much that it would maximize pleasure if they hanged you for a 
crime you didn’t commit. Utilitarianism would approve of this act, since it 
maximizes pleasure. If you were a consistent utilitarian, you’d have to desire 
that if you were in this situation then you be hanged. Since almost no one can 
desire this, almost no one can be a consistent utilitarian. So enlightened moral 
thinking would reject utilitarianism. 
 
My objection appeals not to moral intuitions (which utilitarians might not 
care about) but to consistency. If utilitarians are to hold their view rationally, 
they must hold it consistently. 

116 Ethics 
 
Utilitarians could respond to such objections by rejecting their view and 
moving to another approach—perhaps to one where consequences are 
important but limited by other duties. Or they could: 
(a) 
bite the bullet (accept the implausible result), 
(b) 
deny that such cases are possible, or 
(c) 
modify utilitarianism. 
We’ll consider each option. 
(a) Utilitarians might say, “I do desire that I be hanged in this case to pro-
mote the lynch mob’s pleasure.” But then we can find further objections. 
Utilitarians will find it difficult to keep biting the bullets. 
(b) Utilitarians might say, “Permitting such lynchings would have bad long-
range consequences—and so wouldn’t really maximize pleasure.” But we can 
suitably adjust the imagined situation to take account of such consequences. 
Perhaps the politically opportune moment to oppose such lynchings is a year 
after they lynch you. So it could maximize the total pleasure to lynch you 
now—and then to oppose future lynchings later. So the example is possible. 
Hypothetical cases give the best way to evaluate utilitarianism, since they let 
us stipulate that a given action maximizes the total pleasure. With actual cases, 
utilitarianism rarely leads to clear results—since long-range consequences are so 
uncertain. 
(c) Utilitarians might say, “I want to modify my view. I now say that sadistic 
pleasures are intrinsically bad. Thus I can hold that the lynching is wrong—since 
it brings sadistic pleasures to the lynch mob.” Our fictional Ima Rule-Utilitarian 
will take option (c) in the next section. He’ll suggest an improved version of 
utilitarianism that tries to avoid this lynching objection and other objections. 
But before getting there, it will be helpful to sketch six further bizarre implica-
tions that utilitarians need to deal with. 
(1) You’re a utilitarian philosopher hired to give a moral justification of 
slavery. You say, “My job is easy; I just have to make sure that the benefits to 
the slave owners outweigh the harm to the slaves.” So you encourage the slave 
owners to derive greater enjoyment from having slaves. And you drug the 
slaves to keep them docile and make them enjoy being slaves. If slavery 
maximizes the total pleasure, then utilitarianism approves of it. 
(2) You maximize pleasure by secretly killing your miserable rich father and 
donating his money to buy a park for poor children. Utilitarianism approves of 
your action. 
(3) You’re a judge who sentences an innocent man to death for a crime he 
didn’t commit. By discouraging terrorism, your act maximizes the total 
pleasure. Utilitarianism approves of your action. Utilitarianism permits any 
harm to the individual for the sake of the general good. 
(4) You could bring about the same pleasure and pain results by either 
honest or dishonest means. Utilitarianism says that it doesn’t matter morally 
which you use. 

 
Consequentialism 117 
(5) You hurt someone, because this brings you more pleasure than the pain 
it causes the other person. Your act has no further pleasure or pain conse-
quences. Utilitarianism says that you acted rightly. 
(6) You break a solemn promise because doing so will bring you pleasure. 
There are no further pleasure or pain consequences. Utilitarianism approves of 
your act. 
Now the fictional Ima Rule-Utilitarian will present his improved form of 
utilitarianism that tries to avoid such objections. 
Pluralistic Rule Utilitarianism: 
We should evaluate consequences in terms of various goods, 
including virtue, knowledge, pleasure, life, and freedom. 
We ought to do what would be prescribed by the rules with 
the best consequences for people in society to try to follow. 
10.5 Ima Rule-Utilitarian 
My name is Ima Rule-Utilitarian. I believe that the goal of morality is to bring 
about the best consequences for everyone. However, I see “best consequences” 
in broader terms than just pleasure and pain—and I recognize the usefulness of 
following strict rules. 
You might know my girlfriend, Ima Utilitarian. Since we both have the same 
first name, I just call her “Util.” Now Util has some interesting ideas. She says 
that morality is about promoting happiness. So we ought always to do whatever 
brings about the greatest balance of pleasure over pain for everyone affected by 
our action. While this sounds good, it has bizarre implications. However, we 
can avoid these if we make two changes in the view. I suggest that we (a) move 
from hedonism to pluralism, and (b) move from act to rule utilitarianism. 
 
First, what things are intrinsically good? What things are good in themselves, 
abstracting from further consequences? It might seem that pleasure is intrinsi-
cally good, and pain intrinsically bad. But this has exceptions, since pleasure 
over the misfortune of another is intrinsically bad. Suppose that your husband 
is upset over losing his job. It would be intrinsically bad if you felt pleasure 
over his distress—and intrinsically good if you felt distress over his distress. If 
so, then we can only say that normally pleasure is intrinsically good and pain 
intrinsically bad. 
 
This brings up the question of methodology: How should we pick our 
beliefs about what is intrinsically good? Should we follow our intuitions, our 
feelings, or what is socially approved? I suggest rather that we follow a 
rationality approach. We should try to be as rational as possible (consistent, 
informed, imaginative, and so forth) and then see what we desire for its own 
sake. This gives a rational way to pick our beliefs about intrinsic worth. 
This approach leads me to accept pluralism, which says that many things 
are intrinsically good. These include virtue, knowledge, pleasure, life, freedom, 

118 Ethics 
and maybe a few more items. Their opposites (vice, ignorance, and so forth) 
are intrinsically bad. 
Util rejects pluralism because she doubts that mere knowledge or virtue in 
itself, apart from the enjoyment of it, has any intrinsic value. But we often 
desire knowledge or virtue for its own sake, regardless of whether these include 
pleasure. And we’d continue to do so if we came to be more rational (consis-
tent, informed, imaginative, and so forth). 
Here’s an example to show the contrast between hedonism and pluralism. 
Imagine two lives equal in pleasure. In the first life, your pleasure is mindless 
and comes from a “pleasure machine” that stimulates your brain. In the second 
life, you have the same amount of pleasure, but it comes from a normal 
exercise of your higher powers. Almost everyone would prefer the second life, 
even though both have the same amount of pleasure. So our preferences are 
pluralistic—not hedonistic. And it’s hard to imagine that these preferences 
would change if we became more rational. So it seems that our rational 
preferences would support the pluralistic view. 
My argument concedes to hedonism that we can make sense of the phrase 
“two lives equal in pleasure.” In practice, though, “amount of pleasure” is very 
vague. To see this, ask yourself how much pleasure you’re experiencing right 
now. And adding up “pleasure units” is a very doubtful enterprise. 
Let me digress about another error of hedonism—its identification of hap-
piness with pleasure. This idea is entirely wrong; being happy is not the same as 
having pleasure. We might have lots of pleasures but be quite unhappy—since 
we might see our life of pleasure as ultimately meaningless. Or we might have 
few pleasures but be happy—since we might see our life as meaningful in some 
deeper way. 
 
I’d define happiness as an overall contentment with our life. So it’s a kind of 
contentment, but deeper than pleasure. Pleasure doesn’t necessarily bring 
happiness. Neither does money, at least according to many who have it; the 
rich are almost as often dissatisfied with their lives as are the poor. As I see it, 
the key to being happy is to live right; contentment is a byproduct of right 
living. Our personal contentment shouldn’t be our major focus. If we focus too 
much on our own contentment, then we’ll probably end up miserable. Instead, 
we should try to live properly—be concerned for others, do meaningful things, 
and so forth—and this will probably bring contentment. I’d go further and say 
that the key to being happy is to live in the pluralistic rule-utilitarian way. But I 
have to explain what this is. 
Let’s first see how the pluralistic approach to value helps us to avoid some 
bizarre implications. On classical utilitarianism, these three actions would be 
right if they brought about the greatest balance of pleasure over pain: 
1. 
A lynch mob hangs you for a crime that you didn’t commit—
because it gets great pleasure from this. 
2. 
You keep slaves (whom you drug so that they enjoy being slaves)—
since this brings your family great pleasure. 
3. 
You secretly kill your miserable rich father and donate his money to 
buy a park for poor children. 

 
Consequentialism 119 
On my approach, all three actions are wrong. In case 1, the lynch mob’s sadistic 
pleasures are intrinsically bad and your life (which is taken away) is intrinsically 
good; so the lynching has very bad consequences. In case 2, freedom is 
intrinsically good; so you harm the slaves greatly if you take away their freedom 
(even though you give them pleasure). In case 3, the life of your father is 
intrinsically good; so you harm him if you take his life. 
 
So we can avoid many problems by switching from hedonism to pluralism. 
But there are still a few problems—like this example: 
3a. 
You secretly kill your miserable rich father and donate part of his 
money to buy a park for poor children and part of his money to 
fund medical research for some rare disease (which saves some 
lives in the long run). Since your action both maximizes pleasure 
and saves lives, it maximizes good consequences. 
I can’t accept that this killing would be right. Fortunately, the “rule utilitarian” 
part of my view gets me out of the problem. 
 
Let me distinguish between the normal kind of utilitarianism (called “act 
utilitarianism”) and my approach (“rule utilitarianism”): 
• 
Act utilitarianism (AU) says that we ought to do the act with the 
best consequences. 
• 
Rule utilitarianism (RU) says that we ought to do what would be 
prescribed by the rules with the best consequences for people in  
society to try to follow. 
RU takes a two-step approach to determining our duty. First, we ask what rules 
would have the best consequences for people in society to try to follow. As we 
answer this, we should keep in mind the imperfections and limitations of 
human beings. Second, we apply these rules to our action. I’ll argue that RU’s 
two-step approach avoids AU’s bizarre implications and has better conse-
quences for society. 
Classical utilitarians have little respect for rules. They scorn exceptionless 
norms. They see moral rules only as loose “rules of thumb” about what kinds 
of action tend to have good or bad results. They’re prepared to break any rule 
when doing so seems to have better results. 
 
We rule utilitarians, in contrast, have little respect for speculation about what 
maximizes good consequences. People too easily talk themselves into doing 
foolish things for the sake of good results. It would have much better results in 
the long run if people often followed strict or even exceptionless rules. 
 
What rule would be most useful for society to follow about killing? Let me 
give you the act utilitarian and rule utilitarian options: 
AU Killing is right if and only if it has the best consequences. 
RU Killing is strictly wrong, with perhaps exceptions for a few carefully 
defined cases (like self-defense). 

120 Ethics 
A rule against killing needs to be firm and definite; otherwise, people will twist 
it for their own purposes. I’d be afraid to live in a society that followed the AU 
rule—where people would kill whenever they speculated that this would have 
better results. People would apply this in irresponsible ways, with disastrous 
effects. It would have better results in the long run if society followed a strict 
rule against killing. 
 
Let’s get back to case 3a: 
3a. 
You secretly kill your miserable rich father and donate part of his 
money to buy a park for poor children and part of his money to 
fund medical research for some rare disease (which saves some 
lives in the long run). Since your action both maximizes pleasure 
and saves lives, it maximizes good consequences. 
We rule utilitarians condemn the killing. The rule behind this action (that you can 
kill if you think it has better consequences) would bring social disaster and ruin. 
As I noted in the previous paragraph, it would have better results if society 
followed a strict rule against killing. 
 
Consider the example of the judge: 
 
4. 
You’re a judge who sentences an innocent man to death for a crime 
he didn’t commit. By discouraging terrorism, your act maximizes 
the total pleasure. Classical utilitarianism approves of your action. 
Again, we rule utilitarians condemn this action. In real life, judges don’t know 
whether sentencing the innocent will have the best consequences. They can 
only speculate, or guess. Such speculation generally backfires and has very bad 
consequences. It would have better results in the long run if judges, instead of 
speculating about future consequences, simply followed a rule never to sentence 
an innocent person to death. 
 
So we rule utilitarians think that in many areas it has better results to apply 
strict or even exceptionless rules. Let me give two more examples. First 
consider rules about drugs. It would have better results if people followed the 
second rule instead of the first: 
AU Take heroin for recreational purposes if and only if this has the best 
consequences. 
RU Never take heroin for recreational purposes. 
People who are tempted to take drugs tend to be poor decision-makers. If they 
calculate consequences, instead of following a hard-and-fast rule, they’ll more 
easily yield to temptation. They’ll give in to peer pressure when their friends 
talk about the pleasure of drugs. So they’ll become drug addicts and ruin their 
lives. It has better results to follow the second rule: “Just say no.” 
Or suppose that you’re a happily married man who dearly loves his family. 
You’re away on a trip and are tempted to infidelity. It would have better results 
if you followed the second rule instead of the first: 

 
Consequentialism 121 
AU Commit adultery if and only if this has the best consequences. 
RU Don’t commit adultery. 
Men who are tempted to infidelity are notoriously bad decision-makers. They 
too easily convince themselves that infidelity will have the best consequences. 
They too easily say to themselves, “A one-night stand will be pleasant and have 
no future bad results.” But this act, of course, is apt to have very bad results; it’s 
apt to destroy your marriage and hurt you and the people you love. Again, it 
would have better results to follow the second rule: “Just say no.” 
 
Here’s yet another example of rule-utilitarian reasoning. Suppose that you’re 
a teacher. A student who gets a low grade may bring you a story about how a 
higher grade would help her to get into law school. So you might raise the 
grade, thinking that this will have the best results. But a wiser teacher would 
respond along RU lines: “If you get into law school, you’ll bump someone else; 
I don’t really know if this would have better results. But I do know that it’s a 
useful practice for teachers to give accurate grades and for law schools to use 
these in deciding whom to admit. It’s not a useful practice for teachers to let 
themselves be talked into changing grades by (often questionable) student 
stories; such a practice would encourage students to try to get good grades by 
creative stories instead of by study—and thus would undermine what school 
tries to accomplish. So I always try to give students the grade they deserve.” 
Let me sum up. My improved version of utilitarianism claims that: 
• 
We should evaluate consequences in terms of various goods, 
including virtue, knowledge, pleasure, life, and freedom. 
• 
We ought to follow the rules with the best consequences for society 
to follow. 
My version of utilitarianism is better because (a) it avoids the bizarre implica-
tions of classical utilitarianism and (b) its stress on strict rules would in the long 
run have better results for society. 
Reflect on how you react to this view. Do you have objections? 
10.6 RU problems 
Is pluralistic rule utilitarianism acceptable? It surely seems better than classical 
utilitarianism. Its pluralistic approach to intrinsic value makes sense. And it has 
a deeper understanding of human psychology. It sees that humans, without 
strict rules, will often talk themselves into doing foolish things. 
RU seems to avoid the bizarre implications. It’s difficult to be sure about this, 
because it’s difficult to know what RU would lead to. Applying the “maximize 
good consequences” test to rules isn’t much easier than applying it to individual 
actions. In many cases, we can only guess at the long-range results of following 
one rule instead of another. 

122 Ethics 
I have two objections to rule utilitarianism. First, suppose that people in 
your society were stupid and it was useful to teach them simplistic moral rules. 
Why should you, who are more intelligent, have a duty to follow these simplis-
tic rules—especially if you could produce better results by breaking them? I’m 
not sure how a rule utilitarian would answer this question. 
Second, rule utilitarianism, even if it would generally lead to the right judg-
ments, would seem to do so for the wrong reasons. Why is it wrong to kill your 
father in case 3a (where you donate his money to fund a park and medical 
research)? Is this action wrong just because it’s socially useful to have a strict 
rule against killing? What if this were not so? What if the rules that were most 
socially useful would permit killing your father? Then would killing your father 
be right? It’s hard to believe that it would be. The belief that this would be right 
would seem to violate GR consistency. 
Nonconsequentialists have a simple answer to why it’s wrong to kill your 
father in case 3a. They say that it’s wrong in itself to kill an innocent human being. 
This wrongness doesn’t depend on any lucky fact about the social usefulness of 
a strict rule against killing. 
Ima Rule-Utilitarian suggested the following methodology for justifying his 
pluralistic approach to intrinsic value: 
We should try to be as rational as possible (consistent, informed, 
imaginative, and so forth) and then see what we desire for its own 
sake. This gives a rational way to pick our beliefs about intrinsic 
worth. 
When we follow this, we seem to desire, abstracting from further conse-
quences, that certain kinds of action (such as killing the innocent or breaking 
promises) not be done. So Ima’s suggestion would lead us to believe that these 
kinds of action are bad in themselves (and not just bad because the rule against 
them happens to be socially useful). So Ima’s suggestion would seem to lead to 
nonconsequentialism. 
If we reject rule utilitarianism, as I think we should, we may want to incor-
porate some of its ideas into a better approach to normative ethics. 
10.7 Chapter summary 
Consequentialism says that we ought to do whatever maximizes good conse-
quences. It doesn’t in itself matter what kind of thing we do. What matters is 
that we maximize good results. 
One popular kind of consequentialism is classical (hedonistic) utilitarianism. 
This view says that we ought always to do whatever brings about the greatest 
balance of pleasure over pain for everyone affected by our action. This view 
could be based on the golden rule, which leads us to be concerned about the 
happiness and misery of others. Or it could be based on God’s will, self-evident 
truths, or our own personal feelings. 
We can apply utilitarianism directly (by first estimating the likely conse-
quences of each option and then picking the option with the best conse-

 
Consequentialism 123 
quences) or indirectly (by applying a “rule of thumb” about what kinds of 
action tend to have good or bad results). Many utilitarians reject exceptionless 
rules. They think any rule should be broken when it has better consequences to 
do so. So they see moral rules only as loose “rules of thumb.” 
Despite its plausibility, utilitarianism has many bizarre implications; these 
make it difficult to hold the view in a consistent way. For example, imagine a 
town where the lynch mob enjoys hangings so much that it maximizes pleasure 
to hang you for a crime that you didn’t commit. Would it then be right to hang 
you? Utilitarians can respond to such objections by biting the bullet (accepting 
the implausible result), denying that such cases are possible, or modifying 
utilitarianism. 
Pluralistic rule utilitarianism is a modified form of utilitarianism. It rejects 
hedonism (that only pleasure is intrinsically good). Instead, it accepts a plural-
istic view of value (that many things are intrinsically good, including virtue, 
knowledge, pleasure, life, and freedom). This view also says that we ought to do 
what would be prescribed by the rules with the best consequences for people in 
society to try to follow. It says that we’ll live better if we follow strict rules in 
areas like killing or drugs. Without strict rules, we’ll too often talk ourselves 
into doing foolish things. Rule utilitarians claim that their approach avoids the 
bizarre implications and produces better consequences. 
One may object that rule utilitarianism, even if it leads to the right judg-
ments, would do so for the wrong reasons. RU opposes killing the innocent on 
the grounds that socially useful rules would forbid such actions. But what if 
socially useful rules permitted such actions? Then would killing the innocent be 
right? The belief that this would be right would seem to violate GR consisten-
cy. So wouldn’t it be better to hold that killing the innocent is wrong in itself? 
10.8 Study questions 
1. Explain the difference between consequentialism and nonconsequen-
tialism. (10.1) 
2. What is (classical) utilitarianism? (10.2) 
3. How did the study of cultural relativism first lead Ima Utilitarian toward 
utilitarianism? 
4. How did the golden rule confirm Ima’s belief in utilitarianism? What 
other paths could bring one to utilitarianism? 
5. Explain the direct and indirect ways to apply utilitarianism. When should 
we use the direct method? 
6. Why did Ima reject exceptionless norms? 
7. How do egoistic and utilitarian forms of consequentialism differ? Why 
did Ima reject egoism? (10.3) 
8. What was Ima’s view about what is intrinsically good? What is pluralism 
and why did she reject it? 
9. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to utilitarianism. Does it 
seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike about it? Can you 
think of any way to show that it’s false? 

124 Ethics 
10. Explain the “lynching is fun” objection to utilitarianism. How does it 
involve consistency? (10.4) 
11. In what ways could a utilitarian respond to such objections? 
12. Among the other objections to utilitarianism, which two do you take to 
be the strongest? 
13. What does pluralism hold? Why might one prefer this view to hedonism? 
(10.5) 
14. What are some objections to equating happiness with pleasure? What 
definition of happiness is given in the text? 
15. Give an example of how pluralism helps us to avoid objections to 
classical utilitarianism. 
16. What is rule utilitarianism? Explain how it applies to the “killing your 
father” example. 
17. Why does rule utilitarianism advocate that we follow strict or even excep-
tionless principles? Give an example of such a rule. 
18. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to pluralistic rule 
utilitarianism. Does it seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike 
about it? Can you think of any way to show that it’s false? 
19. Explain the two objections to rule utilitarianism. (10.6) 
10.9 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 10—Consequentialism.” 
 
Mill’s brief book Utilitarianism is the classic statement of the view; Smart’s 
brief “Utilitarianism” is a more recent defense. Brandt’s short “In search of a 
credible form of utilitarianism” is a good statement of one form of rule 
utilitarianism; Hare’s longer Moral Thinking attempts to bridge act and rule 
utilitarianism. Be forewarned that there are many forms of rule utilitarianism. 
Aristotle’s Nicomachean Ethics (especially Book 1) is the classic treatment of 
happiness. Carson’s Value and the Good Life is a thorough investigation of 
intrinsic value. The Bibliography at the end of the book has information on 
how to find these works. 
 
 

 
Nonconsequentialism 125 
11 Nonconsequentialism 
 
Ross’s Prima Facie View: 
The basic moral principles say that we ought, other things being 
equal, to do or not to do certain kinds of action: keep our 
promises, do good to others, not harm others, and so forth. 
Nonconsequentialism (deontology) says that some kinds of action (such as 
killing the innocent or breaking promises) are wrong in themselves, and not just 
wrong because they have bad consequences. Such things may be exceptionless-
ly wrong, or may just have some independent moral weight against them. Some 
nonconsequentialists (like the eighteenth-century German philosopher Imman-
uel Kant) support exceptionless rules. Others (like the twentieth-century British 
philosopher W.D. Ross) support only weaker prima facie rules. 
We’ll begin by listening to the fictional Ima Rossian defend Ross’s approach. 
Then we’ll consider some objections—especially ones that might be made from 
the “exceptionless rules” perspective. Then we’ll consider rights and justice 
(especially distributive justice). Finally, we’ll look at the ten commandments and 
compare them with philosophical approaches. 
11.1 Ima Rossian 
My name is Ima Rossian. I’ve been trying to steer between the “exceptionless 
duties” approach that I was taught as a child and the utilitarianism of my 
roommate; both of these lead to absurd results. I’ve found a more sensible 
approach in the “prima facie view” of the British philosopher W.D. Ross. 
 
A prima facie duty is a duty that holds if other things are equal. More 
precisely, it’s a factor that tends in itself to make something our duty but can 
sometimes be overridden by other factors. Ross’s prima facie view says that 
the basic moral principles are about prima facie duties. Other things being 
equal, we ought to keep our promises, do good to others, not harm others, and 
so forth. On this approach, what matters in ethics is not just consequences but 
also what kind of thing we do. 
 
Ross says that breaking promises is wrong in itself. Violating our word is 
wrong not just because it tends to have bad consequences but because of the 
kind of act that it is. So keeping promises is an independent duty, not just a 
 

126 Ethics 
“rule of thumb” to promote good consequences. But it isn’t our only duty, and 
other duties can conflict with it. In order to fulfill other duties that are more 
urgent, we sometimes ought to break a promise. 
 
Here’s an example. I promised my boyfriend to go hiking with him on the 
Brecksville trails after school; we both looked forward to seeing the beautiful 
fall colors. Since I promised, I felt some obligation or duty to do as I promised. 
But how strong was the obligation? What would it take to justify violating it? 
 
The “exceptionless duties” view says that I ought to keep my promises no 
matter what. This is crazy. Suppose that I get home after school and find that 
my mother is sick and needs to be taken to the hospital, and I’m the only one 
who can take her. Should I say, “Sorry Mom, but I can’t take you; you’ll just 
have to suffer and die—because I promised to go hiking and the duty to keep 
promises holds without exception”? No way! My duty to help my mother is 
stronger than my duty to keep the promise. Unless my boyfriend is an absolute 
jerk, he’ll understand this. 
So I reject exceptionless duties. I agree with my roommate Ima Utilitarian 
about this. There can’t be exceptionless duties, she argues, because such duties: 
1. 
would conflict and thus lead to contradictions, 
2. 
would lead to inhumane results in unusual cases, and 
3. 
should be violated if we need to do this to keep Dr. Evil from 
torturing everyone and then destroying the world. 
This seems conclusive to me. But I differ with her on further points. 
 
Ima Utilitarian explains exceptions in terms of consequences. She sees moral 
norms as “rules of thumb” about how to promote good results. While such 
rules can be helpful, we should break them whenever doing so has better 
consequences. In the case about driving my mother to the hospital, it clearly 
has better consequences to break the rule about keeping promises. 
This sounds sensible until you think about it carefully. Utilitarians say it’s all 
right to break a serious promise whenever doing so has slightly better conse-
quences. This doesn’t take seriously enough the duty to keep promises. When 
we promise something, we take on a special obligation to another person. We 
may have to break a promise in some cases; but a slight gain in good conse-
quences won’t justify breaking it. Keeping our word is a serious duty. 
Suppose that I baby-sit for your child, so that you and your wife can go to a 
concert. You promise to pay me a certain amount of money. But you discover 
that you could bring about slightly better consequences by giving the money to 
the poor instead of to me—since the benefit to the poor would outweigh my 
disappointment. Utilitarianism says that you should give the money to the poor, 
since this maximizes good consequences. The fact that you promised carries no 
special moral weight. But this is absurd. If you promise to pay me, then that 
creates a strong obligation. I’d protest if people took so lightly the promises 
that they make to me. 
 
So, for promise-keeping at least, Ross’s prima facie view is more sensible 
than either the “exceptionless norms” view or utilitarianism. 

 
Nonconsequentialism 127 
11.2 Our basic duties 
This is still Ima Rossian. I need another section to explain Ross’s basic duties. 
 
Some of his duties are about doing good or harm. To fill this out, we need 
to talk about what is intrinsically good. Ross was a pluralist and accepted three 
main intrinsic goods: virtue, knowledge, and pleasure. I’d like to add life and 
freedom. So to do good to another is to promote the virtue, knowledge, 
pleasure, life, or freedom of the other person. And to do harm is to bring vice, 
ignorance, pain, death, or bondage. 
 
Ross recognized seven basic prima facie duties: 
1. 
Fidelity: Keep your promises. 
2. 
Reparation: Make up for harm you’ve done to another. 
3. 
Gratitude: Return good to those who have done good to you. 
4. 
Justice: Upset distributions of pleasure or happiness that don’t 
accord with merit. 
5. 
Beneficence: Do good to others. 
6. 
Self-improvement: Improve your virtue and knowledge. 
7. 
Nonmaleficence: Don’t harm others. 
Other things being equal, we ought to follow these norms. When just one 
norm applies, that one gives our duty. But sometimes the norms conflict. In the 
example about my mother, fidelity and benevolence conflicted: 
• 
Fidelity would say to keep my promise to go hiking (which involves 
not driving my mother to the hospital). 
• 
Beneficence would say to drive my mother to the hospital (which 
involves breaking my promise to go hiking). 
When our duties conflict, we have to follow the stronger duty. Here the strong 
benefit to my mother outweighs the casual promise. So I’d break the promise. 
Ross’s principles make sense to me, with two exceptions. First, I just don’t 
get his justice principle. If my brothers and sisters aren’t happy in proportion to 
their virtue (the most virtuous being happiest, the second most virtuous being 
second happiest, and so forth), should I try to upset this? Does Ross really 
mean this? I think we need a better justice rule. 
Ross is unsure whether to include promoting our own enjoyment under the 
self-improvement duty; he says that we promote our own enjoyment enough 
already. Ross has obviously never met my mother—who really ought to go out 
and enjoy herself sometimes; maybe then she wouldn’t get so sick. I’d include a 
duty to promote our own enjoyment, and base it on the self-regard principle 
[see Q9 of Section 8.4]. 
Other duties flow from these basic ones. When we talk, we make an implicit 
promise not to tell lies; and so we have a duty not to tell lies. And we make an 
implicit promise to obey the laws of the country where we live; and so we have 
a duty to obey the law. This latter duty also derives in part from gratitude (for 
benefits received from the country) and beneficence (to cooperate in promot-
ing the general good). 

128 Ethics 
 
Ross bases his duties on moral intuitions [see Sections 4.1 to 4.3 for his 
defense of intuitionism]. When duties conflict, we appeal to intuitions to find 
out which duty is stronger. This is the weakest part of Ross’s view, and the part 
most often criticized. People’s moral intuitions vary greatly, and the view gives 
no way to criticize defective intuitions (for example, racist intuitions). 
 
We get a stronger view if we replace Ross’s intuitionism with an appeal to 
rationality (being consistent, informed, imaginative, and so forth [as in Chapters 
7 to 9]). Rationality would endorse most of Ross’s duties. Since we demand that 
others practice fidelity, reparation, gratitude, and so forth toward us, we will, if 
consistent, demand these things of ourselves too—and we’ll regard them as 
duties. Rationality also can guide us when norms conflict. In the example about 
my mother, golden-rule consistency would practically force me to think that I 
ought to break the promise and drive my mother to the hospital. 
 
Ross sees some basic duties as stronger than others. Nonmaleficence is 
normally stronger than beneficence. In general, it’s not right to harm one 
person to help another or to promote social usefulness. One of the defects of 
utilitarianism is that it permits any harm to the individual for the sake of 
maximizing pleasure. Ross’s view fixes this defect. 
 
Often our duties are relational, in that they depend on how we’re related to 
another person. We have special duties to X if we made a promise to X, or hurt 
X, or if X helped us, or if X is our spouse or child or friend. Each relationship 
leads to special duties. Utilitarianism wrongly sees such personal relationships 
as morally irrelevant: our only duty is to maximize good consequences. So 
utilitarianism doesn’t do justice to the personal and relational aspects of duty. 
 
The main drawback to Ross’s approach is that it doesn’t give us clear 
answers to most moral questions. But the other views aren’t any better. The 
exceptionless-duties view gives clear answers, but it leads to contradictions 
when its norms conflict. Utilitarianism would give us clear answers if we knew 
the long-range consequences of our actions; but this is beyond our knowledge. 
 
Consider how Ross’s view applies to killing. By nonmaleficence, it’s wrong 
to bring something intrinsically bad to another. Since death is intrinsically bad, 
it’s wrong to bring death to another. So killing is wrong. But how wrong? Can 
it be right to kill in self-defense? What about capital punishment, abortion, and 
mercy killing? Ross’s view is vague on such issues. While his view gives a 
general framework for seeing our duties, we still need to work out (in a 
consistent, informed, and imaginative way) specific duties on areas like killing. 
 
In spite of this vagueness, Ross’s view has many strengths. It gives a 
balanced perspective that accords closely with what most intelligent, reflective 
people believe about our duties. 
Reflect on how you react to this view. Do you have objections? 
11.3 Exceptionless norms 
Ima has given us a clear formulation of an important approach to morality. I 
agree with much of what she says, including her criticisms. She says that Ross’s 

 
Nonconsequentialism 129 
view needs a better justice rule (we’ll work on this later) and that the view is 
vague when applied to specific moral issues. 
Another problem with Ross’s view, in my opinion, is its rejection of strict or 
exceptionless rules—a feature it borrowed from classical utilitarianism. Ross 
didn’t mention rule utilitarianism, which in his time hadn’t been developed very 
far. I favor combining Ross’s view with some rule utilitarian ideas about the 
importance of strict rules. 
Ima Rossian and her roommate had three arguments against exceptionless 
duties. There can’t be exceptionless duties, they argued, because such duties: 
1. 
would conflict and thus lead to contradictions, 
2. 
would lead to inhumane results in unusual cases, and 
3. 
should be violated if we need to do this to keep Dr. Evil from 
torturing everyone and then destroying the world. 
But these arguments fall apart if we examine them carefully. 
(1) “There can’t be exceptionless duties, because they’d conflict and thus 
lead to contradictions.” The norms that Ima was taught as a child did indeed 
conflict; but not all groups of exceptionless norms conflict. Consider these 
three negative norms: 
• 
Never kill an innocent person. 
• 
Never take heroin for recreational purposes. 
• 
Never commit adultery. 
These won’t conflict. So it may be consistent to accept a few exceptionless 
norms, especially negative ones, so long as they’re formulated carefully. 
(2) “There can’t be exceptionless duties, because these would lead to inhu-
mane results in unusual cases.” Ima Utilitarian pointed out how “Stealing is 
always wrong” would forbid you to steal a loaf of bread to keep your family 
from starving. Surely it would be all right to steal in this case. 
I agree that we should avoid exceptionless norms that have inhumane  
results. I propose consistency as the test of “inhumane results”: can we desire 
that the norm be followed even if we imagine ourselves (or our family) in such 
and such a place in the situation? If we can’t desire this, then we’re inconsistent 
in holding the norm. Ima Utilitarian’s example shows that it would be difficult 
to hold “Stealing is always wrong” consistently. 
 
The most plausible exceptionless norms are ones that forbid seriously 
inhumane actions. Recall that both Socrates and Jesus were innocent and yet, 
for utilitarian reasons, were put to death. “Never kill an innocent person” is 
designed to stop such inhumane actions. 
 
Would “Never kill an innocent person” sometimes have inhumane results? 
Some think so, and bring up examples like mercy killing. If I were convinced by 
these examples (which I am not), then I’d support an anti-killing rule with more 
qualifications—perhaps one like (b) instead of (a): 

130 Ethics 
(a) 
Never kill an innocent person. 
(b) 
Never kill someone except in self-defense or mercy killing. 
I regard both norms as “exceptionless” (even though they have built-in 
restrictions) because they’re formulated using “never.” 
 
So if a proposed exceptionless norm is found to have inhumane results in 
unusual cases, we can revise the norm to avoid the results—and then claim that 
the revised norm holds in all cases. Of course, it may be difficult to think of all 
the needed qualifications; but this doesn’t show that exceptionless norms are 
impossible. 
(3) “There can’t be exceptionless duties, because any rule—even one against 
killing the innocent—should be violated if we need to do this to keep Dr. Evil 
from torturing everyone and then destroying the world.” We could answer this 
objection in one of three ways: 
• 
We could bite the bullet—and insist that we shouldn’t kill the 
innocent even to stop Dr. Evil from destroying the world. 
• 
We could qualify the norm to avoid objections. We could add a 
disaster clause (as in “Never kill the innocent unless this is needed to 
prevent disaster”) or else insist that our norm is intended to cover  
only actual cases (and not fantastic Dr. Evil ones). 
• 
We could insist that, even if there could be unusual cases where 
killing the innocent is justifiable, still in real life we don’t know 
enough to be able to recognize these cases. So we’ll make better  
decisions if we follow the practical rule never to kill the innocent; 
following this rule strictly will prevent many tragic mistakes. (This 
answer is in the spirit of rule utilitarianism.) 
For practical purposes, it doesn’t matter which answer we give. In all three 
cases, we’ll make the same decisions on practical cases. 
 
When should we take a norm as very strict, or even exceptionless? I suggest 
this principle: “Take a norm more strictly if doing so would tend to prevent 
great evils or foolish choices.” Here “great evils” would cover things like the 
killing of an innocent person, the bringing about of a drug addiction, or the 
ruining of a happy marriage. When such things are at stake, and when following 
a looser rule is apt to lead to bad choices (see Section 10.5), it makes sense to 
follow a strict or even exceptionless rule. 
 
It’s important to insist that some (but not all) moral rules should be taken 
very strictly. Many of the problems in the world today come from people who 
take moral rules very loosely and thus can talk themselves into doing almost 
anything. 

 
Nonconsequentialism 131 
11.4 Rights 
Duties connect closely to rights. A right is what can be justifiably demanded of 
others. So if you have a right, then you can demand that others treat you in 
certain ways. Traditionally, legal rights are distinguished from human rights. 
Legal rights are rights recognized by a society’s governing body. For example, 
in a given society we might have a legal right to sell our slaves. Human rights, 
on the other hand, are rights that we have, or ought to have, simply because we 
are human beings, and not because we belong to a specific society. For 
example, all people have the human right not to be enslaved. Human rights are 
sometimes called “moral rights” or “natural rights” (see Section 13.1). Most 
thinkers contend that political structures are set up, at least in part, to protect 
human rights and that human rights ought to trump legal rights; so civil laws 
that violate human rights are unjust and ought to be changed. 
We can classify rights as negative or positive. A negative right is a right not to 
be interfered with in certain ways. John Locke spoke of our right to life, liberty, 
and property. These are areas where others ought not to interfere; it’s seriously 
wrong to take the life, freedom, or property of another. Other rights are often 
claimed, many of which could be subsumed under these three. For example, we 
have the right to think and act for ourselves (autonomy), to follow our 
conscience, to express our views (freedom of speech and the press), to form 
and follow our religious beliefs, to vote for the officials who govern us, and to 
have a fair trial—and we ought not to be prevented from these because of race, 
religion, political beliefs, disabilities, gender, or sexual orientation—nor ought 
we on such grounds to be insulted, brutalized, or discriminated against regard-
ing educational or employment opportunities. Not all rights can be exception-
less; for example, society cannot permit people to follow religious beliefs that 
require killing those with different religious beliefs. As John Rawls put it, each 
person has an equal right to the most extensive scheme of equal basic liberties 
compatible with a similar scheme of liberties for others. 
A positive right is a right to certain goods that society should help to pro-
vide; when people affirm the “right to health care,” they think that society 
ought to ensure that everyone can have health care. Other alleged positive 
rights include the right to a decent standard of living, to education, and to 
adequate housing. 
There are many disputes about negative and positive rights. On the one 
extreme, libertarians like Robert Nozick and Ayn Rand reject positive rights 
and favor negative ones. They reject the universal right to health care, to a 
decent standard of living, and so forth; they say that society could pay for such 
things only by violating our property rights—by taking away from some in 
order to give to others. Libertarians tend to favor a pure and unregulated form 
of capitalism. In a capitalist system, you provide for most of your own needs. 
If you break your arm, you have to pay a doctor to fix it (or perhaps pay a 
private insurance company for a policy to cover medical costs). Privately owned 
and operated businesses provide goods and services for profit; capitalism is 
marked by competition, free markets, and the profit motive. In a pure form of 
capitalism, business has minimal regulation and government is small. The state 
needs to protect negative rights, like life and property, and this requires police, 

132 Ethics 
an army, and a judicial system. But the state ought not to promote positive 
rights, like health care or a decent standard of living. 
On the other extreme, Karl Marx and other radical socialists favor an egali-
tarian distribution of wealth over supposed property rights. Marx thought the 
poor should seize factories in order to bring about a fairer sharing of goods. 
Twentieth-century Marxist societies tended to distribute goods somewhat 
equally but had less concern with negative rights like free speech and freedom 
of religion. However many socialist societies, such as Sweden, respect individu-
al rights and liberties. In a socialist system, the larger society provides for most 
of your needs. If you break your arm, then society pays a doctor to fix it. The 
community owns and controls organizations that provide goods or services; 
socialism is marked by cooperation and an egalitarian ideal of everyone sharing 
somewhat equally in the goods of society (unlike some capitalist societies, 
where corporation heads often earn over 100 times the salary of an ordinary 
worker). The government plays a big role in promoting positive rights, like 
health care and a decent standard of living, for everyone. 
Today most countries, whether they call themselves “capitalist” or “social-
ist,” combine elements from both approaches. So many predominantly capi-
talist countries, aware of problems that unregulated capitalism can cause for the 
poor, have set up trade unions, a minimum wage, social security, unemploy-
ment compensation, rules about how to treat workers, free public education, 
free lunches for school children, and free medical care for the poor or elderly—
with many of these being financed by inheritance taxes and a graduated income 
tax. And many predominantly socialist countries have privatized some indus-
tries and turned to a market economy, competition, and a profit motive. So 
many countries have moved away from an ideological commitment to capital-
ism or socialism and are more concerned with the practical question of whether 
specific areas (mining, manufacturing, transportation, utilities, medical care, and 
so forth) would work better if nationalized or privatized. On this mixed 
approach, which makes sense to me, we shouldn’t ask whether we ought to be 
capitalist or socialist. Instead, we should ask how we ought in a specific society 
to combine the best elements of both approaches. 
11.5 Distributive justice 
Justice deals with treating others as they have a right to be treated. There are 
various types of justice. For example, retributive (criminal) justice is about 
punishment, racial justice is about the treatment of different races, and 
distributive justice is about the distribution of goods. Continuing from the 
last section, we will now focus on the hotly disputed area of distributive justice. 
How ought goods to be distributed in a society? We noticed problems with 
Ross’s view on distributive justice. So we’ll here consider three further views—
first utilitarianism, and then the nonconsequentialist views of John Rawls and 
Robert Nozick. 
 
Classical utilitarianism says that we ought always to do whatever brings 
about the greatest balance of pleasure over pain. If our action maximizes good, 
it doesn’t matter how equal or unequal the distribution of good is. So utilita-

 
Nonconsequentialism 133 
rianism could in principle justify a wide gap between rich and poor. Utilitarians, 
however, claim that their view in practice prefers a more equal distribution. 
Consider a simple island society with two families. The rich family earns 
$999,000 a year and has abundant goods; the poor family earns $1000 a year 
and is close to starvation. Suppose that $1000 from the rich family went to the 
poor family. The poor family would benefit greatly, and the rich family would 
hardly notice the loss. The reason for this is the diminishing marginal utility 
of money; as we get richer, each extra dollar makes less difference to how well 
we live. Going from $999,000 to $998,000 matters little, while going from 
$1000 to $2000 makes a big difference. Thus, utilitarians argue, a given amount 
of wealth tends to produce more total happiness if it’s spread out more evenly. 
Our island society would probably maximize its total happiness if both families 
shared their wealth more equally. 
 
While this seems sensible, nonconsequentialists are suspicious. If one family 
gets more pleasure out of a given amount of money than another, should it 
then get more money (since this would maximize the total enjoyment)? Is this 
fair? And even if utilitarianism leads to the right judgments on equality, does it 
do so for the right reasons? Is equality good not in itself, but merely because it 
produces the biggest total? 
John Rawls has proposed an influential nonconsequentialist approach to justice. 
How can we decide what is just? Rawls suggests that we ask what rules we’d 
agree to under certain hypothetical conditions (the original position). Imagine 
that we’re free, clearheaded, and know all the relevant facts—but are under a 
“veil of ignorance” about our own place in society (whether rich or poor, black 
or white, male or female). This knowledge limitation is meant to insure 
impartiality. If we don’t know our race, for example, we can’t manipulate the 
rules to favor our race over others. The rules of justice are the rules we’d agree 
to under these impartial conditions. 
 
What would we agree to in the original position? Rawls argues that we’d pick 
two basic rules of justice (which I’ve simplified in their wording): 
• 
Equal liberty principle: Society ought to safeguard the greatest 
liberty for each person compatible with an equal liberty for all others. 
• 
Difference principle: Society ought to promote the equal distri-
bution of wealth, except for inequalities that serve as incentives to 
benefit everyone (including the least advantaged group) and are 
open to everyone on an equal basis. 
The equal liberty principle supports negative rights, like freedom of religion 
and freedom of speech. Such rights, Rawls says, are not to be violated for the 
sake of social usefulness. The difference principle, which deals with positive 
rights, is about how to distribute wealth. From the original position, we might 
be attracted to the egalitarian view, that everyone should have the same wealth. 
But this would bring stagnation, since people would have little incentive to do 
difficult things (like become doctors or inventors) that ultimately benefit 
everyone. So we’d prefer a rule that permits incentives. In a Rawlsian society, 

134 Ethics 
everyone would have roughly the same wealth—except for equalities (like more 
pay for doctors) that are justified as incentives that ultimately benefit everyone, 
and that are open to everyone on an equal basis. 
 
Robert Nozick is a libertarian (rejecting positive rights in favor of negative 
ones) and the sharpest critic of Rawls’s difference principle. He proposes the 
entitlement view of just possessions. This says that whatever you earn fairly, 
through hard work and just agreements, is yours. If everyone has legitimately 
earned what they have, then the resulting distribution is just—regardless of 
how unequal it may be. No one has a right to take your possessions away from 
you, even if others have far less. Schemes (like a progressive income tax) that 
force a redistribution of wealth are wrong, because they violate your right to 
property. They steal from you in order to give to others. 
 
How much should doctors get paid? On Nozick’s approach, they should get 
paid whatever they legitimately earn. In one society, they may earn about the 
same as everyone else; in another, they may earn huge amounts of money. In 
both cases, they’re entitled to what they earn—and any scheme to take away 
their earnings to help others is unjust. 
Which view should we prefer, Rawls’s or Nozick’s? If we appealed to moral 
intuitions, we’d have a deadlock; liberal intuitions accord with Rawls, while 
libertarian intuitions accord with Nozick. I’d claim, however, that rational con-
sistency would favor something like Rawls’s view. Imagine a society organized 
on Nozick’s free-market approach, in which, after several generations, there’s a 
huge gap between rich and poor. Those born into a rich family are rich, and 
those born into a poor family suffer from a poverty that they can’t overcome. 
Imagine yourself and your family suffering from this poverty. Can you desire 
that, if you were in this condition, then Nozick’s principles be followed? 
11.6 Ten commandments 
It may be helpful to compare the norms that we’ve collected with the world’s 
most influential list of duties: the ten commandments. 
 
Our philosophical norms divide into two groups. The first group (from 
Chapters 7 to 9) gives a method for reasoning about and picking other moral 
judgments: 
Be consistent (in a broad sense that involves being conscientious 
and impartial and following the golden rule), informed, imaginative, 
and so forth. 
Using this as a basis, we defended a rough and incomplete list of further goods, 
duties, and rights: 
• 
Intrinsic goods: virtue, knowledge, pleasure, life, and freedom—and 
maybe a few more things that we missed. 
• 
Ross’s prima facie duties: fidelity, reparation, gratitude, beneficence, 
self-improvement, and nonmaleficence. 

 
Nonconsequentialism 135 
• 
The principle that we should take a norm more strictly if doing so 
would tend to prevent great evils or foolish choices. 
• 
Justice duties (for negative and positive rights): the equal liberty and 
difference principles. 
To these, I’d like to add two further norms. Act and rule utilitarianism can be 
good ways to think through a moral issue, even though they can be outweighed 
by other duties. So I suggest adding these as prima facie duties: 
AU If you can trust your judgment about which individual act has the 
best consequences, then do this act—unless this violates a stronger 
duty. 
RU If you can’t trust your judgment about which act has the best 
consequences, then follow the rule with the best consequences to 
apply in such cases—unless this violates a stronger duty. 
AU would apply more to decisions that we can carefully research, while RU 
would apply more to training our moral habits. 
Nonconsequentialism is messy. It lacks the simplicity of classical utilitarian-
ism, with its single norm: “Always bring about the greatest balance of pleasure 
over pain.” But the truth isn’t always simple. 
 
The ten commandments, in contrast, gives ten key duties toward God and 
toward human beings: 
Duties to 
God 
01. Thou shalt not worship false gods. 
02. Thou shalt not take God’s name in vain. 
03. Keep holy the Sabbath. 
Duties to 
family 
04. Honor thy father and thy mother. 
06. Thou shalt not commit adultery. 
Duties to 
neighbor 
05. Thou shalt not kill. 
07. Thou shalt not steal. 
08. Thou shalt not bear false witness. 
Duties to 
yourself 
09. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s wife. 
10. Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor’s goods. 
The Bible recognizes many further duties beyond these ten (for example, 
gratitude and reparation). But these ten are seen as especially important. 
The philosophical and Biblical lists have different goals. The philosophical 
list tries to give a comprehensive but general account of all duties. The Biblical 
list, in contrast, tries to give the most important specific duties. While the two 
lists share no common items, they fit together nicely and offer mutually 
enriching insights. Both lists can be based on the golden rule. 
 
The first group of commandments gives duties toward God. Other such 
duties include faith, hope, and love; praise and thanksgiving; and obedience. 

136 Ethics 
Our duties to other people are indirectly duties to God, since they express 
obedience to him and concern for his creatures. 
While our philosophical list doesn’t mention duties to God, it could, pre-
suming a belief in God, lead to such duties. For example, we’d have duties of 
gratitude to respond to God’s goodness—and duties of rationality to follow the 
will of a supremely wise being. St. Augustine claimed that the golden rule 
would lead us to love God; we surely desire that if we were in God’s place then 
we’d be loved by our creatures. 
 
The second group gives duties to family, seen in traditional terms as a hus-
band, wife, and children. For a family to flourish, the bond between husband 
and wife must be strong. So adultery is forbidden; few things can destroy a 
family more quickly. Further duties include affection, communication, and time 
together—and avoiding physical and mental cruelty. Children are to honor their 
parents; this involves obedience, and later friendship, and later caring for 
parents in their old age. Parents are to care for their children and help them to 
grow up into caring and responsible adults; later on, they are to provide emo-
tional support for their grownup children through life’s difficulties. There also 
are duties to brothers and sisters, and to members of an extended family. All 
these duties could be based on Ross’s benevolence, nonmaleficence, and fidel-
ity, or on a rule utilitarian view that seeks to promote the goods of family life. 
 
Other social units, besides the family, include companies, schools, clubs, 
cities, and countries. Membership in a community brings special duties. Espe-
cially important is the duty to do your part to support the community and to 
make it better (including more just). 
 
The next group gives duties that we have to our neighbor. We are not to kill, 
steal, or lie. Other duties are to show respect and politeness toward others, not 
enslave or insult them, help those in need, and show gratitude and reparation. 
In general, we are to do good and not harm to others. We are to treat others 
only in ways we consent to ourselves being treated in like circumstances. 
 
The last group gives duties to ourselves. The duty not to covet is the duty to 
avoid bad desires, whether these be to steal or commit adultery (or to kill or lie 
or hate). Other duties to ourselves include self-improvement, self-regard, and 
future-regard. Perhaps the most important duty to ourselves is to live out our 
lives in the wisest way that we can. 
 
These thoughts try to combine some insights from the philosophical and the 
Biblical traditions. You might try the same exercise yourself. What do you see 
as our main duties toward God, family, society, neighbor, and ourselves? 
11.7 Chapter summary 
Nonconsequentialism says that some kinds of action (like breaking promises or 
killing the innocent) are wrong in themselves, and not just wrong because they 
have bad consequences. Such things may be exceptionlessly wrong, or may just 
have some independent moral weight against them. 
Ross’s prima facie view is a popular form of nonconsequentialism. It tries to 
avoid the extreme implications of the “exceptionless duties” view and utilita-
rianism. Ross focuses on our duty to keep promises. This duty doesn’t hold in 

 
Nonconsequentialism 137 
an exceptionless way, since it can be overridden by other duties. And yet it isn’t 
just a rule of thumb that we can break whenever it has good consequences to 
do so. Instead, the duty to keep promises is an independent duty. It binds us, 
other things being equal, but may sometimes have to yield to other duties. 
Ross’s basic moral principles say that we ought, other things being equal, to 
do or not to do certain kinds of action. There are duties of fidelity, reparation, 
gratitude, justice, beneficence, self-improvement, and nonmaleficence. When 
these duties conflict, we have to weigh one duty against another and see which 
is stronger in the situation. 
Nonmaleficence is stronger than beneficence; in general, it’s not right to 
harm one person to help another or to promote social usefulness. Many of our 
duties are relational; we have a specific duty to a person X because of how X is 
related to us (as, for example, someone to whom we’ve made a promise). 
Ross’s prima facie view, even though much of it seems acceptable, has 
several weaknesses. First, it’s vague when we apply it to specific moral issues 
(for example, about killing). Second, it needs a better justice principle. Third, its 
objections to exceptionless norms are simplistic; we could improve the view by 
adding insights from rule utilitarianism about strict principles. 
A right is what can be justifiably demanded of others. A negative right (for 
example, a right to life or property) is a right not to be interfered with in certain 
ways. A positive right (for example, a right to health care or a decent standard 
of living) is a right to certain goods that society should help to provide. 
Libertarians deny positive rights, on the grounds that society can pay for these 
goods only by violating the property rights of others; libertarians favor minimal 
government, free markets, private property, and unregulated capitalism. 
Socialists, on the other hand, support positive rights, community ownership of 
organizations that provide goods and services, a more equal distribution of 
wealth, and a government that’s actively involved in providing for everyone’s 
needs. Also possible is a mixed view, which tries to combine the best elements 
of capitalism and socialism. 
Distributive justice is about how goods ought to be distributed. Utilitarians 
say that we ought to maximize the total good, and that we’ll generally do this 
better by spreading out wealth more equally. Rawls says that society ought to 
promote the equal distribution of wealth, except for inequalities that serve as 
incentives to benefit everyone. Nozick says that whatever you earn fairly is 
yours—and society has no right to take it away to redistribute wealth or help 
the poor. I argue that the golden rule would lead us closer to Rawls than to 
Nozick. 
Our philosophical approach tries to give a complete list of our basic duties 
in abstract terms. In contrast, the ten commandments try to give the most 
important of our concrete duties but without aiming at completeness. The 
philosophical and the Biblical lists fit together nicely and offer mutually 
enriching insights. Both lists can be based on the golden rule. 

138 Ethics 
11.8 Study questions 
1. What is nonconsequentialism? Do all nonconsequentialists believe in 
exceptionless duties? 
2. What is a “prima facie” duty? Why did Ima Rossian think promise-
keeping is a prima facie duty, and not exceptionless? (11.1) 
3. Why did Ima reject the utilitarian approach to promises? 
4. On Ima’s view, what is intrinsically good? (11.2) 
5. On Ross’s view, what are our basic duties? What should we do when our 
duties conflict? 
6. Explain Ross’s intuitionism method. Did Ima accept this? 
7. Explain the claim that nonmaleficence is stronger than beneficence. 
8. Explain the claim that many of our duties are relational. 
9. Does Ross’s approach give us a definite answer to most moral questions? 
Give an example where it wouldn’t. 
10. Write about a page sketching your initial reaction to Ross’s prima facie 
view. Does it seem plausible to you? What do you like and dislike about 
it? Can you think of any way to show that it’s false? 
11. What are the three objections to exceptionless norms? How could these 
be answered? (11.3) 
12. What principle is suggested about how strictly to take a norm? 
13. What is a right? Distinguish legal from human rights. (11.4) 
14. Distinguish between negative rights and positive rights—and give an 
example of each. 
15. Explain libertarian capitalism and extreme socialism. What do they say 
about positive rights and the role of government? What would a mixed 
view say? 
16. What is utilitarianism’s approach to distributive justice? Explain how 
diminishing marginal utility tends to favor equality. (11.5) 
17. Explain how Rawls proposes to pick principles of justice. What is his 
difference principle? 
18. What is the entitlement view of Robert Nozick? What is the golden rule 
argument for criticizing this approach? 
19. How does our list of philosophical duties differ from the duties listed in 
the ten commandments? (11.6) 
11.9 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 11—Nonconsequentialism.” 
 
Ross’s view is in Chapter 2 of his The Right and the Good. Kant’s Groundwork of 
the Metaphysics of Morals is the classic defense of an exceptionless nonconsequen-
tialism. For more on human rights and distributive justice, see the United 
Nations “Declaration of Human Rights,” Marx and Engels’s The Communist 
Manifesto, Rawls’s A Theory of Justice, Nozick’s Anarchy, State and Utopia (especially 
Chapter 7), and Rand’s The Virtue of Selfishness. The ten commandments are in 
Exodus 20:2–17 and Deuteronomy 5:6–21 of the Bible. The Bibliography at 
the end of the book has information on how to find these works. 

 
Virtue 139 
12 Virtue 
 
A virtue is a good habit. To influence our lives in a deeper way, norms need to 
be internalized into our character. For example, the golden rule needs to be so 
much a part of us that we follow it instinctively, as if it were part of our nature. 
A good person is a person of excellent character traits, a person of virtue. 
 
Virtue played a central role in ancient Greek ethics and has made a come-
back in the “virtue ethics” movement. We’ll start by looking at what the ancient 
Greeks had to say. Then we’ll connect virtue to further controversies, especially 
those featured in previous chapters. 
12.1 Socrates and Plato 
Socrates (c. 470–399 BC) began ancient Greek ethics by asking questions like 
“What is virtue?” and “What is justice?” His dialogue partner answers, for 
example, “Virtue is what God desires” (see Section 3.4). Socrates asks further 
questions, and the partner responds; there are clarifications, objections, and 
inferences. While he claimed to teach no ethical doctrine, Socrates taught the 
life of reason. He taught people to think carefully about ethical questions and 
to search for beliefs that could be held consistently after thorough examination. 
 
Socrates was sentenced to death because his questioning was thought to 
“corrupt the youth.” He contended that it was better to do the right thing and 
obey God than to obey man. So in his death too, Socrates taught people to 
seek virtue and wisdom above self-interest. 
 
Plato (c. 428–347 BC), Socrates’s star pupil, had an ethical doctrine. For 
Plato, ethics is like geometry. In geometry, we use our minds to grasp pure 
ideas, like the idea of a perfect circle, which is the model of the imperfect 
circles of the material world. So too in ethics, we use our minds to grasp the 
idea of the Good, which is an objective pattern of perfection that provides the 
basis for ethics. Like the later intuitionists (see Chapter 4), Plato thinks the 
norm of right and wrong is within us; things are good insofar as they follow the 
objective pattern of Good that our minds grasp. And if we know the Good, 
then we’ll be virtuous and act rightly. 
 
In Plato’s philosophy, the lower must depend on the higher. The human has 
two parts, body and soul, with the soul being higher. So the soul needs to 
control the body. Now the soul itself has three parts. The highest part is 
thought (reason), the lowest is appetites (impulses and desires). The middle 
“spirited” part is emotions, which should help reason to control appetites. 
 

140 Ethics 
Accordingly, there are four main virtues: one for each part of the soul and one 
for the three parts working together: 
• 
Wisdom is excellence in thinking. 
• 
Self-control (temperance) is the rational control of our appetites 
(impulses and desires). 
• 
Courage is the rational control of our “spirited” part (emotions, 
especially fear). 
• 
Justice is the correct ordering of the parts of the soul, whereby the 
rational part guides the spirited part, and both together guide the 
appetites. 
Thus the good life is a harmony; the higher rules the lower, with reason and the 
idea of the Good regulating desires and emotions. The life of virtue aims at the 
health of our souls; it doesn’t selfishly pursue our own pleasure (which is 
lower). But the good life is the most pleasant life; a selfish pursuit of pleasure 
hurts us by disorienting our souls. 
 
Plato’s emphasis on controlling our emotions reminds me of the Rocky V 
movie. Here Rocky Balboa, the boxing champion of the world, gives this 
(slightly edited) advice to a younger boxer: 
Your best friend is a guy named Franky Fear. Fear is a fighter’s best 
friend. It aien’t nothing to be ashamed of. Fear keeps you sharp, it 
keeps you awake. But you gotta learn how to control it. Fear is fire, 
burning deep inside. If you control it, it’s gonna make you hot. But 
if it controls you, it’s gonna burn you up. 
These days we hear much about how our basic impulses (about food, sex, 
violence, fear, and so forth) evolved when we were struggling for survival in the 
jungle. Take the example of eating. In the jungle, where food was scarce, it 
made sense to eat whatever we could and whenever we could; and so our genes 
are programmed to make us want to do this. But life today is different: food is 
plentiful, attractive, and almost always available. Following our innate urges 
about eating can lead to ruin. And so eating and other impulses need to be 
controlled by reason. Learning self-control is a large part of learning how to 
live properly. 
 
St. Augustine (354–430) Christianized Plato’s approach. Augustine sees life 
as a journey toward God, who is our supreme good. He sums up his ethics as 
“Love, and do as you will”; central are love of God, in which our ultimate 
happiness consists, and love of neighbor for the sake of God. Evildoing comes 
from disordered desire, where we submit to lower impulses; the correct order is 
for the soul to rule the body, reason to rule the soul, and the unchangeable 
Good (God and his law) to rule reason. Augustine accepts Plato’s four natural 
virtues, which came to be called the four cardinal virtues. Christianity adds 
three theological virtues: 

 
Virtue 141 
• 
Faith is believing in God and what he revealed. 
• 
Hope is emotionally trusting in God and his promises. 
• 
Love is unselfishly striving to serve God and to do good and not 
harm to his creatures. 
The greatest virtue is love; the greatest vices are selfishness and hatred. 
 
Plato thinks human society mirrors the structure of the soul. He divides 
people into three classes, depending on which part of the soul predominates. 
The ruling class, which should guide society, is strong in thought and reason. 
The working class, which needs self-control, is strong in appetites and im-
pulses. The warrior class, which needs courage and honor, is strong in spirit. In 
a just society, each class plays its own special role. This rigid class structure is 
for modern readers a less attractive part of Plato’s ethics. 
12.2 Aristotle 
Aristotle (384–322 BC), Plato’s star pupil, developed the ethics of virtue further. 
Aristotle makes three structural changes in our understanding of virtue and he 
puts virtue into a different wider context. 
 
First, Aristotle studies many virtues in detail and puts them into two main 
groups. Since reason has two main uses, to think and to act, there are two sorts 
of excellence that we should pursue: 
• 
Intellectual virtues (about thinking) include examples like philo-
sophical wisdom, intuition, scientific knowledge, and practical  
wisdom (knowing how to live). 
• 
Moral virtues (about acting) include examples like justice, self- 
control, courage, generosity, friendliness, and wittiness. 
Gone is Plato’s distinction between our appetites and our “spirited” part. 
 
Second, justice for Aristotle has to do with treating others fairly. Distribu-
tive justice deals with the distribution by merit of things like wealth and honors; 
corrective justice (including what we call “criminal justice”) deals with punish-
ments. What is just is determined partly by nature and partly by convention: 
while it’s by nature just that criminals be punished, the civil law determines 
which punishment goes with which crime. Gone is Plato’s peculiar sense of 
“justice” as a harmony between the parts of the soul. 
 
Third, virtues are a golden mean of “just enough,” between twin vices of 
“too much” and “too little.” To be courageous, for example, is to have just the 
right amount of fear in a given situation. It’s a vice to have too much fear: 
you’re cowardly if you ski only on the safe bunny slope. But it’s also a vice to 
have too little fear: you’re foolhardy if after one lesson you try to ski the double-
diamond expert slope. So the virtue of courage is midway between the vices of 
cowardice and foolhardiness. It’s important that we face the challenges of life 
(including courses, jobs, and relationships) with proper courage. 
 
The golden-mean point depends on the person and situation. We can eat 
too little or too much; but what is “just enough” depends on the case. What is 

142 Ethics 
too much for you to eat may be too little for Milo (a famous wrestler in 
Aristotle’s time). The golden mean is determined by a person of practical 
wisdom who knows about the case. 
 
Aristotle sees that not every mean between extremes is a virtue. It isn’t a 
virtue to be unjust or cruel to the right amount, neither too much nor too little. 
Instead, any amount of injustice or cruelty is a vice. But still, virtues are a mean 
between extremes. To be properly witty, for example, demands that we neither 
joke about everything (being “too witty”) nor joke about nothing (being “not 
witty enough”). And being properly friendly demands that we neither go around 
hugging every stranger (being “too friendly”) nor be impersonal to friends and 
family (being “too little friendly”). We need balance. 
 
I find Aristotle’s “golden mean” to be a useful analytical tool. I once wrote a 
short article on the virtue of forgiveness. I started by saying that to be forgiving is 
to give up angry feelings of resentment toward one who treated us wrongly. I 
contrasted this with the vice of vengefulness, which is to harbor resentment. I 
added that vengefulness can lead to “getting even,” to endless feuds, and to 
harm both for the vengeful person (who lives with anger) and for those who 
suffer retaliation. 
 
But then, thinking of Aristotle, I asked, “Can we be too forgiving?” After 
reflection, I decided that this is the vice of moral passivity (having too little 
resentment toward those who wrong us). I imagined a wife who is regularly 
beaten by her husband but does nothing, suffering in a passive way, forgiving 
excessively, and avoiding anger. I thought how moral passivity harms both 
victims (who suffer) and oppressors (who need to be confronted about their 
wrongdoing). I concluded that the virtue of proper forgiveness (to have the right 
degree of resentment but be ready to give this up when appropriate) is midway 
between the vices of moral passivity and vengefulness. Aristotle would have been 
proud of me. 
 
So, unlike Plato, Aristotle divides virtues into intellectual and moral ones, 
sees justice as about our fair treatment of others, and sees virtue as a mean 
between extremes. He also puts virtue into a different wider context. 
 
Plato, you recall, thinks ethics is like geometry; both depend on ideas that 
the mind can reach by pure thinking. Aristotle, by contrast, thinks ethics is 
more like biology. We can examine animals and their behavior, and see why 
they do things. Similarly, we can examine humans and their behavior, and see 
why we do things. Ethics does the latter. 
Aristotle begins his Nicomachean Ethics with this observation (slightly edited): 
“Every action aims at some good; and for this reason the good has rightly been 
declared to be that at which all things aim.” So humans act for goals. These 
goals form a hierarchy; you do A to bring about B, you bring about B to bring 
about C, and so on. But we can’t go on forever; there must be an ultimate goal 
for which we act. Aristotle assumes (rightly or wrongly) that we all act for the 
same ultimate goal, which he calls “happiness.” 
But what is this “happiness”—this ultimate goal of all our actions? Aristotle 
argues that it isn’t pleasure or honor; instead it’s a life where we excellently 
exercise our highest and distinctive capacity, our function or purpose, which is 
reason. But the excellent exercise of reason (either in thinking or in acting) is 

 
Virtue 143 
called “virtue.” So happiness is a life of virtue. Aristotle thinks that the highest 
form of the good life is contemplation, which is the activity of our highest 
faculty (knowledge) toward the highest objects (necessary truths); but he admits 
that this is too elevated for most people. For most of us, the good and happy 
life is to live according to both the moral and the intellectual virtues. This 
brings pleasure, but pleasure isn’t what we aim at; instead, we aim to be good 
people, people of virtue. 
Some object that this scheme sounds too good to be true. Do we all have 
virtue as our ultimate goal? When a thief does A in order to bring about B, 
brings about B in order to bring about C, and so on—is his ultimate goal here 
to bring about a life of virtue? Presumably not. Or maybe Aristotle is just 
claiming that a life of virtue is what we ought to have as the ultimate object of 
our desire, perhaps because we intuit its goodness (a la Plato) or perhaps 
because we’ll otherwise be frustrated. 
 
St. Thomas Aquinas (1224–74) Christianized Aristotle’s view. Aquinas’s 
ethics has two levels: a natural level (from Aristotle) and a supernatural level 
(from the Bible). With Aristotle, he accepts the natural virtues and the natural 
happiness that they promote. But he argues from the Bible for a greater 
supernatural happiness, which consists in the contemplation of God in the 
afterlife. This supernatural happiness is the activity of our highest faculty 
(knowledge) toward the highest object (God); it will bring ultimate fulfillment 
and is (or ought to be) the highest end of all our actions. To orient ourselves 
toward this ultimate happiness, we need the three theological virtues: faith, 
hope, and (especially) love. What makes any action bad is that it moves us away 
from our ultimate goal, which is complete happiness in God. (We’ll see more of 
Aquinas in the next chapter.) 
 
Another medieval contribution was the seven deadly sins (the worst vices): 
pride, greed, lust, wrath, gluttony, envy, and sloth. If we add the corresponding 
virtues and the opposite vices (following Aristotle’s golden-mean method), we 
get this: 
• 
Pride is an inflated, self-centered view of yourself. Self-understanding 
is a correct appraisal of your strong and weak points. Low self-esteem 
is an excessively negative view of yourself. 
• 
Greed is an excessive desire for money and possessions. The 
corresponding virtue is to put money and possessions in their 
proper place, as important but outranked by some other goods 
(such as family and relationships). The opposite vice is to have too 
little concern for money and possessions (for example, you collect 
unemployment insurance instead of seeking work to better support 
yourself and your family). 
• 
Lust is excessive sexual desire that’s out of control. Chastity is a 
proper use of sex. Prudishness is negativity to all sex. 
• 
Wrath is a vengeful and hateful anger toward one who has wronged 
you. Proper forgiveness is to have a proper degree of resentment but 

144 Ethics 
be ready to give this up when appropriate. Moral passivity is to have 
too little resentment toward those who wrong you. 
• 
Gluttony is overindulgence in food. Self-control in eating is to eat in a 
moderate and healthy manner. Anorexia is undereating, often based 
on the mistaken view that you are too fat. 
• 
Envy is discontent over another’s good fortune. The correspond-
ing virtue is to rejoice in the good fortune of others (and not to see 
this good fortune as detracting from yourself). The opposite vice is 
not to care, positively or negatively, about what happens to others. 
• 
Sloth is laziness, an excessive aversion to work. Having a proper work 
ethic is to work in a proper way. Being a workaholic is to work exces-
sively, at the expense of life’s other goods (such as family and rela-
tionships). 
Other important virtues include patience, honesty, mercy, peacefulness, gener-
osity, cooperativeness, carefulness, compassion, non-discrimination, kindness, 
and so on. There are many, many virtues that are important to the moral life—
many more than can be mentioned here. 
 
Let me add two further ideas from Aristotle. First, we aren’t born with the 
virtues; instead, virtues come with practice. If we want to be generous, for 
example, we need to push ourselves to do things for others; in time, generosity 
will become part of our lives. Those who say “I’m not a generous person—
that’s just not the way I’m built” are avoiding responsibility. To a great extent, 
we can become the kind of persons that we want to be. 
 
Second, to be virtuous isn’t just to act in a certain way; it also involves acting 
for the right reasons and with the right feelings, as a person of virtue would act. 
If we speak honestly just because we fear getting caught in a lie, then we don’t 
adequately have the virtue of honesty. 
Let me sum up. For Aristotle, virtue is rational moderation. Socrates began 
Greek ethics by asking “What is virtue?” Aristotle’s answer (in Section 6 of 
Book II of his Nicomachean Ethics) goes: “Virtue, then, is a state of character 
concerned with choice, lying in a mean, i.e. the mean relative to us, this being 
determined by a rational principle, and by that principle by which the man of 
practical wisdom would determine it.” 
12.3 Virtue and Imas 
Previous chapters discussed views about the nature and methodology of moral 
judgments (metaethics) and the principles that we ought to live by (normative 
ethics). To explore how virtue connects to these, I’ll now bring back the Imas. 
Ima Relativist will start the discussion. 
 
Ima Relativist: “Good is what is socially approved in a given culture. Since 
virtues are good habits, it follows that virtues are habits that a given culture 
approves of. 
 
“This semester, I have an anthropology course right before a course in 
Aristotle’s ethics; but I see the second course as a continuation of the first. 

 
Virtue 145 
Aristotle tells us about the virtues of upper-class males in ancient Athens. 
Lacking are virtues that appear in the Christian era, like humility, concern for 
others, and love of enemies. Lacking also are virtues that we prize today, like 
non-discrimination against those who are different from us. Aristotle often 
mentions slavery but never condemns it as a vice. He often mentions women 
but never considers that they too might have virtues; I fear that he’d have 
considered quiet obedience and submissiveness to be their chief virtues. In 
short, his virtues differ somewhat from ours. I mention this not to condemn 
him but to emphasize that every set of virtues is relative to culture. 
 
“Imagine the virtues accepted in Nazi Germany. Patriotism to the state and 
loyalty to one’s racial group were emphasized, along with opposition to those 
(like Jews) who were considered enemies of the state and the people. It was a 
vice to be nice to Jews and treat them as equals; it was virtuous to overcome 
personal squeamishness and put Jews in concentration camps. We were 
brought up to abhor these Nazi virtues. But we have no argument to show that 
our virtues are objectively superior. Indeed, there are no objective standards 
about virtues; what we call virtues are just those character traits that our society 
approves of.” 
 
Ima Subjectivist: “Ima Relativist makes good points against the supposed 
objectivity of virtues. But I contend that virtues are relative not to culture, but 
to the individual. So I’d be surprised if Aristotle simply parroted the ideas 
about virtue current in his own time, without adding an occasional disagree-
ment. When I call a character trait ‘virtuous,’ I’m saying that I like or approve 
of it—not that my culture does. If I lived in Nazi Germany, I could consistent-
ly reject their virtues. I could say, ‘This kind of patriotism is socially accepted—
but I call it a vice because I abhor it.’ My value judgments are about how I feel. 
David Hume expressed this well (Book III, Part I, Section I of his A Treatise of 
Human Nature, 1739): ‘When you pronounce any action or character to be 
vicious, you mean nothing, but that from the constitution of your nature you 
have a feeling or sentiment of blame from the contemplation of it.’” 
Ima Emotivist: “I basically agree with Ima Subjectivist. You have to go with 
your feelings when you pick virtues and vices.” 
Ima Idealist: “I disagree with all three of you, since you make ethics irration-
al. With Aristotle, I contend that practical reason determines which character 
traits are correctly called virtues. I contend that a moral judgment is a statement 
about what we’d feel if we were rational—where being rational involves things 
like being informed, impartial, and consistent. I argued previously that Nazi 
values were based on factual errors, ignorance, and extreme violations of 
impartial concern for everyone. Nazi ‘virtues’ are wrong because we’d reject 
them if we were rational.” 
 
Ima Supernaturalist: “I like what Ima Idealist says, except that I have doubts 
about making humans, instead of God, the norm of rationality. Instead, I say 
that character traits are virtues if God approves of them and vices if God 
disapproves. And I’d argue that Nazi ‘virtues’ go against the supreme virtue of 
universal love that God has revealed.” 
Ima Intuitionist: “I like the appeal to objective standards, but I don’t want to 
base them on religion or on some ideal-observer construct. The correct answer 

146 Ethics 
is simpler; it’s self-evident that certain things are virtues and certain things are 
vices. We need to appeal to our moral intuitions.” 
 
Ima Prescriptivist: “Moral judgments are prescriptions (or imperatives), not 
truth claims. But their logical structure gives us a way to reason about moral 
issues, by appealing to consistency and the golden rule. Nazi virtues commit 
one to Nazi ought-judgments, and we can refute these in ways that I’ve already 
discussed. 
 
“So how do we pick virtues? Well, we have to get informed, develop our 
imagination, and then see what norms we can consistently will about how 
people ought to live. Each such norm corresponds to a virtue, a character trait 
that internalizes the principle.” 
 
Ima Utilitarian: “OK, with me we move from ethical methodology to actual 
ethical principles. I see the supreme ethical principle as classical utilitarianism: we 
ought to do whatever has the best total consequences (as measured by pleasure 
and pain) for everyone affected by our action. Utilitarianism can bring unity 
and order to the chaos of virtue ethics. Virtues are simply character traits that 
tend to promote good consequences; on this basis, I’d praise virtues like 
honesty, courage, and justice. While virtue has no intrinsic value (since only 
pleasure and the avoidance of pain have intrinsic value), virtue is very useful to 
society because it tends to promote the general good. The supreme virtue of 
benevolence is the character trait to do the individual action that we think has the 
best total consequences.” 
 
Ima Rule-Utilitarian: “While I applaud this emphasis on virtue’s usefulness, 
I’d like to add two refinements. First, I contend that virtue, besides being 
useful, is of value for its own sake. Picture two worlds that are equal in terms of 
pleasure and pain, but one world has great virtue while the other has great vice. 
It’s clear to me that the world with great virtue is better. But then virtue is 
valuable for its own sake, and not just because of its good effects. 
 
“Second, I fear a world where people follow what Ima Utilitarian mislead-
ingly calls ‘benevolence.’ In such a world, people would treat each other 
dishonestly or unjustly whenever they speculated that this would have slightly 
better total consequences. This would bring moral chaos and bad conse-
quences. I think instead that we should encourage character traits that really 
would have the best consequences for society—like taking honesty and justice 
very seriously and strictly.” 
 
Ima Rossian: “While I largely agree, I’d like to bring in further refinements. 
As a nonconsequentialist, I think some kinds of action (like breaking your 
word) are wrong in themselves, and not just wrong because they have bad 
consequences. Following W.D. Ross, I believe in seven basic prima facie duties. 
And so I also believe in seven basic virtues: fidelity, reparation, gratitude, 
justice, self-improvement, beneficence, and nonmaleficence. Other virtues can 
be derived from these. 
“Virtues should be neither too rigid nor too loose. Consider these three 
approaches to the virtue of fidelity: 

 
Virtue 147 
1. 
A virtuous person would never break a promise. 
2. 
A virtuous person would break a promise only in unusual cases 
where this is required by a stronger moral requirement. 
3. 
A virtuous person would break a promise if doing so were believed 
to have even slightly better total consequences. 
While 1 (the view of the extreme nonconsequentialist Immanuel Kant) is too 
rigid, 3 (the view of Ima Utilitarian) is too loose and too easy to rationalize. The 
correct view is 2, in the middle. This follows the golden-mean approach of 
Aristotle and the prima facie duty approach of W.D. Ross (who much admired 
Aristotle and translated many of his works). 
“With Kant, though, I think the highest and most sublime virtue is good will, 
which means being motivated to do something just because it’s right. Kant 
thought lower motives, like self-interest and social pressure, lessen our moral 
worth and can lead us to act wrongly. A grocer who gives correct change from 
a sense of fairness, and not from fear of getting caught, has a good will. A good 
will is good in itself, not just good for what it produces. In good will lies our 
dignity as moral agents.” 
12.4 Virtue and GR 
Chapters 7 to 9 developed the golden-rule consistency view about moral 
rationality. We’ll now put this view into virtue-ethics terms. 
 
These chapters presuppose this general consistency norm: “Keep your 
beliefs, resolutions, desires, and actions in harmony with each other.” The 
corresponding good character trait is also called consistency: a consistent person 
is one who habitually keeps his or her beliefs, resolutions, desires, and actions 
in harmony with each other. Chapter 7 presented four consistency norms that 
were more specific: 
Avoid inconsistencies between: 
• 
your beliefs (logicality), 
• 
your ends and means (ends–means consistency), 
• 
your moral judgments and how you live  
(conscientiousness), and 
• 
your evaluations of similar actions (impartiality). 
Here are the corresponding good character traits (virtues): 
• 
To be logically consistent is to refrain from believing inconsistent 
things and to refrain from believing something without believing 
what logically follows from it. 
• 
To have ends–means consistency is to keep our ends and means 
in harmony with each other. 
• 
To be conscientious is to keep our actions, resolutions, and 
desires in harmony with our moral beliefs. 

148 Ethics 
• 
To be impartial is to make similar evaluations about similar 
actions, regardless of the individuals involved. 
The two ways to express the view (as consistency norms and as good character 
traits) go together nicely. Chapter 7 often switches between the two; for 
example, it sometimes talks about impartiality as a norm and sometimes talks 
about impartial people. 
 
Chapter 8 presented the golden rule as a consistency norm: 
GR Theorem: 
Treat others only as you 
consent to being treated 
in the same situation. 
GR forbids this combination: 
• 
I do something to another. 
• 
I’m unwilling that this be done 
to me in the same situation. 
In Section 8.1, we derived GR from the virtues of conscientiousness and 
impartiality. We argued that anyone with these two virtues would follow GR—
or, equivalently, that those who violate GR must violate one of these virtues. 
Habitual GR violators are often criticized using vice terms like “inconsiderate” 
or “thoughtless”; we also call such people “jerks.” 
What should we call the GR character trait (to habitually treat others only as 
we consent to being treated in the same situation)? The world-religions expert 
Karen Armstrong (2009: 370–1) suggests the term compassion, which she under-
stands in the root sense of “the ability to feel with the other” (com-passion = 
feeling with), and not in the narrower sense of pity (to feel sad over another’s 
suffering). Or we could use consideration for others, empathy, benevolence, kindness, 
fairness, or reciprocity. Or we could invent a term, perhaps goldenness. Aristotle 
complained that Greek often lacks precise words for important virtues; English 
has the same problem here. Perhaps Chinese can do better; Confucius used 恕 
(shu) for the golden-rule virtue. 
Chapter 9 begins in virtue mode and talks about good character traits: 
Moral Rationality: 
We’re rational in our moral judgments to 
the extent that we’re consistent, informed, 
imaginative, and a few more things. 
If we put this into Aristotle’s vocabulary, it would say: 
Practical Wisdom: 
We’re wise about how to live to the extent 
that we’re consistent, informed, imagina-
tive, and a few more things. 

 
Virtue 149 
If we put this into norm mode, we’d present, as crucial for forming moral 
judgments, norms like “Be consistent,” “Be informed (get your facts straight),” 
and “Be imaginative (develop and exercise a vivid awareness of what it’s like to 
be in the place of the other person).” 
Chapter 9 returns to norm mode when discussing moral education. It gives 
six key commandments of rational moral thinking: 
1. 
Make informed decisions. 
2. 
Be consistent in your beliefs. 
3. 
Live in harmony with your moral beliefs. 
4. 
Make similar evaluations about similar actions. 
5. 
Put yourself in the other person’s place. 
6. 
Treat others as you want to be treated. 
To teach these is to teach six key character traits that are important for practical 
wisdom: being informed, consistent, conscientious, impartial, imaginative, and 
considerate of others. 
12.5 Virtue and duty 
How does virtue relate to duty (ought)? Is one primary and one derivative? Do 
we need both? 
 
There are two extreme views. An extreme ethics of duty would say that 
“ought” is primary, virtue is derivative, and we could without loss dispense 
with talking about virtue. A virtuous person can be defined as one who has 
internalized the correct principles about how one ought to live. So to have the 
virtue of gratitude is just to have internalized the norm that we ought to return 
good to those who have done good to us. So to talk about “virtue” adds 
nothing to our understanding of ethics. 
 
An opposing extreme ethics of virtue would say that “virtue” is primary, 
duty is derivative, and we could without loss dispense with talking about duty. 
We can define “ought” in terms of “virtuous”: how one ought to act can be 
defined as how a virtuous person would act, when correctly understanding the 
situation and acting in character. So we can do ethics using only virtue notions; 
to talk about “ought” adds nothing to our understanding of ethics. 
 
Following Aristotle’s idea that virtue is a mean between extremes, I see the 
truth as somewhere in the middle. Duty and virtue are interdefinable; neither is 
more basic. Instead, both are different sides of the same moral coin. Views like 
cultural relativism and utilitarianism can be expressed in terms of either norms of 
right action or good character traits. Yet there’s an added richness in bringing both 
duty and virtue into ethical discussions, as did all the great moral philosophers 
from the time of Plato and Aristotle. It’s often helpful to look at the same 
terrain from different but complementary viewpoints. 

150 Ethics 
12.6 Chapter summary 
A virtue is a good habit. Moral philosophy started in ancient Greece when 
Socrates asked questions about virtue and encouraged people to think about 
such questions in a rational way. 
 
For Plato, who was Socrates’s star pupil, the lower must depend on the 
higher. And so our soul needs to control the body, and our soul in turn needs 
to be guided by the Good, which is an objective pattern that our minds can 
grasp. There are four main virtues: wisdom, self-control, courage, and justice. 
St. Augustine and other Christian thinkers accepted this but added three 
theological virtues: faith, hope, and love. 
 
Aristotle discussed many virtues, but divided them into two main groups: 
intellectual virtues and moral virtues. Virtue is a mean between extremes; so 
courage, for example, is midway between cowardice (having too much fear) and 
foolhardiness (having too little fear). We need practical wisdom to pick the 
virtues and determine the mean. Virtues aim at happiness, which is the ultimate 
goal of our actions. 
 
Virtue raises many controversial issues. For example, cultural relativists see 
each culture as having its own “socially approved habits,” or virtues; there’s no 
objective way to call the virtues of one culture better than the virtues of 
another culture. Classical utilitarians, by contrast, see virtues as habits that 
promote the general good, seen in terms of pleasure and pain; the supreme 
virtue is the character trait to do the individual action that we think has the best 
total consequences. 
 
The golden-rule consistency view, expressed in virtue terms, would talk 
about character traits like consistency, conscientiousness, and impartiality. 
Corresponding to the golden rule would be the character trait, perhaps to be 
called “compassion” or “consideration for others,” that we have when we 
habitually treat others only as we consent to being treated in the same situation. 
To apply the golden rule, it’s important to have character traits like being 
informed and being imaginative. 
 
Finally, there are questions about whether duty or virtue is primary (with the 
other being derivative), or whether both are different sides of the same moral 
coin. 
12.7 Study questions 
1. Very roughly, what is a virtue? 
2. Who started ancient Greek ethics, and what was his main contribution? 
(12.1) 
3. For Plato, was ethics based on sense experience or on reason? What role 
does “the Good” play in his thought? 
4. Explain Plato’s belief that the lower must depend on the higher? 
5. What for Plato were the four main virtues? 
6. What additions did St. Augustine and other Christian thinkers make to 
Plato’s approach to virtue? 
7. For Aristotle, what were the two main groups of virtues and how did 
they differ? (12.2) 

 
Virtue 151 
8. Explain Aristotle’s view that virtue is a mean between extremes—and 
give an example. 
9. For Aristotle, what is happiness and what role does it play in ethics? 
10. Give examples of virtues that you think are especially important. 
11. Sketch how virtue is viewed by Ima Relativist, Ima Subjectivist, Ima 
Idealist, Ima Supernaturalist, Ima Intuitionist, Ima Utilitarian, and Ima 
Rossian. (12.3) 
12. What virtues would be important for the golden-rule consistency view? 
What virtue would correspond to the golden rule? (12.4) 
13. Explain three views about whether duty or virtue is primary. (12.5) 
12.8 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 12—Virtue.” 
Classic sources on virtue include Plato’s Republic and Aristotle’s Nicomachean 
Ethics. Elizabeth Anscombe’s “Modern Moral Philosophy,” Philippa Foot’s 
Virtues and Vices, and Alasdair MacIntyre’s After Virtue led to the rebirth of 
interest in virtue. Recent works include Rosalind Hursthouse’s On Virtue Ethics 
and Michael Slote’s Morals from Motives. The Bibliography at the end of the book 
has information on how to find these works. 
 
 

152 Ethics 
13 Natural Law 
 
Natural law is a tradition that sees basic moral principles (called natural laws) as 
objective, based on nature instead of convention, and knowable to all through 
natural human reason. Natural moral laws differ from positive laws, which come 
from human legislation, and divine laws, which require divine revelation. 
St. Thomas Aquinas is the central figure in the natural-law tradition, and so 
this is where we’ll start. Then we’ll talk about natural-law controversies, the 
principle of double effect, and sexual ethics. 
13.1 Aquinas overview 
St. Thomas Aquinas (1224–74), the greatest thinker of the Middle Ages, was a 
Catholic priest and Dominican monk. He wrote two comprehensive treatments 
of philosophy and theology: the Summa Theologica and the Summa Contra Gentiles. 
His central theme is the harmony between human reason (especially as 
explained by Aristotle [384–322 BC], whose main works had just been redisco-
vered) and Christian faith (based on the Bible and church Tradition). Aquinas 
insists that faith and reason shouldn’t conflict if approached correctly. While 
reason gives us some basic truths about God and morality, divine revelation 
builds on these and provides other truths that exceed the powers of reason. 
Aquinas’s thinking about morality has two parts, which we’ll call his “moral 
philosophy” (the part based on human reason) and his “moral theology” (the 
part based on his Christian faith): 
• 
Aquinas’s moral philosophy mostly follows Aristotle (see Section 
12.2), with additions from Stoics (like Cicero and Seneca) and 
Christian thinkers (like Augustine and Boethius). Its norms, called 
natural laws (moral laws), are knowable from natural reason and do 
not require Christian revelation (which Aristotle lacked). 
• 
Aquinas’s moral theology requires Christian revelation. It adds 
further norms, called divine laws (revealed laws), and a larger reli-
gious context for viewing reason’s natural laws. 
Faith and reason overlap in their conclusions, since both teach many of the 
same norms (e.g., the golden rule and the wrongness of stealing). Aquinas 
thinks this redundancy is helpful, since those who lack the time or ability to 
 

 
Natural Law 153 
think out moral issues rationally are still able to follow Biblical norms. Revela-
tion can also help to clarify the natural moral law and purify our motivation. 
Based on Christian faith, Aquinas argues that Aristotle’s description of hap-
piness is correct but incomplete. Yes, there is such a thing as natural happiness, 
which consists in a proper and excellent use of our rational facilities (intellect 
and will) and which brings us a degree of fulfillment. But beyond this is a 
greater supernatural happiness, which consists in the contemplation of God in the 
afterlife. What makes any action bad, ultimately, is that it moves us away from 
our ultimate goal, which is complete happiness in God. To orient ourselves 
toward God, we need more than just natural virtues like wisdom, justice, self-
control, and courage; we also need faith, hope, and love. 
Also based on his Christian faith, Aquinas sees morality as part of God’s 
larger plan for the world. God governs the world through laws. Some of these 
laws are what we’d call “scientific laws,” like the law of gravity; such laws 
describe how objects act and must act—and not how they act out of free 
choice. There also are prescriptive laws, like the golden rule, which tell us how 
we ought to act; these appeal to our free will, since we can choose to obey them 
or not. As mentioned earlier, some of these prescriptive laws are knowable 
through human reason, some are knowable through the Bible, and many are 
knowable both ways. Those laws about how we ought to act that are knowable 
on the basis of natural reason are called “natural laws.” 
Also based on his Christian faith, Aquinas sees morality as possible because 
of how God created us, as rational animals with an intellect and a will. Through 
our intellect, as formed by God, we can come to know the basic principles of 
right and wrong; these needn’t be based on special revelations from God or on 
human conventions. So we have some sense of right and wrong built into us. 
And through our will, we can freely choose to follow or violate what we know 
to be right. We’re built to have a special inclination toward altruism and 
pursuing the good, but also contrary inclinations toward selfishness and 
laziness; so following the good is a struggle. Our duties are based on our nature 
as rational and biological beings: we are to pursue goods of the body (like food 
and survival) as well as goods of the mind (like knowledge) and social goods 
(like cooperation). Thus human morality is what it is because of our human 
nature, which comes from God; morality’s ultimate purpose is to lead us to 
happiness with God. 
These last few paragraphs come from Aquinas’s moral theology, which is based 
on Christian faith. These paragraphs would have been alien to someone like 
Aristotle, who didn’t share this Christian faith. But Aquinas also had a moral 
philosophy about natural law, which is based on natural human reason and can be 
shared with believers and non-believers alike. 
According to Aquinas, the principles of natural law (like the golden rule and 
the wrongness of stealing) can be known from natural human reason. These 
basic moral norms are objective, based on nature instead of convention, and 
knowable to everyone (of any culture or religion) through human reason. These 
basic moral norms are fixed and unchangeable, although they can be applied 
differently to different cultural situations. While our minds can be perverted by 
passion or vice, we cannot be completely blind to the basic moral norms. 

154 Ethics 
Human laws (“positive laws”) can be set up to promote the common good. 
Aquinas defined “law” in general as an “ordinance of reason for the common 
good, made by one who has care of the community, and promulgated.” Civil 
laws and customs are designed to support the natural law and apply it to a 
concrete situation. While the natural law may say, for example, that stealing is 
wrong, we need human laws to specify and enforce this—laws about owner-
ship, property rights, police, courts, punishments, and so forth. Human laws 
can rightly vary somewhat from place to place, so long as they do not violate 
the natural moral law. But human rules that violate the natural moral law are 
unjust and thus not genuine laws at all. So this tradition would not say that Nazi 
laws that prescribed stealing from and killing Jews were “unjust laws”; instead, 
it would say that these “so-called laws” were not genuine laws at all—because they 
violate natural moral laws about right and wrong. 
Later thinkers in the natural-law tradition developed the idea of natural rights. 
For example, the Spanish Jesuit Francisco Suárez (1548–1617) condemned 
Spanish colonization as violating the natural rights of sovereign peoples. And 
the Dutch Protestant Hugo Grotius (1583–1645) developed influential ideas 
about natural rights and international law. 
13.2 Aquinas’s axioms 
How does human reason arrive at the norms of natural law (like the golden rule 
and the wrongness of stealing)? While Aquinas’s answer here is sketchy, it 
seems to involve self-evident truths, human inclinations, and practical reason. 
 
In his Summa Theologica (Part I–II, Question 94, Article 2), Aquinas speaks of 
the basic norms of natural law as being “self-evident.” He explains this in terms 
of the predicate being contained in the notion of the subject. In contemporary 
terms (see Section 5.1), such principles are said to be “analytic” or “true by 
definition”; the standard example is “All bachelors are single,” which is true 
because “bachelor” means “single man.” Accordingly, Aquinas defines “good” 
and then derives the first precept of natural law: 
The first principle of practical reason is one founded on the notion 
of good, viz. that “good is that which all things seek after.” Hence 
this is the first precept of law, that “good is to be done and pur-
sued, and evil is to be avoided.” 
So here we have a definition and a norm based on it: 
1. 
Definition: “Good” means “what all things seek after.” 
2. 
First precept of natural law: Good is to be done and pursued, and evil 
is to be avoided. 
There are two problems here. First, not all good things are sought after by all 
humans, let alone by all things. So it seems better to define “good” as “what we 
(humans) ought to seek after.” Second, if we define “good” in terms of what in 

 
Natural Law 155 
fact is sought after, we can’t derive a norm about what ought to be sought after. We can 
avoid these problems by cleaning up Aquinas’s definition and norm to become: 
1. 
Definition: “Good” means “what we ought to seek”; “evil” means 
“what we ought to avoid.” 
2. 
First precept of natural law: We ought to seek good and avoid evil. 
So modified, the norm become true by definition and self-evident. However, 
the norm has no content. To give it content, Aquinas must specify what things 
are good and what things are evil. 
So Aquinas goes on to say: “All those things to which man has a natural 
inclination are naturally apprehended by reason as being good.” But don’t we 
have a natural inclination toward bad things too, such as selfishness, laziness, 
and revenge? In response, Aquinas clarifies that our inclinations insofar as they are 
ruled by reason belong to the natural law. So we discover what is good by seeing what 
is reasonable to desire. Much in the same spirit, some contemporary thinkers 
suggest that we pick our beliefs about good by seeing what we desire insofar as 
we are rational (informed, consistent, and so forth—as in Section 10.5). 
Another approach is that of John Finnis, an Australian thinker who tried to 
restate Aquinas’s natural-law ethics in intuitionist terms. Finnis argues that we 
can uncover the basic goods of human life by rational reflection, after which 
their goodness becomes self-evident. The basic goods include seven items: 
life/health, knowledge, play, aesthetic experience, sociability, practical reasona-
bleness/autonomy, and religion. We cannot say that one of these goods is more 
important than another; each good can, from a certain perspective, seem like 
the most important thing in life. Since these goods can’t be measured on a 
common scale and totaled, the consequentialist norm to maximize total value 
is meaningless. Instead, we are free to choose which goods we want to 
emphasize in our lives; for example, we might choose research (emphasizing 
knowledge) or medicine (emphasizing health). Choosing directly against a basic 
good, however, is always wrong; this leads to exceptionless norms (for 
example, against murder, which violates the basic good of life). Thus Finnis 
arrives at a nonconsequentialist ethics (see Chapter 11). 
13.3 Controversies 
Natural law is more a broadly pluralistic tradition of doing ethics than a 
precisely formulated ethical theory. People in the natural-law tradition are much 
impressed by the work of St. Thomas Aquinas; but after that they go in 
different directions. 
 
For example, some in the natural-law tradition base ethics on God’s will, 
along the lines of supernaturalism (Chapter 3, which has some arguments 
from natural-law thinkers). Others in the natural-law tradition base ethics on a 
naturalism that deduces ethical norms from empirical facts about desires—or, 
alternatively, on an intuitionism that appeals to moral intuitions or self-
evident moral truths (Chapter 4). But all are (or at least claim to be) true to the 
inspiration of St. Thomas Aquinas. 

156 Ethics 
 
Most in the natural-law tradition are nonconsequentialists, and defend 
exceptionless norms (for example, against killing the innocent, see Chapter 11). 
But a few adopt a “proportionalism” close to utilitarianism (Chapter 10). Still 
others follow a virtue ethics (Chapter 12). 
 
While almost everyone in the natural-law tradition accepts the golden rule, 
many put it at the core of morality (so that it sums up the whole natural law); 
but many others see it as less important than “Do good and avoid evil.” In 
either case, I see no reason why a natural-law approach couldn’t incorporate 
the insights of our Chapters 7 to 9 about the golden rule. 
 
While natural law has been especially important among Catholics, some 
non-Catholics have also pursued the natural-law tradition; prominent examples 
include Hugo Grotius (1583–1645) and Samuel von Pufendorf (1632–94). 
Pope Paul VI’s Humanae Vitae (1967) argued, along natural-law grounds, that 
the inherent natural purpose of intercourse is to procreate life; he concluded 
that the use of the birth control pill and other forms of artificial birth control 
(but not the rhythm method) are wrong. While Elizabeth Anscombe defended 
the Pope’s reasoning, many thinkers of a natural-law slant (including most of 
the committee that the Pope had established to advise him) disagreed with it. 
Some such thinkers argued that it is fallacious to draw moral conclusions from 
claims about what is biologically “natural.” So there are deep controversies 
within the natural-law tradition. 
13.4 Double effect 
One influential part of the natural-law tradition is the principle of double 
effect. This principle says, roughly, that under certain conditions it’s permissi-
ble to do something that has a morally good intended effect and a morally bad 
unintended side effect. 
Suppose you’re offered a contract to build a big bridge. Judging from similar 
projects in the past, you see that this project would surely cause the death of 
one or more innocent workers. You believe that it’s exceptionlessly wrong to 
kill an innocent person. So is it then wrong to build the bridge, since this will 
kill an innocent person? 
The principle of double effect says building the bridge may be permissible, 
even if it has the unintended side effect of killing an innocent person. It’s 
permissible to do an act (building the bridge) that has a good effect (the bridge 
is built) and a gravely bad effect (killing innocent human beings), provided that: 
1. 
The act is in itself either good or indifferent; 
2. 
the good effect is intended and the bad effect is not intended (so if 
you could bring about the good effect without bringing about the 
bad then you would); 
3. 
the bad effect is not the means to produce the good effect (instead, 
the bad effect is just an unintended byproduct of an act aimed to 
bring about the good effect); and 

 
Natural Law 157 
4. 
there’s a proportionate reason for permitting the bad effect (so the 
good effect outweighs the bad effect and there’s no way to produce 
the good without producing more bad). 
Condition (4) roughly comes to the condition that act utilitarianism (Chapter 
10) would approve of the act. If act utilitarianism forbids the act, then double 
effect does too; but if act utilitarianism permits the act, then double effect may 
or may not permit the act. 
Suppose your country is at war and you’re bombing the enemy. Assume that 
killing innocent civilians is intrinsically wrong and your bombing will kill a few 
innocent civilians. Is your bombing morally permissible? Double effect says it 
can be, so long as conditions (1) to (4) apply. Crucial here are (2) and (3): you 
don’t intend to kill innocent civilians (your target is military and if you could hit 
it without killing innocent civilians then you would) and killing innocent civil-
ians is not a means to the good end (but is instead an unintended side effect). 
Strictly forbidden would be a terrorist approach that intends to kill innocent 
civilians in order to bring about a good effect (such as a military victory or an 
early end to the war). 
Double effect has also been applied to cases like these (by those who believe 
that euthanasia, abortion, and suicide are wrong): 
• 
Prescribing pain medication which in fact will shorten the patient’s 
life can be permissible; directly killing the patient is not. 
• 
Performing a hysterectomy on a pregnant woman with uterine 
cancer can be permissible even if the unborn child will die; directly 
killing the fetus by crushing its head is not. 
• 
Throwing yourself on a live grenade to protect others can be 
permissible, even if you know you’ll die, if you see your death as an 
unintended side effect of shielding others from the grenade; it’s 
wrong to jump on the grenade to kill yourself. 
Some cases are controversial, for example whether double effect would have 
justified America’s use of atomic bombs against the Japanese cities of Hiroshi-
ma and Nagasaki during World War II. 
The principle of double effect was formulated by Thomas Aquinas and is an 
important part of the natural-law approach to ethics. Many legal systems and 
rule utilitarians accept it. But the principle has had critics. Act utilitarians say 
that only condition (4) is needed; we should do what has the best total conse-
quences, even if this involves directly killing innocent people. Others see 
problems with the principle’s wording but may accept the general idea. 
A related part of natural law is the just war doctrine. Refining ideas from 
Augustine, Aquinas argued that war can be just only if it’s waged by a legitimate 
authority, for a just cause (like self-defense), and with proper intention (for 
example, to promote the good and not just self-interest or cruelty). Just-war 
theorists have added further elements over time, for example, that war must be 
the last resort, the harm done must be proportionate to the good obtained, 

158 Ethics 
innocent civilians cannot be targeted directly, and prisoners of war must be 
treated humanely. Today much of the secular world accepts (at least verbally) 
similar principles. However, the just-war doctrine has had critics, which include 
both pacifists (who argue that all war is wrong) and so-called “realists” (who 
argue that nations do and should wage war whenever it permits their self-
interest, regardless of moral considerations). 
13.5 Sexual morality 
Aquinas and most of the natural-law tradition support what we might call the 
“conservative view” about sexual morality. This view holds that genital sexual 
relations are morally proper only if they occur between husband and wife in a 
form of sexual intercourse that is open to the procreation of children. So oral 
and anal sex are morally improper, as are premarital sex, adultery, masturbation, 
homosexual relations, bestiality, and contraception. This conservative norm is 
often defended on the grounds that any other use of sexual relations perverts 
the natural, biological purpose of sex organs, which are intended (by God or 
evolution or both) for reproduction and for strengthening the life-bond 
between potential parents. 
Critics object that it needn’t be wrong to use organs for something other 
than their primary biological purpose; for example, there’s nothing wrong in 
using our feet to kick a football. So it needn’t be wrong to use sex organs for 
something other than their reproductive functions. Although the “natural 
biological purpose” argument is often attributed to Aquinas, John Finnis claims 
that it’s better, and truer to Aquinas, to argue for the conservative norm based 
on the role that sexual relations play in a good human life; human life, and 
especially family life, will prosper better if sexual relations are limited. 
The contrasting “liberal view” rejects special moral norms for sexual con-
duct; sexual relations are to be guided only by ordinary moral norms, such as 
not to harm oneself or others, not to treat others only as a means to getting 
what one wants, to promote good consequences (including pleasure for oneself 
and others), to keep promises, and to respect the will of others. Such norms 
make a strong case against rape (which hurts others and violates another’s will) 
and most adultery (which hurts families and violates marriage vows). But most 
consensual adult sexual relations, including premarital and homosexual sex, 
emerge as morally acceptable, so long as these don’t harm others or violate 
other ordinary moral norms. Liberals disagree about whether casual (uncom-
mitted) sex is morally proper; if it’s morally improper, then this must be 
because it harms people by trivializing sex for them, so that it serves more for 
immediate gratification than for building a deeper life-bond. 
Critics object that the liberal “sexual revolution” has had bad social conse-
quences: it has weakened the family and hurt children. Liberal sexual attitudes 
have brought massive increases in divorce, teenage pregnancy, unwed mothers, 
date rape, and sexually transmitted diseases. Women are often deserted and 
forced to bear the entire burden of raising children; and children brought up 
without a father are statistically much more likely to suffer from psychological 
problems, poverty, doing poorly in school and dropping out, drug abuse, 

 
Natural Law 159 
criminal behavior, and furthering the cycle of fatherless families. Liberal sexual 
attitudes in practice (although not necessarily in theory) lead people to pursue 
immediate gratification and to use others as mere sex objects—instead of 
building deep life-bonds that help to nurture the next generation of children. 
Some critics of liberal sexual attitudes argue for a “moderate view” using 
rule-utilitarian arguments. This moderate view says that people will live better if 
they follow fairly strict rules about sexual relations, which liberalism doesn’t 
provide; without fairly strict rules about sex, people will more often talk 
themselves into doing foolish things that harm themselves, their loved ones, 
and society. On the moderate view, the basic sexual norm is to follow those 
rules about sexual relations that are required, in one’s cultural situation, to 
promote the integrity of the family and the nurturing of children. Moderates on 
this basis accept many but usually not all of the conservative prohibitions; their 
challenge is to sort through the conservative prohibitions and determine which 
are needed for a well-functioning society and which can be dropped. While 
there are many empirical studies about the negative results of broken families 
on children, moderates stress the need for studies about which sexual norms 
are needed to promote healthy families and well-nurtured children. 
Natural-law moderates largely agree on this approach but would talk more 
about the biological-psychological nature of humans and about their high ideal 
of sexual love. A striking fact about human biology is how weak a human baby 
is; while the newborn of most other species can almost immediately walk and 
assume a normal existence, a human baby is entirely defenseless. To survive 
and prosper, a human baby requires much help over many years—preferably 
from two parents who love one another and love the child. Both in the 
evolutionary jungle and in modern society, bringing up a child with only one 
parent tends to compromise the child’s future; as was mentioned above, 
empirical studies bring this out. It’s crucial for humanity’s future that children 
be brought up well. Evolution may have “hard wired” this concern into our 
psychology; so it’s not surprising that sexual attitudes that attack children and 
the family so often lead to a deeply unsatisfying existence. 
Natural-law moderates often have a high ideal of sexual love, which is sup-
posed to work in the following way. A man and woman become romantically 
attracted to each other, get to know each other, fall in love, and commit 
themselves to each other in a complete and exclusive way. They totally care for 
and often make sacrifices for each other; their sexual relations enrich and 
solidify their love. They sometimes struggle and fight; but then they work 
things out. Their love for each other extends to a love for their offspring; so 
their love becomes a family love. Later, as the man and woman grow older and 
weaker, they are there to help each other and to grow old together—and to be 
cared for by their children. This is the whole package—how it’s supposed to 
work—and sexual practices that attack this are to be avoided like the plague. 
13.6 Chapter summary 
Natural law is a tradition that sees basic moral principles as objective, based on 
nature instead of convention, and knowable to all by natural human reason. 

160 Ethics 
St. Thomas Aquinas was the central figure in the natural-law tradition. His 
moral theology, which was based on his Christian faith, sees morality as part of 
God’s governance of the world. Morality’s purpose is to lead us to our final 
goal, which is eternal happiness with God. We have two ways to know the 
basic moral norms: human reason and the Bible. Morality is possible because of 
how God created us, as rational animals with an intellect and a will. 
Aquinas’s moral philosophy sees the basic moral norms (like the golden rule 
and the wrongness of stealing) as fixed and unchangeable, although they can be 
applied differently to different cultural situations. Human laws are set up to 
promote the good and must accord with natural law. 
Good is that which all things seek after. The first precept of natural law is 
that good is to be done and pursued, and evil is to be avoided. We can know 
what is good by investigating our natural (rational) inclinations. John Finnis, a 
follower of Aquinas, suggests that there are seven basic goods (which include, 
for example, knowledge and life), that these cannot be measured on a common 
scale and totaled, and that it’s always wrong to choose directly against a basic 
good (for example, by taking the life of an innocent person). 
Natural law is more a pluralistic tradition of doing ethics than a precisely 
formulated ethical theory. So thinkers in the natural-law tradition can take 
different sides in the debate over supernaturalism, naturalism, and intuitionism. 
 
The principle of double effect, which is part of the natural-law tradition, says 
roughly that under certain conditions it’s permissible to do something with a 
morally good intended effect and a morally bad unintended side effect. 
 
Natural-law thinkers usually defend a conservative view about sexual moral-
ity: genital sexual relations are morally proper only if they occur between 
husband and wife in a form of sexual intercourse that is open to the procrea-
tion of children. Some natural-law moderates propose instead that the basic 
sexual norm is to follow those rules about sexual relations that are required, in 
one’s cultural situation, to promote the integrity of the family and the nurturing 
of children. 
13.7 Study questions 
1. Very roughly, what is natural law? 
2. Sketch three important points about Aquinas’s moral theology. (13.1) 
3. Sketch three important points about Aquinas’s moral philosophy. 
4. What is Aquinas’s first precept of natural law—and what is it based on? 
(13.2) 
5. According to Aquinas, how do we know what is good? 
6. Give three examples of basic goods, according to John Finnis. 
7. What is Finnis’s objection to consequentialism? 
8. How does Finnis generate exceptionless norms? 
9. Give two issues on which natural-law thinkers tend to differ. (13.3) 
10. What controversy was raised by Pope Paul VI’s Humanae Vitae? 
11. Explain the principle of double effect, using the example of giving pain 
medication to a sick person. (13.4) 
12. Explain why utilitarians would reject the principle of double effect. 

 
Natural Law 161 
13. Advocates of the just-war doctrine say that a war can be just if it fulfills 
several conditions. Give three of these conditions. 
14. Explain the conservative view about sexual morality. (13.5) 
15. How do critics dispute the “natural biological purpose” argument for the 
conservative view about sexual morality? 
16. Explain the liberal view about sexual morality. 
17. What bad consequences do critics say come from the liberal view about 
sexual morality? 
18. Explain the moderate view about sexual morality. 
19. What two factors would natural-law moderates stress in defense of this 
moderate view about sexual morality? 
20. Do you think that the premises of the moderate view would lead (as 
some have claimed) to conservative conclusions about areas like prema-
rital sex and homosexual relations? If not, then what concrete norms do 
you think the moderate view would lead to? 
13.7 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 13—Natural Law.” 
The classic source of natural law is St. Thomas Aquinas’s Summa Theologica; 
among other topics, he discusses natural law (Part I–II, Questions 90–7), 
double effect (Part II–II, Question 64, Article 7), just war (Part II–II, Question 
40, Article 1), and sexual morality (Part II–II, Questions 151–6). John Finnis’s 
Natural Law and Natural Rights restates Aquinas’s natural-law ethics in contem-
porary terms. For more on sexual morality by authors defending the conserva-
tive view, see Finnis’s “The Good of Marriage” and Karol Wojtyla’s Love and 
Responsibility. For approaches to natural law by non-Catholics, see Samuel 
Pufendorf’s On the Duty of Man and Citizen according to Natural Law and Timothy 
Chappell’s Understanding Human Goods. The Bibliography at the end of the book 
has information on how to find these works. 
 
 

162 Ethics 
 
14 Synthesis Chapter 
 
We’ve studied various approaches to ethics. In this, our final chapter, we’ll try 
to achieve a more unified understanding of these views and what difference 
they make. We’ll do this by applying these views to a specific moral issue—the 
hotly disputed topic of abortion. This will also be an example of applied 
normative ethics. 
 
We’ll first consider some abortion arguments that appeal to antecedent 
moral principles. Then we’ll move back to our central question: “How should 
we pick our moral principles?” I’ll argue that the appeal to consistency gives a 
helpful way to deal with the issue. 
14.1 Nonconsequentialism 
Let’s assume for the moment that it’s seriously wrong to kill innocent human life. 
I’ll take “seriously wrong” here to imply, at the very least, that killing wouldn’t 
be justified to prevent a financial burden or an interference with one’s job or 
schooling. Given this assumption, one might argue against abortion as follows: 
 
Killing innocent human life is seriously wrong. 
 
A fetus is innocent human life. 
Á Killing a fetus is seriously wrong. 
Is the second premise true? Is a fetus human life? Many people assume that the 
whole issue depends on this question. If a fetus is human life, then abortion is 
wrong; otherwise, it’s permissible. 
 
However, many who are anti-abortion claim that a fetus isn’t human life but 
only potential human life; but they add that it’s seriously wrong to kill potential 
human life. And many who are pro-abortion admit that the fetus is “human 
life”—but only in a trivial and irrelevant sense of the term; they say that the 
serious duty not to kill human life requires a stronger sense of the term and 
doesn’t apply to the unborn. So they point to an ambiguity in the word 
“human.” 
 
When people disagree about whether a fetus is human life, what is the 
nature of this disagreement? Do both sides use the same sense of “human”—
and differ only on whether a fetus is human in this sense? I think not. Instead, I 
think that both sides use the word “human” differently. “Human” has at least 
three senses: 

 
Synthesis Chapter 163 
hu·man (hy›”m…n) n. 1. A born or unborn member 
of the species Homo sapiens 2. A born member of the 
species Homo sapiens 3. An animal who reasons 
We use sense 1 in the biology lab when we distinguish between a “mouse 
fetus” and a “human fetus.” We use sense 2 when we do a population study 
and count the number of humans in a city. Sense 3 is the traditional definition 
used to distinguish humans from other animals by their higher mental powers. 
A fetus is “human” in sense 1, but not in senses 2 or 3. So whether a fetus is 
“human” depends on which sense of “human” we use. “Is the fetus human 
life?” has a clear answer just if we make clear what sense of “human” we’re 
using in the question. 
People have claimed human life to begin at various points: 
(c) 
conception. 
(i) 
individuation: when a zygote can’t split or fuse with another. 
(w) brain waves: when the fetus exhibits brain waves. 
(v) 
viability: when the fetus could live apart. 
(b) 
birth. 
(r) 
rationality: when the child first thinks rationally. 
Here we don’t have a factual dispute over when there emerges, in the same 
clear sense of the term, a “human.” Instead, we have six ways to use the 
ambiguous term “human.” 
The real issue is this: Which sense of “human” should we use when we say 
“Killing innocent human life is seriously wrong”? We get different principles 
depending on which sense we pick. If we use the neutral term “actual or 
potential human being” to cover any point from conception to adulthood, and 
thus avoid the verbal ambiguities, we can express the six principles as follows: 
It’s seriously wrong to kill an innocent actual or potential 
human being, starting from the point of: 
(c) 
(i)
 conception. 
 individuation. 
(w)
(v)
 brain waves. 
 viability. 
(b)
(r)
 birth. 
 rationality. 
Principle (c) says that abortion at any point is seriously wrong. Principles (i), 
(w), and (v) permit earlier abortions but forbid later ones. Principle (b) permits 
any abortion but forbids infanticide. Principle (r) permits both abortion and 
infanticide. Which of the six should we accept? 
Science can’t decide the issue. Science can tell us whether an individual 
shows brain waves, and thus is “human” in sense (w). But it can’t tell us which 
sense of “human” to use in our moral principle. 
Most people pick the principle that fits their moral intuitions. This leads to 
an impasse, or stalemate, since people have different intuitions. Catholics were 

164 Ethics 
taught to oppose infanticide and abortion; their intuitions tend toward principle 
(c). Ancient Romans were brought up to allow both infanticide and abortion; 
their intuitions tend toward (r). Many today are taught to accept abortion but 
not infanticide; their intuitions tend to favor (b). So appealing to intuitions 
brings an impasse. To resolve the issue rationally, we need to appeal to 
something more basic. 
 
Let’s for the moment suppose that the serious duty not to kill begins at 
some point or other. To be concrete, let’s suppose that it begins at birth. What 
about beings prior to this point? Do those who aren’t yet born have: 
1. 
no right to life at all, 
2. 
a lesser but constant right to life, or 
3. 
a gradually increasing right to life? 
On option 1, a human fetus has no right to life. So killing it is permissible for 
minor reasons, or even no reason at all. On option 2, a fetus of any age has the 
same weak right to life, and can be killed for the same reasons. On option 3, 
the right to life gradually increases. So it’s more seriously wrong (and requires 
more justification) to kill a fetus who is six months old than one who is three 
months old. Which of these options is the most plausible? Few people have 
firm intuitions about this. So again, appealing to moral intuitions won’t lead to 
any firm conclusion. We need a better way to argue about moral principles. 
So there are many possible nonconsequentialist norms about abortion. And 
we have yet to consider consequentialist views. 
14.2 Consequentialism 
Classical utilitarianism has a single basic norm: we ought always to do whatever 
brings about the greatest balance of pleasure over pain for everyone affected by 
our action. Here there’s no special “right to life” that begins at some specific 
point; our only duty is to maximize good consequences. So we ask, “Will killing 
this fetus (or infant) bring about the greatest balance of pleasure over pain?” If 
the answer is “yes,” then we ought to kill. 
 
Many who are pro-abortion argue on consequentialist grounds. They claim 
that abortions often have the best consequences. An abortion can avoid the 
disgrace to an unwed mother, the disruption of schooling or a career, and 
financial burdens. The child-to-be has less chance for happiness when these 
problems or probable birth defects exist. And abortion provides a second 
chance to prevent a birth when contraceptives fail. 
Opponents say that we can have equally good results without abortion; we 
need better social support toward unwed mothers and poor families, better 
adoption practices, wiser use of contraceptives, artificial wombs, and so on. 
Children born with disabilities can lead happy and productive lives, if we show 
them love; disabilities can bring families together and give them a sense of 
purpose—and studies show that, by a variety of measures, the disabled are just 
as happy as the non-disabled. Finally, abortions can harm women psychologi-
cally and promote callous attitudes toward human life. 

 
Synthesis Chapter 165 
Others object that we can’t really know whether having or not having the 
baby would produce better consequences. We mostly rely on guesses when we 
apply utilitarianism. 
More importantly, classical utilitarianism is a very questionable view. It 
justifies killing innocent humans (including the sick, disabled, and elderly) when 
this produces even a tiny increase in good consequences. It has bizarre 
implications and is difficult to hold consistently. I argued in Chapter 10 that 
rationality would lead us to reject this approach. 
 
In light of these problems, many have moved to rule utilitarianism with a 
pluralistic approach to values. Rule utilitarians would ask what rule about killing 
(including abortion) would have the best consequences for society to adopt and 
try to follow. One can plausibly argue that the rule with the best consequences 
would be a strict rule against killing (including against abortion). 
 
Let’s consider four rules about killing that society might adopt. 
1. 
Killing innocent human life is permissible whenever this brings 
about the greatest balance of pleasure over pain. 
Adopting this norm would have disastrous effects on society. Imagine what it 
would be like if your friends and relatives felt authorized to kill whenever they 
speculated that killing would have the best consequences. People would apply 
this in irresponsible ways, and respect for life would diminish. A rule against 
killing needs to be firm and definite. 
2. 
Killing a child is permissible until it exercises rationality. 
This norm is extremely vague. When does a child reach the “point of rationali-
ty”? Does this happen when it first begins to speak, or when it enters the first 
grade, or when it graduates from high school? Since children develop gradually 
in their rational powers, it’s arbitrary to pick a “point of rationality” at which it 
becomes wrong to kill children. Again, a rule against killing needs to be firm 
and definite. A vague rule like this would lead to a large amount of killing and 
would erode respect for human life at all levels. 
3. 
Killing a fetus is permissible, but killing an infant is wrong. 
This norm is clearer (except for partial-birth abortions) but unstable. A late 
fetus and a newborn infant are practically identical except for their spatial 
location. So it will seem arbitrary to permit killing a late fetus but forbid killing 
a newborn. So societies that adapt this norm will tend to move toward 
accepting infanticide—and thus to norm 2 (with all its problems). Rules (i), (v), 
and (w) of the previous section would have similar instability problems. 
4. 
Killing innocent human life is seriously wrong, starting from the 
moment of conception. 

166 Ethics 
This last norm, by contrast, gives clear guidelines and upholds respect for 
human life. A society that followed it would likely live better (in terms of long-
range consequences) than a society that followed the other rules. So, one might 
argue, rule utilitarianism would seem to favor a strict rule against abortion. 
14.3 Metaethical views 
The last two sections considered various principles about abortion. Should we 
follow one of the nonconsequentialist principles? Or should we go with 
classical or rule utilitarianism? 
We need to move to the more basic question: “How should we pick our 
moral principles?” So we’ll now consider the metaethical views that we studied 
earlier. First we’ll listen to the Ima characters explain how they approach 
abortion. Then see what virtue ethics and natural law can contribute to the 
discussion. Finally, we’ll turn to the GR consistency view, which I think gives a 
good way to deal with the issue. 
 
Ima Relativist: “Morality is about social conventions; so our moral beliefs 
have to be based on what our society approves of. Now surveys show that 
most people in our society are moderately anti-abortion; they disapprove of 
most abortions but allow some exceptions. So this should also be our view.” 
 
Ima Subjectivist: “A moral judgment is a statement about your feelings. 
When you consider a moral issue, about abortion or anything else, you have to 
go with how you feel. There’s no ‘objective truth’ about whether abortion is 
right or wrong. Nor is there any effective way to reason about it. I can only 
suggest that you think about the issue and then see how you feel.” 
 
Ima Emotivist: “Yes, I think you have to go with your feelings.” 
 
Ima Idealist: “A moral judgment is a statement about what we’d feel if we 
were rational. Being rational involves things like being informed, impartial, and 
consistent. Consistency may give a way to help resolve the issue. The next 
section talks about this.” 
 
Ima Supernaturalist: “Right and wrong are based on God’s will. To discover 
God’s will about abortion, we must look to the Bible and to the church. 
“While the Bible doesn’t mention the issue directly, I feel that it would lead 
one to be against abortion. It says much about loving your neighbor, and being 
concerned for the weak and defenseless. It says ‘Thou shalt not kill.’ And Psalm 
139:13 and Jeremiah 1:5 speak of how God lovingly forms us in our mother’s 
womb. When I pray about these passages and ask God for direction, I feel 
strongly that abortion is wrong. But I admit that other Christians who read the 
Bible and pray about it may come to the opposite conclusion. 
 
“Church tradition from the start has condemned abortion. The Didache, 
which summarizes the teachings of the apostles, is one of the earliest Christian 
sources after the Bible. Here are verses 1:2 and 2:2—which start with the law of 
love and the golden rule, and end by condemning abortion and infanticide: 
First, love the God who made you; secondly, your neighbor as 
yourself: do not do to another what you do not wish to be done to 
yourself. … Do not kill a fetus by abortion, or commit infanticide. 

 
Synthesis Chapter 167 
Catholic teaching has strongly condemned abortion. Many other (but not all) 
religious groups agree with this.” 
Ima Intuitionist: “There’s an objective truth about the morality of abortion. 
To find this truth, we need to appeal to our moral intuitions. However, the 
apparent problem here is that people’s intuitions about abortion vary widely. 
But maybe we can appeal to some very basic and widely shared intuitions 
(perhaps about consistency) to help us to think through the issue more clearly.” 
 
Ima Prescriptivist: “Moral judgments are prescriptions (or imperatives), not 
truth claims. But their logical structure gives us a way to reason about moral 
issues, like abortion, by appealing to consistency and the golden rule.” Section 
14.6 talks about how to do this. 
14.4 Virtue 
We can ask about the virtue of women who choose to have abortions. Do 
most such women tend to have virtuous and admirable characters? Janet Smith 
(1993) argues that the answer is no. 
There are a great many documented interviews with women who have had 
abortions. If you read these interviews, according to Smith, you’ll be disturbed 
by the moral character and moral reasoning displayed. In general, these women 
don’t come across as being kind, generous, loyal, self-reliant, disciplined, or 
responsible. Instead, they’re confused, irresponsible, and poor at making deci-
sions. There’s much talk about social pressures and unstable relationships; 
there’s little talk about morality. Most of the women, prior to their abortion, 
would have said that abortion was wrong except in a few cases (cases very 
unlike their own situation). Many got pregnant intentionally (for example, to 
force the issue of marriage) or because of contraceptive carelessness. Almost 
one in three cases were repeat abortions. If an ethics of virtue evaluates actions 
by the type of character that chooses them, then abortion does not fare well; 
those who choose to have abortions seldom have the strong, virtuous character 
that we’d like to imitate in our own lives. Smith contends that this gives some 
indication (but not a proof) that abortion is morally bad. 
 
Critics say that Smith exaggerates the poor character of most women who 
have abortions and that, even if this were not so, we still couldn’t conclude that 
abortion is wrong. 
14.5 Natural law 
The natural-law tradition generally endorses the nonconsequentialist argument 
against abortion (Section 14.1). But where this tradition can contribute in a 
special way, for those who consider abortion seriously wrong, is through its 
principle of double effect (Section 13.4). On this principle, as noted before, it 
can sometimes be permissible to perform a hysterectomy on a pregnant woman 
with uterine cancer even if the unborn child will likely die, as an unintended 
consequence of the operation; but it’s wrong to directly kill the fetus (for 
example, by crushing its head). 

168 Ethics 
14.6 GR consistency 
Chapters 7 to 9 sketched a practical approach to moral rationality. This 
approach gives moral consistency principles that can be defended from various 
perspectives (as based on social conventions, personal feelings, God’s will, self-
evident truths, or whatever). These consistency principles require that we be 
impartial (make similar evaluations about similar actions, regardless of the 
individuals involved) and conscientious (keep our actions, resolutions, and 
desires in harmony with our moral beliefs). From these, we derived this golden 
rule theorem: 
GR Theorem: 
Treat others only as you 
consent to being treated 
in the same situation. 
GR forbids this combination: 
• 
I do something to another. 
• 
I’m unwilling that this be done 
to me in the same situation. 
We proposed that we’re rational in our moral judgments to the extent that we’re 
consistent, informed, imaginative, and a few more things—where consistency 
includes impartiality, conscientiousness, and the golden rule. We used this 
approach to reason about racism and to attack racist moral beliefs. 
I believe that this same approach pushes us into an anti-abortion view. I’ll 
argue that people of fairly normal desires won’t, if they’re consistent, hold that 
aborting a fetus is normally permissible. 
 
Let me start with a parallel argument about stealing: 
 
If you’re consistent and think stealing is normally per-
missible, then you’ll consent to the idea of others 
stealing from you in normal circumstances. 
 
You don’t consent to the idea of others stealing from 
you in normal circumstances. 
Á If you’re consistent, then you won’t think stealing is 
normally permissible. 
The first premise is a golden-rule consistency condition; it’s somewhat like our 
GR theorem and can be justified the same way. I’ll assume that the second 
premise, about your desires, is true—that you aren’t willing that people steal 
from you in normal circumstances. The conclusion is about the consistency of 
your holding a given moral belief. You can escape the conclusion if you don’t 
care if people steal from you; this would make the second premise false. 
Through the rest of this chapter, I’ll assume that you (the reader) desire not to 
be robbed or blinded or killed. If you don’t care whether people do such things 
to you, then most of my further conclusions won’t apply to you. 
 
I think we can apply a similar argument to abortion. But let’s go slowly on 
this. Let’s first see if it makes sense to apply GR consistency to how we treat a 
fetus in a case that doesn’t involve abortion. 

 
Synthesis Chapter 169 
Suppose that you’re a pregnant woman. You’re about to get drunk, which 
you realize may harm the health of the unborn. But you ask yourself, “How do 
I react to the idea of my mother having got drunk while pregnant with me?” If 
you do this to the unborn, and yet aren’t willing that your mother would have 
done the same thing in similar circumstances while pregnant with you, then you 
violate the golden rule and are inconsistent. This use of the golden rule toward 
the unborn seems to make perfect sense. However, there are two things that we 
have to be careful about. 
 
First, we need to ask about our present attitude toward a hypothetical case 
(see Section 8.2). We should ask, “Am I now (as an adult) willing that if my 
mother was pregnant with me in the same situation then she would have got 
drunk?” We shouldn’t ask about what desires we’d have if we were a fetus. 
Presumably a fetus has only very simple desires; it doesn’t know much about 
alcohol and its harmful effects. So GR is about our present desires—about the 
fact that we now (as an adult) don’t consent to the idea of our mother having 
got drunk while pregnant with us. 
 
Second, our question may raise worries about the human identity of the 
fetus. Someone may object as follows: 
“I’m supposed to consider a case where my mother was pregnant 
with me in the same situation. But doesn’t this presuppose that the 
fetus and my present self are identical—the same human being? 
Aren’t you presupposing that the fetus is ‘human’?” 
If my wording presupposes this, we could change the wording. We could 
phrase the question in either of these ways: 
• 
“Am I now (as an adult) willing that if my mother was pregnant 
with the fetus that developed into my present self in the same situa-
tion then she would have got drunk?” 
• 
“How do I react to the idea of my mother having got drunk while 
pregnant in the spring of 1945?” (Substitute some time a few 
months before your birth.) 
These don’t presuppose that the fetus and my present self are identical, or the 
“same human being.” If you wish, you may rephrase what I say in one of these 
two ways. I’m against the drunkenness not because I think that the fetus was in 
some metaphysical sense the same human being as I, but because the drunken-
ness could have had harmful effects on me during my whole life. 
Let’s consider a more extreme example. Suppose again that you’re a preg-
nant woman. But this time you’re very sadistic. You’re thinking of injecting 
yourself with a special blindness drug. The drug won’t affect you but will cause 
your child to be born blind and remain blind all its life. You could inject the 
drug at various points in the pregnancy: 

170 Ethics 
(c) 
just after conception, 
(i) 
just after individuation, 
(w) when the fetus begins to have brain waves, 
(v) 
when the fetus becomes viable, or 
(b) 
just before birth. 
However, at any of these points you’d violate the golden rule—since you aren’t 
willing that your mother would have done this to you in a similar case. The 
moment of the injection is irrelevant, since the effect would be the same—
you’d be blind all your life. 
Applying the golden rule to abortion is similar. We only need to switch from 
a blindness drug (which blinds the fetus) to a death drug (which kills it). 
Suppose that you’re a pregnant woman. You’re about to abort the fetus. But 
you ask yourself, “How do I react to the idea of my mother having aborted me 
under such circumstances?” If you kill the unborn, and yet don’t consent to the 
idea of your mother having done the same thing to you in the same situation, 
then you violate the golden rule and are inconsistent. 
As with the blinding case, the moment of abortion (whether it happened, for 
example, just after conception or just before birth) makes little or no difference 
to our reaction. We’re equally against the idea of ourselves having been 
aborted, regardless of the moment that we imagine the abortion having taken 
place, since the effect would be the same—we would never have been born. 
We can argue as we did in the stealing case: 
 
If you’re consistent and think abortion is normally 
permissible, then you’ll consent to the idea of your 
having been aborted in normal circumstances. 
 
You don’t consent to the idea of your having been 
aborted in normal circumstances. 
Á If you’re consistent, then you won’t think abortion is 
normally permissible.
Again, with most people the second premise will be true. Most people won’t 
consent to (or approve of) the idea of this act having been done to them. So 
insofar as most people take a consistent position, they won’t think abortion is 
normally permissible. 
14.7 Some questions 
(Q1)  Suppose that I approve of abortion but not infanticide or the 
blindness drug. Couldn’t I consent to the idea of my having been 
aborted under actual or imagined normal circumstances, and so be 
consistent? 
You could be consistent, but only with bizarre desires about how you your-
self are to be treated. Suppose you hold these two principles: 

 
Synthesis Chapter 171 
1. 
It’s wrong to blind an adult or child or infant or fetus. 
2. 
It’s wrong to kill an adult or child or infant, but it’s right to kill a 
fetus. 
To be consistent about your blinding-principle 1, you’d have to answer these 
questions as follows: 
• 
Do you consent to the idea of my blinding you now?—No! 
• 
Do you consent to the idea of my blinding you yesterday?—No! 
• 
… when you were five years old?—No! 
• 
… when you were five days old?—No! 
• 
… just before you were born?—No! 
Similarly, to be consistent about your killing-principle 2, you’d have to answer 
these questions as follows: 
• 
Do you consent to the idea of my killing you now?—No! 
• 
Do you consent to the idea of my killing you yesterday?—No! 
• 
… when you were five years old?—No! 
• 
… when you were five days old?—No! 
• 
… just before you were born?—Yes! 
It’s strange that you disapprove equally of being blinded at the various times—
and disapprove equally of being killed at the first four times—and yet approve of 
being killed at the last time. You oppose the blinding because, regardless of 
timing, the effect would be the same—you’d be blind. You oppose the killing at 
the first four times because, again, the effect would be the same: you wouldn’t 
be alive. But killing at the fifth time has the same effect. Why shouldn’t you 
oppose this killing too? The “yes” here seems strange. So a person, to be 
consistent in holding the two principles, would have to have bizarre desires. 
 
We can test our judgments about moral relevance by appealing to GR 
consistency. Maybe society taught us that dark skin merits abuse; so it’s all right 
to abuse people with dark skin but not people with white skin. To test this, we 
ask how we react to the idea of ourselves being abused in cases where we are 
white and in cases where we are dark. From this GR perspective, we see that 
skin color is morally irrelevant; we oppose our being abused regardless of what 
skin color we imagine ourselves having. 
Similarly, we might have been taught that the point of birth (or viability, or 
whatever) is morally relevant to whether it’s right to kill. To test this, we again 
ask how we react to the idea of ourselves having been killed before or after 
reaching this point. From the GR perspective, we see that the point is morally 
irrelevant. We’re equally opposed to our having been killed at any point. 
Whether we’d be killed before or after reaching the point of birth (or viability, 
or whatever) makes little difference. So GR consistency leads us to think that 
killing is seriously wrong, starting from the moment of conception. 

172 Ethics 
(Q2)  Are you saying that the desires that most people have are 
good, while unusual (or “bizarre”) desires are bad? How would you 
establish this? 
I’m not saying that common desires are good while unusual desires are bad. 
Often the reverse is true; and sometimes a conflict between our moral beliefs 
and our desires leads us to change our desires instead of our moral beliefs. 
I’m appealing to desires that most people have because I’m arguing that 
most people who are pro-abortion are inconsistent. I’m challenging such 
people: “Look at what you’d have to desire in order to be consistent in your 
position—think about it and see whether you’re consistent.” I claim that most 
people who favor abortion support moral principles about the treatment of 
others that they’re not willing to have had followed toward themselves. 
(Q3)  If it would have been wrong for your parents to have aborted 
you, wouldn’t it have been wrong for them not to have conceived 
you? The result would be the same—you wouldn’t exist. So if abor-
tion is wrong, then isn’t it also wrong not to conceive children? 
No, the cases differ in important (but complicated) ways. 
My first reaction is to think it would have been wrong for my parents not to 
have conceived me. But then I’d have to hold (since my case isn’t special) that 
in general it’s wrong not to conceive. In other words, I’d have to hold that 
everyone ought to conceive as much as possible. But I can’t will this, since it 
would bring disaster. So, to be consistent, I change my first reaction. I come to 
think it would have been permissible for my parents not to have conceived me 
(but perhaps to have conceived someone else a month later). 
Abortion doesn’t raise the same problem, since I can easily hold that abor-
tion in general is wrong. I can will a general prohibition against aborting but 
not one against not-conceiving. 
Keep in mind that GR never tells you what specific act to do. Instead, it’s a 
consistency condition that you have to satisfy. But there are other consistency 
conditions as well, and in this case another one kicks in, one based more 
directly on impartiality. 
(Q4)  Suppose that reason forces us to think that abortion is wrong 
in normal cases. What does “normal” here mean? And aren’t the 
“abnormal” cases the more important ones? So isn’t your conclu-
sion unimportant? 
By “normal” here I mean “ordinary” or “typical.” This excludes cases where, 
for example, the life of the mother would be threatened, the baby would be 
defective, or the pregnancy was caused by rape. I make this restriction because 
my way of reasoning doesn’t always yield a definite answer for such cases. 
Some people are willing that they would have been aborted under some 
unusual conditions. Suppose, for example, that the baby would be born 
severely disabled; some may prefer not to have lived at all than to live in this 

 
Synthesis Chapter 173 
condition. Might not someone easily consent to having been aborted in such a 
case? 
This objection is based on a common misconception about severely disabled 
people—that they lead miserable lives. If you study the matter, you’ll find that 
this is not true at all. You’ll find that even the severely disabled are just as 
happy, by a variety of measures, as the non-disabled. So I’m hesitant to allow 
this exception. 
Another factor which makes me hesitant to allow exceptions is my religious 
beliefs. Because I see our lives in a larger religious context, I see every life as 
worth living; so I’d have trouble willing my abortion under any circumstances. 
If my GR arguments work, reason forces the conclusion that abortion is 
wrong at least normally (in the great majority of cases)—and seriously wrong (since I 
can’t will my own non-existence for small reasons). But it leaves some details 
fuzzy. This is how reason usually works in ethics. For example, reason forces 
the conclusion that racism in general is wrong (see Sections 7.4 and 9.3). But it 
doesn’t give a decisive answer about the details (on bussing, quotas, ways to 
combat racism, and so on). It would be nice if reason were powerful enough to 
eliminate all gray areas; but I don’t see any way to do this. I’m happy, instead, 
that reason is powerful enough to make many things in ethics fairly clear. 
Does this concession make my general conclusion about abortion unimpor-
tant? I think not. On the contrary, in light of the great number of “convenience 
abortions” going on, the general moral status of abortion is now the more 
important issue. So it’s very important if, without presupposing any antecedent 
moral premises (except ones about consistency), we can show that the more 
rational approach to abortion is to hold that it’s seriously wrong in at least the 
great majority of cases. 
(Q5)  What should I do if I’m not 100% convinced of your argu-
ment against abortion? 
If there’s genuine doubt in your mind about the morality of abortion, you 
ought to take the safer course and not do what may be seriously wrong. 
Suppose that you have a revolver in your hand with some bullets, but you 
don’t know how many. If you point the gun to someone’s head and pull the 
trigger, it might go off or it might not. It would be wrong to pull the trigger if 
there’s a genuine possibility that it might go off. Similarly, it would be wrong to 
have an abortion if there’s a genuine possibility that it might be as evil to do 
this as to kill a five-year-old child. 
(Q6)  Why do you avoid the terms “pro-life” and “pro-choice”? 
I prefer “anti-abortion” and “pro-abortion,” since these terms are less emo-
tional. Also, the “pro-choice” view isn’t really about whether abortion is wrong. 
Instead, it’s about whether abortion should be legal. Some who are pro-choice 
think abortion is wrong but should be legal. While I disagree with this (and 
question the GR consistency of this view), I don’t want to discuss it here. 

174 Ethics 
Abortion raises a lot of complicated issues. My purpose here isn’t to resolve 
all the issues. My purpose, rather, is to sketch a rational way to reason about 
some of the issues. 
14.8 Chapter summary 
This chapter studies the morality of abortion. It does so by applying to this 
issue the metaethical and normative views that we’ve studied so far. 
Some argue that abortion must be seriously wrong—since a fetus is innocent 
human life and it’s seriously wrong to kill innocent human life. But “human” 
has various senses. A fetus is “human” in some senses but not in others. The 
real issue is what sense of “human” we should use when we say “Killing 
innocent human life is seriously wrong.” Depending on how we take “human,” 
we get different principles—with different implications about when it’s 
seriously wrong to kill. 
Classical utilitarians argue that we ought to kill a fetus or infant whenever 
doing so has the best consequences; this would seem to favor the pro-abortion 
view. Rule utilitarians say that we ought to adopt whatever rule about killing 
(including abortion) would have the best consequences for society to adopt and 
try to live by; this would seem to favor the anti-abortion view. 
Since these arguments all appeal to controversial moral premises, we moved 
to the more basic question: “How should we pick our moral principles?” So we 
considered some of the main views on this—including cultural relativism, 
subjectivism, emotivism, the ideal-observer view, supernaturalism, intuitionism, 
and prescriptivism. We also looked at how virtue ethics and natural law might 
be applied to the abortion debate. 
The last two sections argue that golden-rule consistency forces us into an 
anti-abortion view. It claims that most people won’t be consistent if they hold 
that abortion is normally permissible—since they won’t consent to the idea of 
themselves having been aborted in normal circumstances. But this argument, 
even if it succeeds at what it tries to do, still leaves some details fuzzy. 
14.9 Study questions 
1. Suppose that we agree that killing innocent human life is seriously wrong. 
If we claim that a fetus isn’t human life, how could we still be strongly 
anti-abortion? (14.1) 
2. Suppose that we agree that killing innocent human life is seriously wrong. 
If we claim that a fetus is human life, how could we still be strongly pro-
abortion? 
3. What are some of the main senses of the word “human”? In which of 
these senses is the fetus “human”? 
4. Can we decide what sense of “human” to use in the principle “Killing 
innocent human life is seriously wrong” by appealing to science? Can we 
decide by appealing to moral intuitions? 
5. Explain and give objections to the classical utilitarian argument in favor 
of abortion. (14.2) 

 
Synthesis Chapter 175 
6. How would rule utilitarianism apply to abortion? How might one use this 
approach to argue against abortion? 
7. How would cultural relativism, subjectivism, supernaturalism, and intui-
tionism apply to abortion? (14.3) 
8. Sketch Janet Smith’s view on moral character and abortion. (14.4) 
9. How does the principle of double effect apply to abortion? (14.5) 
10. What is the GR consistency argument against stealing? (14.6) 
11. Give an example of how to apply GR consistency to our treatment of a 
fetus in a case that doesn’t involve abortion. 
12. What is the GR consistency argument against abortion? 
13. Could a person be consistent who disapproves of the blindness drug and 
infanticide—but who approves of abortion? What desires would such a 
person have to have? (14.7) 
14. Explain why the GR argument doesn’t yield a definite answer on some 
abortion cases. 
15. Is the conclusion that abortion is “normally wrong” unimportant—since 
it avoids the tricky question of what unusual situations, if any, would jus-
tify abortion? 
16. What does this book say we should do if we’re still unsure about the 
morality of abortion? 
17. Is being pro-choice the same as being pro-abortion? 
14.10 For further study 
To solidify your understanding, do the EthiCola exercise (see Preface) for 
“Ethics 14—Abortion.” Also do “Ethics 14v—Vocabulary for 10–14,” “Ethics 
14r—Review of 10–14,” and “Ethics 14z—Review of 0–14.” 
Many of the ideas in this chapter are adapted from Gensler’s “A Kantian 
argument against abortion.” This article also discusses two further influential 
articles defending abortion: Thomson’s “A defense of abortion” and Tooley’s 
“Abortion and infanticide.” Hare also wrote an article on “Abortion and the 
golden rule”; but his approach was significantly different from mine. For the 
Didache reference, see Kleist (1948). For a thorough defense of the anti-
abortion view, see Schwarz’s The Moral Question of Abortion. For a debate 
between Peter Singer and myself, see my “Singer’s unsanctity of human life: A 
critique.” See also Janet Smith’s “Moral character and abortion” and Rosalind 
Hursthouse’s “Virtue theory and abortion.” The Bibliography at the end of the 
book has information on how to find these works; the reference to the first 
Gensler article mentions two books with further readings on abortion. 
 
 

176 Ethics 
Suggested Works 
 
If you’ve mastered this book and want to read more, I suggest that you look at 
the companion anthology that I co-edited with Earl Spurgin and James 
Swindal: Ethics: Contemporary Readings (London: Routledge, 2004). 
If you want still more, consult the Historical Dictionary of Ethics (Lanham, Md.: 
Scarecrow Press [Rowman & Littlefield], 2008) that I wrote with Earl Spurgin. 
This is an encyclopedia of ethics; it has an alphabetical series of short, non-
technical articles on a broad range of ethical topics—and a 26-page chronology 
listing major events in the history of ethics. It also has a 58-page bibliography. 
If you want still more, are some suggestions (the Bibliography that starts on 
the next page has more details on most of these): 
• 
Reference: the Encyclopedia of Philosophy and the Encyclopedia of Ethics. 
• 
Journals: Mind, American Philosophical Quarterly, Journal of Philosophy, 
Ethics, and Philosophy and Public Affairs. 
• 
Textbooks: Brandt and Frankena—both are older classics—and 
Pojman. 
• 
Anthologies: Gensler-Spurgin-Swindal (which is keyed to this 
present book), Sher, Shafer-Landau, and Timmons. 
• 
History of ethics: Arrington (general), Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, 
Aquinas, Hobbes, Hume, Kant, Mill, and Sidgwick. 
• 
Religious and non-Western ethics: Wadell (Catholic), Gustafson 
(Protestant), Gupta (East–West), Confucius, and Laozi. 
• 
Applied ethics: Pojman-Beckwith (abortion); Regan-Singer (animal 
rights); Boatright and DesJardins-McCall (business); Beauchamp-
Childress, Pence, and Mappes-DeGrazia (bioethics); Sterba (envi-
ronment); and Singer (utilitarian). 
• 
Ethical theory: Moore, Ross, Ayer, Hare (especially 1963), Mackie, 
Rawls, Nozick, MacIntyre, Sartre, and Habermas. 
• 
Ethics website: http://ethics.sandiego.edu (Ethics Updates by 
Lawrence M. Hinman). 
See also the “For further study” section at the end of each chapter. 
 

 
Bibliography 177 
Bibliography 
 
Anscombe, E. (1958) “Modern Moral Philosophy,” Philosophy 33: 1–19. 
—— (1970) “Conception and Chastity,” The Human World 7: 9–30. This was 
reprinted as Contraception and Chastity, London: Catholic Truth Society, 1977. 
Aquinas, St. Thomas, Summa Theologica, 3 vols, trans. Fathers of the English 
Dominican Province, New York: Benziger Brothers, 1947–8. Questions 90–
7 of Part I–II deal with natural law. 
Aristotle, Nicomachean Ethics, trans. T. Irwin, Indianapolis, Ind.: Hackett, 1985. 
Armstrong, K. (2009) The Case for God, New York: Knopf. 
Arrington, R. (1998) Western Ethics: An Historical Introduction, Malden, Mass.: 
Blackwell. 
Ashby, R.W. (2006) “Verifiability principle,” in the Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Audi, R. (2006) “Philosophy,” in the Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Augustine, On Free Choice of the Will, trans. T. Williams, Indianapolis, Ind.: 
Hackett, 1993. 
Ayer, A.J. (1946) Language, Truth and Logic, 2nd ed., New York: Dover. 
Beauchamp, T., and J. Childress (2001) Principles of Biomedical Ethics, 5th ed., 
New York: Oxford Univ. Press. 
Benedict, R. (1934) “A defense of cultural relativism,” Journal of General 
Psychology 10: 59–82. Several anthologies have this essay, including C. Som-
mers (ed.), Vice and Virtue in Everyday Life, San Diego, Calif.: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1985. 
Blackburn, S. (1993) Essays in Quasi-Realism, Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
Boatright, J. (2007) Ethics and the Conduct of Business, 5th ed., Upper Saddle River, 
N.J.: Prentice Hall. 
Brandt, R. (1953) “In search of a credible form of utilitarianism,” in G. 
Nakhnikian and H. Castañeda (eds), Morality and the Language of Conduct, 
Detroit, Wayne State Univ. Press. 
—— (1955) “The definition of an ‘ideal observer’ theory in ethics” and “Some 
comments on Professor Firth’s reply,” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 
15: 407–13 and 422–3. 
—— (1959) Ethical Theory, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. 
—— (2006) “Ethical relativism,” in the Encyclopedia of Philosophy. See also the 
addendum by D. Wong. 
Cadoux, A.T. (1912) “The implications of the golden rule,” Ethics 3: 272–87. 
Carson, T. (1984) The Status of Morality, Dordrecht: D. Reidel. 

178 Ethics 
—— (2000) Value and the Good Life, Notre Dame, Ind.: Univ. of Notre Dame 
Press. 
—— (2010) Lying and Deception, Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. Chapters 6 and 7 
say much about the golden rule. 
Chappell, T. (1999) Understanding Human Goods: A Theory of Ethics, Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh Univ. Press. 
Confucius, The Analects, trans. S. Leys, New York: W.W. Norton, 1997. 
Darwin, C. (1839) The Voyage of the Beagle, New York: P.F. Collier, 1909. 
DesJardins, J., and J. McCall (eds) (2005) Contemporary Issues in Business Ethics, 
Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. 
Encyclopedia of Ethics, 2nd ed. L. and C. Becker (eds), New York: Routledge, 
2001. 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy, 2nd ed. D. Borchert (ed.), Detroit: Macmillan, 2006. 
Epictetus (90 AD) The Golden Sayings of Epictetus, trans. H. Crossley, London: 
Macmillan, 1935. 
Finnis, J. (1980) Natural Law and Natural Rights, Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
—— (1997) “The good of marriage and the morality of sexual relations: Some 
philosophical and historical observations,” American Journal of Jurisprudence 42: 
97–134. Search for “finnismarriage.pdf” for an online version. 
Firth, R. (1952) “Ethical absolutism and the ideal observer,” Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research 12: 317–45. Brandt (1955) replied to this article; 
Firth (1955) replied to Brandt. 
—— (1955) “Reply to Professor Brandt,” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 15: 414–21. 
Foot, P. (1978) Virtues and Vices, Berkeley: Univ. of California Press. 
Frankena, W. (1966) “Two concepts of morality,” Journal of Philosophy 63: 688–
96. 
—— (1973) Ethics, 2nd ed., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. 
Gensler, H. (1986a) “A Kantian argument against abortion,” Philosophical Studies 
49: 83–98. This was reprinted in R.M. Baird and S.E. Rosenbaum (eds), The 
Ethics of Abortion, Buffalo, N.Y.: Prometheus Books, 1989, and in L.P. Poj-
man and F.J. Beckwith (eds), The Abortion Controversy, Boston and London: 
Jones and Bartlett, 1995. 
—— (1986b) “Ethics is based on rationality,” Journal of Value Inquiry 20: 251–
64. 
—— (1996) Formal Ethics, London: Routledge. 
—— (2009a) “Gold or fool’s gold? Ridding the golden rule of absurd implica-
tions,” in The Golden Rule: Analytical Perspectives, ed. J. Neusner and B. Chilton, 
Lanham, Md.: Univ. Press of America, 131–49. 
—— (2009b) “Singer’s unsanctity of human life: A critique,” in Peter Singer 
Under Fire, ed. J. Schaler (Chicago: Open Court), 163–84 (with Peter Singer’s 
response on 185–94). 
—— (2009c) “Darwin, ethics, and evolution,” in Darwin and Catholicism, ed. L. 
Caruana (London: T.&T. Clark), 121–33. 
—— (2010) Introduction to Logic, 2nd ed., New York: Routledge. 
—— (201?) The GOLDEN RULE Book, a future comprehensive book on the 
golden rule that I plan to write. 

 
Bibliography 179 
Gensler, H., and S. Kaye (2003) “Is God the source of morality?” God Matters: 
Readings in the Philosophy of Religion, ed. R. Martin and C. Bernard, New York: 
Longman, 481–87. 
Gensler, H., E. Spurgin, and J. Swindal (eds) (2004) Ethics: Contemporary 
Readings, London: Routledge. 
Gensler, H., and J. Swindal (eds) (2005) The Sheed & Ward Anthology of Catholic 
Philosophy, Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Gensler, H., and E. Spurgin (eds) (2008) Historical Dictionary of Ethics, Lanham, 
Md.: Scarecrow (Rowman & Littlefield). 
Gibbard, A. (1990) Wise Choices, Apt Feelings, Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press. 
Gupta, B. (ed.) (2002) Ethical Questions: East and West, Lanham, Md.: Rowman & 
Littlefield. 
Gustafson, J. (1975) Can Ethics be Christian? Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press. 
Haas, P.J. (1988) Morality after Auschwitz, Philadelphia: Fortress Press. 
Habermas, J. (1990) Moral Consciousness and Communicative Action, trans. C. 
Lenhardt and S. Nicholsen, Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press. 
Hare, R.M. (1952) The Language of Morals, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
—— (1963) Freedom and Reason, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
—— (1975) “Abortion and the golden rule,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 4: 
201–22. 
—— (1981) Moral Thinking, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Hertzler, J.O. (1934) “On golden rules,” Ethics 44: 418–36. 
Hobbes, T. (1651) Leviathan, ed. M. Oakeshott, New York: Macmillan, 1962. 
Hume, D. (1739) A Treatise of Human Nature. Garden City, N.Y.: Doubleday, 
1961. 
—— (1751) An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals, ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975. 
Hursthouse, R. (1991) “Virtue theory and abortion,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 
20: 223–46. 
—— (1999) On Virtue Ethics, Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 
Kant, I. (1785) Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. H.J. Paton, New 
York: Harper & Row, 1964. 
Kleist, J.A. (trans.) (1948) “The Didache,” in J. Quasten and J.C. Plumpe (eds), 
Ancient Christian Writers 6, Westminster, Md.: Newman Press. 
Kohlberg, L. (1972) “A cognitive-developmental approach to moral educa-
tion,” Humanist 32: 13–16. 
—— (1981 and 1984) Essays on Moral Development (The Philosophy of Moral 
Development and The Psychology of Moral Development), vols. 1 and 2, San Fran-
cisco: Harper & Row. 
Laozi, Dao De Jing: the Book of the Way, trans. M. Roberts, Berkeley: Univ. of 
California Press, 2001. 
MacIntyre, A. (1984) After Virtue, 2nd ed., Notre Dame, Ind.: Univ. of Notre 
Dame Press. 
Mackie, J.L. (1977) Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong, London: Penguin. 
Mappes, T.A., and D. DeGrazia (eds) (2006) Biomedical Ethics, 6th ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill. 

180 Ethics 
Marx, K., and F. Engels (1848) The Communist Manifesto, ed. Samuel H. Beer, 
Arlington Heights, Ill.: Harlan Davidson, 1955. 
Mill, J.S. (1861) Utilitarianism, New York: Library of Liberal Arts, 1957. 
Moore, G.E. (1903) Principia Ethica, Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
Neusner, J., and B. Chilton (eds) (2008) The Golden Rule: Analytical Perspectives, 
Lanham, Md.: Univ. Press of America. 
—— (2009) The Golden Rule: The Ethics of Reciprocity in World Religions, New 
York: Continuum. 
Nozick, R. (1974) Anarchy, State and Utopia, New York: Basic Books. 
Ockham, W. (1957) Philosophical Writings of William of Ockham, trans. P. Boehner, 
Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs-Merrill. 
Passmore, J. (2006) “Logical positivism,” in the Encyclopedia of Philosophy. 
Pence, G. (2007) The Elements of Bioethics, New York: McGraw Hill. 
—— (2008) Classic Cases in Medical Ethics, 5th ed., New York: McGraw-Hill. 
Phipps, W. (1982) “The glittering rule,” Theology Today 39: 194–8. 
Plato, Euthyphro and the Republic. Several anthologies have these dialogues, 
including E. Hamilton and H. Cairns (eds), The Collected Dialogues of Plato, 
New York: Pantheon Books, 1963. 
Pojman, L. (2006) Ethics: Discovering Right and Wrong, 5th ed., Belmont, Calif.: 
Wadsworth. 
Pojman, L., and F. Beckwith (eds) (1998) The Abortion Controversy, 2nd ed., 
Belmont, Calif.: Wadsworth. 
Pufendorf, S. (1673) On the Duty of Man and Citizen according to Natural Law, ed. J. 
Tully, trans. M. Silverthorne, Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 1991. 
Quinn, P.L. (1978) Divine Commands and Moral Requirements, New York: Oxford 
Univ. Press. 
Rand, A. (1964) The Virtue of Selfishness, New York: New American Library. 
Rawls, J. (1999) A Theory of Justice, 2nd ed., Cambridge: Harvard Univ. Press. 
Regan, T., and P. Singer (eds) (1989) Animal Rights and Human Obligations, 2nd 
ed., Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice Hall. 
Rimland, B. (1982) “The altruism paradox,” Psychological Reports 51: 221–2. 
Ross, W.D. (1930) The Right and the Good, Oxford: Clarendon Press. 
Sartre, J.-P. (1957) Existentialism and Human Emotions, New York: Wisdom 
Library. 
Schulman, M., and Mekler, E. (1994) Bringing Up a Moral Child, New York: 
Doubleday. 
Schwarz, S.D. (1990) The Moral Question of Abortion, Chicago: Loyola Univ. 
Press. 
Shafer-Landau, R. (ed.) (2007) Ethical Theory: An Anthology, Malden, Mass.: 
Blackwell. 
Sher, George (ed.) (1996) Moral Philosophy: Selected Readings, 2nd ed., Fort Worth, 
Tex.: Harcourt Brace. 
Sidgwick, H. (1901) The Methods of Ethics, London: Macmillan. 
Singer, M.G. (1963) “The golden rule,” Philosophy 38: 293–314. 
Singer, P. (1993) Practical Ethics, 2nd ed., Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press. 
Slote, M. (2001) Morals from Motives, Oxford: Oxford Univ. Press. 

 
Bibliography 181 
Smart, J.C.C. (2006) “Utilitarianism,” in the Encyclopedia of Philosophy. See also 
the addendum by B. Hooker. 
Smith, J.E. (1992) “Moral character and abortion,” in Abortion: A New Genera-
tion of Catholic Responses, ed. Stephen J. Heaney, Braintree, Mass.: The Pope 
John Center, 189–208. Also in Doing and Being, ed. Joram Graf Haber, New 
York: Macmillan, 1993, 442–56. Search for “Janet Smith character abortion” 
for an online version. 
Sterba, J. (ed.) (2000) Earth Ethics: Introductory Readings on Animal Rights and 
Environmental Ethics, Saddle River, N.J.: Prentice Hall. 
Stevenson, C.L. (1963) Facts and Values, New Haven, Conn.: Yale Univ. Press. 
Stowe, H.B. (1852) Uncle Tom’s Cabin, New York: Harper & Row, 1965. 
Sumner, W. (1911) Folkways, Boston: Ginn & Co. 
Terry, Q.C. (2006) Golden Rules and Silver Rules of Humanity, Bloomington, Ind.: 
AuthorHouse. 
Thomson, J.J. (1971) “A defense of abortion,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 1: 
47–66. 
Timmons, M. (ed.) (2007) Disputed Moral Issues: A Reader. Oxford: Oxford Univ. 
Press. 
Tooley, M. (1972) “Abortion and infanticide,” Philosophy and Public Affairs 2: 37–
65. 
United Nations. “Declaration of Human Rights.” http://www.un.org/en/ 
documents/udhr 
Wadell, P. (2008) Happiness and the Christian Moral Life: An Introduction to Christian 
Ethics, Lanham, Md.: Rowman & Littlefield. 
Wattles, J. (1996) The Golden Rule, New York: Oxford Univ. Press. 
Werner, R. (1983) “Ethical realism,” Ethics 93: 653–79. 
Wojtyla, K. (1981) Love and Responsibility, trans. H. Willetts, New York: Farrar, 
Straus, Giroux. Wojtyla later became Pope John Paul II. 
 
 
 

 
Glossary/Index 182 
Glossary/Index  
 
This includes definitions for terms introduced 
in bold type in the text, plus a few other 
common terms. Other authors may use some 
terms in somewhat different senses. 
The Study Questions, Suggested Works, and 
Bibliography parts aren’t indexed. 
 
 
abortion, 3f, 42, 111, 128, 157, 162–
75 
act utilitarianism: We ought to do 
the ACT with the best conse-
quences. 119–21, 157; see also 
rule utilitarianism, utilitarianism 
analytic statement: Statement that 
is true by definition (and thus 
true because of logical connec-
tions and the meaning of terms). 
46f, 50, 154 
animals, 69, 90f, 142, 153, 163 
Anscombe, E., 151, 156 
applied ethics: Studying specific 
moral issues like abortion or 
lying, or moral questions in areas 
like business or medicine. 3 
Aquinas, St. Thomas, 33, 35, 143, 
152–61  
argument: A set of statements 
consisting of premises and a 
conclusion. 2f 
Aristotle, 69, 124, 141–5, 147–53  
Armstrong, K., 148 
Ashby, R.W., 55 
atheists, 28, 30f, 33–5 
Audy, R., 7 
Augustine, 136, 140, 150, 152, 157 
Ayer, A.J., 46f, 51, 55 
Babe, 175 
Bahá’í, 88 
Benedict, R., 15 
beneficence: Do good to others. 
127f, 134, 136f, 146, 148 
Bible, 26–30, 32–4, 73, 78, 94, 113, 
135–8, 143, 152f, 160, 166  
biting the bullet: Accepting an 
implausible consequence of your 
view. 10, 31, 116, 123, 130 
Blackburn, S., 55 
Boethius, 152 
Brandt, R., 16, 124 
Buddhism, 88 
Cadoux, A.T., 96 
capitalism: A social system 
characterized by the private 
ownership and operation of 
businesses, competition, free 
markets, and the profit motive; in 
a pure form of capitalism, busi-
ness has minimal regulation and 
government is small. 131f, 137 

 
Glossary/Index 183 
cardinal virtues: The basic natural 
virtues; in Plato, these are wis-
dom, self-control, courage, and 
justice. 140 
Carson, T., 25, 96, 124 
CELI FUGS, 93 
Chappell, T., 161 
Christianity, 27, 32, 33, 35, 73, 88, 
94, 140, 143, 145, 150, 152f, 156, 
160f, 163, 166f; see also Aquinas, 
Augustine, Bible, Jesus 
Cicero, 152 
classical utilitarianism: We ought 
always to do whatever brings 
about the greatest balance of 
pleasure over pain for everyone 
affected by our action. 110–12, 
118, 121, 129, 135, 146, 165 
cognitivism: Moral judgments are 
truth claims, and so are literally 
true or false. (Examples of cogni-
tivism include cultural relativism, 
subjectivism, the ideal-observer 
view, supernaturalism, and intui-
tionism.) See truth claim 
commandments; see ten command-
ments 
Confucius, 88, 148 
conscientiousness: Keep your 
actions, resolutions, and desires 
in harmony with your moral 
beliefs. 66, 69f, 77–9, 82, 87, 91, 
93, 95, 97, 105, 108, 134, 147–50, 
168 
consequentialism (teleology): We 
ought to do whatever maximizes 
good consequences. 4, 40, 110–
24, 164–6 
consistency, 4, 6, 10, 14, 24, 30, 33, 
37f, 47, 51f, 56, 58–64, 66–82, 
86–9, 91–5, 97–108, 110–11, 
113–15, 117f, 122f, 128f, 134, 
139, 145–50, 155, 162, 165–74 
courage: The rational control of our 
fear. 75, 92, 140f, 146, 150, 153 
cultural relativism: “Good” means 
“socially approved.” (This is 
ethical relativism; descriptive relativism 
claims that different societies 
disagree about basic moral 
norms.) 3, 5, 8–19, 22–4, 38, 47, 
57, 67, 77, 93, 111, 113, 144f, 
149f, 166, 174 
Darwin, C., 103f 
deontology; see nonconsequential-
ism 
descriptive relativism, 16; see also 
cultural relativism 
difference principle: Society ought 
to promote the equal distribution 
of wealth, except for inequalities 
that serve as incentives to benefit 
everyone (including the least 
advantaged group) and are open 
to everyone on an equal basis. 
133–5 
diminishing marginal utility: The 
fact that, as we get richer, each 
extra dollar makes less difference 
to how well we live. 133 
distributive justice: How goods 
ought to be distributed in a socie-
ty. 125, 132–4, 137f, 141; see also 
justice 
divine command view; see superna-
turalism 
double effect: The principle, 
roughly, that under certain condi-
tions it’s permissible to do some-
thing that has a morally good 
intended effect and a morally bad 
unintended side effect. 152, 156–
8, 160f, 167 
Dr. Evil, 68, 90, 113, 126, 129f 

184 Ethics 
egoism: We ought to do whatever 
maximizes good consequences 
for ourselves. (This is ethical 
egoism; psychological egoism claims 
that people always do whatever 
they think will maximize good 
consequences for themselves.) 
42, 77f, 94, 113f, 115 
emotivism: “X is good” is an 
emotional exclamation (not a 
truth claim), and means “Hurrah 
for X!” 20, 46–55, 57, 78, 94, 145, 
166, 174; see also moderate emo-
tivism 
empirical statement: Statement 
that is testable by sense expe-
rience (and thus can in principle 
be shown by sense experience to 
be true or at least highly proba-
ble). 46f, 49–51, 67, 107, 155, 159 
ends–means consistency: Keep 
your means in harmony with your 
ends. 66, 67, 77, 79, 93, 97f, 108, 
147 
entitlement view of just posses-
sions: Whatever you earn fairly is 
yours—and society has no right 
to take it away from you in order 
to redistribute wealth or help the 
poor. 134 
envy: Discontent over another’s 
good fortune. 143f 
Epictetus, 101 
equal liberty principle: Society 
ought to safeguard the greatest 
liberty for each person compati-
ble with an equal liberty for all 
others. 133, 135 
EthiCola, x 
ethics of duty: An approach to 
ethics that emphasizes duty; an 
extreme ethics of duty would say 
that “ought” is primary, virtue is 
derivative, and we could without 
loss dispense with talking about 
virtue. 149 
ethics of virtue: An approach to 
ethics that emphasizes virtue; an 
extreme ethics of virtue would 
say that “virtue” is primary, duty 
is derivative, and we could with-
out loss dispense with talking 
about duty. 4, 139–51, 156, 166f, 
174 
ethics; see moral philosophy 
etiquette, 13, 16 
exactly similar actions: Actions 
that have all the same properties 
in common. 73f, 76f, 84; see also 
relevantly similar actions 
exceptionless principles, 41f, 68, 97, 
113, 115, 117, 119f, 123, 125–31, 
136–8, 155f, 166, 173 
extrinsically good: What has good 
consequences. (This contrasts 
with intrinsically good.) 
faith: Believing in God and what he 
revealed. 135, 141, 143, 150, 152f, 
160 
fidelity: Keep your promises. 120f, 
127f, 134, 136f, 146f 
Finnis, J., 155, 158, 160f 
first principle; see self-evident truth 
Firth, R., 25 
Foot, P., 151 
forgiveness, 142f 
formula of universal law; see 
universal law 
Frankena, W., 16, 55 
freedom, moral, 17–20, 57f, 60f, 63, 
65, 75, 98, 108, 117, 119, 121, 
123, 127, 131–4, 137, 153, 155 
future-regard principle: Don’t do 
what you’ll later regret; more 
precisely, treat yourself (in the 
future) only as you’re willing to 
have been treated by yourself (in 
the past). 92f, 95, 97, 136 
Gensler, H., 68, 72, 96, 98, 175 
Gibbard, A., 55 

 
Glossary/Index 185 
gluttony: Overindulgence in food. 
143f 
God, 1, 3f, 6, 26–35, 37f, 48f, 66f, 
70, 76, 78f, 94f, 98f, 103, 106, 
110, 112, 122, 135f, 139–41, 143, 
145, 152f, 155, 158, 160, 166, 168 
golden mean: The virtuous point 
of “just enough,” between the 
twin vices of “too much” and 
“too little.” 141–3, 147 
golden rule (popular phrasing): 
Treat others as you want to be 
treated. 4, 6, 12, 14, 26, 56, 58–
64, 66, 74, 81–104, 106–12, 114f, 
122f, 128, 134–7, 139, 146–50, 
152–4, 156, 160, 166–75; see also 
literal golden rule, GR consisten-
cy condition, GR theorem 
GR consistency condition 
(prescriptivism): This combina-
tion is logically inconsistent: (a) I 
believe that I ought to do some-
thing to another, and (b) I don’t 
desire that this be done to me in 
the same situation. 58f, 61, 64, 82 
GR theorem: Treat others only as 
you consent to being treated in 
the same situation. 81, 90, 148, 
168 
GR: golden rule 
gratitude: Return good to those 
who have done good to you. 28, 
30, 34, 127, 128, 134–7, 146, 149 
greed: An excessive desire for 
money and possessions. 103, 143 
Grotius, H., 154, 156 
Haas, P.J., 103 
happiness, 33, 39, 94, 111f, 114f, 
117f, 122, 124, 127, 130, 133, 
140, 142f, 150, 153, 160, 164, 173 
Hare, R.M., 53, 56–65, 72, 80, 96, 
109, 124, 175 
hedonism: Pleasure is the only 
intrinsic good; pain is the only 
intrinsic bad. (This is ethical hedon-
ism; psychological hedonism claims 
that people act only for the sake 
of gaining pleasure and avoiding 
pain.) 113–15, 117–19, 122f 
hedonistic utilitarianism; see classical 
utilitarianism 
Hertzler, J.O., 96 
Hillel, 88 
Hinduism, 88 
Hitler, A., 9, 19, 48, 63 
hope: Emotionally trusting in God 
and his promises. 135, 141, 143, 
150, 153 
human right (moral right, natural 
right): A right that we have (or 
ought to have) simply because 
we’re human beings—and not 
because we’re members of such 
and such a society. 12, 131, 138, 
154, 161; see also legal right, right 
Hume, D., 25, 38f, 45, 145  
Hume’s law: We can’t deduce an 
“ought” from an “is”; equivalent-
ly, we need a moral premise to 
deduce a moral conclusion. 38f, 
45 
Hursthouse, R., 151, 175 
ideal-observer view: “X is good” 
means “We’d desire X if we were 
fully informed and had impartial 
concern for everyone.” 17, 20–5, 
27, 29, 43, 53, 57, 61, 78, 94, 99, 
145, 174 
ideal observer: Imaginary person of 
supreme moral wisdom (which 
includes things like being fully 
informed and having impartial 
concern for everyone). 22, 24, 27, 
94, 99, 145 
imagination, 59f, 63f, 73–5, 77, 81, 
84–9, 91–3, 95, 97f, 100–9, 129, 
134, 146, 170f  

186 Ethics 
impartiality: Make similar evalua-
tions about similar actions, re-
gardless of the individuals in-
volved. 20–4, 53f, 56, 66, 73–9, 
82, 87, 91, 93, 95, 97f, 108, 133f, 
145, 147–50, 166, 168, 172 
imperative; see prescription 
intrinsically good: What is good in 
itself, abstracting from further 
consequences. (This contrasts 
with extrinsically good.) 40–2, 114, 
117, 119, 123, 127 
intuitionism: “Good” is indefina-
ble, there are objective moral 
truths, and the basic moral truths 
are self-evident to a mature mind. 
(Some intuitionists say that basic 
moral truths, instead of being 
self-evident, are grasped by a kind 
of perception that resembles 
sense experience.) 29, 36–45, 48–
51, 53, 57, 63, 78, 94f, 104, 115, 
117, 128, 134, 139, 141, 145f, 
155, 160, 163f, 167, 174 
Islam, 29, 73, 88 
Jesus, 26, 28, 78, 88, 111, 113, 129 
Judaism, 10, 19f, 22f, 29, 42, 48, 60f, 
72f, 88, 99, 102–4, 145, 154 
just war: A war that is waged by a 
legitimate authority, for a just 
cause, with proper intention, as a 
last resort, with any harm done 
being proportionate to the good 
obtained, not directly targeting 
innocent civilians, and treating 
prisoners of war humanely. 29, 
157f, 161 
justice: Treating others as they have 
a right to be treated. 3, 125, 127–
9, 131–5, 137–42, 146, 150, 153f; 
see also distributive justice, right 
Kant, I., 80, 93, 96, 109, 125, 138, 
147, 175 
Kennedy, J., 81, 101 
King, M.L., 12 
Kleist, J., 175 
Kohlberg, L., 13–16 
legal right: A right recognized by a 
society’s governing body. 131 
libertarianism: People have 
negative rights but not positive 
rights; so the state ought not to 
promote positive rights. 131, 134, 
137 
Lincoln, A., 101 
literal golden rule: If you want X 
to do something to you, then do 
this same thing to X. 83–90, 95; 
see also golden rule 
Locke, J., 131 
logical positivism: Any genuine 
truth claim is either empirical 
(testable by sense experience) or 
analytic (true by definition). 46f, 
50f, 53, 55 
logical reasoning: Concluding 
something (conclusion) from 
something else (premises). 2 
logicality: Be logically consistent in 
your beliefs. 66–8, 77, 79, 93, 97, 
147 
logically consistent person: One 
whose beliefs are consistent. 58, 
62f, 66f, 78, 147 
love (of God and neighbor): 
Unselfishly striving to serve God 
and to do good and not harm to 
his creatures. 26, 28–30, 33f, 76, 
87–9, 94, 103, 111, 115, 120f, 
135f, 140f, 143, 145, 150, 153, 
159, 161, 164, 166 
lust: Excessive sexual desire that’s 
out of control. 143 
MacIntyre, A., 151 
Mackie, J.L., 35, 55 
Marx, K., 132, 138 
masochism, 87f, 99 
Mekler, E., 109 

 
Glossary/Index 187 
metaethics: Studying the nature and 
methodology of moral judg-
ments. 3, 6, 68, 110, 144, 166f, 
174 
Mill, J.S., 111, 124 
moderate emotivism: Moral 
judgments, while they express 
emotions and not truth claims, 
are rational to the extent that they 
are informed and impartial. 53, 55 
Moore, G.E., 36–40, 42, 45, 47, 51 
moral education, 5, 10, 13f, 16–18, 
20, 23f, 28, 41f, 50, 57–60, 63, 
102–6, 108f, 115, 122, 149  
moral philosophy (ethics): 
Reasoning about the ultimate 
questions of morality. 1–6, 152f, 
160f 
moral realism; see objective view 
moral right; see human right 
moral theology: A study of 
morality that is based on divine 
revelation (as in the Bible). 152f, 
160f 
Murphy, E., 93 
natural law: A tradition, associated 
with St. Thomas Aquinas, that 
sees basic moral principles (called 
natural laws) as objective, based 
on nature instead of convention, 
and knowable through natural 
human reason. 4, 152–61, 166f, 
174 
natural right; see human right 
naturalism: “Good” can be defined 
using ideas from sense expe-
rience. (This is descriptive natural-
ism; reforming naturalism claims that 
our ordinary “good” is confused 
and ought to be redefined using 
ideas from sense experience—
and metaphysical naturalism claims 
that goodness is identical to some 
property that comes from sense 
experience.) 37, 44f, 47, 155, 160 
Nazis, 10f, 22f, 42, 49, 52f, 57–61, 
63f, 99f, 102–4, 145f, 154 
negative right: A right to not be 
interfered with in certain ways. 
131–3, 137; see also right 
noncognitivism: Moral judgments 
aren’t truth claims, and so aren’t 
literally true or false. (Emotivism 
and prescriptivism are examples 
of noncognitivism.) See truth 
claim 
nonconsequentialism (deontolo-
gy): Some kinds of action (such 
as killing the innocent) are wrong 
in themselves, and not just wrong 
because they have bad conse-
quences. 4, 110, 122, 125–38, 
146f, 155f, 162–4, 166f 
nonmaleficence: Don’t harm 
others. 127f, 134, 136f, 145 
normative ethical theory: Studying 
very general moral principles. 3 
normative ethics: Studying 
principles about how we ought to 
live. (Normative ethics includes 
normative ethical theory and 
applied ethics.) 3, 6, 68, 110f, 
122, 144, 162 
Nozick, R., 131f, 134, 137f  
objective view (moral realism): 
Some things are objectively right 
or wrong, independently of what 
anyone may think or feel. 8f, 11–
15, 18f, 27f, 30, 32–6, 38f, 41–3, 
45–50, 55–7, 62, 66f, 78, 99, 139, 
145, 150, 152f, 159, 166f; see also 
truth claim  
Ockham, W., 32, 35 
original position: A hypothetical 
situation where people are free, 
clearheaded, and know all the 
relevant facts—but don’t know 
about their own place in society 
(whether rich or poor, black or 
white, male or female). 133 

188 Ethics 
Passmore, J., 55 
philosophy: Reasoning about the 
ultimate questions of life. 1–7 
Phipps, W., 101 
Plato, 35, 139–43, 149–51  
pleasure and pain, 3, 37, 40–2, 77, 
86f, 91, 99, 104, 111–23, 127f, 
132–5, 140, 142f, 146, 150, 157f, 
164f; see also hedonism 
pluralism: Many things are 
intrinsically good (for example, 
virtue, knowledge, pleasure, life, 
and freedom). 40, 114f, 117–23, 
127, 165 
pluralistic rule utilitarianism: We 
ought to follow the RULES with 
the best consequences for society 
to follow—and we should eva-
luate consequences in terms of 
various goods, such as virtue, 
knowledge, pleasure, life, and 
freedom. 117–23, 165; see also 
utilitarianism 
Pope John Paul II; see Wojtyla 
Pope Paul VI, 156 
positive right: A right to certain 
goods that society should help to 
provide. 131–5, 137; see also 
right 
prescription (imperative): 
Linguistic form, like “Shut the 
door,” that tells what to do in-
stead of making a truth claim. 3, 
56–9, 62, 69, 99, 153 
prescriptivism (universal pre-
scriptivism): “You ought to do 
this” is a universalizable prescrip-
tion (not a truth claim); it means 
“Do this and let everyone do the 
same in similar cases.” 53, 56–66, 
70, 76, 78, 82f, 94, 102, 146, 167, 
174 
pride: An inflated, self-centered 
view of yourself. 143 
prima facie duty: A duty that holds 
if other things are equal; more 
precisely, a factor that tends in 
itself to make something our duty 
but can sometimes be overridden 
by other factors. 40, 42, 98, 125–
7, 134f, 137, 146 
prima facie view: The basic moral 
principles say that we ought, 
other things being equal, to do or 
not to do certain kinds of action. 
125–8, 136f, 147; see also Ross 
psychology, 1, 13–5, 68, 77, 121, 
158f, 164 
Pufendorf, S., 156, 161 
Quakers, 101 
Quinn, P.L., 35 
racism, 5, 10–2, 15, 17, 19f, 22–4, 
28, 30, 42f, 49, 51–3, 57–61, 63f, 
67, 71–3, 79, 99–4, 108, 128, 
145f, 154, 168, 173 
Rand, A., 131, 138 
rationality condition: Principle 
about how we ought (ideally) to 
form our moral beliefs. 23f, 97–
100, 108 
rationality, 1–6, 13f, 17–25, 27–30, 
33f, 36, 39–42, 49f, 52–4, 56–80, 
85–9, 91, 94–109, 114f, 117f, 
122f, 128, 134, 136, 139–41, 144–
50, 152–5, 159f, 163–8, 172–4 
Rawls, J., 131–4, 137f 
reasoning; see arguments, logical 
reasoning, rationality 
relative term: Term (for example, 
“to the left”) that needs a further 
reference to complete its sense. 
8f, 18 
relativism; see cultural relativism 
relevantly similar actions: Actions 
that are so similar that the rea-
sons why one fits in a given 
moral category also apply to the 
others. 73, 75–7, 79, 84; see also 
exactly similar actions 

 
Glossary/Index 189 
religion, 1, 11f, 20, 26–35, 38, 66, 
87f, 94, 96, 103, 106f, 131–3, 145, 
148, 152–5, 167, 173; see also 
God, supernaturalism 
reparation: Make up for harm that 
you’ve done to another. 127f, 
134–7, 146 
right: What can be justifiably 
demanded of others. 3, 10–2, 39, 
125, 131–5, 137f, 154, 161, 164; 
see also human right, legal right, 
negative right, positive right 
Rimland, B., 94 
Rocky, 140 
Ross, W.D., 36, 40, 42, 45, 125–9, 
132, 134, 136–8, 146f  
rule utilitarianism: We ought to do 
what would be prescribed by the 
RULES with the best conse-
quences for people in society to 
try to follow. 14, 110, 117–24, 
129f, 135–7, 157, 159, 165f; see 
also act utilitarianism, utilitarian-
ism 
Sartre, J.-P., 28, 35 
Schulman, M., 109 
Schwarz, S.D., 175 
self-control (temperance): The 
rational control of our appetites 
(impulses and desires). 140f, 144, 
150 
self-evident truth (first principle): 
Known truth that requires no 
further proof or justification. 3f, 
36, 39–43, 51, 66f, 70, 76, 78f, 
94f, 104, 106, 110, 112, 122, 146, 
154f 
self-improvement: Improve your 
virtue, knowledge, and so on. 
127, 134, 136f, 146 
self-regard principle: Treat 
yourself only as you’re willing to 
have others treat themselves in 
the same situation. 91–3, 95, 97, 
127, 136 
Seneca, 152 
seven deadly sins: Pride, greed, 
lust, wrath, gluttony, envy, and 
sloth. 143 
sexual morality, 26, 120f, 129, 136, 
143, 152, 158–61 
Singer, M.G., 96 
Singer, P., 175 
Slote, M., 151 
sloth: Laziness, an excessive 
aversion to work. 143f 
Smart, J.C.C., 124 
socialism: A social system characte-
rized by community ownership 
and control of organizations that 
provide goods and services, 
cooperation instead of competi-
tion, an egalitarian ideal of every-
one sharing somewhat equally in 
the goods of society, and gov-
ernment playing a big role in 
promoting positive rights (like 
health care and a decent standard 
of living) for everyone. 132, 137 
Socrates, 31f, 34, 36, 129, 139, 144, 
150 
Stevenson, C.L., 55 
Stoics, 152 
Stowe, H.B., 101, 104 
Suárez, F., 154 
subjectivism: “X is good” means “I 
like X.” 17–25, 38, 42, 48, 52, 57, 
77f, 94, 145, 166, 174 
Sumner, W. 16 
supernaturalism: “X is good” 
means “God desires X.” 26–35, 
37, 70, 76, 112, 139, 155, 160, 174 
Taoism, 88 
teleology; see consequentialism 
ten commandments, 26f, 125, 134–8 
theological virtues: The basic 
virtues that connect us to God; in 
Christianity, these are faith, hope, 
and love. 135, 140f, 143, 150, 153 
Thomson, J.J., 175 
Tooley, M., 175 

190 Ethics 
truth claim: Claim that is true or 
false. 3, 6, 12f, 18, 20, 36, 38–48, 
50–3, 56f, 62–4, 78, 83, 146, 155, 
167 
United Nations, 12, 138 
universal law, formula of: Act only 
as you’re willing for anyone to act 
in the same situation, regardless 
of imagined variations of time or 
person. 92f, 95, 97, 108 
universalizability principle: 
Whatever is right (wrong, good, 
bad, etc.) in one case would also 
be right (wrong, good, bad, etc.) 
in any exactly or relevantly similar 
case, regardless of the individuals 
involved. 58; see also impartiality 
universalizable: Judgment that 
logically commits us to making a 
similar judgment about similar 
cases. 56, 58f, 61–4 
utilitarianism: We ought to do 
whatever maximizes good conse-
quences for everyone affected by 
our action. 14, 65, 110–26, 128–
30, 132f, 135–7, 146f, 149f, 156f, 
159, 164–6, 174; see also act 
utilitarianism, classical utilitarian-
ism, pluralistic rule utilitarianism, 
and rule utilitarianism. 
valid argument: Argument in 
which the conclusion follows 
logically from the premises. 2, 78 
virtue: A good habit. 3f, 6, 40, 61, 
103, 114f, 117f, 121, 123, 127, 
134, 138–51, 153, 156f, 167, 174f 
Wattles, J., 96 
Werner, R., 45 
wisdom: Excellence in thinking. 22, 
36, 106, 139–42, 144, 148–50, 
153; see also rationality 
Wojtyla, K., 161 
wrath: A vengeful and hateful anger 
toward one who has wronged 
you. 143 
Zaharias, B.D., 75 
 
 
 
 

