
ii
MEREOLOGY IN EVENT SEMANTICS
Chia-Yi Tony Pi
Department of Linguistics
McGill University, Montreal
A thesis submitted to the Faculty of Graduate Studies and Research
in partial fulfilment of the requirements
of the degree of
DOCTOR OF PHILOSOPHY
© Chia-Yi Tony Pi
August 1999

iii
Abstract
This thesis investigates verbal and prepositional representations of change
under a non-localistic analysis based on the mereology of events, i.e., a system of
aspect that uses event parts as primitives in lieu of path parts.  Localistic analyses,
developed from motional concepts (e.g., Verkuyl 1993, Asher & Sablayrolles 1994),
do not extend to non-motional data (e.g., changes of state or possession) except via
metaphor, thereby bypassing essential generalizations about change.
It is argued that, instead of modeling change after the tripartite source-route-
goal divisions of a spatial path, the various combinations of two eventive primitives -
distinguished point and distinguished process - are sufficient and necessary in
accounting for abstract and concrete data, including the four aspectual verb classes
of states, activities, achievements and accomplishments (Vendler 1967).  The medial
lexical specification, route, is shown to be unnecessary, being an epiphenomenon of
two distinguished points interacting, or inferable through pragmatic considerations.
This is shown by examples from English and French.
Event mereology unifies concrete with abstract change under a single system
of features for verbs (e.g., arrive and inherit), prepositions, and their associated
phrases (in the house and in debt).  Underspecification and complementation further
economize the lexical representations while accounting for cases of semantic
ambiguity.  Such issues as homogeneity in states/processes, resultatives, aspectual
verbs (continue, stop), agentivity, and the effects of aspectual coercion by English
aspectual morphemes (-ed, -ing) are examined and re-formulated where necessary.
The event-mereological approach is demonstrated to be compatible with
various current syntactic analyses, and one such analysis (Travis 1999) is
investigated in detail.  Event mereology is also shown to extend to more complex
aspectual patterns observed of serial verb constructions in Èdó (Stewart 1998).

iv
Résumé
Cette thèse examine les représentations verbales et prépositionnelles du
changement en adoptant une analyse basée sur la méréologie des événements, c'est-
à-dire sur un système aspectuel qui se sert des parties d'un événement (event parts)
au lieu des parties d'un trajet (path parts) comme primitifs.  Les analyses basées sur
des lieux, qui ont comme unité de base des concepts de mouvement (e.g., Verkuyl
1993, Asher & Sablayrolles 1994) ne s'appliquent pas aux données qui ne
concernent pas le mouvement (e.g., changements d'état ou de possession) sauf les
cas où l'analyse se sert de la métaphore, ainsi échappent-elles aux généralisations qui
concernent le changement.
Je propose que les combinaisons variées des deux primitifs de type
événement, notamment ceux de point défini (distinguished point) et de processus
défini (distinguished process), sont suffisantes et nécessaires pour tenir compte des
donnés abstraites et concrètes, y compris les quatres classes verbales et aspectuelles
des états, activités, réussites (achievements) et accomplissements (accomplishments)
(Vendler 1967), il n'est pas nécessaire de modeler le changement sur les divisions
triparties d'un trajet dans l'espace en surce-route-but.  Je montre que la spécification
lexicale intermédiaire, route, est superflue comme elle est soit un épiphénomène qui
est un conséquence de l'interaction de deux point définis, soit prévisible des
considérations pragmatiques.  La discussion se base des exemples tirés de l'anglais
et du français.
La méréologie des événements unifie le changement concret avec le
changement abstrait sous un seul et même système de traits pour les verbes (e.g.,
arrive et inherit), les prépositions, et les syntagmes qui leur son associés (in the
house et in debt).  La sous-spécification et la complémentation servent à rendre les
représentations lexicales plus économes tout en rendant compte des cas d'ambiguïté
sémantique.  J'examine des sujets tels que l'homogénéité des états/processus, les
constructions résultatives, les verbes aspectuels (continue, stop), l'agentivité, et les
effets de coercition aspectuelle des morphèmes aspectuels en anglais (-ed, -ing); je
propose des reformulations là où nécessaire.
Je démontre qu'une approche qui se sert de la méréologie des événements est
compatible avec plusieurs analyses syntaxiques actuelles; j'en examine une (Travis
1999) en détail.  La méréologie des événements peut bien s'appliquer aux
comportement aspectuel plus complexe que l'on observe chez des constructions des
verbes en série en Èdó (Stewart 1998).

v
Acknowledgements
I must begin by expressing my utmost respect and profoundest thanks to
my advisor, Brendan Gillon.  When I first came to McGill, I originally intended to
conduct research in syntax; it was mostly Brendan's enthusiasm and perspective on
semantics that drew me into that fascinating field, and I've never looked back since.
Though Brendan was on sabbatical leave during my dissertation year, he was still
very much a guiding presence:  he devoted much care commenting on my drafts,
helping me create simple order from seeming chaos.  When things seemed darkest,
Brendan was always there to encourage me, to help me see a problem in a new light.
Always patient when I was having difficulty articulating my intuitions, he taught me
how to sharpen my ideas into theory.  I am very much in his debt for this present
accomplishment.
I also owe much thanks to Lisa deMena Travis for her incredible advising, in
matters of aspect, graduate studies, and unexpected crises.  Lisa boosted my
confidence in my own work by her enthusiastic interest in my research, and has
often provided invaluable advice on pursuing a career in linguistics.  She also
sparked my interest in the field of aspect.  During a very stressful crisis in my
graduate studies, Lisa and Glyne Piggott understood the source of my difficulties
and sought many different ways to help out, and I am very grateful to both for
everything they had done to help me through that dark time.  I would also like to
thank Glyne for keeping me on track for all my deadlines and forms.
I want to express my gratitude to Mark Baker, for showing me how to do
my best work, and for his insightful comments that led to the initial development of
the idea underlying this thesis.  Nigel Duffield is owed my thanks for always
finding time to talk to me about my papers and ideas, and for being a pleasure to TA
for.  I am also grateful to the other faculty members who have made my experience
at McGill an unforgettable learning experience:  Heather Goad, Lydia White, Michel

vi
Paradis, Jonathan Bobaljik, Myrna Gopnik, Nicole Domingue, Charles Boberg, Julie
Auger, and Eva Kehayia.  I must also thank Lise Vinette and Linda Suen for their
invaluable help dealing with all things bureaucratic, no matter what strange hoops
and unexpected red tape came my way.
I acknowledge with much thanks funding from SSHRCC fellowship #752-
94-1814 and SSHRCC grants #410-90-0523 (Baker, Travis & White), #410-98-
0463 (Gillon), #410-98-0452 (Travis), without which this research could not have
been possible.  I would also like to thank the Department of Linguistics at McGill
for TAships.  I am also grateful to the McGill Career and Placement Service, the
McGill Engineering Career Centre, McGill Summer Studies and McGill Arts &
Science Invigilation for further financial support.
I would like to give special thanks to my co-authors, O.T. Stewart,
Roumyana Slabakova, and Miwako Uesaka for teaching me that learning need not
be a solitary endeavour, but could be a rewarding collaboration.  I am also pleased to
have made the acquaintance of some extraordinary fellow grads at the Department of
Linguistics at McGill:  Mengistu Amberber, Walcir Cardoso, Dongdong Chen,
Steve Jimerson, Takako Kawasaki, John Lewis, Martyna Macgregor, John
Matthews, Anna McLachlan, Evan Mellander, Silvina Montrul, Jennifer Ormston,
Ileana Paul, Philippe Prévost, Lara Riente (for checking the French abstract), Sharon
Rose, Yvan Rose, Steve Sheppard, Jeff Steele (to whom I also owe thanks for
translating my abstract), Vanessa Taler, Hidekazu Tanaka, and Mikael Vinka.  A
special thanks goes to Ben Shaer for the late-night semantics talks and his
invaluable tips on surviving the dissertation.
I am also indebted to the Department of Linguistics at the University of
Toronto for shaping my early career as a linguist, in particular Ed Burstynsky, Jack
Chambers, Elizabeth Cowper, Diane Massam, Peter Reich, Keren Rice, and Hank
Rogers.  Much thanks also go to other linguist friends I have made over the years:  

vii
Andrew Carnie, Bill McClure, Martha McGinnis, Matt Pearson, Carson Schultze,
and Rachel Walker.
I am very grateful to my friends for their constant encouragement and
cherished company:  Deb Allen, Steve Baker, Gregg Blachford, Ben Caplan, Becky
Carpenter, Carla Cavalheiro, Bain Chin, David Dalgleish, Bill Georgas, Philip
Hamilton, Chris Hampel, Doug Jackson, Jo de Jong, Jörg Käufer, Mike Kovrig, Mai
Lee, Devin Mitchell, Jean-Pierre Paquet, Jaime Pimstone, Jim Pun, Norbert Putora,
Jeananne Robertson, Dave Van Domelen, and Chris Wilson.  In particular, I would
like to thank Roy Male, Scott Cowie, Eric Ross, Andrew Lesk, and Jean Chartrand,
without whose friendship and love (and the occasional commiseration sessions) I
would not have made it this far.
Finally, I want to express my love and thanks to my family, who have made
me who I am today:  my aunt Mei Hui, uncle C.T. Huang, and my cousins I-Wei
and I-Li for their support and generosity; my grandfather for teaching me how to
read and to never stop reading and discovering the secrets of the universe; my late
grandmother, who I miss with all my heart; my sister Julie for being her adorable,
uncompromising self; and my mother Natalie, for her infinite love, understanding,
and courage to fight on, no matter what the odds.  She is the greatest role model any
son could have.

viii
Table of Contents
Page
Abstract                                                                                                              iii
Résumé                                                                                                              
iv
Acknowledgements                                                                                            
v
Chapter 1:  What is Event Mereology?
1.0  Introduction                                                                                    
1
1.1  Why Study Change?                                                                       
7
1.2  Subclasses of Motion Verbs                                                           
8
1.3  Non-Motion Verbs of Change                                                        13
1.4  A Localistic Analysis:  Asher & Sablayrolles (1994)                      22
1.4.1  Localism and Change in A&S                                         24
1.4.1.1  Seven Proximity Relations                                25
1.4.1.2  Nine Verb Classes                                            27
1.4.1.3  Sixteen Spatial Prepositions                              29
1.4.2  Spatiotemporal Trajectories                                              30
1.4.2.1  Spatiotemporal Trajectories in A&S                 30
1.4.2.2  Problems with Spatiotemporal Referents
in A&S                                                        32
1.4.3  Simons (1987)                                                                 35
1.4.3.1  Against Classical Extensional Mereology         36
1.4.3.2  Definitions:  Events                                           39
1.4.3.3  Definitions:  Spreads, Spells and Spans            40
1.4.3.4  Definitions:  Phases, Slices, Segments and
Sections                                                       43
1.4.4  Overgeneration with Spatial Parameters                           45
1.4.4.1  Gaps and Continuousness in A&S                   45
1.4.4.2  Problems with Medial Polarity in A&S            48
1.4.5  The Medial Parameter Versus Complementarity              50
1.4.5.1  Eliminating the Medial Parameter                     50
1.4.5.2  On Ooze and Absorb:  Different Syntactic
Patterns                                                        52
1.4.5.3  On Surface and Sink:  Change-of-Position
Verbs                                                           53
1.4.5.4  Complementarity in Event Mereology               55
1.5  Structure                                                                                          58

ix
Chapter 2:  Events and Mereologies:  Stating the Basics
2.0  Introduction                                                                                    61
2.1  Ambiguity and Indefiniteness                                                         63
2.1.1  Ambiguity                                                                        63
2.1.2  Constructional Polysemy                                                 65
2.1.3  Underspecification                                                           69
2.1.4  The Colour Spectrum                                                       71
2.2  Distinguished Points                                                                       74
2.2.1  Distinguished Points and Aspectual Classes                    75
2.2.1.1  The Imperfective Paradox                                 77
2.2.1.2  Point Adverbials and Frame Adverbials            77
2.2.2  Distinguished Points and Complementarity                     79
2.3  Event Mereology and Localism                                                       81
2.3.1  Dynamic vs. Static Models of Change                             84
2.3.2  Deriving Internal Paths                                                    86
2.3.2.1  Two BECOME Operators                                86
2.3.2.2  Two Distinguished Points                                 88
2.3.2.3  Step and Walk                                                   90
2.3.3  Negation and Complementation                                       91
2.3.3.1  Contraries                                                         91
2.3.3.2  Different Possibilities for From-To                  94
2.3.3.2.1  When P and Q Are
Immediate Contraries                       95
2.3.3.2.2  When P and Q Are Polar
or Simple Mediate Contraries          95
2.3.3.2.3  When P and Q Are Synonyms          97
2.3.3.2.4  When P and Q Are
Unrelated Predicates                        98
2.3.4  The Truth Value Gap and Homogeneity                          98
2.3.4.1  The Truth Value Gap                                        98
2.3.4.2  The Truth Value Gap and Event Mereology      101
2.3.4.3  Homogeneity                                                    104
2.3.4.4  States in Event Mereology                                107
2.3.4.5  Processes in Event Mereology                          108
2.4  Summary                                                                                         110

x
Chapter 3:  Aspect in Event Mereology:  Acting on the Hypothesis
3.0  Introduction                                                                                    112
3.1  Changes of State and States of Change                                           114
3.2  Aspectual Classes in Event Mereology                                           117
3.2.1  Pustejovsky (1991)                                                          119
3.2.1.1  Event Structure:  States and Processes              119
3.2.1.2  Event Structure:  Transitions & Agentivity        121
3.2.1.3  Event Structure:  Almost                                    122
3.2.1.4  ES vs. EM:  Against Agentivity                         124
3.2.1.5  Event Structure:  On Notation                           126
3.2.1.6  Accomplishments as Juxtapositions                  127
3.2.1.7  Accounting for Almost                                      130
3.2.2  Kamp & Reyle (1993)                                                     131
3.2.2.1  DRT:  Accomplishments and Achievements     132
3.2.2.2  DRT:  States and Activities                               134
3.2.3  EM:  Imperatives as Achievements                                   135
3.2.3.1  The Imperative Test                                           136
3.2.3.2  Progressive Imperatives                                    140
3.2.3.3  States and Negated Imperatives                         142
3.2.3.4  Remain Verbs and Imperatives                          144
3.2.3.5  Ideal Trajectories                                               148
3.2.4  Summary of ES and DRT Aspect                                    150
3.3  Prepositions                                                                                    150
3.3.1  General Characteristics of Prepositions                           151
3.3.2  Spatial and Non-Spatial Prepositions                               152
3.3.2.1  Prepositions with Spatial & Temporal Uses     153
3.3.2.2  Non-Spatial and Non-Temporal Uses               157
3.3.3  Prepositions and Verbal Meaning                                    158
3.3.3.1  Prepositions & the Partitioning of Continua     158
3.3.3.2  Prepositions, States, and Changes of State        161
3.4  An Analysis of Medial Prepositions                                               165
3.4.1  Medial Prepositions                                                         167
3.4.2  Representing Prepositions and Verbs                              170
3.4.2.1  Representing Prepositions                                170
3.4.2.2  Representing Verbs                                           171
3.4.3  Axes and Medial Prepositions                                         172

xi
3.4.3.1  Internal Axis and Object Axis Readings           174
3.4.3.2  Dimensionality and Axes                                  178
3.4.3.2.1  Via                                                     179
3.4.3.2.2  Verbs of Extension                            180
3.4.4  Summary of Prepositions and Verbs                               181
3.4.5  Metarelations                                                                   182
3.5  Summary                                                                                         184
Chapter 4:  Compositionality in Event Mereology:
Achieving a Unified Analysis
4.0  Introduction                                                                                    185
4.1  Resultatives                                                                                     185
4.1.1  Representing Resultatives:  ES vs. EM                            185
4.1.2  Processes as Results                                                        189
4.2  Coercion                                                                                          193
4.2.1  The Simple Past and the Perfect                                       194
4.2.2  The Progressive                                                               195
4.2.2.1  The Open and Closed Senses of the
Progressive                                                  198
4.2.2.2  English -Ing and Japanese Te-Iru                      199
4.2.2.3  Cambridge States                                              200
4.2.3  Activities With Known Minimal Parts                             201
4.2.4  Medials Interacting With Progressive and Past                204
4.3  A System of Aspectual Features                                                     206
4.3.1  The Feature [Vector]                                                        207
4.3.2  Predictions and Empirical Data                                        209
4.3.2.1  Inertial Change-of-Position Verbs                    210
4.3.2.2  Change-of-Posture Verbs                                 211
4.3.2.3  Change-of-Location Verbs                                213
4.3.2.4  Change-of-Position Verbs                                214
4.3.2.5  [- Vector] Verbs                                                215
4.3.2.6  Dialectal Differences With In                           216
4.3.2.7  Thematic Discontinuity                                     219
4.4  Summary                                                                                        222

xii
Chapter 5:  Syntax and Mereology:  Accomplishing an Interface
5.0  Introduction                                                                                    223
5.1  Travis (1999)                                                                                  224
5.1.1  McCawley, Morgan, and Kac                                           224
5.1.2  Dowty, Parsons and Pustejovsky                                     225
5.1.3  Larson, Hale and Keyser                                                  227
5.1.4  Causatives in Tagalog and Malagasy                               229
5.1.5  L-Syntax, S-Syntax, M-Words and S-Words                  231
5.1.6  The Articulated VP Structure                                           233
5.2  Telicity, Affectedness and Boundedness                                         234
5.2.1  Tenny (1987)                                                                   235
5.2.2  Boundedness, Telicity, & the Plus Principle                    236
5.3  Serial Verb Constructions                                                               239
5.3.1  Data on Serial Verb Constructions                                   240
5.3.2  Previous Analyses of SVCs                                             242
5.3.3  Syntactic Tests for SVCs                                                 245
5.3.4  Serial Verb Constructions and Micro-Events                   247
5.3.5  Resultative and Consequential SVCs                               249
5.3.6  Four Possible Patterns                                                     252
5.3.6.1  Distinguished Point With Distinguished
Process                                                        252
5.3.6.2  Two Distinguished Processes                           254
5.3.6.3  Double Unaccusative SVCs                              256
5.3.6.3.1  Keeping the Internal Structure
of the S-Word                                  257
5.3.6.3.2  Altering the Internal Structure
of the S-Word                                  259
5.4  Summary                                                                                         261
Chapter 6:  Summary and Directions for Future Research
6.0  Summary                                                                                         262
6.1  Directions for Future Research                                                       264
6.1.1  The Comparative                                                              264
6.1.2  Binary Contrasts In Other Linguistic Domains                265
6.1.3  The Aspectual Load Hypothesis                                      267
Bibliography                                                                                                     269

1
Chapter One
What is Event Mereology?
1.0      Introduction
While much has been observed and written about aspect in linguistics, it
remains a difficult topic for both syntacticians and semanticists.  Part of the
difficulty lies in the paradoxical nature of aspect:  though it is understood and used
intuitively in languages, aspectual semantics eludes a single, straightforward analysis
due to the diversity of aspectual systems in the world's languages, as well as subtle
variations within a single language.  Yet at the heart of all natural languages, as part
of Universal Grammar, there should be a universal aspectual system with the
flexibility to accommodate the range of possibilities in individual systems of aspect.
Many different attempts in as many frameworks have been made to isolate the
nature of this system (Vendler 1967, Mourelatos 1978, Dowty 1979, Verkuyl 1993,
Kamp & Reyle 1993, to name a few).  However, though the variety of approaches
amount to a mosaic that is tantalizingly close to showing the viewer a complete and
unified picture, the viewer cannot bring the picture into focus because the details are
overwhelming.  In accord with this mosaic metaphor, it is necessary to pull back
from the details so that the essence of aspect may emerge.
In this thesis, I develop on the basis of simple principles, a theory of aspect
called Event Mereology (EM) to identify the features inherent in a universal
aspectual system.  Its very name captures the essence of the theory:  events are basic
ontic objects, and aspect is calculated through mereological means, i.e., by the parts
defined from the properties of these events.  The aspectual class to which an
expression belongs depends upon the part-whole relation of the items in its
denotation.
Some universal principles of mereology are so fundamental that these
parthood relations are naturally incorporated into linguistic systems, in particular the

2
domains of aspect and nouns.1  For example, the concepts of parthood in Event
Mereology connect a verb of change enter (1a) with its prepositional counterpart
into (1b) by positing semantic features common to both.  As well, EM provides the
means of differentiating progressives (2a) from perfectives (2b), by proposing that
each construction focuses on different parts of the event (the process or the
transition).
(1)
a.
Geoff entered the house.
b.
Geoff went into the house.
(2)
a.
Takako is arriving on Tuesday.
b.
Takako arrived on Tuesday.
Drawing from diverse insights to produce an intuitive and simple analysis of
change that takes advantage of part-whole relations, I develop a new perspective
which uses Event Mereology.  These insights include, but are not limited to, classic
and modern works on verbal aspect (Vendler 1967, Dowty 1979, et al.);
observations on the progressive from Galton (1984); Discourse Representation
Theory or DRT (Kamp & Reyle 1993); and mereological principles from Simons
(1987).  By taking the divergent ideas in these works and considering their
interactions, a coherent picture emerges.
In particular, I argue against localistic theories of aspect, i.e., those analyses
that have been developed based on motional and locational criteria.  Localistic
analyses use spatial primitives to define phenomena of change.  Though spatial
primitives appear to be natural for dealing with purely locational changes (3a,4a),
these spatial concepts must somehow be adapted to account for abstract changes of
state (3b,4b):
                                                
1Mereology (the study of parts and wholes) is inherent in the domain of nouns, e.g., the
distinction between mass and plural count nouns (i.a,b respectively):
(i)
a.
Footwear was on sale.
b.
Shoes were on sale.
Note that in (i.a,b), the nouns refer to the same items, yet the subject-verb agreement is dependent
on whether the noun is classified as mass or plural count.  The difference lies in how the collection
of shoes is viewed:  as a whole (as in i.a) or as many individual parts that are collected together
(i.b).  Thus, the nominal domain requires the theory of parts and wholes to explain the difference
between mass and count nouns.

3
(3)
a.
Eric came home in the night.
b.
A solution came to Eric in the night.
(4)
a.
Eric switched shirts.
b.
Eric switched majors.
For instance, a location-based analysis might treat Eric in (3a) as involving a
moving object in physical space that occupy three successive spatial parts, one after
the other.  Contrast this physical movement with (3b), where a solution is not a
physical entity, and thus cannot move through physical space.  Likewise, in (4b), the
act of switching majors is not a physical act like switching shirts in (4a), but may
simply involve a decision made on the agent's part.  The tripartite division of motion
is graphically represented in (5):
(5)
The data below illustrate two physical motions.  In (6a), the source
corresponds to the store, the internal path to the set of locations between the store
and the post office, and the goal to the post office.  While the three parts may appear
in the order <source, internal path, goal> syntactically, as in (6b), they can vary in
order (6c).2  The theme in (6c) (Esther in her car) moves from the source
(Vancouver) to the goal (Calgary); the internal path passes through at least a point
of reference (the Rocky Mountains), but the internal path excludes Vancouver or
Calgary.3
                                                
2<X,Y,Z> is the notation for an ordered triple, or three things ordered in time.  X precedes Y
temporally, and Y precedes Z temporally.  By commutativity, X also precedes Y.
3That the internal path excludes Vancouver and Calgary is implied, not entailed.  The most salient
scenario excludes passage through the source and goal locations during the travel (e.g., going back
through Vancouver again in a circular course).

4
(6)
a.
Andrew ran from the store to the post office.
b.
Esther drove her car from Vancouver via the Rocky Mountains
to Calgary.
c.
Esther drove her car all the way from Vancouver to Calgary, passing
through the Rocky Mountains on her way.
I argue that localistic analyses are inadequate models of change.  While
spatial information is crucial for any analysis of aspect and change, these localistic
analyses cannot be extrapolated into more generalized theories of change without
attendant conceptual problems.  Critically, change uncontroversially requires
temporal components, which are lacking from spatial notions such as paths.  All
change involves time, but not all change involves place.  Localistic theories treat all
change as change of place.  To handle changes which involve no change of place,
localistic theories must resort to metaphor to explain non-locational change.
Mismatches arise between specifically locational characteristics (7a, 8a) and abstract
states (7b, 8b), because not every use of a locational verb has three parts:
(7)
a.
Martha Jo entered the Faculty Club.
b.
Martha Jo entered the lottery draw.
(8)
a.
Martha Jo entered the law school.
b.
Martha Jo entered law school.
For example, in (7a), Martha Jo was entering the Faculty Club, performing a
distinctly physical movement.  It can be argued that the physical path taken by the
agent can be divided into three parts, i.e., the area exterior to the Club, the doorway
she passes through, and the interior of the Club.  However, it is difficult to find an
analog of the middle phase for (7b), where Martha Jo bought a ticket but has not yet
become a participant in the lottery.  Here the act of entrance is abstract:  originally
Martha Jo (m) is not a member of the set of people who are in the lottery (L).  By
buying a ticket, Martha Jo has now become a member of the set of people who are
playing in the lottery.  It is unclear whether there is, or even can be, an intermediate
stage (i.e., Internal Path) between the states where Martha Jo was not participating in
the lottery (m ∉L at t1) and her participating in it (m ∉L at t2), shown in (9).

5
(9)
Thus, one concern explored in this thesis is whether metaphor is a valid
linguistic device in the calculus of aspect, a necessary condition for localism to be
justified as the basis for all kinds of change.  Yet, there is no cogent theory of
metaphor.  It is of no explanatory help to rely on something that is even more
obscure than what it is being used to explain, say some:  i.e., explaining the obscure
by the more obscure.
The approach developed herein obviates the problem of metaphor by
positing events as ontic objects, which naturally include the temporal dimension.
Events have natural parts.  The aspectual system takes advantage of these natural
parts to project corresponding parts (phases) onto the timeline.  These phases
abstract away from the extra information provided in the event, so that the aspectual
system does not need to handle information extraneous in its calculation.  By
calculating aspect with respect to an event's phases, we are able to deal with the
temporal component of change naturally.
On another level, this thesis aims to clarify and simplify certain issues in
aspectual semantics, which in turn can be used to explain syntactic phenomena.  The
goal is to establish a system that does not depend on encyclopedic knowledge or
common sense, but rather relies on a small set of simple principles that interact to
produce the array of aspectual phenomena observed.  Economy in linguistic
representation is thus actively sought in the development of EM.
While certain problems in aspect may have important ramifications in
philosophical discussions, only issues directly relating to syntactic or semantic
representations are incorporated into the linguistic analysis.  I will argue that some

6
concerns, like homogeneity, may be pertinent to philosophical problems, but they are
not for the aspectual system.  This view is balanced by ensuring that the simple
tenets of EM are still capable of generating the range of empirical data.  The vast
array of aspectual systems have in common a set of uncomplicated mechanisms; this
set of mechanisms constitute global mereological principles that can be tailored by
local mereological principles unique to each language.
This idea of global versus local mereology has significant impact on the
status of localism:  EM does not deny that localistic concepts like source and goal
are important in verbs of locational change.  Clearly, they are important.  The
universal properties of change, whether they are cross-linguistic universals (e.g.,
similarities between English and Slavic aspect; cf. Slabakova 1998) or cross-
categorial universals (e.g., similarities in English between verbs and prepositions
involved with change, as was shown in 1a,b), belong in the domain of global
mereology.  Local mereologies target more specific types of parthood that may
participate in semantic interpretation, including language-specific differences and
parthood ideas required for locations (since there are some concepts that apply only
to spatial phenomena, and which require additional rules).  This thesis discusses
how the global and local aspects of EM interact.
Chapter One introduces the problem of representing change.  In §1.1, I
begin by discussing the nature of change in semantics.  In §1.2, I examine motion
verb classes; in §1.3, I show that verbs of change extend beyond simply verbs of
locational change into other semantic domains.  In §1.4, I explore in detail a
localistic theory, that of Asher & Sablayrolles (1993).  I point out areas in which
that theory can be improved, including the use of terminology and ontological
concepts from Simons (1987) pertaining to events and their parts that are better
suited for a general theory of change.

7
1.1      Why Study Change?
It is intuitive that a movement involves a kind of change in space (10a).
However, movement is not the only kind of change possible.  In fact, language can
express changes in states of being (10b) and possession (10c):
(10)
a.
John got into the car.
spatial
b.
John got taller.
state of being
c.
John got a new cat.
possessional
The essence of change could be defined as a contrast between two valuations
of a single predicate at different times.  What the changes above have in common is
that at an earlier point in time (t1), a predicate (e.g., be in the car, have a new cat)
was false of John.  Then, at a later point in time (t2), the predicate is true of John.
This understanding of change is based not only on intuition, but has formed the
basis of theories of change and motion for centuries, from Aristotle onward.  More
recently, the same idea has been put forth in linguistics by Von Wright (1965).  Von
Wright posits a transition relation T, which means 'and next'.  Thus, pTq means 'p
and then q', or 'p is temporally ordered before q'.  Versions of this have been
discussed in Dowty (1979), Landman (1991), among others.
When verbs of change are examined, however, there is a tendency to
overlook changes of possession and changes of states in favour of motion verbs.
There are many reasons for this attraction:  it is easy to find examples of motion
verbs; there is great variety in the range of motion verb classes; they appear to be
more numerous than verbs of change of possession or states (but see §1.3);
movements are physically perceptible and thus it is easier to dissect the parts of a
concrete motion rather than with an abstract change.  Given these reasons, there has
been much more attention paid to motion verbs in the literature than non-motion
verbs.
I turn to Asher & Sablayrolles (1994) (A&S) for the definitions of location,
position and posture, which are examinations of finer-grained distinctions in

8
motional phenomena.  I will then use this information, along with an overview of
other authors on the same topic, to motivate the necessity and appropriateness of a
generalized theory of change using event primitives.  It will be argued that even more
is to be learned about the mechanisms of change by focusing our analysis on event
mereology than locational concepts.
I will also show that there is a preponderance of verbs that do not involve
just locations, but other kinds of changes (§1.3).  I argue that there are sufficient
verbs in English that do not involve spatial displacement, but do involve change in
other types of domains.  Thus, it would make no sense to restrict ourselves to
locational concepts, when so much of the data is non-motional.  This is not to deny
that spatial changes have properties unique to the spatial domain; I will argue that
this is a result of the difference between global mereology and local mereologies.
As mentioned previously, global mereology captures the set of rules that are
operative for all instances of change.  Local mereologies, on the other hand, can be
thought of as domain-specific rules, of which location is one.  The rules of global
mereology are present in all local mereologies, but not all rules in local mereologies
qualify as global mereological principles.  An analogy of the difference between
global and local mereology is, federal (global) laws are obeyed in all provinces of
Canada, but provincial (local) laws vary from province to province.
1.2      Subclasses of Motion Verbs
A consequence of the greater focus on motion phenomena has led to a
correspondingly closer scrutiny of the subclasses of motion verbs.  For example,
A&S posit four classes of motion verbs:  change of location (11a), change of
position (11b), inertial change of position (11c), and change of posture (11d).
(11)
a.
change of location
entrer
to enter
(CoL)
arriver
to arrive
accourir
to rush up
sortir
to go out

9
b.
change of position
se déplacer
to move around
(Cpn)
circulerto circulate
descendre
to go down
s'éleverto go up
c.
inertial change of 
courir
to run
position   (inertial Cpn)
danser
to dance
voler
to fly
d.
change of posture
s'asseoir
to sit down
(Cpr)
se baisser
to bend down
se pencher
to lean over/towards/
  forward/back
Let us look at the definitions of location, position and posture in A&S.  In
essence, a location under A&S is a portion of space, whereas a position is a portion
of surface of a location.  Locations are associated with a functionality (explained
below) and are lexicalized by real lexical items or a preposition with a lexical item.
In contrast, positions do not have functionality or 'real associated lexical items', but
can only be lexicalized by deictic expressions like here, this position, and the
position she occupies now, and are dependent on the entity used for their definition.
Functionality, as it has been defined by A&S, contrasts locations and
positions.  Locations are 'portions of space which can be 'designated' in natural
language' and 'can be recognized as one in which certain types of activity take
place' (A&S, p.170).  It is clarified in their footnote 7, reproduced in (12):
(12)
For example, a kitchen is normally a place one recognizes as
being one where people can cook and eat, a street one on
which cars and people move, a house a place in which people
live ... In contrast, positions (see Definition 2) have no such
functionality.  An unmarked part of the street has no
associated activity and is not recognizable as such.  It can
only be defined deictically (which may involve referring to
the position of some object by ostension or by the use of
coordinates).     (A&S, p.206)
A posture is defined as a special way to be inside one's 'pragmatic shape'.
Put another way, an entity may have many parts that can assume different
orientations with respect to its other parts.  The entity would have a specific shape at
any time involving the sum of its parts; that specific shape is called a posture.

10
Importantly, a change in posture has roughly the same location throughout the
change.  For example, neither kneel or lean (13a,b) involve a remarkable movement
from the original location or position.
(13)
a.
Felix knelt down on the bench.
b.
Felix leaned out of the window.
A&S classify (14a) as a change of location verb (entrer, 'to enter').  (14b) is
an example of a change of position verb (se déplacer, 'to move around'), and
contrasts with (14c), which is an inertial change of position verb (courir, 'to run').
(14d) is a change of posture verb (s'appuyer, 'to lean').4
(14)
a.
Demain j'entrerai à la cuisine, sous un pretexte quelconque.
'Tomorrow, I will enter the kitchen under some pretext.'
CoL  (A&S, p. 168)
b.
Pauline se déplace en bus au centre ville.
'Pauline takes the bus in the centre of the city.'
lit. 'Pauline moves around on a bus in the city.'
Cpn  (A&S, p. 171)
c.
Les joueurs courent sur le terrain de football.
'The players run on the soccer field.'
inertial Cpn (A&S, p. 168)
d.
Le gardien de but s'appuie contre le mur.5
'The goalkeeper leans against the wall.'
Cpr
A&S distinguishes change of position verbs from inertial change of position
verbs with the sur place 'on the spot' test.  Those verbs which can be combined with
sur place only suggest a change in position, whereas those that cannot imply a
change in position.
To qualify as a change of location verb, A&S require that there is actual
change with respect to the reference location.  In the cases of (14a-d), the reference
locations are respectively la cuisine 'the kitchen', centre ville 'the centre of the city', le
                                                
4Change of posture verbs can double as stative verbs.  We are taking the active reading where
Andrew was not leaning against the spiral staircase in the first place.  See the next chapter for a
discussion of stative verbs.
5Adapted from A&S:
(i)
Le gardien de but s'appuie contre le montant de ses buts.
'The goalkeeper leans against his goalpost.' (A&S, p. 168)

11
terrain de football 'the soccer field', and le mur 'the wall').  Thus, there is only a
change of location in (14a).  In contrast, centre ville in (14b) remains as the
background location within which Pauline moves around; the location of the moving
object stays constant throughout the event.  Likewise, it is argued that (14c) and
(14d) do not involve true change in location, as A&S have defined location.
Furthermore, change of posture verbs differ from the other three classes in
that the movement only involves parts of the entity, not the whole entity as required
by CoL, Cpn and inertial Cpn verbs.  It is argued in A&S that a Cpr verb (15a)
cannot have the meaning in (15b):
(15)
a.
Gaby se penche par la fenêtre.
Gaby leans out of the window.
(A&S, p. 172)
b.
Gaby passe par/tombe de la fenêtre.
Gaby goes out through/falls out of the window.
(A&S, p. 172)
In A&S, change in location, position and posture are all analyzed as
tripartite.  Only the granularity of the position and posture predicates are different.
This is shown in the different types of predicates used (16a-c), but it remains true
that each kind of verb requires a three-part division:
(16)
a.
change of location
Source(e), SIP(e), Goal(e)
b.
change of position
Init-position(e), SIP-position(e), Final-position(e)
c.
change of posture
Init-posture(e), SIP-posture(e), Final-posture(e)
Asher & Sablayrolles (1994) compare their four subclasses of motion to
eight previous approaches in the literature, distinguishing syntactic approaches
(Wunderlich 1991, Maienborn 1992, Guillet 1990) from semantic approaches
(Hays 1989, Dervillez-Bastuji 1982, Lamiroy 1986, Boons 1985, Laur 1991).  They
argue that their analysis correlates well with all these analyses, as is shown in table
(17).  Despite some differences in classification, tests and nomenclature, verbs of
movement on the whole exhibit the same properties, showing great compatibility
between the different analyses.

12
(17)
(Figure 8, A&S, p. 205)
Asher &
Sablayrolles
verbs of change of location
verbs of change
of position
verbs of inertial
change of
position
verbs of change
of posture
Wunderlich
verbs of
placement
verbs of
movement
verbs of location
Maienborn
Bewegungsverben
Positionsverben
Guillet
Verbes locatifs
other verbs
Hays
Transposition verbs
non-
transposition
verbs
Dervillez-
Bastuji
Displacement verbs                                   Agitation verbs
Lamiroy
verbs of direction
verbs of displacement
verbs of the
movement of
the body
Boons
displacement verbs
<-- (in the facts) AND
(by definition) ->
motion verbs
Laur
Initial and Final verbs
Medial verbs
motion verbs
We have already seen that there are some problems associated with a
tripartite analysis, which can likewise extend to changes in posture and position.
The predicates may differ, but the same arguments could be made for Cpn and Cpr
verbs that only a final state and a complementary initial state are required to capture
the idea of change.
Consider for instance (18a) and (18b), respectively change of position and
change of posture verbs.  In (18a), there is a point at which Andrew has completed
his action of descending the staircase.  That distinguished point is the focus of the
event, emphasizing that the action is completed.6  We know it to be true that before
the distinguished point, Andrew has not yet finished traversing the staircase, if he
began the motion at all.  Again, a two-phase analysis proves adequate in representing
the linguistic information that is to be conveyed by the Cpn verb.
(18)
a.
Andrew descended the spiral staircase.
b.
Andrew leaned against the spiral staircase.
                                                
6The past tense marker on the verb coerces a completive reading, i.e., the event has concluded,
establishing a point of change.  See §4.2 for more on coercion and the interaction of -ed and -ing.

13
Likewise, we can represent the change of posture verb as a two-phase change
in (18b).  While (18b) could be interpreted as a state, it can also be interpreted as a
change from not leaning against the staircase to leaning against it:  from one state
to its complementary state.  While the default interpretation of lean seems to be that
of change from an upright, standing position to the leaning position, note that
Andrew could have been kneeling at first, or in any other posture before he adopted
a leaning posture against the staircase.  Take the example of Andrew sitting on a bar
stool next to the spiral staircase, while leaning backward against the staircase (19a).
This scenario is just as reasonable as one where Andrew is in a standing position
(19b).
(19)
a.
Andrew sat leaning against the spiral staircase.
b.
Andrew stood leaning against the spiral staircase.
The A&S subclasses of motion verbs treat changes of location, position, and
posture all separately, yet it has been demonstrated that these three kinds of change
all reflect a very distinctively localistic tripartite division, as was shown in (16a-c).  A
two-phase analysis of change in these three subclasses of motion is shown to be
possible, and we will explore this non-tripartite treatment of change in more detail
below.
1.3      Non-Motion Verbs of Change
There are two kinds of data that we want to consider that will help clarify the
nature of change.  One logical step is to investigate whether or not there are
sufficient non-motional verbs (and prepositions) to justify a non-localistic analysis.
If there are many non-motional verbs, then it becomes a non-trivial question of how
changes are dealt with in general.  The second type of data that is relevant are motion
verbs with non-motional interpretations.  When motion verbs are used with non-
localistic senses, we can show that the extrapolation of localism to the non-localistic
senses results in redundant lexical information.

14
In this section, I argue that there are many verbs that do fit the description of
non-motion verbs.  Some of these verbs will be descriptive of physical actions, and
as a consequence involve motion of one type or another (20a).  However, there will
be non-motional applications of these verbs (e.g., 20b), as well as verbs which are
strongly abstract, lacking a physical application (suspect, as in 20c).  Contrast (20c)
with (20d), where the object of the verb suspect appears concrete, but in its actual
interpretation involves an abstract element.  Thus, Jasper suspects the chairs of being
in a certain state.  Examples are given in (21a-c):
(20)
a.
Jasper arranged the chairs.
b.
Jasper arranged a meeting.
c.
Jasper suspected Mary of being unfaithful.
d.
Jasper suspected the chairs.
(21)
a.
Jasper suspected the chairs of being unsturdy.
b.
Jasper suspected the chairs of being illicit goods.
c.
Jasper suspected the chairs of being booby-trapped.
Drawing from Levin (1993), I list below several sets of English verbs that do
not necessarily involve motion.7  The majority of these verbs can also be argued to
involve some kind of change, whether they be actual changes of state or states of
change (following Galton 1984; see §2.2 and §3.1).  For example, discover (22a) is
a change-of-state verb, whereas search (22b) is a state-of-change verb:
(22)
a.
Doug discovered the missing dime.
b.
Doug searched for the missing dime.
Of course, this listing is not meant to be comprehensive, but representative of
the diversity of verbs involving change.  Levin has analyzed her set of English verbs
both in terms of syntactic behaviour and semantic criteria.  Since Levin uses her
semantic classes to test her classification of syntactic patterns, I have selected only
semantic classes instead of listing the verbs by their syntactic behaviour.
                                                
7Some of the verbs listed in the classes may have motional interpretation, e.g. criss-cross (A1),
stalk (H3).

15
(23)
A
Verbs of Combining and Attaching
(L22=Levin's class 22)
A1
Amalgamate Verbs (L22.2)
• amalgamate (WITH), affiliate, alternate, associate, coalesce,
coincide, compare, confederate, confuse, conjoin, consolidate,
contrast, correlate, criss-cross, entwine, entangle, harmonize,
incorporate, integrate, interchange, interconnect, interlace, interlink,
interlock, intermingle, interrelate, intersperse, intertwine, interweave,
mate, muddle, ?pair, rhyme, ?team, total, unify, unite
• engage (TO), introduce, marry, oppose, wed
B
Verbs of Creation and Transformation (L26)
B1
Build Verbs (L26.1)
• build, arrange, assemble, bake, blow, carve, cast, chisel, churn,
compile, cook, crochet, cut, develop, embroider, fashion, fold, forge
(metal), grind, grow, hack, hammer, hatch, knit, make, mold, pound,
roll, sculpt, sew, shape, spin (wool), stitch, weave, whittle
B2
Grow Verbs (L26.2)
• grow, develop, evolve, hatch, mature
B3
Verbs of Preparing (L26.3)
• prepare (meal), bake (cake), blend (drink), boil (egg, tea), brew
(coffee), clean, clear (path), cook (meal), fix (meal), fry (egg), grill,
hardboil (egg), iron, light (fire), mix (drink), poach (egg), pour
(drink), roast (chicken), roll, run (bath), scramble (egg), set (table),
softboil (egg), toast, toss (salad), wash
B4
Create Verbs (L26.4)
• create, coin, compose, compute, concoct, construct, derive, design,
dig, fabricate, form, invent, manufacture, mint, model, organize,
produce recreate, style, synthesize
B5
Knead verbs (L26.5)
• knead, beat, bend, coil, collect, compress, fold, freeze, melt, shake,
squash, squish, squeeze, twirl, twist, wad, whip, wind, work
B6
Turn Verbs (L26.6)
• turn, alter, change, convert, metamorphose, transform, transmute
B7
Performance Verbs (L26.7)
• perform (play), chant (prayer), choreograph (dance), compose
(symphony), dance (waltz), direct (movie, play), draw (picture), hum
(tune), intone (prayer), paint (picture), play (music, game), produce
(movie), recite (poem), silkscreen, sing (song), spin (story), take
(picture), whistle (tune), write (book)
C
Engender Verbs (L27)
• engender, beget, cause, create, generate, shape, spawn
D
Calve Verbs (L28)
• calve, cub, fawn, foal, kitten, lamb, litter, pup, spawn, whelp

16
E
Verbs with Predicative Complements (L29)
E1
Appoint Verbs (L29.1)
• appoint, acknowledge, adopt, consider, crown, deem, designate,
elect, esteem, imagine, mark, nominate, ordain, proclaim, rate, reckon,
report, want
E2
Characterize Verbs (L29.2)
• characterize, accept, address, appreciate, bill, cast, certify, choose,
cite, class, classify, confirm, count, define, describe, diagnose,
disguise, employ, engage, enlist, enroll, enter, envisage, establish,
esteem, hail, herald, hire, honor, identify, imagine, incorporate, induct,
intend, lampoon, offer, oppose, paint, portray, praise, qualify, rank,
recollect, recommend, regard, reinstate, reject, remember, represent,
repudiate, reveal, salute, see, select, stigmatize, take, train, treat, use,
value, view, visualize
E3
Dub verbs (L29.3)
• dub, anoint, baptize, brand, call, christen, consecrate, crown, decree,
label, make, name, nickname, pronounce, rule, stamp, style, term, vote
E4
Declare verbs (L29.4)
• declare, adjudge, adjudicate, assume, avow, believe, confess, fancy,
find, judge, presume, profess, prove, suppose, think, warrant
E5
Conjecture verbs (L29.5)
• conjecture, admit, allow, assert, deny, discover, feel, figure, grant,
guarantee, guess, hold, know, maintain, mean, observe, recognize,
repute, show, suspect
E6
Masquerade verbs (L29.6)
• masquerade, act, behave, camouflage, count, officiate, pose, qualify,
rank, rate, serve
E7
Orphan verbs (L29.7)
• orphan, apprentice, canonize, cripple, cuckold, knight, martyr,
outlaw, pauper, recruit, widow
E8
Captain verbs (L29.8)
• captain, boss, bully, butcher, butler, caddy, champion, chaperone,
chauffeur, clerk, coach, cox, crew, doctor, emcee, escort, guard, host,
model, mother, nurse, partner, pilot, pioneer, police, referee, shepherd,
skipper, sponsor, star, tailor, tutor, umpire, understudy, usher, valet,
volunteer, witness
F
Verbs of Perception (L30)
F1
See verbs (L30.1)
• see, detect, discern, feel, hear, notice, sense, smell, taste
F2
Sight verbs (L30.2)
• sight, descry, discover, espy, examine, eye, glimpse, inspect,
investigate, note, observe, overhear, perceive, recognize, regard, savor,
scan, scent, scrutinize, spot, spy, study, survey, view, watch, witness
F3
Peer Verbs (L30.3)

17
• peer, check (on), gape, gawk, gaze, glance, glare, goggle, leer, listen
(to), look, ogle, peek, peep, sniff, snoop (on), squint, stare
G
Verbs of Assessment (L34)
• assess, analyze, audit, evaluate, review, scrutinize, study
H
Verbs of Searching (L35)
H1
Hunt verbs (L35.1)
• hunt, dig, feel, fish, mine, poach, scrounge
H2
Search verbs (L35.2)
• search, advertise, check, comb, dive, drag, dredge, excavate, patrol,
plumb, probe, prospect, prowl, quarry, rake, rifle, scavenge, scour,
scout, shop, sift, trawl, troll, watch
H3
Stalk verbs (L35.3)
• stalk, smell, taste, track
H4
Investigate verbs (L35.4)
• investigate, canvass, explore, examine, frisk, inspect, observe, quiz,
raid, ransack, riffle, scan, scrutinize, survey, tap
H5
Rummage verbs (L35.5)
• rummage, bore, burrow, delve, forage, fumble, grope, leaf, listen,
look, page, paw, poke, rifle, root, scrabble, scratch, snoop, thumb,
tunnel
H6
Ferret verbs (L35.6)
• ferret, nose, seek, tease
I
Destroy verbs (L44)
• destroy, annihilate, blitz, decimate, demolish, devastate, exterminate,
extirpate, obliterate, ravage, raze, ruin, waste, wreck
J
Verbs of Change of State (L45)
J1
Break verbs (L45.1)
• break, chip, crack, crash, crush, fracture, rip, shatter, smash, snap,
splinter, split, tear
J2
Bend verbs (L45.2)
• bend, crease, crinkle, crumple, fold, rumple, wrinkle
J3
Cooking verbs (L45.3)
• cook, bake, barbecue, blanch, boil, braise, broil, brown, charbroil,
charcoal-broil, coddle, crisp, deep-fry, Fench fry, fry, grill, hardboil,
heat, microwave, oven-fry, oven-poach, overcook, pan-broil, pan-fry,
parboil, parch, percolate, perk, plank, poach, pot-roast, rissole, roast,
sauté, scald, scallop, shirr, simmer, softboil, steam, steam-bake, stew,
stir-fry, toast
J4
Entity-Specific Change of State (L45.5)

18
• blister, bloom, blossom, burn, corrode, decay, deteriorate, erode,
ferment, flower, germinate, molder, molt, rot, rust, sprout, stagnate,
swell, tarnish, wilt, wither
J5
Verbs of Calibratable Changes of State (L45.6)
• appreciate, balloon, climb, decline, decrease, depreciate, differ,
diminish, drop, fall, fluctuate, gain, grow, increase, jump, ?mushroom,
plummet, plunge, rocket, rise, skyrocket, soar, surge, tumble, vary
K
Verbs of Existence (L47)
K1
Verbs of Entity-Specific Modes of Being (L47.2)
• billow, bloom, blossom, blow, breathe, bristle, bulge, burn, cascade,
corrode, decay, decompose, effervesce, erode, ferment, fester, fizz,
flow, flower, foam, froth, germinate, grow, molt, propagate, rage,
ripple, roil, rot, rust, seethe, smoke, smolder, spread, sprout, stagnate,
stream, sweep, tarnish, trickle, wilt, wither
Below, I take a verb from each class and give an example of its use with both
an abstract and physical use of that verb (if applicable).  The (a) sentences are
physical, and (b) sentences are abstract.  Verbs from these thirty-five classes are
more than adequate to establish that there are many non-motional verbs, and a
generalized analysis of change would account for both non-motion and motion
verbs.
(24)
A1
a.
The two lovers were united.
b.
The two countries were united.
B1
a.
Bill and Mary wanted to build a house together.
b.
Bill and Mary wanted to build a future together.
B2
a.
Bridget grew day by day.
b.
Bridget's trust grew day by day.
B3
a.
Brian poured his marbles out.
b.
Brian poured his heart out.
B4
a.
Bethany organized her books.
b.
Bethany organized her thoughts.
B5
a.
Boris collected the loose change.
b.
Boris collected anecdotes.
B6
a.
Belle changed the lightbulb.
b.
Belle changed her mind.
B7
a.
Blake played hockey.
b.
Blake played mind games.

19
C
a.
Connie created a stained glass window.
b.
Connie created a story.
D
a.
The fish spawned its eggs.
b.
The announcement spawned dissent.
E1
a.
The senator adopted a child.
b.
The senator adopted a motion.
E2
a.
Erwin selected a CD to play.
b.
Erwin selected a word to say.
E3
a.
Edna labeled the cannister as dangerous.
b.
Edna labeled her manager as dangerous.
E4
a.
Eugene found Ellen a cheap apartment.
b.
Eugene found Ellen guilty.
E5
a.
no  physical uses for Conjecture verbs8
b.
Ellen maintained that she was innocent.
E6
a.
Elwy camouflaged his jeep.
b.
Elwy camouflaged his accent.
E7
a.
no physical uses for Orphan verbs
b.
Queen Elizabeth outlawed hunting.
E8
a.
Ethan guarded the prince.
b.
Ethan guarded the secret.
F1
a.
Felicia felt the carpet.
b.
Felicia felt sad.
F2
a.
Fred savoured the caviar.
b.
Fred savoured the irony of the situation.
F3
a.
Freya listened to the waterfall.
b.
Freya listened to her heart.
G
a.
Giles studied the book.
b.
Giles studied music.
H1
a.
Henrietta dug a hole out of the ground.
b.
Henrietta dug a confession out of the groundskeeper.
H2
a.
Hugh searched the metallurgical lab.
b.
Hugh searched his memory.
                                                
8The sentence Ellen maintained the engine has the meaning Ellen kept the engine in working
order, and may be semantically linked to Ellen maintained her innocence.  Both have a meaning
of continued process.  However, this appears unique to maintain and not the conjecture verbs as a
whole.  Ellen observed the man walking and Ellen observed Passover may be another instance of
a conjecture verb that has both physical and abstract uses.

20
H3
a.
Harriet smelled the rose.
b.
Harriet smelled a rat. figuratively
H4
a.
Howard raided the fridge for a midnight snack.
b.
Howard raided his mind for ideas.
H5
a.
Hilda rummaged through her drawers.
b.
Hilda rummaged through her recollections.
H6
a.
Hank sought his long lost love.
b.
Hank sought closure.
I
a.
Ingrid's boat was destroyed.
b.
Ingrid's career was destroyed.
J1
a.
Jim broke Jame's leg.
b.
Jim broke Jame's concentration.
J2
a.
Jane bent the stick.
b.
Jane bent the rules.
J3
a.
Jules roasted the turkey.
b.
Jules roasted the guest at the Friar's Club.
J4
a.
The flower blossomed.
b.
Love blossomed.
J5
a.
Jeananne gained two pounds.
b.
Jeananne gained my respect.
K1
a.
The silver was tarnished.
b.
His reputation was tarnished.
It appears from the above that the object of the verb controls the
interpretation, whether it be physical (24 K1a) or abstract (e.g., 24 K1b).  If the
object is concrete, then there is a physical change that occurs; an abstract concept
like reputation can only change in an abstract sense.
Zeugma appears to be of use here.  Cruse (1986) proposes as one of the
tests of ambiguity, that independent senses of a lexical form cannot be
simultaneously used without causing a degree of oddness (zeugma); i.e., the two
meanings are antagonistic.  A classic example of zeugma is given below, where John
and his driver's license select different senses of the verb expire:
(25)
?John and his driver's license expired last Thursday.

21
Cruse (1995) argues that polysemy deals with the degree of distinctness
between two or more readings, whereas polylexy is the extent to which separate
entries in the lexicon are justified.  He assumes that polylexy is a sub-class of
polysemic variants, and that a certain degree of polysemy must be demonstrated in
order for polylexy to be relevant.  It seems that there must be distinct polysemy in
the cases presented in (24), as the examples in (26a,b) show.  There is sufficient
distinctness in the two senses, the strictly physical and the strictly abstract.
However, it is not clear if we require polylexy.
(26)
a.
Jane bent the stick.  It broke.
b.
?Jane bent the rules.  They broke.
If our goal is to unite physical and abstract changes into a single analysis of
change, then we need there to be a connection between the concrete and abstract
senses of the verb.  It is clear that we do not have full ambiguity characterized by
discreteness and antagonism (Cruse 1995), as in the case of the two senses of bank.
(27)
a.
I moored the boat to the bank.
b.
I robbed the bank.
For a verb like bend, it remains part of the meaning that an agent caused
something normally rigid (either a stick or a set of rules) to yield to his intent.  The
abstract sense is a metaphorical extension of the physical sense, and the vast range
of data shown in (24) confirms that the abstract sense is regularly derived from the
physical.
Thus, I propose that there is no polylexy involved, but that for verbs of
change, metaphoric extension creates a sense spectrum (Cruse 1986), on which
physical and abstract senses are merely 'local senses'.  Zeugma arises between
senses which are more distantly separated points on the sense spectrum.  In one
sense, the physical use of a verb establishes a point of origin on the sense spectrum,
and metaphorical uses draw out the points along the sense spectrum.  The type of

22
object, i.e., the degree of abstractness of the object, establishes a 'metaphoric'
distance from the 'original' use of the verb.
1.4      A Localistic Analysis:  Asher & Sablayrolles (1994)
That the fundamentals of a theory of aspect be generalizable for most (if not
all) languages is an objective of this thesis.  If the human capacity for perceiving
change and motion is universal, then the human linguistic capacity for expressing
change and motion is likely to make use of certain language universals in the
linguistic expression of change over time.9  The underlying linguistic mechanisms
involved in expressing aspect must be general enough to account for aspectual
universals, yet be sufficiently flexible to generate the diversity of aspectual systems
observed across languages.
The simplest way to expound the problem is to investigate one example of a
localistic analysis.  Through a detailed critical analysis of the chosen framework, the
factors motivating the abandonment of localism as the driving force behind aspect
will be used as guidelines in developing the precepts of EM.  The remainder of this
chapter will explore one particular localistic analysis (Asher & Sablayrolles 1994),
isolating the motivations for departing from that theory and for developing Event
Mereology.  The structure of this investigation will roughly mirror the structure of
the thesis, where the key issues motivating EM are formalized and examined fully
with supporting data.  Once the key elements of EM have been introduced,
applications of EM will be given, in particular its functionality in syntax.
In this subsection, I present an investigation of the location-based analysis in
Asher & Sablayrolles (1994), referred to as A&S.  A&S specifically addresses
                                                
9I am addressing the interface between perception and semantics, i.e., translating perception into
components used by the language faculty, rather than cultural differences in the understanding of
time and change.  In other words, I am not addressing differences in temporal philosophy across
cultures as in Sapir-Whorfian terms.  For instance, a culture that considers time to be cyclical
would be unlikely to have such views incorporated into their language.

23
French motion verbs and prepositions, but their analysis also extends to English
verbs and prepositions.  It is also chosen because it is a precise and well-developed
theory, amenable to critical discussion.
A&S's analysis is a good beginning on a difficult problem, bringing some
essential insights to bear.  One question that arises is whether or not a localistic
analysis like A&S provides mechanisms that are general enough for expressing
change.  I use A&S to pinpoint the features inherent in a localistic theory of aspect.
Then, the localistic analysis in A&S is explored with respect to the following issues.
Firstly, the localistic theory overgenerates.  A&S advocates a system of
lexical representations with three parameters when one of the parameters is
extraneous.  The parameters operate on a path-based system that overgenerates the
number of motion verb classes.  It is possible to introduce modifications to their
analysis of change and constrain the number of verb classes while preserving certain
of their insights into the behaviour of motion verbs.
Secondly, the localistic theory appears to mix linguistic and extra-linguistic
considerations.  We can improve the A&S analysis by considering also eventualities
without spatiotemporal location of the concrete type.  In other words, the inclusion
of abstract eventualities, such as the (b) examples listed in (24) earlier, will allow
additional insights into phenomena of change.  There are two types which are
relevant:  motion verbs used in abstract contexts (27a), and non-motion verbs (27b).
(27)
a.
John ran into trouble.
b.
John forgot his troubles.
A similar example from French involves the verb décoller, which means 'to
take off' or 'to unstick'.  This verb can be used for an airplane taking off (28a) and
for taking a picture off a wall (28b).  The former is figurative, whereas the latter is
the standard use of the verb.  Naturally, a unification of the standard and figurative
uses of the same verb is desired.  It will be shown that a mereology of events will
ameliorate the A&S analysis.

24
(28)
a.
L'avion a décollé.
The plane took off.
b.
Jean a décollé la photo.
Jean took the photo down.
1.4.1 Localism and Change in A&S
Asher & Sablayrolles (1994) is one of a long tradition of works on aspect,
motion and spatial phenomena (Gruber 1976, Cienki 1989, Taylor 1989, Hawkins
1993, inter alia) that assume that a typical path of motion, i.e., the spatial projection
of a movement, has three distinct parts that are ordered temporally.  These parts -
Source, Internal Path and Goal - are grammaticalized.10  The English prepositions
in (29), along with the longer list given in (30a-c), are often cited as evidence for the
grammatical necessity of these three path components, because they seem to pick
out specific parts of the motion.  Source, Internal Path and Goal prepositions are
also respectively called initial, medial, and final prepositions in A&S.
(29)
Our bus traveled from Toronto via Kingston to Montréal.
(30)
a.
SOURCE initial
from, off (of), out of, ...
b.
INTERNAL PATH medial
via, past, through, across, ...
c.
GOAL final
to, into, onto, ...
In a localistic analysis of change, these three non-overlapping spatial
segments are adopted as semantic primitives, in the sense that the lexical
specification of a verb of motion is broken down in terms of these three segments.
All three segments are obligatory and independent of one another in the theory in
order for the verb to be properly interpreted.
A&S propose a typology of French motion verbs and prepositions based on
just such a tripartite perspective of change.  Their analysis of events requires change
                                                
10The intermediate component has been called by various names in the literature:  Strict Internal
Path (Asher & Sablayrolles 1994), the perlative (Cienki 1989), IMPERFECTIVE PATH
(Hawkins 1993).  In this thesis, the term Path will refer to a path of motion that includes the
source, the internal path and the goal, whereas Internal Path will refer specifically to a Path
modulo the Source and Goal segments,and will be a term used synonymously with Strict Internal
Path (SIP) in this thesis.

25
to be lexically encoded for each of the three spatial components (Source, Internal
Path and Goal).  Under the A&S theory, each spatial component is a parameter with
seven possible settings.
1.4.1.1
Seven Proximity Relations
The seven possible settings for the three spatial parameters are elementary
spatial proximity relations:  Inner-Halo, Inner-Transit, Contact, Contact-Transit,
Outer-Halo, Outer-Transit  and Outer-Most.  These spatial primitives are defined
with respect to a reference location (RefLoc) that acts as a landmark for the motion
in question.  For example, in (31a) the reference location is Chicago, embedded in a
prepositional phrase, whereas in (31b) it is the downtown station, the direct object of
the verb.
(31)
a.
Lisa's plane landed in Chicago.
b.
Mark's train left the downtown station.
Under A&S, a change of location (CoL) verb encodes the proximity of the
reference location over the Source, Internal Path and Goal periods that extend over
the event's duration with the seven spatial relations, given verbally in (32a-g) (from
A&S):
(32)
a.
Inner-Halo(x,y): x is strictly in the functional inside of y, i.e., x is in
a non-tangential part of y.
b.
Contact(x,y):  x is in the functional outside of y, and x and y are in
contact but share no (internal) points.
c.
Outer-Halo(x,y,C):  x is in the functional outside of y, but at a
distance less than the critical distance C (beyond which is the area
which is not in proximity of y).
d.
Outer-Most(x,y,C):  x is in the functional outside of y and at a
distance greater than the critical distance, i.e., x is not in proximity of
y.
e.
Inner-Transit(x,y):  x shares at least one of its points with the
frontier of y, i.e., x is externally connected with y.
f.
Contact-Transit(x,y):  x shares a point with the boundary which
delimits the fact of being in contact with y and the fact of being in an
Outer-Halo relationship with y.
g.
Outer-Transit(x,y):  x shares a point with the boundary which
delimits the fact of being in the outer-halo of y and the fact of being
in an Outer-Most relationship with y.

26
The same relations are expressed formally in (33a-g), preceded by their
abbreviations (also from A&S):11
(33)
a.
IH
Inner-Halo(x,y) ≡def PP(x,f-int(y,x))
b.
C
Contact(x,y) ≡def PP(x,f-ext(y,x)) ∧ weak-contact(x,y)
c.
OH
Outer-Halo(x,y) ≡def PP(x,prox(y,x,C))
d.
OM
Outer-Most(x,y) ≡def PP(x,f-ext(y,x))
∧ ¬PP(x,prox(y,x,C))
e.
IT
Inner-Transit(x,y) ≡def EC(x,y)
f.
CT
Contact-Transit(x,y) ≡def Contact(x,y) ∧ Outer-Halo(x,y,C)
g.
OT
Outer-Transit(x,y) ≡def Outer-Halo(x,y,C)
∧ Outer-Most(x,y,C)
The actual organization of the seven generic locations is graphically
illustrated in (34), with the abbreviations as shown in (33).  A&S subclassifies CoL
verbs according to the zones that the object occupies successively at the three
different periods of the motion.12
(34)
(Asher & Sablayrolles 1994, Figure 1, modified)
1.4.1.2
Nine Verb Classes
(35a-i) summarizes the nine classes hypothesized by A&S.  A&S
partitioned 216 French intransitive verbs into ten classes, of which nine are
expressed in terms of locational parameters.13  These nine verb classes are
                                                
11EC(x,y): x is in external contact with y (i.e., touching but no overlap).  PP(x,y):  x is a proper
part of y.
12The object that undergoes movement is referred to variously as cible(x) and mobile(x) in A&S.
13The tenth class, Dévier 'to deviate', is omitted because it involves ideal trajectories and the
deviation of the action from the ideal.  It does not fit into A&S's localistic system, since it
involves a heavy component of modality in its formulation that cannot be dealt with in terms of
parts of a path.  This point will be discussed in further detail in §3.2.3.5, where it will be shown
that Event Mereology can be extended to cover verbs like dévier.

27
subclassified as having initial, medial or final polarity, as they focus on the Source,
Internal Path, and Goal respectively.14
final polarity
Source, Internal Path, Goal
(35)
a.
S'Approcher Approach
OM
OT
OH
b.
Arriver
Arrive
OM
OH
IH
c.
Se poser
Land
OH
CT
C
d.
Entrer
Enter
OH
IT
IH
initial polarity
e.
S'éloigner
Distance-from
OH
OT
OM
f.
Partir
Leave
IH
OH
OM
g.
Décoller
Take-off
C
CT
OH
h.
Sortir
Exit
IH
IT
OH
medial polarity
i.
Passer (par)
Cross
OH
IH
OH
These verbs can be represented by an ordered n-tuple <x, y, z, ..., n> with
each zone represented by a member in the ordered n-tuple.  The localistic analysis of
A&S specifies three distinct and temporally ordered zones, and so each verb is
representable by an ordered triple.  For instance, Sortir can be represented as the
ordered triple <IH,IT,OH>, corresponding to <source, internal path, goal>.
These verb classes are illustrated in the diagrams (36a-e).  The arrow
indicates the complete path of motion, and passes through three different zones.
The tail of the arrow corresponds to the Source, the middle to the Internal Path, and
the arrowhead to the Goal.
                                                
14A&S uses the term median, whereas I use the term medial; the two terms used interchangeably
in this thesis.

28
(36)
a.
S'Approcher
b.
Arriver
c.
Décoller
d.  Sortir
e.  Passer (par)
For instance, (36a) shows the S'Approcher/approach class.15  The motion
begins in Outer-Most, passes through Outer-Transit, and ends in Outer-Halo.
Semantically, this corresponds to the intuition that an approach towards a reference
location does not mean one arrives at the reference location, but rather outside of it.
                                                
15When French verb classes are discussed, the verb representing the class will be used
(S'Approcher class, for example).  When English verb classes are discussed, the English verb
representative is used (e.g., Approach class).  If both are used (French/English class), the latter
glosses the verb before the slash.

29
If we reverse the polarity of motion (i.e., with the arrowhead on the other end
instead), then we derive the counterpart, the S'éloigner class.
(36b) shows another final polarity verb class:  Arriver, where the moving
object enters the Inner-Halo of the reference location.  Its initial polarity counterpart
is the Partir class.  Likewise, (36c) and (36d) show initial polarity verb classes
Décoller and Sortir, which have final polarity counterparts Se poser and Entrer,
respectively.  (36e) illustrates a medial polarity verb class, Passer (par).  This class
is unique in that there are no counterparts in polarity.
1.4.1.3
Sixteen Spatial Prepositions
A&S also classifies spatial preposition with spatial relations to indicate their
positional and/or directional properties.  A&S's classification system for
prepositions is shown in the table in (37), yet only four (Inner-Halo, Contact, Outer-
Halo and Outer-Most) of the seven possible values are used in the prepositional
classification scheme.16
(37)
IH
C
OH
OM
Positional
chez; dans
sur; contre
sous; derrière, à
loin de
at; in
on; against
below; behind; at
far away from
Initial
de chezde sur
de derrière
de dehors
  directional
from -'s
from on to
from behind
from outside
Medial par
au fil de
le long de
au-delà de
  positional
through
- (in the 
along
beyond
  course of)
Final
jusque dans
jusque sur
vers
pour
  positional
up to the
up on to
towards
for
   inside of
                                                
16Further refinements to the prepositions are possible, such as the entity's intrinsic orientation, as
in the English prepositions behind and below.

30
1.4.2 Spatiotemporal Trajectories
Against this background, I introduce the first issue to be dealt with:  the
nature of changes, motions, events and locations.  It is shown in this subsection that
this particular localistic analysis could benefit from a clarification of the roles of
space and time with respect to a crucial function, STref.
1.4.2.1
Spatiotemporal Trajectories in A&S
Following Vieu (1991), A&S treats motions as events (also known as
eventualities).  A&S assumes that all objects have spatiotemporal extent, i.e.,
extension through both space and time.  An object x in a movement has a
spatiotemporal trajectory, denoted by the function STref(x,e), which is the
spatiotemporal extent of x at the time of the event e, containing both spatial and
temporal information.  A temporal slice t may also be taken, provided that t is
temporally included in the trajectory STref(x).  A&S phrase it thusly:
(38)
Eventualities are concrete but complex objects.  They may have both
objects as constituents and also other eventualities.  Every concrete
entity, we suggest along with Vieu (1991), has a spatiotemporal
trajectory, which we will denote with the aid of a function STref.
STref(x) is the spatiotemporal extent of x...STref(x) is a new discourse
entity designating the trajectory described by x all along its 'life'.  STref
may be additionally parametrized with the aid of a temporal variable:
STref(x,e) (or STref(x,t)) denotes the 'temporal slice' of STref(x) whose
time matches the time of the event e (or the time t), if e (or t) is
temporally included in STref; otherwise it is not defined.  (A&S:  p.166)
The claim in (38) requires further investigation.  Mathematically, there is
nothing wrong with associating temporal or spatial location with either physical
objects or events.  However, it is a long step from this to treating physical objects
which are actors (as it were) in an event relation to the event as events making it up.
Surely, a man and the tools he uses bear a different relation to baking a cake than the
subevents of beating the eggs, folding the eggs into the flour, sifting flour, etc.

31
It will be useful to invoke two terms from Simons (1987) here (see §1.4.3
for a full explanation).  A continuant, such as a man, exists as a whole at any time
that it exists; it is different from an occurrent, which persists through time and is
defined by its temporal parts.  We can separate the physical location of a continuant
from its temporal location.  Thus, if Roy was in Toronto on August 6th, 1999, Roy
was at a location at a specific time.  In contrast, if the TTC strike was in Toronto on
August 6th, 1999, then the occurrent, strike, could be said to have occurred at that
time.  Whereas the continuant Roy could undergo change, the occurrent the TTC
strike cannot change per se:  its existence as an entity is intimately linked to a
temporal specification.
The localistic aspect of A&S reveals itself in the kind of mechanisms it
adopts.  A&S assumes that all events of locational change invariably have a
beginning (Source), an end (Goal), and a middle (Internal Path, SIP).17  This
tripartite division embodies one aspect of localism, and is also found in Gruber
(1976), Verkuyl (1993), and countless other analyses.  Source(e) is a function
returning a 'location' (segment), as is Goal(e).  Source(e) and Goal(e) are defined as
locations whose spatiotemporal referent, STref(Source(e)) or STref(Goal(e)),
contains or is in contact with STref(e,Initial(e)) or STref(e,Final(e)),  respectively.18
Under the A&S analysis, a Path(e) is a set of sequences of locations that
includes also the source and goal locations.  The Internal Path is obtained as the
spatial difference between the spatial extent of the entire event and its end-point
locations, Source(e) and Goal(e).  In other words, the Internal Path consists of the
largest subsequence (or segment) of locations, minus the Source and Goal
segments.  Thus, a Path consists of the sum shown in (39).  A&S uses this
                                                
17A&S use Strict Internal Path, but I refer to it as Internal Path for consistency, as previously
mentioned.  SIP is still used as an abbreviation to distinguish Internal Path from Inflectional
Phrase, abbreviated as IP.
18Initial(e) evaluates the point in time that event e begins, and Final(e) returns the point in time
that event e ends.  Init(e) is also used for the former function.

32
tripartition into Source, Internal Path and Goal in their representations of change-of-
location verbs.
(39)
Path(e) = Source(e) + SIP(e) + Goal(e)
Note the type of entity that STref applies to:  concrete entities (continuants).
In §1.4.2.2, however, it will be shown that STref is applied by A&S to locations and
events (occurrents) also.  I question the appropriateness of STref for these other
entity types.
1.4.2.2
Problems with Spatiotemporal Referents in A&S
There are several problems with STref as it is used in A&S.  What is the
connection between the one-place (STref(x)) and two-place function (STref(x,e))?
What does it mean to apply the one-place function to locations?  It also seems odd
to apply the one-place function both to events (occurrents) and things (continuants).
It is unclear what kinds of entities A&S allow to have spatiotemporal extent, as
STref(x,e) is used in many different contexts.  While STref(x,e) may refer to an
object's spatiotemporal trajectory, examples like STref(li), STref(e), and
STref(e,Init(e)) show that STref may apply to locations, events, and slices of time
respectively.  Clearly, this flexibility is confusing.  Whereas continuants may exist
as complete entities through time (forming a spatiotemporal trajectory), occurrents
are entities only because they have temporal parts and are incomplete at any one
time.  It is strange to speak of occurrents as having a trajectory when they are not
objects that undergo any type of movement.  To combine continuants with
occurrents as a single ontological category is problematic, and STref should not be
able to apply to these two very different ontological categories.
Consider an analogous example.  The function kg(x) converts weight from
imperial pounds to metric kilograms, and m(y) converts height from imperial feet to
metric meters.  Both are measurement conversions from the imperial system into
metric, but clearly the conversions are not the same.  Now, suppose we posited a

33
unified function called metric(x), which converts imperial units into metric units.
Clearly, we would be collapsing two very different functions, kg(x) and m(y), into a
single 'omnipotent' function.  How, given a person's imperial measurement x and the
function metric(x), can we decide which kind of measurement conversion is
required, weight or height?  Only the unit of measurement would give a clue as to
the kind of measurement required, but metric(x) must then be compositionally
defined by the two different functions, with access to the type of units involved
explicitly stated in its definition.  This parallels what A&S have done with the STref
function:  they expect STref to double as two kinds of functions, according to the
type of object involved.  Yet, as we have seen in the analogy, it is important to
acknowledge that the 'omnipotent' function is made of two dissimilar functions
operating on different types of inputs.
A possible interpretation of STref(x,y) is that x represents the object, and y
the event.  STref(x,y) is defined as STref(x)  STref(y) if non-empty, and undefined
otherwise.  However, STref(x) applied to both events and things seems more
doubtful, since as Simons (1987) argues, continuants and occurrents are very
different entities ontologically.  While STref(x) seems plausible for events, it is more
doubtful when applied to locations.  Ontologically, locations are continuants.  Time
is inherent to events, meaning that they cannot be defined without an element of
time.  In contrast, a continuant can be defined without the element of time:  a
continuant is an independent entity that can exist at different points in time.
Yet, we see A&S use STref for x where x is a location, when a location
cannot have a spatiotemporal trajectory.  It is strange to speak of the temporal
trajectory of a location or its spatiotemporal extent.  A location is considered fixed
and does not move.19  (40) below is one of many instances where STref(x) is
applied to a location in A&S (p. 166):
                                                
19Certain types of locations may change in size or range, or even move (e.g., the bazaar is a
location, but it can vary in size from hour to hour as merchants set up stalls or take them down).

34
(40)
For 
each 
sequence 
of 
locations 
<l1,...,ln> 
we 
have
P(STref(e),
iSTref(li)), and for each i, EC(STref(li)),STref(li+1)), i.e.,
adjacent locations in the sequence are externally connected.
A location lacks a definable temporal span, and is not an occurrence of any
kind.  It is also improbable that STref(l) could be shorthand for STref(x,l), that is, the
spatiotemporal trajectory of an object at location l.  STref charts locational changes
of an object x through time.  In fact, a principal fact about change is that change
must occur over time.  It makes no sense to speak of change of location over a
location, as STref(x,l) would suggest.
Neither does it make sense for there to be STref(e), also used in the cited
passage in (40).  STref(e) would refer to the spatiotemporal extent of an event.
While events can have a spatial extent and a temporal span, events themselves cannot
change, because their very nature precludes the possibility of themselves changing
(Simons 1987).  We can only speak of an event's object participants changing.
Thus, STref(x) only makes sense when x is an object.  When x is a location or event,
functions other than STref need to be defined to avoid confusion.
One aim of this thesis is to clarify the interrelations between events, locations
and time to avoid unclear definitions seen in the STref(x,e) relation in the A&S
model.  The Event Mereology system presented is conceptually simpler to
understand and use.  To be a little more specific, it suffices to say that events remain
unaltered, but lexical information can trigger the projection of phases and segments
onto a timeline or spatial (or other kind of) domain.  Since the event retains all
relevant information, its separate projections of phases and segments onto temporal
and spatial domains avoids the STref(x,e) confusion in A&S.
                                                                                                                                    
These might be the type of locations that A&S refer to:  locations whose boundaries that fluctuate
in time.  However, this method is unnecessarily complicated, especially if we are looking at a
sequence of locations as in (40).  I believe that a location with variable boundaries over time owes
its variation to the fact that it too is a continuant that may have different parts at different times.
That an object is interpreted as a location is based more on its use in a syntactic frame than the
object's inability to change.  For example, a moving object can also be a location:  in John
boarded the bus, the bus is his destination location, but that does not mean that the bus, a
continuant, cannot also move, as in The bus traveled down the road.

35
1.4.3 Simons (1987)
Simons (1987) brings together various kinds of mereology from various
sources in the literature to give an overall account of the formal theory of part, whole,
and related concepts.  On the basis of the works he has surveyed, he identifies
certain philosophical defects in classical extensional mereology (CEM) analyses:
CEM asserts the existence of mereological sums that are unattested by evidence
outside the theory; CEM also is not applicable to most types of objects that we deal
with on a day-to-day basis.  To put it another way, CEM is a theory that does not
relate to the types of part-whole constructs that are relevant in the real world.
Simons cites two reasons for the above deficiencies.  Firstly, CEM does not
deal with temporal and modal notions in its logic.  While it is possible to extend
CEM to account for these notions, there is a more fundamental problem, which is
mereological extensionality.  Mereological extensionality states that objects with the
same parts are identical.  However, if mereological extensionality is adopted, then
two questions arise.
The first question involves objects that have different parts at different times.
For example, if John got a haircut on Saturday, mereological extensionality would
imply that John with long hair on Friday is not the same as John with short hair on
Saturday, because the sums of the parts are not identical on those respective days.
However, such fluctuations in the parts are extremely common.  For instance, if we
replace a laser printer cartridge, do we have a new laser printer?  If a company fires
and hires people on a regular basis, does it become a different company with every
hiring or firing?  Clearly, the answer is no:  something allows us to identify an
object as a laser printer or a company despite the fact that its parts may be in flux.
The second problem involves modality, i.e., some objects might have had
some parts other than those that they in fact have, but remain the same object
nonetheless.  For example, a company might have had a male CEO instead of the

36
female CEO that they currently have, but in either case the company's identity would
be preserved.
1.4.3.1
Against Classical Extensional Mereology
Simon's response to these problems is the idea of the integrated whole.  He
rejects the four characteristics that were prevalent in CEM:  tenselessness, non-
modality, the extensionality of parts, and the conditioned existence of general sums.
For Simons, the event is an integrated whole that involves time and modality, whose
parts are not extensional, and general sums do not exist.
While some of the four CEM characteristics may be correctly applied for
domains that are extensional, not all domains are extensional.  To unify domains
instead of simply accounting for CEM, Simons pursues the idea of a global
mereology, i.e., the bare minimum required in having a part-whole relation.  I follow
Simons in adopting four principles required for this minimalist mereology:
Falsehood, Asymmetry, Transitivity, and (Weak) Supplementation.20
(41)
a.
Falsehood
x << y ⊃ E!x ∧ E!y
b.
Asymmetry
x << y ⊃ ¬(y << x)
c.
Transitivity
x << y ∧ y << z ⊃ x << z
d.
Supplementation
x << y ⊃ ∃z(z << y ∧ ¬(z ο x))
These four principles are essential to the part-relation, but sometimes
additional principles may need to apply.  The four rules constitute the global
mereology, whereas in various local mereologies these four principles do not suffice,
e.g., in the realm of certain kinds of objects.  Simons claims that the nature of the
objects controls the choice of local mereologies and the set of additional principles
required, i.e., which local mereology modifies the global mereology.  A clear
example is the case of spatial prepositions, which often involve specifically spatial
                                                
20'<<' means is a proper part of, 'O' means overlaps, and 'E!x' means x exists and x is a singular
individual.

37
information such as direction, which are not required in the more general system of
aspect that we are developing.
Falsehood (41a) states that if x is a proper part of y, then there is a unique
part x and a unique whole y that x is part of.  This principle is the most opaque in
terms of applications in aspect.  The most I dare to conjecture is that parts typically
defined on the event are lexicalized only once.
Asymmetry (41b) states that if x is a proper part of y, then y cannot be a
proper part of x.  If a process is a part of an event, then that event cannot be a proper
part of the process.  This seems intuitively true.  As well, Asymmetry allows events
to have parts which are states, but disallows states to have events as parts.
Asymmetry thus brings up the question of the ontological relationship between
events and states, an issue that is discussed later in this thesis.
Transitivity (41c) states that if x is a proper part of y and y is a proper part of
z, then x is a proper part of z.  This also seems non-controversial as a description of
parts.
Of greatest import to the Event Mereology under development is the proper-
parts relation of Supplementation (41d), or more precisely, Complementation.
Complementation is the property which will allow us to generate the two parts
(Goal, not-Goal) as suggested in §1.4.5.4.
Supplementation (41d) states that if x is a proper part of y, then there is some
z such that z is a proper part of y but z and x do not overlap.  Supplementation
allows there to be some subpart u that is a proper part of y, but does not include x or
z (42a).  In other words, supplementation allows y to have three parts:  x, u, and z.
In comparison, complementation  states that there is a part z , a proper subpart of the
entire object y , such that there is no subpart u of y that is neither a part of z or a part
of x.  In other words, y is bisected into two and only two parts, x and z (42b).

38
(42)
a.
Supplementation
b.  Complementation
I posit that Complementation is the key behind transitions, since optimally
such changes are represented biphasically.  Recall that earlier this chapter, we
established that a two-phase analysis of change accounts for more data than a three-
phase analysis.  Complementation also allows us to simplify the representation of
change in the lexicon.  It allows us to deduce the state prior to the change, which will
be opposite to the final state.  Once able to predict one of the two states, we can
derive one state through a rule, leaving it out of the lexical representation.  Only the
goal state needs to be encoded.  This principle will be the focus of the current
proposal.
The four principles cited above are so essential to parthood that it is not
implausible that they have linguistic applications.  In this thesis, I will demonstrate
that the fourth principle, that of Supplementation/Complementation, has significant
impact on aspect.  If it can be shown that a mereological principle is essential to a
module of universal grammar, then it is not unreasonable to extrapolate that other
principles of mereology can also influence semantics.  It is beyond the scope of this
thesis to account for examples of other types of mereological principles that apply in
language; only Supplementation and its impact on aspect will be examined in detail.
Relevant to our linguistic analysis is that the same dichotomy between global
mereology and local mereologies found in Simons (1987) likewise applies to our
Event Mereology analysis.  CEM takes local principles such as extensionality (true
for some kinds of objects but not all) and lets them apply globally to all domains
instead of locally to the proper set of objects affected by the connotation.  I claim
that the localistic analyses parallel CEM:  the intuitions gleaned from locations and

39
movement are made global and applied to all sorts of changes, including non-
locational phenomena.
Rather, there should be a set of principles which is common to all instances
of change, that applies equally to locational and non-locational phenomena.  It is this
minimal set of principles that we want to capture, since it is applicable globally to all
kinds of parts and wholes.  In contrast, localistic ideas such as Internal Path are valid
within the context of a spatial submereology, but must in light of consistency be
restricted to the peculiarities of that particular local mereology dealing specifically
with spatial data.  Such localistic ideas must not be retroactively applied to all
instances of change.  If they are applied to all changes, then we run into the
conceptual difficulties with the abstract constructional polysemy cases.
1.4.3.2
Definitions:  Events
I adopt terminology from Simons (1987).  An occurrent  is an object that
possesses temporal parts, commonly called events, states, or happenings.21  A
motion like (43a), which has temporal parts, is thus analyzed as an occurrent, as is a
change of state (43b), which also has temporal parts.
(43)
a.
Maria entered the hospital.
b.
Maria entered a coma.
Continuants are objects without an inherent temporal property.  Continuants
are distinct from occurrents, because time is built into the concept of occurrents.
Whereas a continuant, like the participant Maria in (43a) above, is present as a
whole at any time that it exists, an occurrent extends through time.  A continuant
may also have different properties at different times, and thus may undergo change.
However, occurrents cannot change, because they cannot first have and then lack a
property, or vice versa.  Examples of continuants are given in (44a), while occurrents
are given in (44b):
                                                
21Simons' term occurrent, originally from Broad (1933), when used in the plural occurrents,
should not be confused with the similar-sounding term occurrence from Mourelatos (1981).

40
(44)
a.
continuants:  John, Toronto, hospital, apple, ...
b.
occurrents:  flying, racing, sleeping, becoming, waiting, ...
Two occurrents may be superposed without being identical.  For example, in
the scenario presented in (45a), the two events may be happening simultaneously,
yet still be two distinct events.  John's sleep (45b) could have been occurring at the
same time as his ride on the train (45c).
(45)
a.
John slept all the way from Kingston to Toronto aboard the train.
b.
John slept aboard the train.
c.
John rode the train from Kingston to Toronto.
In contrast, if two continuants occupy exactly the same space at the same
time (i.e., they are superimposed), they must be the same object.  Consider the
following sentences (46a) and (46b), where the Star of India and the gem must be
the same object, because they exist in the same place at the same time:
(46)
a.
The Star of India was set in the apex of the Crown of England
at noon, New Year's Day, 1999.
b.
The gem was set in the apex of the Crown of England at noon,
New Year's Day, 1999.
1.4.3.3
Definitions:  Spreads, Spells and Spans
The following definitions (47a-c) apply to occurrents (e).  I illustrate these
terms with occurrent diagrams, as in (48).  To interpret the diagram, the occurrent is
represented as a shaded oval in the centre of the diagram.  A timeline (with the past-
future axis extending from left to right) is a possible (and important) domain for
projections from the occurrent.  Since it is always possible to measure the temporal
interval of an occurrent, the timeline is obligatory.  Below the occurrent are the
domains that are not obligatory, such as the spatial, possessional, or stative domains.
(47)
a.
spread
spr[e] the space exactly occupied by an occurrent
b.
spell
spl[e] the time exactly occupied by an occurrent
c.
span
spn[e] the spatiotemporal extent of an occurrent

41
(48)
While Simons (1987) uses spread to refer to spatial phenomena only, for
the theory we are developing, it is crucial that we permit other kinds of domains to
be referred to.  Thus, we generalize the term spread to apply to any domain, from
spatial to possessional to stative.  Within spread itself, we can further distinguish (at
least) between spatial spreads, possessional spreads, and state spreads.
A spatial spread includes all the spatial coverage that an occurrent may take
place over.  Consider again sentence (43a), Maria entered the hospital.  The spread
of the occurrent in that sentence is the space occupied by Maria during the entire
process of entering the hospital.  For example, the spread of her action might be the
route she takes from her car in the parking lot to the emergency room, or just her
stepping though a set of doors.  A spatial spread is illustrated in (49), where a
portion of space has been delimited from the continuum of space:
(49)
Sometimes prepositional phrases may delimit the spread of an occurrent, as
in (50).  The spread of that action is the entire spatial path taken by the walker from
the store to the gymnasium.  It is a type of interval that occurs on the spatial
continuum.
(50)
Felix walked from the store to the gym.

42
A spell is the temporal counterpart of a spread.  It is a kind of temporal
interval that extends from the initial point of the event to the end of the event.  It
matches up with the uptake process in an accomplishment or activity, or just the
point of change in an achievement.  Spells can be of zero duration.  One projects a
spell from parts of the event onto the timeline.  The spell of the occurrent in (50)
would be the time that it took Felix to walk from the store to the gym.  A spell is
illustrated in (51):
(51)
The span of the occurrent is a combination of both spatial and temporal
properties.  For example, in (50), it is the time and the space Felix occupied during
his walk from the store to the gym.  An occurrent is at its span, in any larger region,
and covers any smaller region.  The span is not a projection, but can be considered a
part of the occurrent.  The span of an occurrent is the case where the part is not a
proper part of the occurrent, but the whole of the occurrent.  It is illustrated below:
(52)
We extend these three functions to also apply to subparts of events.  Thus, if
an occurrent has a part x, then we are able to make reference to its spatial projection
as the spread of x (53a), its temporal length as the spell of x (53b), and its

43
spatiotemporal extent as the span of x (53c).  The three functions, as applied to x, are
illustrated in (54):
(53)
a.
spr[x]
the space exactly occupied by x
b.
spl[x]
the time exactly occupied by x
c.
spn[x]
the spatiotemporal extent of x
(54)
One merit of Event Mereology is that it takes events as primitives, instead of
locations or intervals as primitives (as localism does).  That means that we treat the
event (occurrent) as a whole, as a complex structure containing much information,
not just temporal or spatial.  For instance, an occurrent could include information
about the subject, the object, motions and locations they are involved in, or the states
of change.  While we can use the functions to give us the temporal and non-
temporal projections of the occurrents and its parts, we need terminology to refer to
actual parts of the occurrents.  It is crucial that we do not fall into the trap of
merging the two very different concepts of the intervals of spatial/temporal
projections and the spatial/temporal parts of the occurrent that project those
intervals.
1.4.3.4
Definitions:  Phases, Slices, Segments and Sections
Terminology applying to parts of occurrents (as opposed to projections of
those parts) are defined below, following Simons (1987):
(55)
a.
phase
a temporally connected temporal part of an occurrent
b.
slice
a phase of zero duration
c.
segment
a spatially connected spatial part of an occurrent
d.
section
a segment of zero width in one dimension

44
Phases are temporal parts of occurrents, or temporally connected temporal
parts of an occurrent.  A slice is a phase of zero duration.  Though easily confused
with spell, spells are distinct entities.  One may speak of the spell of a phase, since
the function spl[x] would return the temporal length of the temporal part x (i.e., the
phase).  However, one cannot speak of the phase of the spell.  To clarify with an
analogy:  one may speak of the weight of the man, but not the man of the weight.
For example, Shylock may demand a pound of flesh from Antonio, but not an
Antonio of a pound of flesh.
Note as well that while one can measure the weight of a man like Antonio,
we cannot, given a measure of weight (say a pound), match that to a specific part of
Antonio:  various parts qualify for that measure of weight.  Likewise, an interval of
time (spell) could correspond to different phases of the occurrent.  Take the case of
making dinner.  Suppose that in making tonight's dinner (event e), I boil an egg
(subevent b) at the same time as I sautee onions (s), for the same length of time t.
Then, the spells of the phases of the subevents b and s are both the interval t .  It is
not a one-to-one mapping from t to the phases of b and s, however.  One cannot,
given just the spell, find the corresponding phases because there may be different
subparts of the occurrent that have the same spell.
A segment is the counterpart of a phase, which is to say it is a proper part of
the occurrent.  A section is a segment of zero width in one dimension.  Again, a
segment is not to be confused with a spread.  Like spreads, however, we will
generalize the term segment for use with different domains:  spatial segments,
possessional segments, and state segments.
We can also take the span of a phase or the span of a segment, which returns
the parts of the occurrent that correspond to both the phase and the segment.  Put
another way, spn[x] returns both the segmental and phasal parts.  Note that we can
obtain the spread of a phase by identifying its span (adding on its segmental parts),

45
then taking its spread; likewise, we can obtain the spell of a segment through
identifying its span first.
1.4.4 Overgeneration with Spatial Parameters
Another place where the A&S system may be improved is to reduce the
overgeneration of possible change-of-location verb classes.  Ideally, there will be no
predicted classes that are unused.  Under A&S's system, there are no constraints as
to which values the three parameters of Source, Internal Path and Goal are permitted
to have.  It will be shown that in lieu of arbitrarily assigning values to the three
parameters required in the lexical entry of a CoL verb, simple constraints may be
posited to reduce the overgeneration of aspectual classes.  The division of the path
into parts will be demonstrated to be consistent across verb classes and predictable.
1.4.4.1
Gaps and Continuousness in A&S
Let us represent A&S CoL verbs as a ordered triplet <Source, Internal Path,
Goal>.  If there are no restrictions on the three parameters, then all seven spatial
relations may be chosen as values.  The combination of parameters with their values
generates 343 (7x7x7) possible CoL verb classes.  Yet as mentioned in §1.4.1.2,
there are only nine CoL verb classes actually posited in A&S.  This works out to
9/343 or less than three percent of the total possible classes.
It may be argued that certain combinations are naturally excluded by the
configuration of the seven spatial zones previously shown in (34).  Such a
continuousness hypothesis would limit the number of verb classes to less than 343.
This argument would exclude motions that jump from one zone to another that is
not adjacent to it, as in (56), where the hypothetical verb class goes from an Outer-
Halo source to an Inner-Halo internal path, but then skips all intermediate zones and
jumps to an Outer-Most goal.

46
(56)
*<OH,IH,OM>
While such an argument holds with the intuition that spatial motion is linear
and continuous, there remain difficulties with the overgeneration of classes.22  For
instance, why is there not a <OT,OM,OH> motion, when the adjacency of the three
zones ought to permit such a continuous path?  The gaps follow predictable patterns,
as shown in (57).  Note that the Internal Path parameter is shown in parentheses for
each verb class:
(57)
Goal 
(SIP)
Source 
Inner-
Halo
IH
Contact
C
Inner-
Transit
IT
Contact-
Transit
CT
Outer-
Halo
OH
Outer-
Transit
OT
Outer-
Most
OM
IH
+
Sortir
Exit
(IT)
Partir
Leave
(OH)
C
+
Décoller
Take-off
(CT)
IT
+
CT
+
OH
Entrer
Enter
(IT)
Se poser
Land
(CT)
+Passer (par)
Cross
(IH)
S'éloigner
Distance-
from (OT)
OT
+
OM
Arriver
Arrive
(OH)
S'Approcher
Approach
(OT)
+
One observation regarding the system in A&S is that the transit zones (IT,
CT, OT) never appear as Source or Goal in the specification of a CoL verb, as
highlighted by the shaded table cells.  In addition, these three zones happen to be the
                                                
22There are a couple of verbs involving spatial dislocations which are not continuous, such as the
verb teleport.

47
same zones that are not used in A&S's prepositional analysis, as was summarized in
§1.4.1.3.  (58a) and (58b) illustrate respectively that transit zones do not appear as
Source nor Goal.
(58)
a.
*<CT,C,IH>
b.
*<C,IH,IT>
Secondly, the transit zones appear as Internal Path values in six of the nine
classes discussed.  The exceptions are the Arriver, Passer (par) and Partir classes.
The transit zones are always intermediate between two non-transit zones, without
exception.  Even if we assume that a path is always continuous, it does not explain
the absence of such classes as given in (59).  For example, it does not seem
unreasonable to have a Contact internal path between an Inner-Halo source and an
Outer-Halo goal instead of an Inner-Transit internal path (Path1).  Currently, A&S
provides no constraints to rule out such a combination; it will be possible to
ameliorate that analysis by positing a simple constraint, as will be discussed.
(59)
Path1  *<IH,C,OH>
   Path2  *<C,IH,OH> Path3  *<C,OH,IH>

48
1.4.4.2
Problems with Medial Polarity in A&S
The Passer (par)/cross class of CoL verbs is also the only class on the
diagonal marked with the + symbol in (57), i.e., it is the only class in A&S that
permits identical zone values for both Source and Goal (both Outer-Halo).  Yet, it
seems arbitrary to say that the object does not move through the Contact zone, the
Inner-Transit zone nor the Contact-Transit zone during the movement; intuitively it
is necessary to also cross the C, IT and CT zones (60a).  The same argument may
be applied to the Arriver class <OM,OH,IH> (60b) and the Partir class
<IH,OH,OM>, both of which provide no explanation for the absence of passage
through the Outer-Transit and Inner-Transit zones.  (60a) illustrates a path that
should be taken for the Passer (par) class, and (60b) the Arriver class.
(60)
a.  Passer (par) 
b. Arriver  
 ?<OH,IT,IH,IT,OH>
?<OM,OT,OH,IT,IH>
One concludes that the A&S treatment of these classes as tripartite can be
improved upon:  as many as five different spatial parameters could be required in the
lexical specification, yet A&S limit the number of parameters to three, omitting
several spatial relations that need specification, as shown.  Thus, a tripartite division
of a path is as arbitrary as, say, the five-part path divisions in (60a-b).  A non-
arbitrary treatment of the CoL lexical representations is necessary.  Later in this
thesis, I will show that a binary division captures better the actual semantics of CoL
verbs.

49
A related issue involves the absence of other classes that begin and end in
the same source and goal values, such as the Passer (par)-class.  A theory of
medial-polarity CoL verbs should account for what kinds of verbs are permitted or
excluded.  For instance, do <OM,OH,OM> verbs exist, as illustrated in (61a)?  I
suggest that there may be such a class:  Passer, 'to pass by', which differs from the
Passer (par)-class, 'to pass through'.  Another verb category of the same type (i.e.,
symmetrical) is Côtoyer 'to skirt (around)' <OH,OM,OH>.  These verbs are
unexpectedly absent from A&S, and the expected absence of a class like (61b),
<IH,OH,IH>, is not ruled out by the existing aspectual system.
(61)
a.
Passer (devant) 
b.
<IH,OH,IH>
'to pass by'
'step out then back in (?)'
Furthermore, the A&S representation of Passer (par)/cross-class of CoL
verbs omits some critical semantic information.  Consider the sentence (62).
<OH,IH,OH> could be descriptive of the two paths shown in (63):  (63a), where the
verb cross means going from one sidewalk (Outer-Halo), onto the street (Inner-
Halo) and off onto the other sidewalk (Outer-Halo);  or (63b), where cross means
going from a sidewalk into the street, and back onto the same sidewalk without
reaching the other side.
(62)
The chicken crossed the road.

50
(63)
a.
b.
Of course, the only plausible interpretation of a sentence like (62) is (63a),
never (63b).  Yet, given the representation <OH,IH,OH>, the A&S system would
incorrectly permit both scenarios for the English example in (62).  An accurate
account of the verb cross should not permit the interpretation in (63b) under any
circumstances, and the A&S analysis can be modified to produce the right
predictions.
1.4.5 The Medial Parameter Versus Complementarity
One possible way to reduce the number of redundant verb classes but
salvage the tripartite analysis is to restrict the four primary relations (OM, OH, IH,
C) to Source and Goal, and the three transit relations (IT,CT,OT) to the Internal
Path.  However, while this method gains us a better ratio (9 out of 4 x 3 x 4 = 48
possible classes, or roughly 19%) of actual to possible classes, it still overgenerates.
1.4.5.1
Eliminating the Medial Parameter
On the basis of the evidence in §1.4.4, it seems that a plausible amendment
might be to eliminate the Internal Path parameter, since the value of that parameter is
predictable once the Source and Goal values are known.  In addition, the three zonal
values most strongly associated with the Internal Path (Inner-, Outer- and Contact-
Transit) would be barred as possible values for Source and Goal.  The elimination
of the medial parameter, the Internal Path, is closer to the approach adopted in Event
Mereology.  The removal of the Internal Path parameter eliminates redundant
classes, but it is still a predominantly location-based analysis with attendant localistic
peculiarities that do not translate well to abstract data.

51
Consider the localistic analysis modified from A&S for English verbs.
Sixteen possible verb classes are predicted by the bipartite theory:  a 4 x 4 grid with
{IH, C, OH, OM} values.  The previous ratios of 9 out of 343 is improved
drastically to 9 out of 16, or roughly 56%.  While this is an improvement, can we
make the system more economical?
Aside from the A&S verbs, we also predict several classes other than those
already identified.  We predict there to be many more verb classes that involve the
Contact zone, i.e., <IH,C>, <C,IH>, <C,OH> and <OH,C>.  Some verbs that appear
to correspond to these new verb classes are respectively the Ooze-, Absorb-, Throw-
and Catch-classes, italicized in chart (64).  Class names are indicated by an
underscored verb representative of the verbs in its class:
(64)
Final →
Init ↓
Inner-Halo
IH
Contact
C
Outer-Halo
OH
Outer-Most
OM
IH
Ooze   , bleed, drool,
surface, seep,
sweat, trickle,
perspire
Go-out , defenestrate,
empty, exhale,
vomit, exhume,
extract, spit
Leave  , send, go,
deliver, desert,
discharge, disperse,
expel, fire, mail
C
Absorb   , blot,
hydrate, sponge-
up, incorporate,
soak-up
Take-off , detach,
eject, unbolt,
disconnect
Throw    , drop, toss,
forward
OH
Enter , board, box,
breathe, drain,
drink, drug,
poison, eat, fill,
infuse, suck,
penetrate
Land  , attach, bolt,
connect, drench, lift,
glue, hang, lay,
perch, stick, stain
Distance-from
   ,
isolate, flee,
export, scatter,
retreat
OM
Arrive  , bring,
come, invade,
converge, hire,
fetch, return
Catch   , trap, snare
Approach  , attract,
import, near
There remain many gaps, even with the newly proposed verb classes.  For
one, the shaded diagonal cells, e.g., <OH,OH>, leave it unclear as to what happens
between the Source and the Goal.  In fact, there may be no change at all.  The four
classes that have identical Initial and Final phases are not true CoL verbs.  These

52
cells may represent verbs of stasis instead, such as stay, remain and keep (see
Chapter Three).
1.4.5.2
On Ooze and Absorb:  Different Syntactic Patterns
Another problem with this 4x4 hypothesis is that the two of the hypothetical
classes (the Ooze-class and the Absorb-class) seem mostly restricted to liquid-like
objects (65a,b), (66a,b).  One could attempt to attribute the restriction to the mass-
count distinction, since liquids are generally mass terms.  However, when (66c) is
compared with (66b), it is shown that the mass-count distinction is not the relevant
factor in the grammaticality of the sentences, as hypothesized, since drops of wine
are countable.  (66d) shows that the actual physical substance, i.e., whether the
substance is semi-fluid enough, is essential to the acceptability of the sentence.  It is
more conceivable that a gelatinous substance like gummi bears can be absorbed than
solid objects like pebbles.
(65)
a.
The wall oozed slime.
b.
?The wall oozed marbles.
(66)
a.
The sponge absorbed the wine.
b.
??The sponge absorbed the pebbles.
c.
The sponge absorbed the drops of wine.
d.
?The sponge absorbed the gummi bears.
Ooze and absorb have their reference locations (italicized above) in subject
position, and the moving object in direct object position.  These two classes pattern
differently from other CoL verbs, where the reference locations normally appear
within PPs (67a) or in the direct object position of the verb (67b).  Thus, it is unclear
if the Ooze- and Absorb-classes should be treated like standard CoL verbs if their
syntactic patterns differ.
(67)
a.
The woman jumped [PP into the pool].
b.
The snake [VP entered the hole].

53
1.4.5.3
On Surface and Sink:  Change-of-Position Verbs
Are verbs like surface and sink (68a,b) truly CoL verbs that involve a
Contact zone?  Verbs like surface (68a) at first glance appear to have a Inner-Halo
source and a Contact goal, and the converse for sink (68b).
(68)
a.
The submarine surfaced on the lake.
b.
The boat sank into the lake.
In A&S, verbs of locational change (come) are distinguished from verbs of
positional change (descend) and verbs of postural change (kneel), and it appears that
surface and sink are in the class of verbs of positional change, rather than CoL
verbs.  This classification scheme is necessary for A&S's analysis, because their
theory currently lacks the proper structure to treat these kinds of verbs under the
CoL lexical specification system:  as the diagram in (69) shows, there is no zone
between C and IH for the action of the verb sink.
(69)
There are several ways to modify the A&S analysis.  The first solution
reclassifies the verb sink by saying Contact is not the Source for all cases of sink, as
shown in these examples:
(70)
a.
(Drifting lower,) The weather balloon sank into the clouds.
b.
The submarine sank one more league into the sea, to a total
depth of ten leagues.
In (70a), the weather balloon need not have been in contact with the cloud
cover at all, thereby reclassifying sink as being in the same class as enter.  However,

54
(70b) raises the spectre of the problem of the treatment of changes of locations that
occur entirely within the same medium (in this case, the sea).
Movement is a change in gradient within the same reference location, which
means a localistic analysis treating sink as a CoL verb would require the addition of
more spatial relations within Inner-Halo, say Inner-Most (IM) and a Innermost-
Transit (IMT).  However, this approach means that sink would have at least two
different lexical entries, to deal with the different uses of sink (i.e., <OH,IT,IH>, for
70a, vs. <IH,IMT,IM> for 70b).  Such polysemy would degrade the usefulness of
the system.
The classification of sink as a verb of positional change qualifies as this type
of solution, where additional zones have to be introduced.  While I believe that the
evidence argues in favour of sink being different in its representation, I disagree that
change-of-location (CoL) verbs differ from change-of-position (Cpn) verbs as
drastically as A&S would suggest.  Later in this thesis, I will go beyond the analysis
in A&S, taking into consideration the fact that sink and other verbs like it possess
sufficient similarities such that a single analysis of change is possible.  A&S would
propose that inertial Cpn verbs like run  do not have a tripartite path structure
encoded in their lexical entries, but does not take into consideration the incremental
nature of such verbs.  In contrast, I propose that a clearer division of labor between
world knowledge and grammar will naturally accommodate the idea of
incrementation; this point is discussed in Chapter Two.
The change-of-position verb category of verbs might have been adopted
because other kinds of solutions would cause difficulties for A&S, such as the
positing of a new transit relation XT between Contact and Inner-Halo for sink (71a),
or the use of Inner-Transit as the transit relation between Contact and Inner-Halo for
sink (71b):

55
(71)
a.
b.
Yet these modifications would raise the same kinds of questions as above
about overgeneration, usefulness of transit zones, and the proliferation of number of
parameters required to express a single CoL verb.  Having already discussed these
concerns earlier, this discussion on verbs like sink only stresses the importance of
developing a non-tripartite system.
To recap, it seems that this new 4x4 system is flawed because the values for
the Source and Goal parameters are independent of one another.  If left freely to
combine, they generate arbitrary verb classes and verb classes with significantly
different syntactic patterns to warrant a distinct analysis (e.g., the Ooze-class).  The
conclusion we must draw is that the connection between Source and Goal values is
not arbitrary, but predictable.
1.4.5.4
Complementarity in Event Mereology
Complementarity, i.e., the idea that defining a part from a whole leaves the
remainder as a second part, resolves the problem of overgeneration with arbitrary
Source and Goal values.  Instead of two values being specified in the lexical entry of
a CoL verb, only one value is required:  complementarity allows us to derive Source
values from Goal values through complementation.  The motion in (72) is
subdivided into a Goal part, and by complementation the not-Goal part is derived.
This bipartite division forms the template for change-of-state representations:

56
(72)
Consider the function of a verb like enter in (73).  Under A&S, its lexical
entry specifies an Outer-Halo source, a Inner-Transit internal path, and an Inner-
Halo goal.  The intuition behind this analysis is that the ultimate destination is the
Inner-Halo of the reference object, in this case, Canada.  In addition, it is assumed
that there is a route going from the U.S. into Canada, and this route can be
subdivided into Source, Internal Path, and Goal.
(73)
Norbert entered Canada from the United States.
But a crucial question remains:  what does the verb enter really need to
encode?  A&S subdivide the path into three:  United States as the source, Canada as
the goal, and the border between them as the internal path.  If the entry is across a
body of water, say Lake Ontario (74a), then the internal path could have an actual
length.  If it is across the 49th parallel, however, it is reduced to a point (74b).  I
argue that such a tripartite division is extraneous in the lexical entry of the verb enter
itself.
(74)
a.
b.
For the verb enter, it is obligatory that something has arrived within the
Inner-Halo of the reference location at the end of the event.  That will be shown to
be the only aspectual information needed for the verb enter.  Before the event ends
(i.e., when the Goal is reached), there is a stretch (not-Goal) in (72) above that
correlates with Source.  All we need to know about this stretch of space-time is that
the moving object cannot be within the reference object's Inner-Halo during that

57
time.23  All other information is not relevant linguistically.  The two periods of Goal
and not-Goal are projected from the event.  In fact, only the Goal needs to be
encoded 
lexically; 
not-Goal 
can 
be 
derived 
non-arbitrarily 
through
complementation.  What does not qualify as Goal must be not-Goal.
Thus, negation or complementarity can generate two distinct and opposite
zones from a single specified value.  So enter in (73) above gives us two contrasting
locations that the object occupies at different times:  the earlier time and place are as
shown in (75a), and the later time and place shown in (75b).  The locations are
generated from the information encoded in enter:  that the destination location is the
Inner-Halo of the reference location, and the source portion of the path must not be
in Canada.
(75)
a.
Norbert was not in Canada.
b.
Norbert is now in Canada.
In a similar vein, the prepositional phrase from the United States specifies
the source portion of the trajectory, and the goal portion may be derived through
complementation.  The effect of having three different portions of the path that can
be called Source, Internal Path and Goal is a logical consequence of the linear
structure of paths interacting with multiple points that bisect the line into two, and
should not be confused as a necessary linguistic specification of paths.  See Chapter
Two for more discussion on the derivation of the apparent tripartite structure.
                                                
23Trajectories that cross themselves, or ones that repeatedly enter and exit a particular zone before
settling in the destination zone are perhaps best called tease scenarios).  For example, Vanessa
may wander in and out of a parking lot before settling down in it, and that is still expressible by
Vanessa entered the parking lot.  This is shown below:
(i)
The multiple instances of Vanessa entering the parking lot are reduced to the case where a single
point, i.e., the final change, is the only one relevant.  The underspecification of the process leading
up to that final change allows for the tease scenario to be one of the possibilities.

58
Linguistically, a binary division characterized by complementarity is encoded
by each CoL verb and motional preposition.  Through common sense unconnected
with the linguistics, however, we can always construe the path as tripartite or
multipartite through the compositional build-up of information from various binary
divisions.  In other words, two binary divisions may have points of transition that do
not align, thereby creating an intermediate zone.  However, it should be emphasized
that the tripartite division is non-linguistic in the sense that it is not encoded, but
derivable through compositionality.  With the approach developed in this thesis, it
matters not whether the information is obtained from elements within a single
sentence, or from the synthesis of different parts of discourse.  I show that an
intrinsically tripartite analysis of change does not have the flexibility of a bipartite
system that uses complementarity.
1.5      Structure
The preceding subsection explored the concerns about the localistic analysis
proposed in Asher & Sablayrolles (1994).  Those concerns motivate a re-analysis of
the lexical representations of verbs of change-of-location.  The key concepts of
Event Mereology presented herein are introduced in a manner parallel to the A&S
critique.  Below, I summarize the issues that form the nuclei for subsequent
chapters, and delineate the scope of each chapter.
Chapter Two takes up the issue of the basic ontic objects that are dealt with
in the aspectual analysis.  The goal of this chapter is to establish that a mereology of
events is more basic than a mereology of locations, and therefore should be used for
a general theory of change.  Terminology relating to aspect is given in this chapter.
Localistic theories rely on metaphor to satisfy the requirements of change; the
inappropriateness of using metaphor as an explanatory device in the aspectual
semantics is demonstrated.  It will be shown that underspecification can be used to

59
reduce the amount of information needed to be encoded in the lexical entries.
Furthermore, the localistic idea of Internal Path will be shown to arise from the
interactions of two points of transition, whose alignment is pragmatically
determined.
Chapter Three follows up on the ideas in Chapter Two, turning the focus to
the representation of aspectual information, i.e., the notion of change and how it is
encoded lexically.  I discuss the idea in Galton (1984) that there are states of change
and changes of state; it will be argued that these two modes are crucial mereological
concepts in aspect, and are necessary and sufficient in generating the range of
aspectual classes observed.  Two different examples of the use of these two
mereological concepts are explored in this chapter:  (i) in verbal aspect, and (ii) in
prepositional semantics.
Firstly, I revisit the idea that verbs of change-of-state are best represented as
a state and its derived, complementary state.  I review aspectual systems such as
Dowty (1979), Pustejovsky (1991), Verkuyl (1993), inter alia, and work out how
Vendler verb classes (states, activities, achievements and accomplishments) are
characterized under the principles of Event Mereology.  Secondly, I examine the
parallelisms between prepositional semantics and semantics of verbs of change.
Medial prepositions, which prima facie seem to require the notion of Internal Path,
are demonstrated to be compatible with the theory developed herein, which does not
adopt Internal Paths as semantic primitives.
Chapter Four explores the interactions of the individual components
proposed in Chapter Three.  Discussed are issues such as resultatives, how verbs
and prepositional phrases interact in EM, and the parallelism between state of
change and change of state, and progressive and perfective aspects, i.e., aspectual
coercion by -ing and -ed.  A system of aspectual features is developed and tested
with a wide range of data pertaining to aspectual compositionality.

60
Chapter Five demonstrates how Event Mereology may be applied
syntactically, by examining one specific syntactic analysis (Travis 1999).  Previous
analyses that led to the development of Travis (1999) are briefly discussed, and the
connection between those analyses and the principles of Event Mereology
elucidated.  It will be shown that the key semantic concepts of Event Mereology fit
well with the issues underlying that syntactic analysis.  As well, I explore the
application of Event Mereology in Èdó, a serial verb language in Nigeria, in
distinguishing two patterns of serial verb constructions.  I expand on Pi & Stewart
(1998), showing that the analysis of change in this thesis is applicable to the Èdó
data.
Finally, in Chapter Six I discuss the implications and consequences of Event
Mereology, and directions for future research.

61
Chapter Two
Events and Mereologies:  Stating the Basics
2.0      Introduction
One key idea introduced in Chapter One is the reduction of unnecessary
information from the lexical representation of change.  Ideally, there should be just
enough information to distinguish the necessary varieties of change, without losing
generalizations about change that involve issues of polysemy.  Accounting for
semantic ambiguity in motion and non-motion phenomena, then, is a significant step
in the development of Event Mereology.
In §1.4, it has been proposed that a path is divided into two parts only:  a
Goal segment and a not-Goal segment that corresponds to what are called Source
and Path in a localistic analysis.  In a sentence such as (1a), the verb arrive encodes
the existence of a destination, and a route taken to reach that destination.  While we
can infer the existence of some source and path of the motion, the most important
aspectual information is that of a point of change that distinguishes the arrival
location.  By complementarity, the source and path are assumed but not encoded, to
allow for the generalization of change into non-motional domains, as exemplified in
(1b).  An abstract goal like an impasse does not necessarily have an intermediate
stage corresponding to the internal path of motion verbs.
(1)
a.
Ben arrived at Dorval Airport.
b.
Ben arrived at an impasse.
For a concise yet precise theory of the aspect of change, I propose that we
must limit the amount of information encoded in the lexicon.  I will show that not all
types of semantic information must be exhaustively mapped out, for change to be
represented.  On the contrary, two simple mechanisms, i.e., distinguished points and
distinguished processes, capture the range of empirical data.  In other words,
indefiniteness or underspecification are crucial to the formulation of change.

62
In this chapter, I explore the role underspecification plays in a theory of
aspect.  I claim that underspecification is core to Event Mereology, removing the
amount of irrelevant information feeding into the calculus of aspect.  I will show that
this reduction of unnecessary mechanisms produces exactly the ambiguity observed
in the data.
Thus, this chapter has three objectives:  first, it discusses ambiguity and
underspecification, and their prevalence in many linguistic domains; second, it
familiarizes the reader with event-related and aspectual concepts in general, and
incorporates the idea of underspecification into the ontology of events; third, it
examines some classic issues in aspect as treated in localistic analyses, then argues
in support of an event-based mereological treatment of the same issues.
It is a crucial part of any semantic theory to make explicit the assumptions
and terminology used.  Firstly, the terminology and definitions tend to vary from
analysis to analysis, even though they describe the same concepts.  An exposition of
the terminology that I will use is therefore necessary to minimize confusion.
Secondly, the clearer the ideas, the stronger the analysis.  Though some of the topics
seem to be disparate at first, it will be shown that these ideas constitute parts of a
greater whole.
This chapter is organized as follows.  §2.1 begins with a review of the
concepts of ambiguity (in particular constructional polysemy: Copestake & Briscoe
1995) and indefiniteness (or underspecification), which support simplicity and
economy in lexical representations.
In §2.2, I present the idea of the distinguished point and its interactions with
aspectual classes.  In §2.3, I discuss differences in ontological outlook between
Event Mereology and localism.  Localism is explained in more detail, and the
Internal Path characteristic of localistic analyses shown to be a derived notion rather
than a primitive.  Finally, I will contrast Event Mereology with localism, showing the

63
range of phenomena that would not be adequately explained from a spatial
perspective alone.  This expands upon arguments already made in Chapter One.
2.1      Ambiguity and Indefiniteness
Two topics critical in lexical semantics are discussed in this section:  the
notion of ambiguity or polysemy, and the notion of indeterminacy or indefiniteness.
While both ambiguity and indeterminacy figure into the structure of Event
Mereology, the distinction between these two concepts must be made clear, since
they are often confused with one another.
I explore ambiguity, indeterminacy, and other arguments in favour of
economy in representation in this section, to provide a foundation upon which to
build the Event Mereology.
2.1.1 Ambiguity
In brief, ambiguity applies to differences in meaning arising from a single
structure, such as the typical examples in (2).  In (2a), the ambiguity arises from the
word pitcher, which can mean either the container or the baseball player.  In (2b), the
ambiguity is amphibolic:  the two different meanings stem from two possible
syntactic structures (3a,b) for the same sentence.
(2)
a.
Edward found the pitcher.
b.
The detective saw his partner with a pair of binoculars.
(3)
a.
The detective saw [his partner with a pair of binoculars].
b.
The detective saw [his partner] with a pair of binoculars.
Gillon (1990) argues that one of the better definitions of ambiguity is stated
as (4), i.e., ambiguity is 'a many-one relation between syntactic entities and
expressions':
(4)
An expression is ambiguous iff the expression can accommodate
more than one structural analysis.  (Gillon 1990, ex. 14)

64
Though the actual mechanisms may vary, this view of ambiguity as different
syntactic mappings has been espoused by Cresswell (1973), Montague (1970a,
1970b), Katz (1972, 1977), among others.  Gillon points out that the above
definition has, among its virtues, generality:  it applies uniformly in cases of
ambiguity arising from lexical, phrasal, sentential, and provides an explanatory
account of many-one relations between phonic forms that have the same graphic
form (e.g., reject as a verb [re-'ject] or a noun ['re-ject]).
In contrast, indeterminacy refers to words and the properties associated (or
more precisely, not associated) with them.  Gillon states that "an expression is
indeterminate iff there is some property which neither is included in the expression's
connotation nor is a species of any property included in its connotation."  For
instance, the word doctor is indeterminate as to the properties of gender, since its
connotation does not include or exclude being of any specific gender.24  In a sense,
all nouns are indeterminate, since there is always a property that is not included in
the connotation of a nominal expression.  Another term for indeterminacy is
underspecification.
Both ambiguity and indeterminacy play essential yet different parts in Event
Mereology.  With respect to ambiguity, recall that I argued in §1.3 that the
difference between the concrete and abstract uses of a verb of change was polysemy
but not polylexy, and that the abstract-concrete difference arises out of a sense
spectrum.  Below, I will support that claim with some observations in Copestake and
Briscoe (1995), reviewing their examples of constructional polysemy (sense
modulation) and sense extension (sense change).
                                                
24Note that generality is distinct from both ambiguity and indeterminacy.  For example, doctor is
general, not indeterminate, with respect to medical specialty:  a doctor can be a gynecologist,
pediatrist, pediatrician, surgeon, general practitioner, etc.  Gillon (1990) covers the differences
between ambiguity, generality, and indeterminacy in depth, and surveys previous definitions and
tests for ambiguity, such as Scheffler (1979), Zwicky and Sadock (1975), Roberts (1984), among
others.

65
Indeterminacy, on the other hand, ties in with the general principle that not all
information can or should be represented fully in the lexicon; there must always be a
degree of underspecification.  So too with verbs of change:  not all information
about change is required to produce the array of linguistic data; certainly some
concepts such as homogeneity may be applicable at a conceptual level, but they are
not required in the aspectual system.  Such information is simply left unspecified.
2.1.2 Constructional Polysemy
Ambiguity is also known as polysemy, literally 'many meanings'.  Copestake
& Briscoe (1995) observe that there are two types of polysemy: homonymy
(unsystematic and idiosyncratic polysemy), such as pike being both a fish and a
weapon, and systematic polysemy, as in the case of bottle, which has two different
but related meanings (nominal 5a vs verbal 5b).  Cruse (1995) refers to the
homonymy examples (bank, pike) as antagonistic; related senses are referred to as
co-operative.  A systematic sense extension relates the object with an action that
involves the object; consider as well verbs such as hammer, phone, and whip.
(5)
a.
Cory opened the bottle.
b.
Cory will bottle the wine.
(6)
a.
Greta took the hammer.
b.
Greta hammered the metal flat.
(7)
a.
Martin picked up the phone.
b.
Martin phoned Andrew.
(8)
a.
The inquisitor owns a whip.
b.
To whip someone is considered an inhumane act.
Copestake & Briscoe (1995) observe as well a distinction between two
classes of systematic polysemy:  sense extension and constructional polysemy.
Sense extensions include the examples (5) to (8) above, and involve processes such
as conversion or zero-derivation, and are rule-governed.  This type of sense change

66
derives new senses from basic senses, but must depend upon lexical rules (e.g., -ful,
'grinding') to produce the new senses.
In contrast, constructional polysemy is sense modulation, which specializes
or broadens meaning in context.  Though Copestake and Briscoe do not explicitly
define or characterize constructional polysemy except by example, some of their
examples are worth noting.  Their concept of constructional polysemy covers
indeterminacy (or underspecification), and cases of analogical extension.
Take the example of reel, noted in Atkins & Levin (1992).  Depending on its
context or premodifier, the word may take on the meaning of a fishing reel or a film
reel.  While the specifics are different, it is a logical extension of meaning from one
kind of reel to the other; this modulation of sense resembles the discussion on sense
spectra in Cruse (1986), where a cline of uses for the word mouth (ranging from a
human mouth to the mouth of a river) is demonstrated.  The examples in Copestake
& Briscoe (1995) and Cruse (1986) pertain to sense modulations in objects.  The
example below (in abbreviated form) comes from Copestake & Briscoe, drawing a
spectrum between 'newspaper-as-institution', 'newspaper-as-abstract-text', and
'newspaper-as-physical object':
(9)
a.
That newspaper is owned by a trust.
b.
That newspaper is left of centre.
c.
That newspaper has obscure editorials.
d.
That newspaper is full of metaphorical language.
e.
That newspaper is full of spelling mistakes.
f.
That newspaper has an unreadable font.
g.
That newspaper is covered with coffee.
I provide original examples of verbal sense spectra below, focussing on the
verb in its dual uses of concrete and abstract senses.  In (10), the object slowly
becomes more and more abstract, moving from a physical entity (the prince), to an
opening (the archway), to an entity that could be either concrete or abstract (the
secret), to an entirely abstract entity (his thoughts).  Likewise, (11) shows a similar
spectrum with the verb collect.

67
(10)
a.
Ethan guarded the prince.
concrete
b.
Ethan guarded the front door.
c.
Ethan guarded the archway.
d.
Ethan guarded the location of the secret garden.
e.
Ethan guarded the secret.
f.
Ethan guarded his words.
g.
Ethan guarded his thoughts.
abstract
(11)
a.
Boris collected the loose change.
concrete
b.
Boris collected baseball cards.
c.
Boris collected computer games.
d.
Boris collected anecdotes.
e.
Boris collected his wits.
abstract
A feature of sense spectra is that adjacent senses are plausible in co-
predication circumstances, but distant senses are not.  Thus, (12a) is acceptable
while (12b) is not, for the different senses of newspaper.  Examples for the verbs
guard and collect are given in (13) and (14) respectively:
(12)
a.
That newspaper is full of metaphorical language and spelling
mistakes.
b.
*That newspaper is owned by a trust and is covered with coffee.
(13)
a.
Ethan guarded the archway and the location of the secret garden.
b.
*Ethan guarded the prince and his thoughts.
(14)
a.
Boris collected computer games and anecdotes.
b.
*Boris collected the loose change and his wits.
Constructional polysemy bears upon an issue already discussed in Chapter
One, namely, the difference between concrete and abstract senses of verbs.  A sense
can be broadened in context.  Copestake & Briscoe (1995) illustrate this behaviour
with the word cloud, which is normally a mass of water vapour, but may be extended
to other floating masses, such as dust cloud, cloud of smoke, or cloud of mosquitoes.
Copestake & Briscoe say that "we might treat the basic sense as taking a default
content qualia value which can be overridden by a modifying phrase."25  Their view
is compatible with the one espoused by Event Mereology, namely the metaphoric
distance from a basic point on a sense spectrum suggested in Chapter One.  In other
words, it may be the case that most physical instances of a verb action can be
                                                
25Qualia structure, proposed by Pustejovsky (1993), is a feature of the representation of nouns that
encodes such ideas as form, content, agentive, and purpose (telic) roles.

68
overridden by a co-occurring abstract noun, coercing an abstract sense out of the
verb.  They believe that sense modulation is produced by the process of syntagmatic
co-composition (Pustejovsky 1991), stemming from a single lexical sense.
Another example of sense modulation would be the word round.  Note that
the adjective round has two possible meanings (at least):  a two-dimensional
roundness, such as applied to pizzas or tires (15a); and a three-dimensional
roundness, as applied to globe-like objects (15b).  Both meanings are related, since
the latter is an extension of the former.26  This can also be viewed as an example of
vagueness of the word round.
(15)
a.
The pizza is round.
b.
The planet Earth is round.
Sense modulation, then, takes a single sense, usually the physical as the
basis, and extends it to more abstract uses.  Thus, constructional polysemy is useful
in our semantic analysis of change.  It is desirable to have a uniform treatment of
physical and abstract verbs of change, motivated by observations in Chapter One.
Constructional polysemy assists the attainment of the unification of analyses, since
we do not need to posit separate verbs for each verb of change when it is merely a
modulation of a single sense.  We are able to account for abstract and concrete
readings with a single verb, allowing sense modulation to produce the differences
between concrete and abstract.  Therefore, treating ambiguous readings of the verbs
in concrete and abstract contexts as constructional polysemy strengthens our
hypothesis that abstract changes should be treated no differently than physical
changes.
                                                
26These examples also show the tendency of language to ignore certain imperfections so that the
object qualifies for a predicate despite real-world imprecisions.  Ideally, for a thing to be round it
should be perfectly circular.  However, we can still call a pizza, a basketball, or a winter tire round
despite their imperfections.  We abstract away from the fact that these objects are not perfectly
round, and idealize them to fit under the meaning of roundness.

69
2.1.3 Underspecification
While constructional polysemy explains how a single verb can be affected
by contextual elements to yield both concrete and abstract senses, it remains a
distinct issue from how aspect is encoded in the lexical entries of verbs, and how
prepositions and aspectual morphemes affect aspect.  More precisely, how can we
represent aspect most economically in the lexicon?
The issue here is one of how much does the grammar or lexicon specify,
versus how much do we fill in.  It is not the job of language to tell us when someone
dies; that is a task for world knowledge.  Rather, we communicate information by
using the available tools in language to let the hearer know  the scenario envisioned
by the speaker, using her own knowledge of the real world to reconstruct it.  In this
capacity, semantics is the interface between a speaker and a hearer, who are able to
communicate because a system known to both is used to convey the essentials of the
event discussed.  This set of rules is like the rules of a game, where all the players
are able to play a meaningful game because they understand the same rules.
An event involves many different factors, and the use of language is
incapable of expressing the event in its entirety.  This should not be viewed as a flaw
of language, but the very essence of language:  words and sentences by their very
nature limit the number of meanings conveyable, since one purpose of language is to
allow meaningful communication between speakers.  Grice (1975) proposed
maxims for conversation based on the idea of cooperation between speakers:  be
informative, truthful, relevant, brief and orderly.  Thus, the semantics should reflect
the same kinds of qualities, since it is ultimately meaning that is communicated.  We
then expect that the meaning component would be capable of handling much
information with the least amount of conceptual complexity.
I believe that underspecification, or indeterminacy, is a way to reduce the
number of mechanisms involved.  Event Mereology hypothesizes that two kinds of

70
elements in the system of aspect (the distinguished point and the distinguished
process) are necessary and sufficient for capturing the range of aspectual classes
observed.  Obviously, much information concerning motional and non-motional
change must be left out.  Event Mereology claims that the two distinguished features
are the only necessary linguistic information that has to be encoded for aspect.  How
much real-world information (pragmatics) is linguistically relevant?  How much
information must be encoded in the lexicon or the syntax?  Other issues, such as
homogeneity, may be conceptually interesting and valid, but do not participate at the
level of the aspectual calculus.  Consequently, redundant features need not be
incorporated into the aspectual system. This division between the divison of labour
between world knowledge and grammar will be examined in more detail in §2.3.
For now, let us consider other examples in linguistics that show
indeterminacy.  In one sense, indeterminacy arises because language necessarily
abstracts away from the real world; the amount of real world information is too
complex to deliver through the linguistic faculty comprehensively.  There must be
some amount of selectivity.  A distinction must be made as to what the language
faculty handles and what is handled by other cognitive systems.  Our perceptions
and thoughts about the real world may provide us with more distinctions than is
needed for the calculus of aspect.
One way to highlight the difference between real-world information
processed on a non-linguistic level, and grammatical information processed on a
linguistic level, is to show that different languages encode grammatical information
differently while retaining a cross-linguistic cognitive uniformity.
Leech (1974), for example, discusses how different languages vary in the
number of terms used to describe objects and concepts.  In German, the word Stuhl
covers both categories that we call stool and chair in English.  However, it does not
mean that speakers of German are incapable of making the distinction between

71
stools and chairs.  Likewise, French divides what we call a river in English into
fleuve (a river that flows into the sea) and rivière (a tributary).  There is an
observable and definable conceptual difference between the two words for river in
French, easily learnable by English speakers.  Yet, the grammatical feature that
distinguishes fleuve from rivière (namely, the type of terminus of the river mouth) is
underspecified; it is not encoded in English.  Surely, the distinction is useful in the
real world, particularly for riverboat captains.  However, it does not mean that every
language in the world is obliged to include that feature.
2.1.4 The Colour Spectrum
Another example of the difference in the specification of properties in
different languages is in colour terminology.  The colour spectrum is a smooth
continuum, which varies in three dimensions:  hue (the wavelength of reflected light),
luminosity (the amount of light reflected), and saturation (freedom from dilution
with white).  It has been claimed that the human eye can discriminate at least 7.5
million just noticeable colour differences (Brown and Lennenberg 1954).  From the
viewpoint of physics, there are no physical factors that divide the colour spectrum
into colour categories.  In fact, languages differ considerably in the number of
colour terms they possess, and in the denotational range of these colour terms.
Lyons (1968) gives several examples.  To illustrate, the Welsh colour term glas is
the equivalent of English blue, green, and even grey.  In Tsonga, basa encompasses
both English white and beige, whereas tshwuka includes English red, pink, and
purple.
The question arises as to how arbitrary these colour classifications are.
Taylor (1995) summarizes two approaches:  the structuralist approach (Bloomfield
1933, Gleason 1955) which asserts that colour categorization is arbitrary, and the
focal colours approach pioneered by Berlin and Kay (1969).

72
From the structuralist point of view, the arbitrariness of colour terms is
suggested to be indicative of the arbitrariness of language as a whole.  Gleason
(1955) states:
(16)
Consider a rainbow or a spectrum from a prism.  There is a continuous
gradation of color from one end to the other.  That is, at any point there
is only a small difference in the colors immediately adjacent at either
side.  Yet an American describing it will list the hues as red, orange,
yellow, green, blue, purple, or something of the kind.  The continuous
gradation of color which exists in nature is represented in language by a
series of discrete categories...There is nothing inherent either in the
spectrum or the human perception of it which would compel its division
in this way.  The specific method of division is part of the structure of
English.
Taylor (1995) cites the following implications of the structuralist approach
to colour:  all colour terms in a system have equal status; all referents of a colour
term have equal status; the only legitimate object of linguistic study is the language
system, not individual terms in a system.  However, there is evidence against an
entirely arbitrary assignment of colour terms to their colour denotations.
Berlin and Kay (1969) investigated basic colour terms in ninety-eight
languages, and discovered that perception was in fact a crucial component of colour
classification.  Basic colour terms are those terms that are not subsumed under other
terms (*scarlet, *crimson - types of red); that are morphologically simple (*golden,
*bluish-green); that are not collocationally restricted (*blond - describes only hair);
that are of frequent use (*puce, *xanthic).27  Their findings indicate that colour
classifications across languages is not as arbitrary as the structuralists claim.
Berlin and Kay claim that focal colours exist, and that languages appeared to
select their colour terms from a hierarchy of eleven focal colours.  When subjects
are asked to draw boundaries for the colour terms in their language on a colour
chart, there is often great variability across languages, and even among speakers of
the same language.  A speaker may even reclassify a colour sample differently on
                                                
27In these examples, the asterisk indicates that a colour term does not qualify as basic, not that the
form is unattested in the language.

73
different occasions.  However, when subjects are asked to select good examples of
the basic colour terms in their language, variability is drastically reduced.  The
criteria for a good red for a speaker of one language will largely coincide with the
criteria for a good red for a speaker of a different language.  These focal reference
of basic colour terms are called focal colours.
As well, they suggested that an evolutionary hypothesis to explain the
hierarchy.  Berlin and Kay's other claim is that languages draw their colour terms
from the implicational hierarchy in (17).  The existence of a colour term in the list
entails that the language also has the colour terms higher in the list.  For example, if
green is a colour term in language X, then language X also has the colour terms red,
black, and white.  The converse is not true:  that green is a term does not entail that
the language will have the colours brown, grey, or other colours lower in the list:
(17)
{black, white}
all languages
{red}
 |
{yellow, green}
 |
{blue}
 |
{brown}
V
{grey, orange, purple, pink}
more specialized terms,
more 'evolved'
Citing exceptions to the original Berlin and Kay (1969) empirical study,
other authors have made modifications to the hierarchy, but these variations do not
concern us here.  The key insight is that basic colour terms are finite, and that each
colour term varies as to its denotations.  Whereas the human eye can distinguish
between thousands of hues and shades, languages partition colours differently.
While human perception clusters colours around paradigmatic instances, i.e., the
focal colours, each language may group these focal colours into basic colour terms.
As an example, consider the terms for green-blue, a category that Kay and
McDaniel (1978) calls grue.  Terms for grue often are bifocal:  the term refers to
both focal blue and focal green, rather than to one or the other of the two focal
colours or a colour in-between.  It is not a problem for the individuals to distinguish

74
between blue from green, but it is the language that classifies both colours under a
single word.  Zulu is such a language:  it has a grue term (luhlaza), and the fact that
Zulu grue is bifocal is shown in the expressions below, which can be used to
distinguish English blue from green if necessary:
(18)
a.
luhlaza  njengesibhakabhaka
'grue like the sky'
b.
luhlaza  njengotshani
'grue like the grass'
Essentially, we abstract away from information unnecessary in the use of
language.  So while green and blue vary in wavelength, a 'grue' speaker would
abstract away from that perceptual difference and classify them with a single
linguistic term.  This is an example of underspecification:  having a fixed template in
mind, the perceptual data is reinterpreted to fit into the linguistic categories that pre-
exist in the language in question.  While focal colours are not arbitrary, in that
human perception of focal colours seems to be uniform across the world, what
seems arbitrary is the language's choice to collapse focal colours into a basic colour
term.  Colour, then, claims Heider (1971), is 'a prime example of the influence of
underlying perceptual-cognitive factors on the formation and reference of linguistic
categories.'
2.2      Distinguished Points
There are natural points of transition inherent to certain classes of actions.
For example, in (19a), the act of clue discovery occurs at an instantaneous point in
time.  The clue was at first undiscovered, but at a specific moment of transition,
discovered.  Similarly in (19b), Watson's death occurs at a natural point when his
body no longer functions.28
                                                
28Of course, there are various definitions of when death has occurred:  a clinical death may be
different from other kinds of death.  It is important to note that the transition point of death can
vary from situation to situation, since our concepts of death vary.  However, the fact that we can

75
(19)
a.
Holmes discovered a clue under the desk.
b.
Watson died.
It may be argued that the discovery of the clue is not instantaneous, e.g., in
the scenario where Holmes first looks under the desk, then moves aside a shoe to
uncover a bloodstain.  Similarly, it is plausible that Watson may have clung to life
for days though on the edge of death, with his bodily functions shutting down one
by one until he is declared clinically dead.  These observations are quite acceptable,
but there is a big difference between the uptake process which leads to the point of
transition, and the point of transition itself.
An occurrent may have certain of these natural points of transition
lexicalized.  The lexicalized versions are called distinguished points.  A
distinguished point is a linguistic feature, and certain word classes are defined on the
basis of the presence or absence of a distinguished point.
2.2.1 Distinguished Points and Aspectual Classes
The distinguished point grammaticalizes natural endpoints.  Its presence in
aspectual data has been long noted in the literature; I use Vendler (1957)'s four
aspectual classes to illustrate.  The four aspectual classes, statives, activities,
accomplishments, and achievements, emerge from an attempt to characterize a
number of patterns in the aspectual data.  Vendler characterizes these four classes
thusly:
(20)
a.
Statives
A loved somebody from t1 to t2 means that at any instant
between t1 and t2 A loved that person.
b.
Activities
A was running at time t means that time instant t is on a
time stretch throughout which A was running.
                                                                                                                                    
agree on the existence of such a point tells us that there is a culmination point associated with the
verb die.

76
c.
Achievements
A won a race between t1 and t2 means that the time instant
at which A won the race is between t1 and t2
d.
Accomplishments
A was drawing a circle at t means that t is on the time
stretch in which A drew that circle
A distinguished point is indicative of an achievement or accomplishment.
Intuitively, the attainment of a new state or the culmination of an action indicates the
presence of a definable endpoint.  Whereas an achievement includes those actions
that have a definite instantaneous transition (21), an accomplishment involves actions
that do have uptake processes (22):
(21)
achievements:  arrive at the airport, win a race, find a coin, die, ....
(22)
accomplishments:  build a house, eat a cake, draw a picture, figure
out a puzzle....
An achievement may be viewed as a change in polarity:  with Bill arrived at
the airport, there is a change from Bill not being at the airport to his being at the
airport or its immediate vicinity.  Reach has a similar polarity, whereas leave has the
opposite one.  Cognitive verbs also have this change of polarity:  notice, spot,
recognize, identify, discover, find, convince.  All of these involve a change in the
cognitive relation between the denotation of the subject and the denotation of the
object.
The absence of the distinguished point is characteristic of activities (23).
Statives also lack distinguished points (24).  Neither of these have an innate point of
change associated with their semantics, though other grammatical elements (e.g., the
addition of the past tense morpheme -ed) could coerce a derived point of change
(see Chapter Four).
(23)
activities:  run, swim, think, sleep, cry, ....
(24)
statives:  love, hate, know, ....

77
2.2.1.1
The Imperfective Paradox
Certain tests have been suggested in the literature to distinguish these
aspectual classes.  For example, we can use the Imperfective Paradox (Dowty 1979,
Bach 1986, Pustejovsky 1991, et al.) to separate activities such as run, jump, and
think from accomplishments and achievements.  The method of application is
through the use of the progressive aspect.  If the progressive of the verb V (x is V-
ing) entails the perfective (x has V-ed), then the predicate is an activity or process.
For instance, the Imperfective Paradox shows that the verb run is a simple
activity without a lexicalized distinguished point.  Its present progressive does not
entail that an endpoint must be reached.  (25a) entails that Andrew has already done
some running (25b).
(25)
a.
Andrew is running.
b.
Andrew has run.
In contrast, arrive is not an activity and has a natural, distinguished endpoint.
(26a) does not entail that Andrew has already arrived (26b).  The same is true of
writing his thesis in (27):
(26)
a.
Andrew is arriving.
b.
Andrew has arrived.
(27)
a.
Andrew is writing his thesis.
b.
Andrew has written his thesis.
The semantics of an activity dictates that it can be completed to some degree
and still be in progress, because there is no natural endpoint.  However, neither an
achievement nor an accomplishment can be said to have been completed until the
natural endpoint associated with it has been attained.
2.2.1.2
Point Adverbials and Frame Adverbials
There are many other tests to distinguish the Vendler classes from one
another.  Of immediate interest are the Point Adverbials Test and the Frame
Adverbials Test.  The Point Adverbials Test (Dowty 1979, Krifka 1987, Pelletier &

78
Schubert 1989, Pustejovsky 1991) distinguishes achievements.  The prepositional
phrase at noon (or any point-like time adverbials) can be applied to point-like verbs
(28a-c).  It is likely that the natural point of transition is grammatically represented
as a distinguished point, allowing the transition to occur over an instant.  Note that
accomplishments (28d,e) can also be well-formed with point-adverbials.  However,
the actions of the accomplishments take longer than an instant, and the point-
adverbial becomes a frame-adverbial (see below) that starts at the specified time.
Thus, in (28d), the most acceptable interpretation is that Mary ate her lunch during
the noon hour, rather than eating it all in the blink of an eye:
(28)
a.
John died at 3 p.m.
b.
John found his wallet at 3 p.m.
c.
Mary arrived at noon.
d.
Mary ate her lunch at noon.
e.
Mary wrote a letter at noon.
The 
Frame 
Adverbials 
Test 
(Pustejovsky 
1991) 
distinguishes
accomplishments by the addition of in (the span of) an hour, as in (29a,b).  This
frame-adverbial should not be confused with the schedule-adverbial (starting) in an
hour, which is best observed in the present tense (Mary builds a house in a year).
Achievements do not have the same interpretation of the frame-adverbial, as shown
in (29c,d).  In (29c), Mary does not stretch out her arrival (normally an
instantaneous state change) over an hour; instead, she is scheduled to arrive in an
hour.  In the case of the frame-adverbial, the timespan indicated by the frame does
provide an endpoint.  Thus, the data suggests that accomplishments have
distinguished points.
(29)
a.
Mary walked to the store in an hour.
b.
Mary built a house in a year.
c.
Mary arrives in an hour.
d.
Mary found her wallet in ten minutes.

79
2.2.2 Distinguished Points and Complementarity
The function of the distinguished point is to separate the occurrent into two
distinct parts.  From those two event parts, projections onto both temporal and non-
temporal domains can be obtained.  The distinguished point projects a boundary that
bisects the timeline (and other domains) into two distinct and complementary parts.
A distinguished point always has a temporal correlate on the timeline.  As a result, a
distinguished point automatically bisects the timeline into two parts through
temporal projection:  the portion before its temporal index, and the portion after.
In one sense, the distinguished points are boundaries, or transitions, where
there is a change of state.  A boundary may be characterized as demarcating two
distinct parts of the same set, of which one subset has the property x and the other
subset does not have the property x.  This division into two can be likened to
complementarity:  once it is known what parts have the property x, the other parts
must lack property x.  Thus, a distinguished point is the demarcation between two
possible values of a predicate, whether it be motional or not; calling the
distinguished point a marker for complementation or a boundary amounts to the
same thing.
Consider, for instance, the verbs die and enter.  Both are verbs with
distinguished points:  die has a point of transition between the states of not-dead
(alive) and dead (30a), and enter at the moment when the participant moves from
one location across a boundary to another (30b).
(30)
a.
The dragon died.
b.
The dragon entered the castle.
The distinguished point, in addition to dividing the occurent into parts, also
divides the timeline with two distinct projections, labelled as p and q below, where p
precedes q in time.  We can think of p and q as two temporal intervals closed at one
end only.  (31a) illustrates the event of dying in (30a).  There is a point of death that

80
bisects the timeline into a period before the distinguished point, labelled p above, and
a period after the distinguished point, labelled q.
(31)
a.
b.
The same is observed for the event of a dragon entering a castle (30b, 31b),
except the distinguished point demarcates the moment of entry.  In (31a), the
endstate is a predicate dead(x), whereas in (31b) it is in(x,y), where y is location the
castle and x is the participant the dragon.  There is a strong correspondence between
the temporal projections p and q and the predicate domains, since both the temporal
and predicate domains define their projections from the distinguished point, a part of
the occurrent.29
A distinguished point is an idealization:  it divides the event into two parts:
an uptake phase and a result phase, with corresponding spells and spreads.  In the
utterance of a sentence like (30b), the dragon entered the castle, what is relevant is
that the castle has in fact been entered by the agent (the dragon), not the manner by
which that agent entered (flying, walking, etc.).  Such additional information may be
                                                
29Note that the predicate is known to be true only for the spell of the overall occurrent, since
conditions might have changed later on:  other instances of enter may have occurred.  For
instance, the dragon might have entered the castle in the morning and left later in the day.  It does
not invalidate the fact that it did enter the castle, and that such an event has occurred.

81
introduced by the addition of other sentences (32a) and phrases (32b), discourse
information and inferences (32c), and adverbs of manner (32d).  All unnecessary
information is underspecified, so that aspect may be properly calculated from a
simplistic system.
(32)
a.
The dragon entered the castle.  It had flown inside.
b.
The dragon entered the castle by an aerial route.
c.
The dragon entered the castle.  There was now a big hole in
the castle wall.
d.
Aloft, the dragon entered the castle.
One potential concern has to do with the interaction between motion verbs
and distinguished points.  Motions, on the whole, take longer than a single moment
to culminate.  For a dragon to enter the castle, it may, for example, need to go across
the moat, through the gatehouse, and finally into the courtyard.  Yet distinguished
points are but single moments.  Do we leave out a lot of information by adopting the
distinguished point?  Yes, much information is left underspecified when we discuss
the distinguished point; we leave aside such issues as homogeneity of the uptake
process.  But does leaving out such information have impact on the validity of our
analysis?  No; as I have shown in §2.1, underspecification is necessary and
expected.  I will discuss the treatment of homogeneity in §2.3.4.3.
2.3
Event Mereology and Localism
In this section, I examine several localistic theories, including Gruber (1975)
and Verkuyl (1993).  I also discuss Landman (1991), which summarizes some key
issues in the representation of change.
Recall from Chapter One that one of the ideas of localism is that specific
semantic roles appear in a three-place scheme (i.e., <Source, Path, Goal>), specific
in the sense that they express position in temporal structure.  The three-place
scheme, specifically spatial in origin, applies to non-locational changes by
metaphoric extension.  Localism takes spatial concepts such as motion, source, path

82
and goal and applies them uniformly to all kinds of changes.  It was stated that it is
difficult to use metaphor to extend a locational theory to non-locational data in the
first place, since there is no cogent theory of metaphor.
Please note that this observation about metaphor is different from that
observed of metaphor in sense modulation (as discussed in §2.1).  The argument
against localism using metaphor targets the lexicalization of the three parts of a
spatial path in all verbs of change.  Localism can only account for non-locational
changes by assigning all verbs the same three-part lexical specifications for aspect.
That is a use of metaphor distinct from the case of constructional polysemy, where
the issue is one of a single sense modulated to be concrete or abstract.  In the
former, localism imposes a three-part aspectual structure on all change when it is
difficult to figure out the Internal Path; in contrast, the latter is compatible with a
two-part aspectual structure that is capable of handling all kinds of change.
I look first at the features that make the following theories localistic in
nature.  Gruber's (1976) analysis qualifies as a localistic theory, because his theory
is based on motional phenomena and terms, such as Theme, Source, Goal, and Path.
Gruber (1976) shows that verbs of change operate in at least three domains:
Positional, Possessional, and Identificational, all of which are related due to their
syntactic behaviour with from and to (and into), or they incorporate the meaning of
those prepositions (e.g., become incorporates the meaning of into in 33c).
Examples are given in (33a-c), (34a-c), (35a-c) and (36a-c):
(33)
a.
POSITIONAL - go, travel, come, walk, etc.
b.
POSSESSIONAL - inherit, lose, acquire, etc.
c.
IDENTIFICATIONAL - change, turn, become, grow, etc.
(34)
POSITIONAL
a.
John went to the States.
b.
John traveled to the States.
c.
John came here from the States last week.
(35)
POSSESSIONAL
a.
John inherited a car from Bill.
b.
John lost his car to Bill.
c.
John acquired a car from Bill.

83
(36)
IDENTIFICATIONAL
a.
John changed from being generous to being
greedy.
b.
John turned into a greedy man.
c.
John became a greedy man.
All of these examples show a transition between one state and another, but
they do not necessarily involve motion.  For example, the verb inherit means a
transfer of possessions from one person to another, but the item in question does
not necessarily move in space (35a).  However, even for these non-locational
concepts, Gruber adopts the location-based three-part perspective of Source, Goal,
and Path.
Verkuyl (1993) is also a localistic analysis.  Inherent in Verkuyl (1993) is
the idea that there is always a Theme that undergoes a continuous change (in
increments), and that it begins at a Source and ends at a Goal, progressing through a
Path.  This idea is, of course, localistic in nature.
The localistic framework also takes the perspective that events are not
primitives, as they are used in (neo-)Davidsonian frameworks; rather, the events are
construed by language.  Verkuyl does not flatly deny that there are such things as
events.  Rather, he treats events as molecular.  That is to say, he looks at the internal
structure of the event, in terms of component parts that make up the event.
Using the event terminology from earlier this chapter, let us look at the key
elements of localism.    Localism divides motion into three parts.  For example, the
verb enter in (37) can be represented with Source, Internal Path, and Goal values as
per the A&S analysis presented in Chapter One.  An occurrent representing the
motion, then, requires three intervals on the timeline.  Under the localistic analysis,
this suggests two distinguished points, one marking the boundary between Source
and Internal Path, the other the boundary between Internal Path and Goal.  The
corresponding diagram to (37) is shown in (38).  Since localism requires three
aspectual specifications to account for the change, these distinguished points are
obligatory.

84
(37)
Norbert entered the house.
(38)
2.3.1 Dynamic vs. Static Models of Change
A frequent criticism of the Von Wrightian type of analysis of change as two
adjacent and opposing values of the same predicate is that it is inadequate in
accounting for the Internal Path in motions.  Below, I review some of the arguments
presented in Landman (1991) against the use of Von Wrightian change, and show
how the arguments against the so-called static model of change can be reconciled
with the principles of Event Mereology.
The Von Wrightian model, which is similar in spirit to the Event Mereology
approach, has been described by some to be a static 'filmstrip' model of change.
Kamp (1979b) explains the 'filmstrip' model rather simply.  Take a traffic light.
One moment it is red, then it is green:  the change does not progress through any
intermediate stage.30  Clearly a change took place, from red (¬p) to green (p).  But
when did the change occur?  Not before the red interval¬p has ended and not after
the green interval p has started.  The change must take place between these two
states.  However, this is incompatible with classical tense logic, which uses bivalent
truth values:  either the valuation of p is 0 or its valuation is 1.  Thus, there is
incompatibility:  at the moment of change, neither p nor ¬p holds.  There is no
                                                
30The converse, that of instantaneous change cannot be not true for a traffic light turning from red
to green:  recall that the cycle of traffic lights cycles from green to amber to red to green.  The
change from red to green is almost always instantaneous, barring measurements in microseconds or
flaws in the physical apparati.  However, to go from green to red, a traffic light must pass through
the intermediate amber stage.

85
moment of change, because the model of time is identical to that of a 'filmstrip':  the
illusion of change comes from distinct states succeeding one another rapidly.  This
static model of time defines a change as a pair of moments <t,t'>.  The actual change
or point of change is absent.
Landman (1991) agrees, as does Verkuyl (1993), that a consequence of the
'filmstrip' theory of change is the impossibility of giving a present tense report of a
change.  In other words, the point of change cannot occur at this very moment of
'now':  there is no point between t and t' that can be coindexed with the present.
While we can give a past tense report of the change, it would require now to be set at
either the point in time t or t'.  To do so would make the present tense false, due to
the principle of incompatibility.  For that reason, Landman and Verkuyl propose that
change is dynamic:  the temporal structure is 'constructed' or contributed by the verb
'dynamically'.  Landman suggests that classical model theory, which reconstructs
dynamic notions in terms of static reconstructions, is inadequate.  The essential
dynamic moment should remain a part of the semantics of change.  He cites the
example of the instantaneous change:  change is characterized in terms of the
predicate that holds before and after the moment of change, and the actual moment is
absent from the theory.  For that reason, Landman discusses Kamp (1979b)'s theory
that takes changes as primitives; time becomes a temporal ordering of changes that
are experienced.
Event Mereology differs from classical static models, in that it does retain
the actual moment of change as part of the event primitive:  the dynamic point of
change is the distinguished point.  With distinguished point, projections onto
spatial/non-spatial domains is made possible; it is these projections that correspond
to the static components of the classical model theory.  The dynamism is preserved
in the occurrent, whereas static counterparts can be derived from the dynamic
elements in the occurrent.

86
2.3.2 Deriving Internal Paths
One argument against static models of change deals with the apparent
problem of movement:  i.e., simple sentences expressing change over the same
interval, yet involving different factors that change at different times.  For example, if
John walked from X to Y, then there are two different changes involved:  a change
from X to ¬X, and from ¬Y to Y.
(39)
2.3.2.1
Two BECOME Operators
Dowty (1979) points out that a motion like in (40) actually involves two
different changes:  from the taxi being at the hotel to not the hotel, and from being
not at the airport to at the airport.  He argues that the motion cannot be expressed
as just one change or the other, but must involve both changes.  He uses the
sentence operator B, where Bp means 'p becomes to be the case', i.e., there is a
change from ¬p to p.  Dowty proposes to represent (40) as B¬X ∧ BY, where B is
the BECOME operator, X is at the hotel, and Y is at the airport.
(40)
The taxi careened from the hotel to the airport.
Landman, who adopts a tripartite localistic position, claims that the data on
spatial motion requires there to be a region of space that is between but not at X and
Y.  It is argued in Landman (1991) that there must be an Intermediate Path where
neither X nor Y are true.  He argues that Dowty's B operator cannot adequately
express this Intermediate Path.  The closest that Dowty's B operator can get is a
conjunction of two changes:  B¬X & BY.

87
However, Landman (1991) argues that the above solution is unsatisfactory,
because the two B(ECOME) operators are not temporally ordered.  Given Dowty's
definitions, the conjunction can only be true at an interval consisting of two
moments, forcing the absurd conclusion that the changes are simultaneous and the
same point.  Without temporal ordering of the points of change, one must assume
that the points of change for both B¬X and BY coincide.  The timeline would look
like (41) below.  It is argued that the only alternative is to adopt a temporal
conjunction, AND, which will distance the two Bs temporally (see Cresswell 1977,
van Benthem 1983).
(41)
Landman's observation that there must be an intermediate region is of course
physically necessary.31  There must be a stretch of time during which Jane was
neither at the hotel or at the airport, for sentence (40).  However, I believe the same
effect as a tripartite path can be achieved with two distinguished points by modifying
Dowty's solution.
The primary objection from Landman is that the two BECOME operators do
not impose a temporal order.  It must still be true that in from X to Y, that X still
occurs before Y.  The prepositional phrases (in this case, from and to)
compositionally determine the meaning, where the state of from must be true at the
beginning of the change, and the final outcome of the change must be the endstate of
to; this applies even with abstract changes, such as (42), where the change of
possession began with the car in John's mother's possession.  However, the nature
                                                
31An exception is the verb teleport, which is a change of location verb that does not involve an
intermediate location for motion to occur.  Teleport (and beam from Star Trek) can have the
interpretation where there is an intermediate step (e.g., the pattern buffer in Star Trek technology
mediates the beaming of people from one place to another), it is not necessary that there be such a
stage.

88
and existence of an Internal Path is derived through pragmatics and the type of
predicates involved.
(42)
John inherited a car from his mom.
2.3.2.2
Two Distinguished Points
The tripartite division is a consequence of the interaction between two
distinguished points.  For example, the activity verb drive does not have a
distinguished point in its lexical entry, since it does not come to a distinct point of
change; it is a process, not the boundary.32  However, the prepositional phrases from
the hotel and to the airport in (40) above are each associated with a distinguished
point on the occurrent (see §3.3 for more details on the semantics of prepositions).
Whether the points of change (the B operator for Dowty) may or may not
align depends on the pragmatics and the nature of the occurrent in question.  In fact,
the variability in the (non-)coincidence of distinguished points produces the desired
coverage of the empirical data.  Consider these three sentences below:
(43)
a.
The traffic light changed from green to red.
b.
The traffic light changed from red to green.
c.
The strip of litmus paper changed from red to blue.
Each sentence above involves two distinguished points associated with the
prepositions: the from-point and the to-point.  Only the temporal orderings of these
two distinguished points differ in these three sentences.  The Landman perspective
of a motion is parallel to the sentence in (43a), where the from-point precedes the to-
point, and there is an intermediate stage (when the traffic light is neither green nor
red, but amber), illustrated in (44a).  The timeline diagrams in (44a-c) illustrate the
sentences in (43a-c) respectively.
                                                
32Note that when the past tense morpheme is added, then we provide a distinguished point that
terminates the activity.  However, that distinguished point is not inherent to the activity verb
drive.  See §4.2.

89
(44)
a.
b.
c.
Two other possibilities exist:  coincidence of the from- and to-points (44b),
and the to-point preceding the from-point (44c).  The former, that of coincidence, is
an instantaneous change with no intermediate stage.  Such is the case of a traffic
light turning from red to green, with the amber light not being a valid intermediate
option.  The latter, that where the distinguished point of to precedes that of from, is a
gradual change where an intermediate stage satisfies both predicates simultaneously.
A good example is the colour change observed with litmus paper.  As a strip of
litmus paper reacts with a base, the change from red to blue could be gradual, with
both colours being present on the litmus paper at the same time, with intermediate
colours also present (45).33
(45)
Note that we cannot simply say that the from distinguished point is always
ordered before the to distinguished point.  We must allow for coincidence of the
                                                
33Litmus paper is used to test the acidity of substances.  A strip turns red if placed in acid; it turns
blue if placed in base.  Often, only one end of a strip of litmus paper is dipped into the substance
to be tested, and thus a gradient is produced as the chemical diffuses up the paper strip.

90
distinguished points in the occurrent, or allow the to distinguished point precede the
from distinguished point.  This vagueness in pragmatic ordering of distinguished
points is different from the projections from those distinguished points.  It still must
remain the case that in from X to Y, X is the beginning attribute and Y the final
attribute.  We still must preclude Y from preceding X.  This ordering can be
achieved by defining from X as always B¬X, and to Y as always BY, if we use
Dowty's B operator as an example.  Then, we always have X preceding Y.34
Landman (1991) is unsatisfied with the above idea of leaving the points of
transition unspecified as to when they take place with respect to each other (i.e., no
time indices) and letting the facts of physical space determining the ordering for two
reasons:  (i) to get the two changes to hold at an interval, the semantics is permitted
to be largely unconstrained, and that the distinction between a series of changes and
a single change is left unexplored; (ii) the problem is pushed to the pragmatics.
As argued, I differ from Landman in this respect.  In fact, it is possible to let
the pragmatics control the alignment of the distinguished points.  Different factors -
such as the object's ability to take simultaneous properties, which domain is involved
(e.g., it is impossible to be in two places at once) - do affect how the transition
points align, and how many states are derived.
2.3.2.3
Step and Walk
Consider the verb step below:
(46)
Bill stepped from the bathroom into the bedroom.
                                                
34The only place where X might not precede Y is in the case where X is considered finite, and the
moment of change from ¬Y to Y coincides with or precedes the beginning of the X interval.  Under
this scenario the second change would occur before the first state even took place.  However, if we
view X and Y as projections off an occurrent, it is possible that the timeline intervals are bounded
on one side only, i.e., at the point of change.  Then, X will not have a beginning, since that edge
is left open.  A possible objection is that in a motion like John went from Paris to Rome, John
may not necessarily have been in Paris all his life (no beginning for the state of being in Paris).
That may be true; but in the calculus of the aspect, such information is irrelevant; for all intents
and purposes of the calculation, being in Paris is unbounded in the past.

91
Depending on the construction of the house, there may or may not be an
intermediate path.  Suppose the bathroom is down the hall from the bedroom:  then,
Bill's passage through the hall will constitute his path.  However, suppose that the
bathroom is one accessible directly from the bedroom.  It seems ludicrous to insist
that there is an intermediate path.
Notice that the following variant of (46) is odd with regard to the scenario in
(47):
(47)
Bill walked from the bathroom into the bedroom.
The strangeness follows from the lexical knowledge of walk.  All walking
involves taking steps.  Taking a single step cannot be called walking, although taking
a single step is stepping.  The oddity arises from it being strange to imagine taking
more than one step from one room to an immediately adjacent room via an
accessible doorway; it should take only a single step.  Thus, the single step cannot
be an instance of walking.
2.3.3 Negation and Complementation
Let us look more in depth at the types of predicates that interact in the from-
to frame.  The nature of the predicates determines the alignment and ordering of the
distinguished points.  It seems that primary criteria of whether or not two attributes
can co-exist in overlap in a from X to Y construction are the nature of the object(s)
that possess(es) the qualities X and Y, and whether or not the two qualities X and Y
are mutually exclusive.  Thus, it is essential to survey the different kinds of
predicates, and the different types of negation that relate these predicates X and Y
together.
2.3.3.1
Contraries
To understand the relationships that can exist between two predicates, and
the effect that such relationships may bear upon the interpretation of paths (whether

92
they are bipartite or tripartite), let us begin by considering Aristotle.  Aristotle
discusses different sorts of semantic relations that obtain between words:
correlation, contrariety, and privation.  While contradiction may seem to be another
type of negation, note that contradiction applies only to sentences, not to words and
their predicates.  For instance, (48a) is an affirmative, where as (48b) is a negative,
and they contradict each other.
(48)
a.
He stole Mary's watch.
b.
He did not steal Mary's watch.
Correlation is a relation between two relatives, for instance, double versus
half.  There is an interdependence of reference:  A is the double of B iff B is the half
of A.
Contrariety is a relation between two contraries, for example, good versus
bad.  Two contraries cannot both apply at once to the same object.  There are two
different types of contraries:  mediate contraries (49a) and immediate contraries
(49b).
(49)
a.
mediate contraries:  even - odd, sick - healthy, blind - sighted
b.
immediate contraries:  white - black, hot - cold, fat - skinny
Immediate contraries are also known as privation.  Either one or the other
(the privative or the positive) applies to an object, never both, and it has to have one
value or the other (if applicable).  Thus, a number is either even or odd, and it cannot
be the case that a number is both or neither.  Aristotle in Categories states the
following definition for immediate contraries:
(50)
Those contraries which are such that the subjects in which they are
naturally present, or of which they are predicated, must necessarily
contain either the one or the other of them, and have no intermediate.
Thus disease and health are naturally present in the body of an
animal, and it is necessary that one or the other should be present in
the body of an animal.  Categories 12a 1-7 (p. 7, Horn 1989).
In contrast, mediate contraries do have a non-excluded middle.  For
example, an object need not be white or black, but it could be a colour which is
intermediate (grey).  These can be further divided into simple mediate contraries,

93
such as black versus red, and polar mediate contraries, such as black versus white.
For mediate contraries to be polar, each contrary cannot have more than one
contrary.  Thus, they represent extremes along an interval.
Aristotle acknowledges the fact that mediate contraries have an intermediate
term which possesses neither of the attributes; this behaviour permits mediate
contraries to be viewed from a spatial perspective:
(51)
It seems that in defining contraries of every kind men have recourse
to a spatial metaphor, for they say that those things are contraries
which, within the same class, are separated by the greatest possible
distance.  (Categories 6a 15-19).
For two polar contraries, an object cannot have both attributes.  However, the
negations of the polar contraries can be possessed simultaneously by an object
(leaving aside cases where different parts of the object may have the contraries
separately, e.g., an oreo cookie with black and white parts).  For instance, an object
cannot be totally white (w) and totally black (b) at the same time.  However, the
object can be totally not white (¬w) and totally not black (¬b) simultaneously, e.g.,
gray.  Oesterle (1962) cites the following passage from St. Thomas, lesson 11,
which observes the same:
(52)
For any two polar contraries which by definition cannot
simultaneously inhere in the same thing (e.g., white and black), their
contradictories can (i.e., when something is pallid or yellow).  Thus
the contradictories of contraries define an intermediate term.
(Oesterle 1962: 90)
The division of contraries (Horn 1989:39) is illustrated below, with
terminology attributed to the originators of particular terms:

94
(53)
opposed terms
/
\
CONTRARIES
CONTRADICTORIES
[Barnes:  incompatibles]
/
\
MEDIATE [Boethius]IMMEDIATE [Boethius]
[McCall:  weak]
[McCall:  strong]
[Englebretsen:  non-logical]
[Englebretsen:  logical]
/
\
[Barnes:  contradictory predicates]
SIMPLE
POLAR
odd/even, p/not p
[Cajetan: reductive]
[Cajetan: absolute]
[Sigwart: disjunct]
[Barnes:  polar opposites]
black/red
black/white
2.3.3.2
Different Possibilities for From-To
On the basis of the classification above, I argue that the existence or absence
of an intermediate stage is completely dependent on the kinds of predicates involved.
Let us look at the possibilities for P and Q:
(54)
a.
immediate contraries
P and Q are predicates that are complete opposites and cannot be
true simultaneously for any object x at time t, and it is necessary that
one of P or Q be true (e.g., alive, dead)
b.
polar mediate contraries
P and Q are predicates that are complete opposites, and cannot be
true simultaneously for any object x at time t, but there can be an
intermediate where neither P nor Q are true; there is only one
contrary for P, and that is Q, and vice versa (e.g., black, white)
c.
simple mediate contraries
P and Q are predicates that cannot be true simultaneously for any
object x at time t, but there can be an intermediate where neither P nor
Q are true (e.g., black, red)
d.
synonymy
P and Q are the same kind of predicate or synonymous, likely with
different connotations or degree (e.g., late, tardy)
e.
unrelated predicates
P and Q are unrelated predicates that can be true for an object x at the
same time t. (e.g., cold, old)
Corresponding examples are given below:
(55)
a.
Edward went from being alive to being dead.
b.
The computer screen went from being black to being white.
c.
The computer screen went from being black to being red.
d.
?Edward went from being cold to being old.
e.
Edward went from being tardy to being late.

95
2.3.3.2.1    When P and Q Are Immediate Contraries
For immediate contraries, these are the cases of instantaneous change.  As
such, they cause localism the greatest amount of trouble, due to the lack of an
intermediate state.  The two distinguished points for from and to must align, since if
they do not, we are forced into a structure where the intermediate state has values
that conflict with each other.  For immediate contraries, it must be the case that G is
equivalent to ¬F:  Yet, if there is an intermediate state where ¬F overlaps ¬G (as in
56), a paradox arises:  the highlighted interval must be both ¬F and ¬¬F
simultaneously.  That interval cannot exist.
(56)
Localism appears to obey the Law of Contradiction (LC), but not the Law of
the Excluded Middle (LEM), since a middle term is permitted.  Our idea of
complementation fits in with the idea of the Law of Contradiction (57a) together
with the Law of the Excluded Middle (57b), and does not permit an intermediate
term.
(57)
If any two terms F and G are contradictories, then:
a.
by LC, for any a in the relevant domain, ¬(Fa ∧ Ga)
b.
by LEM, for any a in the relevant domain, (Fa ∨ Ga)
2.3.3.2.2    When P and Q Are Polar or Simple Mediate Contraries
Yet even with both LC and LEM both activated, it is still possible to derive a
middle state where neither F nor G apply; such is the case for both polar and simple
mediate contraries.  The mediate contraries permit the possibility by having the not-
F and not-G regions overlap, since there is no requirement for G to be equivalent to

96
¬F as for immediate contraries.  This configuration, of course, has already been
shown several times:
(58)
In (59a), if John changes from being generous to being greedy, that is a
combination of two changes:  generous to not generous, and not greedy to greedy.
Here, it depends on our conceptions of generosity and greed whether or not there is
coincidence of the two distinguished points.  Are greed and generosity predicates
that are exclusive of each other, or can their meanings overlap to some degree on a
continuum?  The change from being generous to greedy may be instantaneous
(59b), or involve an intermediate stage where he is neither greedy nor generous
(59c):
(59)
a.
John changed from generous to greedy.
b.
John changed from being generous to being greedy in the blink of
an eye.
c.
John changed from being generous to being careful with money,
to being greedy.
What of the case where John is both generous and greedy at the same time,
like the litmus paper scenario illustrated previously?  Unlike a litmus paper, which
can have gradients of colour simultaneously, it is harder to reconcile the states of
being generous with being greedy.  It seems that greedy and generous are antonyms
that prevent them from being descriptive of the subject simultaneously, at least in
most contexts.  However, if we permit the subject to have different grades of greed
and generosity (achievable by having more than one person, for example in 60), then
it is possible to have overlap of the two characteristics:
(60)
One by one, these baseball players changed from being generous to being
greedy when they went professional.

97
It seems that the cases where the distinguished point for to temporally
precedes that of from are restricted to two types of constructions:  (i) a single object
that has parts of whose different parts contrary attributes may apply, and (ii) a
collection of items (plurals or mass nouns) whose members do not have such parts,
but as a collection its items may be partitioned into subsets classified by the
different attributes.  The former applies in the case of the litmus paper test; the latter
to the case of baseball players.  It is also possible to have a mix of the two.  For
example, a balloon may have red and white parts simultaneously (61a).  Yet (61b) is
ambiguous:  it may be the case that each balloon is entirely white or red, and that
there are ten red ones and seven white ones; alternatively, there may be seventeen
red-plus-white balloons altogether.  We must also allow for a mixture of the two,
e.g., five red-plus-white balloons, four reds, and eight whites.
(61)
a.
The balloon is red and white.
b.
The seventeen balloons are red and white.
2.3.3.2.3    When P and Q Are Synonyms
Cases of synonymy, such as from tardy to late, work in the from-to frame
well.  Given synonymy, the meanings differ between the words only by connotation
and degree.  A continuum of, say, lateness, is easily identified and the boundaries
determined by F and G.  Since it is a matter of degree between the two words, some
sort of intermediate region consisting of intermediate degrees almost always exists.
For example, if one can imagine a difference between wet and soaked (the latter
having the connotation of being completely wet), then one is likely to also conceive
of an intermediate state between wet and soaked.  Compare (62a) and (62b):
(62)
a.
Johan stepped into the pool, and got wet.
b.
Johan fell into the pool, and got soaked.
Naturally, comparatives (63a) and superlatives (63b) also fall into this
category:

98
(63)
a
Johan's jokes went from bad to worse.
b.
Johan's jokes went from being worse than Carlos' to being
the worst.
2.3.3.2.4    When P and Q Are Unrelated Predicates
With unrelated predicates, such combinations as ?John went from cold to
old are mildly acceptable.  The marginal acceptability arises from a lack of a
coherent continuum:  meaning of cold has nothing to do with the meaning of old.  It
appears that changes in the from F to G construction need some semantic element in
common between F and G, either contrariety or synonymy.
I have argued that the alignment of the distinguished points relies on factors
other than an arbitrary from (Source) preceding to (Goal) order, as suggested by
localism.  Instead, alignment is dependent on the nature of the event and its
participants.  It has been shown that the predicates associated with the occurrent
control whether or not there is an intermediate region, and likewise determine the
way the distinguished points are aligned.
2.3.4 The Truth Value Gap and Homogeneity
In this section, we look at Dowty (1979), Landman (1991), and Verkuyl
(1993) in more detail, focussing on their treatment of potentially problematic issues
in their systems of aspect.  The issues of homogeneity and the truth value gap will
be addressed.
2.3.4.1
The Truth Value Gap
Von Wright (1965)'s transition operator T 'and then' is a good starting point
for the discussion of the truth value gap problem.  Von Wright uses T to link a state
s with its negation ¬s, and orders them in time:  ¬sTs.  Semanticists  are naturally
interested in what happens between the two states, ¬s and s (cf. Dowty 1979,
Landman 1991).  Questions arise as to whether there is an interval between ¬s and

99
s; if so, is the interval between ¬s and s homogeneous; are the subintervals
homogeneous; and is there an actual point at which change occurs?  If there is an
intermediate point or interval, what would be its truth value?  In a classical bivalent
logic system, either the truth value is true or false; if s is true, then ¬s would be
false, but that leaves the hypothesized intermediate interval without a possible truth
value.  A possible out is to leave certain intervals to be underdefined, i.e., a truth
value gap.
For example, Landman (1991) raises a question about Humberstone's
(1979) interval semantics, which uses a classical logic:  what is the truth value for a
larger interval p q (64c) that spans both p (64a) and q (64b), when p and q are
contradictory?  Furthermore, what happens in between p and q, where the change
should be located?
(64)
a.
p
John is not married.
b.
q
John is married.
c.
p q
?
(65)
p q
________________________
____________  ___________
p
q
In Landman (1991)'s discussion of Interval Semantics, it is assumed that all
atomic formulas express states, and that changes are changes from one state to
another.  Downward monotonicity is imposed as an idealization, to simplify the
analysis (where downward monotonicity means that if a state is true at an interval,
then all of its subintervals must be true as well).  Thus, for the interval p q to be
true, all of its parts must be true.  However, the proposition John is married is false
at p, so clearly p q must be false in the example above (given that downward
monotonicity must apply to the interval p q).  However, this does not conform with
the intuition that at least part of the p q interval contains a true value for the
proposition John is married.

100
Landman suggests that the introduction of a monotonic negation operator
Fx, x fails to be the case, distinguishes two kinds of negation and avoids the problem
above.  ¬x is external negation, whereas Fx is internal negation.  ¬x means that the
predicate x cannot be true for that interval, but does not impose falsehood on all
subintervals of that interval; however, the latter (Fx) indicates that the predicate x
must be false at all subintervals.  Thus, the superinterval p q is true for ¬(John is
married), and does not impose the restriction that all of its subintervals must have
the meaning John is not married.  In contrast, p means F(John is married), i.e., that
he cannot be at any point during that interval be married.
(66)
p q
= ¬(John is married)
_____________________________________
__________________  __________________
p = F(John is married)
q = (John is married)
Note that even with this modification, there is a gap between p and q, for
which there is no truth value, i.e., a truth value gap.  Landman states that classical
logic is bivalent: all predicates have either a true valuation or false, nothing in
between.  However, the principle of incompatibility (at the moment of change neither
p nor ¬p holds) forces there to be no true moment of change.  Even though we
know that the change occurs between p and q, classical logic would not permit us to
locate a moment (or interval) that corresponds to the moment of change.  For
instance, for sentence (67), we cannot locate the precise moment of now:
(67)
It is becoming dark now.
A similar phenomenon appears in Von Wright (1965), where change is
represented as an initial state and an end state, correlating to points on a timeline.
Von Wright's approach, according to Verkuyl (1991), has a no-man's land between
the two.  The intuition is that in (68), there is a state when John is not dressed at all
(¬s), an interval when he is half-dressed (?s), and a final state when he is dressed
(s).  The problem resides with ?s.  How do we represent the truth value of the period
when he is not fully dressed?

101
(68)
John dressed himself.
An alternative for describing the change intermediate between one state and
another is to use vagueness:  leave the interval between the true and false valuations
unspecified for a truth value.  In other words, the truth value gap is removed with the
introduction of three kinds of stability operators:  Fp (fails), Up (undefined), and Pp
(presently/true).  Changes from ¬p to p, then, are constituted of a Fp interval,
followed by a Up interval, and a Pp interval.  Essentially, the point of change is in
the U interval, where p is neither true nor false:
(69)
Fp
Up
Pp
__________________  _______________  __________________
The three valued model is not without problems.  For instance, p  ¬p is not
a contradiction under a three-valued logic.  Landman goes on to modify the
vagueness analysis with supervaluations to correct for flaws in the vagueness model:
supervaluations allow the vague interval in a change to be determined precisely.  In
essence, making the change precise means filling in the Up interval so that it
becomes entirely a two-part change, from Fp to Pp directly.  This modification is
necessary for cases where the precise moment of change can be located.  Rather
than going into a rather lengthy discussion of the problems of vagueness already
presented in Landman (1991), I refer the reader to that work.  Instead, we will return
to the Event Mereology treatment of the truth value gap.
2.3.4.2
The Truth Value Gap and Event Mereology
To reiterate, the truth value gap problem arises from the bivalence of
classical logic and the principle of incompatibility:  with both factors involved, the
moment of change cannot be located on the timeline.  Bivalence must assign a value
to all moments/intervals, but at the moment of change, clearly neither ¬p nor p
apply.  The change must apply after ¬p ends, but the change must also take place
before p begins.  Incompatibility does not permit the moment of change to have

102
either the p or ¬p values.  Neither the classical instant tense logic nor an interval
semantics permit the change to take place between these two states.
The bivalent incompatibility argument, to give it a name, takes as a direct
consequence the impossibility of locating the dynamic moment of change at the
present moment now.  But the bivalent incompatibility analysis of change hinges on
the representation of change entirely on interval or moment primitives.  All elements
of the change are assumed to be laid out fundamentally on the timeline.
Event Mereology, however, makes use of the occurrent as the primitive, of
which distinguished points are proper parts denoting moments of change.
Distinguished points are distinct from moments on the timeline because they are not
simply temporal moments, although one can certainly map the distinguished point
onto the timeline.  Distinguished points also form the boundaries for predicates
such as location and states of being.  Thus, if necessary, one can locate the exact
moment of change by projecting the distinguished point onto the temporal
dimension.  For the purposes of locating the point of change in time, there is no
need to calculate whether the moment is ¬p or p, because the predicate p figures into
the aspectual calculation only when there are projections onto the spatial (or other)
domains.  Thus, for the sentence The light is changing now, now can refer to the
present moment.
(70)
The distinguished point does bisect the timeline into two; the corresponding
spells are associated with adjacent spreads that have different valuations for the same
predicate.  The projected spreads divides their continua into two.  For instance, to

103
enter the store means that the spatial continuum is divided into p, in(the store) and
¬p, ¬in(the store).  Each spread and its valuation is linked to the two halves of the
timeline, thereby resembling a static 'filmstrip' model of change.
Is the moment of change required to have a valuation?  I believe it does not
require one.  In the bivalent incompatibility model, the ontology requires that every
moment be associated with a bivalent value because change is represented solely by
temporal parts directly participating in predicates.  Event Mereology uses events as
ontological objects, and derives the temporal spells and the predicative spreads from
the distinguished point.  The projections are used for grammatical purposes, fitting
into a syntactic frame that makes use of the two valuated predicates.  We know that
one valuation precedes the other, but there is no need in the aspectual grammatical
module to locate the moment of change, which is more likely a function of tense.
Another way to look at it is, tense locates the moment of change without
needing to know what is on either side of the change, while aspect acknowledges
two distinct and complementary predicate valuations without needing to locate the
precise moment of change.  While tense and aspect do interact, they are looking at
very different kinds of information.  The difficulty with the bivalent incompatibility
model is made clear:  tense phenomena (locating points in time) and aspectual
phenomena (attributing predicate values with intervals) are treated ensemble when
the modules should be treated as distinct, leading to an avoidable clash of principles.
Thus, the problem of the truth value gap is an illusion:  there can only be a truth
value gap iff the moment of change must have a valuation with respect p, and it does
not need one on account of the hypothesis that a moment of change is defined on
the timeline only during tense calculation, not aspectual calculation.

104
2.3.4.3
Homogeneity
An issue tied in with the truth value gap problem is that of homogeneity.
Dowty (1979: 57) formulates the homogeneity criterion as follows for activity verbs
(71), and Verkuyl (1993) offers one possible logical formulation (72):
(71)
Homogeneity
If V is an activity verb, then x V-ed for y time entails that at any time x
V-ed was true.  If V is an accomplishment verb, then x V-ed for y time
does not entail that x V-ed was true during any time within y at all.
(72)
Homogeneity
If the temporal interval I defined by the operator T is taken as a
collection I of its subintervals, then for each ij,ik ⊆ I, if ij ∈ I and ik
⊆ ij, then ik ∈ I.
Verkuyl (1993) argues against the use of homogeneity to characterize
activity verbs.  Verkuyl prefers the approach adopted by Gruber (1976), because the
question of homogeneity does not arise.  Gruber's analysis is additive:  it builds up
to a structure that has a begin and end point at which ¬s and s hold respectively.
Cumulativity (additivity) is definable in terms of closure, which is not the same
notion as homogeneity.  Homogeneity (closely linked with monotone decreasing
structures) and cumulativity (a weaker version of monotone increasing structure) can
be defined as follows:
(73)
Cumulativity
If the temporal interval I defined by the operator T is taken as a
collection I of its subintervals, then for each ij,ik ⊆ I, if ij ∈ I and ik
∈ I, then ij ∪ ik ∈ I.
(74)
Homogeneity
If the temporal interval I defined by the operator T is taken as a
collection I of its subintervals, then for each ij,ik ⊆ I, if ij ∈ I and ik
∈ I, then ij ∩ ik ∈ I.
Homogeneity will be shown to be possible only in idealized situations for
activities.  The problem of homogeneity in the definition of activities is a pragmatic
issue, not a linguistic feature.  For instance, one might believe the act of running to
be homogeneous, yet in fact it is not:  running involves two feet in alternating contact

105
with the floor.  When the motion is analyzed in greater detail, it becomes evident that
at some point a subpart of running is no longer running (e.g., when one foot is in
the air and the other on the ground, which is a step but not a run), thereby
invalidating the homogeneity hypothesis.  There may be breaks where the runner
stops to catch his or her breath, slows down, etc.
Dowty (1979) discusses a similar example (75):  if she stopped before
taking three steps (the minimum requirement for a waltz), can she still be said to
have been waltzing?
(75)
She stopped waltzing.
Verkuyl (1993) points out that there may be a scale to this type of lexical
homogeneity, where there is a gradient on the homogeneity of verbs (76).  For
instance, buy is less homogeneous than fall:  He argues that while these examples of
lexical homogeneity may be interesting from a philosophical perspective, they are
not relevant in event construal.
(76)
fly - fall - polish - walk - dial - buy - discover
Verkuyl states that the the problem with homogeneity is that entire VPs are
being wrongly analyzed as a complex verb; the interaction between object arguments
and the verb is being ignored.  He proposes instead that the localistic approach is
better:  building up a structure having a beginning point ¬s and an endpoint s,
instead of assigning ¬s and s to the endpoints of an interval and imposing
restrictions like homogeneity on its internal structure.
Under Verkuyl, the verb phrase uses its object (77a) (or its subject, for
passives and intransitives,  77b, 77c respectively) as a kind of 'space' that the Theme
moves through.  For example, in (77a), if John ate three sandwiches then John
moves through the 'space' created by the three sandwiches.  In (77b), the pizza itself
is the quantity which is consumed over time, and in (77c), the ice is the quantity that

106
evaporates 
over 
time. 
 
I 
provide 
additional, 
abstract 
examples 
in
(77d-f).
(77)
a.
John ate three sandwiches.
b.
The pizza was eaten.
c.
The ice evaporated.
d.
John remembered his ideas.
e.
Love blossomed.
f.
Othello's distrust of Desdemona grew.
By using these 'spaces', Verkuyl is able to treat verb phrases as odometers:
he takes the continuous Path that every VP has and quantizes the parts of a Path so
that there are smaller path segments, as shown in (78).
(78)
Change in a domain of interpretation is conceptualized in terms of a
movement along a path from point zero to or towards an endpoint.  There are two
temporal systems interacting here:  one based on the natural numbers N, like an
odometer; the other is based on the real numbers R, which is unbroken.  The
presence of the quantized segments allows us to 'jump' in time, like N, but also like
R, the path is in one sense unbroken.  Because the segments are quantized (and are
filters, i.e., closed under intersection), the Von Wrightian problem with a truth value
gap is avoided.
Verkuyl argues that the problem of homogeneity does not arise in his
analysis, because verbs of change are additive or cumulative processes that progress
from Source to Goal.  If the verb induces a structure with a Path that already
connects to a Goal, then we need not worry about homogeneity, because a Path does
not need to be (and very often is not) homogeneous.  It merely needs to be
cumulative.

107
I suggest that the question is not 'what happens between ¬s and s', as
Verkuyl believes.  Verkuyl, by taking a localistic approach, is tied down to the
peculiarities of spatial motion, incorporating Source, Internal Path, and Goal; the
dangers of doing that have already been pointed out in Chapter One.  While
homogeneity is not required in Event Mereology either, EM leaves the issue of
homogeneous intervals out of the discussion from a different perspective.  Since the
event is primitive, the occurrent itself contains much information that is left out of
the aspectual system.  Homogeneity does not cause problems for the system,
because the spells are derived from the occurrent:  they are expected to be
idealizations used in the grammatical system, and thus the projected states can be
treated as atomic (see §2.3.4.4).  We do not have to concern ourselves with the loss
of crucial information, which is still preserved by the presence of the occurrent.  The
discussions in the next two sections clarify the issue of atomicity in states and
processes under Event Mereology.
2.3.4.4
States in Event Mereology
Event Mereology views states as derived parts of an event primitive.  States
do not include change in their meaning.  Thus, state verbs must denote occurrents
without a grammaticalized point of change, because no such distinguished point
exists during the occurrent.  In one sense, the state is atomic from a grammatical
point of view:  further partitions of the state certainly are possible (e.g., being sick
may involve stages of nausea, vomiting, and fever), such refinements are not matters
for the grammar but rather the ontology.  The grammar treats states as indivisible
units.  Thus, a state is a single, undivided spell projected off the occurrent.
For example, a verb like love denotes an occurrent without any
grammaticalized transition.  To love someone (a state which persists) is not
equivalent to coming to love someone (an act which does have a definite resultant
state, and thus a distinguished point of change in the occurrent).  Though one might

108
argue that love could involve subinstances of love, e.g., a fervent period of love is
followed by a less fervent period of love, it is only an idiosyncratic property of this
occurrent that its subparts may be themselves instances of love.  The important point
is that the verb love treats the spell as atomic, and its lexical entry does not contain a
grammaticalized point of change.
Here is an example of atomicity.  In (79), we know that John's act of
marrying Sue is unlikely a part of his love for Mary.  Yet we also know that his love
for Mary persisted even through the period of time when he married Sue, though
one could argue that the degree of love was diminished during that spell.
(79)
Though John married Sue, he really loves Mary.
The state love, though it can include subphases where there may be differing
degrees of love, ignores the internal changes because the subphases are not involved
in the projection of the spell from the main phase of love onto the timeline:
(80)
Thus, homogeneity seems to be only applicable in the sense that a state is
associated with only one predicate's valuation throughout its length.  Homogeneity
is inapplicable at the level of the occurrent.  As shown by the example of love above,
an occurrent may contain many subparts that are not homogeneous.
2.3.4.5
Processes in Event Mereology
Dowty (1979) assumes that all subintervals greater than a moment possess
the same truth value as their parent intervals.  In other words, processes are
downwardly closed.  In EM, however, we take an alternative view of processes
similar to that of states as described in the previous section.

109
Verbs are subdivided into those verbs which grammaticalize a unique point
of change and those that grammaticalize no change at all.  Both states and processes
fall into the latter category, i.e., there is no distinguished point.  States and processes
differ in that states are marked for no change, while processes are unmarked for
change.  While processes do involve change of a sort (state of change - see Chapter
Three), the lack of grammaticalization of any internal points of change makes them
resemble states in behaviour, which lack any kind of change.
In EM, then, a process occurrent is also like a state in that only a single
phase is involved in projecting a single spell onto the timeline.  This phase that
demarcates the spell for processes (i.e., tells us when the process starts and ends)
can be called the distinguished phase; however, the distinguished phase appears to
be equivalent to the projection of the span of the whole occurrent, if that occurrent
has a measurable start and end (as in an activity or accomplishment).35
States are atomic:  a state spell has no smaller units.  For example, to know
Mary is a state which is indivisible, in the sense that there are no smaller atoms of
knowing.  In contrast, a process is underspecified for such atomicity.  A process
may have smaller subunits that are atomic, such as the fact that it takes three steps to
comprise a basic unit in a waltz.  For an activity or process verb like waltz, then, it is
divisible into smaller units ontologically, but it plays no part in the aspectual
calculus.  Aside from the differences in atomicity, processes and states are both
processed as antipartite, meaning they are intervals associated with a single valuated
predicate (lacking a distinguished point).  Thus, for sentences like (81a) and (81b),
during the spells of owning and washing, those respective predicates have the
valuation of true.
                                                
35Achievement occurrents, for which the start and end points are one and the same (i.e.,
instantaneous), could only project a spell with length zero if we tried to locate a distinguished
phase.  Consequently, I assume achievements do not have a distinguished phase in their lexical
entries.  I discuss this characteristic of achievement verbs and its interaction with the progressive -
ing (e.g., he is dying or she is winning) in §4.2.

110
(81)
a.
Mary owned that car.
b.
Mary washed that car.
The difference between states and processes parallels that of mass nouns
and count nouns.  Every stative verb denotes a state (just as every count noun has a
countable denotation), while every activity verb may denote either a process or a state
(just like every mass noun may denote something which is uncountable or
something which is countable).  Some mass nouns may have no discernable
minimal parts, like water (unless one considers H2O molecules); other mass nouns
like furniture may have a minimal unit (e.g., a chair or table).  Mass nouns are thus
like processes in that the minimal part is left underspecified.
Count nouns, on the other hand, are state-like:  neither a count noun or state
permit smaller units than themselves; even if they do have parts to them.  The phases
of love example in the previous section exemplifies this property for states.  An
analogous example for count nouns is observed in the noun crown.  In the special
case of the Pope's crown, that particular crown is actually composed of three
crowns.  However, it is still referred to as the singular and behaves as such
grammatically, as shown in the plural agreement facts below.  Thus, despite the
Pope's crown being underlyingly plural, it is still grammatically singular:
(82)
a.
The Pope's crown was stolen.
b.
*The Pope's crown were stolen.
2.4
Summary
In this chapter, I have looked at the fundamentals behind Event Mereology.
I began with a review of the terms ambiguity and indeterminacy, describing how
these factors played out in Event Mereology as sense modulation and
underspecification.  I presented terminology, diagrams and definitions specific to
events (occurrents) and mereology.  Most importantly, the idea of the distinguished
point was introduced, and its relationships to the Vendler aspectual classes explored.

111
The differences between localistic and event-mereological ontologies were
considered, and issues such as dynamic versus static modelling of change, the role
of negation and complementarity, the truth value gap, homogeneity (among others),
all helped us establish characterizations of transitions, processes, and states.
In the next chapter, I look more closely at Galton (1984)'s distinction
between states of change and changes of state, exploring how those notions
complement the ideas developed in this chapter.  I account for the different aspectual
classes using distinguished points and distinguished processes, and discuss other
models of aspect that address the same issue, such as Pustejovsky (1991) and Kamp
& Reyle (1993).  I will also look at the representation of spatial and non-spatial
predicates in verbs and prepositions in Chapter Three.

112
Chapter Three
Aspect in Event Mereology:  Acting on the Hypothesis
3.0      Introduction
This chapter discusses the role of aspect in semantics.  There is a vast
corpus on aspectual semantics, far too much to cover in depth here and explored in
further detail elsewhere.  Thus, I will focus on those analyses that are relevant to the
Event Mereology being developed, primarily Galton (1984), Pustejovsky (1991) and
Kamp & Reyle (1993).
To recap, an Event Mereology (EM) is based on the premise that occurrents
(including events and states) are primitives, and that one may grammaticalize
selected parts of these occurrents so that they become valid participants in the
aspectual calculus.  In particular, points of change (a.k.a. transitions) may be
grammaticalized.  A verb with a grammaticalized point of change has a definite point
of transition which demarcates the boundary of an occurrent.  That boundary may
be used to project spells and spreads onto the temporal and non-temporal domains
respectively.
Certain features of the Event Mereology remain to be addressed, such as the
mechanisms underlying the classification of aspectual classes among verbs, and the
effects of prepositional phrases and aspectual morphemes on those classes.  The
interactions between verbs, prepositional phrases and aspectual morphemes changes
the aspectual semantics.  For example, take the activity verb ski.  In (1a), ski is an
activity.  An activity does not have a distinguished point (i.e., no natural endpoint).
However, the addition of a prepositional phrase can provide an endpoint:  to the
village acts as a distinguished point in (1b).  The village is not itself a distinguished
point; rather, it is the preposition to that provides the initial boundary of Yvan's being
in the village.

113
(1)
a.
Yvan skied.
b.
Yvan skied to the village.
c.
Yvan was skiing.
d.
Yvan was skiing to the village.
The issue of coercion by aspectual morphemes, i.e., the differences in
reading between the past tense (1a-b) and the past progressive (1c-d), is also
illustrated above.  In brief, in the past tense, the action was completed and the
distinguished point reached (bounded; see Depraetere 1995); in the past progressive,
the action was still in progress and the distinguished point not reached (unbounded).
However, coercion will not be dealt with in Chapter Three but in Chapter Four.
This chapter will discuss the interactions between verbs and prepositions.  In
§3.1, I first summarize Galton (1984)'s distinction between changes of state and
states of change.  These concepts are useful in our development of the Event
Mereology analysis of the distinguished point and the distinguished process,
respectively.  I will then present my hypothesis for the Event Mereology aspectual
system in §3.2.  I discuss the aspectual analyses in Pustejovsky (1991) and Kamp
& Reyle (1993), comparing their accounts of the Vendler verb classifications with
the system proposed for Event Mereology.  Aspects of other analyses will be
discussed where relevant.  Where appropriate, I explore the EM analysis of each
aspectual class in further detail, examining such related phenomena as verbs like
stay and keep, and imperatives.
§3.3 deals with prepositions and prepositional phrases, and their
contribution to the calculation of aspect.  I discuss non-spatial prepositions and
spatial prepositions with abstract uses.  Furthermore, I propose a non-tripartite
analysis for prepositions like via, past, across and through, which have been
traditionally labelled as medial prepositions that rely on the localistic idea of a three-
part path.  In §3.4, I consider the non-locational uses of these prepositions, and
propose a treatment of these prepositions that is compatible with Event Mereology.

114
3.1      Changes of State and States of Change
I begin this discussion of Galton (1984) with the distinction between state of
change and change of state, which correspond to the EM ideas of distinguished
process and distinguished point respectively.  I will argue that those two modes are
the basic linguistic tools that are used to measure change of all kinds, and thus are
essential in Event Mereology.  I hypothesize that these two classifications are all that
are required; complex aspectual systems fall out of the interactions between these
two elements.  I will show that these two modes provide two different ways to view
change (activities and achievements), which can be juxtaposed to form a third,
synergistic way to view change (accomplishments).
Galton (1984) formalizes a difference between the categories of states and
events.  Events, which are inherently perfective are assigned to a different logical
category from states, which are inherently imperfective.  In other words, events are
treated as unitary wholes with definite beginning and ending points, while states of
affairs lack such measurable lengths.  He cites the following sentences as
exemplifying events (2a) and states (2b), respectively:
(2)
a.
Jane had a swim.
b.
Jane was swimming.
His conception of the differences between states and events is summarized
below:
(3)
a.
A state is dissective, an event is unitary:  any timespan
correlated with a state may be broken down into a substretch
in which the same state obtains; events may be divided into
phases but are not of the same type as the original event.
b.
A state obtains, an event occurs:  the dissective property of
states permit states to obtain at each moment in its interval;
events do not occur at a moment.
c.
States obtain at moments, events occur in intervals.
d.
Events, but not states, have individual occurrences:  events
are separated into individual occurrences of an event and
event-types; states either obtain or they do not - there are no
individual occurrences of a state within a state interval.

115
e.
Occurrences of an event may be counted, a state can only be
measured:  states, like Jane was swimming, can only be
measured for duration, since they do not have occurrences.
f.
A state has a negation, an event does not:  a state not
obtaining is itself a state; an event which is negated means the
failure of an event to occur, not that some type of negated
event occurred.
g.
States are homogeneous, events have distinct phases:  states,
whether they are states of rest or states of change, are in
some sense unchanging during each of the moments of that
state interval; events essentially involve change, where the
truth value of a proposition changes with respect to an object.
Given these differences between states and events, Galton concludes that
states and events are quite distinct in nature.  To clarify the nature of change, Galton
makes a fundamental division between the ways change is recognized:  by
perceiving it directly, or by observing the results.
For instance, we may perceive change directly when viewing a moving
vehicle or a litmus paper changing colours; the same applies to other senses, such as
feeling a piece of metal growing hot or hearing a train whistle growing shrill.
However, physiological thresholds prevent us from detecting change directly when
the change occurs too fast or too slow.  Thus, we are unable to see a bullet strike a
target, since it is too quick for the eye to follow.  However, we can observe the
change by seeing the results of the shot.  Similarly, the slowness of the hour hand
on a clock makes it much harder to detect its motion in comparison with that of a
second hand.
Galton draws a parallel between these two modes of perceiving change with
the linguistic expression of change.  A detectable change in progress can be likened
to a progressive:  John is writing the letter.  Alternatively, change may be expressed
as its result:  John wrote the letter.  The detectable change in progress is called a
state of change, while the resultant change is called a change of state.  Note that the
parallelism does not limit the expression of perceptible ongoing change to states of

116
change, nor imperceptible change to changes of state; they are similar in character,
but the linguistic use of changes of state and states of change is flexible enough to
apply to both kinds of perceived events in most cases.
Likewise, Galton establishes a correspondence between states and states of
change, and events and changes of state.  Since a state of change obtains at any
moment during its interval, it parallels a state.  Only processes qualify as states of
change; states are classified as the more general state of affairs, of which states of
change are a subset.  A change of state, on the other hand, must involve two different
times and the facts at those times.  Thus, Galton claims that it makes no sense to
locate the change of state at a single moment, but more sense for it to occur in an
interval, much like an event.
Event Mereology's use of distinguished point and distinguished process
parallels the use of change of state and state of change in Galton, respectively.  The
distinguished point projects two spells and spreads, like the change of state does
with two distinct points of evaluation.  The distinguished process involves a spell
during which an action is ongoing; thus, the distinguished process parallels the state
of change.
I will argue that the aspectual system needs only the distinction between
state of change and change of state to account for the empirical data.  Aspectual
classes for verbs will be defined on the basis of states of change and changes of
state, as are prepositions.  Furthermore, the perfective (-ed/-en) and the imperfective
(progressive -ing) morphemes in English will be respectively associated with
changes of state and states of change.  These issues will be developed in the rest of
this chapter.

117
3.2      Aspectual Classes in Event Mereology
Having assumed that there are two fundamental ways to regard change, i.e.,
as change-of-state and state-of-change, I now present my hypothesis for EM's
account of the four Vendler classes (statives, activities, achievements,
accomplishments).
Under the EM analysis, these two modes of change are reflected in the
linguistic component as distinguished point (dT) and distinguished process (dP)
respectively.36  These are the only elements that are needed in the EM system for
aspect.  That processes and points of change are used in the calculus of aspect is not
unfamiliar (cf. the use of Processes and Transitions in Pustejovsky 1991 below).
Event Mereology proposes that the basic representations for an event of change are
a distinguished process (activities) or a distinguished point in English
(achievements), as in (4a) and (4b), or a combination of both (accomplishments), as
in (4c).  E below stands for an occurrent; its dependents indicate specifications
found for that event type.
(4)
a.
E
activities
b.
E
achievements
 |
 |
dP
dT
c.
    E
accomplishments
   /   \
(properties of both activities and achievements)
dP  dT
States, like know and love, are viewed as antipartite spells and spans that are
projected from the ocurrent.  In that sense, states are comparable to processes like lie
and sleep, differing only in that states are specified for no minimal parts (being
atomic) and processes underspecified for such minimal parts (allowing the option of
being atomic or not).37  Thus, both states and activities are viewed as states of affairs
                                                
36The abbreviations are taken from a similarity to Pustejovsky (1991)'s Transitions (T) and
Processes (P), as well as taking the   d   from    d   istinguished,    P    from    P   rocess and    T    from poin   T   .  dT
may also be remembered as a distinguished transition, which will be used as an alternate term for
distinguished point.  The d is never capitalized, to avoid confusion with Determiner Phrase (DP).
37Activity verbs with atomic parts include cough, bounce, laugh, giggle; see §4.2.3.

118
(the latter being in the subcategory of states of change), and are both marked by a
distinguished process.
Achievements are represented in EM as a single distinguished point.  In
contrast, accomplishments are juxtapositions of both distinguished points and
distinguished processes. Distinguished points and distinguished processes are
distinct, yet not incompatible with each other; accomplishments, as I will argue in a
later subsection, demonstrate properties of both activities (dP) and achievements
(dT).
Compare the EM analysis with Vendler (1967).  As pointed out by Galton
(1984), Hoeksema (1984), and Verkuyl (1993), Vendler analyses the partition of the
four Vendler classes as on equal footing with one another.  The matrix below
summarizes the Vendler system, using ±Process to distinguish states and
achievements (instants, -Process) from activities and accomplishments (processes,
+Process).  ±Definite refers to whether or not the entity is unique (+Definite) or a
non-unique, indefinite temporal entity (-Definite):
(5)
Vendler-classes
-Process
+Process
-Definite
State
Activity
+Definite
Achievement
Accomplishment
Notice that states of change correspond well to -Definite (states and
activities), while changes of state correspond to +Definite (achievements and
accomplishments).  Thus, there is a close correspondence between +Definite and the
presence of a distinguished point, and -Definite with the lack thereof.  +Process
indicates the presence of  state of change underspecified for minimal parts (i.e., a
true process, not a state that is specified for no minimal parts).  Accomplishments
exhibit both states of change and changes of state.
There are other proposals which are comparable to the Event Mereology
analysis; however, there are important differences between EM and these cousins.
Below, I review two analyses (Pustejovsky 1991, Kamp & Reyle 1993) which

119
incorporate ideas similar to the distinguished point and distinguished process
analysis in Event Mereology.  At various points in the exposition, I will point out the
major differences between their systems of classifying aspectual classes and that
being proposed for Event Mereology.  Both departures from theoretical
assumptions and new empirical evidence will be used in my argument.
3.2.1 Pustejovsky (1991)
Following Vendler (1967), Dowty (1979) et al., Pustejovsky (1991)
proposes that any verb in natural language can be classified as belonging to one of
three basic event types:  states (S), processes (P) or transitions (T).  Transitions are
further divided into achievements and accomplishments.  Pustejovsky argues in
addition to the lexical item's event type, two other primary components are necessary
in his Event Structure (ES):  the mapping rules to lexical structure and event
composition rules.
Pustejovsky (1991) proposes that events have internal structure, and that
event structure (ES) constitutes a separate level of representation.  He posits that ES
is related to the lexical conceptual structure (LCS) through an intermediate level
resembling the LCS called the LCS'.  The LCS' contains simple relational predicates
that are partitioned according to the ES.  Simultaneous interpretation of the ES and
the LCS' results in the LCS representations such as proposed by Levin and
Rappaport (1988).  We will focus on event types below.
3.2.1.1
Event Structure:  States and Processes
States like love are simply a single event (6).
(6)
ES
S
 |
 e

120
Processes or activities (e.g., run, walk) are identified by their behaviour,
illustrated by the Imperfective Paradox discussed in Chapter Two.  To recap:  if
John is running (a process; 7a), then it is an entailment that John has run (7b).
(7)
a.
John is running.
b.
John ran.
In contrast, the progressive transition does not entail the perfective in
English:  an accomplishment in the progressive (8a) does not entail that John has
completed that action in its entirety (8b).  John is building a house does not entail
that John has built a house:
(8)
a.
John is building a house.
b.
John built a house.
Processes or activities in ES are considered a series of subevents identifying
the same semantic expression (9).  Thus, in Pustejovsky's structural representation
of Process, P dominates a string of identical subevents.  Process verbs like run,
push and drag make no explicit reference to the culmination of the activity, nor the
length of the activity.
(9)
ES
        P
e1    ...     en
LCS'
   swim(x)
LCS
[swim(x)]
However, the concerns associated with homogeneity as discussed previously
in §2.3.4.3 resurface.  Pustejovsky follows Dowty (1979) and others in assuming
that if a process verb P identified with a semantic expression P' is true at an interval
I, then P' is true for all subintervals of I greater than a moment.  In EM, however, we
take an alternative view of processes that does not court the homogeneity;
distinguished processes do not require their subintervals to be downwardly closed
under the subinterval relation, as ES would require.

121
3.2.1.2
Event Structure:  Transitions and Agentivity
Transitions in ES are events which identify a semantic expression evaluated
relative to its opposition (Jackendoff 1972, Lakoff 1970, Von Wright 1963).
Examples of verbs with transitions include give, open, build and destroy.
Pustejovsky subdivides transitions into the Vendler classes of achievements and
accomplishments.  Examples of achievement verbs are die, find, and arrive, whereas
accomplishment verbs include build, destroy, and eat.
Both achievements and accomplishments are structurally represented in ES
as a transition (T) that dominates E and its complement ¬E.  The earlier event ¬E is
treated as a process (P) and the later event E is treated as an endstate (S).
(10)
       T
      /   \
 ¬E    E
  (P)  (S)
For Pustejovsky, the only difference between accomplishments and
achievements is agency.  Agency is represented in the LCS' of accomplishments
under the P node as the predicate act(x,y).  He argues that for verbs like build (11a),
there is an element of action on Mary's part (the causal agent).  In contrast,
achievements like die (11b) have no causal agents:  dying makes no explicit
reference to the action being performed.
(11)
a.
Mary built a house.
accomplishment
ES
  T
   
P
     S
LCS'
 |
      |
[act(m,y) & ¬house(y)]
[house(y)]
LCS
cause([act(m,y)], become(house(y)))

122
b.
Mary died.
achievement
ES
  T
   
P
     S
LCS'
 |
      |
  [¬dead(m)]
[dead(m)]
LCS
become([dead(m)])
3.2.1.3
Event Structure:  Almost
The presence or absence of agentivity, claims Pustejovsky, explains the
difference between accomplishments and achievements that are modified by the
adverb almost.  The Almost Test is well-known (Kac 1972a, Dowty 1979,
Pustejovsky 1991; see also Chapter Five), and is used to distinguish
accomplishments from other verb classes.  Non-accomplishments have a single
reading with almost; accomplishments have two almost readings.
With activities, the addition of the adverb almost indicates that the action did
not begin at all, but there was intent to perform the activity (12a, 13a).  In contrast,
accomplishments (12b) modified by almost have two possible interpretations:  the
action did not begin because it was only intended (as with activities), or the action
did begin but was not completed.  The former has almost modifying the intent
predicate (13b), whereas the latter denies that a completed object can be asserted to
exist (13c).  Thus, for (12b), either John almost began to build a house, or he almost
finished building a house.
(12)
a.
John almost swam.
activity
b.
John almost built a house.
accomplishment
c.
John almost died.
achievement
(13)
a.
        P[almost(P)]
e1    ...     en
   swim(x)

123
b.
  T
  
P[almost(P)]
     S
 |
      |
[act(m,y) & ¬house(y)]
[house(y)]
c.
  T
   
P
     S[almost(S)]
 |
      |
[act(m,y) & ¬house(y)]
[house(y)]
d.
  T
   
P
     S[almost(S)]
 |
      |
[¬dead(j)]
[dead(j)]
For achievements (12c), only the endstate is relevant, because there is only a
single predicate and its opposition (13d).  The endstate is modified by almost, with
there being no act(x,y) predicate for almost to modify.  Pustejovsky claims that the
only possible reading is the one where something has occurred without the terminus
event being achieved.  If John almost died, then he could have been on the verge of
death from injuries, or he could have just narrowly missed being hit by a truck.  In
neither case does John actually reach the endpoint of death.  As well, for (14), John
almost satisfied the criteria for arriving (such as making the effort and almost
coming all the way).  The reading where he intended to come yet made no effort at
all is difficult to get.  Neither interpretation of (14) can mean that John did arrive.
(14)
John almost arrived.
The ES analysis accounts for the difference above by stating that while both
types of transitions permit almost to modify the endstate, only accomplishments
have the act(x,y) agentivity in its LCS' representation that licenses almost to modify
the incipient process P.  The presence of agentivity permits the reading where the
agent intends but does not make an effort to perform the action.

124
3.2.1.4
ES vs. EM:  Against Agentivity
However, following Mourelatos (1981), it can be shown that agency is not
an adequate characteristic to distinguish between 
accomplishments 
and
achievements, since agency is present in both types of verbs.  Instead, Mourelatos
classifies punctual transitions as occurrences, while transitions with duration are
classified as developments.  Occurrences and developments may or may not have an
agent.  An agentive occurrence corresponds to an achievement, and an agentive
development corresponds to an accomplishment.  Examples are given below:
(15)
a.
The balloon burst.
occurrence
b.
The balloon deflated.
development
c.
Geoff burst the balloon.
agentive occurrence (achievement)
d.
Geoff deflated the balloon.  agentive development (accomplishment)
EM also treats achievements and accomplishments as a unity of opposite
states, much like in ES.  However, EM diverges from ES with respect to agentivity;
EM does not distinguish achievements and accomplishments by agency as does ES.
While an accomplishment verb like build can have a volitional agent (16a), the
simple substitution of a machine for a living agent shows that accomplishment verbs
can also have agents lacking in volition (16b).  This data casts doubt on the
volitional criterion as the deciding factor between accomplishments and
achievements.
(16)
a.
with volition
The carpenter built the house.
b.
without volition
The robot built the house.
How, then, should achievements be distinguished from accomplishments?
Event Mereology proposes that achievements are not specified for the uptake
process (i.e., the distinguished process) in their lexical representations.  The
implication is that developments must involve the uptake process, since the gradual
process is an essential part of the semantics of accomplishments.
In contrast, occurrences are only marked for the distinguished point; at the
grammatical level, an achievement is not specified for a distinguished process.  Thus

125
no specific starting point for a process of change, since the change is instantaneous
at the disitnguished point.  The uptake and the beginning of that uptake are
grammatically irrelevant for these kinds of verbs.
In another sense, however, all types of transitions (including achievements
and accomplishments) can have uptake processes, i.e., a gradual development which
leads up to the resultant state.  In accomplishments, the presence of the uptake is a
natural part of the action.  In contrast, the process must be coaxed out of the
achievement through semantic coercion.  For example, building a house (an
accomplishment) involves steps which add to the physical structure of the house.
Dying (an achievement) involves steps which lead to the eventual demise of the
unlucky patient.  The difference lies in their grammaticalization of that uptake
process, or lack thereof.  Achievements, being underspecified for the presence of a
distinguished process, can be coerced into the state of change reading with the
English aspectual morpheme -ing.38
Examples of typical achievements (17a-c) are shown to have non-punctual
readings when coerced into the past progressive in (18a-c).  For example in (17c),
forget is a transition from a state of remembering (r) to a state of not remembering
(¬r).  While the simplest way to view this is as an instantaneous change between
two states, one may choose to include, say, the ramblings and tangents that his
grandmother told in the course of telling her story.  There, the act of forgetting can
be argued to be an ongoing process.  More on the coercion of different aspectual
meaning is discussed in Chapter Four.
(17)
a.
Old Yeller died.
b.
Martin discovered his sexual identity.
c.
His grandmother forgot the point of her story.
                                                
38Languages may differ as whether it is possible to coerce a distinguished process reading from the
achievement.  For example, the te-iru progressive in Japanese apparently does not allow
achievement verbs to be coerced into the distinguished process reading (McClure 1994).  See also
§4.2.2.2.

126
(18)
a.
Old Yeller was dying.
b.
Martin was discovering his sexual identity.
c.
His grandmother was forgetting the point of her story.
Under EM, an accomplishment is in fact specified simultaneously for both a
distinguished process and a distinguished point; it exhibits both properties of a
change of state and a state of change.  One can view an accomplishment as a
juxtaposition of an achievement and an activity.  Thus, the difference between
accomplishments and achievements under EM is made clear:  an accomplishment is
an achievement with a distinguished process, with agentivity not being the
distinguishing factor.
3.2.1.5
Event Structure:  On Notation
One question about the Event Structure concerns the notation that
Pustejovsky uses for his tree diagrams.  The tree diagrams are not consistent.
Syntactic trees represent the (syntactic) constituency relation, which in turn serve as
directives for the computation of meaning of the relevant expression.  Clearly,
Pustejovsky's diagrams in (6), (9) and (11) are not syntactic trees, nor do they
represent syntactic constituency.
Processes, for example, are represented diagrammatically by Putejovsky as
the relation of being made up of:  the mother node denotes a process which is made
up of the subprocesses denoted by its daughter nodes, in (9).  Thus, it represents the
part-whole relation over processes.  However, this interpretation cannot be assigned
to the diagrams in (11a,b), achievements and accomplishments.  Thus, for example,
an achievement is not simply a part-whole relationship with two substates.  Rather, it
is a point of a change of state.  The same may be said of an accomplishment:  it is
not merely a state with two substates.
Achievements and accomplishments have something in common.  Unlike
states or processes, they are specified for a change, or a point of transition.  As
argued above, achievements and accomplishments are distinguished from each other

127
by the former not being specified for a process, and the latter being specified for a
process.  Thus, both achievements and accomplishments can be specified by an
ordered pair corresponding to the transition.
For instance, for x to die can be specified as the ordered pair <x alive, x not
alive>.  In comparison, the transitive for y to build x is represented as the ordered
pair <x does not exist, x exists> where the ordered pair is specified as resulting from
a process in which the subject y has a role.  What this process is must largely be
underspecified, since one can build a house, website or trust, and since such building
need not be brought about by something animate.
3.2.1.6
Accomplishments as Juxtapositions
Event Mereology is able to achieve the same ontological classification as
Vendler by using the two possible items in our repertoire:  distinguished point (dT)
and distinguished phase (dP).  A verb of change is specified for one or the other, or
both.  dP corresponds with activities, and dT with achievements.  Accomplishments
are complex:  they encode both dP and dT.  I show this characteristic of
accomplishments below.
It has been observed that accomplishments have no unique aspectual
properties that justify them as a separate aspectual class (Dowty 1979, McClure
1994).  Rather, accomplishments are aspectually ambiguous.  All accomplishment
predicates are syntactically complex, having activity counterparts that are
syntactically simpler.
Accomplishment verbs can be interpreted as activities, yet sometimes they
permit achievement interpretations.  For example, the predicates build and read,
typically classified as accomplishments, exhibit an achievement/activity ambiguity.
They are activities in (19a,b), but in their transitive use build demonstrates the
semantics of an achievement (20a), and read shows a semantic ambiguity between
achievement and activity (20b).

128
(19)
a.
John built for an hour (but still hadn't built anything).activity
b.
John read for an hour.
activity
(20)
a.
John built a house *for an hour/in an hour.
accomplishment
b.
John read a book for an hour/in an hour.
activity/accomplishment
To account for the evidence above, it has been argued that accomplishments
are activities syntactically, but achievements semantically (see McClure 1994):
accomplishments are in the same syntactic frame as activities, yet they are
achievement-like in that they also have the semantics of terminativity.  Interesting
pairs here are transitive verbs (mostly of creation) which have intransitive
counterparts:  most of what have been classified as accomplishment verbs may
behave as activities (like read, write, paint, speak, eat, knit, sow, cook), and usable
without a direct object (i.e., as intransitive verbs) (21a-d).  However, as transitive
verbs they behave like accomplishments.  Like (21a), the construction V and V can
improve the activity reading of these accomplishment verbs, but are not necessary
for some accomplishments (21b,c).
(21)
a.
John built (and built).
b.
John read.
c.
John ate.
d.
John fell.
What makes these verbs different from activity verbs like sleep and waltz is
that verbs like read are able to use a NP direct object in addition to the activity
reading to provide the achievement component (22a,b).  Other syntactic frames
(particles, for example) provide the distinguished point dT as well, as in (22c,d):
(22)
a.
John built a raft.
b.
John read a magazine.
c.
John ate up.
d.
John fell down.
Note as well that there do not appear to be any monomorphemic
accomplishment verbs, in the sense that these accomplishment verbs are activities

129
unless a direct object NP or a particle are added to provide the endpoint.39  One
possible analysis is that syntactically, accomplishments are specified syntactically
for a direct object position that can be filled or unfilled.  When just the bare verb
appears, only the activity reading (dP) is accessible.  When the direct object position
is occupied by a noun phrase or particle capable of providing a distinguished point
(dT), the endpoint or achievement-like transition becomes accessible as well.40
Thus, the verb can act as a standard accomplishment with both the semantics of
activities and achievements.
Thus, it is evident that developments or accomplishments have correlated
with them both a process and a state.  In Bill built the house, the process is Bill's
activities, while the state is the existence of the house.  It is the initial boundary of
the state which provides the distinguished point, i.e., the relevant boundary at which
the house came into existence.  This pairing of process and state can be lexicalized,
as with verbs of creation like build, or it can be constructable in a phrase, such as
with process verbs like run followed by certain kinds of prepositional phrases, such
as into the barn.
Accomplishments involve both processes (dP), which may or may not cease,
and the initiation of a state.  Of course, insofar as there being the initiation of a state,
that is equivalent to the existence of a change of state (dT).  Accomplishments differ
from achievements as follows:  there is a change of state in the achievement without
any commitment to a process, though a process interpretation may be forced
through coercion (see Chapter Four).  The boundary for the achievement is simply
the point of change in state, i.e., dT.
                                                
39See Tenny (1987)'s discussion on telicity and delimitedness, which bear upon this topic.  A brief
discussion is included in Chapter Five.
40Matters become more complicated by plurals, which cannot provide a definite endpoint to the
action, e.g., John built houses.  Under Verkuyl (1993)'s analysis, indefinite plurals are [-SQA], or
not a specified quantity of A.  Verkuyl's Plus Principle states that terminativity comes only when
all features in a sentence have the + value; having [-SQA] plurals means that the accomplishment
cannot be interpreted as a delimited action, and thus there would be no definite endpoint.  See also
Chapter Four.

130
3.2.1.7
Accounting for Almost
With this analysis of achievements as grammaticalized for the distinguished
point (dT), and accomplishments as grammaticalized for both the distinguished
point (dT) and the distinguished process (dP), we are now able to account for the
ambiguity in the almost sentences involving accomplishments.
Almost can only modify the endstate in the achievement, since it is generated
from the dT.  If almost modifies the endstate associated with dT, then the meaning is
that an event almost reached that distinguished point.  For an achievement, where the
change is instantaneous, there can only be that single reading.  A possible notation is
shown in (23).  The italics show the derived complementary valuation for the
predicate involved:
(23)
Occurrent
  |
dT[almost(dT)]
  |
[¬dead(j)]
[dead(j)]
In an accomplishment like John almost built the house, almost can modify
both the endstate associated with the dT and the process associated with dP, since
both dT and dP have been grammaticalized in the accomplishment.  If almost
applies over the distinguished point, we have the same interpretation as with the
achievements, where the action has not completed (24a).  If almost applies over the
entire span of dP (i.e., the whole occurrent), then we get the additional 'almost
started' reading without resorting to agency.  The idea of 'starting' is only possible
when there is a distinguished process.  This is illustrated in (24b).  Note that dP and
dT are not at the same level; this is intentional, to show that these are merely
projections of states from the occurrent.  dP is a projection of the entire length of the
occurrent, while dT is a projection of two states divided by the distinguished point.
Thus, when dP is modified by almost, it is equivalent to the entire occurrent being
modified by almost.

131
(24)
a.
Occurrent
dP
  
dT[almost(dT)]
       |
[¬house(y)]
[house(y)]
b.
Occurrent
     
dP[almost(dP)]       
       dT
         |
[¬house(y)]
[house(y)]
3.2.2 Kamp & Reyle (1993)
In Kamp & Reyle (1993) (K&R), it is proposed under their Discourse
Representation Theory (DRT) that three different elements are necessary to
distinguish between the Vendler classes.  The basic schema for accomplishment
verbs consists of a preparatory phase (I), a culmination point (II), and a result state
(III) (25).  This schema will be modified for the schemata of other aspectual verbs:
(25)
preparatory phase
culmination point
result state
________________________|__________________________
I
II
III
Thus, for a sentence like (26a), the action of write must be completed;
otherwise, either (26b) or (26c) must be used to express the incompletion of that
action.  The natural culmination point (i.e., the distinguished point) must be reached.
The period leading up to but excluding the culmination point is the preparatory
phase, and the result state follows the culmination point.  Whereas the simple past
(26a) refers to both I and II (the actual writing event), and the past progressive (26b)
to I (the preparatory phase), the present perfect (26d) refers to III (the result state).
(26)
a.
Mary wrote the letter.
b.
Mary was writing the letter (but she did not finish it).
c.
Mary started writing the letter (but she did not finish it).
d.
Mary has written the letter.

132
3.2.2.1
DRT:  Accomplishments and Achievements
Kamp & Reyle declare that these three part-whole relations on the schema
are the only relevant aspectual properties involved; they define three mutually
exclusive aspectual properties (27a-c).  They capture these properties with two
binary features, ±STAT and ±PERF.  +STAT describes a state, while -STAT
describes an event.  +PERF refer to result states (III), and -PERF refer to other
parts of the schema excluding the result state (i.e., I or II).  Since result states are
always states, +PERF expressions are always +STAT as well.
(27)
accomplishments
a.
I + II
past tense
-STAT, -PERF
b.
I
past progressive
+STAT, -PERF
c.
III
present perfect +STAT, +PERF
The accomplishment schema has both the preparatory phase (I) and the
culmination point (II) in the simple past, as in (28):
(28)
_____________|_____________
accomplishment
I
II
(III)
In contrast, the achievement schema under K&R consists of the culmination
point (II) only (29), since the simple past tense of these verbs do not include the
preparatory phase as part of their meaning (30a,b).
(29)
_____________|_____________
achievement
(I)
II
(III)
(30)
a.
Mary won the marathon.
b.
Mary died.
That the preparatory phase is not included in the meaning of achievement
events is demonstrated by their progressive counterparts (31a,b), claim Kamp &
Reyle.  Their view assumes that if Mary died at noon, then Mary was dying cannot
be true at that time.  The progressive of an achievement refers only to the
preparatory phase (I) but not the culmination point (II).  Essential here is the fact
that the past progressive is not ongoing at the same time as the past tense
counterpart.

133
(31)
a.
Mary was winning the marathon.
b.
Mary was dying.
In contrast, the progressive of an accomplishment is argued to refer to part
of the accomplishment schema (I+II), i.e., the preparatory phase (I).  Their argument
hinges on the fact that accomplishments are marginally acceptable with punctual
moments (32a).  At noon must refer to a short interval surrounding 12:00 p.m.
instead of treating the temporal prepositional phrase as a single moment, as is
possible with achievements.  With the temporal interval interpretation, it becomes
possible to say that the progressive sentence, i.e., (32b), is ongoing at the same time
as its past tense counterpart (32a).
(32)
a.
Mary wrote the letter at noon.
b.
Mary was writing the letter at noon.
However, this argument is dependent upon the addition of a punctual
temporal adverb.  If we leave out the prepositional phrase and merely had (33a), then
it is not so clear that at the culmination point whether (33b) is true.  If Mary finished
writing the letter at noon, at that precise moment one cannot say she was still
engaged in writing the letter, anymore than we can say that at the culmination of an
achievement like Mary died, that Mary was dying at that precise moment.
Achievements and accomplishments unmodified by temporal adjuncts are thus
parallel in this respect:  the progressive form, when we are not dealing with
additional elements like temporal adverbs, seems always incompatible with the actual
culmination point.
(33)
a.
Mary wrote the letter.
b.
Mary was writing the letter.
EM has an advantage in producing the three segments in K&R's DRT
analysis with a single distinguished point.  A distinguished point corresponds the
culmination point of Kamp & Reyle's analysis (II) and generates two distinct phases
that correspond to K&R's preparatory phase (I) and result state (III).  By
grammaticalizing this unique point of change, in effect we define the endstate of the

134
action as a part of the overall occurrent.  Furthermore, the relationship between the
two phases is not trivial:  the valuations of the predicates associated with these two
phases will be opposite in value.  This insight introduces complementarity between I
and II and increases the utility of DRT's culmination point.
3.2.2.2
DRT:  States and Activities
Both statives and activities under K&R lack culmination points.  In the past
tense, statives like know and trust come to an end, but here the termination is only an
implicature, defeasible by the addition of another clause.  K&R contrast statives
(34a) with accomplishments (34b) in this respect.  States, then, consist of a single
interval uninterrupted by a culmination point (35):
(34)
a.
Mary trusted John, and for all I know she still does.
b.
??Mary wrote the letter (this morning) and for all I know she is still
writing it.
(35)
________________
state
Likewise, activities do not have natural culmination points.  However,
activities allow the progressive.  Kamp & Reyle argue that the progressive is often
required.  They judge (36a,b) as odd without antecedent context, preferring the
progressive as in (36c).41  For the purposes of DRT, they claim that an activity verb
like walk cannot introduce a new event in the discourse, only to redescribe events
already introduced.  The termination point must be introduced by an independently
introduced event, such as in (36d), with prepositional phrases (36e), or frame
adverbials (36f).
                                                
41Their judgments differ from mine, since I find many examples of activity verbs acceptable
without antecedent contexts (i.a-b).  Such a difference could be attributed to the goal of DRT
versus EM.  Whereas DRT aims to account for discourse, and as such it distinguishes between
those verb classes which permit the introduction of new discourse events, EM strives to account
for the level of the sentence, not the level of discourse.  Thus, DRT requires antecedent contexts
for activities, whereas EM permits activities as a type of occurrent.
(i)
a.
Mary danced.
b.
Mary laughed.

135
(36)
a.
Mary walked.
b.
Yesterday morning at 10 Mary walked.
c.
Yesterday morning at 10 Mary was walking.
d.
Most days Mary got a lift from Fred.  But yesterday was different.
Yesterday she walked.
e.
Mary walked to the store.
f.
Mary walked for two hours.
Thus, K&R suggest that bare activities are incomplete with respect to being
unable to provide a terminating point, as opposed to statives, and must rely on other
factors supplied externally.  Otherwise, an activity cannot be used in the non-
progressive.  The simple past representation for activities is shown in (37), showing
that past tense forms of activities require an externally-provided culmination point.
(37)
_____________|_____________
activity
(I)
(II)
(III)
3.2.3 EM:  Imperatives as Achievements
I will now introduce additional data on imperatives that increases our
understanding of achievements.  The imperative mood can be used to express
commands, which could be taken to include orders, directives, injunctions,
instructions and prohibitions, but also to give advice (ask your doctor about it!), to
make a reproach (don't ever advise me again!), to denounce (go to the devil!)  to
make a request for co-operation (save me!), and to pray (give us this day our daily
bread!), as Rescher (1966) points out.  Even laws of nature can be formulated as a
hypothetical imperative:  If you want water to freeze, cool it to 0˚C!  The discussion
here is limited to imperatives that are commands.
Every command has an issuing agency and a recipient.  Pivotal to the
command is also the mooted action or result, i.e., 'the possible process of activity or
state of affairs which the source enjoins the target to do or achieve or to refrain from
doing or achieving.' (Rescher 1966, p.16).  Commands are of at least two sorts:  the
performing of an action (e.g., look for your glasses) and the bringing about of a
certain result (find your glasses).  In the former case (an action-performance

136
command), one is asked to initiate a process.  In the latter case (a state-
realization/achievement command), one is asked to act so as to bring about a certain
result without any specification as to what activities must be done to achieve the
result.
Furthermore, there are positive or negative qualities of a command.  A
command is positive when it orders a certain action to be performed or a state
attained (open this window!); it is negative when it prohibits a certain action or
attainment of a result (don't raise your voice!).
3.2.3.1
The Imperative Test
The Imperative Test (Dowty 1979, Pustejovsky 1991), used to distinguish
states by the use of imperatives, identifies states by the criterion that states do not
appear as imperatives.  I will argue that the Imperative Test, while inadequate
because it is not the case that states do not appear as imperatives (in fact they do),
nevertheless supports our bipartite analysis of changes of state.
The example cited in Pustejovsky from Dowty (1979) is given in (38a): sick
is a state because it is ill-formed as an imperative.  However, (38b-e) show that there
are imperatives that are formed from states.  The issue involves agency rather than
simply statehood; the real difference resides in whether or not a state can be
achieved through volitional action:
(38)
a.
*Be sick!
b.
Get sick!
c.
Be good!
d.
Believe me!
e.
Love me!
As shown, it is possible to initiate states such as belief, love and good
behaviour; being intentionally sick (38a) is harder to accomplish, but not impossible.
For instance, the issuer of the malevolent command may be mad at the person,
wanting him to contract a disease through a volitional act, such as infecting himself.
Note that in (38b), the verb get has the same meaning as become, and definitely

137
indicates a change of state; the copula be does not automatically contribute the
meaning of change of state, and thus (38a) is less acceptable than (38b).
Observe that in (38c-e), the verbs behave like achievements, bringing about a
change.  One is asked to change one's current belief (<¬b,b>), or to begin to love
someone (<¬l,l>), for example.  The semantics of the imperative automatically
explains why we view imperative states as achievements.  Note that an imperative
command is a request for some action to be performed.  The speaker assumes that
the endstate is not true of the hearer at the time of utterance, and desires that the
endstate become true of the hearer in the future.
For example, the imperative Be good! presupposes that the intended target of
the imperative is not good (¬g), and that the desired state is goodness (g).  Since in
EM, two adjacent temporally ordered states with complementary truth values, such
as <¬g,g> constitute an occurrence; there is a distinguished point.  The agency
requirement mentioned earlier in addition to the criterion for an occurrence makes
the imperative interpretable as an achievement (which is equal to an agentive
occurrence in Mourelatos' terminology).  The EM standpoint is that the imperative
command introduces a distinguished point at the initial boundary of an occurrent
regardless of its original classification, and thus creates an achievement-like
structure (39a-d).
(39)
a.
state:
Love me!
b.
activity
Run!
c.
achievement:
Die!
d.
accomplishment:
Build the house!
The four Vendler classes as imperatives are illustrated below.  The
distinguished point projects a moment onto the timeline ordered after the moment of
speech.  Note that the occurrent remains intact in the sense that it retains all the
aspectual information it would have in a declarative; only its earlier edge is used to
form the distinguished point for the imperative.  In (40), the state occurrent begins,
but there does not need to be an endpoint to the state, since the declarative

138
counterpart (you love me) requires no such distinguished point, consistent with the
properties of states as we have discussed.  The declarative version of the occurrent
must be reconstructable from the imperative.  Thus, the imperative commands that a
state of love be established between the speaker and the listener in the future, with no
information concerning the state of love have an end.
(40)
Likewise, (41) shows an activity (whose semantics does not require an
endpoint); the speaker may intend for the person to keep running without end
(limited only by real-world limitations).  Here, it is the initiation of a process that is
desired, i.e., Rescher's action-performance command.  While not a state-realization
command, it is achievement-like because there is an abrupt change associated with
the beginning of the activity.
(41)
However, consider the case of (42a), where additional prepositional phrases
are used to indicate the presence of distinguished points that must be taken into
consideration when the hearer interprets the imperative.  The declarative version of
the imperative is shown in (42b).  For such imperatives, the distinguished points
provided by the modifying phrases remain accessible.  The imperative itself still
retains an achievement-like quality, since only its initial point is required:

139
(42)
a.
Run from the laundromat to the supermarket!
b.
You will run from the laundromat to the supermarket.
In (43), the achievement verb die still is a point-like occurrent with zero
length in the temporal dimension:  the occurrent retains its structure in its entirety.
Thus, the intent of the speaker is to have the hearer perform the instantaneous action
in the future.  With an achievement, there is no process to initiate:  it must be a state-
realization command.
(43)
Finally, (44) shows an accomplishment with the information contained in the
occurrent intact; a command like build a house! implies that the speaker intends for
the builder to stop after a house has been constructed, but the actual endpoint is not
predetermined by the information contained in the imperative itself.  Semantically,
we do know that there is one and only one house to be built; the length of time it
actually takes to complete it depends on pragmatic factors such as the type of house,
the amount of expertise that the builder has, et cetera.  In fact, the speaker may not
even expect the hearer to complete the accomplishment, merely expecting him to
start.  Here, the accomplishment has a process, and thus the command is an action-
performance command, involving the initiation of the process that leads up to the
endpoint.

140
(44)
Thus, it appears that the imperative creates its achievement-like quality by
adjacent yet complementary valuations of some predicate of occurrent existence:  at
the present time, no such occurrent exists, but it is expected that some action be done
to bring about the existence of the desired occurrent.  Thus, the imperative is like a
future BECOME operator.
Observe that other constructions which involve the irrealis (e.g., future 45a,
infinitive 45b) may appear to neutralize some of the differences in aspectual class,
but in fact behave like imperatives and keep all aspectual information.  The activity
of sleep remains an activity, but the irrealis property gives these sentences a
transition-like quality much like the imperatives, where the contrast is between an
unrealized state (¬s) followed the same state realized (s):
(45)
a.
Martin will sing.
b.
I persuaded Martin to sing.
3.2.3.2
Progressive Imperatives
To support the argument that imperatives are achievement-like, examine such
sentences as (46a,b), where the progressive is incorporated into the imperative.
Though judgments may vary as to the acceptability of these sentences, it is clear in
(46a) that the person issuing the command expects the listener to be engaged in the
writing of his thesis, but not necessarily expecting him to finish in a split second.
(46)
a.
?Be writing your thesis, young man!
b.
?Be getting dressed, you!
According to Galton (1984), the distinction between narrow and broad
readings of a progressive verb V is the difference between being actively engaged in

141
strict reading of the activity of V (narrow) or a looser interpretation of V.  For
instance, if I am drinking a cup of coffee, there could be intervals when I am not
actively sipping, and intervals where I am not sipping.  If I am actively sipping, that
is the narrow interpretation of the progressive drinking; if I am in an interval
between active sippings, I can be said to be drinking in the broad sense of the
progressive.
It is clear in (46) that the desired process, writing, does not currently obtain
in the narrow sense of the progressive.  The speaker would not be issuing the
command if the young man was actively writing his thesis (writing Chapter Three on
his laptop, for instance) at the moment of speech.  The same does not apply for the
broad sense of the progressive, which includes non-active phases in the writing
process as well as the narrow readings of writing.
For example, the young man began writing his thesis a year ago and still has
a year to go.  If he is not currently engaged in the active writing process, say having
a coffee break, then (47a) is false on the broad reading, but true on the narrow.  In
contrast, (47b) would be true on the broad reading, but false on the narrow reading.
Note that the broad sense always includes the narrow sense.  Thus, the negation of
the broad sense also precludes readings of the narrow sense, but the negation of the
narrow sense does not preclude the validity of the broad sense.
(47)
a.
Tony is not writing his thesis; he is on a coffee break.
b.
Tony is writing his thesis; he is on a coffee break.
The imperative in (46a) may only be issued when the speaker desires a
narrow reading of the progressive.  In (48a), the imperative commands the young
man to begin the broad sense of write (which may require a phase of the narrow
sense of writing).  In (48b), only the narrow sense is expected to be the final state of
the change.  In both cases, we have a pair of states that establish the point of
transition (<¬writingbroad, writingbroad>, <¬writingnarrow, writingnarrow>) and

142
ergo, the achievement-like property.  The complementary valuations inherent in
Event Mereology produces exactly the right results.
(48)
a.
You haven't started your thesis?  Be writing your thesis, young man!
b.
You are on a coffee break?  Be writing your thesis, young man!
3.2.3.3
States and Negated Imperatives
Further insights can be obtained by examining negated imperatives.
Negative commands may be asking one to desist from some activity, or to initiate
some activity.  Compare the negated imperatives in (49a-d) to their unnegated
counterparts in (50a-d):
(49)
Don't S!
a.
Don't be sick!
b.
Don't be good!
c.
Don't believe me!
d.
Don't love me!
(50)
S!
a.
Be sick!
b.
Be good!
c.
Believe me!
d.
Love me!
These negative commands in (49) each have two different interpretations.  At
the moment of speech, the speaker B issues a negative command to A.  Either A is in
the state S or A is not in the state S.  The former is the desist reading where the state
S currently obtains and the speaker desires the hearer to desist from participating in
that state; these sentences can be paraphrased as stop V-ing! or don't continue to V!
For example, A is in the state S.  B says to A:  don't be in S.  B is thus
ordering A to change from being in S to being in not S, i.e., to act so as to go from S
to not S, to desist from S.  Thus, if A is running, then if B says to A, don't run, then
B is requesting or ordering A to desist from running.  If A is sick, then if B says to
A, don't be sick, then B is requesting or ordering A to desist from being sick, i.e., to
act as so as to become healthy.

143
The desist reading is similar to the imperative achievements described above,
since there is a change from one state to its negation.  The corresponding diagram is
illustrated below for (50d), where you love me at the present time, but I want you to
stop loving me in the future.  The distinguished point that produces the achievement-
like result occurs at the end of the occurrent, as opposed to the beginning as for
positive commands.
(51)
The second possible reading is cautionary:  the state S does not currently
obtain (¬S) and the hearer is warned not to participate in the described state in the
future  (again, ¬S).
Take the case where A is not in the state S.  B says to A:  don't be in S.  Thus,
B is ordering A to refrain from S, i.e., to act so as not to change from not S to S, that
is, to refrain from becoming S.  Thus, if A is not running, then if B says to A, don't
run, then B is requesting or ordering A to refrain from running.  If A is not sick, then
if B says to A, don't be sick, then B is requesting or ordering A to refrain from
becoming sick (i.e., to act so as to remain healthy).
Under this latter cautionary reading, since the speaker uttering the imperative
desires the current state of affairs to remain unchanged, we lack the complementary
states required for an achievement in EM.  Thus for (50d), you do not love me at the
present time, and I want that state to continue.  This is shown in (52), where the
boundary between the two ¬S states is arbitrary:  there is a distinguished point, but it
does not split the occurrent into two different phases.  In fact, it is unclear if there is
an occurrent at all, since the speaker desires that no such occurrent comes into
existence.

144
(52)
Note that only states (53a), activities (53b) and accomplishments (53c)
exhibit this duality of meaning with the negative commands, but not achievements
(53d).  Achievements can only have the cautionary reading.  This can be attributed to
the lack of a distinguished process in the achievement; states, activities and
accomplishments all have in common a non-punctual nature.  This property controls
whether or not the recipient of the command could be currently engaged in the verb's
activity.  Achievements, being a point of transition, have no process that the recipient
of the command could participate in, since the performance of the achievement takes
place in an instant.  Thus, the only possibility is that the action currently does not
obtain at the time of utterance, and that the recipient is warned not to perform the
achievement.  Note that momentary activities (§4.2.3) like jump (53e), burp, sneeze
and giggle, while point-like, are still activities, and may be currently engaged in by
the recipient.  Thus, momentary activities may have both the cautionary and desist
interpretations.
(53)
a.
Don't love me!
b.
Don't run!
c.
Don't read the book!
d.
Don't leave!
e.
Don't jump!
3.2.3.4
Remain Verbs and Imperatives
Examine as well verbs like stay and continue, also called aspectual verbs (ter
Meulen 1997).  These verbs have been argued (Gruber 1976) to be distinct from
states.  Verbs of the remain class take into consideration temporal length, i.e., more
than a single moment in time.  In contrast, be-verbs involve only the evaluation of the

145
predicate at a single moment in time, as demonstrated by the data below (54a,b).
The present tense of be only involves the current state, regardless of the future and
the past status of Roy's doctorhood.  In comparison, remain in (55a,b) shows that
the status of Roy's doctorhood in the past is relevant in the discourse, in addition to
the present moment:
(54)
a.
Roy is a doctor.
b.
Roy is not a doctor.
(55)
a.
Roy remains a doctor.
b.
Roy does not remain a doctor.
Consider the following sentences:
(56)
a.
Roy became a doctor.
b.
Roy did not become a doctor.
c.
Roy had not been a doctor.
In (56a), the verb become denotes an evident change that Roy undergoes.
Note that to become in (56a) carries a presupposition that Roy had not been a doctor
(56c).  When negation applies (56b), Roy remains in the state that he was, i.e., not a
doctor.  The presupposition in (56b) is also (56c), that Roy had not been a doctor.
This presupposition is not negated by the introduction of a negation.  It is possible
that Roy (r) did undergo a change and became something other than a doctor;
however, the relevant fact is that the state of doctorhood (D) is not attained.  Thus, at
t1, Roy is not a doctor, and at t2, Roy is not a doctor either.  The biphasic change no
longer consists of two complementary states (57a); the negation converts it to a two-
part non-change (57b):
(57)
a.

146
b.
Now consider (58a,b).  In (58a), remain also has a presupposition, that Roy
had been a doctor (58c).  In (58b), even when negated, the presupposition that Roy
had been a doctor remains.  Here, as in the become examples above, show that the
presupposition is not affected by the introduction of a negation:
(58)
a.
Roy remained a doctor.
b.
Roy did not remain a doctor.
c.
Roy had been a doctor.
One possible analysis of verbs like remain and stay is that they are
composed of two parts that have the same predicate valuation (59a), i.e., no
complementation.  When negation is applied (59b), they become achievement-like,
with the latter valuation becoming its negated counterpart.  The same analysis works
for the verb continue (59c,d).
(59)
a.
Stay healthy!
<h,h>
b.
Don't stay healthy!
<h,¬h>
c.
Continue running!
<r,r>
d.
Don't continue running!
<r,¬r>
With stay, there is not a change of state (59a).  The same predicate must
hold true at t1 and at t2, as shown in (60a), and cannot fluctuate.  Yet with the
addition of negation (59b), we obtain a situation where a change must occur, as
shown in (60b).  This set of data shows that verbs like remain are exact inverses to
verbs like become.
(60)
a.

147
b.
With verbs like stop and start, the unnegated usage is a straightforward
transition (61a,c).  However, for stop in its negated imperative, it is the latter negated
state that is converted to a positive (61b), whereas start in its negated imperative that
the latter positive that is converted to a negative.  In both cases, it is the final state
that switches value in its negated imperative, never the initial state.  We can link this
switch in polarity of values with that of stay and continue from above:  all these
negated imperatives switch the value of the latter state.
(61)
a.
Stop singing!
<s,¬s>
b.
Don't stop singing!
<s,s>
c.
Start dancing!
<¬s,s>
d.
Don't start dancing!
<¬s,¬s>
A related issue is whether or not a verb like stay is more, less, or just as
complex as verbs encoding change of state or state of change.  We do not want to
use complementation to derive two opposite values for these verbs, since the values
are not complementary here.  How, then, do we represent these verbs?  I suggest that
the fact that the negation of become and remain does not affect the presuppositions
indicates that such presuppositions are encoded higher in a syntactic structure than
the distinguished points and the distinguished processes, such that the placement of
the negation in affecting the process or the point of change does not also negate the
presupposition.
It is likely that this presupposition 'slot' is underspecified, except for verbs
like start, keep, continue, and stop, where the value has been specified.  The purpose
of the slot is to determine what initial state obtains.  For example, the verb stay
would encode the first state as being positive:  the verb action is currently being
performed.  In contrast, the verb start would encode the first state as being negative:

148
the verb action is not being performed currently.  For both stay  and start, the
endstate are both specified as positive, that the action will be (or in the case of stay,
continue to be) performed.
For an achievement verb like find, the presupposition is that the endstate is
the positive; the distinguished point allows the initial state is derived.  When one
finds something, the object was not discovered initially, but then at the point of
change the polarity shifts, so that the object has been discovered.  Thus, there need
be no presupposition about the initial state.  Further investigation into the nature of
this hypothetical presupposition slot will elucidate the data on these aspectual verbs,
but such a task is outside the scope of the current thesis.
3.2.3.5
Ideal Trajectories
Recall that in Asher & Sablayrolles (1994) that there was a tenth class,
Dévier 'to deviate', that was omitted from the discussion.  This class of verbs
involves ideal trajectories and the deviation of the actual action from the ideal, or the
intended.  The additional element of modality necessitates some changes from
A&S's localistic analysis.  For a verb like dévier, there is some kind of change of
location, but the location does not consist of a standard type of spatial location.
Asher & Sablayrolles believe that there is an ideal trajectory, and that the actual
motion goes from the inside of the ideal trajectory to a near outside of an ideal
trajectory, as shown in (62):
(62)
Following the same system used for the other nine verb classes in A&S, the
corresponding Source, Internal Path and Goal specifications for dévier are

149
respectively Inner-Halo, Inner-Transit, and Outer-Halo.  In this form, it is the same
as the Sortir 'to go out' class, with the exception that the reference location consists
of the ideal trajectory.
If the actual motion deviates from the ideal trajectory, however, we are no
longer dealing with purely spatial concepts, but must introduce an element of
modality.  It appears that the Dévier-class does not fit smoothly into A&S's overall
system, which deals with strictly spatial zones.
In comparison, Event Mereology easily incorporates the idea of deviations
from ideal trajectories into its biphasic schema.  The English sentences below
(63a-d) show that deviation involves an intention, and a change from doing that
original intention (i) to not continuing the intention (¬i).  There is a distinguished
point that separates the participation in performing the original intention and the later
switch to a different intention.
(63)
a.
Bruce deviated from his path.
b.
Bruce deviated from his original plan.
c.
Bruce strayed from the ministry.
d.
Bruce strayed from the pursuit of his true love.
There is a strong parallel between the semantics of deviate and the use of the
prepositions towards and for.  (64a) is an acceptable paraphrase of (64b), just as
(64c) is for (64d).  The data suggests that under Event Mereology, verbs like deviate
can be represented as <towards(x,y), ¬<towards(x,y)> or <for(x,y), ¬<for(x,y)>.
Such an analysis fits in seamlessly with the other verb classes already discussed in
Chapter One.
(64)
a.
Bruce was heading towards/for the theatre, but now he's not.
b.
Bruce deviated from his plan to go to the theatre.
c.
Bruce was making passes towards Karen, but now he's not.
d.
Bruce deviated from his pursuit of Karen.

150
3.2.4 Summary of ES and DRT Aspect
In these two sections, I have laid out the aspectual systems of Pustejovsky
(1991) and Kamp & Reyle (1993).  Both approaches have their merits, and those
features have been incorporated into the Event Mereology analysis of aspect.
Certain alterations that improve our theoretical understanding of aspect have been
noted, as well as the addition of new empirical data.  With respect to Pustejovsky,
the criterion he uses to distinguish achievements from accomplishments, i.e.,
agentivity, has been replaced by the following EM hypothesis:  achievements and
accomplishments both involve a change of state (dT), whereas they differ in that the
former associates with it an underspecified activity, and the latter a specified activity
(dP).  A reanalysis of the almost data based on the EM system was provided.
Kamp & Reyle (1993)'s analysis is most similar to that espoused by Event
Mereology, except their system is geared towards discourse representations.  As
well, there appears to be no complementary relationship between their preparatory
phase and the result state.  I provided additional evidence in support of EM's use of
complementarity, looking at imperatives, negation, and verbs like keep and start.  A
tenth class from Asher and Sablayrolles (1994), that of Dévier, was also shown to fit
in well with the complementary valuations approach taken by EM.  The next section
deals with prepositional phrases, their interaction with verbs, and the treatment of
medial prepositions in EM.
3.3      Prepositions
Prepositions 
and 
prepositional 
phrases 
play important 
parts 
in
understanding event composition.  Aspect is not merely calculated from the
semantics of the verbs, but also from interactions with prepositional phrases.  As
was seen in Asher & Sablayrolles (1993), spatial prepositions are sudivided into
positional, initial directional, medial positional, and final positional prepositions.

151
Since Event Mereology opts for a non-localistic analysis, concepts such as medial
positional require reanalysis.  It is also useful to examine non-spatial prepositions,
to see if any general patterns emerge, and if so, what modifications (if any) are
required to account for them in a system of aspect.
I begin by surveying prepositions, both spatial and non-spatial.  Next, I look
at the effects of adding prepositional phrases to verbs of change.  Finally, I examine
medial prepositions such as via and past, and offer an analysis of these prepositions
that does not depend on the localistic notion of medial.
3.3.1 General Characteristics of Prepositions
Since we will be using prepositional predicates in the lexical entries of verbs,
I will summarize some properties of prepositions that have been hitherto observed
(Wood 1967, Emonds 1976, Jackendoff 1977, Vestergaard 1977, Millward 1983,
Quirk et al. 1985, Cienki 1989, Fries 1991, Froskett 1991, Jolly 1991, König &
Kortmann 1991, Rauh 1991).  A traditional definition of prepositions is that they are
'words that govern a noun or pronoun and indicate a relation between this and
another word, which can be a verb, an adjective, or another noun' (Froskett 1991).
Prepositions 
may be 
right-headed 
(postpositions) 
or 
left-headed
(prepositions).  Greek has only prepositions, whereas in German, both prepositions
and postpositions are common.  In English, prepositions occur most often, though
there are some prepositions that can be used as postpositions (e.g., 65a) or pure
postpositions (65b) (Froskett, 1991):
(65)
a.
The world around, people want peace.
b.
I saw Bill and Ted together.
There are some similarities between complementizers and prepositions.
Complementizers do not take NP complements, whereas prepositions take NP and
gerund complements.  Certain prepositions can take finite clauses as complements,
just like a complementizer:

152
(66)
when (C)
after (C,P)
by (P)
finite clause (she danced)
     √
     √
     *
non-finite/gerund (dancing)
     √
     √
     √
NP (the end of the dance)
     *
     √
     √
While the inventory of prepositions is limited, it is not a closed class,
contrary to common perception.  The class of prepositions admits new additions and
constantly changes throughout the history of a language.  There are deadjectival
(67a), denominal (67b), and deverbal prepositions (67c) in English.  Prepositions
are classified typically as [-N,-V].  [-N] indicates that the preposition is a case
assigner; [-V] means that prepositional phrases may be focused in cleft
constructions in English.  These features suggest that nouns [+N,-V] and verbs [-
N,+V] are more likely sources for new prepositions than adjectives [+N,+V].
(67)
a.
deadjectival
along, near, worth, subsequent to
b.
denominal
thanks to, in front of, in spite of, by means of, in
addition to
c.
deverbal
barring, excepting, concerning, pending
The frequency of use among prepositions in English is estimated by Quirk
et al. (1985) to be 45% the use of of and in.  90% of the prepositions used are
limited to thirteen prepositions:  of, in, to, for, with, on, by, at, from, as, into, about,
and than.  It is not an unlikely hypothesis that these most frequently appearing
prepositions contain the elementary meaning components that are used in the
semantics of verbs with distinguished points.
3.3.2 Spatial and Non-Spatial Prepositions
Just as verbs of change are not all verbs of motion, not all prepositions are
spatial prepositions.  Aside from prepositions of spatial location, there are also
prepositions that are temporal, directional, discourse-related, and those which serve
other functions.  Some spatial prepositions can also have non-spatial uses.
From various sources (Wood 1967, Emonds 1976, Quirk et al. 1985, Fries
1991, among many others), two-hundred and eighty-six English 'prepositions' were

153
collected; these include simple and complex prepositions, particles, directional
adverbs, and other elements that have been classified as prepositions by their
sources.  Not all prepositions need to be discussed here; I will not be analyzing
those prepositions which are not prepositions that affect aspectual interpretation.
Thus, I exclude prepositions that serve to explain a cause, topicalize, or focalize (e.g.,
focal prepositions, 68), and those that include, exclude, or distribute (clusion
prepositions, 69).42
(68)
focal prepositions
according to, as for, as to, because of, concerning, considering, due to,
given, granted, in (the) face of, in (the) light of, in (the) process of, in
accordance with, in behalf of, in case of, in charge of, in common with, in
comparison to, in compliance with, in conformity with, in consequence
of, in favour of, in quest of, in regard to, in relation to, in respect of, in
respect to, in return for, in search of, in spite of, in view of, on (the)
ground(s) of, on account of, on behalf of, on pain of, on the matter of, on
the part of, on the strength of, owing, re, regarding, regardless of,
respecting, thanks to, touching, with reference to, with regard to, with
respect to
(69)
clusion prepositions
along with, apart from, aside from, bar, barring, besides, but, but for, cum,
despite, devoid of, ex, except, except for, excepting, excluding, exclusive
of, failing, in addition to, in exchange for, in lieu of, including, instead of,
irrespective of, less, minus, notwithstanding, of, outwith, per, plus, sans,
save, times, together, together with, void of, with, with the exception of,
without
3.3.2.1
Prepositions With Spatial and Temporal Uses
The remaining prepositions are mostly applicable to time and space, and can
also be subdivided into different categories.  First, directional particles (e.g., away,
forwards) and locational particles (e.g., far, north, nowhere), and other words
classified as 'prepositional' by their sources yet do not take direct objects, can be
separated (70).  (71) shows the prepositions that can be used spatially, and (72) the
prepositions that can be used temporally.
                                                
42The lists of prepositions are by no means exhaustive or absolute; neither are all the 286
prepositions collected classified, as some are unclear as to their proper classification or are very
archaic.  Of those listed, there may be better ways to subclassify them.

154
(70)
particles
aft, abroad, afterwards, ago, ahead, aloft, anywhere, apart, ashore, aside,
astern, away, back, backward(s), close, down, downhill, downstairs,
downstream, downward(s), downwind, east, eastward(s), elsewhere,
everywhere, far, forward(s), here, hereabouts, home, indoors, inland,
inshore, inward(s), larboard, left, locally, (noun)-wards, nearby, north,
nowhere, offshore, outdoors, outside, outward(s), overboard, overhead,
overland, overseas, port, right, sideways, skyward(s), somewhere, south,
starboard, there, thereabouts, underfoot, underground, uphill, upstairs,
upstream, upwards, west
(71)
spatial prepositions
('gainst, 'tween, 'twixt,) aboard, about, above, across, adjacent to, after,
against, ahead of, along, alongside, amid, amidst, among, amongst,
around, as far as, astride, at, athwart, atop, away from, back of, before,
behind, below, beneath, beside(s), between, betwixt, beyond, by, close to,
from, in, in amongst, in back of, in between, in contact with, in front of, in
line with, inside, inside of, into, near, nearer, nearest, near to, nearer to,
nearest to, next to, off, off of, on, on to, on top of, onto, opposite, out, out
of, outside, outside of, over, past, round, round about, through,
throughout, to, to the left of, to the right of, to the side of, toward(s),
under, underneath, unto, up, up against, up to, upon, via, within, without
(72)
temporal prepositions
('tween,) about, after, around, as of, at, before, between, by, circa, close to,
during, ere, following, for, from, in, in between, in consequence of, inside,
into, on, outside, over, past, pending, preliminary to, preparatory to,
previous to, prior to, pursuant to, since, subsequent to, throughout, till, to,
toward(s), under, until, unto, up to, upon, within
Further distinctions among the temporal and spatial prepositions are
possible.  There is some overlap between temporal and spatial prepositions, as
shown in (73).  The differences in spatial and temporal usage of these prepositions
are illustrated in (74):
(73)
spatial and temporal prepositions
('tween,) about, after, around, at, before, between, by, close to, from, in, in
between, inside, into, on, outside, over, past, throughout, to, toward(s),
under, unto, up to, upon, within
(74)
A
a.
Anakin Skywalker usually sleeps about the workshop.
b.
Anakin Skywalker usually sleeps (for) about 7 hours.
B
a.
Jar-Jar Binks walked in the parade after the droids.
b.
Jar-Jar Binks walked in the parade after dinner.
C
a.
Chewbacca waited around the corner for C3PO.
b.
Chewbacca waited (for) around an hour for C3PO.

155
D
a.
Darth Vader landed his spaceship at the spaceport.
b.
Darth Vader landed his spaceship at dawn.
E
a.
Ewoks only eat before the altar.
b.
Ewoks only eat before dusk.
F
a.
Boba Fett planted a tree between two rocks.
b.
Boba Fett planted a tree between dawn and noon.
G
a.
Greedo arrived by the sea route.
b.
Greedo arrived by the agreed time.
H
a.
Han Solo searched for Luke close to the Rebel Base.
b.
Han Solo searched for Luke (for) close to an hour.
I
a.
I have watched Star Wars from that balcony.
b.
I have watched Star Wars from the first day it opened.
J
a.
Jabba the Hutt built a new speeder in his hangar.
b.
Jabba the Hutt built a new speeder in December/a day.
K
a.
Obi-Wan Kenobi practiced in between the boulders.
b.
Obi-Wan Kenobi practiced in between meals.
L
a.
Luke Skywalker will freeze to death inside the ice cave.
b.
Luke Skywalker will freeze to death inside an hour.
M
a.
Darth Maul somersaulted into the cockpit.
b.
Darth Maul somersaulted into the late afternoon.
N
a.
Boss Nass rested on his throne.
b.
Boss Nass rested on Tuesday.
O
a.
My speeder will take Bail Organa outside the city to sell.
b.
My speeder will take Bail Organa outside an hour to sell.
P
a.
Senator Palpatine jumped over the bench.
b.
Senator Palpatine jumped (for) over an hour.
Q
a.
Qui-Gon Jinn continued running past Yoda.
b.
Qui-Gon Jinn continued running past his bedtime.
R
a.
R2D2 searched for C3PO throughout the market.
b.
R2D2 searched for C3PO throughout the day.
S
a.
Sebulba will walk his dog towards the cantina.
b.
Sebulba will walk his dog towards five o'clock.
T
a.
Threepio can fall asleep under the bed.
b.
Threepio can fall asleep (in) under a minute.
U
a.
Uncle Owen walked unto the tarmac.
b.
?Uncle Owen walked unto the next day.

156
V
a.
Chancellor Valorum had been creeping up to the podium.
b.
Chancellor Valorum had been creeping (for) up to five
minutes.
W
a.
Watto came to assist me upon the barge.
b.
Watto came to assist me upon hearing my call.
X
a.
Yoda died within his cave.
b.
Yoda died within a minute of Luke's arrival.
There are, of course, differences between the spatial and temporal uses of
these prepositions.  The spatial use locates the action within an area, or
positions/orients the actor in the area (a. examples in 74).  Temporal uses (b.
examples in 74) fall into two basic types:  those that modify a stretch of time (74
ACHJLOPSTVX), or positions the action at a specific point (or between two
specific points) on the timeline (74 BDEFGIJKMNQRUW).  In appears to be a
member of both classes (74 J).
The first set identified, those that modify a stretch of time (i.e., about,
around, close to, in, inside, outside, over, towards, under, up to, within), are almost
more like quantifiers over a temporal noun phrase than a proper preposition in their
temporal usage.  In most of these sentences, the addition of for or in before the PP
improves the reading, showing that they do act like modifiers that make the length of
time denoted by the prepositional object less rigid.  For example, about an hour,
around an hour, and up to an hour impose fuzzier boundaries on the length of
time.  If I is the timespan, then about(I), around(I) and other similar predicates
indicate the degree to which the timespan may vary.
Note that the addition of ago to some of these sentences turn them into the
second type of temporal usage, where a moment is located on the timeline (75a-f).
This is the effect of ago taking the event and locating it in the past with respect to the
present.  How far back in the past depends on the timespan I; as shown in (76).  For
instance, if I equals two hours, then the event happened two days prior to the present
moment.

157
(75)
a.
Han Solo searched for Luke (for) close to an hour.
b.
Han Solo searched for Luke (*for) close to an hour ago.
c.
Senator Palpatine jumped (for) over an hour.
d.
Senator Palpatine jumped (*for) over an hour ago.
e.
Chancellor Valorum had been creeping (for) up to five minutes.
f.
Chancellor Valorum had been creeping up to five minutes ago.
(76)
3.3.2.2
Non-Spatial and Non-Temporal Uses
Not only are there spatial and temporal uses of prepositions, but sometimes
these prepositions have other abstract uses.  For instance, the preposition for can be
used to denote a length of time as in (77a), or as a goal to aim for (77b,c), or as a
desired item (77d).  The meanings in (77b,c) are related to that of (77d), except
(77b) is a desired temporal moment, (77c) is a desired physical goal, and (77d) is a
desired exchange of services.  Only (77c) can be construed as a locational use of
for, and even then its usage as a spatial preposition is uncertain.  In an earlier
section, we have seen how the predicate for can be used in the semantics of deviate,
making that class of verbs conform to the two-phase analysis of change.
 (77)
a.
You should wait for an hour.
b.
You should wait for Mary (to come).
c.
He is heading for the theatre.
d.
He will work for food.
As with verbs, the choice of an abstract or concrete NP in the complement of
the preposition can control whether that change is abstract or physical.  While we
have already seen differences between locational and temporal NPs in the
complement of PP, here are some additional minimal pairs that do not involve the
temporal:
(78)
A
a.
Arden stayed away from cars.
b.
Arden stayed away from politics.

158
B
a.
Benedict went into the castle.
b.
Benedict went into business.
C
a.
Corwin was near to the bank.
b.
Corwin was near to a checkmate.
D
a.
Deirdre remained within the hotel.
b.
Deirdre remained within her rights.
E
a.
Eric lured Corwin into the tower.
b.
Eric lured Corwin into a confession.
F
a.
Fiona went beyond that tree.
b.
Fiona went beyond the call of duty.
G
a.
Underneath all that rubble was a good man.
b.
Underneath all his haughtiness was a good man.
3.3.3 Prepositions and Verbal Meaning
3.3.3.1
Prepositions and the Partitioning of Continua
In general, a preposition bisects a continuum into two regions:  one of which
consists of those denotations that it is true for, the other of those denotations that it
is false for.  Thus, a spatial preposition delimits two complementary regions in a
spatial continuum.  For example, the preposition on in on the table involves the
relation On(x,y,t), which defines a two-dimensional surface on y as part of its
function.43  The NP the table provides the reference required by the spatial relation
to partition the spatial domain.  There are two spatial parts:  the region that qualifies
as on (where On(x,y,t)=1), and the region complementary to that (where
On(x,y,t)=0).
These regions should not be confused with the actual reference object of the
preposition, the table.  In fact, the region that is defined does not need the reference
object to be part of it.  For instance in (79a), the phrase near the table involves some
relation Near(x,y,t) that carves out the space that John stood in using the table only
                                                
43Note that the particular surfaces or volumes selected are subject to pragmatic factors, such as the
properties of the reference object or the subject.  For example, on the table defines a flat plane on
top of the table, whereas on the plane is ambiguous, since on can also be used for people who are
aboard the plane.

159
as a reference, not requiring John to be touching the table in any way.  In fact, John
cannot be standing on the table (79b) if he is near the table.44
(79)
a.
John stood near the table.
b.
John stood on the table.
It appears to be a property of near not to allow the reaching of a
distinguished point (80a), as opposed to on, which could provide a distinguished
point or terminus (80b).  The only way John could go near the boat yet still be on its
bridge is if the bridge was physically separated from the boat.  Prepositions like on,
at, and in are only possible if there is a strong degree of closeness with the reference
object.  Thus, if John stood near the table, he was not close enough to have reached
it, and remains outside a certain distance from the object.  Being able to cross that
boundary of closeness is similar to having reached a distinguished point.
(80)
a.
*John went near the boat and stood on its bridge.
b.
John went on the boat on stood on its bridge.
Likewise, the non-spatial use of near prevents the culmination of the
reference event (81a).  There is an approach towards the event on the timeline, or a
temporal proximity to the event (81b-d):
(81)
a.
Andrew's essay was near completion.
b.
Andrew was near a decision.
c.
Andrew was near a crisis.
d.
Andrew was near a nervous breakdown.
Thus, the reference object or time guides the granularity or size of the
segments by providing a real-world point of reference.  In other words, the reference
object or time does not take over the grammatical function of the distinguished point
and the associated predicates.  In a change of state, only the distinguished point
bisects the spread of the occurrent and defines two parts with complementary
valuations with respect to a predicate like Near(x,y,t), On(x,y,t), or In(x,y,t).
                                                
44Near is both a preposition, as in he stood near the car, and also an adjective, as in John is
near.  Typical adjectival word formations are seen in the examples nearer, nearest, and nearly.

160
In the phrase on the table, on delimits an area of space using the table as its
reference (R), leaving behind a complementary region, off (of) the table (82a).
Likewise, near the table demarcates a region using the table as its reference, leaving
behind a complementary region that is described by its inverse, far from the table
(82b).
(82)
a.
b.
If we look also at the pairs in-out (of) and at-away from, it is evident that the
positive valuations are always in the region closer to the reference object, and the
negative valuations always in the region farther from the reference object.  To put it
another way, in, at, near, and on are more basic than their opposites out (of), away
from, far from, and off (of), and are used to delimit space immediately around the
reference object.
This observation bears upon our representation of verbs.  For example, if a
change-of-state verb involves the predicate Near(x,y,t), then we expect that a change
from <Near, ¬Near> will distance the subject from the reference object
(<Near(x,y,t)=1, Near(x,y,t)=0>); that is to say, even though an object cannot
technically be on and near the same thing simultaneously, the region for
Near(x,y,t)=0 does not intersect with the region On(x,y,t)=1.  The Near(x,y,t)=1
region includes the On(x,y,t)=1 region.  This configuration of the spatial region
prevents a sentence like (83) with the change <Near, ¬Near> from being descriptive
of the scenario where she was no longer near the stage because she climbed onto the
stage.
(83)
Anne distanced herself from the stage.

161
Two points are emphasized.  Firstly, all predicates of change distinguish two
regions on the continuum, using the reference object to guide the location of the
boundary between its binary valuations (matched with the phases of the occurrent
bisected by the distinguished point).  Secondly, there is a crucial difference between
using the reference object as a region in and of itself, and using the reference object
as a guide to partition the region.  As we will see, the latter method, where the
reference object merely acts as a referent, permits Event Mereology to unify medial
prepositions with the other kinds of prepositions.
3.3.3.2
Prepositions, States, and Changes of State
Prepositional predicates, as argued, always delimit two regions that
correspond to their valuations in a binary logic.  Together with other verbs,
prepositional phrases may affect the aspectual interpretation of the sentence:  such is
what is commonly called event composition or aspectual compositionality.
Aspectual compositionality can be understood as the claim that small parts with
aspectual influence exist, and that these parts can be put together to form a more
complex verb phrase with a resultant aspect that is dependent on the smaller parts.
These prepositional predicates come in two basic kinds:  positional (e.g., in,
on, at, near; 84a,b) and transitional (e.g., into, onto, to, until; 84c,d).  Positional
prepositions are used to describe a background location (or time) where (or when)
the action takes place.  Since a positional prepositional phrase is used to describe a
property that obtains throughout the event, it is like a state of affairs.  Transitional
prepositions indicate a definite change of state, and are thus indicative of a
distinguished point.
(84)
a.
Jean-Pierre sat on the porch.
b.
Jean-Pierre cried on Sunday.
c.
Jean-Pierre stepped onto the porch.
d.
Jean-Pierre cried until Sunday.

162
In a state of affairs, only one predicate valuation is assigned to the span of
the occurrent; its complementary value is irrelevant to the internal aspectual
structure.  In contrast, an occurrent of change is comprised of both complementary
valuations of the predicate.
A transitional prepositional phrase can affect the aspect.  An activity verb like
run, normally lacking a distinguished point, can be provided with an endpoint by the
addition of a goal phrase headed by a preposition like to, into, or out of
(85a-g).  We can observe the change caused by the addition of to the library to the
activity verb run:  (85a) does not entail (85b), since the addition of the PP endpoint
prevents the activity verb from having a subpart that is also an instance of the activity
verb.  In this way, run to the library is accomplishment-like.
(85)
a.
Andrew is running to the library.
b.
Andrew has run to the library.
c.
Andrew ran into the library.
d.
Andrew ran into debt.
e.
Andrew ran into trouble.
f.
Andrew ran out of the library.
g.
Andrew ran out of time.
Pustejovsky (1991)'s Event Structure posits that such a PP is a function
<P,T> from Process to Transition.  The preposition to is analyzed as a relation
between states and processes, such that the result is a Transition.  In EM terms, the
transitional prepositional phrase introduces a distinguished point.  By the addition
of a dT to an activity verb normally without a dT, we introduce a bipartite element to
the event complex.  Thus, the verb phrase modified by a transitional PP resembles
an accomplishment even though the verb itself is an activity verb.
Verkuyl (1993) also discusses similar cases, such as (86a), which contrasts
with (86b).  He follows Jackendoff & Landau (1992), where the dimensionality of
the object is crucial:  in (86a), the river is assigned the interpretation of an
unbounded, one-dimensional object by the preposition along (87a).  In (86b), the
river is assigned the interpretation of a bounded zero-dimensional point by the

163
preposition to (87b).  Thus, says Verkuyl, the former unbounded river permits the
durative, whereas the boundedness of the latter requires the terminative.
(86)
a.
John ran along the river.
b.
John ran to the river.
(87)
a.
unbounded 
b.  bounded destination
(1-dimensional line)
(0-dimensional point)
Verkuyl's terms unbounded or durative corresponds to the idea of state of
affairs or background location, i.e., no distinguished point; his term bounded or
terminative correlates with the concept of change of state, i.e., the existence of a
distinguished point.  The two variants are illustrated below.  (87a) shows that there
is no definite endpoint, whereas (87b) shows that the motion stops once the
destination is arrived at.
Along and to carry the load of the semantic interpretation, not the objects of
the preposition.  In other words, the prepositions can take all sorts of objects for
which it is not evident whether they have a specific dimensionality or boundedness.
For instance, we can say (88a) without having to say that the fence is endless.
Certainly a fence can be a short, finite segment.  It is the fact that we are using along
that the reference object is interpreted as an unbounded, one-dimensional object.
The effect of along simply keeps the finite nature of its object, the fence in this case,
underspecified for a point of change.  (88b) illustrates the action in (88a).

164
(88)
a.
John walked along the fence.
b.
That the object's inherent shape and dimensions are not as important as the
semantics provided by the preposition can be shown by the examples below.
Objects having a long axis (e.g., road, river, shore) have a natural orientation when
used in an along PP.  However, this does not mean that objects without such long
axes cannot be used in an along PP.  We can say (89a), for instance, letting the
preposition along tell us to interpret the object as having a long axis that can be used
as the one-dimensional length, as illustrated in (89b).  One might judge (89a) to
border on being unacceptable, but that judgment would be based on extra-linguistic
knowledge of crop circles.  Crop circles do not have a natural long axis, which is
why we resist the sentence as being fully acceptable when used with the same
preposition:
(89)
a.
John walked along the crop circle.
b.
In one sense, the PP provides the specification of change of state, just as the
NP complement to an accomplishment verb provides a specification of a change of
state (90).  Of course, verb phrases of the form process verb followed by a PP
specifying the change specifies the process which leads to the endstate (91).
 (90)
X builds a Y.
The activity of X's building takes place.
The state of Y's existence comes about as a result.
a.
Bill built a house.
b.
Bill built a model airplane.
c.
Bill built a website.
d.
Bill built a financial empire.

165
(91)
X runs into Y.
The activity of X's running takes place.
The state of X's being in Y comes about as a result.
a.
Bill ran into the house.
b.
Bill ran into the library.
c.
Bill ran into debt.
d.
Bill ran into trouble.
Sentences as those in (91) involve entailments.  Suppose that (91b) were
true.  Then, there must be some time at which Bill was not in the library and a
subsequent time at which he was in the library.  An analogous entailment can be
shown to hold for the other sentences in (91).  Notice that a sentence such as Bill
ran along the river carries no such entailment; being along the river does not come
about as a result of Bill's running.
Into NP specifies a state which some element is in.  This element is, in many
instances, specified by some other NP in the sentence.  In the cases above, it is the
subject.  However, it could be the object, as shown below:
(92)
a.
Bill sent Mary into the house.
b.
Bill sent Mary into the library.
c.
Bill sent Mary into debt.
d.
Bill sent Mary into trouble.
Moreover, it presupposes that the element in the specified state (in the house
for the sentences 93b-e) was not previously in the specified state (93a):
(93)
a.
Bill was not in the house.  previous to when (b) first became true
b.
Bill ran into the house.
c.
Bill did run into the house.
d.
Did Bill run into the house?
e.
Bill, run into the house!
While similar paradigms can be given for the other sentences in (91) and
(92) above, no such change can be specified for the sentences with along the river.
3.4      An Analysis of Medial Prepositions
A class of prepositions and their associated verbs that bears closer
examination are the medial prepositions.  The medial class of prepositions includes

166
beyond, through, past, over, via and across.  Their verbal counterparts include cross,
pierce and pass.  In the locational use of these medial prepositions and verbs, as in
(94a-f) and (95a-c), the reference location appears to describe a segment
corresponding to a medial phase of the occurrent of change.
(94)
a.
Mike walked beyond the mailbox.
b.
Jean-Yves crawled through the tunnel.
c.
Stefan drove past the billboard.
d.
The plane flew over the mountain.
e.
The train arrived in Toronto via Kingston.
f.
The ball rolled across the table.
(95)
a.
Why did the chicken cross the road?
b.
Connie passes the bookstore every morning.
c.
The pencil pierced the poster.
A localistic analysis typically claims that in (96), because the forest itself
constitutes a segment, and because it appears between the Source and the Goal, it
must be a third basic type of segment, the Internal Path (medial).
(96)
Little Red Riding Hood ran from her house through the forest to her
Grandmother's house.
Does this kind of evidence support the claim that the tripartite division of
localism is necessary in the aspectual system?  I believe the answer is no:  the label
'medial' should not be misinterpreted as evidence for a third, intermediate phase.
Event Mereology's bipartite divisions, the distinguished points, are quite capable of
explaining these medial prepositions.  Begin first by examining the non-spatial uses
of the same prepositions (97a-f) and verbs (98a-c).  The standard argument against
the medial parameter, that of abstract domains not having intermediate paths, is
usable here to a certain degree.
(97)
a.
Why Mike did certain things is beyond human comprehension.
b.
Jean-Yves went through law school on a scholarship.
c.
Stefan worked past five o'clock.
d.
Sara spends way over her budget.
e.
I learned of Quentin's arrival via gossip.
f.
Brian got his point across (to Mary).
(98)
a.
Why did Ian's antics cross the line?
b.
Connie passed her exam.
c.
The cunning detective pierced the deception.

167
However, certain examples are not so clear, as in (97b), where one can
conceive of law school as an intermediate stage.  The question of being medial or
not seems to be part of one's world knowledge, and not necessarily part of the
grammar.  Consider (99) and (100).  The (99a) and (100a) examples may be
construed as instantaneous, whereas (99b) and (100b) cannot be instantaneous,
given our world knowledge of what constitutes an activity of walk (discussed
previously) and the time it takes to cross a town (as opposed to a line):
(99)
a.
Mike stepped beyond the mailbox.
b.
Mike walked beyond the mailbox.
(100)
a.
The chicken crossed the line.
b.
The chicken crossed the town.
The rest of this section will show how Event Mereology addresses such
apparent intermediate stages.  I will argue that 'medial' verbs and prepositions like
cross and through also divide continua into two by means of a distinguished point,
and fit into the overall aspectual system of verbs like land, enter, and leave, or
prepositions like on, into and off (of).  As before, a change of state involves a
proposition and its negation (s and ¬s), except medials possess an additional axial
specification that may apply in certain contexts.  I show my analysis below.
3.4.1 Medial Prepositions
I propose that prepositional phrases with medial prepositions should not be
treated differently from other prepositions we have examined so far, since medial
prepositions also partition their continua into two.  The major difference is that the
notion of an axis is inherent in medial prepositions, and the effect of having an axis
is clearest in the spatial domain.  As Jackendoff & Landau (1992) and Talmy
(1983) inter alia have pointed out, the medial class of spatial descriptions involve an
axis and movement from one side of the axis to the other.  This axis could be
intrinsic to the reference object, such as the vertical axis in the body (101a) or the

168
center line of a river (101b).  An object without an intrinsic axis, e.g., a crop circle,
could be construed to possess one (101c):
(101)
a.
The ant crawled across Mick's chest .
b.
The guard crossed the river.
c.
The farmer drove his tractor across the crop circle.
In Event Mereology, through defines two regions based on the meaning of
its predicate, like in or near do.  The forest in through the forest has the exact same
function as the house does in near the house:  the reference object provides a source
of real-world reference; the two abstract halves of the change of state (s and ¬s) are
mapped onto denotations in the world.  For example, the locational use of through
bisects space into two: a segment distal or opposite from the object's original
location (e.g., the state of being in a location on the other side of the forest) and a
segment proximal to the object's original location (i.e., the state of not being in a
location on the other side of the forest).  In other words, the Through(x,y,t) relation
can be used by a distinguished point to demarcate two segments.  Reconsidering
(94a-f), those sentences of change would involve the pairs of states given in
(102a-f).
(102)
a.
source
Mike was in the space on one side of the mailbox
goal
Mike is in the space on the other side the mailbox
b.
source
Jean-Yves was in the space on one side of the tunnel
goal
Jean-Yves is in the space on the other side of the
tunnel
c.
source
Stefan was in the space on one side of the billboard
goal
Stefan is in the space on the other side of the
billboard
d.
source
The plane was in the space on one side of the
mountain
goal
The plane is in the space on the other side of the
mountain
e.
source
The train was in the space on one side of Kingston
goal
The train is in the space on the other side of Kingston
f.
source
The ball was in the space on one side of the table
goal
The ball is in the space on the other side of the table

169
Of course, it is evident that a certain crucial element is missing from the
semantic decomposition above:  for these verbs of motion, the manner in which the
motion is performed must also be part of the meaning.  For example, to go through
the tunnel means the subject must have been in the tunnel during his motion.
Through is differentiated from across, in that through contains information that the
trajectory was enclosed in a three-dimensional manner for at least some part of the
motion, whereas for across, some sort of horizontal two-dimensional planar surface
with a central dividing line is involved.
An example is across the sea, where the surface of the sea is identified along
with a central axis.  In (103a-c), it is illustrated that, regardless of whether travel was
through the air, on the surface of the ocean, or under the water, the route itself spans
two parts of the sea divided down the middle.  The idea of horizontality of the plane
defined by across is supported by the unacceptability of (103c) in the context where
the shark swam vertically from the surface of the sea to the ocean floor; across
cannot describe a vertical descent or ascent.
(103)
a.
The airplane flew across the sea.
b.
The ocean liner sailed across the sea.
c.
The shark swam across the sea.
Thus, medial prepositions are very much like other prepositions discussed
earlier.  There are always two segments of space delineated by a spatial preposition,
and the reference object guides the projection of regions which may or may not
overlap the reference object.  The 'medial' prepositions in fact do not require a
medial phase in their lexical specification, as a tripartite analysis would suggest;
spatial medial prepositions perform the standard bisection of space as other spatial
prepositions do.  However, we do need to look into the role of the axis in more detail
below; but first, let us summarize the representations of non-medial prepositions and
verbs.

170
3.4.2 Representing Prepositions and Verbs
3.4.2.1
Representing Prepositions
When representing prepositions that indicate background location or a state
that remains throughout the time of the occurrent, the following predicates and their
valuations may be assumed for the prepositions chosen as examples in (104a-h).
Below, v(P) returns the binary valuation of the predicate P at time t.:
(104)
preposition
a.
in
v(In(x,y,t)) = 1
He stood in the arena.
b.
on
v(On(x,y,t)) = 1
He stood on the balcony.
c.
at
v(At(x,y,t)) = 1
He stood at the door.
d.
near
v(Near(x,y,t)) = 1
He stood near the door.
e.
outside
v(In(x,y,t)) = 0
He stood outside the arena.
f.
off (of)
v(On(x,y,t)) = 0
He stood off the balcony.
g.
away from
v(At(x,y,t)) = 0
He stood away from the door.
h.
far from
v(Near(x,y,t)) = 0
He stood far from the door.
As (104h) shows, far from is the opposite of near.  Note however that away
from might also be argued to be the opposite of near as well as at, there being no
significant difference between not at and not near.  I see no no appreciable
difference.  One explanation for away from encompassing both specifications could
be that at and near are different only by the quality of proximity:  at is close enough
to indicate terminativity (as are in and on), whereas near cannot provide
terminativity.  The negated regions of at and near do not have any impact on
terminativity.  Lacking this distinction, then, these negated regions are functionally
equivalent, and away from can be used as the negation of both near and at.
The prepositions of change, into, onto, and to and their inverses out of, off
(of), and from are linked with the presence of a distinguished point that divides their
associated spreads into two portions.  Note that the inverses also appear to be usable
as states, as was shown above.  The cases of towards and its inverse away from also
fit into this general scheme.  The corresponding prepositions and predicates, when
used to indicate a change of state, are shown in (105).

171
(105)
preposition
time1
time2
a.
into
v(In(x,y,t1)) = 0
v(In(x,y,t2)) = 1
b.
onto
v(On(x,y,t1)) = 0
v(On(x,y,t2)) = 1
c.
to
v(At(x,y,t1)) = 0
v(At(x,y,t2)) = 1
d.
towards
v(Near(x,y,t1)) = 0
v(Near(x,y,t2)) = 1
e.
out of
v(In(x,y,t1)) = 1
v(In(x,y,t2)) = 0
f.
off (of)
v(On(x,y,t1)) = 1
v(On(x,y,t2)) = 0
g.
from
v(At(x,y,t1)) = 1
v(At(x,y,t2)) = 0
h.
away from
v(Near(x,y,t1)) = 1
v(Near(x,y,t2)) = 0
These prepositions of change are built from the simple predicates In(x,y,t),
On(x,y,t), and At(x,y,t).  To simplify the representations of these prepositions, we
can represent the two temporally ordered valuations with the notations below.  The
notation v<P> = <a,b> means that the earlier valuation of P is a, and the later
valuation of P is b.  Given our assumptions about distinguished points demarcating
adjacent and complementary states, it will be the case that a is derived as the
negation of b.
(106)
a.
Into(x,y,t1,t2):
v<In(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
b.
Onto(x,y,t1,t2):
v<On(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
c.
To(x,y,t1,t2):
v<At(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
d.
Towards(x,y,t1,t2):
v<Near(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
e.
OutOf(x,y,t1,t2):
v<In(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
f.
OffOf(x,y,t1,t2):
v<On(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
g.
From(x,y,t1,t2):
v<At(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
h.
AwayFrom(x,y,t1,t2):
v<Near(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
3.4.2.2
Representing Verbs
Verbs of change are essentially represented in the same way as prepositions
of change.  (107a-h) show the representations of eight classes identified in A&S.
Also based on other observations and hypotheses discussed earlier in this thesis, we
can add several new classes.  The imperative of a verb S is achievement-like, and
looks like (107i).  Also, if we use For(x,y,t) to represent x having intention to do or
possess y, then we can capture the meaning of deviate as (107j):

172
(107)
verb
a.
Enter
v<In(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
b.
Land
v<On(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
c.
Arrive
v<At(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
d.
Approach
v<Near(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
e.
Exit
v<In(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
f.
Take-off
v<On(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
g.
Leave
v<At(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
h.
Distance-from
v<Near(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
i.
verb S as an imperativev
<S(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
j.
Deviate
v<For(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
3.4.3 Axes and Medial Prepositions
We cannot simply construct the representation of medial prepositions
compositionally from contrasting values of spatial relations  as we do for into, onto,
and to above.  Medial prepositions differ from prepositions like into and out of in
that they require an axial component; otherwise, we cannot distinguish a preposition
like into from through, since they both involve the semantics of being in and motion.
The axial component must be incorporated somehow, while preserving the
bipartitioning property of prepositions.
It was shown in §3.4.1 that prepositions like across and through involve
being in one region and change to the opposite region.  How should Through(x,y,t)
and other medial predicates be decomposed into simpler predicates?  I propose that
Opposite(x,y,t) expresses the relation we desire best:  x is on the opposite side of the
axis of y at time t.  In a binary deictic space, the satisfaction of Opposite(x,y,t) would
situate the object separate from the observer's location or perspective (for a state of
affairs) or the object's original location or state (for a change of state).  Then, we can
represent the medial prepositions and verbs of change partially as follows (108a-i):
(108)
a.
beyond
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
b.
through
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
c.
past
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
d.
over
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
e.
via
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
f.
across
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
g.
cross
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
h.
pass
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
i.
pierce
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>

173
But how are these verbs distinguished from one another?  It appears that
dimensionality plays a significant role in differentiating the various medial
prepositions and verbs.  We can also decompose Through(x,y,t), a complex
predicate, into a combination of simpler predicates, as we did with Into(x,y,t) for
prepositions of change, but introduce dimensionality as well.  Examples will be
drawn mostly from spatial data, where the distinctions are most necessary.
We need to situate the axis of the reference object in space:  the axis can
form a plane that extends through a three-dimensional space (for through) or a line
on a planar surface (for across), for example.  The axis must satisfy a spatial
relation:  for instance, through requires motion to be associated with being in the
reference location (three-dimensional); across requires a plane (two-dimensional) to
be traversed, and that fits best with the predicate On, which defines a surface.  At
indicates a line, with a point acting as an axis.  Near is similar to At, except the line
does not pass through reference object, but in the space close to it.  (109a-d) lists
these predicates and the medial verbs and prepositions most likely to be associated
with them.
(109)
a.
In(x,y,t)
through, pierce
b.
On(x,y,t)
across, cross, over
c.
At(x,y,t)
via
d.
Near(x,y,t)
past, pass, beyond
The prepositions beyond and past, and the verb pass have been classified as
involving the Near predicate, since the data below suggest that the subject need not
go through the reference object, but merely close enough.  In (110a), it is not
required that the bridge be crossed; the bridge only serves as a reference that
establishes the axis.  (110b) definitely does not allow the reference object to be on
the route of the swimming action.  While (110c) functions the same as in (110a),
(110d) is a case where one might argue that the predicate At is involved, since Sam
must handle the cookies and so the cookies might be at Sam at some point.

174
However, since pass is a cognate of past, I am inclined to attribute pass with the
same semantics as its prepositional counterpart, i.e., involving Near.
(110)
a.
Sam walked beyond/past the bridge.
b.
Sam swam beyond/past the island.
c.
Sam passed the bridge.
d.
Sam passed the cookies (to Mary).
Let us examine some non-spatial uses of these prepositions.  Recall that the
distinguished point forms a boundary for a state of change.  In (111a), the
preposition at indicates that the inescapable conclusion has come into being, or is
confirmed.  With medial prepositions, the abstract use also indicates a change:  the
evidence in (111b) has been examined (in part or in whole), just as in (111c) the
book has had its pages turned (and read) in part or in whole.  The objects the
evidence and the book are boundaries here as well, things that must be engaged in
some part by the action performed.  There can also be a temporal use of these
medial prepositions, as shown in (111d,e).  Past can indicate a point in time that
must be passed (111d), or a stretch of time (111e); both are boundaries, and the
subject must continue its action (living) from one side of the temporal boundary to
the other.
(111)
a.
Fred arrived at the inescapable conclusion (via logic).
b.
Fred went through the evidence.
c.
Fred leafed through the book.
d.
Fred lived past age eighty.
e.
Fred lived through World War II.
3.4.3.1
Internal Axis and Object Axis Readings
The exact nature of the axis needs to be addressed.  There are two
possibilities:  either the internal axis of the object itself is relevant, or the object itself
may act as the axis (or a point of reference for establishing the bisecting axis).  For
example, in (112a), Mick's chest has a natural axis, i.e., the central line dividing his
chest into a left and right side.  The entire motion in this case takes place entirely on
the reference location:  the ant does not leave Mick's chest.  This will be called the

175
internal axis reading.  In contrast, the river in (112b) guides the bisection of space
into two, say a river's north and south shores, in the case where the guard begins
and ends his movement on one shore or the other.  This is called the object axis
reading.  Of course, in the scenario where he remains in the water the whole way
through his motion, the internal axis reading obtains.
(112)
a.
The ant crawled across Mick's chest (from the left side to the right).
b.
The guard crossed the river (from one shore to the other).
In the internal axis reading, the entire occurrent's spread must be contained
within the reference object.  In (112a) above, Mick's chest must contain the whole of
the ant's path of crawling.  Thus, if e is the occurrent, then for the internal axis
reading, spr[e] must be a subpart of the spatial extent of the reference object, and
the axis is the inner axis of the reference object, and it acts as a distinguished point
in a change of state.  Another way of saying this is, the distinguished process part of
the activity or accomplishment occurs entirely within the reference object.
For the object axis reading, the reference object itself is construed as the
axis:  it is idealized into a line.  In the object axis reading of (112b), the river is
idealized thusly, and there is no restriction on the spread of the occurrent.  A motion
is still a binary change, and the distinguished point is the reference object.  Notice
that the object axis interpretation makes no claim about the spatial relationship
between the object and the spread of the occurrent, but only that the object has a role
as axis.  Thus, Jean does not have to have been in contact with the table in the object
axis interpretation below:
(113)
Jean jumped across the table.
Some medial prepositions used with states are given in (114a-d).  In these
uses, the object axis reading obtains.  In (114a), for instance, Jean is not sitting on
the table, so the internal axis reading does not obtain.  The subject occupies the
v(Opposite(x,y,t))=1 side, as illustrated in (115), where the eye represents the

176
speaker's point of view, and the man indicates the object that occupies the opposite
side:
(114)
a.
Jean sat across the table.
b.
The village is through the forest.
c.
Gilbert stood beyond the bed.
d.
I live past the pharmacy.
(115)
Certain prepositions in combination with the right verbs do produce states
with the internal axis reading.  These are states for which an object is in contact with
or occupies both sides of a single object at the same time.  Examples are given in
(116a-c).  Note, however, that certain prepositions do not permit both kinds of
readings.  For example, athwart (116c) can only be used when the object occupies
both sides of the axis.  Contrast it with beyond and past (116d,e), which do not
permit an object to occupy both sides of the axis at the same time; the object must
occupy the opposite side, if a state, or be involved in a motion.  For an object to be
past something, the object must occupy the space on the other side of the boundary
from its original location (for a state), or end up on the other side (for a change of
state).  In (116e), the pharmacy divides space into two by acting as an axis, rather
than confining the spread of the occurrent to its own spatial extent.  The internal axis
reading is not permitted:  (116e) cannot mean that I live within the pharmacy.  It may
be 
the case that prepositions which 
are 
neither 
2-dimensional 
nor
3-dimensional (i.e., 0-dimensional medial prepositions like beyond and past) do not
have sufficient internal structure to accommodate an internal axis, and are restricted
to an object axis interpretation.

177
(116)
a.
The body lies across the table.
b.
The tunnel runs through the mountain.
c.
I stood athwart the table. (on both sides of the table)
d.
*Gilbert lay beyond the bed. (on both sides of the bed)
e.
*I live past the pharmacy.  (on both sides of the pharmacy)
For the internal axis reading, the entire spread of the occurrent, spr[e], must
be a part of the spread of the reference object, spr[RefObj], as shown in (117a).
The pentagon represents the reference object's spatial extent.  For the object axis
reading, it is the case that the spatial extent of the reference object is idealized into a
boundary with zero length; spr[RefObj] = 0, as in (117b).  The idealized boundary
is then used to divide up the remaining spatial continuum into two parts, Opposite
and ¬Opposite (117c).
(117)
a.
b.
c.

178
I theorize that the internal axis reading and the object axis reading are
controlled by two axis specifications, [I-AXIS] and [O-AXIS], respectively.
Prepositions may be specified for one or the other, or underspecified for either,
depending on whether they allow the internal or object axis readings, or both.  (118)
summarizes some of the prepositional specifications.
(118)
[I-AXIS]
- athwart
[O-AXIS]
- past, beyond, via
underspecified
- across, through
3.4.3.2
Dimensionality and Axes
Dimensionality plays a role in the internal axis and object axis difference.
Recall that we have associated the prepositions with certain basic prepositional
predicates like In(x,y,t) for through.  These predicates find their use as follows.  In
the object axis reading, it need only be true that at some point during the occurrent,
the subject be true for the predicate associated with that preposition.
For example, for the object axis reading of (119), at some point t, John must
satisfy v(John, the tunnel, t)=1, to signify that he has been in the tunnel for at least a
moment.  Since John could have been outside the tunnel when he started and when
he finished, he does not need to be in the tunnel for the entire spell of the occurrent.
(119)
John walked through the tunnel.
In comparison, the internal axis reading of (119) requires that John be inside
the tunnel for the entire spell of the occurrent.  For all intervals t, where t is a part of
the spell of the occurrent e, John must satisfy the predicate v(John, the tunnel, t)=1,
to signify that he has been in the tunnel for the entire event.  Let us represent
prepositions used in changes as follows:
(120)
a.
through
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
  & {∃/∀t, t ⊆ spl[e]: v(In(x,y,t)) = 1}
b.
across
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
  & {∃/∀t, t ⊆ spl[e]: v(On(x,y,t)) = 1}

179
c.
via
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
[O-Axis]
  & {∃t, t ⊆ spl[e]: v(At(x,y,t)) = 1}
d.
past
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
[O-Axis]
  & {∃t, t ⊆ spl[e]: v(Near(x,y,t)) = 1}
e.
athwart
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
[I-Axis]
  & {∀t, t ⊆ spl[e]: v(On(x,y,t)) = 1}
3.4.3.2.1    Via
Let us examine a specific preposition (via) briefly, to see how well it fits
within a biphasic analysis.  Bennett (1970) suggested that via is the simplest medial
preposition (i.e., 0-dimensional), without the dimensional properties that through (3-
dimensional) and across (2-dimensional) have.  The reference object of via is used
as a point on the spread of the occurrent that is intermediate between the two
complementary spaces, much like through and across.
For example, in (121), Scarborough helps determine the route of arrival:  at
first, Mario was someplace not here, then he came here, and on his way he passed
through Scarborough.  His origin must be on the opposite side of Scarborough
from his destination.  The reference object of via is not the entire spread of the
occurrent, but is a proper subsegment of the spread, and the subject Mario must
have been at Scarborough at some point during the occurrent, as determined by the
semantics of via given earlier in (120c).
(121)
Mario arrived here via Scarborough.
Via, then, is more flexible than tripartite localistic analyses may lead one to
believe.  A&S's analysis would assume via to be purely medial (Internal Path), i.e.,
non-overlapping with Source nor Goal.  But as (122a,b) illustrate, the medial
segment the backyard can either be adjacent to the Goal the house (122a), or the
kitchen can be a proper subpart of the Goal the house (122b).  Clearly, (122b)
violates the condition of non-overlap required for the tripartite analysis.  Thus, a
localistic analysis would need to be modified to account for the via data below.  In

180
contrast, Event Mereology's account of via in (120c) needs only at the reference
object to be true at some point during the spell of the occurrent.  Both (122a) and
(122b) satisfy the given condition, since Mario was at  the backyard and at the
kitchen during the respective occurrents.
(122)
a.
Mario entered the house via the backyard.
b.
Mario entered the house via the kitchen.
3.4.3.2.2    Verbs of Extension
A set of data to consider are the verbs of extension, which include extend,
span, and run.  These verbs  involve 'virtual change'.  Talmy (1983) notes that
stationary linear figures that span both sides of the reference object (once the sides
are determined by the selection of an axis) are sometimes incompatible with a
stationary (non-motional) verb like lie.  (123a,b) are fine if the intended meaning is
total containment of the object in the segment of space beyond the rock (123a), or
the segment of space beyond the tube (123b), but they are ill-formed when the
whole of the object extends over both segments of space.
(123)
a.
*The snake lay past the rock.
b.
*The snake lay through the tube.  (Talmy 1983, 11d,e.iii)
However, when a motional verb such as run, extend, or go is used, one can
consider one edge of the linear object to be the virtual object, which undergoes
virtual movement from one end to the other.  Those prepositions which cannot be
used with static verbs can be used with these kinds of verbs (124a,b).  Similarly, for
verbs of perception, the focus of one's perception becomes the object and follows
the linear object from one end to the other, also feigning motion (124c):
(124)
a.
The railway extends through the tunnel.
b.
That yellow brick road runs past the Emerald City.
c.
The thief looked through the window.

181
3.4.4 Summary of Prepositions and Verbs
The Event Mereology analysis of change establishes an inviolable
connection between the initial and final states through complementarity.  I follow
Gruber (1976) in assuming that verbs incorporate prepositional (and other)
meanings into their own meaning.  Under the EM analysis, a single spatial relation S
can be used to create at most two verb classes of change:  v<S(x,y,t)>=<0,1> or
v<S(x,y,t)>=<1,0>, not including their use with Opposite(x,y,t).  Mismatches are
no longer an issue, since every spatial relation creates two and only two segments
that are correlated to two phases that encode change.  Thus, to keep the number of
change of location verb classes down to a size that reflects the data, we need only
limit the number of spatial relations, since each relation adds a maximum of two verb
classes.45
Recall that at, on and in are 0-, 2-, and 3-dimensional, respectively.  We can
represent these as At(x,y,t), On(x,y,t), and In(x,y,t) with valuations of 1, and define
away from, off (of) and out of with these same relations, except the valuations are 0.
Prepositions of change are also built out of these dimensional prepositions as well:
to/from, onto/off (of), and into/out of.  There is also the Near(x,y,t) relation, for
near/far from and their verbal counterparts, approach/distance (oneself) from.
Dimensional counterparts of 'medial' prepositions also appear:  via, across, and
through.  Table (125) below shows the correlation between the nine classes used in
A&S with their specifications under EM, and the corresponding prepositions in
English.  (125i) also suggests that three other kinds of verb classes for verbs with
medial polarity with different spatial properties exist, and indeed some such verbs
(and corresponding prepositions) exist in English and French, and form classes
                                                
45Other kinds of axes may be relevant as well, such as the vertical axis (for prepositions like
over/under).  How these other axes interact with the biphasic analysis are omitted from the
present discussion, since the range of data is quite large.  These and other related phenomena, such
as all over and (all) throughout, may be interesting to examine in a future paper.

182
A&S do not account for (125j-l).  I also include the analyses for the imperatives and
deviate, in (125m-n):
(125)
final polarity
a.
S'Approcher/Approach
near
          v<Near(x,y,t)> =<0,1>
b.
Arriver/Arrive
to
v<At(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
c.
Se poser/Land
onto
v<On(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
d.
Entrer/Enter
into
v<In(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
initial polarity
e.
S'éloigner/Distance-from
far from        v<Near(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
f.
Partir/Leave
away from
v<At(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
g.
Décoller/Take-off
off of
v<On(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
h.
Sortir/Exit
out of
v<In(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
medial polarity
i.
Passer (par)/Cross
across
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1> & {∃/∀t, t ⊆ spl[e]: v(On(x,y,t))=1}
j.
Côtoyer/Skirt
around
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1> & {∃/∀t, t ⊆ spl[e]: v(Near(x,y,t))=1}
k.
Passer/Pass
past, by
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1> & {∃/∀t, t ⊆ spl[e]: v(At(x,y,t))=1}
l.
Transpercer/Pierce
through
v<Opposite(x,y,t)> = <0,1> & {∃/∀t, t ⊆ spl[e]: v(In(x,y,t)) = 1}
other
m.
verb S as an imperative
v<S(x,y,t)> = <0,1>
n.
Dévier/Deviate
v<For(x,y,t)> = <1,0>
3.4.5 Metarelations
Let us look more closely at the representation of the prepositions, such as
In(x,y) and On(x,y), and how they can be extrapolated for use in abstract contexts.
Consider the following sentences:
(126)
a.
Bill remained in the room.
b.
Bill remained in debt.
c.
Bill remained in love.
d.
Bill remained happy.
The verb remain takes a PP complement in (126a-c), and a AP in (126d).  In
(126a), the preposition in takes a concrete NP as its complement, denoting a location
L, contrasting with (126b,c) where the NP complement is abstract, denoting a state S,

183
like debt and love.  The question arises as to how the physical characteristics
associated with the locational use of in can be invoked when the complement is
concrete, and omitted when the complement is an abstract entity.
In other words, the relevant predicate P involves some subject x in a specific
relationship with the NP complement y.  Here, y may either a nominal denotation of
a state S or a physical object N.  For the former, x possesses the state S (for
prepositions with a positive polarity, like in) or lacks it (prepositions with a negative
polarity, like out of); for the latter, x does not possess the physical object N, but
rather denotes a region of space around the reference location N, as discussed in
Chapter One.
Likewise consider the following examples, which show that other locational
prepositions also lose their strictly spatial interpretations with abstract NPs denoting
a state S.  In (127b), Bill is not in a state of self-control; in (127d), Bill is in a state
of ease.
(127)
a.
Bill is out of the room.
b.
Bill is out of control.
c.
Bill is at the park.
d.
Bill is at ease.
Let us posit that prepositions with locative use are metarelations of the form
Rz(x,y), where x is the subject, y is the prepositional object, R is the metarelation for
the preposition z (e.g., Rin is the metarelation for the preposition in).  If y is a
physical location, the metavariable defaults to the spatial relation indicated by z, e.g.,
Rin(Bill,the room) becomes v(In(Bill,the room))=1.  If y is a nominal denotation of
the state S, then the metarelation Rz(x,y)  is equal to the state S(x), e.g., Rin(Bill,debt)
becomes debt(Bill).  Note that the polarity of the preposition is still determined by
the valuation of the predicate; for instance, out of control is represented by the
relation Rout-of(x,control), which is equivalent to v(Rin(x,control))=0.
The same metarelations are used in the verbal representations as well.
Consider enter:  Law school in (128a) is a concrete place, and in (128b) it denotes

184
the abstract state of being enrolled in a law program.  The location-specific
properties of enter are neutralized; i.e., the lexical entry of enter also uses the
metarelation Rin(x,y) to permit both the locational and abstract interpretations.  Thus,
all the lexical entries discussed earlier use metarelations (Rin, Ron, Ropposite, etc.)
instead of bare spatial relations (In, On, Opposite, et al.).
(128)
a.
Bill entered the law school building.
b.
Bill entered law school.
3.5
Summary
In this chapter, we have argued for the utility of two modes, change of state
and state of change, in the system of aspect.  It has been shown that such
frameworks as Pustejovsky (1991) that use agentivity to distinguish between
accomplishments and achievements cannot capture all the data, and that it is the
presence or absence of a distinguished process that differentiates the two aspectual
classes.  I have also shown that spatial and non-spatial prepositions can be unified
under a single aspectual analysis, just as spatial and non-spatial verbs of change can
be unified.  Medial prepositions were shown to be analyzable without positing an
intermediate path element between source and goal, as would be required under a
localistic analysis.  Instead, medial prepositions are specified for a distinguished
point, in addition to an axial element unique to that class of prepositions.  Finally,
the use of metarelations allows for specifically spatial components of the
prepositions to be unactivated in a non-spatial context.

185
Chapter Four
Compositionality in Event Mereology:  Achieving a Unified Analysis
4.0      Introduction
In this chapter, I will consider additional data on aspectual compositionality.
I begin with an analysis of resultatives in the Event Mereology framework.
Empirical data on the use of negation, almost, and the effects of aspectual
morphemes like -ed and -ing in English will be discussed, and followed by a more
in-depth look at the interactions of prepositional phrases and verbs.
To reiterate, the basic idea is that simple clauses may express a state, process
(activity), occurrence (achievement) or development (accomplishment).    This
chapter focuses on developments, which are pairings of processes with changes.
Simple clauses may express a development either through a simple lexical item (e.g.,
build) or through a syntactically complex structure comprised of a process verb
followed by a prepositional or adjectival phrase (e.g., run into the house, wipe clean,
respectively).
I examine a set of spatial phenomena in §4.3, focusing on the application of
Event Mereology principles to spatial motion.  While our ultimate goal is to unify
spatial and non-spatial changes in one theory, it remains important that EM is still
able to account for the range of spatial data with the mechanisms available.
4.1      Resultatives
4.1.1 Representing Resultatives:  ES vs. EM
In simple terms, a resultative is a process that leads to an endstate.  With the
resultative, there is a systematic type shifting from a state of change to a change of
state.  A resultative, like (1), has a process verb hammer (something), as well as an
endstate like flat.
(1)
Mary hammered the metal flat.

186
I argue that when used in English resultative constructions, adjectives (e.g.,
red, ill, flat) and prepositional particles (like up, down, away; so-called bounders in
Bybee & Dahl 1989) are analyzed as predicates associated with distinguished
points, which are always accomplishment-like in that there is an activity that leads to
a resultant state s.  Any such state s, defined by an adjectival or prepositional
proposition, can be endstate correlated with a distinguished point on an event.  Like
any other distinguished point, there are two phases defined on the occurrent, which
are correlated with two spreads on the relevant continuum.  The spreads are defined
by the binary valuations of s, with¬s being derived from the specified s.  As always,
two such complementary and adjacent valuations of the same predicate give us a
change of state, represented in EM by dT, the distinguished point.
For example, V+P and V+Adj (2a,b) appear to always have resultative
meaning.  For example, in (2a), the table began in upright position, but as a result of
the pushing action became no longer upright.  Likewise in (2b) the table was
originally not clean, but then as a result of the wiping action becomes clean.  That is
a clear example of a change of state, going from a state of being not clean to clean.
The resultative can have an abstract interpretation, as (2c,d) show.  However, verbs in
the resultative construction are not permitted in English, as (2e-g) illustrate.  The
exception appears to be in cases of gerunds embedded in a PP, as in (2h), where the
gerund is interpreted as a process.  Such mediation by prepositional phrases bar
such sentences from being classified as true English V+V resultatives, being no
different from a standard resultative like (2i).
(2)
a.
John pushed the table over.
(V+P)
b.
John wiped the table clean.
(V+A)
c.
John pushed Mary around.
d.
John wiped his record clean.
e.
*John pushed the table roll/sink.
(V + bare V)
f.
*John pushed the table rolled/sunken.
(V + V-en)
g.
*John pushed the table rolling/sinking.
(V + V-ing)
h.
John pushed Mary into walking.
(V + P + V-ing)
i.
John pushed Mary into the room.

187
In English, the closest a resultative sentence comes to acceptability with a
verb in the resultative position is given in (3a,b) and (4a,b).46  For the first data set,
the verb make imposes causativity, and thus the second verb (ring, scream) is the
result of the action Mary is performing.  The first verb is a cause of the second
verb's action.  The second set of data shows the apparently infinitival to V form in
the resultative position, but in these cases they are not true resultatives.  The to V
construction here is not the true infinitival, but appears to be an abbreviated form of
in order to V; the intent to V is not the same as a V result.  (4a) cannot mean that
Mary has achieved the endstate of winning.
(3)
a.
Mary made the metal ring.
b.
Mary made John scream.
(4)
a.
Mary pushed herself (in order) to win.
b.
Mary wiped the table (in order) to impress her guests.
In Pustejovsky (1991), it is claimed that Event Structure predicts why only
process verbs undergo the resultative, and why the resultative phrase must be a state:
both follow directly from the decomposition of events in ES, where the the first
phase is always a process (P), and the result is always a state (S).  The ES
decomposition of resultatives can be represented as the ordered pair <P,S>.
Obviously, we find no cases like (5) in English, where it means Mary loved John (a
state), and as a result John is happy (also a state).  In other words, the ordered pair
<S1,S2> is ruled out because the most complex structure in Event Structure is
<P,S>, where the process obligatorily precedes the endstate.  Likewise, Event
Structure would rule out <P,P> and <S,P> orderings, since only a state may
occupy the second position of the ordering.
(5)
*Mary loved John happy.
Recall that in EM, states and processes only differ by the attribute that states
have no minimal parts (specified for the feature [+atomic]), and processes are
                                                
46In serial verb languages, such as Èdó, verbs can be in the resultative position to create a serial
verb.  See Chapter Five for more discussion on this topic.

188
underspecified for such minimal parts, represented as [0 atomic].47  Both states and
processes are antipartite, though states do not change, while processes are
underspecified for change (see §2.3.4.4 and §2.3.4.5).  If there is no other
difference, then states and processes should be interchangeable.  It appears that EM
would allow states that precede processes as results <S,P>, processes that precede
process results <P,P>, and states that lead up to a different state <S1,S2>.  Should
EM allow these classes, then EM must be able to explain the ungrammaticality of
sentences like (5) somehow.
The EM response to the above concern is to address the difference between
Event Structure and Event Mereology with respect to the components used by each
system.  The crucial difference between ES and EM here is that ES takes as
primitives States (S) and Processes (P), and uses them to build more complex
structures like accomplishments.  As such, there are different ways to pair up the
different values that each phase can take in the ES system, since there are two phases
(initial and final), and two possible values for each.  In order to avoid generating the
classes that do not appear empirically, the distribution of P and S are assigned to the
initial and final phases respectively; this restriction seems arbitrary.
In contrast, Event Mereology does not directly use States and Processes,
since they are not primitives in EM; EM uses the primitives of distinguished point
dT and distinguished process dP.  In EM, one primitive is the distinguished point
dT, which always produces two complementary states <¬S,S> by projection onto a
continuum, rather than taking a state S as a primitive.
With these two primitives dT and dP being unrelated to each other, there are
four possibilities:  dT is the only specification, dP is the only specification, or dT
and dP are present simultaneously.  The fourth possibility, where neither dT nor dP
are present, does not appear to contain any relevant information that contributes to
                                                
47For features, [+ feature] and [- feature] indicate specified values, whereas [0 feature] indicates that
that feature is underspecified.

189
the final output of the aspectual calculus, and will not be considered here.  To
borrow an idea from phonology, one might say that dT and dP are on separate tiers;
the presence of one does not preclude the presence of the other.  They are two
distinct features that are not competitive, but can co-occur.
Given that dT is either present or absent, it follows that either two
complementary phases are present or totally absent; also, either dP is specified or it
is not.  There is no need to order the expressions denoting the states and processes
to produce different verb classes, since it is only the presence or absence of dT and
dP that differentiates the verb classes.  The ordering of the process before the result
state is a syntactic phenomenon:  it appears that processes are associated with a
higher position in the syntactic tree than points of change, and given the headedness
of English, the expressions denotating processes are syntactically ordered before
those denoting endstates.  (See Chapter 5 for more discussion of this topic.)
4.1.2 Processes as Results
Aside from the syntactic output ordering the expressions denotating dPs
ahead of dTs in English, it can be argued that there is no conceptual difficulty in
having a process that leads to another process, or a state that leads to another state,
or a state that leads to a process.  For example, the cutting of a carrot held above the
floor (cut as a process) causes the pieces to fall due to the pull of gravity (fall as a
process); a state of being jealous can grow into a state of paranoid delusion, as in the
tragedy Othello; likewise, a state of love can cause the act of wooing (woo as a
process).  A gerund may also be argued to be a process result, as in John pushed
Mary into walking.
Despite the fact that we can conceive of these process-process and other
combinations, there are no simple ways to express them without using multiple
verbs or verb phrases.  Only the process-endstate seems to be a common single-

190
verb construction in English.  There appears to be a very close connection between a
single process and a single point of change that forms a natural event unit, provided
that the process in some way causes the attainment of the state, or the state is a
natural consequence of the process.  This is an s-word or event as described in
Travis (1999), as will be shown in Chapter Five.  Serial verb languages likewise
recognize the strong connection between a distinguished process and a
distinguished point in cases with an element of causativity, as argued in Stewart
(1998) and Pi & Stewart (1998).
To understand the causal connection between the distinguished process and
the distinguished point, consider the data in (6a-c).  As pointed out by Carlson
(1997), (6a) is not only the process of cutting the carrot into pieces, but also the
implied process of the carrot pieces falling into the bowl as a result of gravity.  In
contrast, (6b) does not work well with the interpretation where the carrot pieces fly
across the room as a result of the cutting action, but better with across the room as a
locational PP.  There appears to be more naturalness to associate cut with an implied
fall than cut with an implied fly.
The stronger connection between cut and fall can be said to be an example of
iconicity (Stewart 1998), i.e., the pragmatic expectation that certain actions have more
salient actions that result from their performance.  In a serial verb language, iconicity
will account for the syntactic differences between the pairs push and fall (an iconic
action; if you push something it might fall) and the pairs push and cook (non-iconic;
one does not push something to cook it).
(6)
a.
Greg cut the carrot into the bowl.
b.
Greg cut the carrot across the room.
Other examples of verbs that normally are not used as motion verbs but can
under certain interpretations are given in (7a-c); non-motional equivalents are given
in (7d,e).  For non-motional verbs, it is harder to find an iconic pair of actions, but
one could make a weak case for iconicity between complain and getting fired, or talk

191
and accepting marriage.  Instead of trying to establish such iconicity, for non-
motional verbs it seems more likely that the simple process-endstate type of
resultative is at work, rather than the process-process type.
(7)
a.
Greg grated the cheese/melted the butter onto the spaghetti.
b.
Greg froze the strawberries into his jello.
c.
Greg shook the dandruff off his head.
d.
Greg complained himself out of a job.
e.
Greg talked Mary into marriage.
In (6a), the preposition into provides a distinguished point for the process of
cutting, but is in the bowl really the end result of the cutting action itself, or the end
result of the implied falling action?  The latter is more plausible, since to cut
something into a bowl is not the same as to cut into a bowl, where the knife is
assumed to have cut the bowl itself.  The transitive use of cut makes smaller portions
of its direct object as a part of the process; the motion of these pieces into the bowl
is contributed by the preposition into, which provides a definite change of state.  It
seems that the distinguished process is distinct from the distinguished point, and
may actually be a process (cutting) succeeded by another type of process (falling).48
Note also that a distinguished point does not always indicate the endpoint of
an action.  In fact, a process may be continued past the moment of change associated
with a distinguished point.  For example, the act of building a cabin can involve
many different steps, such as sawing down trees, cutting the logs, planning, moving
planks, et cetera.  At a particular moment of change associated with a dT, such as the
simple past in (8a), the quantity of a single cabin is the result of the building activity.
Yet Abe could be engaging in the same activities even after that point in time has
passed, and still be considered to be in the process of building.  By no means is it
entailed that the process must come to an end, but rather that the process of building
that particular cabin is complete.  Thus, the distinguished point does not need to
                                                
48 Note as well that the process may be one stretch of the cutting action, but the individual pieces
fall independently and successively into the bowl.  Thus, each instance of a piece falling into the
bowl might be considered to be a minimal part to the process of to cut a carrot into the bowl.

192
mark the absolute end of the distinguished process, as shown in (8b); only the
presence of a dT and a dP is necessary for the accomplishment.
(8)
a.
Abe built a cabin.
b.
Another case that illustrates that the distinguished point need not always be
the terminus of the distinguished process is seen in chained paths (involving motion
or non-motion), such as in (9a,b) (see also Pi 1993).  The chained paths involve the
construction from-to-to, which can be extended indefinitely.  The verbs skateboard
and drift are activities, yet there are several different stops along the process that do
not constitute the endpoint of the associated activity.  In (9a), for instance, the hotel
is but a reference point pertaining to Henry's route.  The distinguished point
contributed by to in this instance marks a point along the overall process.
(9)
a.
Henry skateboarded from the park to the hotel to the courthouse.
b.
Henry's career choice drifted from doctor to lawyer to comedian.
c.
These chained paths may be specialized conjunctions of various from-to
paths:  from x to y to z is a conflation of from x to y and from y to z, ordered
temporally (9c).  Even with this analysis of chained paths as from-to conflations, we
are still able to argue that the appearance of the distinguished point does not force
the verb activity to terminate.  The from-to-to construction merely demarcate
possible subunits of the process.
Furthermore, in (9c), it is always the syntactically final-most transition of the
chained path which is the transition of the overall verb action.  We may test this
claim by checking the entailments.  (10a,b) show which statement is true of the
outcome of (9a,b) respectively; the checkmark indicates that the endstate is an
entailment of the sentence in (9a) or (9b), while the asterisk indicates that it is not.

193
(10)
a.
Henry is:  *at the park / *at the hotel / √at the courthouse.
b.
Henry's current career choice is:  *doctor / *lawyer / √comedian.
Since there are two to phrases in the examples, both theoretically could
constitute the distinguished point of the overall event; however, only the final-most
to phrase may be thus interpreted.  Pi (1993) shows that prepositional phrases in
chained paths form a single structure from which PPs cannot topicalize, whereas a
non-chained path can have topicalized phrases because the PPs consist of two
separate structures.  Thus, it seem that the syntax has a tendency to place
distinguished points as the deepest embedded in both VPs (resultatives) and PPs
(chained paths).  In resultatives, processes dominate the transition; in chained paths,
the final-most to phrase is dominated by the other prepositional phrases.  This is
further evidence that the syntax maps certain semantic roles to specific structural
positions.
(11)
a.
Markus ran [from the bar] [to the YMCA].
b.
[From the bar], Markus ran [to the YMCA].
c.
Markus ran [from the bar [to the YMCA [to the bus station]]].
d.
*From the bar, Markus ran to the YMCA to the bus station.
It can be concluded that other possibilities exist aside from process-endstate
types of accomplishments, but only the process-endstate forms a micro-event.  The
micro-event is representative of a cause-effect relationship between the activity and
the ensuing action, and is limited in English to an activity followed by a change of
state.  This cause-effect relationship is pragmatically determined, since it depends
upon what verb actions are most likely associated with which other verb actions in
the real world (iconicity; §5.3.1).  It has also been shown that a distinguished point
is not always restricted to being the endpoint of the overt distinguished process; it
can be the endpoint of a different and covert process.
4.2      Coercion
Certain grammatical structures are inherent to certain verb classes.  For
example, an activity verb has a different syntactic structure from that of an

194
achievement verb.  Yet verbs can be coerced into other meanings, e.g., a process verb
like swim (12a) can be given an endpoint (i.e., the action is bounded) by putting it
into the past tense (12b).49
(12)
a.
Tony will swim (and it is not known for how long).
b.
Tony swam (for an hour).
4.2.1 The Simple Past and the Perfect
According to the Event Mereology treatment of aspect thus far, an
achievement is specified by a distinguished point, i.e., there is a change of state
(13a).  Once an achievement has occurred, it no longer can be true at the present
moment that the action is still going on (13b).  Likewise, an activity is specified by a
distinguished process, i.e., there is a state of change but not a change of state (13c).
Whereas the former verb die lacks a state of change meaning since the achievement
is an instantaneous event, the latter verb run does not encode a change of state
meaning because there is no specified endpoint associated with the running action.
(13)
a.
Jean-François died.
b.
*Jean-François died and is still dying.
c.
Jean-François ran.
However, (13c) can be interpreted to have an endpoint, by virtue of the fact
that it is in the past tense.  Any activity verb in the past tense can be considered to
have terminated (14a), although this is an implicature, not an entailment, as shown by
(14b).  Even though a distinguished point is not present in the semantics of the verb
run, the past tense (and the present prefect and past perfect tenses 14c,d) can coerce
a change of state interpretation (see also Pustejovsky 1995); that is to say, one is
able to claim the presence of a definite change from performing the action (a) and
not performing the action (¬a) that is like a distinguished point <a,¬a>.
                                                
49The term coercion is one invented by Pustejovsky (1995) which covers what has been
traditionally called conversion (following Quirk et al. 1985), and applies not only to verbs, but
also phenomena such as shifts between mass-count (e.g., the mass noun beer acting as a count
noun a beer, beers).

195
(14)
a.
Jean-François ran (but is no longer running).
b.
Jean-François ran (and is still running, for all I know).
c.
Jean-François has run.
d.
Jean-François had run.
Likewise, it is possible to coerce a change of state reading with statives with
the past tense and the present and past perfects (15a-c).  In these cases, the state
which obtained (S), like the state of love in (15a), can be interpreted as no longer
applying in the present (i.e., <S,¬S>).  Though the coercion of the change of state is
possible as a reading (16a), it is not obligatory here either and may continue as a
state (16b):
(15)
a.
Jean-François loved Marie-Claire.
b.
Jean-François has loved Marie-Claire.
c.
Jean-François had loved Marie-Claire.
(16)
a.
Jean-François loved Marie-Claire (but no longer).
b.
Jean-François loved Marie-Claire (and loves her still).
There is no need to coerce a change of state reading in the case of
accomplishment verbs (17a) and achievement verbs (17b), for which there are
already change of state readings available on account of the distinguished points in
the aspectual structure of those verbs.  In fact, it is impossible not to have a change
of state reading with these verbs in the past tense (17c,d); the distinguished point in
the lexical specification of these verbs prevent their event from still continuing after
it has already occurred (as indicated by the past tense).  Activities and statives do not
have dT specifications, and thus can be extended past their coerced point of change.
(17)
a.
Jean-François ate his apple.
b.
Jean-François arrived.
c.
*Jean-François ate his apple and was still eating it.
d.
*Jean-François arrived and was still arriving.
4.2.2 The Progressive
The other issue is whether a state of change reading can be coerced from
verbs without a distinguished process specification.  With an achievement verb that
normally lacks a state of change reading, it is indeed possible to coerce a state of

196
change reading out of the achievement verb by putting the verb into the English
progressive, as with the verb die (18a-c).
(18)
a.
Jean-François died.
b.
Jean-François was dying.
c.
Jean-François is dying.
The progressive -ing identifies the distinguished process part of a verb.  In
an accomplishment with both process and change of state parts, it is the process that
becomes the focus of the aspectual interpretation.  For example, the inflected verb
ate (19a) focuses on the point of change, due to the past tense.  However, in the
present progressive (19b), the present moment is situated in the temporal interval
associated with the process leading up to the point of change.  In the past
progressive (19c), the event occurred in the past, but the focus of the event is still on
the process and not the point of change; the actual event has not culminated.
(19)
a.
The dog ate my dinner.
b.
The dog is eating my dinner.
c.
The dog was eating my dinner.
Kamp & Reyle (1993) summarizes the semantic effect of the progressive of
a verb v as isolating the eventualities that correspond to the 'part of their schema that
corresponds to the Aktionsart of v that terminates in, but does not include, the
culmination point.'  Thus, part I of their aspectual structures are accessible by the
progressive.  Achievements do not have part I in its past tense specification, but it is
possible to use the aspectual operator -ing to access the part before the culmination
point that constitutes the achievement.  In one sense, a process phase is forced onto
the achievement structure by the aspectual operator.
K&R's treatment of the progressive also means that states are excluded from
taking the progressive, because there is no culmination point present in their
aspectual structure. One test using -ing  to distinguish states and achievements from
accomplishments and activities is called the Continuous Tense Criteria (PROGF)

197
(Vendler 1957, Verkuyl 1993), and is based on the premise that states and
achievements do not take the progressive:
(20)
a.
*I am knowing, she is loving him, he is possessing the house,
he is ruling the country (STATE)
b.
He was running, she is swimming, they are pushing the cart
(ACTIVITIES)
c.
She is running a mile, he is drawing a circle,
he was eating a sandwich (ACCOMPLISHMENTS)
d.
*She was recognizing him, he was reaching the top,
 she was winning the race (ACHIEVEMENTS)
Yet there have been many counter-examples cited (Leech 1971, Comrie
1976, Vlach 1981, Mourelatos 1978), where states can be in the continuous tense
(the present progressive), as in (21a-d).  In these sentences, there is still a state being
described, despite the addition of -ing (e.g., living).  It seems, then, that the
progressive should be permitted to apply to states as well:
(21)
a.
I am living in Amherst.
b.
I am assuming you will come tonight.
c.
The dead man is hanging there to deter the population.
d.
Mr. Smith is standing by the Nile.
It is also strange that the Continuous Tense Criteria would consider data
such as (21d) as ungrammatical.  Though she was recognizing him may seem odd,
it is ameliorated by the addition of an adverb that turns the instantaneous meaning
into a more prolonged transition, as in (22a,b).  In my judgment, there is nothing
wrong with either he was reaching the top or she was winning the race:
(22)
a.
She was finally recognizing him.
b.
She was slowly recognizing him.
-Ing tells us that the focus should be on the distinguished process portion of
the event.  However, an achievement verb like die does not have a dP specification in
its lexical entry.  We can, however, coerce the dP specification because dP is
underspecified for die, and the aspectual marker licenses us to coerce a process part
for the verb die.

198
4.2.2.1
The Open and Closed Senses of the Progressive
One effect of -ing's coercion of the process part from an achievement is the
denial that the culmination point has been reached and realized at that point in time,
but may still be reached.  Galton (1984) distinguishes between two types of
progressive senses:  the closed sense and the open sense.  With the closed sense of
the progressive, the action of the verb V in V-ing is assumed to have begun, is
underway, and will be completed.  Thus, if John is writing his book is taken to have
a closed sense of the progressive, then it is assumed that the writing of the book will
be completed.
The open sense of the progressive, on the other hand, does not need the
event to be completed.  Galton cites the case of (23), where events in the future may
prevent the house from completely burning down.  Yet the open sense does not
completely ignore the range of possible futures.  Included among the possible
futures must be a closed sense of the progressive, where the house will burn down
completely.
(23)
The house is burning down.
Thus, should the open sense of the progressive be adopted in (24a-d), the
sentences do not entail that the top of the mountain was in fact reached, nor that she
did or will win the race.  That the change might still occur (i.e., the narrow sense of
the progressive) remains a possibility.  Particularly with the present tense (24c,d), if
matters remain the same as they are currently, the point of change will be reached.
With the past progressive (24a,b), the past implies that the V-ing is no longer true at
present.  Thus, in she was winning the race, it is strongly implied that she is no
longer winning the race.  Yet it is only an implicature; see (24e).
(24)
a.
He was reaching the top of the mountain.
b.
She was winning the race.
c.
He is reaching the top of the mountain.
d.
She is winning the race.
e.
She was winning the race (and is still winning, for all I know).

199
The open sense of the progressive is applicable only to events with an
endpoint, since the fulfillment of the entire event is only left open to interpretation in
the cases of accomplishments and activities with an endpoint (supplied by a change-
of-state prepositional phrase like in swim into the bay).  -Ing, when applied to a bare
activity verb, can have neither the closed or open meaning, since in sentences like
(25a,b), there is no endpoint to be achieved.
(25)
a.
The firefighter is sleeping.
b.
Jane is swimming.
Thus, the English progressive can coerce an incipient process out of an
achievement, despite achievements lacking a distinguished process in their lexical
specification.
4.2.2.2
English -Ing and Japanese Te-Iru
However, not all languages have morphemes that consistently coerce the
process reading out of the achievement.  For example, following Kindaichi (1950,
1976), McClure (1994) and Uesaka (1996) point out that the te-iru construction in
Japanese possesses similarities to the English progressive only for some verbs
(26a), whereas with other verbs, the te-iru form has a perfective meaning (26b).  The
perfective meaning is always available in a te-iru construction, but not the
progressive meaning.  Other verbs cited by McClure that only have the perfective
meaning of the te-iru construction include kuru 'come', aku 'is open', and wakuru
'understand'.  These verbs are ambiguous as to referring to the change of state (e.g.,
not dead to dead), or to the resulting state, where the subject is already dead.  With
an accomplishment verb like read as in (26c), both the progressive and perfective
meanings may obtain simultaneously.
(26)
a.
Ima       oyoide-iru
Now swimming-be
'(I) am swimming now.'  or  '(I) have swum.'
b.
Ima       sinde-iru
Now     dying-be

200
'(He) is dead now.'  not   *'(He) is dying now.'
c.
Hon-o          yonde-iru
book-ACC    reading-is
'(I) am reading a book.'  or  '(I) have (just) read a book.'
To capture the facts under an EM-style analysis, it is likely that the
morpheme te-iru is capable of yielding the progressive readings only when the state
of change reading is already supplied by dP.  A verb with a dT in its lexical entry
behaves under the te-iru construction as a resultative, since te-iru (unlike -ing in
English) is unable to coerce a process if it is not already present.  Since an
accomplishment contains both dT and dP in their specification, and thus te-iru may
have either interpretation.  What about the activity in te-iru form, how do we get the
resultative reading?  We can solve this problem by saying that te-iru acts more like
the English past (-ed) and perfects (-en), in that it can coerce a change of state.
Thus, the fundamental difference between te-iru and -ing is that the former can only
coerce a change of state reading from verbs without dT, and the latter can only
coerce a state of change reading from verbs without dP.
4.2.2.3
Cambridge States
One point of debate is the issue of whether an event E, once having occurred,
requires there to be a state of E having occurred to persist from thenceforth.  In
other words, do we want the state of, say, a house having been built to be an eternal
state?  Is the state of having been built required to be true of the house even after the
event?
My answer is no:  while we want to have the state of a house having been
built so that we can derive its complement a house having not yet been built, these
two states are relevant only at the time the event takes place.  We only need the
moment of change and what surrounds it.  It gains us nothing to say that the result
state is true of that object forever after the transition; after all, wherever there is a
transition, we can point to the timeline and say there is an infinite stretch backward

201
in time of ¬E (the event having not yet occurred in its entirety), and an infinite
stretch forward in time of E (the event having occurred).  If we are able to obtain two
such infinite timespans with any distinguished point or boundary, then it is a moot
point to attribute any special status to these persisting states.
One might call these derived eternal states Cambridge states, since they are
similar to Cambridge changes.  A Cambridge change is often not considered a real
change, since a real change is thought to involve an object itself changing.  For
example, an ice cube melting is a real change under this definition, whereas John
becoming a widower is not.  The latter is an instance of a property (or relation) that
John has that switches in its truth value.  It is not John himself that has undergone
any change at all; it is the change in his relationship with his wife (her death) that is
involved in becoming a widower.  Under Event Mereology, Cambridge changes
(which would include changes in possession and states) are still a type of change
and are thus retained in our analysis of general change.
A Cambridge state, then, is not a real state in the sense that the persisting
state is not integral to the actual event, but a derived notion that adds nothing to the
characterization of the event.  Thus, if one asks, did John jump?, the true question is,
did such a change (John jumping) occur, not whether the state of John having
jumped currently persists.
4.2.3 Activities With Known Minimal Parts
One subset of verbs that require more scrutiny includes sneeze, bounce,
cough, giggle, blink, laugh, hiccup, jump, clap, hop, fart, wink, flash, and burp.
These verbs are slightly different from other activity verbs.  Contrast run with
sneeze below.  A standard activity verb like run, in conjunction with a punctual
temporal prepositional phrase like at noon (27a), must be interpreted as that activity
starting at noon, instead of that activity being momentary, as in the case of (27b).  In

202
(27b), the sneeze is short enough an action to have occurred almost punctually, like
die in (27c):
(27)
a.
Scott ran at noon.
b.
Scott sneezed at noon.
c.
Scott died at noon.
Yet sneeze (28b) also behaves like an activity (28a) but not an achievement in
(28c) when observed in the context of a for phrase:
(28)
a.
Scott ran for an hour.
b.
Scott sneezed for an hour.
c.
*Scott died for an hour.
Also in support of this claim that sneeze is activity-like, consider the results
of the Imperfect Paradox Test applied to sneeze.  Observe that (29a) does entail
(29b), showing that the verb sneeze behaves like the verb run in isolation (an
activity).  Yet sneeze is more like the activity run (30a,b) than an accomplishment
(31a,b) or achievement (32a,b).  
(29)
a.
Scott is sneezing.
b.
entails Scott has sneezed.
(30)
a.
Scott is running.
b.
entails Scott has run.
(31)
a.
Scott is eating the pie.
b.
does not entail Scott has eaten the pie.
(32)
a.
Scott is arriving.
b.
does not entail Scott has arrived.
What makes sneeze different from standard activity verbs is that these verbs
have minimal units that are identifiably punctual:  a sneeze, a cough, a burp, or a
bounce.  Even though they have minimal units, they are unlike states in that these
minimal units are themselves momentary events, and may be repeated many times
like a process.
So far, we have characterized processes as different from states in that states
are atomic, while processes are underspecified for such atomicity.  There are no
states that one can point to, such that they themselves are comprised of states of the

203
same kind.  For example, the state of owning a car is not comprised of substates of
owning a car.  In contrast, a process can be comprised of subprocesses.  For
instance, multiple subprocesses or substretches of coughing may comprise a cough
event.  However, there is a minimal process beneath which, so to speak, one cannot
go:  a single cough.
It is necessary to modify this characterization of the process slightly.  We
will further distinguish between two kinds of activities:  those with momentary
minimal units (bounce-type verbs) and those underspecified for such (waltz-type
verbs).  Even though waltz has a discernable minimal unit (i.e., three steps), it is not
a momentary minimal unit, as supported by (33).  Let us represent the momentary
minimal unit property as [+momentary].50
(33)
Bonnie and Clyde waltzed at noon.
These momentary activities must be distinguished from achievements, even
though they are achievement-like.  To see how these momentary processes differ
from occurrences, several tests can assist in this task, some of which have already
been discussed above.  The progressive affects momentary activities differently from
achievements, for instance:  momentary activities in the progressive (34a,b) can be
interpreted to consist of many instances of the same momentary minimal units
having occurred, while the progressive achievement (35a,b) is most salient with the
interpretation that only a single change of state will occur, at an upcoming point of
change.
(34)
a.
Thelma is sneezing.
b.
Thelma is jumping.
(35)
a.
Thelma is dying.
b.
Thelma is arriving.
The addition of a modifier like just once also makes more sense with
momentary activities, since there are units to be counted.  With verbs like waltz that
                                                
50This feature can also be alternately characterized as privative.

204
have minimal units but which are not momentary, just once refers to the entire event
and thus may have more than one minimal event (36a).  However, momentary events
are restricted to a single minimal unit by the addition of just once (36b):
(36)
a.
Felix waltzed just once (for an hour).
b.
Felix sneezed just once (*for an hour).
Furthermore, such processes differ from occurrences.  Consider the
converse relation to the is comprised of relation.  No sequence of multiple instances
of someone arriving constitutes a case of someone's arriving.  However, a sequence
of someone coughing (subprocesses) may comprise a coughing event.51
4.2.4 Medials Interacting With Progressive and Past
Consider medial prepositions and their interactions with verbs of motion in
the simple past.  These actions are more easily interpreted as being changes of state
than states of change.  For instance, (37a) has the meaning that John jumped over
the line in a single action; the meaning where John was always in a space across the
line and jumping on the spot across the line (as an activity) is harder to get.
Similarly in (37b), it is easier to interpret the sentence to mean that the coin changed
location, rather than spinning in one spot.  In (37c), the salient interpretation is that
Felix was originally in a place not beyond the park, but ended up past it.
(37)
a.
John jumped across the line.
b.
The coin spun across the table.
c.
Felix ran beyond the park.
Contrast these sentences with their progressive counterparts, which have two
possible meanings:  a process or state of change.  (38a-c) could be the actions in
(37a-c) in the open sense of the progressive, where the action is in the process of
taking the subjects through a change (with the past progressive suggesting strongly
                                                
51Alternatively, we may treat these verbs as cross-classified, being both occurrence and process
verbs, with the -ing suffix forcing a category shift, preventing the occurrence reading.  Data like (i)
and (ii), where verbs like cough seem much more natural as a process than verbs like arrive, may
help settle the issue.
(i)
The king coughed to death.
(ii)
*The king arrived to death.

205
that the action has been abandoned, but not forcing such an interpretation);
alternatively, the action could have the meaning that the entire event occurs on one
side of the bisecting axis only (39a-c).  The contrast can be viewed syntactically:  the
first reading has the medial PP as an argument of the verb, so that it is considered a
kind of resultative.  The second reading treats the medial PP as a locational
preposition modifying the location of the verb action.
(38)
a.
John was jumping across the line.
b.
The coin was spinning across the table.
c.
Felix was running beyond the park.
(39)
a.
John was jumping (on the spot) across the line (from me).
b.
The coin was spinning (on the spot) across the table (from me).
c.
Felix was running (in a circle) beyond the park.
The simple past -ed can coerce a change of state from activities.  Thus, the
medial PPs delimit a space which is treated as a goal due to the coercion of the
change of state reading.  In comparison, it is the association of -ing with states of
change that permits the readings in (39a-c), since the entire activity can be performed
against a single background location.  The other reading, where a single action is in
the process of occurring, is also possible because -ing can represent this other
meaning; however, we would need to interpret the medial as a preposition of change,
i.e., with a distinguished point associated with it.  Thus, it appears that medial
prepositions, or at the very least the prepositions beyond and across, must be able to
act as both prepositions of change and prepositions of location in the spatial
domain.
What is the source of this ambiguity?  We know that certain prepositions are
used strictly as prepositions of change-of-state, e.g., into and onto, and cannot be
used as background locations, as the minimal pair (40a,b) demonstrates.  The verb
stand is only locational and not descriptive of a state of change:  it is unacceptable
for stand to co-occur with into.  This means that into must have encoded into its
meaning a change-of-state component.

206
(40)
a.
The bull ran into the bullpen.
b.
*The bull stood into the bullpen.
Thus, it is plausible that across is ambiguous due to the fact that it is
underspecified for  change-of-state (as into does), and consequently is flexible in
describing either background location or a goal.  Let us represent this property of
into as [+ vector], meaning that it must contribute an element of change; then across
is representable as [0 vector] with respect to this feature.  It is underspecified for
change, meaning that both the presence or the absence of change remain viable
options for interpretation.  From this underspecification, we obtain ambiguity.
For (38a) and (38b), there is another interpretation that is less available to
(38c) without additional adverbs:  John was jumping across the line can also have
the meaning of John being engaged in a series of individual jumps back and forth
across the line; the same can be argued for the coin was spinning across the table,
where the coin was making several circuits across the table.  These readings are
available to the momentary activities identified earlier this chapter (the class to which
jump and spin belong to), since these activities consist of small point-like minimal
parts that could be iterated to be process-like.
4.3      A System of Aspectual Features
In this section, I bring together many of the elements discussed into one
aspectual analysis.  Much of the data examined will be locational in nature; this is
done to show that the domain of space can be captured adequately by the Event
Mereology analysis of aspect.  Locations involve some properties only available to
space, yet the submereology of locations fits in consistently with non-
locational sentences.  Of course, there remain much more to be done with respect to
unifying the spatial and the non-spatial systems, a task that cannot be adequately
achieved within the space of this thesis.  Therefore, I present this analysis of spatial
data as a springboard to unification with other kinds of data, such as possessional.

207
4.3.1 The Feature [Vector]
Recall that in Chapter One, the difference between French change-of-
position (Cpn) and inertial change-of-position verbs was determined by the sur
place 'in place' test.  We can use the English counterpart on the spot to the same
effect.  Inertial change-of-position verbs (e.g., run, 41) are those verbs which have
Cpn meaning, yet also allows an entity to perform that action without physical
dislocation from a single spot.  A change-of-position verb (e.g., meander, 42) must
have movement from or to the location.
(41)
run
inertial Cpn verbs
a.
John ran on the spot.
b.
John ran in the park.
c.
John ran into the park.
d.
John is running on the spot.
e.
John is running in the park.
f.
John is running into the park.
(42)
meander
Cpn verbs
a.
*John meandered on the spot.
b.
John meandered in the park.
c.
John meandered into the park.
d.
*John is meandering on the spot.
e.
John is meandering in the park.
f.
John is meandering into the park.
Examine in more detail the pairs (41b) and (41c).  In (41b), the reference
location is background location, when it co-occurs with the preposition in.  In
contrast, in (41c), the background location becomes a destination when it co-occurs
with the preposition into; there is a definite change-of-state associated with the
meaning of into that does not permit it to act as a background location.  Since the
verb remains constant, the difference must lie in the preposition.  We will call
prepositions like in, inertial prepositions (positional prepositions in A&S), and the
second kind (like into), vectored prepositions (initial directional, medial positional,
and final positional prepositions in A&S).

208
Note as well that there is a difference in meaning between the inertial
change-of-position verb (41b,e) and (43b,e), where a change-of-location (CoL) verb
is used.  In (41b,e), the reference location must be interpreted as a background
location, whereas in (43b,e), the reference location is interpreted as a destination.
(43)
go
CoL verbs
a.
*John went on the spot.
b.
John went in the park.
c.
John went into the park.
d.
*John is going on the spot.
e.
John is going in the park.
f.
John is going into the park.
Inertial and vectored are applicable as a distinction between verbs as well.
Vectored refers to directed changes of state, so in the case of spatial verbs, it refers
to directed displacement in space.  Such verbs include the CoL verbs, Cpn verbs and
Cpr verbs.  In contrast, inertial verbs include those verbs that lack such a vectored
property, i.e., the inertial Cpn verbs.  Compare the inertial and vectored distinction to
the difference between a line and a ray, the former being undirected and the latter
directed.
Let us hypothesize that the total aspectual output of a sentence is either
inertial or vectored.  Let us also hypothesize that various components that go into the
aspectual calculation must not have contradictory values simultaneously.
Simultaneous specifications of inertial and vectored will result in ungrammaticality.
However, components underspecified for either will not clash in the presence of
another component with one of those specifications.  Let us represent the distinction
as the feature [vector] proposed earlier, with [+ vector] meaning vectored, [- vector]
meaning inertial, and [0 vector] meaning that it is underspecified for that feature.
Then, inertial Cpn verbs are those verbs which can co-occur with on the spot
or sur place, distinctly inertial prepositional phrases for which there can be no
motion off the initial location.  Inertial Cpn verbs like run are underspecified,
represented by [0 vector].

209
Non-inertial Cpn verbs like go cannot co-occur with sur place, because they
are inherently vectored [+ vector], and under the theory here, the specification of
vectored [+ vector] is incompatible in combination with inertial [-vector].
With Cpr verbs like lean, we observe that they have a stative interpretation
(44a), where he is located against the window.  Stativity seems to be naturally
correlated with inertia, suggesting a [- vector] specification.  However, as mentioned
in Chapter One, (44a) can also sometimes have a change-of-state interpretation as in
(44b):
(44)
a.
John leaned against the window.
b.
John came to lean against the window.
This ambiguity in the use of lean suggests that Cpr verbs should be
represented as underspecified for the inertial/vectored distinction, i.e., [0 vector].
More [vector] specifications for prepositions and verbs are proposed in (45):
(45)
a.
CoL verb (go)
[+ vector]
b.
Cpn verb (meander)
[+ vector]
c.
inertial Cpn verb (run)
[0 vector]
d.
Cpr verb (lean)
[0 vector]
e.
on the spot, without going anywhere
[- vector]52
f.
in, on, against
[0 vector]
g.
into, onto
[+ vector]
4.3.2 Predictions and Empirical Data
We can make some predictions based on the interactions of verbs with
prepositional phrases and test them against empirical data.  Contradictory values
(i.e., [+vector] and [-vector] together) will yield an ungrammatical result.  For
example, the preposition into will be incompatible with on the spot, as in (46):
(46)
*Bob ran into the pavilion on the spot.
These predictions are borne out in the subsections below.  Each possible
motional verb subclass and up to two possible PPs are placed in combination, and
                                                
52On the spot sometimes has a temporal interpretation that means right then and there.  In the
ensuing examples, only the spatial meaning (synonymous to without leaving that spot, in place)
is used.

210
the expected output calculated.  If there is a clash between simultaneous [- vector]
and [+ vector] specifications in the aspectual composition, then the output crashes.
Otherwise, a dominant output is obtained (i.e., [0 vector], [+ vector], or [- vector]).
In the cases of [0 vector], the sentence remains underspecified for the [vector], and
consequently can be interpreted as either a change of state or a state of affairs.  
[+ vector] means the entire sentence must be interpreted as a change of state, and
[- vector] yields the state of affairs reading.
These predicted aspectual behaviours are then checked with empirical data.
Note that the data below are all in the simple past, and consequently it is expected
that a change-of-state interpretation may be coerced as a result.
4.3.2.1
Inertial Change-of-Position Verbs
Inertial change-of-position verbs are a subclass of activity or process verbs
that fall into the spatial domain.  These include verbs like run and dance, and are
underspecified for [vector] (i.e., [0 vector]).  The EM system predicts the overall
aspect of inertial Cpn verbs with different prepositions in (47), and checks the
predictions against the evidence in (48).  The data confirms the EM predictions.
(47)
Inertial Cpn
verb
PP1
PP2
result
a.
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [0 vector]
b.
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [0 vector]
c.
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
[- vector]
√
= [- vector]
d.
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
e.
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
f.
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [+ vector]
g.
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
[- vector]
*
h.
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
i.
[0 vector]
[- vector]
√
= [- vector]
j.
[0 vector]
[- vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [- vector]
k.
[0 vector]
[- vector]
[- vector]
√
= [- vector]
l.
[0 vector]
[- vector]
[+ vector]
*
(48)
Inertial Cpn
a.
[0,0]
√Bob ran in the park.
b.
[0,0,0]
√Bob ran in the park in the city.
c.
[0,0,-]
√Bob ran in the park on the spot.

211
d.
[0,0,+]
√Bob ran in the park into the pavilion.
e.
[0,+]
√Bob ran into the pavilion.
f.
[0,+,0]
√Bob ran into the pavilion in the park.
g.
[0,+,-]
*Bob ran into the pavilion on the spot.
h.
[0,+,+]
√Bob ran into the pavilion onto the stage.
i.
[0,-]
√Bob ran on the spot.
j.
[0,-,0]
√Bob ran on the spot in the park.
k.
[0,-,-]
√Bob ran on the spot without going anywhere.
l.
[0,-,+] *Bob ran on the spot into the pavilion.
The grammatical sentences are mostly self-explanatory.  With (48d), a pause
between the two prepositional phrases (or the insertion of and in the same place)
ameliorates the interpretation, making it more like (48f).  The same pause or
insertion of and also improves (48h).  This effect clearly separates the two
prepositional phrases so that the latter PP is a modifier of the verb, and not a PP
modifier of the prepositional object of the first PP (as in 48f).  The NP data below
clarifies this point.  (49b,d) are ungrammatical noun phrases, unlike (49a,c).  Thus,
any PPs with these noun phrases will also be ungrammatical.  However, separate
PPs like in (50a,b) do not have this problem.  Refer also to §4.3.2.7 for additional
data that bear upon this phenomenon.
(49)
a.
√[the park [in the city]]
b.
*[the park [into the pavilion]]
c.
√[the pavilion [in the park]]
d.
*[the pavilion [onto the stage]]
(50)
a.
√[in the park] [into the pavilion]
b.
√[into the pavilion] [onto the stage]
4.3.2.2
Change-of-Posture Verbs
Change-of-posture verbs like lean and kneel are likewise [0 vector], and
pattern with inertial change-of-position verbs when it comes to co-occurrence with
prepositions.  While these verbs are process-like, the simple past tense of the data
below coerces a change-of-state reading.  While most of the data seem to confirm
the predictions, some of the judgments are not as clear-cut.

212
(51)
Cpr
verb
PP1
PP2
result
a.
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [0 vector]
b.
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [0 vector]
c.
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
[- vector]
√
= [- vector]
d.
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
e.
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
f.
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [+ vector]
g.
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
[- vector]
*
h.
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
i.
[0 vector]
[- vector]
√
= [- vector]
j.
[0 vector]
[- vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [- vector]
k.
[0 vector]
[- vector]
[- vector]
√
= [- vector]
l.
[0 vector]
[- vector]
[+ vector]
*
(52)
Cpr
a.
[0,0]
√Bob kneeled (knelt) on the bench.
b.
[0,0,0]
√Bob kneeled on the bench in the park.
c.
[0,0,-]
√Bob kneeled on the bench on the spot.
d.
[0,0,+]
?!Bob kneeled on the bench onto the cushion.
e.
[0,+]
√Bob kneeled onto the cushion.
f.
[0,+,0]
√Bob kneeled onto the cushion on the bench.
g.
[0,+,-]
?!Bob kneeled onto the cushion on the spot.
h.
[0,+,+]
√Bob kneeled onto the bench onto the cushion.
i.
[0,-]
√Bob kneeled on the spot.
j.
[0,-,0]
√Bob kneeled on the spot on the bench.
k.
[0,-,-]
√Bob kneeled on the spot without moving from
there.
l.
[0,-,+]
√!Bob kneeled on the spot onto the cushion.
For example, (52d) seems peculiar even with an intonational break.  There
appears to be a preferred ordering, where goal phrases like onto the cushion are
better closer to the verb than locational phrases like on the bench.  This ordering
makes sense, an activity delimited by a goal phrase (e.g., kneel onto the cushion)
could take place entirely against a background location (e.g., in the church; 53
below).
(53)
Bob kneeled onto the cushion in the church.
As well, the predicted ungrammaticality of (52g,l) do not appear to be
absolute.  I believe there is a temporal interpretation of on the spot which comes into
play here.  It seems that the change of posture verbs tend to force a temporal
reading, in the sense that on the spot is interpreted as right then and there.  This
appears to be a consequence of Cpr verbs being descriptive of a spatial posture

213
without specific reference to locational change.  In other words, it is by default
already interpreted as a non-CoL and a (non-)inertial Cpn verb:  the posture change
involves no significant spatial displacement from the entity's current position.
Likely, the temporal reading for Cpr verbs is more easily coerced due to a Gricean
maxim of quantity, i.e., every component of the utterance is considered maximally
informative in the discourse.  Cpr verbs already indicate no change in position; to
have on the spot be interpreted spatially would be as redundant as saying (54).
(54)
Jeff sleeps in the nude naked.
In (52h), there is a kind of thematic discontinuity effect (Brunson 1992):
notice the strangeness of *Bob kneeled onto the cushion onto the bench.  There is a
distinct ordering effect that is dependent upon the size of the reference locations,
where the smaller must precede the larger item.  I elaborate on thematic discontinuity
in a later subsection.
That these verbs are more processes than changes is confirmed by the
following progressives (55a-c).  Note that it is much harder to get a change-of-state
reading out of the progressives of these verbs unless a prepositional phrase like onto
contributes [+ vector] (55c), since there is no simple past to coerce the change-of-
state out of the dT-less verb.  Instead, the most salient interpretation of these
progressive activities is the state-of-affairs (or state-of-change) reading.
(55)
a.
Bob is kneeling on the couch.
b.
Bob is kneeling on the bench in the park.
c.
Bob is kneeling onto the cushion.
4.3.2.3
Change-of-Location Verbs
Change-of-location verbs like go are [+ vector].  There is a definite change
that occurs with the use of these verbs, and thus they are associated with a
distinguished point.  Thus, according to EM, they are predicted to be incompatible
with [- vector] prepositions.  The predictions in (56) match up nicely with the data in
(57):

214
(56)
CoL
verb
PP1
PP2
result
a.
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [+ vector]
b.
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [+ vector]
c.
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
[- vector]
*
d.
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
e.
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
f.
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [+ vector]
g.
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
[- vector]
*
h.
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
i.
[+ vector]
[- vector]
*
j.
[+ vector]
[- vector]
[0 vector]
*
k.
[+ vector]
[- vector]
[- vector]
*
l.
[+ vector]
[- vector]
[+ vector]
*
(57)
CoL
a.
[+,0]
√Bob went in the park.
b.
[+,0,0]
√Bob went in the park in the city.
c.
[+,0,-]
*Bob went in the park on the spot.
d.
[+,0,+]
√?Bob went in the park into the pavilion.
e.
[+,+]
√Bob went into the park.
f.
[+,+,0]
√Bob went into the park in the city.
g.
[+,+,-]
*Bob went into the park on the spot.
h.
[+,+,+]
√Bob went into the park onto the roller coaster.
i.
[+,-]
*Bob went on the spot.
j.
[+,-,0]
*Bob went on the spot in the park.
k.
[+,-,-]
*Bob went on the spot without moving.
l.
[+,-,+]
*Bob went on the spot into the park.
Note that there must be actual physical movement into the park in (57a);
(57a) is interpreted identically to (57e).  Because in is underspecified, it does not
affect the value of go, which is [+ vector].  Thus, the [+ vector] aspect is obtained
for that sentence.
4.3.2.4
Change-of-Position Verbs
Change of position verbs like meander are treated in EM the same as
change-of-location verbs:  they are [+vector].  Consequently, we expect Cpn verbs
to have the same patterns as CoL verbs.

215
(58)
Cpn
verb
PP1
PP2
result
a.
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [+ vector]
b.
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [+ vector]
c.
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
[- vector]
*
d.
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
e.
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
f.
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [+ vector]
g.
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
[- vector]
*
h.
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
√
= [+ vector]
i.
[+ vector]
[- vector]
*
j.
[+ vector]
[- vector]
[0 vector]
*
k.
[+ vector]
[- vector]
[- vector]
*
l.
[+ vector]
[- vector]
[+ vector]
*
(59)
Cpn
a.
[+,0]
√Bob meandered in the park.
b.
[+,0,0]
√Bob meandered in the park in the city.
c.
[+,0,-]
*Bob meandered in the park on the spot.
d.
[+,0,+]
√?Bob meandered in the park into the pavilion.
e.
[+,+]
√Bob meandered into the park.
f.
[+,+,0]
√Bob meandered into the park in the city.
g.
[+,+,-]
*Bob meandered into the park on the spot.
h.
[+,+,+]
√Bob meandered into the park onto the roller coaster.
i.
[+,-]
*Bob meandered on the spot.
j.
[+,-,0]
*Bob meandered on the spot in the park.
k.
[+,-,-]
*Bob meandered on the spot without moving.
l.
[+,-,+]
*Bob meandered on the spot into the park.
The only piece of data above that contradicts our predictions is (58d).  Here
again we have an odd reading where the goal phrase is not closer to the verb than the
locational phrase, as observed earlier.
4.3.2.5
[- Vector] Verbs
A [- vector] verb would mean that there is no dislocation from a particular
spot, suggesting that the verbs stay and remain belong to this class.  We predict that
[- vector] verbs cannot be used with [+ vector] prepositions like into.  Our
predictions are borne out below:

216
(60)
[- vector]
verb
PP1
PP2
result
a.
[- vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [- vector]
b.
[- vector]
[0 vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [- vector]
c.
[- vector]
[0 vector]
[- vector]
√
= [- vector]
d.
[- vector]
[0 vector]
[+ vector]
*
e.
[- vector]
[+ vector]
*
f.
[- vector]
[+ vector]
[0 vector]
*
g.
[- vector]
[+ vector]
[- vector]
*
h.
[- vector]
[+ vector]
[+ vector]
*
i.
[- vector]
[- vector]
√
= [- vector]
j.
[- vector]
[- vector]
[0 vector]
√
= [- vector]
k.
[- vector]
[- vector]
[- vector]
√
= [- vector]
l.
[- vector]
[- vector]
[+ vector]
*
(61)
a.
[-,0]
√Bob remained in the park.
b.
[-,0,0]
√Bob remained in the park in the city.
c.
[-,0,-]
√Bob remained in the park on the spot.
d.
[-,0,+]
*Bob remained in the park into the pavilion.
e.
[-,+]
*Bob remained into the park.
f.
[-,+,0]
*Bob remained into the park in the city.
g.
[-,+,-]
*Bob remained into the park on the spot.
h.
[-,+,+]
*Bob remained into the park onto the roller coaster.
i.
[-,-]
√Bob remained on the spot.
j.
[-,-,0]
√Bob remained on the spot in the park.
k.
[-,-,-]
√Bob remained on the spot without moving.
l.
[-,-,+]
*Bob remained on the spot into the park.
The verb remain as a [- vector] verb generates the correct predictions.  Note
that we remain must be [- vector], not [0 vector].  The latter solution would generate
the predicted sentence patterns for inertial Cpn and Cpr verbs, a result that we do not
desire.
4.3.2.6
Dialectal Differences With In
There is a dialectal difference that needs to be addressed:  some people
interpret the preposition in as only descriptive of background location, while others
can interpret in as both background and destination location.  For some speakers,
(62a) could have an additional meaning that is the same as (62b).  The other set of
speakers cannot interpret (62a) to have the meaning of (62b).  How is this difference
explained?
(62)
a.
Bob ran in the park.
b.
Bob ran into the park.

217
I will show that the solution does not reside in speakers analyzing in
differently as [+ vector] or [0 vector], nor does it involve differences in analyzing
verbs like run as [0 vector] or [- vector].  Both of these analyses lead to wrong
predictions.  Instead, I will argue that the variation we see with in and on is a result
of clipping, where speakers who have two interpretations for in shorten into to in
(and likewise for on and onto), possibly conditioned by rapid speech.
First let us consider if the treatment of in as either [0 vector] or [- vector] will
predict two dialects.  It is plausible that one dialect only permits a stative
interpretation of in.  We must now test to see if allowing in to be [- vector] will
invalidate some of our other predictions.  A single verb and a single PP are
sufficient to test this hypothesis.  The various possibilities that are produced are
listed below.  (63a-c) lists the combinations that do not change, while (64a-c) and
(65a-c) constitute the separate dialects.
verb
preposition
result
(63)
a.
[0 vector]  run
[+ vector] into
√
= [+ vector]
b.
[- vector]  remain
[+ vector] into
*
c.
[+ vector]  go
[+ vector] into
√
= [+ vector]
(64)
a.
[0 vector]  run
[0 vector] in
√
= [0 vector]
b.
[- vector]  remain
[0 vector] in
√
= [- vector]
c.
[+ vector]  go
[0 vector] in
√
= [+ vector]
(65)
a.
[0 vector]  run
[- vector] in
√
= [- vector]
b.
[- vector]  remain
[- vector] in
√
= [- vector]
c.
[+ vector]  go
[- vector] in
*
(63a-c) remain unchanged by in as [- vector], since into remains
[+ vector] throughout; (64a) is the only combination predicted to be ambiguous.
However, if in is classified as [- vector], we get an incorrect ungrammaticality
prediction in (65c), invalidated by such the common appearance of data such as (66),
a very basic grammatical sentence that is not ungrammatical at all.
(66)
John went in the room.
Another possibility is have one dialect classify run as [- vector].  For the
speakers who can only interpret John ran in the park as John remains in the park

218
throughout his running, it appears that run may be classified as [- vector] instead of
[+ vector].  For these speakers, the inertial Cpn verbs conflate with the remain-class
of verbs.  (67a-d) show the combinations unaffected by this split in the specification
of [vector].  (68a,b) and (69a,b) constitute the dialectal differences.
verb
preposition
(67)
a.
[- vector]  remain
[0 vector] in
√
= [- vector]
b.
[- vector]  remain
[+ vector] into
*
c.
[+ vector]  go
[0 vector] in
√
= [+ vector]
d.
[+ vector]  go
[+ vector] into
√
= [+ vector]
(68)
a.
[0 vector]  run
[0 vector] in
√
= [0 vector]
b.
[0 vector]  run
[+ vector] into
√
= [+ vector]
(69)
a.
[- vector]  run
[0 vector] in
√
= [- vector]
b.
[- vector]  run
[+ vector] into *
We run into trouble with (69b), which predicts that (70) is ruled out.
However, (70) is a perfectly grammatical sentence and rather common construction:
(70)
Bob ran into the park.
We cannot specify in as [- vector], nor run as [- vector].  There is a third
alternative:  my proposal considers the difference in stress/intonational patterns.
(71a) and (72a), when pronounced so that run (jump) and in are pronounced with
the same intonation (as opposed to an intonational pattern where there is a pause or
change in between the two words), gives the [+ vector] interpretation.  Note also that
topicalization is possible for the stationary interpretation but not for the change-of-
state interpretation, as shown in (71b) and (72b):53
(71)
a.
Bob ran in the park.  = Bob ran into the park.
b.
Bob ran in the park.  = In the park, Bob ran.
(72)
a.
Bob jumped in the pool.  = Bob jumped into the pool.
b.
Bob jumped in the pool.  = In the pool, Bob jumped.
With the intonational difference detected above, it is likely that one thing is
derived from run+into rather than run+in.  To have a run-in with the law means to
                                                
53For speakers who do not judge John ran in the park as a change of location, another reference
location might give a more grammatical sentence that has two interpretations.  For example, John
ran in the house is more acceptable to these same speakers as having ambiguous meaning:  both
running into a house and running inside a house.

219
run into the law, not to run inside the law.  Thus, in (71a) and (72a), what look to be
in are actually into clipped; likewise for on/onto.  Note that the converse is never
true:  you cannot interpret (73a) as bearing the meaning in (73b):
(73)
a.
Bob jumped onto the table.
b.
≠
On top of the table, Bob jumped.
The verb jump (74) is more acceptable in this type of ambiguity than with
run.  This difference may be attributed to the [+momentary] aspect of jump.  Recall
that jump is interpretable as either a single event consisting of a single jump or a
series of jumps, whereas run is is interpretable as a single event that consists of a
single run, but not a series of separate runs within the same 'run'.  Run is only atelic
if it is habitual, i.e., (62a) means Bob always runs in the park:  As an activity verb,
run can only have a change-of-state reading if coerced by the simple past.  In
contrast, the momentary activity verb jump is more achievement-like, and it is easier
to coerce the change-of-state reading because momentary activities already resemble
change-of-state achievements.
(74)
Bob jumped in the pool.
4.3.2.7
Thematic Discontinuity
Brunson (1992) argues that the effect of thematic discontinuity is observed
among prepositional phrases that modify verb phrases, affecting syntactic ordering.
Compare, for instance, (75a), Bob remained in the park in the city to (75b-d).  The
most natural order is (75a), although (75b,c) are both acceptable, albeit more
awkward.  However, in the case of (75d), the topicalization is not permitted.
(75)
a.
Bob remained in the park in the city.
b.
Bob remained in the city in the park.
c.
In the city, Bob remained in the park.
d.
*In the park, Bob remained in the city.
(75a) has two possible structures, shown in (76a,b).  For purposes of
thematic discontinuity, Brunson has preferred the second treatment, (76b), where the
PPs are separate and the second PP not a modifier of the NP of the first.

220
(76)
a.
[in [the park [in the city]]]
b.
[in the park] [in the city]
The two syntactic structures possible for (75b) are represented in (77a,b).
(77a) is strange:  it is a structure which has a coarser-grained NP (the city) modified
by a finer-grained PP (in the park).  However, normally, parks are smaller than cities
and found in cities, rather than the unlikely case where a city is in a park, which is
the marked case.  The strangeness of (77a) arises from the entailment that a city is
contained within a park, which conflicts with pragmatic considerations.  In contrast,
in the second reading, the adoption of separate PPs accounts for the acceptability of
(75b); both PPs independently modify the verb.
(77)
a.
?[in [the city [in the park]]
b.
[in the city] [in the park]
The treatment of the PPs as separate allows each PP to be topicalized, as was
shown in (75c) and (75d).  To account for the acceptability of (75c) and the
ungrammaticality of (75d), Brunson assumes a single location may have different
granularities.  Multiple PPs that express the same location may appear in the same
sentence, so long as they describe different granularities of that location.
Granularity determines the size of the reference object:  in the real world,
Bob remains in location A, but when we try to describe that location A in words, we
have a choice of how fine-grained or coarse-grained to make that location.  For
example, if Bob is standing on the glass floor on the observation deck of the CN
Tower in Toronto, we could describe Bob's location with a PP using a variety of
granularities.  The following sentences in (78) are arranged in degrees of increasing
granularity.
(78)
a.
Bob is on the glass floor.
b.
Bob is on the Observation Deck.
c.
Bob is at the CN Tower.
d.
Bob is in Toronto.
e.
Bob is in Ontario.
f.
Bob is in Canada.
g.
Bob is in North America.

221
Brunson theorized a syntactic constraint called thematic discontinuity,
whereby these PPs that describe the same location must have a specific ordering.
Brunson claims that with such locative PPs, syntactic effects are observed such as
was shown in (75a-d), where a finer-grained descriptor of location A cannot m-
command a coarser-grained descriptor.54  This constraint restricts a finer-grained
descriptor from being topicalized out of the sentential IP (or base-generated in topic
position), if there is a coarser-grained descriptor within that IP.
A similar constraint (path ordering constraint) can be imposed upon paths
of motion.  Here, we have granularity as an operating factor, but it is temporal
precedence (or linear precedence in the sentence) which controls the order that the
moving object enters the reference locations.  Suppose that there is a cushion on a
bench.  Then, it is plausible to have the coarser-grained PP (bench) linearly
preceding the finer-grained PP (cushion) in the sentence (79a).  Note that a pause
between the two PPs improves the readings.  The ordering is highly dependent on
the real world arrangement of the items and the items themselves.  (79b) is less
acceptable than (79a):  it appears that the coarser-grained destination (onto the
bench) must linearly precede the finer-grained destination (onto the cushion).  We
observe in (79c,d), cases where the first PP is a [0 vector] PP and the second PP [+
vector], that the same pattern identical to the one in (75a,b) obtains.
(79)
a.
Bob kneeled onto the bench onto the cushion.
b.
?Bob kneeled onto the cushion onto the bench.
c.
Bob kneeled on the bench onto the cushion.
d.
?Bob kneeled on the cushion onto the bench.
In (75a-d), the second PP (onto X) cannot be a modifier of the noun
preceding them (*the bench onto the couch); [+ vector] prepositions are generally
ungrammatical as noun phrase modifiers (80a,b), unless the noun they modify is a
type of path, gateway or linear structure (80c-e).  This subset of nouns, which I will
call pathway nouns, are either a path that is divisible into two halves (e.g., the road is
                                                
54See Brunson (1993) for her revised definition of m-command.

222
half in Avonlea and half not in Avonlea), or a type of access that forms the axis that
bisects two spaces, over which a change-of-state may take place (e.g., the door is the
opening between in the theatre and not in the theatre).  In contrast, one does not use
a desk or cushion to access a room or bench.
(80)
a.
*the cushion onto the bench
b.
*the desk into the room
c.
the road into Avonlea
d.
the door into the theatre
e.
the ramp onto the highway
In comparison, (81a,b) have as the second PP a [0 vector] preposition (on).
In (81a), the fact that the on phrase is permitted to modify non-pathway nouns
makes the structure in (82a) possible.  Here, pragmatics requires that the bench be
placed on a large-enough cushion.  If on is taken to be a change-of-state due to the
clipping effect, then the path ordering constraint permits the (81a) to have the same
interpretation as (75a).  The path ordering constraint would rule out the on-as-
clipped-onto reading in (81b), leaving only the possible structure as (82b).
(81)
a.
Bob kneeled onto the bench on the cushion.
b.
Bob kneeled onto the cushion on the bench.
(82)
a.
[onto [the bench [on the cushion]]
b.
[onto [the cushion [on the bench]]
4.4  Summary
This chapter has dealt with such issues as resultatives, aspectual coercion,
and a system of aspectual features for a selected set of locational data.  The nature of
accomplishments was explored, and it was shown how Event Mereology accounts
for spatial data with its event-based primitives.  Of course, there still remains much
to be explored with respect to aspectual compositionality and the relationship
between a local mereology (pertaining to spatial phenomena) and global mereology
(pertaining to all change), but the discussions in this chapter are good starting points
for further research into these areas.

223
Chapter Five
Syntax and Event Mereology:  Accomplishing An Interface
5.0      Introduction
In this chapter, I will show that Event Mereology concepts are compatible
with some current developments in syntax.  I examine two related syntactic analyses,
specifically that of Travis (1999) and Pi & Stewart (1998).
The idea that a verb can be decomposed into two syntactic parts, that of an
uptake process and a point of change, can be traced from McCawley (1968),
Morgan (1969), and Kac (1972a), through Dowty (1979), Parsons (1990),
Pustejovsky (1991), Travis (1991, 1994), Borer (1994a,b), McClure (1994), to more
recent works such as Slabakova (1997) and Travis (1999).55  These approaches
investigate the hypothesis that there are (at least) two different syntactic components
that participate in the calculation of aspect, where a functional category that is related
to a DO/CAUSE operator dominates a functional category related to the operator
BECOME.  It will be shown that the former corresponds to the EM idea of
distinguished process, and the latter the distinguished point.
Travis (1999) establishes the current trend towards subeventual structure in
syntax that figure into the meaning of aspect, and argues for a structure that makes
use of functional projections that correspond to distinguished process and
distinguished point; I summarize the findings therein and focus on her concept of
eventhood in syntax.
Based on observations in Stewart (1998), which adopts Travis's articulated
VP structure, Pi & Stewart (1998) investigates serial verb constructions in Èdó.  The
serial verb structures provide a good testing ground for Travis's theory.  Arguments
                                                
55Some of these works (Dowty 1979 and Pustejovsky 1991) have already been discussed in earlier
chapters (which see).  Borer (1994a,b), will not be discussed, since it has been argued elsewhere
(Slabakova 1997) that it accounts for the same range of data as Travis (1991), except with some
additional stipulations.

224
based on principles of Event Mereology will be made to explain the two different
patterns of serial verb constructions (resultative and consequential) observed by
Stewart.
5.1      Travis (1999)
Historically, the internal structure of events (and verbs that denote them) had
been considered to belong to the autonomous domain of semantics.  Travis (1999)
tracks the development of event structure from the early view espoused by
McCawley (1968) to the recent trend by syntacticians to account for subeventual
structure in syntax.  Below, I summarize the analyses which were influences in the
development of her theory, highlighting elements and ideas that pertain to Event
Mereology.  I then outline her key arguments in favour of an Event Phrase and an
Aspect Phrase, which are functional categories dominating a VP each, and are
associated with the ideas of distinguished processes and distinguished points
(transitions), respectively.
5.1.1 McCawley, Morgan, and Kac
Travis looks first at McCawley (1968), which proposed under the Generative
Semantics framework that verbs, particularly causative verbs like kill, melt, and
break, can be decomposed in prelexical representations into smaller segments of
semantic meaning.  A verb like kill would be composed of such components as
CAUSE, BECOME, NOT, and ALIVE, combined into a larger predicate pre-
syntactically through predicate raising.  Lexical insertion occurs after this semantic
composition.
Morgan (1969) and Kac (1972a) further develop McCawley's idea.  The
sentence in (1) is claimed to be ambiguous in three ways, on account of the scope of
the 
modifier 
almost, 
as 
illustrated 
by 
the 
paraphrases 
in
(2a-c) and (3a-c):

225
(1)
John almost killed Fred.
(2)
a.
John almost did something that would have killed Fred.
b.
John did something that came close to causing Fred to die.
c.
John did something that brought Fred close to death.
(3)
a.
John almost caused Fred to become not alive.
b.
John caused Fred to almost become not alive.
c.
John caused Fred to become almost not alive.
Kac argues that the difference between the meanings of (3b) and (3c) is
negligible:  there is only a difference between almost affecting the action (as in 3a)
or the result (3b,c):  either the action was almost commited or almost achieved.  To
capture this datum, Kac motivates for the existence of prelexical structures with
semantic units smaller than the word.  Kac's presentation of this problem of
ambiguity with almost led to further analyses which adopt the division between
action and result for such verbs.  (For a more in-depth look at the data on almost,
see §3.2.1.)  However, it was a general consensus at the time by syntacticians from
the interpretativist school that these predicates are not syntactically relevant, but
should be relegated to the realm of semantics.
5.1.2 Dowty, Parsons and Pustejovsky
Next, Travis considers the re-emergence of the idea that aspectual semantics
is handled partly by syntax.  Dowty (1979) continues along the same lines in
Montague's semantic framework, proposing three different aspectual operators:
BECOME, DO, and CAUSE.  Under Dowty's classification scheme, all of the
Vendler classes are generated from these aspectual operators (or lack thereof):
activities are derived through the application of the operator DO; achievements
through the operator BECOME; accomplishments are a combination of all three,
DO, CAUSE, and BECOME.  For accomplishments, DO denotes a process verb
that is linked by CAUSE to produce the transition denoted by BECOME.  States do

226
not require operators.  However, Dowty does not associate any of these operators
with specific syntactic structures.
Parsons (1990) proceeds along the same dichotomy, arguing that English
causative transitive verbs may quantify over two sub-events, i.e., the causal event or
the result event.  In contrast to Dowty, Parsons uses the event e, highlighting the
accessibility of events to such predicates as CAUSE.
In a causative sentence as in (4a), the transitive event of fly is derived from
the intransitive fly as in (4b), but merged with a component of causation.  Thus, the
prepositional phrase behind the library may modify two different aspects of the
sentence in (4c), creating ambiguity.  In the first reading, it is the kite that is flying
behind the library, whereas Mary may be in front of the library.  Under the second
reading, it is Mary behind the library and performing the action of kite-flying from
that position.
(4)
a.
Mary flew the kite.
b.
The kite flew.
c.
Mary flew the kite behind the library.
The logical notation is given in (5), where Cul(e) means the culmination of
the event.  Note that there are two separate events, e and e', such that the first event
(that of Mary performing kite-flying actions) causes the second event (that of the
kite actually flying).  Parson uses the ambiguity of (4c) to argue that there must be
subevents, in order for there to be two different interpretations of that sentence.  This
claim fits with the EM view that there are subparts to events.
(5)
∃(e)[Agent(e,Mary) & Cul(e) & ∃(e')[Flying(e') & Cul(e')
& Theme(e',kite) & CAUSE(e,e')]]
Pustejovsky (1991), already discussed in much detail in §3.2.1, likewise
uses similar predicates as CAUSE and BECOME.  The primary difference with
Pustejovsky is the introduction of multiple levels:  the Lexical Conceptual Structure
(LCS), the Event Structure, and an additional LCS (called LCS').  Only aspectual
information is extracted, separating it from non-eventual information.  Thus, the

227
trend in syntax is towards the selective encoding of meaning, rather than encoding
all meaning in the domain of syntax.
5.1.3 Larson, Hale and Keyser
Travis next argues for the articulation of the internal structure of VP,
adopting insights from several sources.  Her goal is to show that languages with
complex verbal morphology, such as Western Malayo-Polynesian languages
(mostly Malagasy and Tagalog), provide clues to the internal structure of events.
Morphemes from these languages support a hypothesis that certain components of
meaning appear in specific configurations, and that these configurations are
products of a general articulated aspectual structure that is applicable cross-
linguistically (with variations accounted for by parameterization).
Firstly, following Fukui and Speas (1986) et al., she adopts VP internal
subjects, an essential assumption required by the range of Malayo-Polynesian
languages to support her syntactic analysis.  The Agent (subject or external
argument) is base-generated in the specifier position of VP, while internal arguments
are dominated by V'.  This assumption allows the VP to represent the whole event,
including both external and internal arguments.  In EM terms, this translates as the
fact that agents are indeed participants in the event.
Next, Travis traces the development of the syntactic division between the part
of a verb that denotes the uptake process and the part that denotes the distinguished
point.  Larson (1988) is used to show that a single verb can be represented by not
just one VP, but one VP dominating another.  Hale & Keyser (1993) is then cited to
show that each position or category is associated with a specific semantic function:
the upper VP is argued to denote the uptake and the lower VP the transition.
Larson (1988)'s proposal of the Single Complement Hypothesis, which
states that a head may only have one argument, introduces the next level of VP

228
articulation.  In effect, each head may only license one element, forcing a binary
branching structure.  In order for verbs like put, which have more than one internal
argument, to accommodate all arguments, it is necessary to generate more V heads.
Thus, two VPs are required so that in (6a), both the book and on the shelf will be
licensed by a head, as shown in (6b).  The verb head in V2 will undergo head
movement to the higher V1.
(6)
a.
John put the mug on the shelf.
b.
VP1
      
NP
V1'
John
      
    V1
VP2
        
NP
V2'
        the book         
V2
PP
put
     on the shelf
The placement of objects is not accidental:  a theta-hierarchy (such as
proposed by Larson 1988 or Baker 1988) determines where an Agent is base-
generated (in the specifier of V1), where the Theme is base-generated (in the
specifier of V2), etc.
Hale and Keyser (1993) expand upon the Larsonian representation,
proposing that syntactic processes like head movement contribute semantics as well.
For example, the verb shelve is base-generated in the head of N in (7), but moves
through the heads P and V2 to the V1 node.  Its origination in N defines the
destination of the endpoint of the action, i.e., the shelf.  By passing through the P
node, a locative meaning (on) is picked up.  It is further hypothesized that its
passage through the V2 node contributes the meaning of BE/BECOME, and its final
target, V1, contributes the meaning component CAUSE.

229
(7)
VP1
      
NP
V1'
John
      
    V1
VP2
shelvei        
NP
V2'
        the book       
 
  V2
PP
   ti
        
     P
NP
     ti
             |
N
             ti
Principally, the heads of the VPs in the Larsonian shell have been attributed
with semantic content.  Furthermore, arguments likewise receive specific meanings
in specific specifier or complement positions (e.g., Agents are always in the specifier
of VP1).  This link between semantics and syntax will allow us to associate the
distinguished process with the upper VP, and the distinguished point with the lower
VP.
5.1.4 Causatives in Tagalog and Malagasy
Let us examine some Tagalog and Malagasy data.  It is shown by Travis that
both languages demonstrate a transitive and intransitive alternation, such as for the
verb melt in English, which can be used either transitively or intransitively.  For
example, in Tagalog there is the alternation between (8a) and (8b).  Note that there is
the causative morpheme pag- in the transitive form (8b):
(8)
a.
t-um-umba
b.
m-pag-tumba
X fall down
Y knock X down
It is observed that the causative pag appears even in verbs without an
intransitive form, as shown in (9a,b).  Similar behaviour is observed in Malagasy
with the causative morpheme an.  The presence of these morphemes indicates that
these verbs have causative meaning despite lacking inchoative counterparts such as
(9a).

230
(9)
a.
*h-um-alo
b.
m-pag-halo
??X incorporate
Y mix X
The causative morpheme may reiterate (with the provision that a morpheme
intervenes between each instance of the causative), to create meanings such as s
causes y to cause z to V.  For example, in Malagasy, manitrika 'Y hide X' can be
extended to mampanitrika, 'Z make Y hide X' by the addition of the causative an-
(shown here as the allomorph am-).
Travis distinguishes between two types of causatives:  the lexical causative
(closest to the stem) and the productive causative.  In both Malagasy and Tagalog,
these causatives have the same morphological form (an- in Malagasy and pag- in
Tagalog).  An intervening morpheme (f- in Malagasy and pa- in Tagalog) also
appear between each instance of the reiterated causative.  Tagalog is slightly
different from Malagasy:  when the productive causative is added to the lexical
causative, the lexical causative morpheme disappears (instead of producing
magpapagsama 'W make Y bring along X' from magsama 'Y bring along X', we
have magpasama).  Travis explains this by positing a zero realization of the lexical
causative in this type of structure.
Travis notices that the causative morpheme closest to the stem, the lexical
causative, behaves differently from productive causatives.  Lexical causatives show
semantic idiosyncracies, not always meaning 'cause to V'.  Travis cites the Tagalog
example of the root sabog 'explode'; the lexical causative form of sabog cannot
mean 'cause to explode', but must mean 'scatter'.  Similarly, there are phonological
idiosyncracies (fusion of a nasal) in Malagasy that occur only with the lexical
causatives; likewise, lexical causatives are not productive, having idiosyncratic
distribution.  These facts show that a division must be made between the two types
of causatives in these Malayo-Polynesian languages.

231
5.1.5 L-Syntax, S-Syntax, M-Words and S-Words
Travis accounts for the distinction between lexical and productive causatives
by considering Hale & Keyser (1993)'s distinction between l-syntax and s-syntax.
Both are parts of the syntactic component.  However, l-syntax is lexical (permitting
idiosyncracies), whereas s-syntax is productive.  Travis (1999) investigates l- and s-
syntax further, showing that there are two types of causatives in Malagasy (and
Tagalog):  (i) idiosyncratic lexical causatives formed  in the l-syntax, which still
obey syntactic properties like head movement (cf. the shelve example); (ii) syntactic
causatives, which are always productive and incur no idiosyncracies.  In making the
above distinction, Travis also introduces her conception of what constitutes an event
(both syntactically and semantically); her  notion of event will be linked to Event
Mereology and used to explain certain behaviours observed for the Èdó serial verb
constructions (investigated later this chapter).
To distinguish between l-syntax and s-syntax, Travis makes use of the
distinction between m-words and s-words.  M-words, or morphological words, are
units standardly identified as words in a language.  A single m-word might be
mampanasa 'make-wash' in Malagasy; run in English; renverser 'push down' in
French, or dé 'fall' in Èdó.
S-words are syntactic/semantic words, formed in the l-syntax.  Travis
proposes that s-words represent at most one event; an s-word is a 'possible word' in
the sense of Carter (1976).56  It is hypothesized that s-words are universal.  It is
argued that an Event Phrase demarcates the upper limit of the s-word in syntax, i.e.,
the edge of an event and the boundary between s-syntax and l-syntax.  Travis uses
Malagasy data to argue for an Event Phrase (EP) immediately above the upper VP,
which binds the event argument of the verb, counterpart to the nominal reference R
(cf. Higginbotham 1985).  
                                                
56See also Chapter Six.

232
Travis proposes that a "possible" word correlates to a single event, and can at
most contain one event, one Cause, one Agent, and two Vs.  In English, for example,
the word melt has the meaning make melt, involving a single Cause.  However, there
is no single word that means make kill, which would involve two Causes.  She
observes that while Malagasy has a word mampamono that means 'make kill', it is
clearly a s-syntactic causative created from a lexical causative.  She makes a
comparison between English and Malagasy:  what English cannot have in a possible
word (due to the double Cause), Malagasy cannot build in an l-syntactic causative.
Note that languages differ in the number of m-words that constitute a single
s-word, and the number of s-words that constitute a m-word, due to the
morphological/lexical idiosyncracies of the language.  For instance, make wash
involves two causatives, and thus must be two s-words.  Expressed in English, it is
two separate m-words (make and wash); in Malagasy, it is mampanasa (cause-
cause-be.washed), a single m-word.  Conversely, push down is a single event, and
thus a single s-word.  However, it is two m-words in English (push and down), one
m-word in French (renverser), and two m-words in Èdó (sùá 'push' and dé 'fall').
Travis defines the s-word independent from morphology, considering an
s-word as the structure of one event, with the process syntactically realized by VP1
and the result by VP2, linked by causation and involving only a single agent.  This
concept of the event as an s-word will be explored in further detail later as we
examine evidence from serial verb constructions (SVCs), for which Stewart (1998)
claims that a distinction must be made between SVCs consisting of one s-word and
those consisting of two s-words.

233
5.1.6 The Articulated VP Structure
As the serial verb analysis in Stewart (1998) adopts Travis's structure, let us
complete the picture by discussing Travis's Aspect Phrase.  To account for her
Malagasy and Tagalog data, Travis also argues for an Aspect Phrase to occupy a
position between the two VP layers of a Larsonian VP shell, in addition to
motivations from other hypotheses extant in the literature.  For example, Mahajan
(1990) argued for a functional projection (AgrOP) for object agreement above the
VP; Sportiche (1990) proposed that moved objects do not move out of the VP;
Johnson (1991) suggested that objects move optionally to the Spec of VP.
Based on these claims, and from parallelisms with dative shift and passive
data, Travis (1991, 1994, 1999) places the AspP between the two VPs in the
Larsonian VP structure.  For Travis, objects move for reasons of case; the specifier
position (Spec) of AspP accommodates the object, assigning a completive aspect to
the verb phrase.  In that position, the Aspect node has syntactic scope over the lower
VP, which is the endpoint of the event.  Another use for AspP, argues Travis
(through a set of intricate interlocking arguments from Malagasy and Tagalog; cf.
Travis 1998), is that the non-volitional agents of transitive achievements (e.g., find,
reach) are assigned a theta-role in the specifier of a [+telic] AspP.
Travis incorporates into her structure the sub-event hypothesis, consistent
with her analysis of Tagalog and Malagasy:  the upper VP (selected by EP)
corresponds to CAUSE, whereas the lower VP (selected by AspP) corresponds to
BECOME (or the resultant state).  The structure is given in (10), and the parts of
this structure contribute to the overall (a)telic interpretation of the event, i.e., whether
the event is interpreted as having reached an endpoint.  Travis argues that AspP is
the projection under which telicity and boundedness are calculated, helping to
determine the situation aspect (as described in Smith 1991).  Telicity, boundedness,

234
and the effects of plural objects on aspectual interpretation are discussed in the next
subsection.
(10)
       TP
    
 T
     EP
   
 E
    VP1
  
    Causer
    V'
 
V
AspP
    CAUSE
derived obj
Asp'
 
Asp
  VP2
 
      Theme
   V'
V    Location
BECOME/BE
Travis, like several other authors (e.g., Mourelatos 1981, Brinton 1988,
Verkuyl 1993, Slabakova 1997), has noted that the operator DO, which is dependent
upon volitionality, is not a crucial factor and does not associate DO with a functional
node in her tree structure, using CAUSE instead; other authors (e.g., McClure 1994)
do retain DO instead of CAUSE, and associate it with a functional node dominating
BECOME.  Despite this difference, the structural hierarchy remains identical:
DO/CAUSE are always structurally higher than BECOME.  Processes are
associated with the V denoting CAUSE, on the intuition that it is the process which
causes the endstate; consequently, processes have syntactic scope over the endstate.
5.2      Telicity, Affectedness, and Boundedness
A discussion of telicity and related topics will clarify what Travis means
about telicity being calculated in Aspect Phrase.  I examine Tenny (1987),
Depraetere (1995), and Verkuyl (1993) below with respect to this question.

235
5.2.1 Tenny (1987)
Tenny (1987) lends support to the idea that particles, resultatives, and the
dative arguments in Double Object constructions all contribute a distinguished point
to occurrents (cf. Chapter Four).  Tenny shows that these three kinds of
constructions exhibit similar syntactic behaviour:
(11)
a.
All three require a post-verbal accusative object.
b.
All three may appear before or after the accusative object
(with the heaviness of the NP a point of consideration).
c.
Each appears singly in a VP:  no more than one is allowed.
d.
Each, in conjunction with the verb, select for the accusative
object.
e.
All three contribute to the delimiting of the VP event.
f.
The accusative object in the three constructions measure out
or delimit the event of the verb.
Tenny (1987) proposes two syntactically relevant properties of aspect:
delimitedness and affectedness, often used in the discussion of aspect, and it would
be useful to define them here.  Delimitedness corresponds to the idea that an event
ends; i.e., a distinguished point is reached.  For example, there is a difference
between depictives (12a-c) and resultatives (12d):  in the depictives, the secondary
predicate can be either subject-oriented (12a,c), being descriptive of John, or object-
oriented (12b), where it is descriptive of the steak.  In contrast, a resultative must be
object-oriented: (12c) can only be a depictive, since it cannot have the meaning of the
resultative (having a cause-effect relationship) such that John became tired as a
result of painting the picture.  Since a picture cannot be tired, a resultative
interpretation of (12c) is not possible.  There are only object-oriented resultatives
like (12d).
(12)
a.
John ate the steak naked.
b.
John ate the steak rare.
c.
John painted the picture tired.
d.
John painted the picture black.
Tenny's telic and atelic distinction (following Ryle 1949, Kenny 1963, et al.)
may be thought of in EM terms as the difference between occurrents with a single

236
distinguished point (the semelfactive), and those that do not have a single
distinguished point.  The former includes all events with a single point of change,
while the latter includes both events without an endpoint and those events that are
multiple instances of the same event.
Affectedness involves an object that is the target of a change of state.  Not
only must the affected argument measure out the event, it must also delimit it.
Whereas (13a,b) have affected arguments the steak and an aria (since the steak is
consumed and the aria is created word by word), (13c,d) have arguments that are not
affected, since the cart and the plane are not in any way changed by the action, save
their spatial location.
(13)
a.
Annie ate the steak.
b.
Annie sang an aria.
c.
Annie pushed the cart.
d.
Annie flew the plane.
5.2.2  Boundedness, Telicity, and the Plus Principle
Depraetere (1995) suggests that the telic-atelic distinction is different from
the bounded-unbounded distinction.  Based on her definitions, telicity is an inherent
property of the verb:  either a verb has an innate endpoint (e.g., arrive) or it does not
(e.g., sing).  In contrast, boundedness determines whether or not the situation has
reached a temporal boundary.
These two concepts are separate.  Pi, Slabakovka & Uesaka (1997) and
Slabakova (1997) explore the distinction between boundedness and telicity in more
detail for English, Japanese, and Slavic aspect.  Translated into EM terms, telicity is
related to whether or not the occurrent has a distinguished point.
Following Verkuyl (1993), the authors above assume that a noun phrase in
object position is crucial in determining whether an endpoint to the event may be
inferred.  Verkuyl (1993)'s goal is to explain aspectual phenomena in terms of a

237
Plus Principle (with the use of the features SQA and ADD TO), and to capture
these ideas (including localism) into a Generalized Quantification Theory.
The Plus Principle states that the contributions of SQA and ADD TO
elements in the sentence must be all [+feature] in order for the verb action to be
interpreted as terminative.  The lack of unanimous [+feature]s results in an aspectual
leak, and creates a durative interpretation.
[SQA] (specified quantity of A) is a trait Verkuyl applies to noun phrases,
where [+SQA] means that the object has a fixed bound.  [-SQA], which is a
characteristic of bare plurals and mass objects, can cause aspectual leaks, making a
sentence durative.  Plural objects make sentences with them atelic.
[ADD TO] is based on Gruber's bipartite division of verbs into change
[+ADD TO] and non-change [-ADD TO].  The former includes such verbs as walk,
play, eat.  If a verb is [+ADD TO], then it involves an additive or cumulative
process, and must have temporal structure.  [-ADD TO] verbs are stative.
Verkuyl states that there is a tripartite ontological classification:  STATES
vs. PROCESSES vs. EVENTS.  This contrasts with Vendler's quadripartite division,
which Verkuyl views as an ontological distinction that is relevant at the level of
lexical information, rather than at a linguistic level.  [SQA] is a structural distinction,
where [-SQA] applies to STATES and PROCESSES and [+SQA] applies to
EVENTS (which Verkuyl assumes to be those sentences which are terminative).  [-
ADD TO] applies only to STATES, and [+ADD TO] to both PROCESSES and
EVENTS.  He states that [ADD TO] is a lexical distinction.  This classification is
illustrated in (14):
(14)

238
An essential concept is that the verb phrase uses its object (15a) (or its
subject, for passives and intransitives, 15b, 15c respectively) as a kind of 'space' that
the Theme moves through.  This property correlates with Tenny's affectedness
attribute.
(15)
a.
John ate sandwiches.
b.
The pizza was eaten.
c.
The ice evaporated.
For example, in (15a), if John ate sandwiches then John moves through the
'space' created by the sandwiches.  In (15b), the pizza itself is the quantity which is
consumed over time, and in (15c), the ice is the quantity that evaporates over time.
Verkuyl is able to predict which kinds of structures have durative interpretations.
For (15a), because sandwiches is a bare plural (therefore [-SQA]), the sentence
cannot be terminative.  For (15b), there is only a single pizza (therefore [+SQA]),
and the sentence is terminative.  Likewise, in (15c) the ice is a specified quantity, and
thus is [+SQA] and terminative.
Under Pi, Slabakova & Uesaka (1997) and Slabakova (1998)'s analyses,
verb phrases take into consideration both the [ADD TO] and [SQA] to derive the
overall telicity.  We assume that bare plurals in object position cannot provide a telic
endpoint, since bare plurals are unspecified quantities and thus are [-SQA].  VPs
with bare plural objects are thus analyzed as [-telic], on account of the [-SQA]
feature.
It is also argued in Pi, Slabakova & Uesaka (1997) that -ing indicates an
unbounded event, and -ed/-en indicates a bounded event.  This view is similar to
Smith (1991), where the difference is characterized as aspectual viewpoint or
temporal perspective.  With regards to Event Mereology, boundedness correlates
with the concept of coercion:  either a change of state reading (-ed) can be coerced,
or a state of change reading coerced (-ing).  There are, then, four different
distinctions as shown in (16):

239
(16)
a.
She was eating an apple.
(unbounded, telic)
b.
She was eating apples.
(unbounded, atelic)
c.
She ate an apple.
(bounded, telic)
d.
She ate apples.
(bounded, atelic)
Boundedness and telicity have been shown in Pi, Slabakova & Uesaka
(1997) to correspond systematically to the aspectual projections OuterAspP and
InnerAspP, respectively, in the following structure (17).
(17)
[TP [VPAUX [OuterAspP [EP [VP1 [InnerAspP [VP2]]]]]]]
boundedness
telicity
The actual details of our analysis is outside the scope of this thesis, but
crucially here as in the EM analysis, boundedness appears higher than telicity (the
distinguished point); the distinguished point is generated in the most embedded VP.
Coercion with aspectual morphemes operates on a different level, higher than that of
the telicity of the embedded VPs.
5.3      Serial Verb Constructions
The intuition behind using EM to account for serial verb construction (SVC)
patterns comes from the discussion about s-words.  The s-word proposes that there
is a limit imposed upon the amount of information that a word may carry.  But what
does it mean to be an s-word?  Why is an s-word restricted to one Agent, one Cause,
two verbs and one event, as Travis claims?
I look at Èdó, a serial verb language, for an answer to the nature of the
s-word.  I consider the mechanisms that must be incorporated to produce its
aspectual SVC patterns.  By comparing it to the English aspectual system, we will be
able to see how concepts like distinguished points and distinguished processes may
be used to unify aspectual systems in different languages.
Though English is as far from Èdó as Malagasy or Tagalog, I believe the
principles underlying Event Mereology is applicable across languages.  The EM
system works with simple principles and concepts that the insights we gain from

240
English can serve as a springboard for us to look at languages as different from it as
serial verb languages, and see how other complex verbal structures can be broken
down into such parts as distinguished points and distinguished processes.  It has
also been claimed that (Mandarin) Chinese is a SVC (Craig & Hale 1988); I will
also consider briefly some data from Chinese below.  In the end, I hope to show that
the idea of the s-word arises naturally from the two possible ways of viewing
change, as was discuss by Galton (1984) and expanded upon here.
5.3.1 Data on Serial Verb Constructions
I intend to extend the EM theory of aspect developed for English, a non-
serial verb language, to true serial verb languages.  In Pi & Stewart (1998), an
aspectual account of two patterns of SVCs (serial verb constructions) in Èdó, a Kwa
language spoken in Nigeria, was proposed.  I expand upon the analysis in that paper
below, incorporating additional insights and data from Event Mereology and
Mandarin Chinese.57
There are different structures in Èdó that have usually been lumped into a
class called SVCs, but upon closer scrutiny require further refinement in
classification.  Covert Coordinations (CCs) as in (18a,b) are distinct from true SVCs
as in (19a,b) and (20a,b):  there is no object sharing in a CC.  Each verb in a Covert
Coordination has a separate, overt object which receives its own independent internal
thematic role, besides other factors pointed out in Baker (1989) and Collins (1997),
among others.58  The pattern observed for Covert Coordinations may be abbreviated
as [Subj V NP1 V NP2].59
                                                
57I aim for a more descriptive explanation of the Èdó data here; for a detailed syntactic analysis, see
Pi & Stewart (1998) and Stewart (1998).
58In the transcription system adopted for the Èdó data, lax vowels are indicated with an underscore,
e.g., [  ó  ].
59But see also §5.3.6.1, where the Covert Coordination has a pattern similar to standard SVCs but
differentiated by an intonational break.

241
(18)
a.
Òzó   gbòó   ívìn        bòló    ókà
Ozo   plant coconut     peel    corn
'Ozo planted coconut and [he] peeled corn.'
b.
Òzó    lé     ízè   rrí    órè
Ozo  cook  rice  eat    it
'Ozo cooked rice and [he] ate it.'
(19)
a.
Òzó    kòkó   àdésúwà    mòsé
Ozo   raise    Adesuwa  be-beautiful
'Ozo raised Adesuwa to be beautiful.'60
b.
Òzó    gbé   úkpù   guòghó
Ozo    hit      cup      break
'Ozo hit the cup and it broke.'
(20)
a.
Òzó   lé   èvbàré    ré
Ozo  cook food     eat
'Ozo cooked the food and ate it.'
b.
Òzó   dé   èbé    tìé
Ozo   buy book read
'Ozo bought the book and read it.'
In contrast, the two verbs in a SVC share a single surface object, having the
pattern [Subj V NP V].  This internal argument sharing criterion defines the term
object sharing.  Each verb assigns their internal thematic roles to a single surface
object.  Following Stewart (1998), SVCs are defined as those constructions in which
the subject must set about the plan of one event which may be resultative or
consequential, i.e., the agent intends a single plan of action that is expressed
linguistically by two verbs.
A plan in this context is an action that could be two actions connected by
causation or logical consequence.  Stewart also calls this iconicity.  An example of
causation linking two actions is the instance of something breaking as a result of
falling.  An example of logical consequence is the instance of someone cooking
food in order to eat it after, i.e., the two actions may be considered as phases of a
single event, since there is a logical connection between the two, based on real world
                                                
60There is no clear distinction between verbs and adjectives in Èdó.

242
expectations.  In contrast, the sequence of kicking a ball and then washing it are two
unrelated actions, and thus cannot be iconic.
Stewart also claims that in Mandarin, two verbs expressing resultative
meaning always occur as V-V compounds (21a,b), whereas those that are simply
two transitive verbs sharing a single surface object do not occur as V-V compounds
(21c,d):
(21)
a.
wo da-si   Zhangsan
  I   hit-die Zhangsan
'I struck Zhangsan dead.'
b.
*wo da Zhangsan   si
    I   hit  Zhangsan dead
c.
*wo gie-mai rou
    I   cut-sell meat
d.
wo gie rou    mai
  I  cut  meat  sell
'I cut the meat and sold it.'
Typical iconic pairs include the following from Èdó and Mandarin.  There
are clear similarities across the two languages among their iconic pairs:
(22)
a.
Èdó
sùá-dé 'push-fall', dé-wú 'fall-die', gbé-guòghó 'hit-break',
kó!kó-mó!sé 'raise-be beautiful'
b.
Mandarin
tui-dao 'push-fall', die-si 'fall-die', da-puo 'hit-break',
da-si 'hit-die', tang-ping 'iron-flat'
From this description, it appears that the iconicity described by Stewart is
closely related to the s-word described by Travis.  There are two actions related by
causation.  However, additional data will show that there are two kinds of SVCs, of
which only one (the resultative SVC) can qualify as s-words.
5.3.2 Previous Analyses of SVCs
There are at least two views in syntax on the internal argument sharing
criterion, where a single surface object receives distinct internal thematic roles from

243
two different verbs.  It is problematic for most theories of theta-role assignment for
an object to receive two different thematic roles.  Baker (1989) posits a double-
headed VP structure wherein the verbs directly theta-mark a single object NP
position without an empty category post-V2, for all SVCs.  In contrast, Collins
(1997) posits that all SVC object sharing is mediated by an empty category, pro, so
there would be no true internal object sharing as in Baker.
Stewart (1998) challenges these two views, arguing that there is not a single,
unified class as assumed by the aforementioned analyses, but that in fact there are
two kinds of SVCs with distinct syntactic structures (modifications of Travis's
structure).
Under Stewart's theory, resultative SVCs, shown earlier in (19a,b), have the
structure in (23) and the properties in (24a-d).  Note the use of a single Event
Phrase.
(23)
TP
 
         Spec  
T'
    
 T
EP
        
Spec 
       E'
    
   E
VoiceP
 
Spec
Voice'
 
Voice   VP
Vk
  V'
kòkó
'raise' NP
  V'
     Àdésùwá 
V
V'
  ek
 |
mòsé
'be beautiful'

244
(24)
a.
V2 is always unaccusative.61
b.
There is a single object NP (true object sharing; no empty category).
c.
There is one event (one s-word):  both verbs express a single
event that is existentially quantified-over by a single event
operator, head of EP (Event Phrase).
d.
The two verbs form a co-headed VP (both verbs are non-distinct).
Consequential SVCs, shown in (20a,b), have the properties in (25a-e) and
the structure in (26).  There are two Event Phrases:
(25)
a.
Both V1 and V2 must be transitive.
b.
There are two events (2 s-words):  each verb heads a separate VP
and expresses an unique event (e1, e2).
c.
Each event is licensed by a separate event operator, head of EP.
d.
The two (functional) E heads are asymmetric (E1 quantifies
over the two events, e1 and e2, and binds E2).
e.
Object sharing is mediated by an empty category, pro.
(26)
TP
       
     Spec
T'
 
T
EP
 
    Spec      E'
 
E1w   VoiceP
       Spec    Voice'
      
 Voice   VP1 (e1+e2)
 
  VP1 (e1)        EP2
 
 
         V1       NP          Spec     E'
      'cook'  'food'
E2w   VP2 (e2)
 
V2     NP
'eat'     prok
Thus, the key difference between a resultative and a consequential SVC in
terms of event structure is that the former is a single event (or s-word), whereas the
latter is two events (or s-words).  In terms of the data, they are distinguished by the
following patterns.  Resultative SVCs (27) have the [NP1 V1 NP2 V2] pattern where
NP1 is the subject of the transitive V1, and NP2 is the object of V1 and the subject of
the intransitive V2.  In contrast, consequential SVCs (28) have the same [NP1 V1
                                                
61Unaccusative verbs in Èdó include stative verbs (Baker & Stewart 1997).

245
NP2 V2] pattern but NP1 acts as the subject for both V1 and V2, just as NP2 acts as
the object for both verbs.
(27)
resultative SVC
[Subj1  trans-V1  obj1/subj2   intrans-V2]
(28)
consequential SVC
[Subj1,2  trans-V1  obj1,2   trans-V2]
5.3.3 Syntactic Tests for SVCs
Let us look at his evidence for making this dichotomy.  Previous analyses of
SVCs distinguish between resultatives and consequentials by intuition rather than
systematically.  Stewart (1998) is an exception, claiming that a resultative SVC
consists of a single event, whereas a consequential SVC consists of multiple events.
He uses the following syntactic tests, among others:
(29)
a.
the anaphoric particle tòbórè
b.
INFL-type adverbs, like gìégìé
c.
the iterative morpheme ghá
d.
predicate clefts
With the tòbórè particle test in (29a), Stewart observes that that adverbial
particle has anaphoric properties, semantically being much like herself in the English
sentence She made the dress herself.  The adverb may also be viewed as a type of
intensifier.
It is observed in the resultative SVC (30a) that it is ungrammatical for this
particle to appear after the unaccusative V2.  In contrast, in the consequential SVC
(30b), there is no problem for tòbórè to appear after a transitive V2.
(30)
a.
*Òzó sùá    ògók   dé  tòbórèk
Ozo  push bottle   fall    itself
b.
Òzó  dé    ìyánk    dùnmwún  tòbórèk
Ozo buy   yam       pound          itself
'Ozo bought the yam and pounded it (itself).'
Stewart hypothesizes that the anaphoric adverbial particle tòbórè can only
right-adjoin to an NP or an empty category pro that is its antecedent.  Stewart uses
this evidence to argue that there is no empty category after the second verb in

246
resultative SVCs, whereas in consequential SVCs there is an empty category (pro)
after the second verb, to which the particle can right-adjoin.  In a simple sentence
with an unaccusative verb as in (31a), the tòbórè particle may appear after the
unaccusative verb, taking the trace of the object of an unaccusative verb as its
antecedent.  In (31b), tòbórè  can also be licensed by the object of the verb
dùnmwún.
(31)
a.
ògók   dé    tk tòbórèk
bottle  fall        itself
'The bottle fell, itself (alone).'
b.
Òzó  dùnmwún    ìyánk  tòbórèk
Ozo    pound        yam     itself
'Ozo pounded the yam, itself.'
For the test in (29b), Stewart shows that the INFL-type adverb gìégìé, which
means 'quickly', cannot appear before V2, as shown in the resultative SVC in (32a).
However, consequential SVCs can have a pre-V2 INFL-type adverb as in (32b).
(32)
a.
*Òzó      sùá        Àdésúwà   gié!gié   dé.
Ozo      push    Adesuwa     quickly  fall
'Ozo pushed Adesuwa down quickly.'
b.
Òzó   dùnmwún   èmà     gié!gié     khién.
Ozo   pound         yam     quickly     sell
'Ozo pounded the yam and quickly sold it.'
Stewart assumes that INFL-type adverbs are licensed as left-adjuncts to the
head of EP.  Since the EP is taken to represent an event (s-word) in the syntax, the
distribution of INFL-type adverbs will match up with the number of EPs to reflect
one (resultative) or two events (consequential).  Thus, Stewart predicts that there is a
single event in resultative SVCs but two in consequential SVCs.
Evidence presented in Stewart (1998) shows that the iterative morpheme ghá
likewise cannot appear before the V2 of a resultative SVC, whereas it is permissible
for ghá to appear pre-V2 in a consequential SVC.
Finally, Stewart shows that the predicate clefts are likewise indicative of the
structural difference between consequential and resultative SVCs.  It is

247
ungrammatical to cleft either of the verbs in a resultative SVC.  In contrast, either of
the verbs in a consequential SVC may be clefted.  Stewart argues that this
observation supports the claim that the two verbs in a resultative SVC act as a single
unit, whereas the two verbs in a consequential SVC are not as closely linked.  For
details of these last two tests, see Stewart (1998).
5.3.4 Serial Verb Constructions and Micro-Events
To connect Event Mereology with the analysis of resultative and
consequential SVCs, we take as a starting point several ideas that have their origins
in Dowty (1979) and were further developed in subsequent works (e.g., McClure
1994), extending the scope of their analyses of accomplishments in non-SVC
languages to serial verb languages.
Recall that the idea of the s-word leads to an event being minimally a
distinguished process or a distinguished point, as in (33a) and (33b), and maximally
a combination of both, as in (33c).  This minimal event of change is the s-word (s).
The diagrams below show which the event parts s is specified for.
(33)
a.
s
activities
 |
(transitives)
dP
b.
s
achievements
 |
(unaccusatives)
dT
c.
       s
accomplishments
  
(properties of both transitives/unaccusatives)
dP
dT
most complex s-word possible
It has been observed that not all languages exhibit the same freedom in
transitivity alternations as English.  However, the verb tìé 'read' in Èdó behaves like
its English counterpart, as seen in the parallelism between (34a) and (34b) with
(35a) and (35b), respectively.  Thus, it is assumed that accomplishments are
complex in Èdó as in English.

248
(34)
a.
Òzó    tìérè    là     áwá    ókpá
Ozo     read   for  hour      one
'Ozo read for an hour.'
b.
Òzó    tìé      èbé      là / vbè    áwá    ókpá
Ozo   read  book     for / in     hour    one
'Ozo read a book for an hour/in an hour.'
(35)
a.
John read for an hour.
b.
John read a book for an hour/in an hour.
McClure (1994) claims that there are two kinds of transitive verbs:  those
derived from unaccusatives (36a,b) and unergatives (37a,b):
(36)
a.
The bottle broke.
break:  unaccusative
b.
John broke the bottle.
(37)
a.
John baked.
bake:  unergative
b.
John baked a cake.
There is a semantic motivation for the split between unaccusatives and
unergatives.  I adopt the analysis that only states and achievements are unaccusative.
Conversely, all activities must be unergative.  Since Event Mereology classifies
achievements as those that contain distinguished points, we predict achievements to
be unaccusatives canonically.  States behave achievement-like in resultatives,
providing the boundary for the newly obtained state.  Thus, under those
circumstances, states likewise involve a distinguished point.
However, following Hale & Keyser (1993), unergatives are analyzed here as
underlying transitives with a covert cognate object.  Instead of assuming that
activities are all unergative, the Èdó SVC data shows that the canonical activity is
transitive.
To summarize, distinguished points (dT) are linked to achievements, which
are unaccusatives syntactically.  In contrast, distinguished processes (dP) are linked
to activities, which are transitives syntactically.

249
5.3.5 Resultative and Consequential SVCs
I show below that a resultative SVC consists of a single s-word, and pattern
very much like English resultatives.  A resultative SVC in Èdó exhibits a
distinguished process part and a distinguished point part, just as an English
resultative also has dP and dT components.  It has been argued already that
accomplishments and resultatives are juxtapositions of dT with dP:   this
combination is the only possibility for a complex s-word permitted by the
assumptions given thus far.  It is this highly constrained event structure which yields
the differences between resultative and consequential SVCs.  A consequential SVC
does not have a cause-effect relationship as a resultative SVC does, and is not
accomplishment-like.
Like English, Èdó allows V+Adj and V+P combinations (resultatives and
verb-particle compounds), which compositionally define a single event.  Yet serial
verb languages differ from English in one crucial respect:  two verbs may
compositionally define a single event, because in Èdó, a V2 is present.  Whereas
adjectives and prepositions are predicates that can be used to delimit two
complementary states, as described in the previous chapters, and are naturally
associated with distinguished points, the verb in V2 position can be have a lexically-
independent aspectual specification of dP or dT, i.e., a process or a transition.  This
variability increases the number of combinations predicted to four possible classes,
since both V1 and V2 could have two independent values (dP or dT).
In a resultative SVC, the two verbs are causally related.  Stewart (1998)
proposes that this causal relation is a characteristic that obtains only in the case
where the two verbs can be interpreted as a single s-word.  This causal relationship
is shown in (38a,b).
(38)
a.
Òzó   sùá    Uyi    dé
Ozo   push   Uyi   fall
'Ozo pushed Uyi and made him fall.'

250
b.
Òzó   gbé   èmá!tón    pèrhé
Ozo  hammer  metal    flat
'Ozo hammered the metal flat.'
A resultative SVC (rSVC) exhibits the following characteristics:
(39)
a.
the V1 of an rSVC must be an activity verb and never a stative,
achievement or accomplishment verb;
b.
it can only have one event delimiter;
c.
just like accomplishment verbs, it can only be modified by
in an hour, not for an hour.
These facts are shown respectively in (40a-c):
(40)
a.
*Òzó    bó      òwá    mòsé
Ozo   build    house  be-beautiful
'Ozo built the house to be beautiful.'
b.
*Òzó    má     úkpù   zèzé guòghó
Ozo    mould  cup    hard  break
'Ozo moulded the cup so hard that it broke.'
c.
Òzó    kòkó   àdésúwà    mòsé vbè ùkpó ìsén/ *là ùkpó ìsén
Ozo   raise   Adesuwa  be-beautiful in year five/*for year five
'Ozo raised Adesuwa to be beautiful in five years/*for five years.'
In contrast, in a consequential SVC, the verbs exhibit temporal ordering
rather than causation.  There are also no such rigid aspectual constraints as those
cited in (39) which require the two verbs in a consequential SVC to be interpreted as
a single event as opposed to two separate events, as the data in (41) show.
(41)
a.
Òzó    bó      òwá    khién
Ozo   build    house sell
'Ozo built the house and sold it.'
b.
Òzó    mién  úkpù   dé   khién
Ozo    see      cup   buy  sell
'Ozo saw the cup, bought it and sold it.'
c.
Òzó   dé   ékpò  ízè   lé   là ùkpó ìsén/vbè ùkpó ìsén
Ozo   buy  bag  rice  eat   for year five/in year five
'Ozo bought a bag of rice and ate it for five years/in five years.'
Pi & Stewart (1998) propose that the lack of a causal relationship between a
consequential SVC's V1 and V2 is predicted by their inability as two transitives (i.e.,
two dPs) to juxtapose in a single s-word (which only permits a dT and dP pairing).
V1 and V2 in a consequential SVC must therefore belong to separate s-words that

251
are arranged in a manner closer than that of simple coordination, since consequential
SVCs are quite distinct from Covert Coordinations syntactically and semantically.
If the two verbs in a consequential SVC cannot belong to the same s-word,
then they must belong to two distinct s-words.  These two s-words form a macro-
event instead, in which the temporal ordering relation is dominant.  Covert
Coordinations, which conjoin multiple Event Phrases, are similar to conjoined
macro-events.  Covert Coordinations appear to be asyndetic conjunctions.  The
structure of Covert Coordinations and their behaviour are too complicated to go into
here:  only the difference between the two SVCs are discussed in detail.62
A macro-event (M) is compositionally built from multiple s-words, as
shown in (42a,b).  Theoretically, two distinguished processes (42a) or two
distinguished points (42b) can occur as a single macro-event (42a,b) but not as a
single s-word (42c,d).
(42)
a.
       M
b.
M
  
s
     s
    s
          s
 |
     |
     |
          |
dP
    dP
    dT
         dT
c.
 * s
d.
*  s
  /    \
   /  \
 dP  dP  
dT  dT
The EM proposal accounts for these three observations about resultative
SVCs in Èdó, summarized in (43a-c):
(43)
a.
V1 is always a process and V2 is always an endstate or
achievement verb, because of syntactic constraints on
the realizations of the two components of the resultative
b.
a rSVC only has one event delimiter because an s-word
has just one distinguished point
c.
a rSVC behaves like an accomplishment because the event
structure of the resultative SVC is the same as that of an
accomplishment.
                                                
62See Stewart (1998) for a discussion on Covert Coordinations.

252
Thus, the Èdó data thus far supports the analysis that resultative SVCs have
the same internal event structure as accomplishments, and that a unified eventive
analysis of accomplishments in both SVC and non-SVC languages should be
ultimately possible.  However, in the next section it will be shown that Èdó double
unaccusatives (dT + dT) exhibit properties of resultative SVCs.  While in English,
such two-dT combinations (as in 42b) cannot be s-words, the Èdó SVC data on
double unaccusatives seems to contradict that constraint.  I will discuss possible
solutions to this difference between English and Èdó next.
5.3.6 Four Possible Patterns
Below, the four predicted V1 and V2 combinations are examined separately.
(44a-d) summarizes what the four possible patterns with dP and dT are.  Data on the
members of these classes are given in the ensuing subsections.  The problematic
case is seen in (44d).
(44)
V1
V2
Predicted
Data
a.
dP (transitive)
dT (unacc)
rSVC
rSVC, CC
b.
dT
dP
CC
CC
c.
dP
dP
cSVC
cSVC
d.
dT
dT
cSVC
rSVC
5.3.6.1
Distinguished Point With Distinguished Process
In (44a), that of a distinguished process in V1 followed by a distinguished
point in V2, is exactly what the theory predicts would yield a single s-word, as
shown in (45).
(45)
   s
single s-word
  /  \
dP dT
Its counterpart is shown in (44b), where the order of dP and dT is reversed:
V1 accommodates the dT while V2 accommodates the dP.   The sole difference in
word order yields two very different structures:  while the <dP,dT> yields a

253
resultative SVC, <dT,dP> has to be a case of two events conjoined by parataxis, i.e.,
Covert Coordination as in (46).  Covert Coordinations are very free in their
structure, since many different kinds of VPs or events may be conjoined.  A clear
intonational break signals the divide between the two events of a <dT,dP> Covert
Coordination (as indicated by the comma).
(46)
Òzó dé,      lé     èvbàré
Ozo  fall   cook    food
'Ozo fell, and (he) cooked food.'
An intonational break can also signal the presence of a Covert Coordination
with a <dP,dT> order.  (47) has a <dP,dT> order that resembles a resultative SVC
on first glance, but there can be a clear intonational break between the two events
(again shown by the comma).  Note that in (47) there is no object sharing; it is the
subject Ozo that participates in the second action.  Here as well the pause indicates
the presence of a Covert Coordination, thereby distinguishing it from a resultative
SVC.
(47)
Òzó   sùá    Uyi,   dé
Ozo   push  Uyi  fall
'Ozo pushed Uyi, and Ozo fell.'
Given that the <dP,dT> ordering can be either a resultative SVC or a Covert
Coordination (given the presence of an intonational break), it stands to reason that
some factor aside from simple word order determines the difference between rSVCs
and CCs.  Covert Coordinations, which lack object sharing, likely are conjunctions
of events with separate and full syntactic structures, as opposed to resultative SVCs,
which are able to form a single s-word within a single EP.  However, the properties
of Covert Coordinations are too complex to give a full analysis here.  Tentatively, it
is sufficient to assume that Covert Coordinations of the sequence <dT,dP> are
structurally either macro-events conjoining two s-words, as in (48a), or conjunctions
of two macro-events as in (48b), setting them aside from s-words.  Likewise, for

254
CCs of the sequence <dP,dT>, the same structures are suggested, mutatis
mutandis.
(48)
a.
   M
b.
CC
  /   \
           /     \
s     s
          M    M
 |      |
           |       |
dT  dP
           s     s
           |       |
          dT   dP
If word order does not determine the difference between resultative SVCs
and CCs, then it is reasonable to suppose that the word order <dP,dT> of a rSVC is
a consequence of the verbs being ordered that way by a different mechanism.  Like
the analysis proposed for English resultatives in Chapter Four, the process precedes
the transition due to the hierarchy of syntactic nodes:  following Dowty (1979), the
CAUSE operator (linked with dP) is structurally higher than the BECOME operator
(linked with dT).  Processes cannot be licensed in the lower V2 position, but must
be higher structurally in V1, adjacent to the CAUSE operator.  Stewart (1998) and
Travis (1994, 1999) likewise support this structural ordering.  We then expect that a
rSVC s-word's set of {dP, dT} components must always be linearized with the
order, dP  verb preceding the verb dT verb; that is to say, a rSVC that places its dT in
V1 and dP in V2 will be ruled out because the respective verbs are not licensed to
occupy those positions, given their lexical specifications.
5.3.6.2
Two Distinguished Processes
The <dP,dP> ordering in (44c) is a case where there is object sharing (cf.
Déchaine 1993, Baker 1989, Collins 1997, et al.), but it is neither a resultative SVC
syntactically nor semantically.  As the constraint on s-word composition predicts,
two distinguished processes cannot form a single s-word.  Instead, each dP must
belong in a separate s-word.  A SVC that contains two s-words is instead a
macro-event, as in (49).  If the surface string of a macro-event shows apparent object

255
sharing, distinguishing it from a Covert Coordination, then that SVC is a
consequential.
(49)
       M
      /   \
     s    s
     |      |
    dP  dP
Note that a consequential SVC is capable of accommodating more than two
verbs, as in (50a), but a resultative SVC can only accommodate two verbs at most
(50b):
(50)
a.
Òzó
dé 
ìyán
lé          ré
(cSVC)
Ozo
buy
yam
cook
eat
'Ozo bought the yam, cooked it, and ate it.'
b.
*Òzó    gbé  àkhé   ghuòghó
kànmwán
(rSVC)
Ozo      hit     pot       break
 be.short
'Ozo broke the pot into small pieces.'
The stacking of additional verbs is only permissible in a consequential SVC,
since cSVCs deal with temporal ordering rather than causation, and temporal
ordering is not as limited as the cause-effect phenomenon.  Unlike resultative SVC
s-words, which can only be composed of one dP and one dT, consequential SVCs
are composed of several s-words that chain together to form a macro-event, as
shown in (51).  There is no restriction on the internal structure of macro-events that
parallel the constraint on the internal structure of s-words.  Covert Coordinations are
of course rather free in conjoining multiple entities, and likewise permit such
stacking.
(51)
 M
  
|
s
  s
  s
 |
   |
   |
dP
  dP
  dP
Furthermore, it is observed that consequential SVCs always involve transitive
verbs in both V1 and V2 position; this phenomenon is predicted by the theory.
Recall that Stewart (1998) argues that pro is present in the consequential SVC

256
structure, rather than having true object sharing as resultative SVCs do.  Recall Hale
& 
Keyser 
(1993)'s 
analysis 
of 
unergatives, 
where 
unergatives 
at
d-structure have underlying cognate object.  In a consequential SVC where only the
first verb is overtly transitive, Hale & Keyser (1993) would analyze the object
position of V2 as being filled by an empty category that acts as the underlying
cognate object.  This empty category corresponds to the pro as proposed in Collins
(1997), Baker & Stewart (1997), and Stewart (1998).  The presence of this empty
category provides the conditions for tòbórè to right adjoin, accounting for the
difference observed previously between resultative and consequential SVCs.
5.3.6.3
Double Unaccusative SVCs
Lastly, we examine (44d), where two dTs appear simultaneously in the SVC.
According to the theory, it is predicted that such <dT,dT> SVCs cannot be s-words
and must be macro-events (or, if there is no object sharing, Covert Coordinations).
However, the double unaccusative SVCs data in (52a,b) suggest that these SVCs are
s-word resultative SVCs, since there is a strong causative component in the
semantics of these constructions.
(52)
a.
ògó       dé  guòghó
bottle   fall   break
'The bottle fell (and as a result of the falling it) broke.'
b.
Òzó  dé   wú
Ozo  fall   die
'Ozo fell (and as a result of the falling he) died.'
To understand where the prediction goes wrong with these double
unaccusatives, let us consider some possible ways for these <dT,dT> combinations
to constitute resultative SVCs.  There are two kinds of solutions:  maintaining dP
and dT as the only possible structure for s-words, or changing our concept of the
s-word.  I consider both kinds below.

257
5.3.6.3.1    Keeping the Internal Structure of the S-Word
Let us first consider the cases where the s-word remains a juxtaposition of
dP with dT.  We observe that the class of double unaccusative SVCs is rather
limited; there are only a few examples of these SVCs, where the V1 is usually dé
'fall' or guòghó 'break'.  It could be that these resultative SVCs are exceptions,
created by the lexical properties of the first verb.  These verbs that seem to be
achievements (unaccusatives) are lexically specified to permit a process reading
whenever they appear in V1 position.
Alternatively, we can argue that the verbs of this limited class are
misclassified as dT verbs, and should be dP verbs.  Such a hypothesis works for dé
'fall'.  The semantics of fall is such that an object may fall for a duration without
reaching a distinguished point; landing is an implicature, not an entailment.
Consider, for instance, the following datum from English (53), showing that falling
does not involve a distinguished point (except as coerced by the past tense
morpheme):
(53)
Alice fell for five days in that damned rabbit hole, and is still falling,
for all I know.
Unfortunately, the same cannot be claimed for guòghó 'break' (54), which is
an achievement verb, and consequently must have a dT specification.  However, note
that there is a fundamental difference between the double unaccusative rSVCs
involving 'fall' and 'break':  the former type can take an actual dT verb in V2
position, wheras the latter type takes an adjectival predicate as V2.  The second type
is akin to resultatives in English, where the secondary predicate is adjectival.  It is
possible that the adjectival nature of the second predicate permits the violation of the
constraint on the internal structure of s-words.
(54)
àkhé    guòghó    khànmwán
pot      break          be-short
'The pot broke into small pieces.'

258
Yet there is an inherent flaw to classifying dé 'fall' as dP:  In 'push-fall'
resultative SVCs, that classification fo dé would render a <dP,dP>  s-word, again
not a desirable result for our theory.
Another possibility along these lines is that the proximity of the CAUSE
operator to V1 changes an unaccusative verb (dT) in that position into a transitive
verb (dP).  The appeal of this hypothesis is that it does not require us to reassign the
dT value of verbs like guòghó 'break'.  However, this explanation would not explain
why the class of double unaccusative SVCs is so limited.  Why is it that more dT
verbs do not take on the properties of a distinguished process in V1 position?  Is
there a reason why the change is not very productive, without resorting to a lexical
solution as mentioned earlier?  There does not appear to be a solution that
accommodates this hypothesis that does not involve some sort of lexical
idiosyncracy pertaining to the verb, and the limited class of such verbs remains an
issue in all the hypotheses presented here.
It is possible that this type of coercion, based on the idiosyncracies of the
verb appearing in V1, is workable.  Recall that iconicity plays a part:  two actions are
so closely related by cause and effect that a resultative SVC structure is chosen.  The
first verb, though initially a transition, is coerced to yield an activity reading.  It is
likely that verbs like dé 'fall' or guòghó 'break' are well-suited semantically for such
coercion, based on a strong causative meaning component inherent in the verbs.
Finally, let us consider the possibility that verbs like dé 'fall' or guòghó
'break' are underspecified for both dP and dT.  By so classifying these verbs, there
would be no conflict between having dé 'fall' be coerced into dP in V1 and dT in V2.
However, this solution does not work well for guòghó 'break', since a distinguished
point reading seems to be core to its meaning.
It appears, then, that the direction for further research utilizing this set of
solutions should focus on collecting more Èdó data on these unaccusative SVC

259
constructions, to better determine whether there is any basis for reclassifying the
verbs.  Such a task would bring us outside the scope of the present thesis, and thus I
leave the project for future exploration.
5.3.6.3.2    Altering the Internal Structure of the S-Word
The other type of modifications to our assumptions is to change the
definition of the s-word itself.  In general, this type of solution weakens the
hypothesis maintained by Event Mereology, that a single event of change has only
two modes of perception and grammaticalization (change of state and state of
change).
One modification of this type is to permit SVC s-words to have two dTs,
permitted because these languages possess two V heads in a single VP projection.
Such a difference may be parametrized for.  A parallelism might be drawn between
the double unaccusative problem and colour classification, discussed previously.
Recall that for some languages, the single colour term grue covers two focal colours
(green and blue).  If distinguished points are similar to focal colours, it may be the
case that SVC languages single s-words can have bifocal distinguished points (i.e.,
two dTs), just as single-word colour terms with bifocal colours exist.  Whereas
English events permit only a single change of state (dT) to be encoded by the verbs,
Èdó might treat events as naturally permitting two changes of states.
The problem with this approach is that its adoption might open up a new can
of worms:  why not allow two dPs, or more than two of any specification, in an
s-word?  The constraint on s-word structure, which limits the amount of possibilities
simply by stating that at most both kinds of perception of change (dP and dT) can
be specified in an event, becomes an arbitrary claim with this line of thought.
Another possibility is that there is a tripartite instead of a bipartite division of
s-words, where the s-word is subdivided into distinguished point (dT), distinguished
process (dP), and distinguished result (dR).  The distinguished result can be similar

260
to a dT as well.  So, in (52a), dé 'fall' is a transition and guòghó 'break' is the result
of that transition.
While this solution would provide for richer variations in the verb classes, it
would require drastic re-evaluations of the other Event Mereology hypotheses.  For
instance, this alteration would have to account for the non-appearance of s-words
with all three components simultaneously, since at most a resultative SVC has two
verbs and cannot be stacked (as demonstrated earlier).  Also, such a theory would
have to account for the impossibility of <dT,dP> s-words.
Another possibility is that the V2 in these apparent <dT,dT> resultative
SVCs is actually emphatic, much in the way of sentences like (55a,b), pointed out by
Levin (1993).
(55)
a.
The river froze.
b.
The river froze solid.
In these sentences, the verb freeze already implies a resultant state of solidity,
since the river froze solid is roughly synonymous to the sentence the river froze.
The addition of the adjective solid to (55a) does not render the sentence
ungrammatical.  Note, however, that there is a difference between (55a) and (55b).
In (55a), the river does not have to be completely frozen, whereas in (55b), there is a
sense of complete solidity.  The adjective in (55b) contributes an emphatic sense,
extending the implicature of solidity associated with freeze to an entailment of
solidity.
In the same vein, perhaps the apparent <dT,dT> construction is in fact an
s-word consisting of a single dT, and the V2 is a kind of emphatic modifying the
end result of the V1 distinguished point; it is not an independent distinguished point,
but is in actuality a clarification of the effect of the distinguished point.
Consider (52a,b) again: in these sentences, the verb dé 'fall' has an
implicature of damage.  Falling is an action that more often than not causes some
other action or result upon hitting a surface.  Verbs like guòghó 'break' and wú 'die'

261
provide entailments of damage much in the same way that freeze and solid are
related to one another.  Yet, note that the parallelism is not exact:  whereas it is more
conceivable to have solid be a semantic subcomponent of freeze (in the sense that
for something to freeze, it must become to some extent solid), it is harder to justify
break as a semantic subcomponent of fall (i.e., for something that has fallen, it is not
an entailment that it must also be broken).  The second verb contains much more
information than a secondary adjectival predicate.  The connection may be too
tenuous to be of any use.
At present, I do not find any one solution to be superior to the others,
although it seems necessary in all cases to restrict the class of unaccusative verbs
that participate in double unaccusatives by means of lexical specification.  Since
double unaccusatives remain a problem for most current analyses of SVCs and not
very well understood, more can be said about this peculiar construction once more
data on double unaccusative SVCs have been investigated.
5.4      Summary
In summary, Travis (1999) has been examined and shown to accommodate
such concepts as distinguished points and distinguished processes.  It is
hypothesized that accomplishments are s-words composed of maximally a
distinguished point and a distinguished process.  Resultative SVCs in Èdó are
shown to be s-words.  By having a distinction between s-words and macro-events,
we are able to account for the differences between resultative and consequential
SVCs.
Hopefully, the analysis above will encourage further cross-linguistic
comparisons of accomplishment constructions in non-serial verb languages with
resultatives and consequentials in serial verb languages from an EM perspective.

262
 Chapter Six
Summary and Directions for Future Research
6.0  Summary
The aim of this thesis was to present in detail arguments against location-
based accounts of the representation of change, in favour of an event-based analysis.
Two main objectives in the development of the Event Mereology system of aspect
were the unification of motional and non-motional change, and the unification of
verbal and prepositional representations of change.
In pursuit of an analysis that unified motional and non-motional change, it
was shown that a tripartite source-internal path-goal division to encode change in
verbal and prepositional lexical entries was inadequate:  it overgenerated the number
of verb classes, and required the use of metaphor to extend motion-specific ideas to
verbs of change-of-state.  I argued that an account of change based on event
primitives addressed the nature of changes more directly and more generally.
It was shown that two types of event parts, the distinguished point and the
distinguished process, were more useful and economical than locational approaches
in accounting for change and aspect.  Differences between using an ontology of
locations versus an ontology of events were discussed, and such notions as state,
process, and point of change from various analyses were examined in detail and
improved.  For example, the comprised of relation was argued to be superior to
homogeneity as a characterization of states and processes:  states do not consist of
substates, whereas processes may be comprised of subprocesses.
It was proposed that various combinations of distinguished points and
distinguished processes accounted for Vendler aspectual classes:  an achievement
consisted of a single distinguished point; an activity, a single distinguished process;
and an accomplishment, both a distinguished point and a distinguished process.

263
Some types of information were shown to be irrelevant in the calculus of
aspect, and thus not encoded lexically; for instance, while an act of arrival likely
involved a motion preceding the actual transition, that uptake process was
underspecified for the verb arrive.  Significant in the simplification of representation
was the use of the distinguished point as a boundary between two complementary
valuations of a single predicate.  It was also demonstrated how other phenomena,
such as imperatives and verbs like deviate, behave like achievements, due to some
type of transition between two complementary states.  Resultatives were shown to be
standard accomplishments, and coercion was argued to account for shifts in verbal
interpretation incurred by morphemes such as -ed and -ing.
A key argument against localism was the demonstration that internal paths
were not primitives, but derived.  Internal paths were epiphenomena of two
distinguished points interacting, and their form was dependent on pragmatic factors.
'Medial' prepositions were shown to be insufficient grounds for positing an internal
path primitive, as they could be accounted for via a distinguished point and an axial
specification.
Prepositions like in which could take either a concrete entity (in the plane) or
an abstract state (in shock) as a prepositional complement were analyzed as
incorporating metarelations, whose spatial components activated only when their
reference object was physical.
It remained necessary for the developed general theory of change to account
for locational data.  To this end, a system using distinguished points and processes
was proposed to account for a set of strictly motional data involving verbal and
prepositional composition.
Finally, the Event Mereology analysis of aspect was shown to be compatible
with a specific syntactic analysis, and may be used to account for two serial verb
constructions in Èdó.

264
6.1  Directions for Future Research
Aside from pursuing further the topics discussed herein (e.g., event
composition), there remain many different avenues for future research into Event
Mereology, including (i) other phenomena which use a dT to demarcate two states,
(e.g, the comparative -er); (ii) deixis; (iii) the connection between word complexity
and event mereological entities like dTs via an Aspectual Load Hypothesis (ALH).  I
sketch out these possible directions for investigation below.
6.1.1  The Comparative
The comparative suffix -er compares two things x and y with respect to the
predicate S.  When used with qualities, the modified adjectives behave like phrases
describing states of affairs (1a-c).  In (1d,e), there are definite changes in degrees of
the associated adjectival predicate.  The adjectival predicate can be spatial (1d), but
need not be (1e).  As long as the predicate S can have degrees, -er can modify it.
Even predicates that appear ungradable, like alone or pregnant, can be interpreted as
gradable on special readings:  John felt more alone every year; Mary became more
pregnant by the month.
(1)
a.
David stood closer than everyone else.
b.
David is wiser than Mary.
c.
David is faster at typing than Bill.
d.
David came closer.
e.
David became wiser.
f.
David became wiser than Mary.
For instance in (1b), David is more wise than Mary, evaluated at the present
moment.  In (1f), David attains the more wise state after a less wise state, where
Mary sets the standard to which David's wisdom is compared.  Should the standard
be absent, then the standard is by default the same predicate with the same subject
evaluated at an earlier time.  Thus, in (1e) David became wiser than he used to be.
These -er predicates established continua:  e.g., the degree of proximity (1d)
or wisdom (1e).  These continua are divided into two, arising from a distinguished

265
point contributed by -er:  a less S and a more S segment (2), i.e., <¬More S, More
S>.  Thus, they are achievement-like.  Further investigation into adjectives,
comparatives and superlatives may contribute to our current understanding of
distinguished points.
(2)
6.1.2 Binary Contrasts in Other Linguistic Domains
Binary partitions are common in linguistics and important in all aspects of
language, being a natural way to divide and classify sets, and are not limited to
prepositions and verbs.  There is much additional evidence that such complementary
relations play a significant role in language.  Leech (1974) states:
(3)
"...language strongly predisposes us to make binary distinctions, and so
to impose a simplistic structure on our experiences." (Leech 1974, p.39)
Horn (1989) claims that negation is a language universal, citing Spinoza and
Hegel's views that all linguistic expressions involve negation directly or indirectly.
Likewise, lexical antonyms are as common among adjectives as prepositions.
According to Jackendoff & Landau's (1993) Design of Language Hypothesis, (non-
linguistic, perceptual) spatial representations may encode highly complex
information concerning an object, but linguistic representations filter out much of
the information, leaving the information underspecified.  They suggest that a set of
complex distinctions in any system must be collapsed into a finite set of elements, in
order for the language faculty to process them, and thus a binary partition is
naturally expected.  Landau & Gleitman (1985) supported this claim, showing that
size, an analog property, is digitalized into two contrasting terms in language:
tall/short, big/small, huge/tiny.  These binary relative contrasts are characteristic of
adjectives for many languages.

266
Further evidence includes American Sign Language studies (Newport 1988,
Supalla 1990):  while expressing analog ideas with analog signing (e.g., expressing
speed by hand motions of similar velocity) is certainly plausible given the manual
mode of expression, such gradients are not used in ASL.  ASL parallels spoken
languages in having two distinct signs for such concepts, suggesting that a binary
partition of concepts is intuitive in natural language, and adopted as a convention
even in artificial languages.  Ternary structures, while rarer, have the third being a
property between the two extremes, and may be recharacterized as the result of
overlap between two binary structures, as from-to structures were analyzed.
Deictic evidence also suggests that binary partitions are common.  Romance
languages have binary systems of deixis, with the exceptions of Spanish and
Portuguese, having been analyzed as tripartite (Hottenroth 1982).  The binary deictic
systems differentiate between proximity between the observer and the reference
object (proximal) and its counterpart, non-proximity (distal) (cf. Fillmore 1971,
Schiffrin 1987).  Ici and là in French is an example of this binary deixis.63
Tripartite deictic systems are reanalyzable as bipartite deictic systems.
Deictic systems that are 'ternary', like Spanish (Hottenroth 1982), may be reanalyzed
as the overlap of a binary speaker deixis and a binary hearer deixis, creating the
apparent tripartite deictic system.  Ehrich (1982) likewise argued for a bipartite
analysis for an apparently tripartite deictic system in German, namely the difference
between the spatial deixis terms hier, da and dort (here, there1 and there2 in
English).  Ehrich showed that da is a more neutral spatial anaphor, whereas hier and
dort are always used deictically as binary opposites.
By extrapolation, it may be possible to reanalyze other tripartite deictic
systems as bipartite, with one element being a neutral anaphor, unspecified for
                                                
63The binary deictic systems in modern French and Italian have been argued to be derived from the
Latin tripartite system of deixis (hic-iste-illic).  However, the third elements appear so
infrequently as to not bear upon the modern deictic system.

267
deixis.  This hypothesis is supported by Hauenschild (1982), wherein the proximal-
distal vs. neutral distinctions are proposed for Czech and Russian as in the proposal
for German in Ehrich (1982).64  The set of deictic data provides fertile ground for
research into the types of binary structures in language.
6.1.3   The Aspectual Load Hypothesis
The aim of the Aspectual Load Hypothesis is to find an explanation for the
lack of overly complex words, as observed by Carter (1976).  Carter hypothesizes
that words are restricted in their degree of semantic complexity.  He suggests two
possible reasons for this limitation:  either more complex words exist but are not as
easily found, or the mind is not capable of processing information beyond a certain
complexity.  He rejects the first hypothesis, on the basis of words that he considers
quite complex in meaning, e.g., guffaw and prestidigital.  However, it is not clear
how a word like guffaw can be judged to be semantically more complex than, say,
the word laugh.
More convincing is Carter's observation that there appear to be no words that
encode three different states at once, e.g., a change from a state S to a state of ¬S,
and back to S, i.e., <S,¬S,S>.  At first glance, English verbs like relapse, reshut and
reborn seem to exemplify words encoding these three consecutive states.  One
might consider ambiguous examples involving re- (4a), again (4b), and another X
(4c) as clues to the nature of word complexity.  For example, (4b) is ambiguous:
Henry could have closed the door twice, or the door was closed to begin with,
opened by Jane, and Henry only closed the door once.  Similar ambiguities exist for
(4a,c).
(4)
a.
Henry relapsed today.  Was he ill earlier today?
b.
Henry closed the door again.  Did he close the door twice?
c.
Henry baked another cake.  Did he bake the first cake?
                                                
64It has been pointed out (personal communication) that the deictic systems in languages such as
Mohawk (Mark Baker) and Malagasy (Lisa Travis, Ileana Paul and Matt Pearson) have far more
complex deictic systems than the tripartite ones.  These merit further investigation as well.

268
Evidence from data on almost (Carter 1976) and temporal adverbs like today
suggests that verbs like relapse cannot encode two transitions in their lexical entries,
since complete specification of all three states in a single word prevents the observed
ambiguity from arising.  (4a) should only have a single meaning, since today would
modify all three states in <S,¬S,S>, preventing the reading where the initial state of
sickness occurred outside the temporal domain of today.
The data suggests that at most, one transition is encoded in a possible word.
I hypothesize that the amount of aspectual information that needs to be encoded is
minimal, and a strict limit to aspectual information applies to each morpheme, which
rely on underspecification to simplify informational load.  Let us call this limit on
aspect/word complexity the Aspectual Load Hypothesis (ALH).
An initial formulation of ALH states that languages at most grammaticalize
only a single distinguished process or distinguished point for each morpheme.  A
single verb, then, can either be specified for a distinguished process or distinguished
point of that event, but never a combination of both:  it must be dP, dT, or neither.
This hypothesis on the minimal specification of change forces verbs that describe
change to be as simple as possible morphologically.  A consequence of the ALH
constraint means that more complex aspectual meanings must be built
compositionally:  more detailed actions must rely on event composition (i.e.,
additional inflectional morphology, prepositional phrases, direct objects and
adverbs) to be expressed, since a lone verbal morpheme cannot express more than a
transition or process.  How the ALH interacts with the idea of s-word complexity,
which impose an upper limit to the components that make up an event, is another
issue to be addressed.
Finally, more work remains to be done in terms of event compositionality,
and further investigation into its exact nature will improve upon the present
formulation of Event Mereology.

269
Bibliography
Asher, N., and P. Sablayrolles. 1994.  A typology and discourse semantics for
motion verbs and spatial PPs in French.  Journal of Semantics, 12, 163-209.
Atkins, B. T. and B. Levin. 1992.  Admitting impediments.  In U. Zernik (ed),
Lexical Acquisition:  Using On-line Resources to Build a Lexicon.  New
Jersey:  Lawrence Erlbaum.
Bach, E. 1986.  The algebra of events.  Linguistics and Philosophy, 91, 5-17.
Baker, M. 1988.  Incorporation:  A Theory of Grammatical Function Changing.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Baker, M. 1989.  Object sharing and projection in serial verb constructions.
Linguistic Inquiry, 20, 513-553.
Baker, M., and O.T. Stewart. 1997.  Unaccusativity and the adjective/verb
distinction:  Èdó evidence. NELS 27 Proceedings, 33-47.
Bátori, I. 1982.  Verb deixis in Hungarian.  In J. Weissenborn and W. Klein (eds),
Here and There:  Cross-linguistic Studies on Deixis and Demonstration.
Amsterdam:  John Benjamins.
Bennett, D. C. 1970.  Some observations concerning the locative-directional
distinction.  Mimeo.
Bennett, M. 1975.  Some extensions of a Montague fragment of English.  In
Indiana University Linguistics Club, 1981. (ed) Tense and Aspect:  One
Analysis.  New York:  Academic Press.
Berlin, B., and P. Kay. 1969.  Basic Color Terms:  Their Universality and
Evolution.  Berkeley:  University of California Press.
Bierwisch, M. 1988.  On the grammar of local prepositions.  In M. Bierwisch, W.
Motsch, and I. Zimmermann (eds), Syntax, Semantik and Lexicon:  Rudoff
Ruzicka zum 65. Geburtstag.  Berlin:  Akademie-Verlag.
Bloomfield, L. 1933.  Language.  London:  George, Allen and Unwin.
Boons, J. P. 1985.  Préliminaires à la classification des verbes locatifs:  les
compléments de lieu, leurs critières, leurs valeurs aspectuelles. Linguisticae
Investigationes, 9/2, 195-267.
Borer, H. 1994a.  The projection of arguments.  In E. Benedicto and J. Runner
(eds), Functional projections.  UMass Occasional Papers in Linguistics, 17,
19-47.
Borer, H. 1994b.  Passive without theta grids.  To appear in S. Lapointe (ed), The
Morphological Interface, CSLI.
Brinton, L. 1988.  The Development of English Aspectual Systems.  Cambridge,
UK:  Cambridge University Press.
Broad, C. D. 1933.  An Exampination of McTaggart's Philosophy, vol. 1.
Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.  Repreinted New york:  Octagon,
1976.
Brown, R., and E. H. Lennenberg. 1954.  A study in language and cognition.
Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 49, 452-62.
Brunson, B. 1992.  Thematic Discontinuity.  Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, University
of Toronto.
Bybee, J. L., R. Perkins, and W. Pagliuca. 1994.  The Evolution of Grammar:
Tense, Aspect and Modality in the Languages of the World.  Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
Bybee, J. L., and Ö. Dahl. 1989.  The creation of tense and aspect systems in the
languages of the world.  Studies in Language, 13, 51-103.
Carlson, G. 1997. Events and thematic role assignments to affected objects.  "Events
as Grammatical Objects", LSA Summer Institute Workshop, Cornell
University, June 26-29, 1997.

270
Carter, R. J. 1976.  Some constraints on possible words.  Semantikos, vol. 1, no. 2,
27-66.
Cienki, A. J. 1989.  Spatial Cognition and the Semantics of Prepositions in English,
Polish and Russian.  München:  Verlag Otto Sagner.
Clarke, B. L. 1981.  A calculus of individuals based on 'Connection'.  Notre Dame
Journal of Formal Logic, 22/3, 204-18.
Clarke, B. L. 1985.  Individuals and points.  Notre Dame Journal of Formal Logic.
26/1, 61-75.
Collins, C. 1997.  Argument sharing in serial verb constructions. Linguistic Inquiry,
28, 461-497.
Comrie, B. 1976.  Aspect.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
Copestake, A. and T. Briscoe. 1995.  Semi-productive polysemy and sense
extension.  Journal of Semantics, 12, 15-67.
Craig, C., and K. Hale. 1988.  Verb sequencing constructions in Maccro-Chibchan.
Paper presented at 2nd Niger-Congo Syntax and Semantics Workshop,
MIT, April 1988.
Cresswell, M. 1973.  Logics and Languages.  London:  Methuen.
Cresswell, M. 1977.  Interval semantics and logical words.  In Rohrer (ed), On the
Logical Analysis of Tense and Aspect.  Tübingen:  TBL Verlag.  Reprinted
in M. Cresswell 1985.
Cresswell, M. 1985.  Adverbial Modification.  Dordrecht:  Kluwer.
Cruse, D. A. 1986.  Lexical Semantics.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
Cruse, D. A. 1995.  Polysemy and related phenomena from a cognitive linguistic
viewpoint.  In P. Saint-Dizier and E. Viegas (eds) Computational Lexical
Semantics.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
Dahl, Ö. 1981.  On the definition of the telic-atelic (bounded-nonbounded)
distinction.  In P. H. Tedeschi and A. Zaenen (eds), Tense and Aspect.  New
York:  Academic Press.
Daswani, C. J. 1977  Adverbials of Time and Location in English.  Bombay:  Orient
Longman.
Davidson, D. 1967.  The logical form of action sentences.  In N. Rescher (ed), The
Logic of Decision and Action.  Pittsburgh:  University of Pittsburgh Press.
Déchaine, R-M. 1993.  Predicates Across Categories:  Towards a Category-Neutral
Syntax.  Ph.D. thesis, U. of Massachussetts, Amherst.
Depraetere, I. 1995.  On the necessity of distinguishing between (un)boundedness
and (a)telicity.  Linguistics and Philosophy, 8, 1-19.
Dervillez-Bastuji, J. 1982.  Structure des relations spatiales dans quelques langues
naturelles:  introduction à une théorie sémantique.  Geneva-Paris:  Librarie
Droz.
Dowty, D. 1979.  Word Meaning and Montague Grammar.  Dordrecht:  Kluwer.
Ehrich, V. 1982.  Da and spatial deixis in German.  In J. Weissenborn and W.
Klein (eds) Here and There:  Cross-linguistic Studies on Deixis and
Demonstration.  Amsterdam:  John Benjamins.
Emonds, J. 1976.  A Transformational Approach to English Syntax.  New York:
Academic Press.
Fodor, J. A. 1970.  Three reasons for not deriving 'kill' from 'cause to die'.
Linguistic Inquiry, 1, 4.429-438.
Fries, N. 1991.  Prepositions and prepositional phrases:  a contrastive analysis.  In
G. Rauh (ed) Approaches to Prepositions.  Tübigen:  Narr.
Froskett, C. 1991.  Together - a preposition? In G. Rauh (ed) Approaches to
Prepositions.  Tübigen:  Narr.
Fukui, N., and M. Speas. 1986.  Specifiers and projections.  MIT Working Papers
in Linguistics, 8, 128-172.
Galton, A. 1984.  The Logic of Aspect.  Oxford:  Oxford University Press.

271
Gillon, B. 1990.  Ambiguity, generality, and indeterminacy:  tests and definitions.
Synthese, 85, 391-416.
Gleason, H. A.  An Introduction to Descriptive Linguistics.  New York:  Holt,
Rinehart & Winston.
Grice, P. 1967.  Logic and Conversation.  William James Lectures, Harvard
University, Cambridge, MA.
Gruber, J. 1976.  Lexical Structure in Syntax and Semantics.  Amsterdam:  North
Holland.
Gruber, J. 1992.  Thematic configurational constraints in serial verb constructions.
presented at ACAL, Michigan.
Guillet, A. 1990.  The Classification Des Verbs Transitifs Locatifs.  Ph.D. thesis,
Université Paris 7, LADL, 1990.
Hale, K., and J. Keyser. 1993. On argument structure and the lexical expression of
syntactic relations.  In K. Hale and J. Keyser (eds), The View from Building
20.  Cambridge:  MIT Press.
Hale, K., and J. Keyser. 1993.  (eds), The View from Building 20: Essays in
Linguistics in Honour of Sylvain Bromberger.  Cambridge:  MIT Press.
Hauenschild, C. 1982.  Demonstrative pronouns in Russian and Czech.  In J.
Weissenborn and W. Klein (eds) Here and There:  Cross-linguistic Studies
on Deixis and Demonstration.  Amsterdam:  John Benjamins.
Hawkins, B. W.  1993.  On universality and variability in the semantics of spatial
adpositions.  In C. Zelinsky-Wibbelt (ed)  The Semantics of Prepositions:
From Mental Processing to Natural Language Processing.  New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Hays, E. M. 1989.  On defining motion verbs and spatial prepositions, Bericht B61,
SFB 314:  VITRA, Fachbereich 10-Informatik IV, Saarbrücken, Germany,
October 1989.
Heider, E. R.  'Focal' color areas and the development of color names.
Developmental Psychology, 4, 447-55.
Herskovits, A. 1982.  Space and the Preposition in English:  Regularities and
Irregularities in a Complex Domain.  Ph.D. thesis, Stanford University.
Herskovits, A.  1986.  Language and Spatial Cognition:  An Interdisciplinary Study
of the Prepositions of English.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
Higginbotham, J. 1985.  On semantics. Linguistic Inquiry, 16, 4, 547-593.
Hoeksema, J. 1984. Categorial Morphology.  Ph.D. thesis, University of
Groningen.
Horn, L. R. 1989.  A Natural History of Negation.  Chicago:  Chicago University
Press.
Hottenroth, P-M. 1982.  The system of local deixis in Spanish.  In J. Weissenborn
and W. Klein (eds) Here and There:  Cross-linguistic Studies on Deixis
and Demonstration.  Amsterdam:  John Benjamins.
Humberstone, L. 1979.  Interval semantics for tense logic.  Journal of Philosophical
Logic, 8.
Jackendoff, R. 1977.  X-bar Syntax:  A Study of Phrase Structure.  Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Jackendoff, R. 1991. Parts and boundaries. Cognition, 41, 9-45.
Jackendoff, R., and Landau, B. 1992.  'What' and 'Where' in spatial language and
spatial cognition.  In BBS Report 1993, 16(2).  Cambridge:  Cambridge
University Press.
Johnson, K. 1991.  Object positions.  Natural Language and Linguistic Theory, 9,
577-636.
Jolly, J. 1991.  Prepositional Analysis Within the Framework of Role and Reference
Grammar.  New York:  Peter Lang.

272
Kac, M. B. 1972a.  Action and result:  two aspects of predication in English.  Syntax
and Semantics, 1, 117-124.
Kac, M. B. 1972b.  Reply to McCawley.  Syntax and Semantics, 1, 151-156.
Kamp, H., and U. Reyle. 1993.  From Discourse to Logic.  Dordrecht:  Kluwer.
Kamp, H. 1979a.  Events, instants and temporal reference.  In R. Bauerle, U. Egli
and A. von Stechow (eds), Semantics from Different Points of View.  Berlin:
Springer Verlag.
Kamp, H. 1979b.  Some remarks on the logic of change.  Part I.  In Rohrer (ed),
Time, Tense and Quantifiers.  Tübingen:  Niemeyer.
Katz, J. J. 1972.  Semantic Theory.  New York:  Harper and Row.
Katz, J. J. 1977.  Propositional Structure and Illocutionary Force:  A Study of the
Contribution of Sentence Meaning to Speech Acts.  The Language and
Thought Series.  New York:  Thomas Crowell.
Kay, P., and C. K. McDaniel. 1978.  The linguistic significance of the meanings of
basic colour terms.  Language, 54, 610-46.
Kearns, K. S. 1991.  The Semantics of the English Progressive.  Ph.D. thesis, MIT.
Kenny, A. 1963.  Action, Emotion, and Will.  London/New York:  Routledge and
Kegan Paul.
König, E., and B. Kortmann. 1991.  On the reanalysis of verbs as prepositions.  In
Rauh, Gisa (ed), Approaches to Prepositions.  Tübigen:  Narr.
Krifka, M. 1987.  Nominal reference and temporal constitution:  Towards a
semantics of quantity.  In J. Groenendjik, M. Stokhof, and F. Veltman (eds),
Proceedings of the 6th Amsterdam Colloquium, 153-173.  ITaLI, University
of Amsterdam.
Krifka, M. 1997.  On the semantic representation of movement verbs and verbs
expressing change.  "Events as Grammatical Objects", LSA Summer
Institute Workshop, Cornell University, June 26-29, 1997.
Lakoff, G. 1970.  Irregularity in Syntax.  New York:  Holt, Reinhart and Winston.
Lamiroy, B.  1986.  'Les verbs de mouvement, emplois figurés et extensions
métaphoriques', Langue française, 76, 41-58.
Landau, B., and L. R. Gleitman. 1985.  Language and Experience:  Evidence from
The Blind Child.  Harvard University Press.
Landman, F. 1991.  Structures for Semantics.  Dordrecht:  Kluwer.
Larson, R. 1988.  On the double object construction.  Linguistic Inquiry, 19, 335-
391.
Laur, D. 1991.  Semantique du Déplacement et de la Localisation en Français:  une
Étude des Verbes, des Prépositions et de leurs Relations dans la Phrase
Simple.  Ph.D. thesis, Université Toulouse le Mirail, Toulouse, France, June
1991.
Leech, G. N. 1974.  Semantics.  Middlesex:  Penguin.
Levin, B., and M. Rappaport. 1988.  On the nature of unaccusativity.  Proceedings
of NELS 1998.
Levin, B. 1993.  English Verb Classes and Alternations:  A Preliminary
Investigation.  Chicago:  University of Chicago Press.
Lyons, J. 1968.  Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics.  Cambridge:  Cambridge
University Press.
Lyons, J. 1977.  Semantics.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
Maienborn, C. 1992.  Kompakte strukturen:  direktionale PPn und nicht-lokale
verben.  In P. Bosch and P. Gerstl (eds), Sprachtheoretische Grundlagen
für die Computerlinguistik, DFG Sonderforschungsbereich 340, Stuttgart,
Bericht Nr. 30, December 1992.
Mahajan, A. 1990.  The A/A-bar Distinction and Movement Theory.  Unpublished
PhD thesis, MIT.
Marconi, D. 1997.  Lexical Competence.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

273
McCawley, J. D. 1968.  Lexical insertion in a transformational grammar without
deep structure.  Fourth Regional Meeting of the Chicago Linguistics Society,
4, 71-80.  University of Chicago.
McCawley, J. D. 1972.  Kac and Sibatani on the grammar of killing.  Syntax and
Semantics, 1, 139-149.
McClure, W. 1994.  Syntactic Projections of the Semantics of Aspect. Unpublished
Ph.D. thesis, Cornell University.
Millward, C. 1983.  Handbook for Writers, 2nd ed.  New York:  CBS College.
Montague, R. 1970a.  English as a Formal Language.  In Visentini et al. (eds),
Linguaggi nella Società e nella Tecnica, 189-224.  Reprinted in Thomason
(ed), Formal Philosophy:  Selected Papers of Richard Montague, New
Haven:  Yale University Press.
Montague, R. 1970b.  Universal Grammar.  Theoria, 36, 373-98.  Reprinted in
Thomason (ed), Formal Philosophy:  Selected Papers of Richard Montague,
New Haven:  Yale University Press.
Morgan, J. L. 1970.  On arguing about semantics.  Papers in Linguistics, 1, 1.49-
70.
Mourelatos, A. P. D. 1981.  Events, processes and states.  In P. H. Tedeschi and A.
Zaenen (eds), Tense and Aspect.  New York:  Academic Press.
Newport, E. 1988.  Constraints on language learning and their role in language
acquisition:  studies of the acquisition of American Sign Language.
Language Sciences, 10(1):  147-61.
Noonan, M. 1992.  Case and Syntactic Geometry.  Unpublished PhD dissertation,
McGill University.
Oesterle, J. 1962.  (ed. and trans.) Aristotle:  On Interpretation.  Commentary by
Saint Thomas and Cajeton.  Milwaukee:  Marquette University Press.
Parsons, T. 1990.  Events in the Semantics of English.  Cambridge:  MIT Press.
Pelletier, F. J., and L. K. Schubert.  1989.  Mass expressions.  In D. Gabbay and F.
Guenthner (eds), Handbook of Philosophical Logic, Vol. IV:  Topics in the
Philosophy of Language.  Dordrecht:  Reidel, 327-407.
Pi, C. T. 1993.  The Delineation of Paths.  Unpublished M.A. thesis, University of
Toronto.
Pi, C. T., and O. T. Stewart. 1998.  Micro-events in two serial verb constructions.  In
1998 SALT Proceedings.
Pi, C. T. 1996.  Semantics and a biphasic analysis of change in events.
Unpublished ms, McGill University.
Pi, C. T. 1998.  Localistic change vs. change as event parts, presented at the
Canadian Linguistics Association, June 1998.
Pi, C. T., R. Slabakova, and M. Uesaka. 1997.  Evidence for telicity and
boundedness in syntax.  Presented at the Linguistic Association of Great
Britain, April 1997.
Prior, A. 1967.  Past, Present, Future.  Oxford:  Oxford University Press.
Pustejovsky, J. 1988.  Event semantic structure.  Unpublished ms, Brandeis.
Pustejovsky, J. 1991.  The syntax of event structure. Cognition, 41, 47-81.
Pustejovsky, J. 1995.  The Generative Lexicon.  Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press.
Quirk, R., and J. Svartvik.  1973.  A Concise Grammar of Contemporary English.
New York:  Harcourt Brace Jovanovich.
Quirk, R., S. Greenbaum, G. Leech, and J. Svartvik. 1985.  A Comprehensive
Grammar of the English Language.  New York:  Longman.
Rauh, G. 1991a.  (ed) Approaches to Prepositions.  Tübigen:  Narr.
Rauh, G. 1991b.  Prepositional forms in the lexicon:  problems and suggestions.  In
G. Rauh (ed), Approaches to Prepositions.  Tübigen:  Narr.
Rescher, N. 1966.  The Logic of Commands.  New York:  Dover Publications Inc.

274
Roberts, L. 1984.  Ambiguity vs. generality:  removal of a logical confusion.
Canadian Journal of Philosophy, 14, 295-313.
Ryle, G. 1949.  The Concept of Mind.  London.
Scheffler, I.  1979.  Beyond the Letter:  A Philosophical Inquiry into Ambiguity,
Vagueness, and Metaphor in Language.  Boston:  Routledge & Kegan
Paul.
Schiffrin, D. 1987.  Discourse Markers.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University Press.
Simons, P. 1987.  Parts:  A Study in Ontology.  Oxford:  Clarendon Press.
Slabakova, R.  1998.  Zero Acquisition:  Second Language Acquisition of the
Parameter of Aspect.  Unpublished Ph.D. thesis, McGill University.
Smith, C. S. 1991.  The Parameter of Aspect.  Dordrecht:  Kluwer.
Sportiche, D. 1990.  Movement, agreement, and case.  Unpublished ms, UCLA.
Stewart, O. T. 1998.  The Serial Verb Construction Parameter.  Unpublished Ph.D.
thesis, McGill University.
Supalla, T.  1990.  Structure and acquisition of verbs in motion and location in
A.S.L.  Cambridge:  Bradford Books/MIT Press.
Tedeschi, P. H., and A. Zaenen. 1981.  (eds) Tense and Aspect, Syntax and
Semantics, vol. xiv.  New York:  Academic Press.
Talmy, L. 1975.  Semantics and syntax of motion.  Syntax and Semantics, 4, 1-36.
Talmy, L. 1983.  How language structures space.  In Pick, H., and Acredolo, L.
(eds), Spatial Orientation:  Theory, Research, and Application.  Plenum
Press.
Talmy, L. 1991.  Path to realization:  a typology of event conflation.  In Proceedings
of the Berkeley Linguistics Society, vol. 17.
Taylor, J. R.  Linguistic Categorization.  London:  Clarendon Press.
Tenny, C. 1987.  Grammaticalizing Aspect and Affectedness.  Ph.D. thesis, MIT.
Tenny, C. 1994.  Aspectual Roles and the Syntax-Semantics Interface.  Dordrecht:
Kluwer.
Tenny, C. 1996.  Review of A Theory of Aspectuality by H. Verkuyl, 1993.
Language, 72(1), 121-126.
ter Meulen, A. G. B. 1997.  Representing Time in Natural Language.  Cambridge:
MIT Press.
Travis, L. 1991.  Derived objects, inner aspect and the structure of VP.  Talk given at
NELS, University of Delaware.
Travis, L. 1994.  Event phrase and a theory of functional categories. 1994 CLA
Proceedings, 559-570.
Travis, L. 1997.  The syntax of achievements.  Proceedings of AFLA III.
Travis, L. 1999.  Event structure in syntax.  In Tenny, C & Pustejovsky, J. (eds),
Events as Grammatical Objects.  (in press)
Uesaka, M.  1996.  The te-i-ru construction in Japanese:  interaction between aspect
and syntax.  Unpublished MA thesis, McGill University.
van Benthem, J. 1983. The Logic of Time.  Dordrecht:  Kluwer.
Vendler, Z. 1957.  Verbs and Times.  The Philosophical Review, 66, 143-160.
Vendler, Z. 1967.  Linguistics in Philosophy.  Ithaca:  Cornell University Press.
Verkuyl, H. J. 1972.  On the Compositional Nature of the Aspects.  Dordrecht:
Reidel.
Verkuyl, H. J. 1989.  Aspectual classes and aspectual composition.  Linguistics and
Philosophy, 12, 39-94.
Verkuyl, H.J. 1993.  A Theory of Aspectuality.  Cambridge:  Cambridge University
Press.
Vestergaard, T. 1977.  Prepositional Phrases and Prepositional Verbs.  New York:
Mouton.

275
Vieu, L. 1991.  Sémantique des relations spatiales et inferences spatio-temporelles:
une contribution à l'étude des structures de l'espace en Langage Naturel.
Ph.D. thesis, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse, France.
Vlach, F.  1981.  The semantics of the progressive.  In P. H. Tedeschi and A.
Zaenen (eds), Tense and Aspect.  New York:  Academic Press.
Von Wright, G. H. 1965.  And next,  Acta Philosophica Fennica XVIII, 293-304.
Von Wright, G. H. 1966.  And then, Commentationes Physico-Mathematicae of the
Finnish Society of Sciences, vol. xxxii, no. 7.
Weissenborn, J., and W. Klein. 1982. (eds) Here and There:  Cross-linguistic
Studies on Deixis and Demonstration.  Amsterdam:  John Benjamins.
Wood, F. T.  1967.  English Prepositional Idioms.  London:  McMillan.
Wunderlich, D.  1991.  How do prepositional phrases fit into compositional syntax
and semantics?  Linguistics, 29, 591-621.
Zwicky, A. M., and J. M. Sadock.  1975.  Ambiguity tests and how to fail them.
Syntax and Semantics, 4, 1-36.

