
    i
EVERYTHING IN EVERYTHING
 

ii

    iii
1
EVERYTHING 
IN EVERYTHING
Anaxagoras’s Metaphysics
Anna Marmodoro
 

1
iv
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford. It furthers
the University’s objective of excellence in research, scholarship, and education
by publishing worldwide. Oxford is a registered trade mark of Oxford University
Press in the UK and certain other countries.
Published in the United States of America by Oxford University Press
198 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10016, United States of America.
© Oxford University Press 2017
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in
a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, without the
prior permission in writing of Oxford University Press, or as expressly permitted
by law, by license, or under terms agreed with the appropriate reproduction
rights organization. Inquiries concerning reproduction outside the scope of the
above should be sent to the Rights Department, Oxford University Press, at the
address above.
You must not circulate this work in any other form
and you must impose this same condition on any acquirer.
CIP data is on file at the Library of Congress
ISBN 978–​0–​19–​061197–​2
1  3  5  7  9  8  6  4  2
Printed by Sheridan Books, Inc., United States of America
 

    v
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments 	
ix
Introduction 	
1
	1.	The Fundamental Items in the Ontology 	
11
	
1.1.	 Opposites, Stuffs, and Seeds 	
12
	
1.2.	 Does Matter “Matter” to Anaxagoras? 	
17
	
1.3.	 The Concreteness of Power 	
20
	
1.4.	 Parmenidean Constraints on Change 	
24
	
1.5.	 The Causal Efficacy of the Opposites 	
31
	
1.6.	 An Early Power Ontology? 	
38
	
1.7.	 Closing Remarks 	
42
	
1.A.	Appendix: Anaxagorean versus 
Aristotelian Powers 	
43
	2.	The Principles Governing the Ontology 	
46
	
2.1.	 The Principle of Universal Extraction 	
48
	
2.2.	 The Everything-​in-​Everything Principle 	
51
	
2.3.	 The No-​Least and No-​Largest Principles 	
54
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Con t e n t s
vi
vi
	
2.4.	 The Preponderance Principle: The Mechanism 
of Preponderance 	
60
	
2.5.	 The Outcome of Preponderance 	
66
	
2.6.	 Closing Remarks 	
73
	3.	A Theory of Extreme Mixture 	
74
	
3.1.	 The Inseparability of All Opposites 	
76
	
3.2.	 Power Gunk 	
84
	
3.3.	 Divided Gunk 	
88
	
3.4.	 Gunk’s Location in Space 	
90
	
3.5.	 The Grind Model 	
92
	
3.6.	 Can There Be Preponderance in a Gunky World? 	 96
	
3.7.	 Closing Remarks 	
100
	
3.A.	Appendix: An Overview of Anaxagoras’s 
Main Metaphysical Principles 	
103
	4.	Compresence versus Containment of the Opposites 	
105
	
4.1.	 The Proportionate Interpretation 	
107
	
4.2.	 The Particulate Interpretation 	
109
	
4.3.	 The Liquids Model 	
113
	
4.4.	 The No-​Divisibility Interpretation 	
121
	
4.5.	 Closing Remarks 	
125
	
4.A.	Appendix: Zeno’s Argument from Multitude 	
127
	5.	Intelligent Powers 	
129
	
5.1.	 The Unmixed Status of Nous 	
131
	
5.2.	 The Structure and Operation of Nous 	
136
	
5.3.	 Nous’s Cosmic Powers 	
140
	
5.4.	 Nous’s Cognitive Powers 	
145
	
5.5.	 The Seeds and the Origins of Life 	
147
	
5.6.	 Closing Remarks 	
153
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Con t e n t s
vii
    vii
	6.	Stoic Gunk 	
156
	
6.1.	Unlimited Division 	
158
	
6.2.	Colocation 	
162
	
6.3.	The Constitution of Material Bodies: 
What Is Active and What Is Passive 	
167
	
6.4.	Sharing Subjects 	
174
	
6.5.	Causation 	
177
	
6.6.	Types of Ontological Unity 	
183
	
6.7.	Closing Remarks 	
185
Conclusions 	
186
Bibliography 	
191
General Index 	
199
Index Locorum 	
213
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

viii

    ix
ix
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This book project began in the summer of 2012, as part of my research 
program Power Structuralism in Ancient Ontologies, funded by the 
European Research Council (award number 63484). Throughout the 
years the project was ongoing, the two Oxford institutions to which 
I am affiliated, the Faculty of Philosophy and Corpus Christi College, 
provided me with an ideal research environment. I benefited from 
the opportunity to discuss my work in progress on multiple occasions 
here, and at a number of other universities in the United Kingdom, 
Europe, and the United States. I would like to thank collectively all 
the colleagues and students who engaged with my project and thus 
contributed to making this a better book. I am also very grateful to 
Patricia Curd and Stephen Makin, who served as readers for Oxford 
University Press and gave me insightful and helpful feedback on the 
typescript; and to Peter Ohlin, the Editor, for his support through­
out. This book is dedicated to my friends, near and far, with thanks 
for their cheer and care.
 

x

    1
1
Introduction
How did the world come about? What is it made of? Are there ultimate 
building blocks to it? If so, what’s their nature? How do they compose 
to make up the material objects we causally interact with? Are the 
observable changes at the medium-​size level of material objects an 
illusion of our senses, or are they real? If change is real, what is it 
that remains the same and what doesn’t, when things change? This 
book investigates the answers that Anaxagoras of Clazomenae (fifth 
century BCE) gave to these and similar questions, at the very begin­
ning of the philosophical investigation of nature in Western thought. 
Anaxagoras’s views are profoundly original. Despite the scarcity of the 
extant texts, the range of philosophical topics on which he advanced 
distinctive positions is such that this book can only focus on a few. 
These will be the ones where Anaxagoras is most groundbreaking with 
respect to the development of metaphysics, as we identify the subject 
nowadays. Central to Anaxagoras’s thought is the tenet that there 
is a share of everything in everything—​a tenet whose philosophical 
significance has been much discussed in the scholarly literature, and 
which has received some attention from modern metaphysicians.1 
Building on the existing literature, this book focuses on that tenet, 
1. With reference to the scholarly interest that Anaxagoras’s thought has attracted, 
Richard McKirahan, for instance, writes: “The present century has seen a greater num­
ber of radically different interpretations of Anaxagoras than any Presocratic with the 
possible exception of Empedocles—​a remarkable fact given the small number of frag­
ments on which interpretations can be based” (1994: 231). Among the modern meta­
physicians who have taken an interest in Anaxagoras are, for instance, Theodore Sider 
(1993), Ned Markosian (2004), and Hud Hudson (2007).
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
2
2
and aims to advance our understanding of Anaxagoras’s worldview 
so briefly expressed.
Anaxagoras’s claim that there is a share of everything in everything 
encapsulates what I call a theory of extreme mixture. Extreme mixture 
is put forward as a metaphysical solution to the problem of change 
that Anaxagoras and his contemporaries inherited from Parmenides. 
Parmenides’s veto of the passage from nonbeing to being and vice 
versa motivated his successors to investigate under which conditions 
a collection of basic elements, what-​is, can make up a new entity, 
without the elements themselves undergoing any change other than 
spatial rearrangement. The answer to Parmenides’s challenge lies in a 
theory of mereological composition, whereby what-​is, the parts, remain 
always the same, and yet there can be many different resulting wholes, 
because of the ways the parts recombine.2 One of Anaxagoras’s dis­
tinctive stances is to assume that recombination is unrestricted; that 
is, anything can be added to or extracted from any existing whole. 
This is what the principle that everything has everything in it allows 
for. This move enables Anaxagoras to give the most general response 
that could be given to Parmenides: change is possible and yet there 
is no generation of what-​is from what-​is-​not, because all there is has 
already all types of being in it. This is, I submit, the line of thought by 
which Anaxagoras arrived to theory of extreme mixture.
The metaphysical details of Anaxagoras’s view however are still to 
be explained. What is mixed in his system? How is it mixture? What’s 
the world like if it, and its furniture, are the result of extreme mix­
ing? How can there be different kinds of things, if everything shares 
the same types of ingredients? Anaxagoras’s own words are tanta­
lizingly few on these issues, and commentators have been divided 
since antiquity on how to interpret them. Multiple alternative 
2. Mereological wholes are nothing over and above the sum of their parts, where 
the parts retain their distinctness and individuality. By contrast, nonmereological 
wholes are something more than the sum of their parts. Contrast a bundle of sticks 
with a cake and its ingredients: the former is an example of a mereological whole, the 
latter of a nonmereological whole. I discuss this distinction with special reference to 
Aristotle and neo-​Aristotelian metaphysics in Marmodoro (2013).

I n t rodu c t ion
3
    3
interpretations are possible, and no one of the existing interpreta­
tions in the literature is free of difficulties, of either textual or philo­
sophical nature.3 Is Anaxagoras’s dictum that there is everything in 
everything an interpretative puzzle that we cannot solve? I submit 
that we can solve it, and that if we do, we pay justice to the thought of 
a very original ancient thinker, and also gain a viewpoint that is yet 
to be explored in contemporary metaphysics. I here sketch the thrust 
of the interpretation that the book motivates—​in the forthcoming 
chapters I argue for it and discuss alternative views in the literature.
Parmenides’s principles, which frame the development of 
Anaxagoras’s views, set no restrictions on what it is that what-​is 
has to be. The conceptual space remained open to exploration, and a 
number of possibilities could be pursued. Empedocles, for instance, 
developed a mass ontology of four eternal stuffs, the so-​called roots, 
namely fire, air, earth, and water. The forces of Love and Strife 
cause combination and separation of the four masses, thereby gen­
erating the world of our experience. Leucippus and Democritus on 
the other hand developed an ontology of eternal indivisible atoms 
moving in the void, bouncing off each other, or becoming entangled 
with each other. Anaxagoras’s ontology too has a bedrock of funda­
mental elements which are eternal and metaphysically irreducible. 
Anaxagoras’s own examples include the hot, the cold, the wet, the 
dry, the small, the large, etc. These are instances of opposite physical 
properties. But even if they are properties, they are not borne by a 
material substratum. They have a spatiotemporal location, and are 
observable and measurable. Using a modern philosophical term, we 
would say that they are tropes.4 In Anaxagoras’s ontology the oppo­
sites are substance-​like, in the sense that they can move spatially, and 
also be causal agents. Both points require elucidation; I begin with 
the former. Anaxagoras thinks of the opposites as entities5 that can 
3.  The existing alternative interpretations will be presented and discussed in 
­chapter 4.
4. Anaxagoras’s opposites are not universals, as Plato’s or Aristotle’s forms are.
5. They are tropes; I use the term “entities” loosely here.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
4
4
be set in motion by a cosmic vortex initiated by nous, moving from a 
state of total mixture to a state of increasing separation.6 Regarding 
their causal agency, Anaxagoras thinks that the opposites make 
up material things (I call this their constitutional-​causal role), and 
qualify them in certain ways (I call this their qualitative-​causal role). 
With respect to their constitutional-​causal role, the opposites make 
up material things by clustering (in different quantities) at a cer­
tain location;7 accordingly, we would say that for Anaxagoras objects 
are bundles of tropes.8 With respect to their qualitative-​causal role, 
Anaxagoras’s opposites make a causal difference to the physical world 
through the same mechanism, that is, by their presence; they aggre­
gate or disperse at certain locations, thereby bringing about “change” 
there. In these ways, they give rise to different degrees of intensity 
of the quality they stand for (e.g., hot) in particular regions of space-​
time.9 In ­chapters 1 and 2 I explicate Anaxagoras’s account of what 
the opposites are and how they operate.
Given that the opposites are not metaphysically reducible to 
anything else from which they could derive their causal efficacy, and 
as there is no other source of causal efficacy external to them that 
6. No full account of what makes it possible for the tropes to be moved spatially 
has survived, if Anaxagoras gave one. The action of the vortex is described, for exam­
ple, in B13 (see also B15); the vortex and the workings of the nous will be discussed 
in ­chapter 5.
7. This stance is expressed, for instance, in B15, which will be investigated in 
­chapter 2, section 2.4.
8. A view of material objects like Anaxagoras’s is to be contrasted with the alter­
native one, held for instance by Aristotle, according to which substances are made 
up by a substratum that instantiates universal properties. The reader may want to 
refer to Part IV of Laurence and MacDonald (1998) for a helpful and accessible pre­
sentation in modern terms of the two alternative accounts of substance, the substra­
tum-​ and the bundle-​based ones. Of particular relevance to the present discussion is 
Peter Simons’s chapter, “Particulars in Particular Clothing: Three Trope Theories of 
Substance.”
9. Somehow anticipating discussion in power ontology that got started only very 
recently, Anaxagoras introduces a metaphysics of degrees of intensity of powers. This 
distinctive feature of Anaxagorean powers is presented in ­chapter 2. The idea that 
causal powers may have differ in degrees of intensity is discussed in contemporary 
metaphysics, e.g., in Barbara Vetter (2015) and Manley and Wasserman (2008).

I n t rodu c t ion
5
    5
acts at the local level in the world,10 it is plausible to conclude from 
the preceding discussion that Anaxagoras’s opposites are instances 
of causal powers.11 In general terms, causal powers are properties 
defined by the type of change they enable their possessor to suffer or 
bring about. For instance, magnetism is the capacity to attract cer­
tain metals. Causal powers get exercised, and in so doing they change 
the causal profile of the world, either by themselves changing, or 
by changing something else, or both. It is by and large assumed in 
metaphysics that powers need not be exercised at all times. Rather, 
they exist even when in an inactive state, and in fact they may exist 
without ever being exercised. The exercise of causal powers requires 
appropriate conditions,12 and when such conditions do not obtain, 
the relevant powers remain “dormant.”13 What then of Anaxagoras’s 
opposites? They have a causal role to play in his system, but can they 
change (from being dormant to being exercised) and bring about 
change in a world that obeys Parmenidean rules? In the extant texts 
of Anaxagoras we find descriptions of active powers. But there are 
no descriptions of inactive powers, and it is plausible to assume that 
the conceptual distinction between active and inactive powers is not 
present in his system. Such a distinction had not yet been concep­
tualized in the philosophical tradition. In investigating Anaxagoras’s 
10. Anaxagoras’s system include nous too and the vortex it generates, but they are 
causal agents at a cosmic level. The topic will be discussed in ­chapter 5.
11. The reader might find it helpful to pursue further readings on causal powers, 
for example: Molnar (2003); Mumford (2003); Bird (2007); and Marmodoro (2010). 
For present purposes I do not draw any distinction between powers and dispositions; 
some metaphysicians do, e.g., Bird (2013).
12. Some metaphysicians cash out such conditions in terms of the presence of 
stimuli for the powers (e.g., an appropriate blow for a fragile glass to break); and oth­
ers in terms of the powers interacting with their manifestation partner powers (e.g., 
sugar dissolving in water).
13. Causal powers are contrasted with categorical properties (for instance, the 
sphericity of a ball, by contrast with its capacity to roll), which are causally inert and 
actual at all times; their definition does not involve reference to any change. That there 
are categorical properties at all is, however, a disputed issue in metaphysics, as many 
hold that all properties are dispositional. (I argued elsewhere that the latter is also 
Aristotle’s view, in Marmodoro 2014a).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
6
6
powers, it important to appreciate their distinctiveness, against 
the backdrop of the mainstream post-​Aristotelian views on power 
metaphysics that we are familiar with. To understand Anaxagoras’s 
account, we will need to distinguish between the exercise and the 
manifestation of a power (rather than between the actual and the 
potential). In the current debate, metaphysicians by and large iden­
tify the manifestation and the exercise of a power, and use the two 
corresponding expressions as synonyms. By contrast, I submit that 
in Anaxagoras’s system a power becomes manifest specifically when 
its exercise becomes perceivable. So in his system, a power is always 
exercised, but is not perceivable at all times. This distinction, the 
textual evidence for it, and the philosophical implications of it are 
examined in ­chapter 1.
We can now return to the question of the origin of material 
objects in Anaxagoras’ world, with the benefit of our discussion of 
the causal role of the opposites. Anaxagoras’s view is that every­
thing derives from an original mixture of opposites, set in motion 
by a vortex that moves elements in the mixture. The opposites thus 
get rearranged spatially in new ways, coming to be preponderant 
in some regions of space rather than others. Concentration of par­
ticular sorts of power in space results, for Anaxagoras, in increased 
intensity of the respective powers, which accounts for the prepon­
derance and perceptual manifestation of some powers over others, 
as will be discussed in ­chapter 2. This is how stuff such as earth 
is “generated” by the causal operation of the opposites. Since stuff 
does not require structure, it can result from the mere movement 
and bundling of the fundamental powers. On the other hand, 
Anaxagoras’s ontology includes structured material objects (e.g., 
human beings) too. The simple mechanism of spatial arrangement 
cannot suffice to account for their complexity, and this calls for an 
addition to the ontology. The addition are the ordinary biological 
seeds that Anaxagoras includes in the primordial mixture.14 On my 
14. See, e.g., B4b, which will be examined in ­chapter 5.

I n t rodu c t ion
7
    7
interpretation, the seeds are physical “frames” to which the oppo­
sites scattered around by the cosmic vortex get added, thus contrib­
uting to the growth of an organism. The seeds too, even if not as 
fundamental as the opposites from which they are constituted, are 
causal powers. They are the powers for life in Anaxagoras’s system, 
in the sense that they are powers for the structural development of 
organisms in the universe.15 It is noteworthy to register that both 
opposites and seeds are powers that do not operate by “imparting” 
their own condition to what they act upon. The opposites make 
things hot or cold or wet, etc., not by changing what they act upon, 
but by their presence in them; the seeds grow into organisms by 
addition of opposites onto the frames the seeds provide, and cannot 
impart their structure on other objects. This is a distinctive aspect 
of Anaxagoras’s power ontology, in relation to other ancient (but 
also modern) ones whereby powers exercise their causal efficacy 
by changing what they act upon. In conclusion, on the interpreta­
tion I want to advance, both the opposites and the seeds are causal 
powers in Anaxagoras’s system, operating according to a distinctive 
model of causation that is consistent with Parmenides’s strictures 
on change.16
Anaxagoras does not put any restriction on possible “changes” 
in his theory (possibly because he finds it metaphysically economi­
cal to have a single principle explain all kinds of changes in nature). 
Anything can “change” into anything, by means of one mechanism 
only: the movement of the opposites. But if anything may be “gener­
ated” from anything in his system, and there is no creation of some­
thing from nothing, there must be a share of everything in everything. 
15. If the seeds are the origin of structure in the universe, what structures them? 
For Anaxagoras it is an irreducibly primitive fact about the universe that the seeds 
contained in it are structured. They have eternally existed in the original mixture, and 
in this sense they are as fundamental as the opposites and nous. Interestingly, in this, 
his ontology is similar to Aristotle’s, for whom species forms have always been and 
shall be in the universe.
16. Nous too, as we will see in ­chapter 5, is a bundle of causal powers (cosmic and 
cognitive ones).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
8
8
We are now in the position to see that his theory of extreme mixture 
follows from the model for causal efficacy that Anaxagoras endorses, 
in conjunction with the principle that recombination of the elements 
(the opposites) is unrestricted.
If the elements exist in a state of extreme mixture, they must 
be everywhere. But how can they be everywhere? On the interpreta­
tion I want to motivate the answer is: by being unlimitedly divided. 
That is, not simply endlessly divisible, but by being actually divided 
into parts or shares of which there is no smallest. This is the con­
ceptual breakthrough that, on my interpretation, allows Anaxagoras 
to meet all his philosophical desiderata. Anaxagoras explicitly offers 
the unlimited division of what-​is as a justification of his stance on 
extreme mixture:
B6: Since it is not possible that there is a least thing, it would not 
be possible that [anything] be separated, nor come to be by itself; 
but just as in the beginning, now too all things are together.17
How are we to understand unlimited division of the opposites? Are 
there parts at the end of it? Of which size? How do they make up 
material body? A common modern stance is to think that the uni­
verse is made of atomic matter, i.e., particles. But what if the world 
is not composed of ultimate material particles? What if there are no 
indivisible entities and no bedrock at any depth of the decomposi­
tion of reality? What if the universe is not atomic, but gunky, with 
parts of parts “all the way down”?18 This is conceptual space that has 
been investigated very little in contemporary philosophy to this day. 
That the universe might be made out of material gunk is a possibility 
that philosophers are currently beginning to explore, with the aim to 
17.  B6:  ὅτε τοὐλάχιστον μὴ ἔστιν εἶναι, οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο χωρισθῆναι, οὐδ’ ἂν 
ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῦ γενέσθαι, ἀλλ’ ὅπωσπερ ἀρχὴν εἶναι καὶ νῦν πάντα ὁμοῦ.
18. The term “gunk” and the derived adjective “gunky” are expressions introduced 
in philosophical discourse by David Lewis (1991: 21). Gunk instances are called “hunks 
of gunk,” following Ted Sider (1993: 2).

I n t rodu c t ion
9
    9
develop an ontology of material gunk, and eventually a mathematics 
and physics of it, so as to understand the world, if it is such.19 But 
now consider the possibility that the ultimate elements of our world 
are not matter, but instances of physical powers, tropes, and further, 
that these tropes are not atomic, but gunky, i.e., such that they have 
proper parts ad infinitum.20 Such power tropes have no smallest part, 
because each (proper) part of a power trope has (proper) parts. What 
then? How are we to conceptualize a universe of power gunk? The 
possibility that the building blocks of reality are gunky powers has 
not even been mapped out, so far, in contemporary metaphysics. Yet 
Anaxagoras was driven to posit that the opposites, from which every­
thing else in the universe (except nous) derives, are endlessly parti­
tioned. Anaxagoras is thereby the first ante litteram “gunk lover” in 
the history of metaphysics.21 He also has a unique conception of gunk 
and a unique power ontology: power gunk. Chapter 3 investigates 
the nature of power gunk and the explanatory utility of the con­
cept for Anaxagoras. While most defenders of an atomless universe 
nowadays argue for material atomlessness as a conceptual possibil­
ity (only), Anaxagoras argues for power atomlessness as an answer 
to a problem in his philosophy of nature. Power gunk underpins his 
theory of extreme mixture, which is his solution to the question of 
how to account for generation and qualitative change without pos­
tulating the possibility of creation or qualitative transformation of 
what there is from what is not.
The thought that matter is divisible has both intuitive appeal and 
empirical justification, and is a widespread position among ancient 
and modern metaphysicians. The thought that matter is unlimitedly 
divisible on the other hand has intuitive appeal, but not empirical jus­
tification, which is why there are only few metaphysicians upholding 
19. The literature on gunk is becoming increasingly large; one point of reference 
among many possible is Hudson (2007).
20. Using the definition offered by Cody Gilmore (2014) as a standard one: a 
proper part of x is a part of x that is not identical to x.
21. The expression “gunk lover” is borrowed from J. Hawthorne and B. Weatherson 
(2004).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
10
10
this view (as Aristotle did, for instance). But the thought that matter is 
unlimitedly divided is neither intuitive nor empirically justifiable, and 
has very rarely been endorsed in the history of metaphysics; Leibniz 
is one of the few exceptions. Yet unlimited division is the keystone of 
Anaxagoras’s system—​and not only his. There is another ancient meta­
physical system, in many respects different from Anaxagoras’s, that is 
built on the same assumption: the Stoics’.22 Both Anaxagoras and the 
Stoics posit an unlimitedly divided, physical bedrock of reality. They 
take this stance for metaphysical reasons, i.e., because this assumption 
does explanatory work that would have otherwise been left undone in 
their systems. This explanatory work includes, but is not limited to, 
the constitution of material objects, change, and causation. A compari­
son between Anaxagoras and the Stoics gives us a further angle from 
which we can understand how Anaxagoras’s metaphysics sits within 
its historical philosophical context and what is distinctive about it; the 
relevant Stoic views are presented and investigated in ­chapter 6.
In conclusion, Anaxagoras innovates, not only in relation to the 
philosophical context of his time, but also in the less obvious sense 
that he has something new to contribute to potentially advance cur­
rent debates in metaphysics, with respect to his conception of an atom­
less universe of powers. This book makes a scholarly contribution to 
our understanding of Anaxagoras’s views by offering fresh readings for 
the texts in which Anaxagoras’s principle that there is a share of every­
thing in everything is stated. Such new readings allow us a novel inter­
pretation of the principle, and thus shed light, on the one hand, on the 
innovative metaphysics Anaxagoras developed, and on the other, on 
another ancient ontological system that is in relevant respects similar 
to Anaxagoras’s, that of the Stoics. In gaining an understanding of how 
the ancients conceived of power gunk, we may also enrich our current 
philosophical understanding of the fundamentals in nature.23
22. I am not making here any claim to the effect that Anaxagoras directly influ­
enced the Stoics.
23.  Chapters  2, 3, and 4 draw on my article “Anaxagoras’s Qualitative Gunk” 
(2015).

    11
11
Chapter 1
 The Fundamental Items in 
the Ontology
This chapter introduces what there is, at the fundamental level, in 
Anaxagoras’s ontology. Anaxagoras’s views on this issue are devel­
oped in answer to such questions as these: How did the world come 
about? Was it eternally as we experience it now? What is it made of? 
Is it all flux or all static? Are observable changes in the natural world 
real, or a delusion of our senses? If change is real, what accounts for 
it? Some of the conceptual space opened up by these questions was 
already charted by the time of Anaxagoras, as many great minds were 
wrestling with these issues. Yet Anaxagoras is a brilliant innovator, 
as we will see in this and the forthcoming chapters. In a nutshell, his 
starting point is that there eternally exists a set of building blocks 
that persist and get spatially rearranged to make up all there is in 
the world we experience. The building blocks are the so-​called oppo­
sites; for instance the hot, the cold, the wet, the dry, etc.1 This chap­
ter reviews the textual evidence and the arguments that support the 
interpretation that the opposites are fundamental in Anaxagoras’s 
system, with everything else being composed from them (with the 
exception of nous). This interpretation is not uncontroversial, and 
there exist arguments to the contrary in the literature which will 
be here reviewed. The chapter then addresses the question of what 
1. We will see below and more in detail in ­chapter 5 that Anaxagoras’s ontol­
ogy includes, in addition to the opposites, a cosmic nous, which is not composed from 
opposites; and also seeds, which are primitively structured clusters of opposites.
 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
12
12
the nature of the opposites is. There exists an interpretative line 
according to which the Anaxagorean opposites are physical causal 
powers. This interpretation, which is to my mind essentially correct, 
yet requires careful investigation and argumentation: Anaxagoras’s 
metaphysics of powers and his account of causal efficacy are distinc­
tive. In order to understand their distinctive features, they need to be 
positioned on the one hand in relation to Aristotle’s power ontology, 
and on the other in relation to modern views on causal powers. The 
chapter concludes that Anaxagoras does indeed endorse an ontol­
ogy of causal powers, distributed in spatiotemporal locations in the 
universe.
1.1.  OPPOSITES, STUFFS, AND SEEDS
In the extant fragments we find at least an indicative, if not exhaus­
tive, list of what Anaxagoras includes in his ontology: in B4b we read,
Before there was separation off, because all things were together, 
there was not even any colour evident; for the mixture of all 
things prevented it, of the wet and the dry and of the hot and the 
cold and of the bright and the dark, and there was much earth 
present and seeds unlimited in number, in no way similar to one 
another. Since these things are so, it is right to think that all 
things were present in the whole.2
πρὶν δὲ ἀποκριθῆναι [ταῦτα] πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲ χροιὴ 
ἔνδηλος ἦν οὐδεμία· ἀπεκώλυε γὰρ ἡ σύμμιξις πάντων χρημάτων, 
τοῦ τε διεροῦ καὶ τοῦ ξηροῦ καὶ τοῦ θερμοῦ καὶ τοῦ ψυχροῦ καὶ 
τοῦ λαμπροῦ καὶ τοῦ ζοφεροῦ, καὶ γῆς πολλῆς ἐνεούσης καὶ 
σπερμάτων ἀπείρων πλῆθος οὐδὲν ἐοικότων ἀλλήλοις. οὐδὲ γὰρ 
τῶν ἄλλων οὐδὲν ἔοικε τὸ ἕτερον τῷ ἑτέρῳ. τούτων δὲ οὕτως 
ἐχόντων ἐν τῷ σύμπαντι χρὴ δοκεῖν ἐνεῖναι πάντα χρήματα.
2. This and the following translations of Anaxagoras’s texts are from Curd (2010).
 

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
13
    13
This fragment is very rich with information on many aspects of 
Anaxagoras’s thought and it will be a text that we will come back to 
several times. I will argue below that it describes not only the origin, 
but also the evolution, of the universe over time.3 For present pur­
poses, we can parse the fragment into three sets of claims:
	
(i)	 In the original state of the universe, all things present 
were together; they were mixed.
	
(ii)	 At some point in time there was spatial separation of 
what there was.
	
(iii)	 What there is includes the opposites (e.g., wet and dry, hot 
and cold, bright and dark); stuffs (e.g., earth); and seeds.
Are we to understand that all the items mentioned in (iii) were among 
all things that were together as per (i)? Were all these items present 
as such in the primordial mixture described by (i), before there was 
separation off? These questions are aimed at understanding whether 
all these items are ontologically fundamental for Anaxagoras.4
3. I share Sedley’s (2007: 17) view that for Anaxagoras there is more than one 
stage in the history of the generation of Anaxagoras’s universe as presented in B4b.
4. Scholars have taken different views on this issue. Curd (2010: 153ff.) offers a 
helpful summary of the positions in the debate and of the arguments from all sides. 
Those who think the opposites only are fundamental include, for instance Tannery 
(1886); Burnet (1892 and 1930); Vlastos (1950); Schofield (1980); Warren (2007b); and 
Sedley (2007). I report here some representative quotations. Schofield thinks that sub­
stances and stuffs in Anaxagoras’s system are “logical constructions out of opposites” 
(1980: 116). On the same line, Inwood (1986: 25–​26, n. 29): “My own view [is] that the 
ἔοντα χρήματα (i.e. the elemental entities which alone obey Parmenidean rules of per­
manence) are only the opposites and that everything else, the so-​called Empedoclean 
elements, and flesh, bone etc. is derivative and disobedient to Parmenidean rules of 
permanence” (1986: 25–​26, n. 29); such derivative entities “are only ‘virtually’ present 
in the mixture … [that is to say] the opposites needed to make them up are present” 
(1986: 25). Other views, of variable ontological “generosity,” are held, for instance, 
by Guthrie (1965); Barnes (1982: vol. 1, revised); Mourelatos (1987); Furth (1991); 
Graham (2004); Curd (2010); and others. Barnes, for instance, writes: “Specific talk of 
the opposites may profitably be dropped from the discussion of Anaxagoras’s theory 
of nature” (1979: vol. 2, 18). Similarly, Reeve: “Any obsession with opposites we seem 
to find in Anaxagoras is the obsession of his predecessors not his own” (1981: 96). 
We thus have a full spectrum of views in the literature. In particular, there is a line 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
14
14
Let us first examine the status of stuff, and whether it is ana­
lyzable metaphysically into something more fundamental or not. 
Fragment B15 is quite explicit that,
The dense and the wet and the cold and the dark come together 
here, where <the> earth is now; but the rare and the hot and the 
dry <and the bright> moved out to the far reaches of aether.
τὸ μὲν πυκνὸν καὶ διερὸν καὶ ψυχρὸν καὶ τὸ ζοφερὸν ἐνθάδε 
συνεχώρησεν, ἔνθα νῦν <ἡ> γῆ, τὸ δὲ ἀραιὸν καὶ τὸ θερμὸν καὶ τὸ 
ξηρὸν <καὶ τὸ λαμπρὸν> ἐξεχώρησεν εἰς τὸ πρόσω τοῦ αἰθέρος.
Taking earth as an example of stuff for Anaxagoras, and assuming 
that the same will apply mutatis mutandis to all kinds of stuffs, B15 
indicates that for Anaxagoras stuffs are (metaphysically) reducible to 
opposites. It is the moving about and aggregation of certain oppo­
sites that makes earth, for instance, come to be.5
of interpretation that considers stuffs irreducible. On this view stuffs such as blood 
or gold are not composed out of the opposites, but exist primitively as such (see, e.g., 
Graham 2004). I note here that the interpretation I will present in ­chapter 4 does not 
depend on giving the opposites the particular status of sole type of building block in 
Anaxagoras’s ontology; it can be developed also on the view that stuffs are as funda­
mental as the opposites.
5. The issue of “generation” of stuffs is actually more complex than this, because 
the mere compresence of the relevant opposites does not suffice for us to discern earth 
there, even though it is only their compresence that is needed for the composition 
of earth. The difference lies between compresent relevant opposites of low strength 
or intensity, and compresent relevant opposites of high strength or intensity, where 
“high” means “perceptible.” So it is only when the compresent opposites are intense 
enough to be perceptible that we can recognize and classify their aggregative composi­
tion as earth. The challenge for Anaxagoras will be to explain higher and lower inten­
sity of opposites. We will come to this thorny problem in ­chapter 2.
Patricia Curd asked, in personal correspondence, why Anaxagoras’s respect for 
Parmenidean concerns about change would not also apply to the composition (and 
decomposition) of stuffs. For example, if according to Anaxagoras flesh cannot be 
extracted from nonflesh, how can flesh be generated out of nonflesh in the composi­
tion of flesh out of its opposite constituents, as my interpretation suggests? Or, if heat 
is extracted from, say, flesh, which is hot, how can heat come out of what is not heat? 
These derivations have the makings of generation, which is outlawed by Parmenides 

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
15
    15
We saw that in the inventory of what there is in Anaxagoras’s 
world, there are seeds too. The seeds have been matter of much con­
troversy among the commentators. In this chapter I will limit myself 
to discussing only whether the seeds are primitive or derivative in 
Anaxagoras ontology; I will postpone to ­chapter 5 further questions 
for discussion. In B10 we read,
For in the same seminal fluid there are hair, nails, veins and arter­
ies, sinew, and bone, and it happens that they are imperceptible 
because of the smallness of the parts, but when they grow, they 
gradually are separated off. “For how,” he says, “can hair come 
from what is not hair and flesh from what is not flesh?”
καὶ γὰρ ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ γονῇ καὶ τρίχας εἶναι καὶ ὄνυχας καὶ φλέβας 
καὶ ἀρτηρίας καὶ νεῦρα καὶ ὀστᾶ καὶ τυγχάνειν μὲν ἀφανῆ διὰ 
μικρομέρειαν, αὐξανόμενα δὲ κατὰ μικρὸν διακρίνεσθαι. πῶς γὰρ 
ἄν, φησίν, ἐκ μὴ τριχὸς γένοιτο θρὶξ καὶ σὰρξ ἐκ μὴ σαρκός;
Assuming for present purposes that the animal seed is an instance 
of what Anaxagoras meant by seeds in general (which is a point that 
will be argued for in ­chapter 5), what we learn from B10 is that the 
seeds are made out of stuffs, such as nail, hair, bone stuff. But stuffs 
are made out of opposites. Thus the opposites are metaphysically 
fundamental and both stuffs and seeds are composed from them. 
On the other hand, as I will argue in ­chapter 5, the seeds are not 
and should be respected by Anaxagoras, and yet are not, on my interpretation. The way 
I see Anaxagoras avoiding such Parmenidean objections is by a sophisticated combina­
tion of epistemological and ontological positions. Anaxagoras is a phenomenological 
emergentist, and an ontological mereologist. I develop this interpretation in section 1.4 
of this chapter and in section 2.4 of ­chapter 2. Briefly here, stuffs such as earth or 
flesh only appear, phenomenologically, to be of such kinds, while ontologically they 
are aggregates of opposites in different densities. Thus when heat comes from flesh, 
it in fact comes from heat in the compresence of hot + soft+ heavy + flexible + pale + 
etc., which are phenomenologically flesh. When flesh comes to be, this involves only 
the displacement of opposites, which phenomenologically appear to be flesh (or would 
appear such to an observer). None of these violates Parmenidean strictures that 
Anaxagoras respects in his ontology.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
16
16
exhaustively analyzable in terms of opposites only, in the sense that 
they are irreducibly structured and thus they are more than com­
present opposites. Structure is irreducible to opposites, but requires 
explanation when we find it in the world. Anaxagoras introduces 
structure primitively into his ontology, as do other ancient philoso­
phers, e.g. Aristotle, with his eternal species. Such irreducible struc­
tures are necessary for the metaphysical work the seeds are posited 
to do in Anaxagoras’s system. Also not metaphysically reducible to 
the opposites is nous; again, due to the constraints determined by 
what nous is introduced to do, nous cannot be the result of composi­
tion of opposites, as we will see in ­chapter 5.6
We are now in a position to see that not everything that is listed 
in B4b has been eternally in existence as such, but only the oppo­
sites and the seeds (and of course nous). This point will be discussed 
below, but B15 has already given us an indication that earth came 
about at some (unspecified) point in time, due to the spatial move­
ment the opposites were subject to. The sort of spatial movements 
that give rise to stuffs are referred to in the set of claims (ii) above 
as “separation off.” Fragment B4b then describes not one but at least 
two stages in the universe’s development (or three if we count the 
process of separation as a stage of its own): the primordial state of 
total mixture and a stage in which stuffs and seeds are discernible.7 
On the other hand, this latter stage too, according to Anaxagoras’s 
6. In B12, for instance, we read, “Nous … has been mixed with no thing, but 
is alone itself by itself” (καὶ μέμεικται οὐδενὶ χρήματι, ἀλλὰ μόνος αὐτὸς ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῦ 
ἐστιν).
7. Patricia Curd, in correspondence, objected to the evolutionary account I offered 
here, on the basis of syntactical reasons. She thinks that what is said about earth in 
B4b does not introduce a second phase in the evolution of the cosmos, but rather 
describes the initial state of the primordial mixture. If so, earth, and stuffs more gen­
erally, as well as seeds, were all in the primordial mixture. I want to stress that such a 
position is compatible with my interpretation, because, although I hold that stuffs are 
reducible to opposites, and composed by the movement brought about by the vortex, 
both these claims are compatible with the claim that there were stuff and seeds primi­
tively in the primordial mixture. Stuff and seeds can be reducible; some of these are 
primitively present in the cosmos; while some subsequently generated. If so, there are 

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
17
    17
cosmic narrative, is followed by further developments, which include 
the appearance of living beings. For example, in B4a we read,
For shortly after the beginning of the first book of his Physics, 
Anaxagoras says this, “Since these things are so, it is right to 
think that there are many different things present in everything 
that is being combined, and seeds of all things, having all sorts of 
forms, colours, and flavours, and that human and also the other 
animals were compounded, as many as have soul.”
λέγει γὰρ μετ’ ὀλίγα τῆς ἀρχῆς τοῦ πρώτου Περὶ φύσεως Ἀναξαγόρας 
οὕτως· τούτων δὲ οὕτως ἐχόντων χρὴ δοκεῖν ἐνεῖναι πολλά τε 
καὶ παντοῖα ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς συγκρινομένοις καὶ σπέρματα πάντων 
χρημάτων καὶ ἰδέας παντοίας ἔχοντα καὶ χροιὰς καὶ ἡδονάς. καὶ 
ἀνθρώπους τε συμπαγῆναι καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ζῷα ὅσα ψυχὴν ἔχει.
In sum, there are then a number of stages of the universe’s his­
tory Anaxagoras hints at in the extant texts: a stage of primor­
dial mixture, a stage where stuffs and seeds become discernible, 
and finally the state of the world as we know it (inhabited with 
living beings). We now turn to examining by which mechanisms 
stuffs and seeds respectively derive from the opposites, beginning 
with an investigation of the metaphysical constraints at play in 
Anaxagoras system.
1.2.  DOES MATTER “MATTER” 
TO ANAXAGORAS?
On the interpretation I am developing, Anaxagoras assumes that the 
opposites can aggregate into stuffs, such as earth and flesh—​thus 
endorsing an early version of the view that things are bundles of 
stuffs and seeds in the primordial mixture, and they are not subject to the everything-​
in-​everything principle, but only the opposites are mixed in this way.
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
18
18
property instances. Such stuffs, along with further constituents—​
the seeds—​contribute to the composition of individual organ­
isms such as animals and plants.8 The opposites are not types, or 
universals—​rather, they are tropes. The total amount of a specific 
kind of property in the world, e.g., the opposite hot, is the totality 
of all instances of heat in the world; the opposite dark is the totality 
of all instances of darkness in the world, etc. These are not fusions of 
hot objects, or dark objects, etc. An important aspect of Anaxagoras’s 
ontology is that properties are not instantiated by coming to qualify 
matter or inhere in matter:9 they exist in nature and are located in 
space and time just as tropes are. They are not material, but they are 
physical.10 We can understand their status by analogy, for instance, 
with the way in which a magnetic field is physical, but not material. 
A field is a physical quantity that has a value for each region in space 
and time. Likewise, Anaxagoras’s opposites are physical quantities in 
space and time, e.g., of heat, of darkness, etc., and have a value in 
every region of space-​time, indicating the intensity of each property 
there. The intensity of a property in a region may increase, accord­
ing to Anaxagoras, by accumulation of instances, moved around by 
the vortex, as we read for instance in B4b, B9, B12 (more on this in 
­chapters 2 and 5). Anaxagorean opposites are also subject to physical 
causation of different kinds. For instance, they are impacted upon 
and set in movement by the cosmic vortex generated by nous. The 
8.  Anaxagoras’s account of how individuals come about will be examined in 
­chapter 5.
9.  With a similar approach, although developed very differently from mine, 
Montgomery Furth writes that “the theoretical concept of matter in Aristotle’s 
sense plays essentially no role in Anaxagoras’ theory” (1991: 97). Elsewhere Furth 
states: “My interpretation … takes the elementary building-​blocks of Anaxagoras’ 
theory to be entities totally other than an Aristotelian hupokeimenon” (1991: 124). 
Furth’s own interpretation of Anaxagoras’s metaphysics is examined in section 4.4 
of ­chapter 4.
10. The notion of properties extended in space, but not somehow grounded in 
something else—​matter—​might strike the modern reader as unfamiliar. It is how­
ever in line with modern accounts of individuals as bundles of tropes. In antiquity the 
prime example of this conception of properties as instantiated but not en-​mattered 
are the instances of Plato’s Forms.

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
19
    19
opposites can be impacted upon in Anaxagoras’s ontology precisely 
because they are not abstract properties of an Aristotelian ontology, 
but rather fully-​fledged physical entities.
It might perhaps be a (philosophical) common-​sense expecta­
tion that Anaxagoras would think of the opposites as qualifying 
matter, but I submit that this is not the case. There are a number 
of plausible reasons to think that Anaxagoras’s ontology does not 
include matter. First, an argument ex silentio: matter is never men­
tioned in the extant fragments.11 Second, in a world where there is 
no qualitative change, there is no metaphysical work for underly­
ing matter to do.12 Hence Anaxagoras would have no motivation for 
positing that opposites qualify something that underlies them and 
persists through the loss of acquisition of opposite properties.13 
Third, if Anaxagoras thought that the opposites were en-​mattered 
in a sort of (Aristotelian) featureless substratum that they could 
each qualify, it would be historically rather odd that Plato or 
Aristotle does not engage at all with Anaxagoras’s view of matter 
in the Timaeus or the Physics, respectively. It was not until the later 
period of Plato that the notion of something that is the ontological 
receptacle of properties was introduced. The notion of a material 
substratum bearing properties is, in short, a theoretical acquisition 
that (arguably) Plato gains only in the Timaeus and Aristotle devel­
ops as of the Physics. Does it follow then, from what I have argued 
so far, that Anaxagoras’s world is an immaterial one, where there 
are no material objects but only physical tropes? The textual evi­
dence provides a clear answer to this question. For example, earth, 
air and aether are mentioned in B1; B2 talks about air and aether; 
B4a talks about earth and products that result from its cultivation; 
B4b and B10 mention color, which is a feature of material objects, 
11. This cannot of course be a decisive argument, for Anaxagoras’s work has not 
been preserved in its entirety; nevertheless it is a point that deserves due consideration.
12. This is the converse, as it were, of Aristotle’s principle in Physics I.7, that if 
there is matter, there can be qualitative change.
13. On this topic see also appendix 1.A at the end of this chapter.

Ev e ry t h i n g in E v e ry t h in g
20
20
etc. Although for Anaxagoras there is no matter underlying the 
opposites, matter results from the opposites (as we read, for exam­
ple, in B15). In conclusion, Anaxagoras has no reason to think of 
matter as underlying the opposites. On the one hand his ontology 
does not include universals, so no material substratum is needed 
to facilitate their instantiation in the world. On the other hand, 
he does not allow for any substantial or qualitative change in his 
system, and excludes the transformation of one opposite into the 
other, so no material substratum is needed to serve as a surviving 
pure or physical potentiality for any elemental transformations. In 
sum, Anaxagoras’s opposites are properties in space and time which 
do not qualify underlying characterless substrata of any kind, but 
which are primitively and eternally present in the world.
1.3.  THE CONCRETENESS OF POWER
This section addresses a potential worry the reader might have con­
cerning the status of Anaxagoras’s opposites qua not en-​mattered. 
Are his opposites “ghostly” entities, and is his world so? The answer 
in short is no. Anaxagoras’s ontology delivers a universe that is 
as concrete as ours, and as concrete as the world of Aristotle, who 
first introduced matter in the history of metaphysics. To appreci­
ate this point, it will be helpful to very briefly compare Aristotle’s 
and Anaxagoras’s ontologies—​both are power ontologies,14 but 
one of them makes matter a fundamental principle of things in 
nature, while the other does not reify matter. What distinguishes 
Anaxagoras’s physical ontology from Aristotle’s material ontology? 
Both Anaxagoras and Aristotle talk of earth, water, flesh, etc., though 
these result from different types of composition in each of the two 
ontologies.15 But to understand the difference between Anaxagoras’s 
14. See appendix 1.A at the end of this chapter.
15. Anaxagoras pioneers a mereology à la David Lewis, where the whole is identi­
cal to the sum of its parts; while Aristotle develops nonmereological hylomorphism, 
 

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
21
    21
and Aristotle’s accounts of the concreteness of physical objects, we 
need to determine what such stuff or body is made of according to 
each account. In Aristotle’s account, stuff is made of powers that are 
en-​mattered, while in Anaxagoras’s they are not en-​mattered. But 
what type of entity is the matter that Aristotle reifies in his system, 
and is there ametaphysical function it serves which remains unac­
counted for Anaxagoras’s system? This investigation takes us to 
Aristotle’s notion of ultimate substratum.16
Aristotle’s search for the ultimate substratum that underlies all 
being in objects leads him to matter, in Metaphysics VII.3. In Aristotle’s 
thought experiment, when abstracting away all forms from an object, 
one reaches the underlying matter, which is not qualified in any con­
ceivable way; it is neither an individual, nor a particular quantity 
of matter. The ultimate substratum “is of itself neither a particular 
thing nor of a particular quantity nor otherwise positively character­
ized; nor yet negatively, for negations also will belong to it only by 
accident” (1029a24–​25). Since there is no being or particularity qual­
ifying the ultimate substratum, the substratum is not even a bare 
particular.17 But when we abstract away all form and all particularity 
from the object, what is left?18 I submit that abstraction separates (in 
the mind of the person performing the abstraction) the form from 
the object it belongs to, in which it is instantiated.19 Even a form like 
Plato’s wisdom, abstracted away from Plato, is uninstantiated. It is 
not the identity of the abstracted form that determines whether it is 
where the whole is something over and above the sum of its parts. On the latter see 
Marmodoro (2013).
16. In this context the examination of Aristotle’s positions needs to be brief, since 
the explanatory target is Anaxagoras’s ontology.
17. The literature on Aristotle’s so-​called “stripping away” thought experiment in 
Met. is vast. One the latest treatments of it is Lewis (2013).
18. The ultimate substratum is not matter in the sense of body underlying and 
constituting some individual, e.g., an animal or a plant. Such matter is an abstract 
entity that we individuate by abstracting away the form of an object.
19. See also on this topic Scaltsas (1994) and, among the most recent studies 
specifically of the abstract in Aristotle, Bäck (2014).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
22
22
instantiated or not.20 Its ontological unity with the individual exist­
ing in nature determines this; the process of abstraction, in a sense, 
severs this unity. An abstracted form is therefore an uninstantiated 
form, for forms are not instantiated in virtue of their nature, but are 
made so by being ontologically unified with their subjects. On this 
interpretation (which I developed in Marmodoro 2009 and 2013), 
matter qua ultimate substratum is the ground of the instantiation 
of forms.21 If we consider, e.g., heat and abstract from it the form of 
heat, what remains is its ultimate substratum—​namely, its ground 
of instantiation. But this ground of instantiation does not give the 
form that is instantiated in it either being or particularity. What it 
gives it is actuality, and the form is thereby instantiated. Beyond this 
notion of matter qua ground of instantiation in Aristotle there is also 
the notion of matter qua body, as that which remains throughout 
changes and transformations of objects in nature. Such matter is an 
abstraction, characterized as an underlying physical entity. However, 
this is qualified matter, and hence not relevant to our present con­
cerns of what underlies qualities.
Turning now to Anaxagoras’s ontology:  his opposites exist in 
nature. Are they thereby instantiated? They are instances of physi­
cal powers, but they are not instantiated in any kind of substratum. 
The reason for this is that Anaxagoras has no universal forms, no 
underlying matter, and no abstraction of forms from individuals in 
nature. Hence, there cannot be a relation of instantiation at work in 
his system, and in this sense there is nothing in his ontology that 
can be instantiated. The opposites are in nature, and are actual, for 
they are instances of physical powers qua tropes in specific spatio­
temporal locations. In Anaxagoras’s system, each trope of an oppo­
site is metaphysically simple.22 By contrast in Aristotle’s system 
20. The abstracted form could be universal or particular, e.g., wisdom or Plato’s 
wisdom, but for simplicity of exposition I will assume it to be a universal.
21. See also Marmodoro (2013).
22. I do not see the degree of strength of a power trope as being incompatible 
with its being simple.

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
23
    23
a trope is a composite of matter and form, where form is instanti­
ated in matter. The difference, therefore, between Anaxagoras’s and 
Aristotle’s metaphysics of powers does not lie in the concreteness 
of the powers—​both Anaxagorean and Aristotelian powers are con­
crete. The metaphysical role of matter in Aristotle’s system does not 
involve ensuring the concreteness of bodies, or deriving stuff from 
the basic powers. Importantly however, while Aristotle reifies form 
as an abstract object in his ontology, Anaxagoras does not. There 
are no abstract entities in Anaxagoras’s ontology—​no universals, or 
even particular forms.
Thus Aristotle’s and Anaxagoras’s ontologies differ in an impor­
tant respect. Aristotle can explain similarity between concrete 
objects, but Anaxagoras cannot. For Aristotle, two hot things share 
the form of heat, a universal—​this is how similarity is explained in 
his realist metaphysical framework. Anaxagoras on the other hand 
cannot account for similarity (at least for what we know of his the­
ory from the extant texts).23 For the same reason, Anaxagoras can­
not explain change and transformation, without ex nihilo creation. 
Aristotle accounts for the qualitative as well as substantial changes 
a body may undergo in terms of the body losing a form, while the 
matter remains and acquires a new form. This mechanism allows us 
to understand change as “replacement” of forms in the same matter, 
rather than as a succession of instantiated properties in the same 
location. So Aristotle distinguishes physical continuity from identity, 
and explains physical continuity in terms of the same quantity of 
matter remaining through change of form. By contrast Anaxagoras 
recognizes only physical identity, e.g., there being one and the same 
opposite at a particular spatiotemporal location. Reifying a quantity 
23.  Anaxagoras could treat similarity between objects as a primitive, and 
explain the difference between properties (e.g., between heat and brightness, which 
he assumes in his system) through a nonrealist account of properties, for instance 
as Rodriguez-​Pereyra (2002). On the other hand, there is no textual evidence that 
Anaxagoras thought along these lines. My point here is only to register that there is 
a possible and sound way forward for explaining resemblance, available to someone 
holding an Anaxagorean ontology.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
24
24
of matter is not an open possibility for Anaxagoras, because doing so 
requires the possibility of abstracting a form from some object, and 
individuating the (abstract) remainder. In other words, such a move 
presupposes the reification of an (abstract) form, which are absent 
from Anaxagoras’s ontology.
There is also much to be explored on common ontological fea­
tures between Anaxagoras’s opposites and Plato’s Forms. Nicholas 
Denyer (1983) among others has argued that, thinking of the Forms 
as concrete and particular chemical elements (rather than as univer­
sals), along the lines of Anaxagoras’s ontology, makes much of what 
Plato says about the Forms more reasonable and acceptable. In broad 
agreement with Denyer’s line of thinking, to my mind too, Platonic 
individuals are collections of instances of Forms (i.e., of immanent 
Forms). In that sense, like Anaxagoras’s individuals and unlike 
Aristotle’s individuals, Plato’s individuals are matterless. They are 
bundles of properties.
1.4.  PARMENIDEAN CONSTRAINTS 
ON CHANGE
As the textual evidence reviewed in section 1.1 already indicated, 
Anaxagoras is well aware that in the course of the history of the uni­
verse things have changed—​namely, from a state of even mixture of 
the opposites to worlds inhabited by human beings devoted to agri­
culture.24 To facilitate our understanding of Anaxagoras’s metaphysi­
cal account of how these developments take place, it will be helpful 
to set out some standard distinctions concerning change. Creation 
24.  B4a:  “There are cities that have been constructed by humans and works 
made, just as with us” (καὶ τοῖς γε ἀνθρώποισιν εἶναι καὶ πόλεις συνημμένας καὶ ἔργα 
κατεσκευασμένα, ὥσπερ παρ’ ἡμῖν). I will return to the analysis of this fragment in 
­chapter 5.
 

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
25
    25
is the coming about of something from nothing. Generation is the 
coming about of something new from something already in existence 
in virtue of the latter being substantially transformed by acquiring 
or losing some of its essential properties—​for instance, when flour, 
sugar, and butter are made into a cake, or the parents’ semen and egg 
become an offspring. Alteration on the other hand takes place when 
something already in existence acquires or loses some of its nones­
sential properties —​for instance, when Socrates goes from being pale 
to becoming tanned. There is a sense in which in all three cases—​
creation, generation, and alteration—​something new results from 
the change. Even in the case of Socrates’s tanning, there is a new 
compound of Socrates and the property of being tanned that did not 
exist as such before the relevant alteration took place. The question 
we want to examine here is: what type(s) of change did Anaxagoras 
allow in his ontology? This question has been cast in the secondary 
literature in terms of whether Anaxagoras was an heir of Parmenides 
in his thinking about change, and if so, to what degree, as well as 
in which ways, if any, was he responding to Parmenides in drawing 
up his own account of reality. The issues here are vexed with contro­
versy in the scholarly literature, beginning with the interpretation of 
Parmenides himself.
However, most scholars think that Anaxagoras was a follower 
of Parmenides in the sense that his metaphysics prohibited genera­
tion and change from nonbeing.25 I endorse this conclusion, and in 
lieu of adding my own arguments for it, in what follows I will briefly 
argue against the alternative view, taking John Palmer (2009) as 
representative.
25. See for instance Curd (2010: 142) as representative of the state of the field. 
Those who think that Anaxagoras was a strict Parmenidean believe that Anaxagoras 
would have posited “a multitude of material beings that replicate as far as possible the 
attributes of Parmenidean Being” (in Palmer’s words, 2009: 225). For instance, Vlastos 
(1950: 327) and Guthrie (1965: 281), among others, think this; the latter writes that 
Anaxagoras’s account of the natural world was developed to accommodate the radi­
cal idea that “every natural substance must be assumed to have existence in the full 
Parmenidean sense.”

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
26
26
Palmer’s aim is to “deconstruct” the “myth” that Anaxagoras is 
an intellectual heir of Parmenides. His first set of reasons draw on 
his interpretation of Parmenides. The second set of reasons concern 
philosophical difficulties that Palmer believes Anaxagoras would be 
prey to if he endorsed Parmenides’s views. In discussing this sec­
ond group of reasons, Palmer claims that “the assumption that 
Anaxagoras aimed to accommodate purportedly Parmenidean stric­
tures against non-​being proves untenable on internal grounds … 
[It] either requires arbitrary restrictions or leads to absurdity” 
(2009: 227). The presumed absurdity is that in Anaxagoras’s uni­
verse “one should refrain from characterizing anything as such or 
as having any definite characteristics, except in a phenomenal man­
ner relative to the particular level of observation. With the excep­
tion of the Nous nothing in Anaxagoras is just what it appears to be” 
(2009: 242). It is not possible within the scope of this study to pay 
full justice to Palmer’s arguments on this topic. Yet the reasoning 
leading Palmer to the presumed absurdity raises questions that we 
need to consider here. On the interpretation of Anaxagoras’s meta­
physics which I will develop in the following chapters, it is not true 
that “nothing in Anaxagoras is just what it appears to be.” Palmer 
claims this because he holds that Anaxagoras thinks that nothing is 
“anything as such or as having any definite characteristics.” (We will 
see below that this is not in fact Anaxagoras’s view.) As I understand 
Palmer, he reads Anaxagoras as treating everything in his ontology 
the way he treats stuffs. For example, Anaxagoras holds that flesh 
is a kind of stuff that contains hair and nails in small quantities in 
its constitution—​flesh is a mixture of different kinds of stuff. We 
consider it uniform only because it appears thus to us. By exten­
sion, Palmer claims, for Anaxagoras any uniformity is phenomenal, 
relative to some level of possible observation, even if not at our 
perceptual level. Hence, for Palmer, everything in Anaxagoras is a 
mixture, even when it does not appear to a perceiver to be such. 
On account of this reasoning, Palmer dismisses the possibility that 
“Anaxagoras’s basic stuffs are designed to replicate the attributes of 

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
27
    27
Parmenidean Being” (2009: 242). This reasoning is not, however, apt 
to explain Anaxagoras’s ontology. For Anaxagoras, not everything 
is constitutionally mixed. Importantly, the opposites are not, for in 
Anaxagoras’s system there is pure hot, pure cold, etc.; instances of 
these pure powers can be inseparable, as Anaxagoras argues in B3 
and B8, but inseparability doesn’t entail constitutional mixing.26 
Thus Palmer’s charge that Anaxagoras’s system would face absurdity 
that if he were operating within a Parmenidean framework must be 
rejected.
In what follows I will use the adjective “Parmenidean” as a short­
hand for a philosophical position about change whose formulation 
is by and large (but not uncontroversially) attributed to the histori­
cal Parmenides, and I will assume that Anaxagoras holds this posi­
tion, on the basis of the textual evidence we have of his thought. 
Anaxagoras holds that there is no creation ex nihilo (or destruction; 
see, for instance, B3: “what-​is cannot not be”), no emergence of sub­
stances or qualities, and no qualitative alteration of the opposites 
over time. Among the extant texts where Anaxagoras’s views are 
reported, B5, B10, and B13 attest to this:
B5: He makes clear that none of the homogeneous stuffs either 
come to be or passes away, but that they are always the same.
ὅτι δὲ οὐδὲ γίνεται οὐδὲ φθείρεταί τι τῶν ὁμοιομερῶν, ἀλλ’ ἀεὶ τὰ 
αὐτά ἐστι. . .
B10: When Anaxagoras discovered the old belief that nothing 
comes from that which is not in any way whatsoever, he did 
away with coming-​to-​be and introduced dissociation in place of 
coming-​to-​be.
26. I will examine these fragments and Anaxagoras’s argument for the necessary 
inseparability of the opposites in ­chapter 3, section 3.1. As to the argument why the 
opposites are not constitutionally mixed: on the one hand there is no textual evidence 
to the effect that they are; on the other hand, if they were, absurdities would follow (as 
Edward Hussey cogently argues; see ­chapter 4, section 4.2).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
28
28
ὁ δὲ Ἀναξαγόρας παλαιὸν εὑρὼν δόγμα ὅτι οὐδὲν ἐκ τοῦ μηδαμῇ 
<μηδαμῶς ὄντος> γίνεται, γένεσιν μὲν ἀνῄρει, διάκρισιν δὲ 
εἰσῆγεν ἀντὶ γενέσεως.
B13: He says that coming-​to-​be is nothing other than separation, 
that separation comes to be on account of motion, and that Nous 
is the cause of motion.
εἴπερ τὴν γένεσιν οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ ἔκκρισιν εἶναί φησι, τὴν δὲ ἔκκρισιν 
ὑπὸ τῆς κινήσεως γίνεσθαι, τῆς δὲ κινήσεως αἴτιον εἶναι τὸν νοῦν.
What there is at the fundamental level of reality is always numerically 
and qualitatively the same (B5: ἀεὶ τὰ αὐτά ἐστι), and Anaxagoras 
banishes from his ontology both creation and substantial as well 
as qualitative emergence. All that happens when something new 
comes about is rearrangement by means of spatial movement of 
what there (already) is. Coming to be and passing away are pro­
cesses of “combination and separation”; B10 and 13, but also B17 
indicate this:27
B17: Anaxagoras says clearly in the first book of the Physics that 
coming-​to-​be and passing-​away are combining and dissociating, 
writing this: “The Greeks do not think correctly about coming-​to-​
be and passing-​away; for no thing comes to be or passes away, but 
is mixed together and dissociated from the things that are. And 
thus they would be correct to call coming-​to-​be mixing-​together 
and passing-​away dissociating.”
σαφῶς δὲ Ἀναξαγόρας ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ τῶν Φυσικῶν τὸ γίνεσθαι 
καὶ ἀπόλλυσθαι συγκρίνεσθαι καὶ διακρίνεσθαι λέγει γράφων 
οὕτως· τὸ δὲ γίνεσθαι καὶ ἀπόλλυσθαι οὐκ ὀρθῶς νομίζουσιν οἱ 
Ἕλληνες· οὐδὲν γὰρ χρῆμα γίνεται οὐδὲ ἀπόλλυται, ἀλλ’ ἀπὸ 
ἐόντων χρημάτων συμμίσγεταί τε καὶ διακρίνεται. καὶ οὕτως ἂν 
27. This combination and separation is only ever partial, because nothing can be 
separate out completely from everything else; see ­chapter 3, section 3.1.

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
29
    29
ὀρθῶς καλοῖεν τό τε γίνεσθαι συμμίσγεσθαι καὶ τὸ ἀπόλλυσθαι 
διακρίνεσθαι.
For Parmenidean reasons, which I  mentioned above, Anaxagoras 
does not admit in his ontology the possibility of emergence of new 
forms of being, as from composition. While holding his mereologi­
cal principle, which identifies composed wholes with the sum of 
their parts, Anaxagoras allows for phenomenal emergence of beings 
that are over and above their parts. In other words, for Anaxagoras, 
ontological composition and emergence are phenomenal rather than 
real. Accordingly, he develops the notion of things becoming or being 
manifest, namely perceptually evident (ἔνδηλον).28 It appears to per­
ceivers that there are wholes, where (in reality) there are only parts. 
As a consequence, he is a perceptual relativist about ontological com­
position, i.e., he relativizes composition to perception. For example, 
stuff that is composed of a number of compresent opposites, e.g., 
earth or blood, exists as a kind relative to our perceptual powers. As 
we have seen in B15, the “generation” of earth, for instance, is just 
the becoming visible of certain concentrations of opposites in a spa­
tiotemporal location. Of course, this does not mean that there is no 
earth or blood. What it means is that earth and blood are mereologi­
cal sums or aggregates, each constituted by a different set of powers, 
with different properties. However, they are not emergent wholes, 
and their uniformity as stuff is phenomenal only. (Although he was 
a contemporary of Protagoras, it does not appear that Anaxagoras 
singled out the human perspective as privileged, in the way that 
Protagoras held that “man is the measure of all things: of the things 
that are, that they are, of the things that are not, that they are not” 
28. For example, Anaxagoras writes in B1 that in the cosmic mixture “because all 
things were together, nothing was evident on account of smallness … when they were 
all together, nothing was clear and manifest because of their smallness” (καὶ πάντων 
ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲν ἔνδηλον ἦν ὑπὸ σμικρότητος). I return to this topic (and the exist­
ing discussion in the literature) in ­chapter 4, and also in ­chapter 6; see also Schofield 
(1980), ­chapter 4.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
30
30
[DK 80B1]. Anaxagoras seems to relativize composition and emer­
gence to perceivers in general.)
It is important to emphasize that Anaxagoras’s account of the 
generation of material objects and organisms is not eliminativist—​it 
does not deny them a place in Anaxagoras’s system. Rather, on his 
account such entities exist, but are ontologically fully reducible to 
the fundamental building blocks out of which they are composed 
(e.g. seeds and opposites in the case of living beings), and their 
arrangement in space-​time.29 Hence, my proposed interpretation 
of Anaxagoras’s views on change avoids two alternative problematic 
readings: that living beings and material objects are ab aeterno part 
of the ontology as primitives, on the one hand; and on the other, the 
idea that there are no things at all in the system because all there 
“really” is are the opposites.30
In conclusion, for Anaxagoras there is no initial creation from 
nothing, no passage from nonbeing to being and from being to non­
being, and finally, no qualitative alteration of what is, or generation 
of new types of being. Does this mean that, for Anaxagoras, the world 
is changeless? We already saw that there is clear textual evidence that 
the universe’s development has undergone different stages. In B17, 
Anaxagoras provides an explanation of the phenomenon we describe 
as coming to be and passing away of material objects in terms of com­
bination and dissociation of the fundamental elements in the uni­
verse. This stance allows him to have a very parsimonious account 
of change in general, which is reduced to spatial movement of what 
29. Their arrangement in space-​time does raise difficulties, which will be investi­
gated in ­chapter 5.
30. The former of the two is the reading that Eric Lewis for instance gives; he 
believes that “Anaxagoras took the bold step of having it that all individual organisms 
have always existed” (2002: 22). On Lewis’s interpretation Anaxagoras “makes the 
individual organisms eternal, via his theory of seeds”; there are externally in the world 
“seeds of all the individual organisms that will ever exist,” that is, “homunculi of all 
individual organisms” or tiny instances of all individuals (2000: 18). On account of the 
arguments I offered in this sections, it seems unjustified to saddle Anaxagoras with 
the view Lewis attributes to him, which has been criticized also in Palmer (2009: 239–​
40). I return to the topic of the seeds in ­chapter 5.

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
31
    31
there is at the fundamental level. In this qualified sense, Anaxagoras 
does admit generation in his cosmology. Apart from stuff, the 
account can apply to different kinds of alteration, for instance, the 
case of Socrates becoming tanned. Tanned Socrates can be thought to 
be a new entity that comes about when the property “being tanned” 
comes to apply to Socrates. But Socrates being tanned is only the 
result of a color uniformity that emerges at a certain perceptual level. 
When something “new” comes about, this happens by means of spa­
tial movement of what has always been in existence. What is it then 
that has always been in existence, and has been and will always be 
qualitatively the same in Anaxagoras’s universe?
1.5.  THE CAUSAL EFFICACY OF 
THE OPPOSITES
How does the world and everything else in it come about? And what 
explains all that happens within it? Everything, for Anaxagoras, is 
due to the opposites, the seeds and the activity of nous. What nous 
is and how it operates will be examined in ­chapter  5; the seeds 
will be examined there also. This section addresses specifically the 
question of what the opposites are. There is a long-​established exe­
getical tradition that takes Anaxagoras’s opposites to be powers.31 
Gregory Vlastos is the most significant exponent of that tradition, 
writing that
the most important step ever taken toward the true under­
standing of Anaxagoras, was made by Tannery’s suggestion that 
the ultimate ingredients … are the hot and the cold, the dry and 
the moist, and all the traditional “opposites” of Ionian cosmol­
ogy. These are conceived … as substantial “quality-​things” or, 
31.  See among others Tannery (1886:  280ff.); Burnet (1892:  288–​90, and 
1930: 263–​64); Vlastos (1950: 41–​42); Schofield (1980: 120).
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
32
32
better still, as forms of energy or “power” (dynamis). (1950: 41–​42, 
my emphasis)32
Perhaps the idea that opposites are powers seemed so compelling 
to Vlastos that he did not think that further arguments would be 
required in support of this interpretation, appealing as he did only 
to what he saw as the achievements made in his contemporary philo­
sophical context. Thinking of them as powers is indeed a promising 
direction; I share Vlastos’s view in this respect. There are however 
important issues to investigate. On the one hand, there are clear indi­
cations in the extant texts that Anaxagoras’s opposites have causal 
efficacy with respect to change—​they make things happen.33 If there 
is a plausible way to explain how Anaxagorean opposites can have 
causal efficacy, there is a strong motivation to understand them as 
causal powers. On the other hand, we cannot attribute to Anaxagoras 
a conception of the causal efficacy of the opposites that runs contrary 
to his adherence to the Parmenidean strictures discussed in section 
1.2. To establish the interpretative claim that Anaxagoras’s opposites 
are what we call causal powers, one needs to set out what the crite­
ria (or our criteria) are for something to be a power, and examine 
whether the opposites meet them.34 From this interpretative exer­
cise, we will note a number of interesting considerations for ancient 
and contemporary power metaphysics.
32. Vlastos adds by way of support of his claim: “That Anaxagoras shared the 
traditional view of the ‘powers’ is a reasonable assumption, and this not in spite but 
because of the scantiness of our notices on this topic. Had he deviated in any signifi­
cant way, some trace of the innovation would have been left in the record” (1950: 43).
33. The textual evidence that the opposites have causal efficacy in Anaxagoras’s 
world will be reviewed below.
34. The word dynamis does not appear in the extant fragments but this should not 
be thought of as a difficulty, partly because of the scarcity of the surviving texts, partly 
because we cannot expect at this stage of development of the history of philosophy an 
already codified terminology for metaphysics. Relatedly, Sedley (2007: 15) argues that 
it is too early in the history of philosophy to think that Anaxagoras introduced tech­
nical terms. (Rather, according to Sedley, Anaxagoras tries to “expunge” misleading 
expressions from ordinary language. I raise the same points concerning the so-​called 
seeds, in ­chapter 5.)

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
33
    33
In general terms, causal powers are properties essentially defined 
by their causal efficacy, that is, the exercise of their powerfulness 
(e.g., the hot is defined by heating). There are two influential ways of 
thinking about the causal efficacy of powers that are relevant to the 
present investigation: one is of Aristotelian descent, and the other 
has been put forward in contemporary metaphysics in recent years.35 
It is important to introduce them in order to examine whether 
Anaxagoras’s opposites align with either of these two mainstream 
conceptions of powers and causal efficacy, and if not, to distinguish 
what is distinctive about Anaxagorean powers. In what follows I will 
argue that Anaxagoras does not think of opposites as causal powers 
in either of the two post-​Aristotelian ways we are familiar with.
According to Aristotle’s still influential conception of powers, 
a power is causally efficacious two things obtain. First, the power 
is activated by undergoing a transition from the state of potenti­
ality to the state of actuality and thus changing (intransitively). 
Second, the power changes (transitively) something else. For 
example, x’s power to heat gets activated and heats up something 
colder, which thereby changes by being heated. Both the intransi­
tive and transitive changes in question are qualitative changes. 
Because Anaxagoras does not allow for qualitative change in his 
ontology, it is evident that he cannot admit that powers change, 
transitively or intransitively—​as Aristotelian powers do.36 There 
is however an alternative conception of powers, held in modern 
metaphysics, which might be thought to be a helpful model to 
understand how Anaxagoras thinks of powers. According to this 
alternative conception, powers exist in potentiality, and their 
manifestation is the production of a new, different power (also in 
35. It is not anachronistic to open up a theoretical possibility for thinking of 
Anaxagoras’s opposites on the basis of current research in metaphysics. The goal is to 
understand Anaxagoras in his own terms, but as we approach him from our contem­
porary standpoint, we need to be able to understand what is different between his way 
of thinking of causal powers and ours, and this is why introducing ours is relevant.
36. Appendix 1.A at the end of this chapter brings out noteworthy connections 
between Anaxagoras’s and Aristotle’s power ontology.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
34
34
potentiality); for example fragility is manifested in the new pow­
ers of the fractured glass that come about.37 Mumford and Anjum, 
for instance, who hold this view, claim that “causation happens 
when powers do their work” (2011: 30), and that the work of a 
power is “producing its own manifestation” (2011: 8).38 So causa­
tion happens when a power produces its manifestation. But if a 
power and its manifestation are related as producer and product, 
the manifestation of a power is something numerically different 
from the power itself, and it is something the power is in fact caus­
ally related to. Confirmation that Mumford and Anjum think of 
the manifestation of a power as something numerically different 
from the power itself can be seen in their explanation that “the 
manifestation of a power will … be itself a further power or cluster 
of powers” (2011: 5, my emphasis). On their model, the manifes­
tation of a power consists in its replacement with a new one. This 
new power is real, though unmanifested (until it gets together 
with its own manifestation partner, and produces a further 
power, etc.). Although the powers themselves are not involved 
in a change of state from potentiality to actuality, the view calls 
for new powers that come to be when the original ones manifest. 
But this runs contrary to the Parmenidean stance against change, 
and so plausibly this conception of powers cannot be attributed 
to Anaxagoras.
So in which way, if any, are Anaxagoras’s opposites causally effica­
cious? In what follows I will address the issue of whether and how the 
distinction between potentiality and actuality applies to Anaxagorean 
powers, and what type of causal efficacy his powers have. Because 
Anaxagoras did not want to introduce processes of qualitative change 
in his system, he did not allow for physical activities in the universe 
other than spatial movement. Thus, he did not have a metaphysics 
37. This approach does not distinguish between a power’s being exercised and a 
power’s being manifested.
38.  Mumford and Anjum advocate this position in their Getting Causes from 
Powers (2011). See also my contribution to the book symposium on Getting Causes 
from Powers (McKitrick et al. 2013).

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
35
    35
of interaction among physical powers—​ that is, an interaction that 
brings about changes of state other than through movement. Yet he 
is reported in A90 to have thought that, for example, the sun’s heat 
burned things or made water evaporate:
Anaxagoras says that in the beginning, after the marshy water 
was burned by the revolutions of the sun and after the very rare 
moisture evaporated, the remainder that settled out was salt and 
bitterness. (Aëtius 3.16.2)
Ἀ. τοῦ κατ’ ἀρχὴν λιμνάζοντος ὑγροῦ περικαέντος ὑπὸ τῆς 
ἡλιακῆς  περιφορᾶς καὶ τοῦ λεπτοτάτου ἐξατμισθέντος εἰς 
ἁλυκίδα καὶ πικρίαν τὸ λοιπὸν ὑποστῆναι.
What are we to make of this testimony if we take it at face value? 
Presumably, Anaxagoras would have explained the causal efficacy 
of the sun in terms of the spatial movement of the fundamental 
tropes in his system. Nevertheless, even causing mere movement 
requires causal impact and some form of interaction. Anaxagoras 
seems not to have singled out this state of interacting powers as a 
distinct ontological state that he has to account for. Anaxagoras’s 
powers have only one state, which is the same when they are inter­
acting with other powers and when they are not.39 In other words, 
he does not distinguish a state of potentiality from one of where 
powers are exercised. He did not have the metaphysical distinction 
(drawn first by late Plato,40 and developed by Aristotle) between 
39. Mourelatos (1987) finds this position widespread among Parmenides’s imme­
diate successors:
It is important to note that when the Pluralists speak of a dynamis or “power” 
present in a fundamental constituent, they must be taken to imply a power that 
is continuously, even eternally manifest; nothing like the Aristotelian scheme 
of potencies that are triggered into actualities can be presupposed; nothing like 
Aristotelian qualitative alteration or qualitative interaction can be envisaged. 
(1986: 134–​35)
40. For instance, in the Theaetetus, at 197b–​d, where Plato distinguishes possess­
ing from having a coat, and by analogy, possessing and having knowledge.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
36
36
potentiality and actuality.41 Since Anaxagoras’s powers can and 
do interact in appropriate conditions, e.g., when the sun revolves 
in the example above, we can plausibly assume that the state in 
which they always are is an active state—​whether interacting or 
not. Anaxagoras’s position is thus distinct from that of Aristotle 
on the one hand, and from that represented, e.g., by Mumford and 
Anjum on the other.
Now on to the type of causal efficacy Anaxagorean powers can have. 
They can have a constitutional—​as well as qualitative—​causal role, by 
making other things be of the kind that the preponderant opposite in 
them is. They do so by exhibiting their (different kinds of) natures 
when their instances are present in appropriate degrees of quantity 
or intensity in a specific spatiotemporal region of the universe.42 This 
is a conception of causal efficacy that does not involve the change or 
activation of any particular power itself, but only the effect of their 
accumulation. The opposites come to predominate in specific spatio­
temporal regions of the universe because of external factors (the vor­
tex started off by nous, as we will see in ­chapter 5) operating on them 
and redistributing them in space. In B13, for instance, we read,
When Nous began to move [things], there was separation 
off from the multitude that was being moved, and whatever 
Nous moved, all this was dissociated; and as things were being 
moved and dissociated, the revolution made them dissociate 
much more.
καὶ ἐπεὶ ἤρξατο ὁ νοῦς κινεῖν, ἀπὸ τοῦ κινουμένου παντὸς 
ἀπεκρίνετο, καὶ ὅσον ἐκίνησεν ὁ νοῦς, πᾶν τοῦτο διεκρίθη· 
κινουμένων δὲ καὶ διακρινομένων ἡ περιχώρησις πολλῷ μᾶλλον 
ἐποίει διακρίνεσθαι.
41. On Aristotle, see Marmodoro (2014a, 2015).
42. In this sense they have constitutional causal efficacy. See also sections 1.4 in 
this chapter and 2.4 in ­chapter 2.

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
37
    37
Thus, Anaxagoras conceives of causation as actual quantitative trans­
mission (by spatial movement) of, e.g., “bits” or tropes of heat when 
something is made hotter: it happens by power transference.43
In conclusion, in thinking about causal powers, Aristotle, as well 
as his successors (up to our modern times), presupposes a distinc­
tion between powers being in potentiality and being in actuality, 
which, as we saw above, Anaxagoras does not have. Anaxagoras’s 
powers are always active—​they undergo no change of state when 
they interact with other opposites. Nevertheless, they do cause 
“change”—​change of the sort that I will discuss in more detail in 
­chapter 2—​when some of the opposites come to predominate mod­
ulo perception in some spatiotemporal location over other oppo­
sites. In this connection, one may think of an object before the hot 
comes to predominate in it as being potentially hot, and after it 
comes to predominate in it, as actually hot. Generalizing from this, 
one may think that in Anaxagoras’s system objects have the potenti­
ality to change. But Anaxagoras does not give us any reason to think 
that he singled out states of potentiality of objects in his ontology. 
This potentiality of objects to change should not be confused with 
the potentiality of the opposites to change status, from being in 
potentiality to being in actuality, when engaging in causal interac­
tion. It is metaphysically significant that Anaxagorean opposites do 
not undergo a change from potentiality to actuality and that they 
do not change each other when they causally interact. If they could 
change themselves, or one another, there would be a passage from 
43. The idea that causation happens because of the passing around or transmis­
sion of properties was widespread in antiquity. This is known in the literature as the 
Contagion Model of causation. The model was also revived in early modern philoso­
phy; see for reference, e.g., O’Neil (1993: 44). Aristotle too talked of the transmission 
of the form of the agent’s power onto the patient’s power. But for Aristotle, this is a 
figurative way of speaking; transmission of form is not literal in his system, like the 
physical transference of a quantity, e.g., of a book or of heat, but more like the trans­
mission of information. The causal agent’s form comes to be the patient’s form as a 
result of changes induced in the patient by the agent. I discuss Aristotle’s account of 
causation in Marmodoro (2007, 2014a, 2014b).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
38
38
nonbeing to being, which would defy Anaxagoras’s explicit endorse­
ment of Parmenidean principles.44
1.6.  AN EARLY POWER ONTOLOGY?
On the interpretation I am motivating, Anaxagorean opposites do 
bring about “change” in objects (e.g., from being cold to being hot), 
and make things be of the kind the predominant opposite in them 
is. Still, this conception of causal efficacy does not involve a causal 
effect of an opposite on the nature of another opposite. A cold object 
may become hot, but the existing tropes of cold in the universe 
always remain cold. So on this ground, my account might be taken to 
suggest that Anaxagorean opposites are categorical, i.e., inert prop­
erties.45 Yet I submit the opposites are causally efficacious, only in a 
different way than what we (post-​Aristotle) might expect, and thus 
are not inert properties. They are powers, and in fact “pure” powers, 
that is, with no categorical base. Two things are to be established for 
my conclusion to be justified: that the opposites are powerful—​each 
in ways specific to the kind of opposite it is, and that they are powers 
(rather than, they have powers); in other words, all there is to their 
nature is their powerfulness. Concerning the first point, we can see 
that opposites are powerful, for instance, in B16, where Anaxagoras 
claims that “from the earth, stones are compacted by the cold” 
(ἐκ δὲ τῆς γῆς λίθοι συμπήγνυνται ὑπὸ τοῦ ψυχροῦ). It is the cold 
that compacts stones from earth, not, for instance, the hot or the 
bright. This suggests that each kind of opposites has its own specific 
44. In this sense, there is an analogy between Anaxagoras’s way of obeying 
Parmenides’s strictures on change and the atomists’.
45. There exists a vast literature on the distinction between powers and categori­
cal properties. See, for instance, Armstrong (2005).
 

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
39
    39
powerfulness.46 Concerning now the second point, we saw above, 
and we will investigate further in ­chapter 2, that opposites change a 
thing’s constitution, not by qualitatively changing the existing ele­
ments in the thing’s constitution, but by a change in the aggrega­
tion of opposites of specific kinds. It is the presence of opposites 
and their predominance that determines the nature of objects.
If we suppose that the opposites are causal powers, Anaxagoras 
can be thought to have a power ontology only if all there is in his 
system is a power and/​or can be reduced to powers. Regarding nous 
and the seeds, we will see in ­chapter  5 that they too are powers. 
Regarding stuff, my position is that it can be metaphysically reduced 
to the opposites. There is no scholarly consensus on the this point. In 
support of my interpretation I will here engage with an objection to 
this purported reduction by Daniel Graham (2004), as representative 
of that line of thinking. Graham writes:
I believe the Tanner-​Burnet view is false (2004: 2)… . According 
to the Tannery-​Burnet view (as I understand it) stuffs such as 
flesh and iron are understood as being composed of qualities 
such as hot, cold, wet and dry. Inasmuch as, e.g., flesh is just a 
ratio of qualities, an ultimate description of the world would not 
need to list flesh, but only hot, cold, dry, wet, etc. (2004: 3)
Graham develops two arguments based on methodological consider­
ations against to the Tanner-​Burnet view. The first one is that
if the Tanner-​Burnet view is true, we should expect some sys­
tematic difference in treatment of the opposites and the stuffs to 
appear, some indication that powers are causally, ontologically, 
or logically prior to stuffs. But while B4b hints at a categorial dis­
tinction between powers and stuffs, it falls short of establishing 
the priority of the former over the latter. (2004: 6)
46. In general, the opposites have local causal efficacy, while nous, via the vortex, 
has cosmic causal efficacy, as I argue in ­chapter 5.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
40
40
One question to consider here is whether it is fair to make such a 
methodological demand of Anaxagoras. He did not have the same 
classification system concerning priority that we have, following 
Aristotle. On the other hand he has criteria of his own, based on 
constitutional considerations. I believe that his main classificatory 
criteria for distinguishing ontologically prior and secondary entities 
are (i) whether x is structured or not; and (ii) whether x is mixed or 
not. The second of Graham’s arguments is that on the Tanner-​Burnet 
interpretation, Anaxagoras
turns out to be a more radical reductionist than Empedocles. 
For while Empedocles reduces one set of stuffs to another set, 
Anaxagoras reduces all stuffs to entities of a different and more 
primitive categorial order all together: stuffs are derived from 
powers. Hence there is a type difference between the items to 
be reduced and the items to which they are reduced with cross 
categorial boundaries. There is no clear-​cut historical anteced­
ent to this kind of reductionism; no earlier Presocratic seems to 
have made such a leap. It is … possible that … Anaxagoras felt 
impelled to make a bold innovation… . But if so, he was going 
out on a philosophical limb. (2004: 9)
To put my response in simple terms, stuffs for Anaxagoras consist 
of opposites in the way that a soup is made of tomato juice, water, 
and oil. Anaxagoras did not think there is a cross-​categorial differ­
ence between, e.g., the cold, the dark, the dense, and earth, any more 
than he would have thought that there is a cross-​categorial difference 
between tomato juice and tomato soup. The reason for this is that 
he did not think of the opposites the way we think of properties, or 
even the way Aristotle thought of form—​that is, as abstract univer­
sal entities whose nature is in contrast to material stuff. Anaxagoras’s 
opposites are not abstract, but physical, and his stuff too is not mate­
rial (in the aforementioned Aristotelian sense), but physical. What 
we call material body is for Anaxagoras just a mixture of the physi­
cal opposites, as argued in section 1.4 above. Graham has yet a third 

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
41
    41
objection to the reduction of stuff to opposites in Anaxagoras’s 
system:
Anaxagoras’ commitment to pluralism in metaphysics seems to 
square poorly with reductionism… . It is certainly not a classic 
reductionist strategy to reduce an uncountably large number of 
phenomena to an uncountably large number of principles. It seems 
strange for a philosopher with such a powerful tool as reduction­
ism not to exploit for the purposes of simplification. (2004: 12)
Although in reading Anaxagoras we may be inclined to pay special 
attention to his reductionism, reflecting our own 20th-​ and 21st-​
century philosophical interests, what seems to have made a deep 
impression on Anaxagoras is the qualitatively irreducible differences 
between properties such as the hot, the cold, the bright, the blue, the 
sweet, etc. In this, reifying numerous primitive opposites and assert­
ing their irreducibility, Anaxagoras is a pioneer and perhaps even 
influenced Plato’s Theory of Forms.
A final point of engagement with Graham’s interpretation: I take 
all properties to be opposites, for Anaxagoras. So, color, for instance, 
consists in the opposites dark and light, while on Graham’s interpreta­
tion, what he calls nonopposite properties (which are features of the 
primitive stuff and become perceptible through preponderance) are not 
entities for Anaxagoras; color is a case in point. That is to say, such prop­
erties are not reified, nor are they reduced to the opposites. He writes,
The phenomenal stuffs … are … mixtures in which a given element 
iterates its own properties at the phenomenal level; the properties 
of the phenomenal stuff are not a function of several primitive ele­
ments, but the expression of a single element. (2004: 4)
But, if this is so, the ontology attributed to Anaxagoras lacks an 
account of properties, and in fact, of properties that surface at the 
phenomenal level. I submit this is an uncharitable interpretation of 
Anaxagoras’s system.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
42
42
To conclude this section, material objects (in the broadest sense, 
including animals and plants) have capacities, abilities, dispositions, 
etc.; in short, they are powerful. Anaxagoras’s metaphysics aims to 
explain how objects are powerful. There are two routes, broadly speak­
ing, that he could have taken to deliver this explanation. He could 
have posited that at the fundamental level there were items that had 
powers, or that were powers. If Anaxagoras chose the former route, his 
ontology would have made only a partial contribution toward explain­
ing what it is for an object to be powerful: he would have explained 
the object’s having powers in terms of further objects (its constitu­
ents) having powers. Anaxagoras did not choose this route. Instead, 
he chose to posit powers first, i.e., to build the world from powers, 
the opposites, and to explain the “generation” of powerful objects as 
resulting from the aggregation of these powers. This appears to be a 
more complete and yet economical explanation of the powerfulness of 
objects. I conclude that it is textually and philosophically plausible to 
take Anaxagoras to have developed a powers-​only ontology.
1.7.  CLOSING REMARKS
This chapter has introduced the metaphysical foundations of 
Anaxagoras’s philosophy of nature. Anaxagoras develops a cosmology 
according to which the world that we experience originates from a cos­
mic mixture of all elements together. As we will see in more detail in 
­chapter 5, at some point in time the mixture is set in motion by a cos­
mic vortex, by nous’s intervention. This results in the scattering of the 
elements in different locations and the formation of the world of our 
experience. The fundamental elements in question are properties, and 
more specifically, what the ancients called the opposites, such as hot 
and cold, wet and dry, rough and smooth, etc. The fact that Anaxagoras 
thinks of the elemental properties as opposites motivated the sugges­
tion (by Tannery, Burnet, and Vlastos) that they are what we call causal 
powers. I offered arguments and textual evidence in support of this 
interpretation. As causal powers, they are of a distinctive kind, tailored 
 

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
43
    43
to fit the metaphysical strictures of Anaxagoras’s ontology. The meta­
physical status of the opposites is to be tropes; they are physical and 
concrete; they do not qualify matter, in the way in which, for instance, 
Aristotelian forms do. Matter as such is not part of Anaxagoras’s ontol­
ogy, in the sense that he does not have abstraction and instantiation as 
metaphysical tools at his disposal, and thus he does not conceptualize a 
substratum that survives qualitative or substantial change. From these 
points, two further tenets of Anaxagoras follow: that material objects 
are bundles of tropes, and that qualitative change, generation, and 
destruction in the physical world are reducible to spatial movement of 
tropes. Thus the opposites are physical properties from which matter 
results. If the opposites are the fundamental constituents of reality, 
and they are causal powers, it is plausible to interpret Anaxagoras’s 
theory as an early power ontology.47
1.A.  APPENDIX: ANAXAGOREAN VERSUS 
ARISTOTELIAN POWERS
This chapter has already introduced some points of analogy and contrast 
between Anaxagoras’s and Aristotle’s metaphysics.48 The purpose of this 
appendix is to identify the key fundamental assumption they share, not­
withstanding the profound differences in their philosophical systems. The 
assumption is that the building blocks of all there is in the physical world are 
powers. Aristotle offers his famous analysis of the simple elements, namely 
fire, air, water, and earth, in De Generatione et Corruptione. In allotting the 
47. I am currently investigating in other work the extent to which there is broad 
consensus on this metaphysical starting point across different thinkers and differ­
ent historical periods in ancient Western thought. My working hypothesis, which 
drives my research program “Power Structuralism in Ancient Ontologies,” funded 
by the European Research Council (award number 263484) is that nearly all ancient 
ontologies posit powers as the sole type of fundamental building block of reality. It is 
interesting to note that the powers-​only approach appears to be the starting point in 
ancient metaphysics, rather than an alternative to mainstream metaphysics, as power 
ontology is today.
48.  The material presented in this appendix is more extensively discussed in 
Marmodoro (2014a, ­chapter 1; 2016b; and also 2016a).
 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
44
44
fundamental properties that characterize these elements, Aristotle narrows 
down the candidates to the tangible contrarieties (329b6–​9), and of those, 
the ones that are powers: “capable of acting and being affected … said of 
things in virtue of their acting upon something else or being acted upon by 
something else” (329b20–​21).49 He goes through an analysis of the list of 
contrary powers of what is tangible, and concludes that they are all reduc­
ible to four primary or fundamental ones: heat, cold, wetness, and dryness 
(330a24–​29). The four simple elements are constituted of the four primary 
powers: “Fire is hot and dry, whereas Air is hot and moist … and Water is 
cold and wet, while Earth is cold and dry” (330b3–​5). There are no further 
fundamental properties, and these four constitute the simple elements from 
which all else is composed. The simple elements can reciprocally transform 
into one another by gaining or losing their powers—​for instance:
There will be Air, when the cold of the Water and the dry of the Fire 
have passed-​away (since the hot of the latter and the moist of the 
former are left); whereas, when the hot of the Fire and the moist of 
the Water have passed-​away, there will be Earth, owing to the sur­
vival of the dry of the Fire and the cold of the Water. (331b14–​18)
What Aristotle is describing in the passage above is the constitution of 
the most fundamental level of reality. In sum, there are four types of pri­
mary power, which do not exist separately each on their own, but pair up 
and constitute the simple elements. The simple elements—​earth, water, air, 
and fire—​are the most fundamental separable things in nature.50 Each ele­
ment has two contrarieties, and when they come in contact, the interaction 
between them results in, e.g., the heat of fire overpowering the coldness of 
the water, while the wetness of water overpowers the dryness of fire, giving 
rise to what is hot and wet, namely air (e.g., steam). Accordingly, Aristotle 
distinguishes the underlying matter, the contrary properties, and the com­
posite of the two, namely the simple elements:
Our own doctrine is that although there is a matter of the perceptible 
bodies (a matter out of which the so-​called elements come-​to-​be), it 
has no separate existence, but is always bound up with a contrariety. 
A more precise account of this has been given in another work; we 
49. The translations of Aristotle’s texts are all from Barnes (1984).
50. They are separable at least in principle, since they are not found in pure form 
in nature, but mixed between them. For instance, in the Generation and Corruption we 
read that “fire and air, and each of the bodies we have mentioned, are not simple but 
combined” (330b21–​23).

T he  F u nda me n ta l I t e ms  i n t h e On tol o g y
45
    45
must, however, give a detailed explanation of the primary bodies as 
well, since they too are similarly derived from the matter. We must 
reckon as a principle and as primary the matter which underlies, 
though it is inseparable from, the contrary qualities: for the hot is 
not matter for the cold nor the cold for the hot, but the substratum 
is matter for them both. Thus as principles we have firstly that which 
is potentially perceptible body [i.e. matter in potentiality], secondly 
the contrarieties (I mean, e.g. heat and cold), and thirdly Fire, Water, 
and the like. For these bodies change into one another (they are not 
immutable as Empedocles and other thinkers assert, since alteration 
would then have been impossible), whereas the contrarieties do not 
change. (329a28–​b2, my emphasis)
The difference between this account and how Anaxagoras would describe 
the phenomenon is that while Aristotle explains change in terms of physi­
cal continuity and change of form, Anaxagoras would think of it in terms 
of a succession of opposites in the same location. It is important to note 
that this difference does not entail a difference concerning whether powers 
are concrete or not, as argued in section 1.3 of this chapter. The fact that 
Anaxagoras’s powers are not en-​mattered only entails that we cannot divide 
them by abstraction into a form and a substratum; whereas we can divide 
Aristotelian powers this way (for instance, when the form of heat comes to be 
instantiated where the form of cold was in a pot, as the fire warms the pot up). 
Properties, for Aristotle, are not subject to change. This is because abstract 
forms explain change; if they could change, a regress would develop, whereby 
a further form-​type entity would needed to explain the change. Since proper­
ties themselves do not change, when change occurs, it is the entity qualified 
by a property that changes, by acquiring a new property in place of the former 
one. For Anaxagoras, fundamental properties do not change, either, because 
they are simple (that is, not “divisible” into substratum and form); it is this 
that blocks change at the fundamental level of reality. Yet entities qualified by 
fundamental properties do “change” (e.g., water can warm up), by gaining or 
losing simple fundamental properties—​the opposites.

46
46
Chapter 2
 The Principles Governing 
the Ontology
A prominent philosophical concern of Anaxagoras’s is to account for 
the observable natural phenomena within the Parmenidean stric­
tures examined in ­chapter  1, that is, without allowing generation 
or destruction or even qualitative change of what there is, but only 
spatial movement. That this is an important concern for Anaxagoras 
is clear from the frequency with which the issue is mentioned in the 
extant texts.1 What makes the puzzle of change particularly challeng­
ing for Anaxagoras is that he sees no reason to think that changes 
in nature are somehow restricted in such a way that only things of 
a certain kind can derive from things of some other kind. On the 
contrary, for him anything can derive from anything.2 No argument, or 
even an empirical observation directly attributable to Anaxagoras, 
that might have motivated him to take this unrestricted view of 
change has been preserved in the extant texts.3 So while it is clear 
from the extant texts that Anaxagoras does believe in unrestricted 
1. With the caveat that not all Anaxagoras wrote was preserved, so we can only 
talk of relative frequency.
2. For example, Anaxagoras could have posited that flesh comes only from flesh; 
but he rather thinks flesh may come from gold, and earth from pulp.
3. Only B10 suggests that the development of a complete offspring out of the 
seminal fluid of the father might have appeared to Anaxagoras a case in point of unre­
stricted transformation. B10 is discussed below. On the other hand Aristotle reports 
that it was an empirical observation that led Anaxagoras (and his followers) to commit 
to unrestricted extraction:
 
 

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
47
    47
derivation, we can only speculate as to why he took that view, as the 
textual evidence does not give us any pointers. I submit that hav­
ing a mechanism that allows for unrestricted derivation might have 
seemed to Anaxagoras a simpler and more economical metaphysical 
view, and thus preferable to others on what we would nowadays call 
methodological grounds. It is also the case that Anaxagoras’s meta­
physics would not have the resources for restricting transformation, 
if this were a desideratum in his system; perhaps this was also a con­
sideration that played a role in Anaxagoras’s refraining from restrict­
ing transformation.
If, then, anything can “come out” of anything in Anaxagoras’s sys­
tem, how is this possible? What metaphysics backs up Anaxagoras’s 
stance? This chapter and the following two will investigate this ques­
tion. They will introduce and investigate the theory of extreme mix­
ture that underpins Anaxagoras’s position regarding unrestricted 
derivation. This theory is famously encapsulated in the principle that 
there is a share of everything in everything and some other central 
principles that this chapter will investigate. The next one, ­chapter 3, 
will concentrate on the everything-​in-​everything principle, and argue 
that a sound understanding of this principle requires a shift in inter­
pretative approach, which is put forward in the chapter, along with 
the textual evidence that supports it. Following on this discussion, 
­chapter 4 will review the existing main interpretations of the tenet 
that there is a share of everything in everything, and the difficulties 
that those interpretations encounter. This will provide further argu­
ments in support of my proposed interpretation, by way of present­
ing the existing alternatives in the literature, and the difficulties they 
are prey to.
So they [the Anaxagoreans] assert that everything has been mixed in every­
thing, because they saw [ἑώρων] everything arising out of everything. (Physics, 
187b1–​2)
I assume that Aristotle did not literally believe the Anaxagoreans saw everything, 
but only dissimilars arising from dissimilars. In view of the ancient’s predilection for 
the principle that “like causes like,” even a single instance of “unlike causing unlike” 
would have sufficed to motivate an alternative account of causation.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
48
48
2.1.  THE PRINCIPLE OF UNIVERSAL 
EXTRACTION
There is clear textual evidence to the effect that Anaxagoras’s way to 
avoid the generation of being from nonbeing is to posit that genera­
tion is somehow equivalent to the “extraction” of something x from 
something else y within which x was already in existence. As we 
know from ­chapter 1, in Anaxagoras’s world things exist as bundles 
of tropes, and this is why extraction of x from y amounts to the 
spatial separation of x from whatever else there is in the bundle 
that makes up y; idem if y is taken to be the original mixture itself, 
from which every thing in the natural world derives. This extraction 
mechanism does not contravene any Parmenidean stance, and yet 
it accounts for the coming about of something “new.”4 The principle 
is stated in B13: “Coming-​to-​be is nothing other than separation” 
(τὴν γένεσιν οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ ἔκκρισιν εἶναί).5 It is also reiterated more 
fully in B17:
Anaxagoras says clearly in the first book of the Physics that 
coming-​to-​be and passing-​away are combining and dissociating, 
writing this: “The Greeks do not think correctly about coming-​to-​
be and passing-​away; for no thing comes to be or passes away, but 
is mixed together and dissociated from the things that are. And 
thus it would be correct to call coming-​to-​be mixing-​together 
and passing-​away dissociating.”
4. There are however philosophical complications to be investigated in the case in 
which the generated item is an individual being, e.g., a human; or a bodily part, e.g., in 
the case of tree branch budding; or in the case of the growth of organic matter, e.g., in the 
case of nail or hair becoming longer. These complexities, which, e.g., B10 raises, are the 
topic of ­chapter 5, and involve the study of the role of the seeds in Anaxagoras’s system.
5. The full statement is as follows: “He [sc. Anaxagoras] says that coming-​to-​be 
is nothing other than separation, that separation comes to be on account of motion, 
and that Nous is the cause of motion” (εἴπερ τὴν γένεσιν οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ ἔκκρισιν εἶναί 
φησι, τὴν δὲ ἔκκρισιν ὑπὸ τῆς κινήσεως γίνεσθαι, τῆς δὲ κινήσεως αἴτιον εἶναι τὸν νοῦν).
 

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
49
    49
σαφῶς δὲ Ἀναξαγόρας ἐν τῷ πρώτῳ τῶν Φυσικῶν τὸ γίνεσθαι 
καὶ ἀπόλλυσθαι συγκρίνεσθαι καὶ διακρίνεσθαι λέγει γράφων 
οὕτως· τὸ δὲ γίνεσθαι καὶ ἀπόλλυσθαι οὐκ ὀρθῶς νομίζουσιν οἱ 
Ἕλληνες· οὐδὲν γὰρ χρῆμα γίνεται οὐδὲ ἀπόλλυται, ἀλλ’ ἀπὸ 
ἐόντων χρημάτων συμμίσγεταί τε καὶ διακρίνεται. καὶ οὕτως ἂν 
ὀρθῶς καλοῖεν τό τε γίνεσθαι συμμίσγεσθαι καὶ τὸ ἀπόλλυσθαι 
διακρίνεσθαι.
Along the same lines, in B10 Anaxagoras is reported to have expressed 
his puzzlement about the generation of things, in these terms: “ ‘For 
how,’ he says, ‘can hair come [γένοιτο] from what is not hair, and flesh 
from what is not flesh?’ ” In a sense things such as hair do come from 
things that are not hair, i.e., ultimately the seminal fluid. However, 
the way that hair comes from the seminal fluid is not by generation 
(γενέσθαι) of something new that wasn’t there, but rather by separa­
tion (διακρίνεσθαι)6 of what was already there in the seminal fluid. 
Reading on in B10,
For in the same seminal fluid there are hair, nails, veins and 
arteries, sinew, and bone, and it happens that they are impercep­
tible because of the smallness of the parts, but when they grow, 
they gradually are separated off.
καὶ γὰρ ἐν τῇ αὐτῇ γονῇ καὶ τρίχας εἶναι καὶ ὄνυχας καὶ φλέβας 
καὶ ἀρτηρίας καὶ νεῦρα καὶ ὀστᾶ καὶ τυγχάνειν μὲν ἀφανῆ διὰ 
μικρομέρειαν, αὐξανόμενα δὲ κατὰ μικρὸν διακρίνεσθαι.
Since in each existing thing, as well as in the cosmic mixture, there are 
all opposites (in different degrees of concentration), and the oppo­
sites can be moved around spatially by the vortex initiated by nous, 
and thus scattered or concentrated in space, it follows for Anaxagoras 
6. More generally, the terms that Anaxagoras uses for talking about generation as 
extraction are forms of the verb κρινεῖν (and compound verbs deriving from it).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
50
50
that anything can “come out” of anything else. This commitment to 
unrestricted derivation is expressed in the literature in terms of what 
is known in the literature as the Principle of Universal Extraction:
UE-​P: Any opposite or combination of opposites can be extracted 
from any other combination of opposites.
As mentioned in the opening of this chapter, Anaxagoras does not 
explicitly state the principle, nor does he provide an explicit justifi­
cation for it. In absence of textual evidence, we can only speculate 
as to what motivates Anaxagoras to take this stance.7 One possi­
bility is that he simply believed that anything does indeed “come 
out” of anything in nature. But this need not be the only hypoth­
esis, and there are others to consider. Anaxagoras might have been 
driven by criteria of metaphysical economy, on account of the 
universality and simplicity of the theory which UE-​P expresses. If 
so, Anaxagoras’s motivation would be a methodological concern. 
It is also possible that he was aware that his metaphysical system 
did not have the resources for restricting extraction in some way, 
and this is why he “embraced” UE-​P. If Anaxagoras had wanted to 
restrict the principle in some ways, he would have had to explain 
that x can derive from y but not from z, because x is in y but not 
in z. This would have required positing special relations of qualita­
tive similarity or difference between things (e.g., holding between 
x and y, but not between x and z). These special relations would 
7. Anaxagoras’s principle of universal extraction has attracted much scholarly 
attention, and also speculation on what Anaxagoras’s motivations might have been. 
For instance, Brad Inwood remarks on the generality of the principle thus: “This is 
perhaps an unnecessarily sweeping generalization, since there are some emergences 
which do not occur, but it is in keeping with Anaxagoras’ bold speculative temperament” 
(1986: 28, my emphasis). More in line with the approach I take, Richard McKirhan 
remarks on the metaphysical economy of the principle and the difficulty of restrict­
ing it (1994:  211). Montgomery Furth offers an interesting review of how people 
have reacted to the principle, at least up to the publication date of his own article 
(1991: 109, n. 16).

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
51
    51
have presupposed alternative accounts of the metaphysics of mate­
rial objects, from the ground up, starting from the constitution of 
the primordial mixture and the role of nous in the universe.8 We 
know that Anaxagoras’s metaphysical system, where similarity is 
primitive, does not have the means to differentiate which restric­
tive derivations or transformations might be possible, and which 
not. Spatial movement and preponderance of the opposites9 cannot 
explain special patterns of derivation. It is possible that Anaxagoras 
does not try to restrict the principle because he is aware of the lim­
its of what his metaphysics can account for. We will examine in this 
and the next chapter how central UE-​P is in Anaxagoras’s meta­
physics of nature and how it is put to use.
2.2.  THE EVERYTHING-​IN-​EVERYTHING 
PRINCIPLE
The thrust of UE-​P is that anything can “come out” of anything. On 
the other hand, Anaxagoras holds that what can come “out of” some­
thing must be already in it; this is due to the Parmenidean strictures 
in place in his system, as we saw in Chapter 1. We are now well posi­
tioned to see that from these commitments of Anaxagoras’s, a theory 
of extreme mixture follows. Anaxagoras holds what is known as the 
Everything-​in-​Everything Principle, which says,
EE-​P: There is a share of everything in everything.
This principle is explicitly stated and repeatedly mentioned in the 
extant texts, for instance in B1 (πάντων μὲν ἐν παντὶ ἐνόντων) and 
B6 (ἐν παντὶ πάντα). There are also two alternative formulations of 
the principle. One is in terms of all things having a share (μοῖρα) of 
8. Such speculative alternative accounts would also violate the pivotal principle in 
Anaxagoras’s metaphysics that there is a share of everything in everything.
9. The Preponderance Principle is examined below in section 2.4.
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
52
52
everything, for instance in B6 (πάντα παντὸς μοῖραν μετέχει); B11 
(‘ἐν παντὶ παντὸς μοῖρα ἔνεστι πλὴν νοῦ); and B12 (‘ἐν παντὶ παντὸς 
μοῖρα ἔνεστι πλὴν νοῦ … τὰ μὲν ἄλλα παντὸς μοῖραν μετέχει). The 
other formulation is in terms of all things being together; see for 
instance B1 (πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων) and B4b (πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων). 
We will return to these variants of the formula in ­chapter 3. For now, 
there is a point to examine regarding Anaxagoras’s statement of the 
principle in terms of which there is everything in everything (e.g., in 
B1 and B6). What “everything” refers to in each of its occurrences is 
a matter of controversy among scholars. Some hold that “everything” 
has the same referent in both occurrences; others, that the referent 
is not and cannot be the same. Accordingly, three possible readings 
have been offered in the literature: that (i) there is some of every com­
pound in every compound; that (ii) there is some of every opposite in 
every compound; and that (iii) there is some of every opposite in every 
compound and in every opposite. Readings (i) and (ii) depend on tak­
ing “everything” to have the same referent in both occurrences,10 and 
that is the reading I endorse; while on reading (iii) there are different 
referents in play. I will engage first with the arguments given for the 
reading alternative to mine, taking David Sedley’s (2007) as represen­
tative of this view.
According to Sedley, the referent is not and cannot be the same 
in both occurrences—​rather, the principle has to be read as say­
ing that “every phenomenal thing, for example a horse or a rock, 
contains every opposite” (2007: 29); i.e., there is a share of every 
opposite in every phenomenal thing. Sedley rests his case on three 
sets of considerations. First, he notes that it is not uncommon in 
informal conversational contexts, in ancient Greek as well as in 
English, to find two occurrences of the word “everything” that are 
not coreferential—​Anaxagoras might have stated his principle in 
just this (informal) way. Second, Sedley appeals to the fact that there 
10. As W. K. C. Guthrie (1965: 284–​85), for instance, does.

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
53
    53
are six cases (among the eight times in total the principle appears 
in the extant texts)11 in which Anaxagoras uses different words for 
what is mentioned in the first position and what in the second. From 
this Sedley concludes that two occurrences of “everything” were not 
“part and parcel” of the original formulation of the principle. Finally, 
Sedley calls attention to B11, where we read that “in everything 
there is a portion (μοῖρα), of everything, and in some there is nous 
too.” Now, we know from B12 (as we will discuss in ­chapter 5) that 
Anaxagoras thought that nous resides in human beings. If so, Sedley 
reasons, the first occurrence of “everything” in B11 must include liv­
ing beings too, and refer more generally to compound beings (rather 
than opposites). But if so, Sedley concludes, “The ‘everything’ that is 
in every compound entity cannot itself be every compound entity, 
or Anaxagoras would be saying, nonsensically, that every compound 
being contains a portion of every compound being” (2007:  30).12 
(This corresponds to reading (i) on my classification here above.) The 
(indeed challenging) stance that Sedley wants to avoid attributing 
to Anaxagoras is not however avoided even on his own preferred 
reading of the principle, where the first “everything” refers to all the 
opposites and the second to compound beings. The reason is that 
compound beings are made of stuff, and stuff is made of opposites. 
So if all opposites are in compounds beings, and compound beings 
are made of opposites (which do not undergo any qualitative or sub­
stantial transformation), then by transitivity all opposites are in all 
opposites.
To fully understand the import of EE-​P, I submit, we need to 
consider it in conjunction with the inseparability of everything from 
11. One needs however to bear in mind that the frequency of occurrences can 
only be taken as relative to the small part of Anaxagoras’s work that has been trans­
mitted (in a fragmentary and indirect way) to us.
12. Sedley considers a further hypothesis, which one might think provides an 
alternative to his own proposal, but which he finds flawed. Suppose that the two core­
ferential occurrences were to refer not to compounds, but to the opposites. Even in 
this case, the result would be, according to Sedley, nonsensical: every bit of hot would 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
54
54
everything, which Anaxagoras mentions, for instance, in B6 in con­
nection with EE-​P:
Since it is not possible that there is a least, it would not be pos­
sible that [anything] be separated, nor come to be by itself, but 
just as in the beginning, now too all things are together.
ὅτε τοὐλάχιστον μὴ ἔστιν εἶναι, οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο χωρισθῆναι, οὐδ’ ἂν 
ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῦ γενέσθαι, ἀλλ’ ὅπωσπερ ἀρχὴν εἶναι καὶ νῦν πάντα ὁμοῦ.
We will come to the analysis of this argument in ­chapter 3, and see 
that the justification of inseparability through the unlimited small­
ness of everything requires us to view the mixture of everything 
with everything at the level of the opposites. In other words, it is all 
the opposites which are mixed with all the opposites. The nature of 
each opposite is pure, its constitution unmixed—​but opposites exist 
only mixed with each other. On account of B6, we need to take the 
two occurrences of “everything” in Anaxagoras’s statement of EE-​P 
to be coreferring and to have the opposites as their referent. These 
issues very briefly introduced here will be more fully examined in 
­chapter 3. To conclude this section, the philosophical difficulties that 
Sedley sees arising from reading the EE-​P with the two occurrences 
of “everything” as coreferential derive from the assumption of a par­
ticular interpretation of Anaxagoras’s theory of extreme mixture. 
They are not cogent reasons in absolute terms for denying the coref­
erentiality of the term “everything” in the relevant texts.
2.3.  THE NO-​LEAST AND NO-​LARGEST 
PRINCIPLES
We have so far identified Anaxagoras’s commitment to account for 
change in the natural world within a Parmenidean philosophical 
have in it some cold, some heavy, some sweet, some bright, etc. (2007: 29). I hold 
that “everything” refers to the same in both occurrences, namely to the opposites; but 
I interpret the way they are “in” everything in a new way in ­chapter 4.
 

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
55
    55
framework, and the keystone to that account: a theory of extreme 
mixture. Anaxagoras posits a number of fundamental metaphysi­
cal principles that govern his theory, two of which we have already 
seen: the principle of universal extraction, UE-​P, and the principle 
that there is a share of everything in everything, E-​E. These two 
principles are complemented by an additional one concerning the 
extension of the magnitude that opposites may have. With this third 
principle, Anaxagoras removes, as it were, any upper and lower limit 
to the scale of the opposites’ magnitude. He does so in a single line of 
text, leaving his thought in need of much explication. For the sake of 
clarity of exposition, I articulate here Anaxagoras’s thought into two 
different but complementary principles, one concerning the lower 
limit and one for the upper limit of the opposites’ magnitude. I call 
them the No-​Least Principle and the No-​Largest Principle respectively. 
The former may be formulated thus:
No Least-​P: There is no lowest limit to the magnitude of the 
opposites.
Textual evidence to the effect that Anaxagoras endorses this principle 
is to be found, for instance, in B1 and B3. I will here briefly intro­
duce the texts, and the difficulties that interpreters have encoun­
tered in attempting to derive a philosophically sound position from 
them.13 In B3 Anaxagoras offers the example of the opposite small 
as something that exists in unlimitedly small shares:  “Nor of the 
small is there a smallest, but always a smaller” (οὔτε γὰρ τοῦ σμικροῦ 
ἐστὶ τό γε ἐλάχιστον, ἀλλ’ ἔλασσον ἀεί). He also gives a justification 
for why the endless division of something into smaller and smaller 
shares does not lead to nonbeing:  “For what-​is cannot not be” 
(τὸ γὰρ ἐὸν οὐκ ἔστι τὸ μὴ οὐκ εἶναι). This justification is in line with 
13. Chapter 3 provides a sustained philosophical discussion of the significance 
of No Least-​P in Anaxagoras’s system and in the history of metaphysics at large, and 
­chapter 4 a fuller review of the existing alternative interpretations and the difficulties 
that are left unsolved by them.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
56
56
the Parmenidean views Anaxagoras endorses, as we saw in ­chapter 1.14 
In B1, when talking about the principle, Anaxagoras shows a flair for 
paradoxes—​he says that each of the opposites, e.g., the hot, the dry, 
etc., is unlimitedly large in amount (πλῆθος),15 and unlimitedly small:
In the first book of the Physics he says at the beginning, “All things 
were together, unlimited both in amount and in smallness.”
δηλοῖ διὰ τοῦ πρώτου τῶν Φυσικῶν λέγων ἀπ’ ἀρχῆς· ὁμοῦ χρήματα 
πάντα ἦν, ἄπειρα καὶ πλῆθος καὶ σμικρότητα.
What does Anaxagoras mean in claiming that the opposites are unlim­
itedly large in amount as well as unlimitedly small? The sense in which 
they are unlimitedly large is this: in the original cosmic mixture there is 
an unlimited number of kinds of elements and an unlimited amount of 
them, and the mixture itself is unlimited in extent. On the other hand, 
understanding in which sense they are unlimitedly small has proven 
very challenging to the interpreters since antiquity. There exist three 
main lines of interpretation in the literature, which will be reviewed 
and assessed in terms of their explanatory strengths and fit with the 
extant texts in ­chapter 4. To briefly anticipate that discussion here, 
interpreters are traditionally divided on whether the opposites are 
present in the extreme mixture of everything in everything as very 
small particles, or as very small proportions of each type of thing.16 
These are respectively labeled in the literature the “Particulate” and the 
14. We will return to the analysis of fragment B3 in ­chapter 4; and also to the 
justification Anaxagoras gives for it, which will bring us to discuss the mutual influ­
ences between Anaxagoras and Zeno. Although the statement that there is no smallest 
of the small only indicates the indefinite extension of the magnitude of the opposite 
small, it is Anaxagoras’s use of this principle to derive ontological conclusions that is 
very innovative, as we will see in ­chapter 4.
15. On the difficulty of rendering πλῆθος in English, and the different views dif­
ferent scholars have taken, see Curd (2010: 34); I here follow her translation and the 
general line of thinking.
16. Note that both interpretations presuppose that what is thoroughly mixed are 
material parts—​rather than the fundamental opposites. In this connection, recall the 
discussion in ­chapter 1, sections 1.2 and 1.3.

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
57
    57
“Proportionate” interpretations. On the first of the two, Anaxagoras 
is thinking of juxtaposed particles of stuff; on the other, he is thinking 
of proportions of stuff in a mixture.17 On the Particulate interpretation, 
the material components of Anaxagoras’s ontology are present as such 
in the mixture, as material particles of finite size that are too small to be 
perceptually discerned, with the result being that they appear mixed. 
On the Proportionate interpretation, on the other hand, the total 
quantity of each type of material component is mixed together with 
the total quantities of the rest of the components, so that the totality 
is a uniform mixture through and through. So on the Proportionate 
interpretation the mixants exist in the mixture only potentially, not 
actually, like vanilla in a cake, or salt in seawater. Building on existing 
discussions in the literature, I will argue in ­chapter 4 that both ways of 
taking Anaxagoras’s claim that the opposites exist as unlimitedly small 
are prey to serious difficulties, both philosophically and/​or textually.
There is one more philosophical point to highlight at this stage, 
before we move on to the No-​Largest Principle. Let us return to 
Anaxagoras’s example for the No Least-​P, that of the opposite small. 
When he claims that there is no smallest of the small, he is clearly 
referring to an instance of the small. It is important that he says 
that there is no smallest of the small. This entails that the divisions 
of the small are themselves instances of the small. This is so because 
the small is a homoeomer. The term “homoeomer” was introduced 
by Aristotle, as a “technical” one, that is, with a specific philosophi­
cal meaning.18 Homoeomers are entities whose parts are of the same 
kind as the whole of which they are parts. Homoeomeric opposites, 
17.  Curd (2010, ­chapter  3) provides a helpful state-​of-​the-​art account of the 
scholarly debate.
18.  See Aristotle’s reading of Anaxagoras in Physics 203a19:  “And as many 
as make the elements infinite, as Anaxagoras and Demokritos, the former out 
of homoeomers” (ὅσοι δ’ ἄπειρα ποιοῦσι τὰ στοιχεῖα, καθάπερ Ἀναξαγόρας καὶ 
Δημόκριτος, ὁ μὲν ἐκ τῶν ὁμοιομερῶν). Even if Anaxagoras himself did not use 
the term, nor have an explicit criterion of sameness of kind for the whole and its 
parts to identify homoeomers, it cannot be doubted that he could grasp the distinc­
tion between what is homoeomeric and what is not, on the basis of everyday life 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
58
58
and stuffs (such as wine, flesh, etc.), may be added and divided salva 
qualitate, we may say. By contrast, individuals (for instance a human 
being or a tree) may be divided in unlimitedly small parts, but unlim­
itedly small parts of an individual are not an individual of the same 
kind as the one they are parts of. For instance, the limb of a human 
being is not a human being.19 So Anaxagorean opposites are homoeo­
mers; for example, adding brightness to brightness, one gets more 
brightness, and subtracting gives less of it. Does small added to small 
make up small? Counterintuitive as it might seem, the answer is yes, 
it does, because adding opposites intensifies their quality, so add­
ing small to small increases the smallness, making it smaller, and 
so, small. By extension, if all opposites are homoeomers, then just 
as any part of smallness is smallness, any part of heat will be heat, 
and so forth. From the No Least-​P and the way Anaxagoras uses it 
to derive ontological conclusions, one can now draw two important 
considerations. The first is that Anaxagoras’s universe is atomless, 
because its building blocks, the instantiated opposites, are infinitely 
partitioned into parts. The second consideration, which draws on the 
discussion carried out in ­chapter 1 as well as in this chapter, is that 
in Anaxagoras’s universe power is bottomless. The parts of the end­
lessly divided opposites are like the whole of which they are parts. Any 
part of the small is small. But since the opposites are causal powers, 
it follows that powerfulness does not “give out” at any level of par­
titioning of a power. More on this in ­chapter 3. Before concluding 
this section, let us turn to the other principle complementing the 
No Least-​P, which I called the No-​Largest Principle, thus formulated:
No Largest-​P: There is no upper limit to the magnitude of the 
opposites.
experience. For example, one learns from experience that adding wine to wine in a 
jug results in more wine, whereas adding an apple to an apple does not result in more 
apple, but in two apples.
19. Also, the seeds may be divided in unlimitedly small parts, but unlimitedly 
small parts of a seed are not seeds of the same kind, because seeds are primitively 
structured bundles of opposites, as we will see in ­chapter 5.

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
59
    59
In B3 Anaxagoras says “of the large there is always a larger” (τοῦ 
μεγάλου ἀεί ἐστι μεῖζον), illustrating the principle with the example 
of the opposite large. We can understand this statement in analogy 
with the case of the unlimited smallness of the small. We know that 
Anaxagoras holds that the value at a location of an opposite can 
increase through preponderance (see section 2.4), making the oppo­
site manifestly perceptible. But its perceptibility is not an upper limit 
of its possible increase in magnitude. In view of the unlimited quanti­
ties of each opposite in the universe, there is no limit to how high the 
value of each opposite can be. Thus, for Anaxagoras, the strengths 
or intensities of opposites can be unlimitedly small and unlimit­
edly large; this thought is captured by the No-​Least and No-​Largest 
principles.
A number of difficult questions at this stage remain open. 
I have already briefly mentioned two related ones. In positing that 
the opposites may have unlimitedly small and large magnitude, is 
Anaxagoras thinking of small and large magnitude with regard to 
the size of a volume, or the intensity of a power? Is it the volume that 
an instance of an opposite occupies that may be unlimitedly small or 
large in magnitude, or the strength of that instance of the opposite? 
If there is no limit of smallness or largeness as to how small or large 
something can be, then the size of the volume a trope occupies can 
be unlimitedly small or large. Similarly its strength or intensity may 
be unlimitedly small or large. This has universal application to all 
opposites—​with respect to the volumes their tropes occupy and the 
intensities they have; the issue will be addressed in sections 2.4 and 
2.5 of this chapter. Another related question is what the “presence” 
of an opposite is. Is it the volume a trope occupies, or its intensity? 
What we learned so far does not yet enable us to answer the ques­
tion. We have seen that the fundamental mechanism of the increase 
and decrease of the presence of an opposite at a location is the spa­
tial movement of that opposite (by the cosmic vortex initiated by 
nous). Movement can cause the separation of an opposite from the 
mixture at a location, and it can also cause the preponderance of 
an opposite at a location. That this is Anaxagoras’s view is known, 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
60
60
for instance, from B12 (to which we will return also in the next sec­
tion of this chapter). Clearly the movement of an opposite in space 
determines its presence in specific locations in space, but the nature 
of its presence requires more investigation, which will be postponed 
to ­chapter 3.
2.4.  THE PREPONDERANCE PRINCIPLE: 
THE MECHANISM OF PREPONDERANCE
It is an everyday observation that things in the world are different in 
character, and that, by and large, they also change at different stages 
of their life span. What can explain this natural phenomenon in a 
world like Anaxagoras’s? On the one hand, no generation, destruc­
tion or qualitative alteration is possible in his world, because of the 
Parmenidean strictures in place in the system On the other, every­
thing has the same origin (the primordial mixture) and the same 
type of constituents (the opposites). Anaxagoras’s reply might seem 
(misleadingly) simple:20 in a world where everything is a mixture 
of everything, things are different on account of the ingredient(s) 
that predominate in each. This is known in the literature as the 
Preponderance Principle:
P-​P: A thing is f if and only if the opposite f is preponderant in 
that thing’s constitution (in relation to other opposites also pres­
ent in the thing).
P-​P is posited to explain why things are qualified by certain attri­
butes (for instance, hot), but also why things are of a certain kind (for 
instance, earth). In B1: “all things being in everything, but each being 
characterized by what predominates” (πάντων μὲν ἐν παντὶ ἐνόντων, 
20. We will see, in ­chapter 3 especially, that in fact the metaphysics underpinning 
it is very sophisticated.
 

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
61
    61
ἑκάστου δὲ κατὰ τὸ ἐπικρατοῦν χαρακτηριζομένου).21 Elsewhere also, 
in B12 being preponderant is expressed in terms of being “the most” 
(πλεῖστος) in a bundle of opposites:
Nothing else is like anything else, but each one is and was most 
manifestly those things of which there are the most in it.
ἕτερον δὲ οὐδέν ἐστιν ὅμοιον οὐδενί, ἀλλ’ ὅτῳν πλεῖστα ἔνι, ταῦτα 
ἐνδηλότατα ἓν ἕκαστόν ἐστι καὶ ἦν.
How does an opposite achieve preponderance at a location? What 
is the mechanism for preponderance? Is Anaxagoras thinking 
about preponderance in quantity or in intensity of one (or more) 
opposite(s) in a bundle? Is a bundle hot because there are mostly 
shares of hot in it, or because the share(s) of hot in it are simply 
very hot? Both interpretations of P-​P, as referring to quantitative 
preponderance or higher intensity, are consistent with Anaxagoras’s 
other metaphysical commitments, but one is preferable on textual 
grounds, and that is the quantitative preponderance interpretation. 
I submit that, on the more natural reading of the Greek and by anal­
ogy with the majority of the occurrences of this term in the extant 
texts of Anaxagoras’s, the key word πλεῖστος, which occurs in the 
statement of P-​P in B12, indicates quantitative preponderance. 
Additionally, the term σμικρός that Anaxagoras uses in B3 is natu­
rally read as meaning little in size, or amount, or quantity, rather 
than low strength or intensity.22 To bring the Anaxagorean concep­
tion of the preponderance of powers closer to everyday experience 
with a simile, one can think of the instances of a type of power as 
light bulbs—​the more bulbs there are at a location the more light 
they produce; however, his powers come in infinitesimally small 
21. As we have already touched upon, Anaxagoras relativizes preponderance to 
perceptibility. To this question we will return again.
22. A very different reading from mine of the term σμικρός is offered by Inwood 
(1986) and Furth (1991) among others; I discuss the resulting alternative interpreta­
tion in ­chapter 4.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
62
62
“bulbs” of powerfulness, so varying their quantity can scale up and 
down the whole range of power strength.
Before moving forward to investigate the significance of P-​P as 
understood as referring to quantitative preponderance, let us here 
briefly consider the alternative reading of the principle in terms of 
preponderance in intensity. I pursue this line of thinking here, even 
if it is less well supported by the textual evidence, because I believe 
that by exploring it, we can gain a deeper understanding of what is 
philosophically possible in a system such as Anaxagoras’s. Suppose, 
per hypothesis, that πλεῖστος indicates a higher degree of intensity 
of one (or more) opposite(s) in the bundle. If so, what would make an 
opposite most manifest in a thing would be the strength of its inten­
sity. How could an opposite be greatest in intensity in a bundle, when 
it is being compared to opposites of different kinds? The scale of 
strength of each kind of opposite is peculiar to the kind, and different 
from the scales of each other kind; thus the intensity of hardness is 
different from the intensity of wetness or the intensity of sweetness, 
etc. Now, it is possible that Anaxagoras thought of the preponder­
ance of an opposite only in relation to its own opposite; in this case 
heat, for instance, would be manifest when more intense in an object 
than the cold. However, the lines of B12 quoted above where P-​P is 
stated are more naturally read as referring to the preponderance of 
one (or more) opposite(s) in a bundle over all the other opposites 
present in the bundle. One might think that Anaxagoras held that for 
the intensities of all the opposites, the point of comparison, i.e., the 
threshold above which they become manifest, is their respective level 
of intensity in the original cosmic mixture. Anaxagoras does say, for 
instance in B4b, that the cosmic mixture was an indistinct mass, with 
the mixants “obscuring” one another:
Before there was separation off, because all things were together, 
there was not even any colour evident; for the mixture of all 
things prevented it.
πρὶν δὲ ἀποκριθῆναι [ταῦτα] πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲ χροιὴ 
ἔνδηλος ἦν οὐδεμία· ἀπεκώλυε γὰρ ἡ σύμμιξις ἁπάντων χρημάτων.

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
63
    63
On this possible line of thinking one could take the state of the oppo­
sites in the cosmic mixture as a kind of zero-​sum, where none of the 
opposites “stands out” in comparison to the others. So if πλεῖστος 
meant “of greatest intensity,” the intensity of the predominant oppo­
site in a bundle would be greater than its intensity in the primordial 
cosmic mixture, which was such that it left the opposite “obscured,” 
i.e., nonmanifest, in the mixture with all the other ones. In conclu­
sion, it is possible to develop a reading of P-​P in terms of preponder­
ance in intensity, rather than quantity, of an opposite in the bundle. 
This alternative is consistent with what Anaxagoras says elsewhere 
concerning his metaphysical system. However, I take this reading as 
less preferable to the quantitative preponderance one, which is also 
consistent with Anaxagoras’s claims and is better grounded in the 
extant texts.
We turn now to examine the significance of P-​P within the larger 
metaphysical picture we are canvassing on the basis of Anaxagoras’s 
claims. There are two issues to be teased apart: one is the mechanism 
of predominance, and the other is the outcome of predominance. By 
the former I mean the question of how predominance comes about in 
Anaxagoras’s system. We saw that according to P-​P, if an opposite is 
preponderant in relation to the other opposites in a bundle (or region 
in space), it is most manifest there (recall ἐνδηλότατα in B12), i.e., it 
is perceptually evident, and the bundle appears of a kind to us, e.g., 
hot, rough, yellow etc. That is, when an opposite is preponderant, 
or when it comes to be preponderant in a bundle, it characterizes 
the bundle, contributing to its profile of perceptible properties. Of 
course an opposite can be preponderant in relation to other oppo­
sites without reaching the human perceptibility threshold—​there 
could imperceptible preponderance.23 Anaxagoras gives no indication 
23. The perceptibility of the opposite does not itself settle the question just con­
sidered of whether what makes the opposite preponderant is the quantitative abun­
dance of the opposite or the higher intensity of the opposite over the others. Either 
of these two cases could have a perceptibility threshold that would explain that an 
opposite is considered preponderant if and only if perceptible.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
64
64
of being interested in such levels of preponderance that are not per­
ceptible to humans—​thus showing his ontology to be developed 
“from within” the perspective of humans or more generally, sentient 
organisms. On account of this, in what follows I will talk of composi­
tion modulo perception, to indicate that the relevant opposites for the 
composition in question are the perceptibly preponderant ones. The 
criterion of composition modulo perception applies in two ways in 
any composition of opposites into some thing. It determines which 
opposites are relevant constituents of the bundle, i.e., the opposites 
that are perceptually manifest; and it also applies to the thing com­
posed, in the sense that such thing is perceptually composed. Thus, a 
combination of preponderant (modulo perception) opposites, such as 
“the dense and the wet and the cold and the dark,” can compose (mod­
ulo perception) into a type of thing such as earth. In such a case, earth 
is preponderant in that region.24 This is what B15, for instance tells 
us: “The dense and the wet and the cold and the dark came together 
here, he says, where <the> earth is now” (τὸ μὲν πυκνόν, φησί, καὶ 
διερὸν καὶ ψυχρὸν καὶ τὸ ζοφερὸν ἐνθάδε συνεχώρησεν, ἔνθα νῦν 
<ἡ> γῆ).
Before concluding this section, there is a final issue that we need 
to address, arising from the extant texts, and concerning composi­
tion modulo perception. It may come as a surprise to the reader that 
Anaxagoras also allows the possibility that something that is com­
posed modulo perception may be imperceptible. Importantly, this is 
a different case from the one of imperceptible preponderance. When 
something is composed modulo perception, the relevant opposites 
that make it the type of thing it is (e.g., for earth the dense, the wet, 
the cold, and the dark) are compresent and compreponderant in it. 
24. As Eric Lewis among others has noted (2000: 3, n. 7), P-​P presupposes that 
kinds have some sort of compositional plasticity, in the sense that there is no fixed 
threshold the opposites have to reach for earth to be; predominance (modulo percep­
tion) over the other opposites is sufficient. The thought is exemplified by Schofield 
thus: “Water for example is in essence nothing but stuff in which the dense, the wet, 
the cold and the murky predominate—​to a greater extent than they do in clouds, but 
less than in earth or stones” (1980: 116, my emphasis).

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
65
    65
So it appears that a type of thing is present, earth, over and above the 
opposites, because we perceive it there. Fragment B4b prima facie 
challenges this thought, because it mentions that there was earth in 
the primordial cosmic mixture and yet it was imperceptible, because 
no features were discernible in the mixture:25
Because all things were together, there was not even any colour 
evident; for the mixture of all things prevented it, of the wet and 
the dry and of the hot and the cold and of the bright and the 
dark, and there was much earth present and seeds unlimited in 
number, in no way similar to one another. (My emphasis)
πρὶν δὲ ἀποκριθῆναι [ταῦτα] πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲ χροιὴ 
ἔνδηλος ἦν οὐδεμία· ἀπεκώλυε γὰρ ἡ σύμμιξις ἁπάντων χρημάτων, 
τοῦ τε διεροῦ καὶ τοῦ ξηροῦ καὶ τοῦ θερμοῦ καὶ τοῦ ψυχροῦ καὶ 
τοῦ λαμπροῦ καὶ τοῦ ζοφεροῦ, καὶ γῆς πολλῆς ἐνεούσης καὶ 
σπερμάτων ἀπείρων πλῆθος οὐδὲν ἐοικότων ἀλλήλοις.
How are we to understand this case? There is a way: we can imag­
ine physically dividing up the lump of earth existing in the cosmic 
mixture into smaller and smaller lumps or parcels (which neverthe­
less retain the same compositional ratio of the ingredient opposites, 
as per B15). Then, eventually, with this process of division we reach 
lumps of earth that are so small as to be individually imperceptible 
(especially when mixed with many other things as well). These small 
lumps are still earth, although they are too small to be seen. This 
explains what is said in B4b without committing Anaxagoras to any 
inconsistency, and sits well with what he says in B1: “And because 
all things were together, nothing was evident on account of small­
ness” (καὶ πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲν ἔνδηλον ἦν ὑπὸ σμικρότητος·). 
In conclusion, although it is surprising that Anaxagoras includes 
earth as existing as such in the primordial mixture and yet being 
25. Even if earth come to be only in the second phase of the generation of the 
cosmos (see section 1.1 in ­chapter 1), it is still mixed and imperceptible.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
66
66
imperceptible (which is surprising because earth is composed at a 
perceptual level), nevertheless we can supply a way of understanding 
Anaxagoras’s claim in B4b.26
Recall now that, as we saw in ­chapter  1, section 1.6, Graham 
(2004) objects to interpreting the opposites as powers, on the 
ground that this interpretation does not allow for quantitative pre­
ponderance.27 The powers interpretation I  developed does explain 
preponderance quantitatively (and not qualitatively), since the key 
to preponderance is increase in density, which requires more instances 
of the same kind in the same region of space. Material stuff increases 
in density when more matter accumulates in the same region. Powers 
increase in density when more power accumulates in the same region. 
More matter of the same kind in the same region is heavier, while 
more power of the same kind in the same region is more powerful, 
i.e., stronger in intensity; both are additive within a region. In sum, 
quantitative preponderance can be explicated in terms of increase in 
density, which results in an increase in intensity.
To conclude, this section introduced P-​P, and dealt primarily 
with the issue of whether preponderance has to be understood in 
terms of quantity or intensity. Further, it examined the connection 
between preponderance and perceptibility and a potential challenge 
to Anaxagoras’s theory as sketched so far, namely that there can be 
something like earth where the relevant opposites predominate and 
yet the bundle they make up is imperceptible. Having clarified all 
these interpretative issues, we are now well placed for investigating 
the question of what the outcome of predominance is.
2.5.  THE OUTCOME OF PREPONDERANCE
Before moving forward, let us briefly draw together the conclu­
sions reached so far in this chapter. Anaxagoras’s opposites are 
26. I take earth to be just an arbitrary placeholder for any and every type of stuff.
27. Graham writes that “advocates of the Tannery-​Burnet thesis need to turn P 
[that is, my PP] into a qualitative, not a quantitative principle” (2004: 15–​16).
 

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
67
    67
everywhere, in unlimitedly small shares,28 being of primitively differ­
ent kinds. Accumulation of the shares of an opposite in some region 
of space makes that opposite perceptible as a characteristic of that 
region (e.g., hot). If various opposites become preponderant, and 
hence manifest in some region, they may be perceived as composing 
a kind of stuff, such as earth. (This is their constitutional-​causal role.) 
Furthermore, all opposites are present in every thing, but individual 
things are qualitative differentiated by some opposites, in virtue of 
being preponderant in them; this is their qualitative-​causal role. It 
is timely now to address the question of how Anaxagoras thinks an 
opposite affects the constitution and the qualitative profile of the 
thing it is in, by coming to be preponderant in it. This is the issue of 
the outcome of preponderance. Is it, for instance, that when the large 
becomes preponderant in something, that thing becomes larger by 
being augmented through the acquisition of more and more shares 
of the large? If this were the mechanism, how could something have 
more shares of the opposite small, and yet become, not bigger, but 
smaller the more shares of the small it has? The option that some­
thing becomes smaller by losing shares of the small is not open to 
Anaxagoras, since he needs an account that works for all opposites, 
not just for the small. Intuitively, something cannot become bigger 
by losing shares of the large. On the other hand, it seems prima facie 
paradoxical to say that something becomes smaller by acquiring more 
of the small, that is by augmenting the quantity of shares of the small 
it has. We have already Anaxagoras’s flair for paradoxes, and it sur­
faces here again when Anaxagoras, as we will see, actually says that 
the small becomes smaller by acquiring shares of the small; but the 
meaning of this claim will need to be carefully examined. What is the 
way forward?
Notwithstanding the prima facie paradoxical difficulties that 
the principle generates when applied to the opposite small, the only 
general metaphysical mechanism available in Anaxagoras’s system is 
28. As we will see in ­chapter 3, the shares exist primitively as unlimitedly small; 
they are not the result of a process of division.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
68
68
quantitative accumulation of the shares, as per P-​P, as we saw in the 
preceding section. What then does more of the opposite “do” for the 
compound it is in? That is, what is the outcome of the predominance 
of an opposite in a compound? We know that the shares of the oppo­
sites are located in space. The movement of the shares of opposites 
can result, according to Anaxagoras, in the accumulation (or deple­
tion) of the shares in particular regions of space. But is the outcome 
of the accumulation of an opposite at a location an increase in the size 
of the volume the opposite occupies at that location, or an increase 
in the intensity of the opposite there? For example, a spot of green 
on a canvas may be imperceptible due to its smallness, though many 
such spots together would be perceptible. Alternatively, increasing 
the intensity of the color green at that spot could make the spot of 
green perceptible. Note that here we are not discussing (again) the 
issue of whether the mechanism that leads to the preponderance of an 
opposite in a bundle is to be understood as increasing the intensity 
or the quantity of an opposite in a bundle. The focus now is on the 
outcome of preponderance. Anaxagoras does not give us any explicit 
account of it, so we can only attempt to derive his position from the 
extant textual evidence. I submit that what preponderance achieves 
is intensifying an opposite at a location. The reason why this must be 
the position Anaxagoras holds is that we know that for him all oppo­
sites are already in everything. The size of the volume they occupy 
cannot become larger. This is why they can only intensify, so that, 
e.g., the cold becomes colder.
An additional argument for the same conclusion that the out­
come of preponderance is the increase in an opposite’s intensity may 
be given along the following lines. Assuming that increase of volume 
or in intensity are the only two possible outcomes of preponderance, 
if there are reasons why increase of volume is not a way forward, this 
indirectly supports the other alternative—​the increase in intensity. 
Anaxagoras does make this sort of claim, as in B1: “Nothing was evi­
dent [in the primordial mixture] on account of smallness” (οὐδὲν 
ἔνδηλον ἦν ὑπὸ σμικρότητος). This suggests that it is the smallness 

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
69
    69
in size of the volume of an opposite at a location that determines its 
perceptibility. But when we look at Anaxagoras’s often-​used example 
of the opposite small, accumulation of more shares of the small at a 
location cannot be taken to increase the volume of the thing becom­
ing smaller. More of the small means greater smallness, and hence 
a smaller object. Hence, by generalization, the accumulation of an 
opposite at a location is increase in degree of that opposite, and 
hence, intensification of the opposite at a location.29
We are now in the position to reconsider the more general ques­
tion: how is the volume of each share of an opposite related to the 
degree of intensity of the opposite? Can the quantity of the oppo­
site and its strength or intensity at a location vary independently 
of one another in Anaxagoras’s system?30 This question has already 
come up in different guises in this chapter, in our examination of 
both the mechanism of preponderance and the outcome of prepon­
derance. We can now give it a conclusive answer. Opposites come to 
predominate at a location (in a bundle) by quantitative accumula­
tion, and their intensity (and perceptibility) results from how much 
of an opposite there is at a given location (and how the intensities of 
the shares combine depends on how quantities of shares combine). 
Accounting for the outcome of preponderance of an opposite in terms 
of its increased intensity in a bundle is Anaxagoras’s solution to the 
problem of how P-​P can generalize to include also the case of the 
29. This is the reason why Anaxagoras does not face the paradox that Plato raised 
in the Phaedo, of how the addition of the small could result in the thing becoming 
smaller. In Plato’s words: “ ‘Well, suppose one of us going to have a part of the small. 
The small will be larger than that part of it, since the part is a part of it: so the small 
itself will be larger! And that to which the part subtracted is added will be smaller, not 
larger, than it was before.’—​‘That surely couldn’t happen,’ he said” (Ἀλλὰ τοῦ σμικροῦ 
μέρος τις ἡμῶν ἕξει, τούτου δὲ αὐτοῦ τὸ σμικρὸν μεῖζον ἔσται ἅτε μέρους ἑαυτοῦ ὄντος, 
καὶ οὕτω δὴ αὐτὸ τὸ σμικρὸν μεῖζον ἔσται· ᾧ δ’ ἂν προστεθῇ τὸ ἀφαιρεθέν, τοῦτο 
σμικρότερον ἔσται ἀλλ’ οὐ μεῖζον ἢ πρίν. Οὐκ ἂν γένοιτο, φάναι, τοῦτό γε. Τίνα οὖν 
τρόπον, εἰπεῖν (131d).
30. If they varied independently, there would be a double mereology in play in 
Anaxagoras’s system—​a mereology of the size of the shares of opposites, and a mere­
ology of the degrees of the shares of the opposites. As I have argued in this chapter, 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
70
70
opposite small. As we have seen, something small becomes smaller by 
quantitative accumulation of shares of the small. Anaxagoras avoids 
absurdity here by positing that the result of accumulation of shares 
of an opposite is the intensification of that opposite in the bundle.31 
So, although the mechanism for the increase or diminution of the 
effect of an opposite on the constitution of a thing is the accumula­
tion of shares or tropes of the opposite, this results in a correspond­
ing increase or diminution of its strength or intensity, and hence, its 
perceptibility.
We can now return, with the benefit of the preceding discus­
sion, to the topic of the causal efficacy of the opposites introduced 
in ­chapter 1. The examination of P-​P, which governs the intensifi­
cation of an opposite at a location, gives us a new angle for under­
standing of how the opposites can be causally efficacious. Anaxagoras 
says that, in the original mixture, “before there was separation off, 
because all things were together there was not even any colour pres­
ent” (B4b), the reason why there was no color present being that 
everything was mixed together. Without any preponderant oppo­
sites, the primordial mixture is a mass of no distinct character or 
nature. We should observe that this primordial featurelessness is the 
causal outcome of the compresence of all the opposites in it, without 
any one predominating over the others, because they are all equal in 
amount and mixed together. Thus, the nonpreponderance of oppo­
sites too is causally efficacious, in the sense that it is responsible for 
this isnot Anaxagoras’s position. Another possibility in principle open to Anaxagoras 
would have been to posit shares of opposites that are primitively of different intensi­
ties. But there is no indication of this way of thinking in the extant texts. Instead, all 
variations of intensity of an opposite are explained in terms of the varying numbers 
of shares of the opposite at a location, and hence varying densities of shares of that 
opposite at that location. As we have seen, in Anaxagoras’s ontology, the shares of the 
opposites are unlimitedly small in size and so, if intensity follows quantity, they are 
each unlimitedly small in the degree of intensity.
31. In the Phaedo Plato dismisses the explanation that “the greater man is greater 
by a head, which is small, and [explains] that it is a monstrous thing that one is great 
by something that is small” (ἔπειτα τῇ κεφαλῇ σμικρᾷ οὔσῃ τὸν μείζω μείζω εἶναι, καὶ 
τοῦτο δὴ τέρας εἶναι, τὸ σμικρῷ τινι μέγαν τινὰ εἶναι) (101b).

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
71
    71
the featurelessness of the mixture. There are therefore two different 
ways in which opposites are causally efficacious through their pres­
ence: by preponderance and by nonpreponderance.
Some interpreters have found problematic the idea that accord­
ing to P-​P the opposites make things be of such and such a character 
simply by being part of the very constitution of these things. A recent 
example is John Palmer (2009), who believes that if the domain of 
application of the principle is not somehow restricted, Anaxagoras 
is committed to an absurd position. It is important to consider this 
worry. Palmer writes,
Some restriction of the postulate appears necessary to forestall 
absurdity. Anaxagoras can hardly have meant to analyse all char­
acteristics or properties in terms of the preponderance of stuffs 
in their subjects’ constitution. It would be clearly absurd, for 
instance, to try to account in this way for relational properties 
such as being to the left of… . Smallness and largeness are prop­
erties of things, not things within them. (2009: 236–​37)
I submit that Palmer’s argument can be addressed on behalf of 
Anaxagoras. Palmer considers two groups of properties of things 
that if accounted for by P-​P would generate absurd results. Such (pre­
sumed) absurdities are intended to raise questions about how broad 
the domain of application of P-​P can be, and whether Anaxagoras 
was aware of the need to narrow it. The two group of properties 
Palmer appeals to are on the one hand relational properties, such 
being to the left of a, and on the other the properties of being small 
and large. With respect to the first group, one might want to turn 
the tables and ask Palmer:  why would Anaxagoras want to treat 
these properties that are external to the constitution of things as if 
they were part of the constitution of things? Why would one expect 
Anaxagoras to set out to do so? On the other hand, in Palmer’s favor, 
since external relations had not been identified as such in metaphys­
ics yet, it is plausible that Anaxagoras would not have thought that 
such properties require a different analysis, or that they constitute 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
72
72
a separate category of their own, outside the domain of application 
of P-​P. Let us assume for argument’s sake that Anaxagoras included 
them within P-​P’s domain of application. Would it have been absurd, 
as Palmer claims, to address their metaphysics in terms of the consti­
tution of the things that are externally related to? Plato, for instance, 
who does consider external relations and admits them in his ontol­
ogy, interestingly provides a constitutional account for them in 
terms of the Theory of Forms. We see this, for instance, when Plato 
explains, metaphysically, Socrates and Hippias being two, although 
each of them is only one, in terms of their constitution—​namely, 
in terms of their joint partaking of the Form of Two.32 So either we 
need to charge Plato too of absurdity for having given such account 
of external relations, or the charge should not apply to Anaxagoras 
for having taken that approach. What about smallness and large­
ness? Would it be absurd to think of them as “things” within small 
and large things, as Palmer thinks it would be? Again, there is ample 
textual evidence that Plato tried to explain smallness and largeness 
in terms of small and large things participating, respectively, in the 
Forms of the Small and the Large. He even considered literal par­
ticipation, in the Parmenides, and examined the metaphysical con­
sequences of explaining largeness or smallness by parts of largeness 
and smallness in participating things.33 Further, Plato analyzed com­
parative relations, such as being larger or smaller, in terms of par­
ticipation in the Large and the Small in the Phaedo.34 Comparative 
32.  See Hippias Major, 300d7–​301e5 and the relevant discussion in Scaltsas 
(2016).
33. See Parmenides 130e–​131a: “But tell me this: is it your view that, as you say, 
there are certain forms from which these other things, by getting a share of them, 
derive their names—​as, for instance, they come to be like by getting a share of like­
ness, large by getting a share of largeness, and just and beautiful by getting a share of 
justice and beauty?” “It certainly is,” Socrates replied.
34. See Phaedo 71a: “Then if something smaller comes to be, it will come from 
something larger before, which became smaller? That is so, he said. And the weaker 
comes to be from the stronger, and the swifter from the slower? Certainly. Further, if 
something worse comes to be, does it not come from the better, and the juster from 
the more unjust? Of course.”

T he  Pr i n c i pl e s  Gov e r ni n g t h e On tol o g y
73
    73
relations are particularly interesting, metaphysically, because they 
can be either external relations to a thing, or result from changes 
in the thing’s own constitution, e.g., when a becomes larger than b 
by an increase in a’s size. So assuming at the very least that Plato’s 
approach to these metaphysical issues was not absurd, there is no 
reason to charge Anaxagoras of absurdity, given that he adopted the 
same approach as Plato.
2.6.  CLOSING REMARKS
This chapter introduced Anaxagoras’s theory of extreme mixture, 
which is his solution to the question of how observable changes in 
nature can be accounted for in a world governed by Parmenidean 
principles. There are three pillars to Anaxagoras’s theory:  in his 
system, (i)  anything can “come out” from anything, (ii) there is a 
share of everything in everything, and (iii) things are qualified by 
the opposite(s) predominant in them. The last principle is posited to 
explain why things are qualified by certain attributes (for instance, 
hot), but also why things are a certain kind (for instance, earth). 
These three principles raise interpretative and philosophical difficul­
ties, which have been examined in this chapter, yet they are all sound, 
and with each of them Anaxagoras breaks new ground in metaphys­
ics. Their philosophical significance will be explored in the following 
chapters. Chapter 3 will introduce and offer arguments for the fresh 
interpretation that I  want to motivate of the principle that there 
is a share of everything in everything. Chapter 4 will provide fur­
ther support for my interpretation, by discussing alternative ways 
of understanding the principle and the unresolved difficulties they 
suffer from.
 

74
74
Chapter 3
 A Theory of Extreme Mixture
In the preceding chapters we established that Anaxagoras develops 
an ontology where the opposites (such as the cold, the dark, the dry, 
etc.) are the fundamental elements, and we introduced some of the 
key principles governing this ontology. In this chapter I will argue 
that from such opposites and such principles,1 Anaxagoras derives 
everything else there is in the universe by means of a unique mereol­
ogy.2 His mereology is unique in that on the one hand it allows for 
an actual infinite partitioning of what there is, and on the other it 
divides and combines parts of instantiated properties, the opposites, 
rather than parts of material objects. How can these two tenets be 
combined into one theory? We saw that in Anaxagoras’s system, the 
shares resulting from the division of an opposite are uniform: they 
are homoeomerous according to the conception of homoeomerity 
that Aristotle attributes to Anaxagoras (see ­chapter 1). Each part of 
the instantiated property hot is itself an instance of the property hot, 
as each part of the small is small, etc. In other words, partitioning an 
element does not change its kind. For any given instantiated prop­
erty, there is no smallest part of its instances, and given any part of 
an instance, there is a smaller, proper part of it.3 This is metaphysi­
cally significant: powers remain powerful at any level of division.
1. With the addition of the seeds and nous, which are also powers; see ­chapter 5.
2. In ­chapter 6 we will investigate the closest variant of this mereology in the his­
tory of metaphysics—​that of the Stoics.
3. Equivalently, we could express this as a statement about the intensity of the 
instances of the opposite.
 
 

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
75
    75
This chapter will engage with the main tenets of Anaxagoras’s 
power mereology and examine (or reconstruct where needed) the 
arguments that back them up. The resulting picture is of a uni­
verse whose building blocks, the opposites, each divide into unlim­
itedly many, unlimitedly small parts or instances.4 All the instances 
of an opposite together amount to an unlimitedly large totality, 
though each of these instances is unlimitedly small.5 How are we 
to understand this ontology? How can we model it metaphysically? 
I submit that this atomless system is an ante litteram, and yet an 
explicit description of what we modern philosophers call gunk.6 For 
Anaxagoras, gunk is what underpins the world of our experience.
I will argue in this chapter that modeling the extreme mixture 
of all opposites in terms of hunks of gunk all compresent with each 
other offers us a philosophically sound and textually supported 
interpretation of Anaxagoras’s key principle that there is a share 
of everything in everything. In offering this argument, I make a 
radical departure from the existing accounts in the literature of 
Anaxagoras’s thought. My contention is that Anaxagoras’s extreme 
mixture cannot be understood in terms of the constitutional con­
tainment of everything in everything, which has been the dominant 
line of interpretation of Anaxagoras’s ontology thus far. Rather, his 
mixture needs to be explained in terms of the necessary compres­
ence of everything with everything. For Anaxagoras there is a share 
of everything with everything, rather than a share of everything 
4. Such parts of powers, which are infinite in number, exist as necessarily coinstan­
tiated with each other, in an extreme mixture of everything with everything. Yet, as 
we saw in ­chapter 2, there can be different concentrations of them in different spatial 
regions of the universe, giving rise to stuffs and organisms (which require seeds too).
5. That the unlimitedly many, unlimitedly small instances of each element add up 
to an unlimitedly large element echoes, or at least matches, Zeno of Elea’s paradoxes, 
where infinite divisibility is taken to add up to endless tasks.
6. The word “gunk” does not appear in Anaxagoras’s or any other ancient philo­
sophical texts, but this is no reason to think that we cannot use the expression, as 
defined by David Lewis (1991: 20), as characterizing something whose proper parts 
have proper parts. I will provide a definition of Anaxagorean gunk in section 3.2.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
76
76
contained in everything.7 Two strands of argument support the 
shift I want to bring about in our understanding of Anaxagoras’s 
pivotal tenet: the “positive” argument is built on the textual evi­
dence and the explanatory power of the interpretation I propose in 
relation to the texts we have, and the “negative” argument concerns 
the shortcomings of the alternative interpretations (examined in 
­chapter 4).
3.1.  THE INSEPARABILITY OF ALL OPPOSITES
My starting point in this chapter is Anaxagoras’s explicit statement 
that the fundamental elements in his ontology are necessarily com­
present with each other. We read, for instance, in B6:
Since it is not possible that there is a least, it would not be pos­
sible that [anything] be separated nor come to be by itself, but 
just as in the beginning, now too all things are together.
ὅτε τοὐλάχιστον μὴ ἔστιν εἶναι, οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο χωρισθῆναι, 
οὐδ’ ἂν ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῦ γενέσθαι, ἀλλ’ ὅπωσπερ ἀρχὴν εἶναιa καὶ νῦν 
πάντα ὁμοῦ.
These lines are crucial for our understanding of Anaxagoras’s views. 
In them we find explicitly stated NoLeast-​P, which serves as the 
main premise from which Anaxagoras derives the necessary insepa­
rability of the opposites. The latter can be expressed in the following 
principle, NoSep-​P:
NoSep-​P: No instance of an opposite can occur distinctly, by 
itself (but is always together with instance[s]‌ of opposite[s]).
7.  An important feature of the interpretation I  want to motivate is that for 
Anaxagoras there are pure kinds of opposites, even if their instances are inseparable 
and thus there is extreme mixture of everything in everything, as I will argue in this 
and the next chapter.
 
 

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
77
    77
This principle, I  submit, is of great metaphysical significance in 
Anaxagoras’s system, though no argument has been preserved in 
full in the extant fragments to show how Anaxagoras establishes it, 
by deriving it from NoLeast-​P. We can only try to reconstruct his 
line of thinking on the basis of the information we have about his 
ontology. I submit that the existing evidence allows us to speculate 
that Anaxagoras developed two distinct arguments for the insepa­
rability of the opposites on the basis of NoLeast-​P. The first one 
is flawed and was criticized already in antiquity by Aristotle as 
reported by Simplicius. Only the second one leads to Anaxagoras’s 
desired conclusion of the necessary inseparability of all opposites 
(and ultimately their extreme mixture); but both arguments reveal 
to us important aspects of Anaxagoras’s thought. I  call the two 
arguments (a) from the Relativity of Opposites, and (b) from the 
Unlimited Smallness of the Quality Tropes, and I introduce them 
here in turn.
3.1.1.  The Argument from the Relativity 
of Opposites
In this subsection I reconstruct how Anaxagoras can use NoLeast-​
P to successfully derive the inseparability of opposites within a pair 
(for instance, hot from cold, or large from small). On the other hand 
I also show that this application of NoLeast-​P cannot be extended to 
deliver the more general conclusion that all opposites are inseparable. 
My reconstruction of Anaxagoras’s argument draws on B3 and B8.8 
8. I here quote B3 and B8 in full for ease of reference for the reader:
B3: For in fact Anaxagoras says directly at the beginning of the book that [the 
ingredients] were unlimited: “all things were together, unlimited both in amount 
and in smallness” [b1], and that there is neither a smallest nor a largest among 
the first principles: “Nor of the small is there a smallest, but always a smaller (for 
what-​is cannot not be)—​but also of the large there is always a larger. And [the 
large] is equal to the small in extent, but in relation to itself each thing is both 
large and small.” For if everything is in everything and if everything is separated 
off from everything, then from what seems to be the smallest something yet 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
78
78
In B8 we find the thesis of the inseparability of all opposites illus­
trated with the example of the pair of opposites hot and cold:
The things in the one kosmos have not been separated from one 
another, nor hacked apart with an axe—​neither the hot from the 
cold nor the cold from the hot.
οὐ κεχώρισται ἀλλήλων τὰ ἐν τῷ ἑνὶ κόσμῳ οὐδὲ ἀποκέκοπται 
πελέκει οὔτε τὸ θερμὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ ψυχροῦ οὔτε τὸ ψυχρὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ 
θερμοῦ. . .
Anaxagoras does not offer (in B8 or anywhere else in the extant 
fragments) an argument why the hot and the cold are inseparable 
from each other, but one can be constructed on the basis of B3, 
where the example used is that of the pair of opposites small and 
smaller than that will be separated off, and what seems to be the largest was 
separated off from something larger than itself.
καὶ γὰρ ὅτι ἄπειρα ἦν, εὐθὺς ἀρχόμενος λέγει “ὁμοῦ πάντα χρήματα ἦν ἄπειρα καὶ 
πλῆθος καὶ σμικρότητα.” καὶ ὅτι οὔτε τὸ ἐλάχιστόν ἐστιν ἐν ταῖς ἀρχαῖς οὔτε τὸ 
μέγιστον, οὔτε γὰρ τοῦ σμικροῦ, φησίν, ἐστὶ τό γε ἐλάχιστον, ἀλλ’ ἔλασσον ἀεί 
(τὸ γὰρ ἐὸν οὐκ ἔστι τὸ μὴ οὐκ εἶναι),—​ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ μεγάλου ἀεί ἐστι μεῖζον. καὶ 
ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ σμικρῷ πλῆθος, πρὸς ἑαυτὸ δὲ ἕκαστόν ἐστι καὶ μέγα καὶ σμικρόν. εἰ 
γὰρ πᾶν ἐν παντὶ καὶ πᾶν ἐκ παντὸς ἐκκρίνεται, καὶ ἀπὸ τοῦ ἐλαχίστου δοκοῦντος 
ἐκκριθήσεταί τι ἔλασσον ἐκείνου, καὶ τὸ μέγιστον δοκοῦν ἀπό τινος ἐξεκρίθη ἑαυτοῦ 
μείζονος.
B8: When Anaxagoras says “nothing is dissociated or separated off one from 
another” [B12] because all things are in all things, and elsewhere: “The things 
in the one kosmos have not been separated from another, nor hacked apart with 
an axe—​neither the hot from the cold not the cold from the hot” (for there is 
not anything pure by itself), this, Aristotle says, is stated without Anaxagoras’s 
full knowledge of what it means; for it is not because everything is in everything 
that the dissociation does not occur.
Εἰπόντος τοῦ Ἀναξαγόρου οὐδὲ διακρίνεται οὐδὲ ἀποκρίνεται ἕτερον ἀπὸ τοῦ 
ἑτέρου διὰ τὸ πάντα ἐν πᾶσιν εἶναι, καὶ ἀλλαχοῦ οὐ κεχώρισται ἀλλήλων τὰ ἐν 
τῷ ἑνὶ κόσμῳ οὐδὲ ἀποκέκοπται πελέκει οὔτε τὸ θερμὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ ψυχροῦ οὔτε 
τὸ ψυχρὸν ἀπὸ τοῦ θερμοῦ (οὐ γὰρ εἶναί τι εἱλικρινὲς καθ’ αὑτό), τοῦτο, φησίν, 
οὐκ εἰδότως μὲν λέγεται· οὐ γὰρ διὰ τὸ πάντα ἐν πᾶσιν εἶναι συμβαίνει τὸ μὴ 
διακρίνεσθαι. . .

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
79
    79
large.9 In B3 Anaxagoras says of the small that there is “always a 
smaller” (on account of NoLeast-​P) and “of the large there is always 
a larger” (on account of NoLargest-​P); and he justifies his claim 
with the Parmenidean tenet that “what-​is cannot not be,”10 thus:
Not of the small is there a smallest, but always a smaller (for what-​is 
cannot not be)—​but also of the large there is always a larger.
οὔτε γὰρ τοῦ σμικροῦ, φησίν, ἐστὶ τό γε ἐλάχιστον, ἀλλ’ ἔλασσον 
ἀεί (τὸ γὰρ ἐὸν οὐκ ἔστι τὸ μὴ οὐκ εἶναι),—​ἀλλὰ καὶ τοῦ μεγάλου 
ἀεί ἐστι μεῖζον.
What role does Parmenides’s dictum play in Anaxagoras’s argument? 
What I take Anaxagoras to seek to establish in B3 is that the scale 
representing the intensity of a certain property is limitless, in both 
directions, with no fixed minimum or maximum. The reasoning can 
be reconstructed as a reductio ad absurdum. If there were a mini­
mum in the scale of intensity of an opposite, beyond which the oppo­
site is no more, then further division (which is always possible on 
account of NoLeast-​P, and amounts to decrease in intensity) would 
“destroy” the opposite. But this is impossible because it would violate 
Parmenides’s stance that what is cannot not be. Thus there cannot 
be a minimum end point on the scale of intensity of an opposite. 
Mutatis mutandis the same reasoning holds for the other end of the 
scale, the maximum (on account of NoLargest-​P). Thus there are no 
extremes to the degree of intensity of an opposite. In other words, 
B3 establishes that the possibility of further reduction or increase in 
the intensity of an opposite can never be “exhausted.”11 Let us now 
return to the example of the hot and the cold in B8, and examine 
9. Treating the opposite small as metaphysically analogous to, e.g., the property 
hot or cold may be surprising to us but was not to the ancients; Plato posited Forms of 
the Large, the Small, the Hot etc.
10. See also the helpful discussion of the textual issue concerning the clause “for 
what-​is cannot not be” in Curd (2010: 39–​40).
11. See also section 2.3. in ­chapter 2.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
80
80
how the conclusion reached in B3 can be used to justify the claim 
that the hot and the cold are inseparable. If there is always a smaller 
(i.e., less intense) and always a larger (i.e., more intense) point in the 
scale of an opposite, it follows that any given instance of, e.g., the hot 
will also be an instance of the cold, and thus inseparable from the 
cold. For, anything hot is also cold relative to something hotter (and 
anything cold is also hot relative to something colder). And, as it was 
established in B3, no matter where one starts in the scale of intensity 
of the hot, there will always be a hotter instance of the hot (and vice 
versa with the cold). In sum, the thought is that the hot is inseparable 
from the cold, the large from the small, and generally every opposite 
is inseparable from its own opposite, because every instance of one 
of a pair of opposites is also an instance of the other opposite.12 The 
unlimited smallness and the unlimited largeness of the instances of 
pairs of opposites do not allow for any end-​of-​the-​spectrum extremes 
of intensity in the range of any pair of opposites. Thus, every instance 
of an opposite is inseparable from an instance of its opposite on 
account of the relativity of their intensities. Let us now look at how 
Anaxagoras’s reasoning unfolds in B8. There, he treats the hot and 
the cold as an instance of the general thesis that all opposites are 
inseparable: “For there is not anything pure by itself” (οὐ γὰρ εἶναί τι 
εἱλικρινὲς καθ’ αὑτό). The case of the hot and the cold is to his mind 
a specific example of a general condition that holds true of all oppo­
sites. The problem with this line of thinking is that opposites within 
a pair are inseparable on account of their relativity. However, relativ­
ity does not generalize to all opposites (e.g., the hot and the wet), 
and so can’t be the reason why they are inseparable. This concludes 
my reconstruction of the Argument from the Relativity of Opposites. 
The argument as such is not explicit anywhere in Anaxagoras’s sur­
viving texts. On the other hand it is plausible to think that he might 
12. But note that the necessary inseparability of all opposites is a stronger and 
more general claim than this; this is about every instance of an opposite being insepa­
rable from its own opposite, the other is about every instance of an opposite being 
inseparable from every instance of every opposite.

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
81
    81
have tried to use NoLeast-​P along those lines. One strong reason for 
thinking in this direction is Simplicius, who is our source for B8. He 
notes that there is a difficulty in the argument, reporting Aristotle’s 
objection to it:
This, Aristotle says, is stated without Anaxagoras’ full knowledge 
of what it means; for it is not because everything is in everything 
that the dissociation does not occur.
τοῦτο, φησίν, οὐκ εἰδότως μὲν λέγεται· οὐ γὰρ διὰ τὸ πάντα ἐν 
πᾶσιν εἶναι συμβαίνει τὸ μὴ διακρίνεσθαι.
Aristotle’s (and Simplicius’s) reasoning must be as follows. Contrary 
to what (they believe) Anaxagoras thinks, the inseparability of the 
hot and the cold does not presuppose the extreme mixture of all 
opposites. Rather, their inseparability is derivable from two premises 
only: that opposites have an infinite scale of degrees of intensity; and 
that because of that, the hot and the cold are always relative: there 
will never be an instance of hot that is not cold also. In conclusion, 
Aristotle’s point must be that it is a mistake on the part of Anaxagoras 
to use the same justification for why the opposites within a pair and 
all opposites are inseparable, as I pointed out above.
3.1.2.  The Argument from the Unlimited 
Smallness of the Quality Tropes
I turn now to a second way in which we can reconstruct on 
Anaxagoras’s behalf an argument for the inseparability of all oppo­
sites, deriving it from NoLeast-​P. We saw in ­chapter  1 that on 
Anaxagoras’s conception, the universe has existed ab aeterno as a 
mixture of all the opposites. Things in the universe, e.g., a lump of 
earth, are clusters of tropes in the midst of a “haze” as it were of 
other tropes. How many tropes are there in the universe? And how 
many in the lump of earth? The answer is that the tropes are contin­
uum dense: there are continuum dense tropes making up the lump 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
82
82
of earth, continuum dense tropes mixed with those, even if they are 
not constitutive of the lump of earth, and continuum dense tropes 
all around the tropes “in” the lump of earth. The reason why the 
shares of the opposites populate everything so densely is NoLeast-​
P. What the principle commits Anaxagoras to is a world where the 
fundamental elements, the tropes, are unlimited in number and 
unlimited in smallness, just as by analogy the constituent parts of an 
unlimitedly divisible line are unlimited in number and unlimited in 
smallness. As I understand Anaxagoras, he is saying that no instance 
of an opposite can be separate by itself, for the same reasons for 
which no point of a line can be separate by itself. The reason why a 
point cannot be separate by itself is that between the point and what 
it would be separate from, there is always a point.13 This is what it 
is to be continuum dense—​namely, that there is no next point from 
which a point can be separate. The same goes analogously in the case 
of tropes: that they are continuum dense means that there is always 
a trope between two tropes.
One further argument can be made, more Anaxagorean in spirit, 
by way of explication and justification of Anaxagoras’s position in B6, 
that “since it is not possible that there is a least, it would not be pos­
sible that [anything] be separated nor come to be by itself.” Every 
instance of an opposite is many instances of that opposite, because it 
always has proper parts that are instances of that opposite. Since the 
division is unlimited, every dividee is divisible and divided. Hence, 
there can be no atomic tropes: any instantiated trope is coinstanti­
ated with further tropes of the same kind—​its parts.
Recall, in connection with both arguments in this subsection, that 
the fundamental elements are such that their instances have no small­
est part, as we saw in ­chapter 2. Anaxagoras’s example is the oppo­
site small: “Nor of the small is there a smallest, but always a smaller” 
13. Is it plausible to attribute this line of thinking to Anaxagoras? I submit it is; 
on account of the developments of mathematics at that time, as we know also from 
the work of Zeno of Elea, a contemporary of Anaxagoras. See also the appendix to 
­chapter 4 on Zeno’s argument from multitude.

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
83
    83
(B3); but the view generalizes to all opposites, as we know from B1.14 
Each opposite is equal to every other opposite in total amount (being 
unlimitedly large (B1)) and in the smallness of its shares or instances, 
which are unlimitedly small (B1) and the same in number with the 
shares of every other opposite (B6). Anaxagoras, who likes to make 
paradoxical or at least surprising statements, emphasizes that “the 
small, too, was unlimited” (B1) and equal to the large (B3).15 Thus, 
I submit that it is the numerosity of the opposites that makes it to 
be the case that they are inseparable, as Anaxagoras suggests (with­
out explicitly articulating an argument), for instance in B6, where we 
read, in relation to the example of the opposites large and small:
Since the shares of the large and the small are equal in number, in 
this way too, all things will be in everything; nor is it possible that 
[anything] be separate, but all things have a share of everything.
καὶ ὅτε δὲ ἴσαι μοῖραί εἰσι τοῦ τε μεγάλου καὶ τοῦ σμικροῦ πλῆθος, 
καὶ οὕτως ἂν εἴη ἐν παντὶ πάντα· οὐδὲ χωρὶς ἔστιν εἶναι, ἀλλὰ 
πάντα παντὸς μοῖραν μετέχει.
From what we know from the extant texts, there is no principle by which 
to allot shares of opposites to any one thing that one might want to 
separate away from the rest (for instance, a lump of earth from the rest 
of the mixture). Thus complete separation of the tropes is not possible. 
All opposites are unlimited in smallness, unlimited in numerical and 
in total amounts, inseparable from one another, and compresent with 
one another—​ and it is in this sense they are all together in everything.
In conclusion, in this section we saw that NoLeast-​P underpins the 
extreme mixture of all opposites. In the extant texts Anaxagoras does 
14. B1: “All things were together, unlimited both in multitude and in smallness” 
(my emphasis) (ὁμοῦ χρήματα πάντα ἦν, ἄπειρα καὶ πλῆθος καὶ σμικρότητα· καὶ γὰρ 
τὸ σμικρὸν ἄπειρον ἦν). Note that I here depart from Curd in translating plēthos as 
“multitude” instead of “amount.”
15.  B3:  “And [the large] is equal to the small in multitude” (καὶ ἴσον ἐστὶ τῷ 
σμικρῷ πλῆθος).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
84
84
not articulate how, but we have enough information to reconstruct at 
least two ways in which he thought of deriving EE-​P from NoLeast-​
P. What we need to turn to now is how to model—​metaphysically—​
the extreme mixture of all opposites, on the basis of the central role 
NoLeast-​P has in Anaxagoras’s ontology.
3.2.  POWER GUNK
Abiding to the Parmenidean views discussed in ­chapter 1, Anaxagoras 
wants it to be the case that anything can “come out” of anything, to 
avoid admitting creation ex nihilo (and destruction) in his system. So 
he holds that there is a share of everything in everything, which is 
what allows anything to “come out” of anything, where it was already, 
as discussed in ­chapter 2. The challenge then is: what ontology could 
allow a share of everything to be in everything? A general concern 
for Anaxagoras is that any form of ontology positing indivisibles at 
the fundamental level would set a limit below which generation and 
change could not happen. It follows then that Anaxagoras holds that 
reality is atomless, and therefore gunky, to use our terminology. We 
may take for present purposes Ted Sider’s description of gunk as a 
standard modern account:
Borrowing a term from David Lewis (see for example Lewis 
(1991, 20)), let us say that an object is made of “atomless gunk” 
if it has no (mereological) atoms as parts. If something is made 
of atomless gunk then it divides forever into smaller and smaller 
parts—​it is infinitely divisible. However, a line segment is infi­
nitely divisible, and yet has atomic parts: the points. A hunk of 
gunk does not even have atomic parts “at infinity”; all parts of 
such an object have proper parts. (1993: 286)16
16. In the case of a line segment, the points into which it is infinitely divisible 
are extensionless; points have no extension in any dimension. It is usually taken to 
follow, and is here assumed, that points are simple, and do not have parts. Under 
 

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
85
    85
In positing that reality is atomless, Anaxagoras is the first gunk lover 
in the history of metaphysics.17 But his innovations in metaphysics 
go even beyond that. That the universe might be made out of mate­
rial gunk is a possibility that philosophers are currently investigating, 
and theoretical progress is being made. But now consider the pos­
sibility that the ultimate elements of our world are not matter, but 
instantiated physical properties, or qualities; and further, that these 
instantiated qualities are not atomic, but gunky—​what then? How 
are we to conceptualize a universe of qualitative gunk? Gunky prop­
erties have not even been conceptualized so far. Yet, on my inter­
pretation of Anaxagoras’s system, his world is a world of physical 
qualitative gunk. This is, to my knowledge, the first and only instance 
of this type of gunk in the history of philosophy.
The conclusion that Anaxagoras introduces qualitative gunk, 
rests on the fact that what is gunky in his ontology are the opposites. 
As we saw in ­chapter 1, the opposites are instantiated properties, 
tropes, which do not qualify any underlying material substratum, but 
whose clustering makes up matter by phenomenal emergence. There 
is an additional aspect to Anaxagoras’s ontology that makes it so dis­
tinctive: his opposites are causal powers. Without rehearsing here the 
arguments made in ­chapter 1, if the opposites are indeed causal pow­
ers for Anaxagoras, as I contend, what he introduces in metaphysics 
is power gunk, where what is gunky are instantiated causal powers. If 
on the other hand, one wants to remain uncommitted regarding the 
nature of the opposites, one can think of them generically as proper­
ties or qualities, and his ontology as qualitative gunk. In what follows 
this conception, points are the atoms of the line segment, and the line segment is not 
gunky. One might on the other hand think of a line segment as not being divisible into 
extensionless points, but only into smaller and smaller segments ad infinitum. In that 
case, the line segment is gunky. Similarly, if a surface has line or point atoms, it is divis­
ible into lines or points, which are its atoms. If a surface is gunky, if it is divisible into 
smaller and smaller surfaces, all of which have surfaces as proper parts.
17. Even when the thought that Anaxagoras might have been an ante litteram 
gunk lover was aired in the past, by Theodore Sider (1993) and Hud Hudson (2007), 
crucially this was with no supporting argument or textual analysis.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
86
86
I will cast in the discussion of Anaxagoras’s gunk in terms of qualities 
rather than powers, for the sake of highlighting its metaphysical sig­
nificance no matter what particular interpretation of the ontological 
status of the Anaxagorean opposites one favors. We can thus define 
qualitative gunk in terms of a property’s instances being gunky:
QG: An instantiated physical property (i.e., a trope) is gunky if 
and only if every part of it has a proper part that is an instanti­
ated physical property (a trope).18
A further unique feature of Anaxagoras’s ontology is that the instan­
tiated opposites are not potentially divisible into proper parts that 
have proper parts, etc., ad infinitum. Rather, they are actually divided 
into their gunky parts, as if the supertask of “chopping” them up 
thoroughly had been completed.19 We can infer that the opposites 
exist as thoroughly divided from B1, where Anaxagoras says that “all 
things were together, unlimited both in multitude and in smallness” 
(ὁμοῦ χρήματα πάντα ἦν, ἄπειρα καὶ πλῆθος καὶ σμικρότητα). We will 
return to the issue of the actual division of the opposites in the fol­
lowing section, 3.3, but before concluding this section there is a fur­
ther point to consider. While the fact that opposites for Anaxagoras 
are actually gunky does facilitate the extreme mixture and insepara­
bility of the shares that Anaxagoras wants, because of the numeros­
ity of the shares that exist in nature, it also raises a new philosophical 
challenge. Are the shares causally powerful no matter how small 
they are, or only up to a certain level of division? Anaxagoras has an 
answer to this question: there is evidence that he thought that the 
18. In the case of Anaxagoras’s properties, i.e., the opposites, every proper part of 
an instantiated property is an instance of that property. This is so because his proper­
ties are homoeomers, where every part is of the same kind as the whole. But nonho­
moeomeric properties can also be gunky.
19. Anaxagoras assumes directly thoroughly divided elements in the universe, 
without positing that any supertask has been performed. On the other hand, modern 
metaphysicians when discussing actual gunk describe it as the result of the supertask 
of chopping something up, to facilitate our “visualization” of it.

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
87
    87
opposites are such that their parts are uniform (or homoeomers, to 
use Aristotle’s term), i.e. the same in kind as the whole of which they 
are parts. For instance, the parts of an instance of, e.g., the hot are 
also instances of the hot; and the parts of an instance of the small are 
also small (as Anaxagoras reiterates when he formulates NoLeast-​P). 
This means that the division leaves their nature “intact”—​which is 
needed to preserve their powerfulness at any level of division.
A final remark before concluding this section. The overall inter­
pretation of Anaxagoras’s extreme mixture in terms of gunk that 
I develop in this chapter does not depend on giving the opposites 
the particular status in Anaxagoras’s ontology of ultimate building 
blocks to which stuffs is reducible. As we saw in ­chapter 1, there is a 
line of interpretation of Anaxagoras’s ontology that considers stuffs 
irreducible and real, rather than derivative and reducible. On this 
alternative view stuffs such as blood or gold are not composed out 
of the opposites, but are primitive. I will briefly sketch now how my 
interpretation can be equally developed on the alternative view, tak­
ing Graham (2004) as its representative. Let us assume per hypothe­
sis that Anaxagoras’s ontology is built on fundamental opposites and 
fundamental stuff, instead of opposites only.20 The qualitative gunk 
interpretation I am developing in this chapter would then apply to 
this ontology as follows. The various kinds of opposites and kinds of 
stuff exist in the primordial mixture as gunky, divided into parts of 
unlimited smallness. The vortex started by nous moves them around 
in the mixture generating preponderances such as of milk, of gold, 
of flesh, etc. These preponderances are phenomenally perceptible as 
such, i.e., as milk or gold or flesh, etc. Preponderances of the oppo­
sites in the same regions of space result in such stuff being hot, or 
cold, or dry, etc. Ceteris paribus, an ontology of only opposites as 
fundamental is more economical, as Graham too, for instance, recog­
nizes (2004: 7); and as I argued, I find it a preferable interpretation. 
In the following sections I will argue that it is the gunky nature of the 
20. In addition, on both interpretations, there are also seeds and nous.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
88
88
opposites, on account of the actual infinity of the number of their 
shares, that allows them to be everywhere and thus in everything—​
all together and inseparable.
3.3.  DIVIDED GUNK
In order to assess the philosophical soundness of the view I attribute 
to the Anaxagoras,21 we need to consider whether there are special 
difficulties about conceptualizing actual gunk, which do not arise 
with potential gunk. To address this question, let us look at another 
modern description of gunk in addition to the one offered by Ted 
Sider (given in section 3.2), which interestingly is formulated in a 
way that can be read as referring to either potential or actual unlim­
ited division. Achille Varzi (2016) talks of gunk as
the hypothesis that the universe might consist of “atomless gunk” 
(Lewis 1991: 20), i.e., that either space and time or matter, or 
both, [or instances of physical properties, to include Anaxagoras’s 
version] divide forever into smaller and smaller parts.
It is the expression “divide forever” that may refer to potential or 
actual unlimited division. My thought is that conceiving of unlim­
itedly divided matter and conceiving of continuous matter with 
unlimitedly many parts have the same conceptual complexity. So my 
conclusion is that there aren’t special conceptual difficulties with the 
structure of actual gunk, if one is willing to allow for potential gunk.
What are the actually gunky parts of something? Is there any­
thing there at all, as it were, at that level of division? What is left can­
not be extended parts, because they would be further divisible and 
therefore not actually gunky. It cannot be infinitely many point-​like 
entities of zero extension, because they also would be indivisible and 
21. And to the Stoics too, as we will see in ­chapter 6.
 

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
89
    89
like atoms, which is incompatible with the hypothesis that the oppo­
sites are actually gunky.22 Perhaps thorough division destroys what is 
divided? Alexander of Aphrodisias already entertained this thought 
and the difficulties associated with it:
If the constituents leave no undivided reminder in the blend they 
would be divided through and through, and not into parts but 
into divisions, if no particle of them remains beyond the divi­
sion. (On Mixture 221.34–​36)
εἰ δὲ μηδὲν ἀδιαίρετον ἀλλήλων ἐν τῇ κράσει καταλελοίπασιν, 
εἴη ἂν πάντῃ διῃρημένα καὶ οὐκ εἰς μέρη, ἀλλ’ εἰς διαιρέσεις 
ἡ τομὴ γεγονυῖα, εἴ γε μηδὲν αὐτῶν μόριον παρὰ τὴν διαίρεσιν 
καταλέλειπται.
Interestingly, we find this metaphysical concern restated in a dif­
ferent, modern context by John Hawthorne and Brian Weatherson, 
who explore the possibility of actual gunk:
One might … think that matter sometimes vanishes as a result 
of some sequence of cuts… . If we are allowed to suppose that 
gunk may vanish, then it will be perfectly consistent to say that 
nothing is left at the limit of super-​cutting. (2004: 341)
Of relevance to our present investigation, Hawthorne and Weatherson 
proceed to consider what is the case in a world where actual gunk 
does not in fact “vanish” into nothingness—​and so will we, with 
Anaxagoras. Anaxagoras, too, considers the possibility that divided 
gunk vanishes into nonbeing, and he explicitly rejects this option, 
claiming that thorough (unlimited) division of the elements does 
not destroy them: “Nor of the small is there a smallest, but always 
22. T. Sider, for example, comments on the difference thus: “A line segment is 
infinitely divisible, and yet has atomic parts: the points. A hunk of gunk does not even 
have atomic parts ‘at infinity’ ” (1993: 286).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
90
90
a smaller; for what is cannot not be” (B3), echoing Parmenides. 
I  will therefore assume axiomatically for present purposes that 
when division is applied within the domain of extension, repeated 
division is not a mechanism that can rid parts of their extension.23 
Anaxagoras’s hunks of gunk cannot have extension, nor can they be 
without extension, though on account of their thorough division, we 
can now conclude that they approximate zero extension as a limit. The 
division makes them be scattered into continuum-​many parts, with 
aleph-​1 cardinality.24 This realization will enable us to understand 
how Anaxagoras’s gunky opposites can be everywhere, compresent 
with each other.
3.4.  GUNK’S LOCATION IN SPACE
Anaxagoras assumes in his ontology a thorough division of the instan­
tiated opposites in the cosmic mixture. Each constituent is unlimited 
with respect to its total quantity in the universe and the number of 
gunky parts it is divided in, and each of the parts is unlimitedly small. 
From this follows that there are no continuous “stretches” of one mix­
ant where all the other mixants are not present. Let me restate before 
moving forward that what we are looking for is a metaphysical model 
for colocation that can explain the following stance of Anaxagoras’s. 
For him, gunky opposites are mixed by being colocated throughout 
the space in which their mixture extends, in the sense that each part 
23. For anything small, there can be something smaller. So division does not lead 
to “extinction” of the divided item. Some commentators have read in this position 
of Anaxagoras a denial of Zeno’s conclusions about complete divisibility ending into 
nothingness. There are also those who doubt or positively argue against this conclu­
sion. Curd (2010: 39), for instance, raises doubts on whether the conclusion is war­
ranted. On the one hand Anaxagoras only states NoLeast-​P; he does not argue in 
any open critical engagement with Zeno. On the other hand Curd notes that Zeno is 
concerned only with extinction of being just by division, while Anaxagoras is stating 
that being is not extinguishable in any way. See also the appendix to ­chapter 4.
24. Aleph-​1 is the cardinality of the actually divided gunk, as Hawthorne and 
Weatherson argue (2004: 340).
 

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
91
    91
of the mixture, no matter how small, contains parts of all its constitu­
ents. How, then, can Anaxagoras’s opposites be so colocated? Recall 
that in section 3.3 we established that the status of divided gunk that 
Anaxagoras’s opposites exist in means that their shares approximate 
nonextension. This is what allows them to overlap with each other in 
the same location, and thus be colocated.25 We saw in section 3.1 that 
Anaxagoras states in B6,
Since it is not possible that there is a least, it would not be pos­
sible that [anything] be separated, nor come to be by itself, but 
just as in the beginning, now too all things are together.
ὅτε τοὐλάχιστον μὴ ἔστιν εἲναι, οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο χωρισθῆναι, 
οὐδ᾽ἂν ἐφ᾽ἑαυτοῦ γενέσθαι, ἀλλ᾽ὅπωσπερ ἀρχὴν εἶναι καὶ νῦν 
πάντα ὁμοῦ.
There is no further argument in Anaxagoras’s fragments for this claim 
of universal inseparability, namely that no opposite can be isolated so 
that it is not mixed with the other opposites. When we reconstructed 
on his behalf two lines of arguments in support of that conclusion (in 
section 3.1), we found the numerosity of shares and the lack of a prin­
ciple to allot them to be a sound way to derive Anaxagoras’s desired 
conclusion. We are now in the position to see which metaphysics 
underpins this reasoning. When the infinity of shares of each of the 
gunky opposites is mixed with the infinity of shares of the other oppo­
sites, there is no physical method by which they can be thoroughly 
separated, even if there can be partial extraction of some out of the 
rest of the mixture. Although this has the air of a mere empirical 
statement, it seems that for Anaxagoras it has the status of natural 
law, on account of the actually gunky nature of the opposites.26
25. The convergent colocation of the mixants does not entail that the mixants 
share parts.
26. In ­chapter 6 I will argue for the claim that actual gunk underpins, with signifi­
cant differences, the Stoic stance that bodies exist as thoroughly mixed. That another 
group of ancient thinkers put actual gunk thus to use is in a way surprising, but it also 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
92
92
This very mathematical approach to reality Anaxagoras takes is 
in line with that of many of his contemporaries. Anaxagoras belongs 
to the very first generation of cosmologists and mathematicians 
who investigated the concept of the infinite at its “birth.”27 As I will 
show in some more detail in the appendix to ­chapter 4, Zeno’s argu­
ment from multitude, along with his regress argument about the 
divisibility of motion, are significant for our Anaxagorean investi­
gation because they involve the type of infinity that is required to 
conceptualize gunk. Zeno’s infinities gave definitional expression to 
continuum infinity, namely the infinity of the real numbers, which is 
what Anaxagoras’s definition of the constitution of the opposites 
requires:  “Nor … is there a smallest, but always a smaller” (B3). 
This is also the time that the Pythagoreans (reportedly Hippassus of 
Metapontum, fifth century BC) discovered the irrational numbers, 
whose specification requires infinitely many integers. In this same 
age, Democritus calculated the volume of a cone and a pyramid using 
infinitely many planes. In short, this is a time in which it is plausible 
to assume that Anaxagoras could have operated with the concept of 
infinity in the way I argue he does.
3.5.  THE GRIND MODEL
Before developing further the model I interpret Anaxagoras as hold­
ing, I will engage critically with another existing interpretation in the 
secondary literature that is close to, yet importantly distinct from 
adds plausibility to the claims I make about Anaxagoras. Actual gunk was a view that 
the ancient could entertain.
27. Thus, for instance, Wilbur Knorr: “The interaction of philosophy and math­
ematics is seldom revealed so clearly as in the study of the infinite among the ancient 
Greeks. The dialectical puzzles of the fifth-​century Eleatics, sharpened by Plato and 
Aristotle in the fourth century, are complemented by the invention of precise methods 
of limits, as applied by Eudoxus in the fourth century and Euclid and Archimedes in 
the third” (1982: 112).
 

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
93
    93
mine. It was put forward by Richard Sorabji (1988). I call it the Grind 
model, borrowing the expression from Eric Lewis (2000: 6). Sorabji 
holds a distinctive reading of EE-​P and its metaphysical conse­
quences. As I do, Sorabji focuses on the compresence of Anaxagoras’s 
fundamental entities. He writes that
Anaxagoras may have thought in terms of an infinitesimal pow­
der. The mixture is like what one would have, if bone and honey 
had (counterfactually) started in isolation, and been ground to 
powder and stirred together, only the grinding would have gone 
on until the particles were “infinitely small.” … The units will 
need to be sizeless to avoid nuggets of isolated bone or honey. 
For in a positively sized nugget of bone, there would be inner 
parts not surrounded by honey; whereas in an infinitesimal pow­
der every bit of bone could be together with some honey… . The 
doctrine of something of everything in everything will mean that 
there are infinitesimal units of each kind either at every point, or 
at least in every positively sized region however small. (1988: 64)
Sorabji’s explanation of EE-​P in terms of the Grind model is close in 
some respects to the gunk model I have presented in this chapter. 
One important difference is that Sorabji thinks of Anaxagoras’s fun­
damental elements in terms of ground stuffs, e.g., bone and honey, 
rather than opposites, as I do. But for present purposes I will here 
focus on the metaphysics of division that Sorabji envisages, how it 
compares to mine, and whether it delivers a sound account of EE-​
P. Sorabji wonders whether the infinitesimally small bits of stuff are 
sizeless or positively sized, and correctly concludes that if they are 
positively sized, then they would be further divisible, and the mix­
ture would not be complete. If on the other hand they are sizeless, 
then “every bit of bone could be together with some honey,” as stated 
in the quotation above. But on this line of thinking a problem arises 
for Sorabji’s interpretation: if there were sizeless bits in the grind, 
this would contradict Anaxagoras’s NoLeast-​P, since the sizeless bits 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
94
94
would be indivisible atoms in the ontology, like points. Anaxagoras 
does not allow for a smallest in the ontology. Hence, Sorabji’s model 
cannot ultimately account for colocation. For my part, I appeal to 
convergence to zero extension to account for the colocation of the 
hunks of gunk in Anaxagoras’s cosmic mixture. Although having zero 
extension is not allowed in Anaxagoras’s ontology, we can use it as a 
limit of magnitude, to describe his gunky ontology.
While the Grind model has not received due attention in the lit­
erature,28 it has been discussed quite closely by Eric Lewis (2000), 
who examines it in connection to the metaphysics of Stoic fusion, 
concentrating on the issue of colocation. Lewis compares two coex­
tension models, the Grind model and the Stoic Blend model, and 
finds them of equal explanatory value in relation to Anaxagoras’s 
extreme mixture, to the point that Lewis declares he ultimately can­
not declare that either is more apt than the other (2000: 13). Of the 
Grind model, going beyond what Sorabji has written, Lewis distin­
guishes two versions:
The grind model … comes in two types. [Lewis calls the two ver­
sions the particulate-​juxtaposition model and the particulate-​
coextensive model]. Either the infinitesimally sized particles are 
juxtaposed, or they are completely coextensive. Given the first 
option [which is Sorabji’s], we do not strictly have everything 
found at every location within a compound thing, only within a 
positively sized region. (2000: 12–​13)
We need then to concentrate on the particulate-​coextensive model, 
where the infinitesimally sized particles are coextensive:
What about the particulate-​coextensive model? … If [it] … is 
to do the work it is intended to do, the relation between particles 
28. Curd (2010: 183), for instance, groups Sorabji with those holding a particulate 
interpretation.

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
95
    95
which occupy distinct locations must at least be a dense order­
ing (only then there will be everything in any positively sized 
region). This is close to saying that collectively these particles 
form a continuum, which seems to be a defining feature of the 
blending model. (2000: 12–​13)
The Stoic Blend model that Lewis examines is that of liquids that 
are assumed to be (nonatomic and) homogenous. They are blended 
together so that “all of the blended ingredients are present at every 
location in the blend” (2000: 3). Have we here found one and pos­
sibly even two solutions for Anaxagoras’s extreme mixture puzzle? 
I  submit the answer is no:  neither Sorabji’s Grind model or the 
Stoic Blend model as understood by Lewis delivers colocation. The 
reason can be more clearly brought out starting from the Blend 
model. On this model, two constituents can occupy the same vol­
ume by “being spread throughout the mixture at a lower density,” 
as Sorabji notes (1988: 63). I cannot see, however, how a blend of 
nonatomic homogenous liquids could spread through a mixture at 
lower densities.29 The volume of the blend of two liquids is equal 
to the sum of the volumes each liquid occupies on its own. It does 
not seem right to call on a model to help us understand a physi­
cal scenario, while requiring the model to behave in ways that do 
not comply with its physics. If on the other hand the volume of 
the blended liquids is the sum of the volume of the liquids that 
were mixed, then it cannot be that the liquids are colocated—​
rather, they are juxtaposed. The same problem arises for the Grind 
model, if the infinitesimal particles are not sizeless, like points, 
but have size. They will not be colocated, but juxtaposed. (I will 
offer more sustained arguments in ­chapter 4 against the plausibil­
ity of explaining Anaxagoras’s theory of extreme mixture in terms 
of juxtaposition.)
29. Unless one adopts Daniel Nolan’s conception of weak location discussed in 
section 6.2 of ­chapter 6.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
96
96
3.6.  CAN THERE BE PREPONDERANCE IN 
A GUNKY WORLD?
In the preceding sections of this chapter we examined the metaphysi­
cal significance of NoLeast-​P, which is the keystone of Anaxagoras’s 
ontology. NoLeast-​P underpins his conception of the opposites as 
actually gunky. The question we want to investigate in this section is 
whether his ontology of gunky opposites as derived from NoLeast-​
P can indeed explain, as Anaxagoras thought it could, composition, 
difference, and change in things via P-​P. Can there be preponderance 
in a system where there are gunky shares of everything everywhere? 
The view I want to defend is that Anaxagoras had mixed intuitions 
about both a countable and an uncountable infinity, and that this led 
him to combine in his ontology NoLeast-​P (interpreted as involving 
unlimited division) with P-​P, although they are in fact incompatible. 
Before examining the difficulties that combining the two principles 
generates, let us briefly recall why P-​P was posited and what meta­
physical work it does in Anaxagoras’s ontology. We saw in ­chapter 2 
that according to P-​P, if an opposite is preponderant in relation to 
the other opposites in a region of space, it is perceptually evident 
there,30 and, e.g., the thing in question (which is a bundle of oppo­
sites) appears hot, rough, hard, etc. to us. This is stated, for instance, 
in B12.31 Thus, when an opposite is preponderant in a thing, it char­
acterizes the thing, determining its profile of perceptible properties. 
A combination of preponderant opposites in a region, such as the 
dense, the wet, the cold, and the dark, can compose (modulo percep­
tion) into a type of thing such as earth, as we read in B15.32 If on the 
other hand there are no preponderant opposites, as for example in 
30. Given a certain level of preponderance, modulo human perceptual abilities.
31. B12: “Nothing else is like anything else, but each one is and was most mani­
festly those things of which there are the most in it” (ἕτερον δὲ οὐδέν ἐστιν ὅμοιον 
οὐδενί, ἀλλ’ ὅτῳ πλεῖστα ἔνι, ταῦτα ἐνδηλότατα ἓν ἕκαστόν ἐστι καὶ ἦν).
32. B15: “The dense and the wet and the cold and the dark came together here, 
where <the> earth is now” (τὸ μὲν πυκνόν, φησί, καὶ διερὸν καὶ ψυχρὸν καὶ τὸ ζοφερὸν 
ἐνθάδε συνεχώρησεν, ἔνθα νῦν <ἡ> γῆ).
 

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
97
    97
Anaxagoras’s primordial mixture from which the world derives, the 
whole is perceptually indistinct, as stated in B4b.33 Since the oppo­
sites are all compresent everywhere in the universal mixture, prepon­
derance brought about by the increased presence of an opposite in a 
region of the mixture results in an increase of density of that opposite 
in that region.34 Our question here is: can hunks of gunk be denser in 
some region of space, when they are colocated everywhere in space?
Anaxagoras was familiar with examples of aleph-​0 infinity; he 
was, for instance, familiar with the infinity of the series of inte­
gers. But he was also familiar with examples of aleph-​1 infinity; e.g., 
from the infinite divisibility of the continuum in Zeno’s paradoxes.35 
Aleph-​0 infinities do allow for preponderance. As Euclid showed, 
there are infinitely many prime numbers—​yet the Prime Number 
Theorem tells us that there are more prime numbers among the first 
100 integers than among any other 100 integers.36 So the infinity of 
the primes displays regions of higher density or preponderance, at the 
beginning of the infinite series. It would therefore not be unnatural 
for Anaxagoras to have intuitions about the possibility of preponder­
ance in relation to infinity. But if the colocation of everything is to 
33. B4b: “Before there was separation off, because all things were together, there 
was not even any colour evident; for the mixture of all things prevented it, of the 
wet and the dry and of the hot and the cold and of the bright and the dark” (πρὶν δὲ 
ἀποκριθῆναι [ταῦτα] πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲ χροιὴ ἔνδηλος ἦν οὐδεμία· ἀπεκώλυε 
γὰρ ἡ σύμμιξις ἁπάντων χρημάτων, τοῦ τε διεροῦ καὶ τοῦ ξηροῦ καὶ τοῦ θερμοῦ καὶ τοῦ 
ψυχροῦ καὶ τοῦ λαμπροῦ καὶ τοῦ ζοφεροῦ, καὶ γῆς πολλῆς ἐνεούσης καὶ σπερμάτων 
ἀπείρων πλῆθος οὐδὲν ἐοικότων ἀλλήλοις).
34.  This, for Anaxagoras, increases the perceptibility of the opposite in that 
region. As we saw in ­chapter 2, it is not clear exactly how increased density makes 
an opposite more perceptible—​by the increased amount of the opposite, or by the 
increased degree of intensity of the opposite (or both, which is the view I favor). Both 
readings could be supported textually. But what makes crucial difference for our dis­
cussion here, as we will presently see, is that both the amount and the intensity read­
ings require higher density of the opposite in the region.
35. There is some discussion in the literature concerning how early the distinction 
between aleph-​0 and aleph-​1 infinities was made, and in particular concerning the 
evidence as to whether Democritus (who was younger than Anaxagoras) distinguished 
between the two types of infinity. See Vita (1984).
36. See Oswald Riemenschneider (2007).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
98
98
be explained through the unlimited smallness of the shares of the 
opposites, which are continuum-​dense (i.e., of aleph-​1 cardinality), 
is such an infinity of shares compatible with their variable density? 
Is it possible for an opposite to be preponderant in relation to the 
other opposites in any region of space, in view of the fact that all the 
opposites are distributed gunk in every region of space? The answer 
is that it is not possible, any more than it would be possible to make 
the points of a line denser in some section of the line.37
In concluding this chapter, I turn now to explore in a specu­
lative fashion a possible way of combining NoLeast-​P and P-​P 
(under a specific reading) that can deliver the metaphysical results 
Anaxagoras wants to derive from them. It is not a textual reading 
that I am offering—​rather, it is a possible way of thinking along 
Anaxagoras’s lines that meets all his metaphysical desiderata with 
no inconsistency. I call this the Wave Field model. This model pre­
supposes that we take “least” in NoLeast-​P not to be the opposite 
of “more” in P-​P. Suppose per hypothesis that each opposite is and 
behaves like a gunky wave field. Different opposites are like waves 
of different wavelengths and hence frequencies.38 Each wave field 
spans the whole universe in every direction. Let us stipulate as a law 
of nature in this universe that the waves can interact only with waves 
of the same wavelength.39 On this model, adding (superposing) 
37. As a one-​meter line and a two-​meter line have the same number of parts, aleph-​1, 
similarly opposites of different extent divide into the same number of parts. Chrysippus, 
for instance, already noted in antiquity that a quantity of substance could be spread 
through a much greater area by blending with another than it could be spread on its own. 
For example, a drop of wine could blend with the entire sea (Long and Sedley 1987: 48B). 
Daniel Nolan says in relation to Stoic blending of unequal quantities of mixants:
One interesting thing about this gunky construal of blending is that no conclu­
sions about the volume of the blend follow simply from the assumption that a 
blend is created such that, for one infinite division … every one of those parts 
of the blend contain parts of the blended substances. (2006: 176)
I present my account for this Stoic view in section 6.1 of ­chapter 6.
38. Waves like Anaxagoras’s opposites can be gunky. A gunky wave can be thought 
of as the distribution of values through gunky space.
39.  This can be a possible world that has different physical laws from our 
actual world.

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
99
    99
waves of the same wavelength to one another increases their ampli­
tude, but does not change their wavelength or frequency (per stip­
ulation, waves of different wavelengths do not interact with one 
another). Let us say that the increase in the amplitude of a wave 
corresponds to an increase in the intensity of an opposite (by pre­
ponderance). Then this is a world in which the opposites all over­
lap with one another throughout the whole universe—​an opposite 
can be added to or subtracted from an opposite of the same kind, 
making their intensities stronger or weaker, though the kind of 
each opposite cannot change. This model avoids density and inter­
prets preponderance as higher amplitude, resulting from the addi­
tion of waves of the same wavelength. To get the model aligned with 
Anaxagoras’s actual ontology (as we know it from the extant texts), 
one would have to think of a way in which waves are not only in 
motion, but can be moved, as the opposites are moved by the vor­
tex in Anaxagoras’s system. Both the addition/​subtraction and the 
movement of waves would require that there are different sources of 
waves of the same type, so that, e.g., the waves of hot could be added 
to /​ subtracted from each other, or be moved in different directions 
at the same time independently of one another. Which sort of stuff 
could be composed from waves of different types, and which sort 
of objects could be built from the stuff, would depend on how each 
kind of wave is divided into different sources of that wave.40 The 
Wave Field model, which I have here only sketch—​leaving some of 
the details to the reader to work out—​provides a physical structure 
that can make sense of qualitative gunk being compresent every­
where and exhibiting preponderance in places, and hence can do jus­
tice to Anaxagoras’s intuitions about gunk. On the other hand, as I 
mentioned at the outset, developing this model requires us to make 
stipulations that Anaxagoras did not make and possibly could not 
make because, among other reasons, his understanding of infinity 
was not as advanced as ours.
40. In such a world there would be gunky sources of waves (of different kinds).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
100
100
To conclude then, it was not clear to Anaxagoras that some infini­
ties allow for higher density, and thus preponderance of some oppo­
sites, while other infinities do not allow for higher density. Although 
Anaxagoras had scientific “exposure,” via the mathematics under 
development at his time, to both aleph-​0 and aleph-​1 infinities, I sub­
mit that he could not distinguish clearly between their mathematical 
properties and hence their densities. As I understand Anaxagoras’s 
thought, he had intuitions about two aspects of infinity: that their 
unlimited smallness makes thorough mixing of the opposites possi­
ble, through their colocation, and that their variable density explains 
difference and change of intensity of opposites. The result of the 
combination of these intuitions into a single system was a meta­
physically novel and unique ontology of qualitative gunk. We, with 
Cantorian hindsight, can give up the requirement that gunk be of 
variable density and explore the explanatory possibilities of this type 
of gunk, which may offer novel solutions to the problems of coloca­
tion, contact, containment, composition, constitution, mixing, and 
property-​instantiation.
3.7.  CLOSING REMARKS
In ­chapter 1 we saw Anaxagoras’s aim is to explain the phenomenon 
of generation in nature, by way of a mixture of primitive and eter­
nally existing constituents. Such constituents are for him instan­
tiated properties—​causal powers, I  submit. With them, and the 
principles introduced in ­chapter 2, Anaxagoras developed an ontol­
ogy of extreme mixture, whereby there is something of everything 
in everything. In this chapter we saw that the way everything is in 
everything is by compresence. We further investigated the unique 
mereology that Anaxagoras introduced to underpin his theory of 
extreme mixture. Anaxagoras was the first gunk lover in the his­
tory of metaphysics. What he contributed to metaphysics is not only 
gunk, but qualitative or power gunk. His opposites are scattered hunks 
of actual gunk, which can be colocated with each other on account 
 

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
101
    101
of the fact that each approximates nonextension. Thus each opposite 
extends over the whole of the spatial region occupied by the mixture, 
and its gunky constitution allows it to be colocated with the other 
constituents at every region of the mixture. It is in this sense that 
in the Anaxagorean mixture everything is in everything, namely, each 
opposite is scattered everywhere in the mixture. (In ­chapter 4 we will 
see in which ways my proposed interpretation differs from the exist­
ing ones, and which difficulties the alternatives remain prey to.)
In the present chapter we also discussed an existing tension in 
Anaxagoras’s use of infinities to develop his ontology. To my under­
standing, Anaxagoras has intuitions about two aspects of infin­
ity:  that their unlimited smallness makes thorough mixing of the 
opposites possible, through their colocation, and that their variable 
density explains difference and change of intensity of opposites. We 
saw in ­chapter 2 how he uses variable density to explain (via quanti­
tative preponderance) the composition of things, e.g., into earth or 
flesh; that things have different properties, e.g., that they are cold 
or dry; and that things change, e.g., from being cold to being hot. 
On the other hand we saw in this chapter that he uses the unlim­
ited smallness of the opposites to account for how they can be every­
where in the mixture of everything with everything. That Anaxagoras 
had divergent, and perhaps not clear, intuitions about infinity is not 
surprising, given that the concept was just then being developed in 
Greek mathematics. Yet with his intuitions Anaxagoras developed a 
metaphysical system that represents a great legacy.
To conclude this chapter, a few brief considerations are apro­
pos on the significance of Anaxagoras’s gunk ontology, against the 
backdrop of the metaphysical theories that immediately followed his 
own, and also that of contemporary metaphysics. On my proposed 
interpretation, Anaxagoras is the first gunk lover in the history of 
metaphysics. Interestingly, for him gunk is not simply a theoretical 
possibility that cannot be ruled out in principle (as it is for mod­
ern gunk lovers). Rather, it is a view that follows cogently from his 
metaphysical analysis of the physical world of our experience, via 
the various principles examined in ­chapter 2. What participation in 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
102
102
Forms does for Plato’s ontology and what instantiation of univer­
sal forms does for Aristotle’s, gunk does for Anaxagoras: it makes 
properties readily and directly available anywhere in the universe, to 
account for the identity and similarity of things in the world. Gunk is 
a parsimonious metaphysical solution as, with it, a number of issues 
that are still unresolved in metaphysics can simply be avoided: for 
instance, problems concerning the multiple recurrence of one and 
the same entity, the Aristotelian universal; or concerning the itera­
tive participation in one and the same entity, the Platonic universal. 
Furthermore, gunk does not require positing a characterless substra­
tum in one’s ontology. Rather, with Anaxagoras’s gunk we see one 
of the earliest conceptions of properties as tropes and of substances 
as bundles of tropes. What is distinctive about Anaxagoras’s take on 
gunk is not only what motives the view, but also the particular type 
of gunk that he develops. It is qualitative gunk, rather than material 
gunk. As we saw in ­chapter 1, Anaxagoras’s ontology was developed 
before matter was “invented.” It includes tropes only—​they are 
gunky. The resulting metaphysical view, a world of qualitative gunk, 
is new, in the sense of being hitherto unexplored. And if Anaxagoras’s 
opposites are causal powers, which is the interpretation I favor (as 
argued in ­chapter 1), the view acquires even further complexity and 
turns out to be even more innovative, as Anaxagoras is pioneering 
power mereology and positing a world of power gunk.
In modern philosophy, the metaphysics of powers and of laws of 
nature have been a very lively area of research in recent years. A vari­
ety of directions of inquiry are being explored, including, for example, 
whether powers at the fundamental level are “pure” or they are in need 
of a categorical (inert) bases; what the relation is between a power 
and its manifestation; what the nature of a power’s manifestation is; 
whether the identity of a power is structurally determined by all the 
relations it holds to other powers; whether powers embody a special 
modality, different from necessity and contingency; etc. In sum, there 
is a vibrant area of research in contemporary metaphysics where many 
philosophers are working to develop power ontologies to explain the 
metaphysics of the fundamental level of reality as science reveals it to 

A T h eory of  Ex t r e me Mi x t u r e
103
    103
us. But the atomicity of powers (that is, their internal simplicity and 
indivisibility) is a crucial assumption that research in power metaphys­
ics has not examined so far—​and yet Anaxagoras did! Anaxagoras did 
not have all the answers to the questions that his own ontology raises. 
In fact, we have even fewer of his answers, due to the fact that only 
fragments of his work remain. But the originality of his thought, and 
the uniqueness of his ontology in the history of philosophy, make the 
questions it raises worth exploring and pursuing today. Drawing on 
Anaxagoras’s insights, this chapter has offered a sketch of what a quali­
tative gunk ontology looks like by exploring what motives it and high­
lighting the differences of qualitative gunk from material gunk. The 
following chapter is a critical review of the existing alternative inter­
pretations of Anaxagoras’s theory of extreme mixture which will bring 
out from a different angle the merits of the one offered in this chapter.
3.A.  APPENDIX: AN OVERVIEW OF 
ANAXAGORAS’S MAIN METAPHYSICAL 
PRINCIPLES
	
•	 Principle of Universal Extraction
UE-​P:  Any opposite or combination of opposites can be 
extracted from any other combination of opposites.
	
•	 Everything-​in-​Everything Principle
EE-​P: There is a share of everything in everything.
	
•	 No Least Principle
NoLeast-​P: There is no lowest limit to the magnitude of the 
opposites.
	
•	 No Largest Principle
NoLargest-​P: There is no upper limit to the magnitude of 
the opposites.
	
•	 Preponderance Principle
P-​P: A thing is f if and only if the opposite f is preponderant 
in that thing’s constitution (in relation to other oppo­
sites also present in the thing).
 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
104
104
	
•	 Necessary Inseparability Principle
NoSep-​P: No instance of an opposite can occur distinctly, 
by itself (but always together with instance[s]‌ of 
opposite[s]).
	
•	 Qualitative gunk
QG: An instantiated physical property (i.e., a trope) is gunky 
if and only if every part of it has a proper part that is an 
instantiated physical property (a trope).

    105
105
Chapter 4
 Compresence versus 
Containment of the Opposites
Anaxagoras’s claim that there is a share of everything in everything 
is at the very core of his metaphysics. Taken at face value, the claim 
sounds barely intelligible. Its brevity leaves much work to be done by 
the interpreters. Each of the very few words that appear in it, as well 
as the general metaphysical picture that the principle expresses, have 
been subject to much investigation in the scholarly literature, even 
since antiquity. Yet no consensus has been reached. The challenge 
is to understand not only what metaphysical position the principle 
expresses, but also how it fits with the other principles governing 
Anaxagoras’s ontology. I argued for a fresh line of interpretation in 
the preceding chapter, which I now want to compare and contrast 
with the existing alternatives, to bring out further what is distinctive 
about it. Interestingly, ancient and modern scholars have converged 
on three main lines of interpretations of Anaxagoras’s principle that 
there is a share of everything in everything. They are the so-​called 
Particulate, the Proportionate, and the Liquids interpretations.1 
On the Particulate interpretation, the fundamental elements of 
Anaxagoras’s ontology are conceived of as actually present as such in 
1.  Supporters of the particulate interpretation include among others Raven 
(1954), Guthrie (1965), and Kerferd (1969). Supporters of the proportionate interpre­
tation on the other hand include Strang (1963), Barnes (1979), Schofield (1980), and 
Mourelatos (1986). Sorabji’s (1988) interpretation and Lewis’s (2000) discussion of it 
are examined separately in ­chapter 4.
 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
106
106
the extreme mixture out which of everything is composite, as mate­
rial (indivisible) particles of finite size which are too small to be per­
ceptually discerned as such. The mixture appears to be uniform, but 
it isn’t. On this interpretation, the qualitative variety of the existing 
stuffs is accounted for in terms of concentration of particles of differ­
ent kinds at different locations. On the Proportionate interpretation 
on the other hand, the total quantity of each type of fundamental ele­
ment is mixed together with the total quantities of the rest of them, 
in some proportion. The totality is a mixture that is uniform through 
and through, and the mixture is infinitely divisible. As has already 
been extensively discussed in the literature, both lines of interpre­
tation are prey to difficulties. They both lack positively supportive 
textual evidence and in fact conflict with some of the evidence we 
have.2 Additionally, they commit Anaxagoras to holding problem­
atic philosophical views. More recently, the discussion has received 
renewed attention from fresh suggestions made by Patricia Curd, and 
by Gareth Matthews in discussion with John Sisko. I group together 
the views of these three interpreters, even if they do not engage with 
each other directly, because they all share a mass logic approach to 
Anaxagoras’s ontology—​this is their central innovation. For them, 
Anaxagoras is thinking of (actually existing) masses of stuffs being 
present in composite things, in variable quantities, as impurities 
that are everywhere in the things in question. This line of interpreta­
tion, which I refer to as the Liquids interpretation, differs from the 
Particulate interpretation because it does not postulate the existence 
of small particles of definite size, and from the Proportionate inter­
pretation because it does not postulate that the ingredients are pres­
ent in potentiality only. As my own interpretation, as presented in 
­chapter 3, assumes the divisibility of the opposites’ instances (as per 
NoLeast-​P), I also engage in this chapter with the line of interpre­
tation according to which divisibility does no metaphysical work in 
2. As others have also noted, Anaxagoras does not mention either particles or 
proportion anywhere in the extant text; but this is not the only, or even main, textual 
difficulty affecting these interpretations.

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
107
    107
Anaxagoras’s system. The present chapter as a whole engages with 
the main existing readings of Anaxagoras’s principle that there is a 
share of everything in everything, aiming to offer further support for 
the substantial interpretative shift I introduced in ­chapter 3.
4.1.  THE PROPORTIONATE INTERPRETATION
In this and the following section of the present chapter I will review 
the Proportionate and Particulate interpretations, in turn. The 
Proportionate interpretation, in essence, takes every constituted 
thing in Anaxagoras’s world to contain portions of everything else, 
where the portions are not present in each thing as distinct parts 
(or particles)—​rather, they are present as proportions of kinds in a 
mixture.3 On this interpretation, Anaxagoras is using small and large 
to indicate the quantitative proportion of an item within the local or 
global mixture in which it is present. For instance, “The ‘smallness’ 
of, say, gold [in the global mixture] consists not in its being divided 
into minute particles, but rather in the simple fact that there is very 
little gold in the world” (thus Barnes 1982 [vol. 1, revised]: 23). It 
follows on this reading that when in B1 things are said to be “not 
visible ‘on account of smallness’ it means something like ‘on account 
of the small proportion of most substances relative to the propor­
tions of air and aether in the total mixture’; whereas ‘unlimited in 
smallness’ means something like ‘without limit on how small they 
[the substances] may be divided up’ ” (thus Schofield 1980: 77).4 The 
last explanatory remark made by Schofield amounts to the claim 
3.  There exist many formulations of this interpretation in the literature; for 
instance, Schofield describes the Proportionate interpretation thus: “The ingredient 
portions of every sort of thing which are contained in each object or stretch of stuff of 
a given kind need not themselves take the form of parts individuated in the same gen­
eral fashion as objects or stretches, nor need they be distributed among such parts … 
they are to be thought of simply as proportions” (1980: 75).
4. By “substances” Schofield means the opposites. On the use of the term “sub­
stance” in relation to Anaxagoras, I share Curd’s concern voiced in (2010: 158, n. 11).
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
108
108
that, for Anaxagoras, there is no limit on how small the proportion 
in which something is present in something else might be. On the 
Proportionate interpretation, the primordial mixture is thoroughly 
homogeneous, as no ingredients in it can be individuated as such, 
as a part of the mixture. Attributing this view to Anaxagoras how­
ever commits him to a stance that is not, and cannot, be his, as it 
entails that the ingredients exist in mixtures only potentially, and 
not actually, and thus could change from being in potentiality to 
being in actuality in certain circumstances. On the Proportionate 
interpretation the homogenous primordial mixture would be like, 
e.g., seawater, that is, (pure) water and salt through and through. 
Seawater contains a certain proportion (but no actual parts) of (pure) 
water and of salt; on the other hand, salt and water can be retrieved 
from it, so they exist potentially in the mixture, and could transi­
tion to actuality. We are now in the position to see two fundamen­
tal problems with the Proportionate interpretation. First, on this 
interpretation, Anaxagoras would be thinking that all the elements 
at the primordial stage of the universe are potential only.5 In addi­
tion to the “weakened” sense in which, on this interpretation, things 
would be in existence at the beginning of the development of the 
universe, the second and even more fundamental difficulty with the 
Proportionate interpretation is that the transition from potentiality 
to actuality presupposes the possibility of generation of something 
new, in a stronger sense than the Parmenidean strictures in play in 
Anaxagoras’s system allow, as we saw in ­chapter 1. In conclusion, the 
Proportionate interpretation appears to be wanting, on account of 
5. In this connection, Schofield notes,
It might well be doubted whether the primordial state envisaged by the pro­
portionate interpretation is pluralistic enough. The interpretation affirms, of 
course, a plurality of kinds, existing as proportions of the total mixture. But is 
that existence more than potential—​a promise that once the cosmogonic revolu­
tion begins, different objects and stretches of stuff of different sorts will be sep­
arated out? … [T]‌heir existence is still potential in comparison with the robust 
actuality of the particles of the rival interpretation. (1980: 78)

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
109
    109
these two main difficulties, and also on account of the absence of any 
explicit supportive textual evidence. We turn next to investigate the 
prospects of the Particulate interpretation.
4.2.  THE PARTICULATE INTERPRETATION
The Particulate interpretation is not prey to the concerns raised by 
the Proportionate interpretation: for according to the former, the 
local and global mixtures contain actual ingredients as distinct parts 
or particles in them—​and not only proportions, that is, ingredi­
ents in potentiality. Thus, on the Particulate interpretation, no pas­
sage from potentiality to actuality is posited. Hence both the local 
and global mixtures are heterogeneous, and not uniform (contrary 
to what the Proportionate interpretation postulates). Schofield 
reconstructs the considerations that motivate the Particulate 
interpretation thus:
In the beginning all things—​i.e. all discrete individuals or bits of 
matter and all stretches of stuff (such as air and aither) which do 
not form discrete objects—​were mixed together … as a single 
indistinct mass… . Anaxagoras may have thought that his accep­
tance (in F 17) of the Parmenidean interdict on the possibility of 
coming to be and perishing committed him to an original plural­
ity of discrete objects and stretches: if you don’t include an actual 
plurality in the original state of things, you will never be able to 
conjure one up at a subsequent stage. (1980: 70–​72)
Additionally, the Particulate interpretation facilitates our under­
standing of how the ingredients can move around in space in virtue 
of the vortex initiated by nous; the moving around in space of propor­
tions or potential entities is on the contrary difficult to make sense 
of. Generally, according to the Particulate interpretation, Anaxagoras 
uses small and large to indicate the actual physical dimensions of the 
 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
110
110
particles of the ingredients. In light of this, B1 is interpreted as say­
ing, in Schofield’s words, that
[in the original mixture t]here were different instances of different 
substances (and presumably of the same substance), but … these 
were too small or too indistinct to be discriminable by a human or 
animal eye. (1980: 68)
These are the main advantages of the Particulate interpretation. 
Nonetheless, there are also difficulties that have been raised against 
it in the literature. I will here review two important arguments that 
were put forward by Jonathan Barnes and Edward Hussey respectively, 
as they will help us to gain a deeper understanding of the constraints 
that a sound interpretation has to satisfy. I call them the Saturation 
Argument and the Containment Regress Argument.
4.2.1.  The Saturation Argument
This argument was developed by Barnes as a critique of the Particulate 
interpretation. It runs as follows:
If every piece of S contains a particle of S1, … then every piece of S 
is wholly composed of particles of S1—​which is absurd. (1979: 255)
The challenge is that, in the spirit of Anaxagoras’s own principles, for 
every part of S there must be a part of S1 within it. On what rea­
soning, then, does Barnes hold that if every piece of S contains a par­
ticle of S1, every piece of S is then wholly composed of particles of S1? 
Consider: suppose that in a piece of S there is a particle of S1. Then 
either the S1 particle will be the whole of the S piece, which would 
conclude Barnes’s reasoning, or the S1 particle will be a proper part of 
the S piece, leaving an S-​remainder piece.6 If the latter, there will be a 
6. The remainder piece will be a proper part of the original S piece, according to 
the weak Supplementation Principle of mereology (see, e.g., Simons 1987; Casati and 
Varzi 1999).
 

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
111
    111
further S1 particle in the S-​remainder piece, and it will either be the 
whole of the S-​remainder, or a proper part of it, and so on. Ultimately, 
in Barnes’s argument, the regress stops when there are no S-​remainder 
pieces left in the S pieces, but only S pieces that are wholly7 com­
posed of S1 particles. Hence the charge of absurdity. But the validity 
of Barnes’s argument depends in fact on some further background 
assumptions that he does not make explicit. His argument is sound 
if we assume that S1 particles are finite in size, and that S divides 
into ultimate parts in which S1 particles fit exactly.8 Indeed, Barnes’s 
argument addresses only finite divisions of the mixants, because he 
intends it as a critique of the Particulate interpretation, which does 
not envisage unlimited smallness of particles, but only extreme small­
ness. Yet Anaxagoras tells us explicitly with NoLeast-​P that all things 
are unlimited in smallness. If this is so, contrary to the Particulate 
interpretation, the pieces of S are unlimited in smallness, and so are 
the pieces S1. In that case, Barnes’s argument is not valid. The require­
ment, by hypothesis, that every piece of S contains a particle of S1 is 
satisfied, even if S1 particles are always taken to be proper parts of S 
pieces, leaving an S-​remainder part, ad infinitum. In such a case, the 
conclusion that every piece of S is wholly composed of particles of 
S1 does not follow—​there will always be smaller particles of S1 to fit 
pieces of S as their proper parts, leaving a proper part S-​remainder. 
The Saturation Argument does not, as such, rule out this type of con­
tainment of one element in another. I now turn to explore whether 
such containment can satisfy the requirements of Anaxagoras’s ontol­
ogy, and consider the Containment Regress argument.
4.2.2.  The Containment Regress Argument
It might be thought that if one grants to Anaxagoras that all the ele­
ments are unlimited in smallness, which is what NoLeast-​P states, 
7. Since by hypothesis every piece of S contains a particle of S1.
8. If the particles of S1 did not fit exactly in the smallest pieces of S, the argument 
would not be sound; there would S-​remainders with no S1 particles in them.
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
112
112
this would allow for a containment relation among the elements. 
On this hypothesis, each part of an element S would contain, not 
only a part of an element S1, but also a part of every kind of element 
there is in the ontology—​of which, for Anaxagoras, there are many, 
if not unlimitedly many, kinds. Thus, given NoLeast-​P, each piece 
of S would contain parts of S1, S2, S3, … as proper parts, while still 
leaving an S-​remainder (since it is a piece of S), in every part of S, ad 
infinitum. Yet a different problem arises now, from the complexity of 
the structure of the contained elements. The difficulty comes about 
because it is not only S that contains parts of every type of funda­
mental element, but according to EE-​P, every type of fundamental 
element contains parts of every type of fundamental element. What 
kind of structure emerges from the assumption of this type of con­
tainment? One that is barely intelligible. Expressing this thought, 
Hussey writes,
Within any lump of X, there is a “share” of Y. Either this “share” 
is present as a number of continuous packets, or not. If not, the 
visualisation fails already and it is hard to see how talk of quanti­
ties is to be justified. But if the “share” of Y is present in spatially 
continuous packets within X, there will presumably be “shares” 
of X, and everything else within the packets of Y, so that we are 
started on an infinite progression. This destroys the possibility 
of drawing any definite boundary between the X and the Y in the 
lump, be X and Y whichever ingredients they may, and this in 
turns destroys the notion of a packet with which the infinite pro­
gression has started. (1979: 137, my emphasis)
Hussey’s point is that if shares of each kind of stuff were within every 
share of every kind of stuff, the resulting configuration would lead to 
such a degree of structural complexity that, he concludes, we would 
lose track of the very notion of “contained unit.” If to this we add 
Anaxagoras’s proviso that each kind is unlimitedly small, with each 
unlimitedly small part containing a proper part of every kind of oppo­
site, then the structure defies representation: each of the infinitely 

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
113
    113
many, infinitely divisible parts of each element contains proper 
parts of the infinitely many, qualitatively different kinds of element, 
with a remainder, and each of these (contained) proper parts con­
tains proper parts of the infinitely many, qualitatively different kinds 
of element, with remainders, and so on ad infinitum (horizontally 
and vertically). This is not an infinite series of regressive steps. It is a 
series in which countless infinities “sprout” at each step, and in each 
item of each such infinity, further infinities “sprout,” and so forth. 
This complexity becomes incomprehensible within the first couple 
steps of reasoning. Because of this , it is plausible to rule out that this 
is what Anaxagoras’s ontology looked like. Even if one might want 
to entertain that Anaxagoras could accept a nonintelligible world, 
this interpretation is unsustainable. On the account of containment 
just sketched, there is nothing that could differentiate one kind of 
element from another. Thus the type of containment just envisaged 
undermines the intelligibility of any attempt to construe different 
kinds of element as constituted of every kind of element. By contrast, 
Anaxagoras’s ontology does require the fundamental building blocks 
to be of different kinds.9 In conclusion neither the Proportionate 
nor the Particulate interpretation delivers a sound interpretation of 
Anaxagoras’s views—​both are prey to difficulties, and neither sits 
well with the textual evidence. On account of these considerations, 
other attempts have been made in the scholarly literature. To these 
we now turn.
4.3.  THE LIQUIDS MODEL
The impasse in the debate between the Proportionate and the 
Particulate interpretation has more recently motivated a fresh dis­
cussion which develops the idea that the ingredients of things are 
9. On my proposed interpretation, the fundamental building blocks of different 
kinds are the opposites. As we will see, they are not composed of each other nor do the 
mixtures of the opposites change their constitution.
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
114
114
present in them as masses, not as particles of definite size (as, for 
instance, in the case of a mixture of salt and pepper) nor as fused con­
stituents (as in the case of sugar in a cake). This mass logic approach 
may be visualized by means of a liquids model. The idea has been 
explored since antiquity,10 but it has been most recently and most 
fully developed by Patricia Curd. She describes this interpretative 
approach to Anaxagoras’s EE-​P thus:
The ingredients are like pastes or liquids; they are all mixed or 
smeared together such that all the ingredients are in every pos­
sible place in some concentration or other. Even though every­
thing is unlimitedly small, and the mixture a thorough one, the 
mix need not be uniform; the concentrations of the various 
ingredients can vary in density or intensity in different places, 
but all of them have some non-​zero density at every place… . We 
should think of the basic things as like liquids or pastes that flow 
together and occupy the same volume of space. (2010: 181, 184)
Note that liquids do not mix like salt and pepper, or like salt and 
water, or water and wine. Rightly, Curd is not appealing to the special 
way that we know liquids mix—​which Anaxagoras would not have 
known—​by dissolving one another’s molecular bonds. Anaxagoras’s 
fundamental elements cannot change one another, and they do not 
change, apart from their location. Rather, Curd finds in liquids a 
familiar example of how masses mix, which allows that the ingredi­
ents in the mix retain their own individuality (so they are not in the 
mixture only as potential entities), and yet that they can occupy the 
same space (so Barnes’s Saturation Argument does not apply here). 
So on Curd’s interpretation, what is it to be unlimitedly small, when 
recast in terms of masses? If their unlimited smallness facilitates the 
thoroughness of the mixture (as we know from Anaxagoras’s line of 
10. As we will see in ­chapter 6, the Stoics give water and wine as one of their 
examples of colocation.

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
115
    115
reasoning in B6),11 we need to understand what the units of, e.g., 
liquid are, ontologically. Are they collections of distinct unlimitedly 
small droplets? Curd explicitly rejects this line of thinking:
I don’t think the particulate model is the correct interpreta­
tion. If Anaxagorean stuffs are not particulate, then “small” and 
“large,” at least here in B3 and B6 (and in B1 and B2 as well), do 
not refer to the size of a piece or drop or bit of an ingredient. 
(2010: 183–​84)
How are we then to understand the smallness of the ingredients on 
the Liquids model? Curd writes,
I take “small” and “large” in this context as a way for Anaxagoras 
to speak of submergence in and emergence from the background 
mixture of all things. (2010: 184)
Accordingly, she reads NoLeast-​P as saying that “there is no limit 
on how submerged in the mix an ingredient can be” (2010: 184). For 
instance, gold in my flesh is very small, “I.e. its density is so low that 
it is submerged in the rest of the ingredients, and so it is not mani­
fest” (2010: 184).12 Before proceeding with the analysis of this last 
claim by Curd, I should mention that the Liquids model entails that 
the density of the ingredients cannot change. The reason is that liq­
uids are not compressible, and so we cannot fit more of a liquid in 
a given volume of that liquid. For this model to help us understand 
11. B6: “Since it is not possible that there is a least, it would not be possible that 
anything be separated, not come to be by itself, but just as in the beginning, now too 
all things are together” (ὅτε τοὐλάχιστον μὴ ἔστιν εἲναι, οὐκ ἂν δύναιτο χωρισθῆναι, 
οὐδ᾽ἂν ἐφ᾽ἑαυτοῦ γενέσθαι, ἀλλ᾽ὅπωσπερ ἀρχὴν εἶναι καὶ νῦν πάντα ὁμοῦ).
12. Curd adds that her interpretation is close to Inwood’s, who defines “smallness” 
as “the characteristic of being mixed and so not distinguishable from other stuffs” 
(1986: 22). See also Curd (2010: 187): “I am not suggesting that by ‘large’ and ‘small’ 
Anaxagoras means ‘emergent’ or ‘submerged.’ … Rather, in certain cases we should 
understand that what it is for something to be small just is for it to be of such density 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
116
116
Anaxagoras’s ontology, it would have to develop a conception of a liq­
uid that could change in density. Without such a development of the 
model, when Curd talks about changes in the density of an ingredient 
in the mixture, this can only be in relation to the amount of any other 
ingredient in that mixture rather in relation to itself, by becoming 
more dense; this is in line with P-​P, which refers to the amounts of 
ingredients in relation to other ingredients.13 Now, to the concept of 
submergence. We should not take submergence to mean dissolving. 
This is because Curd wants the Anaxagorean ingredients to be recog­
nizable as such, when they are manifest in sufficiently high concen­
trations. She does not want the ingredients to be potentially present 
in the mixture. In that sense she is not a proponent of the traditional 
Proportionate interpretation. But her ingredients are present in 
mixtures in certain proportions, as we saw in her example of gold in 
my flesh. To pay full justice to Curd’s interpretation, we need to put 
together the claim that the ingredients do not dissolve in the mixture 
(namely, that they are not in potentiality in the mixture) with the 
claim that the terms “large” and “small” do not refer to the sizes of 
pieces or drops or bits of an ingredient. So if we think of her inter­
pretation as being illustrated by, e.g., a water-​and-​oil mixture, how 
are we to think of the water and the oil in the mixture? It should be 
possible for either ingredient to be in a large proportion in relation to 
the other ingredient in the mixture, or in a small proportion. The dif­
ference in proportion between them could be so big that, for practical 
purposes, in the one case the mixture could be thought of as being 
water, with the oil submerged, and in the other it could be thought of 
as being oil, with the water submerged. Let us consider the mixture in 
or concentration that it is submerged in the mix and so is not apparent or evident. 
Context must determine the appropriate sense.” I see important differences between 
Curd’s and Inwood’s interpretation and I will discussion the latter in conjunction with 
Furth’s (1991) as a distinctive interpretative proposal in section 4.4. of this chapter.
13. The only difficulty that might arise for Curd’s stance on this issue is with 
Anaxagoras’s claim that some ingredients can be compacted. For instance, “From the 
earth stones are compacted by the cold” (B16). This phenomenon would require a 
Liquids model that allows for density changes.

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
117
    117
which the oil is submerged. The oil is not in the mixture in very small 
droplets, or bits, or pieces, as we know from Curd (quoted above).14 
Extrapolating from Curd’s pastes simile (2010: 181), we could per­
haps think of the liquids as being in the mixture as malleable bodies. 
The problem is that the differences in the oil and the water cannot 
be that here the oil is more dense than there, since liquids or pastes 
cannot vary in their densities in the proposed model; a mixture can 
contain more or less of one of them, but it would accordingly displace 
another liquid or paste. So the submergence of an ingredient could 
not be achieved by reducing its density in the mix.
I admit that I find it difficult to put together all the metaphori­
cal descriptions of the Liquids interpretation given by Curd into an 
account that accommodates Anaxagoras’s claims about the ingre­
dients in the mixture. I also find it difficult to understand how the 
liquids can supposedly occupy the same volume of space in the mix­
ture. We need to bear in mind that they do not dissolve one another, 
because then they would exist only potentially in the mixture. 
Similarly, pastes (that do not dissolve each other, thereby remain­
ing only potentially in the mixture) do not occupy the same volume 
of space. Typically, when pastes or liquids get mixed together, they 
come to occupy together a volume that is the sum of the volumes that 
each of them occupied separately. If the pastes do not dissolve each 
other, then when mixed they must displace one another (rather than 
occupy the same space), and end up being juxtaposed (even if not 
in the same way as salt and pepper, because we are thinking here in 
terms of masses). In sum, I cannot see how one can derive the coloca­
tion of ingredients in the mixture through the Liquids interpretation.
A further difficulty I find with the Liquids interpretation is in 
its understanding of Anaxagoras’s claim in B1. Given Curd’s pro­
posed understanding of “small,” it follows that she would explain 
Anaxagoras’s claim that in the original mixtures all things were 
14. Strictly, Curd does not say that they are not in droplets, etc., but that by 
“small,” Anaxagoras does not mean the size of droplets, etc.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
118
118
unlimited in smallness as meaning that all things in the mixture were 
unlimitedly submerged, along the following lines:
In certain cases we should understand that what it is for some­
thing to be small just is for it to be of such a density or concen­
tration that it is submerged in the mix and so is not apparent 
or evident… . In all three instances of the word here [i.e., in 
B1], “small” apparently has its specialized sense of “submerged.” 
(2010: 87)
What “unlimitedly submerged” would mean here is not perspicuous. 
For argument’s sake, let us take Curd’s view to be that for Anaxagoras 
all things in the original mixture were everywhere in unlimit­
edly small concentrations or densities. The question is: why would 
Anaxagoras want to make such a claim? All he needs for the original 
mixture to be as he describes it is that no ingredient is predominant, 
and hence (perceptually) evident. So each ingredient in the mixture 
has to be small, in the sense of being submerged in the mixture. But 
why should Anaxagoras want to additionally claim that each ingredi­
ent is unlimitedly small in the mixture? If we look closely at B1, we 
see Anaxagoras is reported to have made in fact two distinct claims:
[1]‌ All things were together, unlimited in amount and in small­
ness, for the small, too, was unlimited. [2] And because all things 
were together, nothing was evident on account of smallness.
[1]‌ ὁμοῦ πάντα χρήματα ἦν, ἄπειρα καὶ πλῆθος καὶ σμικρότητακαὶ 
γὰρ τὸ σμικρὸν ἄπειρον ἦν. [2] καὶ πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲν 
ἔνδηλον ἦν ὑπὸ σμικρότητος
Claim [2]‌ says that the ingredients are small and hence not evident. 
But claim [1] says that the ingredients are unlimitedly small, not qua 
nonevident, but because there is no limit to smallness. I submit that 
it is difficult to explain claim [1] on the submergence interpretation, 
because Anaxagoras explicitly holds in claim [2] that the smallness 
of the ingredients is sufficient for their nonevidence. So one has to 

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
119
    119
allow, with Curd, two senses of “small” (and “large”) in Anaxagoras’s 
text—​in size, and in submergence.
We are not yet however in the position to assess the overall pros­
pects of the mass logic approach that Curd develops, as this approach 
holds promise in some other respects. Gareth Matthews argues that 
this approach can help address a challenging problem in Anaxagoras’s 
ontology which arises from EE-​P. How there can be qualitatively dif­
ferent kinds of things in an ontology where everything is in every­
thing? The problem is generated by the combination of EE-​P and 
NoLeast-​P with P-​P, which we examined in ­chapter 2. Specifically, is 
there room for P-​P in an ontology governed by EE-​P and NoLeast-​
P? Matthews (2002 and 2005), who implicitly adopts the same mass 
logic approach as Curd,15 poses the problem in the following terms:
My watch chain is “most plainly” gold if, and only if, my watch 
chain contains more pure gold than anything else it contains. 
But, if [on account of EE-​P] there is no such thing as pure gold, 
my watch chain will not contain more of that than anything else, 
there being no such thing as that. (2002: 1)
Note that Matthews does not assume that it is part of the nature of 
each ingredient of the mixture to contain other stuff as part of its con­
stitution, as it was assumed in the Containment Regress argument 
in section 4.2. Rather, on Matthews’s reading, other kinds of stuff 
are mixed, as impurities, with each kind of stuff. On this assumption, 
Matthews proposes that we can, in Anaxagoras’s system, form the 
conception of a pure kind of stuff from the recognition that impure 
stuff can be purified, even if not completely, at least approximately. 
Thus, although it will never be the case that we will reach pure, e.g., 
gold, there can be purer and purer gold—​refined gold. For example, 
15. I am not here concerned with settling who was the first to put forward the 
mass logic approach to Anaxagoras’s ontology; it is interesting to note that Curd does 
not engage with Matthews’s views although her translation (2007) follows the publica­
tion of Matthews’s articles.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
120
120
the mixture out of which Matthews’s watch chain is made is that of 
a golden object because, although successive refinements of gold will 
never yield pure gold, they will increasingly converge on an amount 
of refined gold that will be greater than the amount of dross that will 
be generated by the refinement process. This gives us a way to think 
of the chain as being “most plainly” gold if, and only if, it contains 
more refined gold than dross, even if the refined gold is not quite 
pure.16 In response to Matthews, and in response to an even more 
complex analysis (in Barnes 1982) and a further generalized version 
of the recursive refinement, John Sisko (2005) argues that on this 
reasoning the position we are left with is that
no process of recursive refinement—​not monadic, not dyadic, 
not polyadic recursive refinement—​can be used to determine 
specifically how much gold is in a bar of gold. Matthews’s proposal 
fails, Barnes’s proposal fails, and no other proposal that relies on 
recursive refinement can ever succeed. (2005: 244)
My own response to this line of interpretation is that Matthews 
assumes that the process of refinement filters most, even if not all, of 
the impurities out of an ingredient in the mixture. But Anaxagoras’s 
elements are unlimitedly small, as per NoLeast-​P. Anaxagoras also 
holds that the elements are unlimitedly large in amount, as per 
NoLargest-​P—​so what he means by their unlimited smallness is 
not their total quantity, which is unlimitedly large, but that they are 
each divided into unlimitedly small parts. As we saw in ­chapter 3, 
this means that their parts are as numerous as the points in a line:17 
16. Matthews’s proposal is also compatible with either the particulate or the pro­
portionate model of explanation of the mixture. My discussion of his position here will 
not address either of these two versions one could develop of Matthews’s arguments, 
since both the particulate and the proportionate interpretations have been found 
problematic in the scholarly literature, as reviewed in sections 4.1 and 4.2 above.
17. This is of course only an analogy, since points are not parts of a line; the 
important aspect of the analogy is the numerosity of the points, rather than their 
ontological status.

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
121
    121
if a mixture of r and g is like the overlap of a red and a green line, the 
notion of refining the red line by filtering most of the green points out 
of it would not be applicable—​there would always remain as many 
green points in it as we started with. Explaining the preponderance 
of elements in a mixture in view of their unlimited smallness may 
be more Anaxagoras’s problem than Matthews’s, but it follows that, 
given the unlimited smallness of the mixants, Matthews’s recursive 
refinement cannot explain the preponderance of Anaxagorean (con­
tinuum dense) mixants.
4.4.  THE NO-​DIVISIBILITY INTERPRETATION
I will finally examine an existing alternative interpretation that most 
directly contrasts with mine, and that has been put forward with 
interesting arguments in the recent secondary literature. At the core 
of this alternative is the thought that Anaxagoras did not think at 
all in terms of infinite divisibility of the fundamental items in his 
ontology, but rather in terms of composition and segregation of 
mixtures, in line with his contemporary Empedocles. On this alter­
native interpretation, Anaxagoras qualifies the elements as “small” 
when intending to indicate that they are in a state of mixture, and 
thereby imperceptible. I call this the No-​Divisibility interpretation. 
In Brad Inwood’s words, “There is no need to posit infinite divis­
ibility for Anaxagoras” (1986:  18).18 Although a number of schol­
ars hold this view, I  here limit myself to engaging with the work 
of Brad Inwood (1986) and Montgomery Furth (1991), with refer­
ence also to Malcolm Schofield (1980) as a representative selection. 
I cannot fully pay justice here to each version of the No-​Divisibility 
18. Part and parcel of Inwood’s line of argument in support of the nondivision 
interpretation is the view that “it is historically implausible that he should have con­
ceived of infinite divisibility” (1986: 32–​33). My response to this strand of the argu­
ment leans on Mansfeld’s (1979) studies of the historical data, in particular in respect 
of the relation between Anaxagoras and Zeno; see also the appendix to this chapter.
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
122
122
interpretation that each of these scholars has developed. In lieu of 
that, I  will respond to their common line of thinking by focusing 
on Anaxagoras’s own arguments which make clear, in my view, the 
metaphysical work that divisibility does in his system, and why divis­
ibility is needed for Anaxagoras’s desired conclusions. In doing this, 
I will discuss some representative alternative readings of the relevant 
texts put forward by the proponents of the No-​Divisibility interpre­
tation, and show where they do not sit well with the extant evidence.
The thrust of the No-​Divisibility interpretation is that “small­
ness” means being mixed, and “largeness,” being manifest. Furth, for 
instance, puts the claim in these terms:
[Anaxagoras’s] notions of Large and Small have a theoretical 
application which is distinct from … their ordinary-​life appli­
cation to spatial size, and in particular they have nothing to 
do with infinite divisibility as everyone from Aristotle on has 
thought. (1991: 97)
Yet, looking at Anaxagoras’s texts and the reasoning of his arguments, 
it is very difficult to imagine how one can understand them merely 
in terms of mixture and manifestedness. Consider, for instance, B5 
(which we discussed at length in ­chapter 3):
Even though these things have been dissociated in this way, it 
is right to recognize that all things are in no way less or more 
(for it is impossible that they be more than all), but all things are 
always equal.
Τούτων δὲ οὕτω διακεκριμένων γινώσκειν χρή, ὅτι πάντα οὐδὲν 
ἐλάσσω ἐστὶν οὐδὲ πλείω (οὐ γὰρ ἀνυστὸν πάντων πλείω εἲναι), 
ἀλλὰ πάντα ἴσα ἀεί.
Separation does not make what they are separated from less, since 
it is unlimited, or make their totality less, since the totality remains 
the same. Importantly, increasing their number by the separation 
does not make them more, since the total amount remains the same. 

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
123
    123
Although in the final justification Anaxagoras says that “it is impos­
sible that they be more than all,” he could have also added, for the 
sake of symmetry, that it is impossible that they be less than all. 
Generally, I take Anaxagoras’s argument to be that any division does 
not increase or decrease the total. By contrast, Furth explains the 
reasoning in Anaxagoras’s argument thus:
Changes in the manifestness or “largeness” do not involve any 
change in the number of the properties, which is a primitive, 
fixed given, already at the absolute maximum. I  think some 
such thought is the obvious moral of fragment 5, a very pretty 
piece of reasoning about the place of “less” and “more”:  It is 
necessary to recognize that all things are not in any way 
less … or more … (“for it cannot be accomplished” that 
there be more … than all) … but all things are always equal. 
(1991: 118, boldface in the original)
Let me first note that, if this is what Anaxagoras is saying here, 
namely that when something becomes large and manifest its num­
ber does not change, it is not clear why Anaxagoras would think 
he needed to state it at all—​this is an evident and uncontroversial 
point. Second, when Anaxagoras says διακεκριμένον, even if he had 
meant “manifest,” he could not have reasoned as Furth says he does. 
The reason why becoming manifest would not have increased the 
number of properties is not that their number is fixed as a constant 
in nature and that it is at an absolute maximum. Rather, the reason 
why becoming large and manifest does not change its number is that 
it is only a change in size—​the now large and manifest was before 
smaller and unmanifest.
Turning now to Furth’s rendition of what he refers to as a “very 
pretty piece of reasoning,” contrast the way Furth reports the argu­
ment above and how the full argument reads in the original frag­
ment B5. In reporting the argument, Furth leaves out its initial 
assumption:  “Even though these things have been dissociated in 
this way.” Furth understands this assumption as saying that things 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
124
124
become manifest, which of course does not make them “less or 
more.” Importantly, the omission changes the line of reasoning in 
Anaxagoras’s argument. Whereas Anaxagoras is exploring in the 
argument what happens to the quantity of a thing when increasing 
its number by dividing its quantity, Furth reverses the logic of it, 
as if Anaxagoras examined what happens to the number of a thing 
when its quantity increases, which is not problematic. By contrast, 
Anaxagoras is investigating the relation of the number of a thing to 
its total quantity, rather than its size, and concludes that division 
increases the number, but does not change the quantity. The sig­
nificance of the argument’s conclusion is lost in Furth’s rendition of 
Anaxagoras’s reasoning, which may partly explain why Furth does 
not see the relevance of division in Anaxagoras’s ontology. I will not 
pursue the discussion of Furth’s interpretation further here.
Brad Inwood on the other hand reads a tautology in Anaxagoras’s 
argument in B5:
Each one is always equal to itself, being neither less nor greater 
than it is. It is better to see this as repeating the main point of 
fragment 3, that each χρῆμα has equal bigness and smallness, 
rather than to take it as merely saying tautologically that there 
are as many kinds of χρηματα as there are. (1986: 30–​31)
This is a surprising conclusion, since Inwood’s translation of the argu­
ment is this: “These things having been distinguished thus, one must 
recognize that all are in no way lesser or more” (1986: 30). The apo­
dosis by itself is tautological, but there is also a hypothesis that must 
be taken into account. Anaxagoras is not considering how things are, 
as such, but what happens when, to use Inwood’s translation, “these 
things have been distinguished.” What difference does distinguish­
ing these things make, to Inwood’s mind, which leads Anaxagoras to 
wonder whether distinguishing them makes things lesser or more? 
The answer is not perspicuous.
An additional difficulty with Inwood’s version of the No-​Division 
interpretation is this: how are we to understand Anaxagoras’s claim 

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
125
    125
(in Inwood’s translation), “Nor is there something which is itself the 
least of the small”? Inwood proceeds to offer this explanation: “On 
my hypothesis this states that there is no limit to how thoroughly 
things can be mixed” (1986: 29). But what is a thorough mixture? 
Inwood does not explain. In lieu of an explanation, he associates 
smallness with thorough mixture:
I would hypothesize that the smallness, for the χρήματα [pairs 
of opposites, wet-​dry, hot-​cold, etc.], is simply the condition of 
being thoroughly distributed in the mixture. There need be no 
reference to the size of discreet particles, as the traditional the­
ory requires. (1986: 24)
Let us assume, with Inwood, that being thoroughly mixed is being 
thoroughly distributed in the mixture. The question is: what does it 
mean to be thoroughly distributed? One hypothesis could be that it 
means being everywhere in the mixture. But in what sense is some­
thing that is everywhere small? Where then would what is large be, 
and how would it be different from the small? In what sense is the 
small distributed? Is this an articulated entity that is scattered, or 
is it a continuous entity? If articulated, into what? If continuous, 
in what sense is it mixed with other such continuous entities in the 
same regions, namely, everywhere? Finally and importantly, if an 
item is everywhere when thoroughly distributed, how can there be 
degrees of it? How can we understand that there is “no limit to how 
thoroughly things can be mixed”? I will not pursue the investigation 
of the No-​Division interpretation further, as I believe that the dif­
ficulties I have raised for it make it clear that it is not a promising 
interpretation.
4.5.  CLOSING REMARKS
We saw that Anaxagoras likes his paradoxes—​he says, for instance, 
in B1 that each of the opposites, e.g., the hot, the dry, etc., is 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
126
126
unlimitedly large and unlimitedly small. Their largeness is generally 
understood as the total amount of each opposite in the universe. 
Their smallness has been interpreted in the scholarly literature in 
different ways, namely in terms of there being very small particles 
(or masses), or very small proportions of each type of thing in the 
extreme mixture of everything in everything. The conclusion we are 
in the position to draw at this stage, having examined the main 
interpretations existing in the literature, is that we cannot under­
stand Anaxagoras’s ontology, as governed by EE-​P, NoLeast-​P, 
and P-​P, in terms of elements (whether conceived as particles 
or as mass) containing one another ad infinitum, or as somehow 
merged into a blend in which the elements are present as propor­
tions. Recall Hussey’s Containment Regress argument, to the effect 
that Anaxagoras does not have the conceptual tools to preserve the 
qualitative differences among kinds of stuff, if each contains all the 
others, because they all become constitutionally “fuzzy.” I submit 
that the argument applies to any interpretation that reads EE-​P 
as a relation of containment, whether we think of proportions or 
masses or particles.
Could we really understand the Anaxagorean mixture if it had 
such a structure? If each type of thing contained in its constitu­
tion every other of the infinitely many types of thing that exist in 
Anaxagoras’s ontology, the mixture would become unimaginably 
complex, and on account of NoLeast-​P, it would be impossible to 
differentiate between different kinds of thing. The structure of mat­
ter would be of at least aleph-​1 complexity—​that is, it would have 
at least aleph-​1 regresses, of aleph-​1 cardinality each. Every part of, 
e.g., gold would be divisible into aleph-​1 parts of gold, each of these 
parts would contain bits of aleph-​0 kinds in it, and each bit would 
have aleph-​1 parts of its own kind, each of which would be further 
divisible … and so on and so forth. A regress of unimaginable com­
plexity follows. Hence, we cannot begin to understand difference in 
kind between these things.

Com pr e se n c e v e r sus  Con ta i nme n t  of  t h e  Opp o si t e s
127
    127
My conclusion is that the problem in so understanding Anaxagoras’s 
ontology lies in the notion of constitutional containment. We need a 
fresh start. My proposal as presented in ­chapter 3 draws on a largely 
overlooked part of the textual evidence, where Anaxagoras phrases EE-​P 
in terms of the elements that make up his ontology as being compresent 
with one another, rather than as contained in one another. It offers an 
account of Anaxagoras’s ontology that is not based on constitutional 
containment, but rather necessary compresence of the opposites, facili­
tated by the fact that the opposites exist as divided gunk.
4.A.  APPENDIX: ZENO’S ARGUMENT 
FROM MULTITUDE
Controversy has developed in the secondary literature on whether 
Anaxagoras was responding to Zeno’s arguments, or Zeno to Anaxagoras’s. 
John Palmer (2009) recently argued that Anaxagoras was responding to 
Zeno, and I here adopt this line as my working hypothesis.19 One of the argu­
ments that Zeno of Elea developed is of particular relevance to our under­
standing of Anaxagoras’s ontology at this stage of our investigation. The 
argument, an ancestor of the Bradley’s regress, is this:
If there are many things, entities are unlimited; for there are always 
other entities between entities, and again others between those. 
And thus entities are unlimited.20
εἰ πολλά ἐστιν, ἄπειρα τὰ ὄντα ἐστίν· ἀεὶ γὰρ ἕτερα μεταξὺ τῶν ὄντων 
ἐστί, καὶ πάλιν ἐκείνων ἕτερα μεταξύ. καὶ οὕτως ἄπειρα τὰ ὄντα ἐστί.
19. There is evidence that Anaxagoras had an even more sophisticated under­
standing of the infinite than Zeno, insofar as Zeno believed, but Anaxagoras rightly did 
not believe, that if the many things are just as many as they are, they are finitely many. 
Many things can be just as many as they are and be infinitely many, since being infi­
nitely many is not the outcome of change, e.g., of increase in number, as Zeno thought. 
See, for instance, Palmer (2009: 245–​46). For more on the issue of Anaxagoras’s dates 
as such see Mansfeld (1990).
20. Fragment 3, in Palmer’s (2009) translation.
 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
128
128
It is here not possible to pay justice to the argument as such and the impor­
tant scholarly discussion that centers on it. Palmer (2009: 243 ff.) suggests 
that Anaxagoras was influenced by this Zenonean argument, and thinks it 
makes sense to suppose that Anaxagoras would have conceived of EE-​P in 
terms of a containment relation among elements, precisely in reply to Zeno’s 
argument. Palmer explains, in support of this interpretation, that if each 
element contained parts of every element, this would avoid commitment to 
the separateness and distinctness of each element from the others. If the 
elements are neither separate nor distinct from one another, they are not 
vulnerable to the Zenonean regress above, because they are not many; hence, 
there are no in “between” entities, since the elements are not separate and 
distinct. By contrast, on my interpretation of Anaxagoras, his physical sys­
tem can resist the Zenonean regress on account of the compresence of the 
elements, rather than on account of their mutual containment.
In thinking about whether the containment or the compresence inter­
pretation avoids the Zenonean regress, my concern is with the density of 
the continuum. One can distinguish a point, and individuate it, as we do in 
mathematics, but can the point be separate from other points? I gave reasons 
to doubt that it can (in section 3.1.2). One can think of a part that is distinct 
and separate in a whole, e.g., a student in a class; and an entity can be distinct 
and separate from another entity it overlaps with; e.g., the neutrinos that go 
through us all the time are distinct from us, even while they momentarily 
overlap with us. But in neither case is there an assumption of continuum 
density. Zeno’s argument does not explicitly specify either distinctness or 
separateness, but only the multitude of the entities. Furthermore, there is 
no conclusive historical and/​or textual evidence that Anaxagoras was devel­
oping his ontology as an answer to Zeno’s argument from multitude quoted 
above. It suffices to note here that even if Anaxagoras was responding to 
Zeno’s argument from multitude with his cosmic mixture of elements, we 
have found no reason to assume that this led him to favor the containment 
over the compresence interpretation, or even vice versa.

    129
129
Chapter 5
 Intelligent Powers
Abiding by Parmenides’s strictures, Anaxagoras allows for spa­
tial movement, congregation, and separation as the only types 
of “real” change in the universe, and the only “real” causes of any 
other type of change. What powers them? How is movement gener­
ated? Anaxagoras posits a single cosmic source of movement in the 
universe. He makes nous this source: all movement of cosmic pro­
portions originates from nous, directly, or indirectly through the 
vortex that nous originates.1 The vortex is responsible for the spatial 
movement of opposites, and hence for their preponderance, which 
gives rise to stuff of different kinds. Hence the capacity of nous to 
move spatially specific opposites via the vortex gives nous the abil­
ity to “generate” stuff.2 In making nous the single source of cosmic 
movement Anaxagoras combines in it movement (and so change at 
the cosmic level) with intelligence. Nous is an intelligent power. As 
we will see in the present chapter, Anaxagoras provides an account 
of reality whereby a cosmic intelligence, nous, develops the world 
according to its conception of order, from what is primitively given 
in it. This is Anaxagoras’s teleology. (Plato, in the words of Socrates, 
1. B12: “And Nous controlled the whole revolution, so that it started to revolve in 
the beginning” (καὶ τῆς περιχωρήσιος τῆς συμπάσης νοῦς ἐκράτησεν, ὥστε περιχωρῆσαι 
τὴν ἀρχήν).
2. Selecting to move specific opposites presupposes a discerning cognitive ability 
of nous. As we will see in this chapter, Anaxagoras does attributes to nous knowledge 
and discernment about everything there is. Nous’s omniscience places requirements 
on its ontological constitution, spatial extent, and location in the universe. These 
requirements on the ontology of nous will be examined in detail in the present chapter.
 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
130
130
finds this teleology wanting, because he would have wanted to see in 
Anaxagoras’s account of reality everything, including what is primi­
tively given it, to be for the good.)
Is nous alone causally responsible for all change in the universe, 
according to Anaxagoras? I believe that Anaxagoras thought that 
this is not the case. He does not seek to give an account of the world 
where everything derives from the good, or from a god.3 Rather, 
Anaxagoras thinks of the relation between nous and the world we 
live in along the model of farming, to use an apt characterization 
given by Sedley (2007).4 Farmers do not create everything in the 
farm (the soil, the weather, the seeds for the new crops, etc.) —​
rather, they put to use and look after the existing resources in the 
farm. Similarly with nous—​it does not create all the powers for 
change in the cosmos. Rather, nous operates at the cosmic level, 
setting the world order within which local powers for change oper­
ate. Such local powers are not created by nous, but preexist in the 
primordial mixture, and they include the opposites5 as well as bio­
logical seeds. As I will argue in this chapter, living organisms are 
physically as well as diachronically structured.6 The special and 
high complexity of structure that characterizes them cannot be 
accounted for by ratios of opposites (which is what accounts for 
stuffs). Anaxagoras includes the seeds in his ontology precisely as 
the source of such complexity—​the seeds are powers for life. They 
are causally responsible for the highly complex structural develop­
ments of living being, and in this sense they (too) are intelligent 
3. This is a conception that we find in Plato, and frequently after Plato, but not 
in Anaxagoras.
4. Sedley writes: “Nous is a farmer. Its creation of worlds is its way of setting up 
environments which will enable seeds to germinate, with plant and animal life the 
outcome” (2007: 23).
5. We saw in ­chapter 1 that the opposites are a secondary or local source of power 
in the universe; we see them in action, for instance, in B16, where the cold is said to 
compact earth into stones. They could be thought of as being the sources of physical 
necessity in Anaxagoras’s system.
6. Individual organisms are even able even to procreate other individuals of the 
same species; this feature adds further complexity to the way they are structured.

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
131
    131
powers. The present chapter is devoted to the study of intelligent 
powers in Anaxagoras’s system: nous and the seeds.
5.1.  THE UNMIXED STATUS OF NOUS
The most distinctive feature that Anaxagoras attributes to nous, 
which sets it apart from everything else in its system, is that it is the 
only type of entity that is not mixed with any other type of entity. 
Anaxagoras states in B11, “In everything there is a share of every­
thing except Nous” (ἐν παντὶ παντὸς μοῖρα ἔνεστι πλὴν νοῦ, ἔστιν οἷσι 
δὲ καὶ νοῦς ἔνι). This claim is repeated for instance in B12: “The other 
things have a share of everything, but Nous … has been mixed with 
no thing, but is alone itself by itself” (τὰ μὲν ἄλλα παντὸς μοῖραν 
μετέχει … ἀλλὰ μόνος αὐτὸς ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῦ ἐστιν). From the fact that 
it is not composed of them, it follows that nous is featureless with 
respect to the opposites. As discussed in ­chapters 1 and 2, things 
become characterized by determinate features, modulo perception, 
when there is preponderance of some opposites in them. Hence, 
although being mixed with opposites by itself does not make the 
thing in question characterized with any opposites,7 being mixed is 
a precondition of preponderance, and preponderance is what deter­
mines what characteristics something has.
Is nous completely featureless? In B12 we read that nous “is the 
finest of all things and the purest” (ἔστι γὰρ λεπτότατόν τε πάντων 
χρημάτων καὶ καθαρώτατον). On this description, the opposite fine 
and the opposite pure characterize nous. So prima facie it appears 
that nous is characterized by some opposites—​if so, it would be an 
exception to the preponderance principle that governs everything 
7. For even the primordial mixture, which includes all opposites, is not character­
ized by any of the opposites, due to their equipotent mixture. For instance, in B4b we 
read, “Before there was separation off, because all things were together, there was not 
even any colour evident; for the mixture of all things prevented it, of the wet and the 
dry” (πρὶν δὲ ἀποκριθῆναι [ταῦτα] πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲ χροιὴ ἔνδηλος ἦν οὐδεμία· 
ἀπεκώλυε γὰρ ἡ σύμμιξις πάντων χρημάτων, τοῦ τε διεροῦ καὶ τοῦ ξηροῦ).
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
132
132
else in Anaxagoras’s system. This invites closer examination of the 
claim in B11 that “in everything there is a share of everything except 
Nous.” This claim may be given a strong reading (to the effect that 
nous is not mixed at all), but also a weak one (nous is not a mixture of 
everything in the way in which all other things are). The latter reading 
would allow us to explain the fineness and the purity of nous without 
presupposing its mixture with all opposites. The advantage of this 
weak reading is that it would offer an explanation generalizable also 
to other features of nous mentioned by Anaxagoras elsewhere, for 
example, in B12, that it is “unlimited and self-​ruling” (νοῦς δέ ἐστιν 
ἄπειρον καὶ αὐτοκρατὲς). Yet in the very same fragment B12 there is 
evidence that the strong reading is what captures Anaxagoras’s posi­
tion: “Nous has been mixed with no thing, but is alone itself by itself” 
(καὶ μέμεικται οὐδενὶ χρήματι, ἀλλὰ μόνος αὐτὸς ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῦ ἐστιν). 
This sets an absolute condition for the constitution of nous—​it is not 
at all mixed. How then does nous possess its features, if not by being 
mixed with them? We could suppose that such features as being 
refined, pure, unlimited, and self-​ruling are second order properties, 
which Anaxagoras does not reify in the ontology, as if they were 
second-​order descriptions of the nature of nous. On this proposal, 
the features Anaxagoras attributes to nous would be of a different 
type from the opposites.8 How so? They would not qualify anything 
else but nous. This however can only remain a speculation, because 
nowhere in the extant texts do we find it stated that such features as 
being refined, pure, unlimited, and self-​ruling differ from the oppo­
sites, or how they differ.
There is a further characterization that Anaxagoras gives of nous 
that is relevant to the present discussion and that we need to exam­
ine. In B12 Anaxagoras tells us that nous divides into large and small 
portions: “All Nous is alike, both the greater and the smaller” (νοῦς 
8. If the features that characterize Nous were of the same type, being mixed with 
them would bring all other opposites into the constitution of nous because of the 
inseparability of opposites; thus Anaxagoras holds in B12 that nous cannot be mixed 
with anything, for reasons that we will examine below.

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
133
    133
δὲ πᾶς ὅμοιός ἐστι καὶ ὁ μείζων καὶ ὁ ἐλάττων). Presumably these 
are the portions of nous in large and small animate beings, as in the 
same text Anaxagoras also says, “Nous has control over all things 
that have soul, both the larger and the smaller” (καὶ ὅσα γε ψυχὴν 
ἔχει καὶ τὰ μείζω καὶ τὰ ἐλάσσω, πάντων νοῦς κρατεῖ). The division of 
nous in small and large portions entails that the opposites large and 
small characterize nous in the animate beings. Hence nous is mixed 
with the opposites large and small. But how does this square with 
what has been said so far about its unmixed nature? In the very same 
passage, in B12, Anaxagoras tells us that the nature of the large and 
small portions of nous is the same as the nature of the cosmic nous 
(because nous is all alike). Hence, the nous of the animate beings is 
not mixed with opposites large and small any more than the cos­
mic nous is mixed with them. How then are there large and small 
portions of nous? I  offer here a speculative suggestion by way of 
analogy, as Anaxagoras does not give us any explicit answer to this 
question. Consider a landscape where we see grass everywhere, but 
can refer to the grass on the hillside, the grass in the valley, the grass 
with the patch of sun falling on it, etc. The grass is one, but there 
are ways of referring to regions of it that do not divide the grass 
except only referentially. We might speculate that the association 
of nous to animate beings is of a similar kind for Anaxagoras. We 
know from B14 that nous is everywhere.9 But perhaps Anaxagoras is 
thinking that we can single out and refer to special regions in space 
where nous is, e.g., in animate beings, without thereby dividing nous 
metaphysically. On this reading, referring to nous as being in special 
locations does not necessitate the mixture of the great and the small 
with the nature of nous.
In conclusion, Anaxagoras appears to give some physical attri­
butes to nous. On the other hand, he offers no explanation of how 
9. B14: “Nous, which always is, most assuredly is even now where all the other 
things also are, in the surrounding multitude, and in the things that were joined 
together and in the things that have been separated off.” I will return to a detailed 
discussion of this passage in section 5.2.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
134
134
they come to characterize nous, and why this is not incompatible 
with the unmixed nature of nous that he sets as a necessary condi­
tion for nous’s knowledge and control of everything else. In B12 we 
find clearly stated,
The other things have a share of everything, but Nous … has been 
mixed with no thing, but is alone itself by itself. For if it were not 
by itself but had been mixed with anything else, then it would 
partake of all things, if it had been mixed with anything …; 
and the things mixed together with it would thwart it, so that it 
would control none of the things in the way that it in fact does, 
being alone by itself.
τὰ μὲν ἄλλα παντὸς μοῖραν μετέχει … καὶ μέμεικται οὐδενὶ 
χρήματι, ἀλλὰ μόνος αὐτὸς ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῦ ἐστιν. εἰ μὴ γὰρ ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῦ 
ἦν, ἀλλά τεῳ ἐμέμεικτο ἄλλῳ, μετεῖχεν ἂν ἁπάντων χρημάτων, εἰ 
ἐμέμεικτό τεῳ … καὶ ἂν ἐκώλυεν αὐτὸν τὰ συμμεμειγμένα, ὥστε 
μηδενὸς χρήματος κρατεῖν ὁμοίως ὡς καὶ μόνον ἐόντα ἐφ’ ἑαυτοῦ.
What we want to turn to now is the question of why things mixed 
with nous would thwart it and prevent it from controlling the things 
that it in fact controls, it being not mixed with them. To understand 
the reason, we need to briefly introduce an aspect of Anaxagoras’s 
account of perception, which previous interpreters have not studied 
in any specific connection with Anaxagoras’s stance regarding the 
unmixed nature of nous.10 Theophrastus reports that
Anaxagoras says that perception occurs through opposites, 
for the similar is unaffected by the similar… . Touch and taste 
make distinctions in the same way: something that is hot and 
cold to the same degree neither heats nor cools when it is near 
something else, nor do we recognize sweet and bitter by these 
10. On Anaxagoras’s account of perception, to which I cannot pay full justice here, 
see among others Warren (2007a) and Curd (2010: 225–​29).

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
135
    135
qualities themselves, but cold is perceived by hot, fresh by brack­
ish, sweet by bitter. (De Sens. 27; Dox. 507)
Ἀ. δὲ γίνεσθαι μὲν (τὰ αἰσθ.) τοῖς ἐναντίοις· τὸ γὰρ ὅμοιον ἀπαθὲς 
ὑπὸ τοῦ ὁμοίου … τὸν αὐτὸν δὲ τρόπον καὶ τὴν ἁφὴν καὶ τὴν 
γεῦσιν κρίνειν· τὸ γὰρ ὁμοίως θερμὸν καὶ ψυχρὸν οὔτε θερμαίνειν 
οὔτε ψύχειν πλησιάζον οὐδὲ δὴ τὸ γλυκὺ καὶ τὸ ὀξὺ δι’ αὐτῶν 
γνωρίζειν, ἀλλὰ τῶι μὲν θερμῶι τὸ ψυχρόν, τῶι δ’ ἁλμυρῶι τὸ 
πότιμον, τῶι δ’ ὀξεῖ τὸ γλυκὺ.
From this testimony, it appears that the fundamental intuition 
that drives Anaxagoras’s conception of perception derives from the 
empirical phenomenon of blind spots. The thought, if extended to 
nous, is that if nous were mixed with something else, and even con­
stituted by the predominance of some of the opposites, it would 
not be able to have control over these opposites, any more than a 
sense organ can discern the opposites that qualify it. For instance, 
the presence of the hot or the wet, etc., in nous would prevent it 
from being able to control (e.g., to separate off) the hot or the 
wet in the universe. By generalization, it is by being unmixed that 
the nous knows everything else.11 It follows that being unmixed 
is a necessary condition for nous to be capable of controlling 
11. If being different in nature is what allows nous to know and control everything 
else, one might think that this condition prevents nous on the one hand from knowing 
itself and being self-​ruling (see B12); and on the other from knowing and control­
ling animate beings where small portions of nous are present (B12). These would be 
undesirable consequences for Anaxagoras. These difficulties however arise only if we 
presuppose that the way nous causally interacts with itself is the same as the way it 
interacts with the opposites, through the vortex. We have no reason, and it is in fact 
implausible, to think that this is the case. As Sedley emphasizes, nous cannot be taken 
to be on a par with other kinds of physical stuffs for Anaxagoras:
To call intelligence [nous] unmixed is his [Anaxagoras’s] way of saying that it is 
free of physical properties. Anaxagoras is never reported as distinguishing mind 
or intelligence from body as the “incorporeal” from the corporeal, and indeed 
he betrays just the opposite assumption when he calls the nous “the finest and 
purest of all things,” and when, later in B12, he speaks of it in quantitative terms 
(“nous is all alike, both the larger and the smaller”). He thus treats it as if it were 
a physical stuff, albeit a very special one. (2007: 12)

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
136
136
everything else. Anaxagoras must be conceiving of the unmixed 
nature of nous as being the opposite of the mixture of every thing 
in the universe. Being pure also entails that nous is the opposite of 
every single kind of opposite, not only of their mixture.12 In con­
clusion, being unmixed, nous is the greatest power in the universe 
(ἰσχύει μέγιστον, B12), and its nature consists of cognitive and of 
controlling powers.
5.2.  THE STRUCTURE AND OPERATION 
OF NOUS
In the preceding section I  argued that Anaxagoras must be con­
ceiving of the unmixed, pure nature of nous as being the opposite 
of the mixed and impure nature of everything else in the universe. 
That nous is purest indicates that whatever its nature, this is what it 
is through and through in its constitution. Anaxagoras claims this 
explicitly in B12: “All Nous is alike, both the greater and the smaller” 
(νοῦς δὲ πᾶς ὅμοιός ἐστι καὶ ὁ μείζων καὶ ὁ ἐλάττων). That “All Nous 
is alike” and not characterized by any opposites might be taken to 
suggest that nous is uniform, at least with respect to its physical con­
stitution. Yet nous has cognitive powers in virtue of which it knows 
and discerns everything (B12: πάντα ἔγνω νοῦς), and thus exercises 
control in the universe (B12, passim). How does nous perform these 
cognitive activities? Intuitively, such activities presuppose that nous 
is somehow structured. Minimally, one might think, nous is a bun­
dle of cosmic and cognitive powers. Since there are hierarchies and 
dependencies among the operations of these powers, there must be 
some structure in the constitution of nous underpinning them. We 
will also see in what follows that there are further considerations for 
attributing structure to nous.
12. The conception of the pure nature of nous, unmixed with any of the opposites, 
enabling it (as a necessary condition) to control everything suggests a physical power 
whose characterlessness empowers it.
 

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
137
    137
How uniform is nous? We know from B12 that of nous there is 
“the greater and the smaller.” Does this mean that nous comes in 
individual instances, greater and smaller ones. And if so, how are 
they individuated? Is a greater nous a reference to qualitative or to 
quantitative superiority over a smaller nous? These questions give 
ground for speculation. For present purposes we want to note that 
even though we have no explanation from Anaxagoras of what indi­
viduates the instances of great and small nous (if instances they are), 
such differentiation into greater and smaller opens up the way for 
nous to be somehow structured. Let us pursue this thought further. 
In section 5.1 I suggested that perhaps Anaxagoras thinks of large 
and small portions of nous as individuated by reference only, rather 
than by ontological division (to avoid that nous is mixed with the 
opposites large and small). Would this type of differentiation of nous 
be sufficient to ground some operational complexity in nous? Could 
it be that nous is somehow operationally and functionally structured, 
but not constitutionally structured? Any answer to these questions 
would involve speculation.13
In absence of firmer evidence, we can only conclude that 
Anaxagoras does not have any explicit account of the mechanism 
by which nous operates. We saw that the various operations of nous 
require at least organizational structure, which must be some­
how grounded on its nature. What creates a problem is that struc­
ture requires parthood of some kind. On one understanding of 
Anaxagoras’s views, he is committed to having the opposites large 
and small mixed with nous, which is incompatible with his claim of 
13. Alternatively, should we think of nous as extended, so that its instances can 
be large or small? On the latter hypothesis, if nous is extended, NoLeast-​P applies 
to it and nous is gunky, as the opposites are. This conclusion would sit well with 
Anaxagoras’s qualification of nous as the “finest” of all things (λεπτότατον) in B12, as 
the term λεπτός is a natural way to describe ash and dust, whose cloudy fineness and 
smallness suggest gunk. Furthermore, P-​P would apply to nous as well. Nous, being 
gunky, would be the type of entity that could be preponderant in some regions in rela­
tion to the way it is in other regions, and this could even be used to explain the indi­
viduation of different kinds of nous instances in nature.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
138
138
the purity of the nature of nous. On another interpretation, nous is 
not constitutionally structured, but structured only by way of how 
it is referred to. On a third interpretation, nous can be large or small 
but these opposites are not of the same kind as the physical opposites 
hot, cold, wet, etc. In that case, the instances of nous being large or 
small is not incompatible with nous being free of admixture with the 
physical opposites.
We are, on the other hand, able to say more about the operation 
of nous in the universe. In addition to the physical descriptions dis­
cussed above in sections 5.1 and 5.2, in B14 nous is said to be located 
in space, everywhere:
Nous, which always is, most assuredly is even now where all the 
other things also are, in the surrounding multitude, and in the 
things that were joined together and in the things that have been 
separated off.
ὁ δὲ νοῦς, ὃς ἀεί ἐστί, τὸ κάρτα καὶ νῦν ἐστιν ἵνα καὶ τὰ ἄλλα 
πάντα, ἐν τῷ πολλῷ περιέχοντι καὶ ἐν τοῖς προσκριθεῖσι καὶ ἐν 
τοῖς ἀποκεκριμένοις.
Although not explicitly stated, the physical condition of nous being 
everywhere indicates that for Anaxagoras, physical compresence of 
nous with all the things must be a condition of nous’s control of them 
(and knowledge of them, as we will see in section 5.3). We will come 
shortly to the reason why this is the case. Additionally, in B11 we 
read that “there are some things in which Nous, too, is present” (ἔστιν 
οἷσι δὲ καὶ νοῦς ἔνι). It is plausible to infer from these two texts, 
B11 and B 14, that nous is present in some things in a different way 
from that in which it is present in everything. In B12, Anaxagoras 
indicates that nous has a special relation to some things: “And nous 
has control over all things that have soul, both the larger and the 
smaller” (καὶ ὅσα γε ψυχὴν ἔχει καὶ τὰ μείζω καὶ τὰ ἐλάσσω, πάντων 
νοῦς κρατεῖ). Since nous set in order all things that were, are, and will 
be, why does Anaxagoras feel that he has to tell us that it has control 

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
139
    139
over all things that have soul?14 Clearly, the control nous has over 
things with soul is of a different kind than the control it has over 
everything else. In fact, it must be not only of a different kind, but 
also additional to the control it has over everything. But we are not 
told anything more on the nature of this control in the extant texts.15
In conclusion, the extant evidence indicates that Anaxagoras 
thinks that physical considerations are at play in the operations of 
nous in nature. Yet what is missing is a mechanism for such opera­
tions. It may be that the “mechanics” of thinking, deciding, or 
carrying out decisions was not something that Anaxagoras, or phi­
losophers of his time (prior to Aristotle), conceived as a metaphysical 
problem to address. Yet, interestingly, it seems to be the case that for 
Anaxagoras there are changes taking place in nous. For instance, when 
nous “began to move” things, and “moved” things (B13); when nous 
started the vortex (B12); or when nous “set [things] in order” (B12); 
and nous “has control” over animate things (B12).16 What is it that 
happens when these changes occur in nous? In view of Anaxagoras’s 
general stance regarding change, we would not expect any change in 
nous to be qualitative, but only perhaps a change involving move­
ment. Such movement could not have been caused by anything other 
than nous itself in his ontology, since Anaxagoras describes nous as 
“self-​ruling” (B12). We can therefore conclude that the mechanism of 
14. That nous controls everything is implicit in Anaxagoras’s statement in B12 
that “if it [sc. nous] were not by itself … it would control none of the things that in the 
way in fact does”; the way it does it, is specified a few lines later: “And whatever sorts 
of things were going to be, and whatever sorts were and now are not, and as many as 
are now and whatever sorts will be, all these Nous set in order.”
15. In sum, Anaxagoras distinguishes three ways of being in a thing, and tells us 
that nous is in things in two of these ways. It is present in things with a soul, having 
direct control over them; it is present in all things; and it does not itself have anything 
in it, in the sense of being mixed with any thing.
16. Aristotle writes that “Anaxagoras alone says that mind does not suffer change, 
and has nothing in common with any of the other things” (De Anima, 405b19). I take 
this to mean that Anaxagoras’s nous does not change in its nature, rather than that 
there are no moments of activation and action where its state is different from that 
of other moments.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
140
140
operation of Anaxagoras’s nous would need to be movement within 
nous, and that the key movement would be self-​initiated movement. 
We do not have an explanation of how the latter is achieved, but the 
self-​motion of nous seems to be one of the most anthropomorphic 
features in Anaxagoras’s ontology. We will examine more of them in 
the next section.
5.3.  NOUS’S COSMIC POWERS
In section 5.1 I reconstructed from the extant texts the reason why 
Anaxagoras might have held that a precondition for nous’s being 
powerful is that its nature is the most rarefied and pure. In this and 
the following sections I will turn to examining what nous has the 
power to do, looking first at its cosmic powers and then at its cog­
nitive powers. As I examine nous’s cosmic power, I will investigate 
its nature, the conditions for its exercise, how it gets exercised, and 
whether Anaxagoras’s system has built into it any kind of teleology 
or not. Nous is the generator of spatial movement in the universe, as 
Simplicius, for instance, reports Anaxagoras claiming in B13: “Nous 
is the cause of motion” (τῆς δὲ κινήσεως αἴτιον εἶναι τὸν νοῦν). This 
generic causal statement can be clarified and qualified in the light 
of a pattern that emerges from Anaxagoras’s extant texts. When he 
explains the role and impact of the cosmic vortex nous generates in 
nature, he uses the verb ποεῖν (make, cause) to refer to its operation. 
Thus he says:  “The revolution caused [ἐποίησεν] them [sc. things] 
to separate off” (B12); and “the revolution made [ἐποίει] them [sc. 
things] dissociate much more” (B13). Additionally, Anaxagoras talks 
in other places of the role and impact of nous in nature in terms of 
κρατεῖν (control). He writes, “Nous has control [νοῦς κρατεῖ] over all 
things” and “Nous controlled [νοῦς ἐκράτησεν] the whole revolution” 
(B12).17 Notable also is Anaxagoras’s use of the verb διακοσμεῖν in 
17. I acknowledge that at one point in B13 Anaxagoras uses a more evidently 
physical verb, and says “whatever Nous moved (ἐκίνησεν),” where movement is to be 
 

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
141
    141
B12: “All these [sc. things] Nous set in order.”18 These textual obser­
vations suggest that Anaxagoras conceived of nous’s causal action on 
the universe in anthropomorphic terms—​doing, or making things 
happen, ruling over them, as a human being would, and not as (or, 
not only as) a purely physical cause would. Purely physical causes give 
shape, not order. Anaxagoras writes that
whatever sorts of things were going to be, and whatever sorts 
were and now are not, and as many as are now and whatever 
sorts will be, all these Nous set in order. And Nous also ordered 
this revolution, in which the things being separated off now 
revolve, the stars and the sun and the moon and the air and the 
aether. This revolution caused them to separate off.
ὁποῖα ἔμελλεν ἔσεσθαι καὶ ὁποῖα ἦν ἃσσα νῦν μή ἐστι, καὶ ὅσα νῦν 
ἐστι καὶ ὁποῖα ἔσται, πάντα διεκόσμησε νοῦς, καὶ τὴν περιχώρησιν 
ταύτην, ἣν νῦν περιχωρέει τά τε ἄστρα καὶ ὁ ἥλιος καὶ ἡ σελήνη 
καὶ ὁ ἀὴρ καὶ ὁ αἰθὴρ οἱ ἀποκρινόμενοι. ἡ δὲ περιχώρησις αὕτη 
ἐποίησεν ἀποκρίνεσθαι.
It is clear from this quotation that nous is for Anaxagoras an organi­
zational, rather than merely interactive physical power in nature like 
the opposites are. This organization by nous has resulted in what took 
place in the past, what is taking place now, and what will take place 
in the future, as we see in B12. All this suggests intelligent design.19
understood as the effect of the nous’s control over things. But this is one occurrence 
only in all the extant texts.
18. διακόσμησις indicates the orderly (and beautiful) arrangement of the uni­
verse, especially in the Pythagorean system. See also Hussey (1972: 18) on the use of 
the term κόσμος in early Greek philosophy.
19. Even if there are cases attested—​in the Hippocratic corpus, for instance—​
where the verb κρατεῖν is used to refer to merely physical operations, e.g., to refer to 
how an organism assimilates food, there is an overwhelming frequency of uses of it to 
refer to human action. Against my considerations, one might want to stress that the 
adjectives such as “finest,” “pure,” and “unmixed,” with which Anaxagoras character­
izes nous, refer to physical properties and thus suggest that nous is a physical entity 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
142
142
What then is the nature of nous’s control on the universe at 
the cosmic level? In setting this world order, nous is responsible 
for the creation of its furniture out of the opposites and seeds, 
and out of their operation.20 The question that needs addressing is 
whether nous’s organizational role has a teleological nature or not. 
Anaxagoras’s description of the workings of nous in B12 indicates at 
least intentionality on the part of nous—​there seems to be a plan 
that is gradually unfolding in the history of the world. Arguing in the 
same direction, Sedley calls attention to B4ab, remarking,
So far one might nevertheless retain the suspicion that this emer­
gence of life is, as such, a mere accident of the cosmic arrange­
ment, not necessarily an integral part of the intelligence’s plans. 
This suspicion will not however survive the following consider­
ation… . There seems absolutely no reason why accident alone 
should have ensured that each world [of the ones Anaxagoras 
mentions] had precisely one [sun and one moon]. (2007: 21–​22)
In the opposite direction, however, Plato’s complaints—​voiced 
by Socrates in the Phaedo (97b–​98c) and then echoed by Aristotle 
(Met. A 4, 985a18–​21)—​question the nature of nous’s cosmic plan. 
Is nous’s plan for the sake of the good? If so, what type of entity is 
the good in Anaxagoras’s ontology, and how does it relate to the uni­
verse? There are textual indications that Anaxagoras thought that 
and acts causally as such. This reading however would require imposing an impover­
ished interpretation on Anaxagoras’s claim that nous sets order in the universe.
20. Nous does not create seeds and opposites out of nothing—​they are already 
there in the primordial mixture; but by setting them in motion via the vortex, nous 
does cause local preponderance of the opposites and thus “create” stuffs and individu­
als. By placing emphasis on the anthropomorphic ways of operation nous has, I simply 
want to stress that it is an intelligent causal power, as I will argue in this section of 
the present chapter. On this point too I find myself in agreement with Sedley, who 
writes that “when intelligence decided to set up a cosmic rotation, the vortex began to 
separate the pairs of opposites, so that some regions had more hot than cold and vice 
versa… . It is from this intelligently generated set of imbalances that familiar stuffs like 
earth and water have been formed” (2007: 9, my emphasis).

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
143
    143
nous’s cosmic plan was for the sake of an end that had value, since he 
tells us in B12 that the generation of the universe resulted from the 
order that nous sets the world in, through the motion it initiated.21 
On the other hand, Anaxagoras does not posit any entity of the kind 
of Plato’s Form of the Good in his ontology. One can only speculate 
about the reasons why. In general, positing an entity such as “the 
good” as a fundamental building block in the universe is far from 
being an unproblematic move to make in developing a metaphysical 
system. By contrast, the thought that a system may be well designed 
is a metaphysically simpler and more economical option. I  see 
Anaxagoras as assuming that the world’s structure is good, given to it 
by its architect, nous, through the cosmic vortex it generates. On my 
reading, when Anaxagoras says that nous set in order the vortex and 
the things resulting from it, he is explaining exactly where, when, 
and how the good enters the design of the world. The goodness of 
Anaxagoras’s world does not lie beyond the world, but is in the design 
of the world’s structure.22 In this sense, his cosmology is teleological. 
What does remain unaccounted for, in Anaxagoras’s system, is the 
goodness of the building blocks in the universe, which include not 
only the opposites, but also the seeds or powers for life (as we will see 
in the second part of the present chapter). I believe this must be the 
reason for the complaint Plato registers against Anaxagoras’s teleol­
ogy, which stays at the level of the ordered arrangement, rather than 
the design of all there is in the world.
21. According to Sedley nous’s goal is ultimately to “reside” in human beings, and 
this is the good for the sake of which things in Anaxagoras’s world are arranged the 
way they are by nous. He writes: “It therefore seems ultimately implicit in Anaxagoras’s 
text that nous constructs and, as it were, farms worlds primarily in order to generate 
human beings. The teleology proves to have an anthropomorphic bias. Since he fur­
ther regards humans as, among all living creatures, the best vehicles for nous itself to 
occupy, it is at least a possibility that he thinks of the world as created by nous out of 
motives of pure self-​interest” (2007: 24).
22. By contrast, Plato sets the Form of the Good as the “reigning” power in his 
ontology, superior to any other (see, e.g., Republic 509b). On the other hand, Plato 
does not describe the mechanism by which the good imparts its goodness to the world, 
but only the resulting participation of the things in the world in Form of the Good.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
144
144
Anaxagoras’s explanation of why Socrates stays in prison rather 
than escape (namely, because his body is physically arranged thus 
and so in that location) makes implicit reference to one type of 
control that nous has over the world—​that is, to move what there 
is through the vortex. So in this sense it makes reference to a cos­
mic design that caused the vortex to get started. Socrates finds this 
explanation inadequate, because what he was expecting to hear 
from Anaxagoras was that the reason why he is in prison is that he 
thought this was the good thing to do (with respect to his relation 
to the Athenian polis). This explanation wears its teleology on its 
sleeve—​it does not have to be assumed. Similarly, the ontological 
dependence of the Platonic Forms on the Form of the Good wears its 
teleology on its sleeve too. By contrast, the vortex moves things, but 
is the movement directed. And if so, how? It does not seem to wear 
its teleology on its sleeve.
An interesting question is this:  could Anaxagoras give a satis­
factory answer to Socrates with the resources of his philosophical 
system? I argued above, in section 5.2, that nous has a second type 
of control on things in the world, in addition to the one exercised 
through the vortex, as indicated by the fact that nous is in some 
things in a different way from the way it is everywhere. This second 
type is the direct control that nous has on the portions of nous in ani­
mate beings in the world. This type of control of nous to nous could 
explain for us the type of connection Socrates’s decision to stay in 
prison has with the good. We do not have enough textual evidence 
to fully develop this possible line of answer and establish whether 
Anaxagoras would have and could have given it. Many of the details 
are missing: for instance, does goodness in one’s decisions derive 
directly from the control of the cosmic nous on one’s own nous? 
Or does goodness derive from one’s own nous, namely, one’s own 
capacity to plan one’s life in good order? If so, how? While we do not 
have answers to these questions, we can see that Anaxagoras has 
the resources in his ontology to have developed the sort of answers 
Socrates was seeking. In conclusion, I  submit the good is part of 
Anaxagoras’s ontology through the presence and operation of the 

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
145
    145
nous, but its modus operandi is less explicit than in subsequent 
teleological systems, such as, e.g., Plato’s or Aristotle’s. The presence 
of nous is a clear enough instance of the presence of the good in 
the cosmos, but its ontological dissemination into the cosmos is not 
clear in extant fragments. On account of its limited scope, Plato and 
Aristotle, I submit, find it unsatisfactory.
5.4.  NOUS’S COGNITIVE POWERS
In addition to its cosmic “creative” and controlling powers, 
Anaxagoras’s nous has also cognitive powers. Nous knows everything 
in Anaxagoras’s world, as we read in B12:
It maintains all discernment about everything and has the great­
est strength… . And Nous knew them all:  the things that are 
being mixed together, the things that are being separated off, 
and the things that are being dissociated.
καὶ γνώμην γε περὶ παντὸς πᾶσαν ἴσχει καὶ ἰσχύει μέγιστον … καὶ 
τὰ συμμισγόμενά τε καὶ ἀποκρινόμενα καὶ διακρινόμενα πάντα 
ἔγνω νοῦς.
The first question arising for us is: how does nous attain such univer­
sal knowledge? Anaxagoras addresses this question, but only indi­
rectly.23 To understand his position, we need to first appreciate that 
for Anaxagoras the cognitive activity of nous is related to its control­
ling activity. In B12 Anaxagoras describes the controlling activity of 
nous, explaining that it should be unmixed to be able to control all 
the things that it can and it does control, as we saw in section 5.1 of 
23.  I  disagree with Laks’s suggestion that “the process of separation, which 
brings about the cosmos, may also be seen as the means by which νοῦς undertakes 
to make things as similar as possible to itself, namely [self] identical. For, in distin­
guishing things by means of the rotation νοῦς undertakes to identify them properly” 
(1993: 31). See also Lesher’s critique (1994: 128–​29) of Laks’s suggestion.
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
146
146
this chapter. He then continues by offering an explanation of this 
claim, saying:
For it is the finest of all things and the purest, and indeed it 
maintains all discernment about everything and has the greatest 
strength.
ἔστι γὰρ λεπτότατόν τε πάντων χρημάτων καὶ καθαρώτατον καὶ 
γνώμην γε περὶ παντὸς πᾶσαν ἴσχει καὶ ἰσχύει μέγιστον.
This is a list of the conditions that enable nous to have control over 
everything. It is fine and pure, so its nature is opposite to all that is 
to be controlled; it has judgment about everything, which is based on 
its knowledge of everything;24 and ultimately nous has the greatest 
power in the cosmos. While these are conditions that we might in 
some way expect nous to satisfy, more surprising is what Anaxagoras 
says in B14: “Nous, which always is, most assuredly is even now where 
all the other things also are” (ὁ δὲ νοῦς, ὃς ἀεί ἐστί, τὸ κάρτα καὶ νῦν 
ἐστιν ἵνα καὶ τὰ ἄλλα πάντα). Why is nous where the other things are? 
I submit that it is because control, and the presupposed knowledge of 
everything, requires contact with everything. This is a physical condi­
tion that nous has to meet: it must be where the other things are, spa­
tially. The reason why it must be there, we are to understand, is not 
the specific location things occupy, but the fact that they are there.
To briefly recapitulate the results achieved in the first part of 
this chapter: I argued that nous is an intelligent power at work at the 
cosmic level in the universe. Its being unmixed allows nous to know 
everything and thus control everything. In positing nous’s intelligent 
control over the world, Anaxagoras pioneers a teleological approach 
that will be critiqued but also in essence endorsed and developed 
much further by Plato and Aristotle. In the next section I  intro­
duce another type of intelligent power that Anaxagoras posits in his 
24. Control of everything requires knowledge of everything’s nature, to enable 
nous to “manage” each thing. On this issue, see Curd (2010: 199 ff.).

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
147
    147
ontology: the seeds, which I call life powers. They are powers for the 
structural development of living beings.
5.5.  THE SEEDS AND THE ORIGINS 
OF LIFE
Anaxagoras’s philosophical investigation is driven, as we saw in the 
preceding chapters, by the challenge of accounting for the observable 
natural phenomena while respecting Parmenides’s principles. The 
“creation” of stuffs such as earth or flesh is explained by means of 
local movement of preexisting tropes, the opposites. The opposites 
cluster in some region of space, in particular ratios to one another, 
making up (by predominance) bundles of stuff, like earth or flesh. 
Stuffs contribute to the constitution of material objects. Yet living 
beings are (symmetrically and/​or asymmetrically) structured indi­
vidual entities. (For instance, the face of a human being is symmet­
ric along the vertical axis and asymmetric along the horizontal one.) 
Also, they develop along repeatable patterns in nature; for instance, 
man begets man. Furthermore, organisms may undergo develop­
mental stages involving diachronic asymmetries; for instance, the 
growth of a beard in pubescent boys is a developmental structural 
feature that characterizes the male human population.25 Intuitively, 
all these structural characteristics are irreducible to ratios of oppo­
sites only. Anaxagoras is aware that he needs to explain the presence 
in nature of living beings qua structured individual entities. He could 
not allow for them to be created as such, as this would contravene 
the Parmenidean strictures Anaxagoras adheres to. He therefore has 
to allow the preexistence of structures in the world, so as to facili­
tate the coming about of individuals, without their being created 
ex nihilo. With this in mind, Anaxagoras introduces seeds in to his 
25. That it arises at puberty defines the developmental structure of male humans. 
(It is not the process of the growth of facial hair that is the structural feature.)
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
148
148
ontology, in addition to the opposites and nous. The seeds are not cre­
ated, but have eternally been in the world, as Anaxagoras says in B4b:
Before there was separation off, because all things were together, 
there was not even any colour evident; for the mixture of all 
things prevented it, of the wet and the dry and of the hot and the 
cold and of the bright and the dark, and there was much earth 
present and seeds unlimited in number, in no way similar to one 
another.
πρὶν δὲ ἀποκριθῆναι [ταῦτα] πάντων ὁμοῦ ἐόντων οὐδὲ χροιὴ 
ἔνδηλος ἦν οὐδεμία· ἀπεκώλυε γὰρ ἡ σύμμιξις πάντων χρημάτων, 
τοῦ τε διεροῦ καὶ τοῦ ξηροῦ καὶ τοῦ θερμοῦ καὶ τοῦ ψυχροῦ καὶ 
τοῦ λαμπροῦ καὶ τοῦ ζοφεροῦ, καὶ γῆς πολλῆς ἐνεούσης καὶ 
σπερμάτων ἀπείρων πλῆθος οὐδὲν ἐοικότων ἀλλήλοις.
Anaxagoras is concerned with the explanation of the origin and pres­
ence of structures of individuals in nature. He needs to explain how 
such structures come about, and do so in accordance to his metaphysi­
cal principles. It is clear from the texts that Anaxagoras traces the dif­
ferences of one individual from another back to what is present in the 
seeds the individuals have “come from.”26 If seeds contain the required 
structures, then mere growth would suffice to explain the coming to 
be of structured individuals.27 We understand then what metaphysical 
work seeds are posited to do. But what is their nature? How do they 
do their metaphysical work? There is a naturalistic model available to 
Anaxagoras to solve the metaphysical questions seeds are posited to 
answer: it is the biological one, where organisms come from seeds. 
26. If the seeds are the source of structure, what gives structure to them? There 
are two hypotheses; that nous has given them structure, or that it is an irreducibly 
primitive fact about the universe that the seeds contained in it are structured. Sedley 
(2007: 19) briefly discusses these two possibilities and opts for the primitive fact, as 
I do too.
27. It is also by and large accepted in the literature that individuals grow out of 
the seeds by addition of stuffs (and ultimately, opposites) to the seeds themselves.

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
149
    149
I submit that Anaxagoras endorses this model and posits ordinary 
biological seeds as part of this ontology. On this issue, I align myself 
with many other scholars, including, for instance, Furley (1976: 72); 
Schofield (1980: 124); Curd (2002: 153); Sedley (2007: 15); and oth­
ers. In particular, I  share a widespread way of thinking (see, e.g., 
Schofield 1980 and Sedley 2007) concerning the seeds: if (counter­
factually) they were anything other than ordinary biological seeds, 
this would imply that Anaxagoras introduced terms with a “technical” 
philosophical sense in his writings. But this according to Sedley is not 
the case. Anaxagoras’s way to proceed is, in Sedley’s words,
by outlawing ordinary-​language usages which he considers 
misleading … [Anaxagoras’s] key contribution to the Greek 
philosophical vocabulary lies in a cleaning up of philosophical 
language by studious exclusion. The further move of creating 
new terms, or redeploying existing words in unfamiliar technical 
senses, came only later. If “seeds” were being used by Anaxagoras 
as an innovative technical term, it would be a probably unique 
exception to the pattern I have described. (2007: 15)28
I see my own interpretation of the seeds supported by two sets of 
considerations: one concerns the issue of (the absence of a) technical 
philosophical vocabulary in Anaxagoras; the other concerns the dif­
ficulties that alternative interpretations encounter. It is on account 
of both that I find taking the seeds as biological ones to be the prefer­
able reading.
The existing alternative interpretations are reviewed and dis­
cussed, among others, by Schofield (1980: 121ff); Teodorsson (1982: 
28. On this point Sedley clearly disagrees with Vlastos, who claims that “when 
Anaxagoras through the concept of the seed generalizes this principle of germination 
from biology to cosmology, extending it to any process of generation whatsoever, he is 
seeking to convey a new idea for which none of the traditional terms offered a fitting 
vehicle” (1950: 36). According to Vlastos, “No one before Anaxagoras had ever used 
‘seeds’ as he did … [he] meant to stretch the word so far beyond its ordinary sense, 
applying it to inorganic as well as organic, matter” (1950: 33).

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
150
150
45 ff.);29 and more recently Curd (2010: 171 ff.). I here limit myself to 
a brief mention of two positions that are at the two opposite extremes 
of the interpretative spectrum, in order to give the reader a sense of 
how widely these views differ. On the one hand, there are those who 
reify the seeds as an additional entity of a special kind: in Eric Lewis’s 
words, “Seeds are, for Anaxagoras, mini homunculi of every individual 
organism that ever will be” (2000: 1).30 Lewis reads B4 as saying there 
are in the original cosmic mixture “seeds of all the individual organ­
isms that will ever exist. More specifically, these seeds are homunculi of 
all individual organisms, and therefore unique” (2000: 18). “The seed 
of me is a tiny version of me” (2000: 18). On this interpretation, the 
homunculi are taken to be primitively present in the cosmic mixture, 
and in appropriate circumstances some of them grow into individu­
als.31 The difficulty with this interpretation is that on the one hand it 
includes in the ontology more than is needed, and on the other, such 
an addition does too much. What is needed for individuals to develop 
are not homunculi, but just structures, since the rest can come from 
the opposites in the mixture of its immediate environment, when the 
seed is in the appropriate conditions to grow. By saying that if the seeds 
were homunculi they would do “too much”, I mean that if they are tiny 
versions of ourselves, then we exist long before we are born, having 
29. Teodorsson’s own interpretation is in one respect close to mine and in others 
very different. The point of similarity is that we both take the seeds to be the “soft­
ware,” as it were, which can “program” the opposites to cluster in a certain structural 
way, diachronically as well. The point of disagreement is that Teodorsson sees “the 
seeds of all things” as “prefigurations, or matrices, of individual perceptible things, inor­
ganic as well as organic, with one σπέρμα for each individual thing of the universe” 
(1982: 82). For me, by contrast, there are seeds of living beings only, and they perform 
their programming function just in the way that biological seeds do, being biological 
seeds. Although we can find as early as in Aristotle the notion of a biological set of 
instructions, e.g., in the heat motions of a sperm, I believe that there is no reason 
to attribute as clear a division of programing instructions from (proto) implementa­
tion of these instructions in skeletal form to Anaxagoras. See also the discussion of 
Teodorsson’s interpretation in Mourelatos (1986: 156–​57).
30. The same view was held, for instance, among others by Mann (1980: 236).
31. This line of interpretation has been criticized, for instance, in Curd (2010: 
174) and Palmer (2009: 239 ff.).

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
151
    151
tiny bodies and instances of nous. I find no compelling reason to attri­
bute this position to Anaxagoras. At the other extreme of the interpre­
tive spectrum, there is the “deflationary” view that Brad Inwood, for 
instance, takes. He writes that “to say that the seed of x is in it [i.e., the 
mixture] is to say that there is enough of each of the needed opposites 
in it to produce x” (1986: 26). Inwood calls the way the seeds are in the 
mixture “virtual presence” (1986: 25). In addition to the difficulty of 
understanding what virtual presence is supposed to be in a world such 
as Anaxagoras’s where all there is has always existed and will always 
exist as it is, there is also a deeper problem with Inwood’s proposed 
interpretation. On his reading there is nothing that seeds contrib­
ute to the ontology in terms of structure. Thus, the crucial question 
that remains unaddressed is where structure come from, according to 
Inwood, in Anaxagoras’s system. To conclude this discussion, to my 
mind, seeds are a significant addition to the ontology by Anaxagoras. 
Following the biological model, seeds embody the possibility of pro­
ducing an organism, if there is enough of each of the needed oppo­
sites in the environment. The seeds do not supply all that is needed 
for the production of an organism, but they provide the frame for the 
construction of the organism, and the mechanism by which materials 
from the environment can be collected to build the organism.
Moving forward now in reconstructing Anaxagoras’s account of 
living beings, it ought to be noted that he associates soul with the 
individuals that are generated from the seeds. We read in B4a:
Since these things are so, it is right to think that there are many 
different things present in everything that is combined, and 
seeds of all things having all sorts of forms, colours, and flavours, 
and that humans and also the other animals were compounded, 
as many as have soul.
τούτων δὲ οὕτως ἐχόντων χρὴ δοκεῖν ἐνεῖναι πολλά τε καὶ παντοῖα 
ἐν πᾶσι τοῖς συγκρινομένοις καὶ σπέρματα πάντων χρημάτων καὶ 
ἰδέας παντοίας ἔχοντα καὶ χροιὰς καὶ ἡδονάς. καὶ ἀνθρώπους τε 
συμπαγῆναι καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ζῷα ὅσα ψυχὴν ἔχει.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
152
152
Anaxagoras does not explain in the extant fragments what soul is, 
or how soul compares, metaphysically, to nous; he only points at a 
relation of (direct) control. We saw above that in B11 Anaxagoras 
says that “there are some things in which Nous, too, is present.” 
Interpreters of Anaxagoras combine this statement with the one in 
B12 that “nous has control over all things that have soul, both the 
larger and the smaller,” and attribute to Anaxagoras the claim that 
the soul in each animate thing is the nous that resides in it. Thus, for 
instance, Curd (2010: 61), who takes Aristotle’s complaint below as 
supporting the sameness of nous and soul in Anaxagoras:
Anaxagoras, as we said above, seems to distinguish between soul 
and thought, but in practice he treats them as a single substance, 
except that it is thought that he specially posits as the principle 
of all things; at any rate what he says is that thought alone of 
all that is is simple unmixed, and pure. (De Anima, 405a13–​17)32
Ἀναξαγόρας δ’ ἔοικε μὲν ἕτερον λέγειν ψυχήν τε καὶ νοῦν, ὥσπερ 
εἴπομεν καὶ πρότερον, χρῆται δ’ ἀμφοῖν ὡς μιᾷ φύσει, πλὴν ἀρχήν 
γε τὸν νοῦν τίθεται μάλιστα πάντων· μόνον γοῦν φησὶν αὐτὸν τῶν 
ὄντων ἁπλοῦν εἶναι καὶ ἀμιγῆ τε καὶ καθαρόν.
I take Aristotle’s complaint to point in the opposite direction than the 
one Curd envisages. As I read him, Aristotle is saying that Anaxagoras 
considers nous and soul as different, but fails to pay full justice to this 
distinction. In fact, Aristotle points out some features of nous, such 
as that it has cosmic control, and that it has a pure constitution, as 
possible distinguishing features between nous and soul. In my under­
standing of Anaxagoras’s system, nous singles out certain types of 
entity in the universe, precisely those that have soul. Having soul is 
the criterion that distinguishes organisms from other types of entity 
in the cosmos. According to Anaxagoras, “Nous has control over all 
things that have soul” (B12). As we saw, this is a special control nous 
32. I here quote from Barnes’s translation (Barnes 1984).

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
153
    153
has over these entities, different from the overall control it has over 
everything in its universe. The difference, in my understanding of 
Anaxagoras’s ontology, is constitutional: these entities have soul as 
part of their constitution, while the rest of what there is does not.
So, to recapitulate, Anaxagoras thinks that some things have 
soul, that nous comes to be present in things with a soul, that the 
portions of nous in larger animate things are larger than the por­
tions of nous in smaller animate things, and that all portions of nous 
have the same nature as cosmic nous. What things, then, have soul? 
Those things that have life, or are alive. And how is life explained in 
Anaxagoras’s system? A living being is physically structured, its life 
phases are diachronically structured, and it generates offspring with 
the same structure as the parent’s. Anaxagoras cannot explain life 
with an ontology of opposites and their ratios only, because those 
cannot deliver structure. He thus chooses to add seeds to his ontol­
ogy, as the origin of life. Seeds are powers for the dynamic devel­
opment (in the right conditions) of physically and diachronically 
structured entities—​that is living beings.
5.6.  CLOSING REMARKS
Nous is a power in Anaxagoras, indeed the strongest power there 
is (ἰσχύει μέγιστον, B12). It is a power to rule itself (B12), to know 
everything (B12), to generate the cosmic vortex (B12), to control 
all things and to control in a special way animate things (B12), and 
to reside in animate things (B11). Furthermore, it is an intelligent 
power, with its own teleology. On the other hand, nous is not the only 
power Anaxagoras posits in his system. We saw, in ­chapter 1, that the 
opposites are powers as well, with a local range of influence in their 
environment, by contrast with the cosmic range of influence of nous. 
There are also life powers in Anaxagoras’s system: the seeds. Seeds 
have the power to develop in a structured way, but not to design and 
plan their own development; in this sense we can say that they are 
intelligent powers. Thus, at a cosmic level, nous is responsible for the 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
154
154
world’s order and design, which it constructs, while at the level of 
the world’s furniture, there exist primitively structured clusters of 
opposites, which develop by addition of more opposites when nous 
sets the world order.33 We are now in the position to draw the fol­
lowing conclusions: just as nous is causally responsible for the cosmic 
changes in the world, while the opposites are causally responsible 
for local changes, so nous is responsible for the organizational mac­
rostructure of the cosmos, while the life powers in the seeds are 
responsible for the organizational microstructures in the world, the 
organisms. Finally, I argued that for Anaxagoras, nous has a special 
type of control over beings with soul, different from the type of con­
trol that nous has over everything in the cosmos. Nous is found in 
large and small portions in animate beings in nature, and these por­
tions are of the same nature as the cosmic nous. This explains why the 
type of control that nous has over beings with souls is different, over 
and above the type of control it has over them and all else in the uni­
verse. Cosmic nous can have direct rapport with portions of nous in 
things with souls—​for instance, cosmic nous can ensure that animate 
beings can survive and flourish in the environments in which they 
find themselves in nature.34
We have now explicated in full Anaxagoras’s core worldview; 
while it would be interesting to investigate specific domains where 
Anaxagoras puts his metaphysics to use (such as, for example, 
33. If counterfactually nous had the power to control the structural development 
of seeds, this would defeat the purpose of positing that the seeds exist ab aeterno.
34. We know from B4a that individual human beings have powers of intelligence, 
e.g., to construct cities:
There are cities that have been constructed by humans and words made, just as … 
the earth grows many different things for them, the most valuable of which they 
gather together into their household and use.
καὶ τοῖς γε ἀνθρώποισιν εἶναι καὶ πόλεις συνημμένας καὶ ἔργα κατεσκευασμένα, 
ὥσπερ παρ’ ἡμῖν … καὶ τὴν γῆν αὐτοῖσι φύειν πολλά τε καὶ παντοῖα, ὧν ἐκεῖνοι 
τὰ ὀνήιστα συνενεγκάμενοι εἰς τὴν οἴκησιν χρῶνται.
Clearly these powers of planning and realizing their designs comes from the por­
tion of nous in humans, which is therefore able to have goals and plan their actions 
accordingly.

I n t e l l ige n t   P ow e r s
155
    155
perception and knowledge, biology, geology, and astrology), I leave 
the exploration of these possible directions to a future work. Next, 
I want present and discuss a worldview that shares—​surprisingly—​
much in common with Anaxagoras’s with respect to its most original 
tenets—​this is that of the Stoics’. The Stoics too conceive of reality 
as gunky, and their motivation, articulation, and application of the 
theory is both of intrinsic interest, and of value to further our under­
standing of Anaxagoras’s originality. To the Stoics I now turn.

156
156
Chapter 6
 Stoic Gunk
This chapter sets out to investigate the only other metaphysical sys­
tem in antiquity that is underpinned by the same core assumption 
as Anaxagoras’s—​namely, that reality is atomless or gunky.1 A con­
nection between Anaxagoras and the Stoics has rarely been drawn 
in the scholarship. Much divides them: to begin with, the fact that 
their metaphysical systems were developed respectively before, and 
after, the work of Plato and Aristotle and the range of metaphysical 
principles they introduced. In taking the two systems together as the 
only instances in antiquity of a world built on gunk, I aim to bring out 
what is distinctive of each, with respect to motivation, articulation, 
and use of the theory. This will enable us to understand Anaxagoras 
in greater depth, which is the primary focus of this book, but also 
the Stoics, and indirectly our own posture with respect to gunk: we 
are discovering it in nature, while the ancients posited it from first 
principles.
The most distinctive Stoic stance is their extreme physical­
ism: for them, everything that exists is body. To be closer to their 
way of speaking, we can call their view corporealism. Their motiva­
tion for this stance, I submit, is the Eleatic Principle (expressed 
1. As other interpreters have done, I will develop my arguments on the assump­
tion that it is legitimate to speak of the Stoics as a whole, at least in relation to some 
core views that unify the school, such as the ones this chapter is about. A defense of 
this assumption is beyond the scope of this book and would constitute a detour from 
its main themes.
 
 

S toic   Gu nk
157
    157
by Plato in the Sophist)2 according to which only what is causally 
powerful exists. For the Stoics, only bodies can be causally power­
ful. Coming after Plato and Aristotle, the Stoics engage with their 
metaphysical “inheritance” by tailor-​fitting it to their own physi­
calist assumptions, thereby generating many innovations in the 
history of metaphysics.3 Such innovations concern the way Stoic 
corporealism accounts for the constitution of ordinary material 
objects, for their possession of properties,4 and for causality. Of 
2. Sophist 247e: “I am saying that a thing really is if it has any capacity at all. 
Either by nature to do something to something else or to have even the smallest thing 
done to it, by even the most trivial thing, even if it only happens once. I’ll take it as a 
definition that those which are amount to nothing other than capacity” (translation by 
N. P. White).
3. I take my approach to be aligned with Katja Vogt’s, in that we both argue that 
the Stoics have a distinctive take in their philosophical explanations of reality, very 
different from Plato’s and Aristotle’s, on account of their corporealism. Where Vogt 
and I differ, to my mind, is in how we see the Stoics put their corporealism to work. In 
this chapter I argue that the Stoics use physical operations, such as division and mixture 
of the basic elements in their ontology (which are bodies), to do metaphysical work in 
their system. Vogt on the other hand has argued that for the Stoics there is no separa­
tion between physics and metaphysics and that it is physics rather than metaphysics 
that delivers for them the most basic account of reality. In this, she identifies the Stoic 
philosophical distinctiveness. Vogt (2009) writes that,
Their focus on corporeals … explains why the Stoics do not have the kind of the­
ory that, with respect to Plato and Aristotle, we call metaphysics… . Talk about 
“Stoic ontology” is clearly more directly rooted in the texts [than talk of “Stoic 
metaphysics”]. But even here, it seems important to keep in mind that we are not 
referring to a theory that is separate from particular investigations in physics, 
logic, and ethics, or that would offer a deeper understanding of reality than these 
disciplines do… . [T]‌he Stoics are Sons of the Earth in the metaphorical sense 
that they look at the earth and think that the most basic account that philosophy 
can offer is an account that explains the physical universe. (137, 145, 149)
Also arguing that the Stoics have a worked-​out metaphysics (which she char­
acterizes as sophisticated physicalism) is Vanessa de Harven (“Stoic Incorporeals: 
A Grounded Account,” unpublished manuscript), who concludes:
Thus there is good reason to extend Brunschwig’s suggestion that the Stoics 
were masters of their theoretical domain, leading with their ontology and going 
beyond physics to metaphysics.
4. Although the Stoics do not believe universals exist, they hold that ordinary 
material objects can each be classified under various concepts (which they reify, in line 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
158
158
special interest to us is the fact that such innovations all derive 
from the assumption that what exists (bodies), exists as unlimit­
edly divided. I will argue in this chapter that the unlimited division 
of bodies allows for their colocation in the same spatiotemporal 
region, and that colocation does crucial explanatory work in the 
Stoic account of some fundamental physical and metaphysical rela­
tions in their system.
6.1.  UNLIMITED DIVISION
There is explicit textual evidence that the Stoics believe in unlimited 
division of body, for example in the following texts:
T1: Stobaeus 1.142, 2–​6 (LS 50A)
Chrysippus said that bodies are divided to infinity, and likewise 
things comparable to bodies, such as surface, line, place, void 
and time.
Χρύσιππος ἔφασκε τὰ σώματα εἰς ἄπειρον τέμνεσθαι καὶ τὰ τοῖς 
σώμασι προσεοικότα, οἷον ἐπιφάνειαν γραμμὴν τόπον κενὸν 
χρόνον.
T2: Sextus, Against the Professors 10.121–​26, 139–​42 (LS 50F)
Let us start our argument with the first school of thought, 
according to which all are divided to infinity… . [Such school of 
thought comprises] those who say that bodies, places and times 
are divided to infinity, namely the Stoics.
τάξει δὲ ἀπὸ τῆς πρώτης στάσεως ποιώμεθα τὴν ἐπιχείρησιν, καθ’ 
ἣν πάντα εἰς ἄπειρον τέμνεται… . τοὺς εἰς ἄπειρον τέμνεσθαι 
λέγοντας τά τε σώματα καὶ τοὺς τόπους καὶ τοὺς χρόνους (οὗτοι 
δέ εἰσιν οἱ ἀπὸ τῆς Στοᾶς) ταῦθ’ ἥρμοζε λέγειν.
with their physicalism). This generates for them the explanatory need to account for 
why they fall under such concepts.
 

S toic   Gu nk
159
    159
The language used in these texts is neutral as to whether the division of 
bodies under discussion is an infinite division into points, or an infinite 
division into parts. There is however additional textual evidence that 
shows that for the Stoics the division of body generates parts (μέρη, 
see T3 here below). What makes the metaphysical picture far from 
straightforward is that in the very same report where Stobaeus talks 
about infinite division (which is the text from which T1 is taken), he 
surprises us with a prima facie puzzling claim attributed to Chrysippus, 
concerning the parts resulting from the unlimited division of body:
T3: Plutarch, On Common Conceptions 1081C–​82A (LS 50C)
With respect to the ultimate parts, it must be said neither of 
which parts we consist, nor, likewise, of how many, either infi­
nite or finite. I believe I have quoted his [Chrysippus’s] actual 
words. (Translation modified)5
τὰ ἔσχατα μέρη … ῥητέον οὔτ’ ἔκ τινων συνεστάναι, καὶ ὁμοίως 
οὔτ’ ἐξ ὁποσωνοῦν, οὔτ’ ἐξ ἀπείρων οὔτ’ ἐκ πεπερασμένων.’ καί μοι 
δοκῶ ταῖς ἐκείνου κεχρῆσθαι λέξεσιν αὐταῖς.
We know that Chrysippus also holds that what a three-​dimensional 
body is divided into are not infinitely many three-​dimensional bod­
ies; similarly, surfaces are not divided into infinitely many surfaces, 
or lines into infinitely many lines.
T4: Stobaeus 1.142, 2–​6 (LS 50A)
But although these [bodies] are divided to infinity, a body does 
not consist of infinitely many bodies [resulting from the divi­
sion], and the same applies to surface, line and place.
5. I prefer to translate the expression ἔκ τινων as “which parts,” and not as “what 
parts,” as L&S do. The English expression “what parts” is ambiguous, and could be 
understood either as “what sort of parts” or as “which parts.” But Chrysippus’s concern 
here, I argue, is the lack of distinctness of the parts resulting from unlimited division 
of body; this concern is more accurately captured by the translation I offer. I also note 
that the text from T3 is presented as a word-​by-​word report of Chrysippus’s views.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
160
160
εἰς ἄπειρόν τε τούτων τεμνομένων οὔτε σῶμα ἐξ ἀπείρων σωμάτων 
συνέστηκεν οὔτ’ ἐπιφάνεια οὔτε γραμμὴ οὔτε τόπος.
So what does Chrysippus think of the parts? Why does infinite 
division of a body not deliver infinitely many bodily parts? T3 tells 
us that, for Chrysippus, bodies have no ultimate parts, and that a 
body’s ultimate components are neither infinitely many items, nor 
finitely many. T4 says that a body is not made up of infinitely many 
(bodily) parts. At the same time, nothing in the text indicates that 
Chrysippus thought that unlimited division destroys body, in such 
a way that there are no parts left. My interpretation of T3 and T4 
taken together is that, for the Stoics, it is not the case that there are 
no parts, but rather that there is no set of items that are the ultimate 
parts of body, because there is no end to the division.6 The division is 
unceasing, as reported, for instance, here:
T5: Diogenes Laertius 7.150–​51 (LS 50B)
Division is to infinity, or “infinite” according to Chrysippus (for 
there is not some infinity which the division reaches; it is just 
unceasing).
ἥ τε τομὴ εἰς ἄπειρόν ἐστιν (ἣν ἄπειρον, <οὐκ εἰς ἄπειρόν> φησιν 
ὁ Χρύσιππος. οὐ γάρ ἐστί τι ἄπειρον, εἰς ὃ γίνεται ἡ τομή. ἀλλ’ 
ἀκατάληκτός ἐστι).
I reconstruct Chrysippus’s thought as follows: if we look for the ulti­
mate parts, we are looking for the end of the division of the body. 
Let us suppose that at each step, we divide each part of the body 
into half. What do we get at the end of all divisions? Every step is a 
multiplication, by two, of the items in the previous step. So this way 
to proceed will never get us to infinity, since starting with finitely 
many parts and doubling them will always give us a finite number. 
This means that any row of division Chrysippus counted would have 
6. The division has no physical end, rather than no temporal end.

S toic   Gu nk
161
    161
finitely many items. This is true of all rows—​ultimate, or not—​and 
gives a compelling reason to say the parts are finitely many. But the 
rows toward the ultimate one are infinitely many, i.e., the “ultimate” 
row is at infinity. Hence, Chrysippus says, the ultimate parts are nei­
ther finite nor infinite. This means that there is a reason to call them 
finite, and there is reason to call them infinite. So, Chrysippus con­
cludes, they are neither.
The textual evidence is clear that the Stoics held that the divi­
sion of body is unlimited. What we need to explore now, as we did 
with Anaxagoras, is the metaphysical significance of this stance. If 
unlimited, the division does not stop at any kind of atoms. I derive 
this conclusion from the claim that the ultimate parts are neither 
infinite nor finite (T3) and that the division is unceasing (T5). 
Therefore the division does not stop either at extended atoms or 
at extension-​less points.7 So, what are the parts of unceasing divi­
sion like? I submit that the unlimited division of a body (as the 
unlimited division of a trope in Anaxagoras’s case) generates parts 
whose size converges on zero extension. The constituent parts of 
unlimitedly divided bodies are infinite series of parts converging 
on zero extension or point-​size, without ever reaching this limit. 
At the foundations of the Stoic system—​as well as Anaxagoras’s—​
there is divided atomless gunk.8
While some modern metaphysicians, as we saw in ­chapter  3, 
have explored the conceptual possibility that the universe may be an 
atomless continuum, for Anaxagoras and the Stoics, actual or divided 
gunk is the “tool” they need to build their physical universe. More 
7. We do talk of lines as being infinitely divided into points, but the Stoics 
would not allow bodies to consist of extensionless points, since points, as math­
ematical limits, are, according to the Stoics, neither corporeal nor incorporeal. 
Infinite division is always division into extended (and so divisible) parts. The same 
is true of division of lines and time etc. because these are incorporeals (namely, 
physical and dependent on bodies), while points are neither physical incorporeals 
nor corporeals.
8. In ­chapter 3 I argue that divided gunk does not raise special conceptual difficul­
ties if one is willing to accept unlimited divisibility in the first place.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
162
162
specifically, they need it to allow for colocation of the fundamental 
entities in their respective systems. Colocation is, I will argue, the 
physical relation the Stoics use to account for key metaphysical issues 
such as constitution and property possession, in ways that fit in with 
their corporealism. Colocation is also a precondition for causation for 
the Stoics, whom I take to endorse the general principle of no action 
at a distance. (For Anaxagoras, as we saw in ­chapter 3, colocation or 
compresence allows for constitution and property possession [via 
preponderance], and for change [via the action of a cosmic vortex] in 
a world that abides to Parmenidean laws.)
6.2.  COLOCATION
Colocation is a Stoic thesis that has exercised the commentators 
since antiquity. Alexander of Aphrodisias reports:
T6: Alexander, On Mixture 216.14–​217.12 (LS 48C)
Chrysippus has the following theory of blending: … when cer­
tain substances and their qualities are mutually co-​extended 
through and through, with the original substances and their 
qualities being preserved in such a mixture; this kind of mixture 
he calls specifically “blending” … he believes that such a coex­
tension of blended bodies occurs when they pass through one 
another, so that no part among them fails to participate in every­
thing contained in such a blend.
ἔστι δὲ ἡ Χρυσίππου δόξα περὶ κράσεως ἥδε… . δι’ὅλων τινῶν 
οὐσιῶν τε καὶ τῶν τούτων ποιοτήτων ἀντιπαρεκτεινομένων 
ἀλλήλαις μετὰ τοῦ τὰς ἐξ ἀρχῆς οὐσίας τε καὶ ποιότητας σώζειν ἐν 
τῇ μίξει τῇ τοιᾷδε, ἥντινα τῶν μίξεων κρᾶσιν ἰδίως εἶναι λέγει… . 
τὴν δὲ τοιαύτην ἀντιπαρέκτασιν τῶν κιρναμένων ὑπολαμβάνει 
γίνεσθαι χωρούντων δι’ ἀλλήλων τῶν κιρναμένων σωμάτων, 
ὡς μηδὲν μόριον ἐν αὐτοῖς εἶναι μὴ μετέχον πάντων τῶν ἐν τῷ 
τοιούτῳ κεκραμένῳ μίγματι.
 

S toic   Gu nk
163
    163
The substances in question are corporeal (sōmata); as we will see 
from other texts, they may be simple bodies (i.e., the basic ele­
ments in the Stoic system, pneuma and hylē) or composite bodies, 
such as, for instance, water and wine (which result ultimately from 
the combination of pneuma and hylē). The view the Stoics hold is 
that some substances can be thoroughly blended with each other, 
i.e., colocated in a given spatiotemporal region over which they 
coextend.9 By this the Stoics mean that when colocated, such sub­
stances come to occupy the same region of space, as each would 
on its own. This claim is as counterintuitive to us as it might have 
been to the Stoics’ contemporaries. One could uncharitably say 
that it is nonsensical. How is colocation of bodies such as water 
and wine possible, in such a way that there is some water wherever 
there is some wine? If any Stoic account was given, none has sur­
vived. I argue that the Stoics posited unlimited division of body to 
provide an account for the coextension of bodies that would not 
defy any laws of physics. Recall that gunk has parts converging to 
zero extension. This, I argue, allows the Stoics to explain blending 
in terms of the colocation of the parts of the blended substances, 
each of which approaches zero extension and thus can be located 
where another is located.10
It will be helpful to contrast my interpretation of Stoic blends 
to that of Daniel Nolan (2006), who was the first to approach the 
issue in terms of location of gunk in space. Nolan proposes that we 
think of coextension of bodies in terms of mixtures of (material) 
hunks of gunks, which can somehow be colocated. This is intended to 
account for the compresence of the elements of the mixture without 
9. One may wonder: given that all things exist as divided, why do only some of 
them come to be colocated by blending? The Stoics do not address this question in the 
texts that have survived. The answer could be simply based on experience: we find out 
empirically what does and what does not blend. One can only conjecture whether the 
Stoics would have given this answer, or a metaphysical reason.
10. Even if there is no explicit textual evidence that the Stoics thought this way, 
in order to allow compresence of material objects such as water and wine they must be 
committed to giving up continuity of matter.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
164
164
committing the Stoics to saying that two bodies are in the same place, 
i.e., compenetrating (which is assumed to be unsound by the Stoics). 
Nolan writes,
If each of the substances to be blended has no ultimate parts, the 
blend itself can contain all of these parts without there having to 
be any continuous region in the blend which is wholly occupied 
by part of only one of the blended substances. For there can be 
a division of the blend, such that no matter how many stages 
of division are carried out, all of the so-​far divided proper parts 
of the blend contain proper parts of both of the blended sub­
stances. (This can be easily generalised for blends of more than 
one substance …). Furthermore … any continuous region of 
the blend is wholly occupied by a piece of the blend which has 
parts of the original blended substances among its own parts. 
(2006: 171–​72)
The innovation here is distinction between “strict” and “loose” loca­
tion, and the suggestion is that no one of the blended substances is 
strictly located in the blend.11 Assuming that Q and Q′ are the mix­
ants and O the blend, Nolan explains that
Q and Q′ will not be located anywhere at all (though we may 
still say that they are in a loose sense, since they will retain an 
important connection to the place where O is). If we do this, then 
we are not forced to say the mixed substances are in the same 
place—​the mixture is in a specific location, true enough, but 
while they remain mixed the components are not in a place at all 
(at least in the strict sense). (2006: 174)
11. Josh Parsons (2007) offers an intuitive characterization of the difference (but 
note that he uses “weak” and “exact” location in place of strict and loose). Parsons 
explains exact location thus: “I am exactly located anywhere that I am both entirely 
and pervasively located”; and weak location thus: “Let us say that I am weakly located 
in my office iff I am in my office in the weakest possible sense: iff my office is not com­
pletely free of me” (2007: 203).

S toic   Gu nk
165
    165
Thus Nolan’s solution, on behalf of the Stoics, is that each of the 
blended substances is in the blend, and yet it isn’t (because having 
a weak location supposedly amounts to not being located anywhere 
at all)—​this is how the blended substances can be all compresent in 
without material compenetration.12
There is much discussion of the distinction between strict and 
loose location in the contemporary metaphysics literature, but of 
particular relevance here are Josh Parsons’s (2007) arguments, 
which engage directly with Nolan’s argument quoted above. Parsons 
raises two difficulties for Nolan’s account of the Stoic blend. The first 
is that strict (scilicet exact) and loose (scilicet weak) location cannot 
be defined independently; the definition of the latter is dependent 
on the definition of the former: an object is “weakly located at every 
region overlapping its exact location” (2007: 208). Hence one cannot 
hold that the mixants are weakly located, but also not exactly located 
somewhere. Additionally, Parsons finds Nolan’s distinction problem­
atic in that what is weakly located in the blend is still there in a “pure” 
state, i.e. as, e.g., wine and water:
I have my doubts about whether this [i.e., the way Nolan mod­
els metaphysically the blend] is really distinct enough from the 
wheat and lentils case to be what the Stoics were after. After all, 
on Nolan’s view, there are still parts of the blend that are pure 
12. Would the distinction between strict and loose location be a way forward 
for Anaxagoras too, to explain how the opposites are compresent with each other? 
There are a number of considerations to be made here. First, there is an important 
disanalogy to register between the Stoic blend of bodies and Anaxagoras’s extreme 
mixture of opposites. They are both mixtures, but in the Stoic one the hunks of 
gunk are assumed to causally interact with each other. (Nolan is silent on how on his 
account they can causally interact, which isn’t easy to explain when the mixants are 
only potentially in the blend). By contrast, Anaxagoras’s hunks of gunk do not (and 
cannot, for Parmenidean reasons) affect each other causally, and this facilitates their 
being colocated. Second, there is the philosophical rather than interpretative question 
of whether the distinction between loose and strict location appealed to by Nolan is 
a sound one, which we need to address before determining if one can borrow such 
distinction on behalf of Anaxagoras. My conclusion is negative; we can’t borrow it, 
and we need not borrow it.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
166
166
wine and pure water, rubbing shoulders in the blend just like 
grains of wheat and lentils. Unlike grains of wheat, they are not 
exactly located anywhere—​but they are still parts of the blend, 
and they are still unmixed. (2007: 208)
In other words, Nolan holds that as long as the mixants are weakly 
located in the mixture, there is no obstacle as it were to their being 
thoroughly blended with each other. By contrast Parsons suggests 
that, even granting for the sake of argument that something can 
have weak but not exact colocation (which he deems impossible), 
the retained purity of water and wine in the blend is incompat­
ible with their being thoroughly blended.13 The Stoic fusion thus 
become on Nolan’s account a “blurry” case, in between blend and 
juxtaposition.14
In conclusion, Nolan argues, as I do, that the Stoics believe in 
gunk, but he does not use what I take to be the most relevant feature 
of gunk (namely, the convergence of the parts to zero extension) to 
explain how the Stoics can account for colocation. Nolan offers for 
colocation an interpretation alternative to my own. He thinks the 
solution to the question of how blended substances can occupy the 
same spatiotemporal location lies in drawing a distinction between 
loose and exact or strict location. There are a number of difficulties 
with Nolan’s interpretation. The three main issues are the following. 
13. This is a point already made by Alexander of Aphrodisias, On Mixture 220.23–​
36 (Todd 1976: 127).
14. This discussion has been taken forward most recently by Matt Leonard, who 
casts the divergence between Nolan’s and Parson’s views in terms of different degrees 
of ontological parsimony one may want to have in one’s theory of space. Leonard 
writes:
The theories formulated by Varzi and Parsons are ideologically parsimoni­
ous: they only posit one primitive location relation. I’ll consider one possible way 
of reviving Nolan’s claim about the case by introducing multiple primitive loca­
tion relations [i.e., by taking both weak and exact location as primitive], but 
then show that this comes with a high cost: not only is this route ideologically 
costly, but we won’t have enough constraint on our theory of location, unless 
we posit some brute metaphysical necessities [about location]. (2014: 307–​8; 
my emphasis)

S toic   Gu nk
167
    167
First, Nolan treats divided gunk as if the parts “lost” their location; 
i.e., as if by having only loose location, the components of the blend 
were not in a place at all. There is no evidence in the surviving texts 
that the Stoics took this view. Additionally, this is, philosophically, 
a view that would need more explication and defense, for it is a puz­
zling one: how can division of body “dislocate” its parts, i.e., deprive 
them of their location?15 Second, and as already discussed in the 
modern philosophical literature, loose and strict locations are not 
definable independently from one another, contrary to what Nolan 
implicitly assumes. Finally, Nolan holds that as long as the mixants 
are loosely located in the mixture, there is no obstacle, as it were, to 
their being thoroughly blended with each other. But the “purity” of 
the mixants, which Nolan assumes, entails that they are still meta­
phorically “rubbing shoulders” in the blend, like wheat and lentils 
or pepper and salt. I conclude that Nolan does not offer a sound 
solution for how the Stoics could have accounted for colocation of 
bodies. The next question I want to address is: what does coloca­
tion explain in Stoic metaphysics? I will argue that it accounts for 
constitution of material bodies, property possession, and causation. 
I start with constitution.
6.3.  THE CONSTITUTION OF MATERIAL 
BODIES: WHAT IS ACTIVE AND WHAT 
IS PASSIVE
The Stoics inherit from Aristotle a metaphysical analysis of material 
objects in terms of matter and form, or in short, what is known as his 
hylomorphism. They posit two cosmological principles (archai) out 
of which everything is made. These first principles are, in Stoic ter­
minology, that which acts (pneuma or breath or god), and that which 
15. Nolan’s account of nonlocated gunk better fits those who believe that actual 
division into gunk destroys matter—​but Nolan does not commit himself either way 
on this issue.
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
168
168
is acted upon (hylē or matter).16 Both are everlasting, ungenerated, 
and indestructible. Hylē, the passive principle, is entirely unqualified 
in itself, but is at all times inseparably connected to and qualified 
by (in the sense I will explain below) pneuma.17 Pneuma also exists 
always as combined with hylē.18 Together pneuma and hylē make up 
the four elements (fire, air, earth, and water)19 and from them, ordi­
nary material objects.20 The two principles are thus described:
T8: Diogenes Laertius 7.134 (SVF 2.300, part 2.299) (LS 44B)
They [the Stoics] think that there are two principles of the uni­
verse, that which acts and that which is acted upon. That which is 
16. Some scholars (e.g., Cooper 2009) have made the point that the two funda­
mental entities the Stoics posit in their system, pneuma and apoios hylē, are both first 
principles but only pneuma is a cause, because it is that which acts. This interpretation 
identifies being a cause with being a causal agent. I disagree with it and take both to be 
causally powerful, for reasons that I explain in the present chapter.
17. I will use in what follows the transliteration of the Greek terms without trans­
lating them, as I have done with Anaxagoras’s nous.
18. I will not discuss here the phenomenon or ontology of conflagration, about 
which I remain skeptical, like other scholars, including, e.g., Vogt. I cannot enter here 
into a discussion of the relevant issues.
19. The division between pneuma and hylē is (in the doxography) to some degree 
contextual (just as the division of matter and form in Aristotle is to the same degree 
contextual). So, for instance,
T7: Galen, Plen. 7.525.9–​14 (SVF 2.439) (LS 47F)
The breathy substance is what sustains, and the material substance what is 
sustained. And so they say that air and fire sustain, and earth and water are 
sustained.
τὴν μὲν γὰρ πνευματικὴν οὐσίαν τὸ συνέχον, τὴν δὲ ὑλικὴν τὸ συνεχόμενον, ὅθεν 
ἀέρα μὲν καὶ πῦρ συνέχειν φασὶ, γῆν δὲ καὶ ὕδωρ συνέχεσθαι.
For present purposes I will use pneuma to refer, as it were collectively, to what the 
Stoics call in different contexts a reason, god, the active principle, sustaining power, 
breath, the mixture of fire and air; they are all one type of fundamental body. I will use 
hylē to refer to the propertyless substratum, the passive principle, water and earth, 
matter etc.; i.e., to the other type of fundamental body.
20. I take it that for the Stoics, qualitative difference and structure are primitives 
in their ontology. Both qualitative difference and structure are found primitively in 
god. That god is the active principle and matter is the passive one is also a primitive 
in the Stoic system.

S toic   Gu nk
169
    169
acted upon is unqualified substance, i.e. matter;21 that which acts 
is the reason in it, i.e. god. For this … constructs every single 
thing [composite] throughout all matter.22
Δοκεῖ δ’ αὐτοῖς ἀρχὰς εἶναι τῶν ὅλων δύο, τὸ ποιοῦν καὶ τὸ 
πάσχον. τὸ μὲν οὖν πάσχον εἶναι τὴν ἄποιον οὐσίαν τὴν ὕλην, τὸ 
δὲ ποιοῦν τὸν ἐν αὐτῇ λόγον τὸν θέον. τοῦτον γὰρ … διὰ πάσης 
αὐτῆς δημιουργεῖν ἕκαστα.
There are a number of issues to investigate in relation to this char­
acterization of the two principles. Two are of particular interest 
to us here (and have not yet received due attention in the second­
ary literature). We know that for the Stoics both pneuma and hylē 
are bodies (sōmata), because they are causally active.23 On the other 
hand, the way pneuma and hylē are characterized in T8 requires us 
to examine the question of what body is for the Stoics. Pneuma is 
corporeal (it is body, sōma); but has no matter (hylē) in its constitu­
tion. So in the Stoic conception, “body” cannot be what has matter. 
At the same time, hylē is propertyless (ἄποιος) and yet body (sōma), 
too. Hence being a body cannot depend on having any type of prop­
erty. What does “body” mean for the Stoics, then? We know that 
body is three-​dimensional (see, e.g., LS 45E) and causally powerful 
(see, e.g., LS 45A). I submit that the Stoics are operating on a concep­
tion of body that is pre-​Aristotelian and pre-​Platonic. On my under­
standing, “body” for the Stoics means extended causal powerfulness. 
(I argued in ­chapter 1 that Anaxagoras too thought of being physical 
in this way, as being a causal power extended in three dimensions.24 
21. Their conception of propertyless matter is a successor concept to Plato’s chora 
in the Timaeus, and Aristotle’s ultimate substratum in Metaphysics VII.3.
22. Propertyless matter is not space or generally the individuating principle of 
substances, according to the Stoics. Particulars are individuated by their respective 
individual forms, and are, in Stoic terminology, peculiarly qualified (see, e.g., LS 28I).
23. They are each body in a special sense of being somehow interdependent and 
thus each one incomplete without the other.
24. It is intuitive to think of such properties as heat or generally the opposites as 
extended causal powers; but it is less intuitive to think of a propertyless something 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
170
170
The difference is that Anaxagoras divided the causally powerful into 
kinds of powerfulness—​the infinitely many opposites—​while the 
[post-​Aristotelian] Stoics divided the causally powerful into the gen­
era of the active and the passive—​pneuma and hylē.)
A second issue of special interest for the present argument is 
the question of why the Stoics posited hylē in their system. Could 
the Stoics have done without it? It seems prima facie that pneuma 
has/​is everything the Stoics need to build the universe. My thought 
is that the Stoics could have done without hylē, save for their theo­
logical assumptions. On my interpretation of the Stoic metaphysical 
system, their main motivation for positing matter (hylē) as the pas­
sive principle in the constitution of the universe is what we could 
call “division of causal labor.” For the Stoics, pneuma is not only 
what is qualified and gives qualities to everything there is (thereby 
playing an metaphysical role equivalent to Aristotle’s forms), it is 
also divine. In the same way that Aristotle wanted god to be pure 
actuality with no matter, I submit, the Stoics want god to be purely 
active. Assuming that, to account for change, there needs to be in a 
system something that is active and something that is passive, if in 
the Stoic system there were no matter for god to act on, god itself 
would have needed to play both an active and a passive role. But it 
is not apt for the divine to be passive. So hylē, I submit, is posited to 
serve as the passive principle in the Stoic account of the constitution 
and changes of material objects.25 I take hylē to be for the Stoics the 
ultimate principle of passivity, in itself ἄποιος. I conjecture that pas­
sivity and propertylessness are conceptually connected, and that the 
Stoics must have thought along these lines: property, form, structure 
(i.e., hylē) as an extended causal power. Nevertheless, Plato did think this about the 
receptacle (in the Timaeus, which influenced the Stoics); the receptacle can be thought 
of as causally powerful empty space. The relevant arguments cannot be developed in 
this context.
25. There is some doxographic evidence (e.g., Calcidius 293, LS 44C) that suggests 
that the Stoics might have thought that matter is needed in their system, for the same 
reasons as Aristotle’s, to address Parmenidean concerns. To my mind this evidence 
misrepresents the Stoics’ view.

S toic   Gu nk
171
    171
(i.e., god) are ways of being active; they shape, form, qualify prop­
ertyless being; hence, they have an active constitutional-​causal 
role in being. So the ultimate principle of passivity cannot be quali­
fied.26 There is an interesting comparison of causal roles between 
Anaxagoras’s opposites and the Stoic one. As we will see, the Stoic 
conception of causation is fundamentally via compresence, namely, 
constitutionally. Both accounts are causal constitutionally, by 
compresence—​of opposites in the one case, and of pneuma/​hylē 
in the other, or of oppositely qualified objects (e.g., hot and cold 
ones).27 Their understanding of causation is to be contrasted to the 
Aristotelian conception of a causally interacting passive power suf­
fering change.
We know that for the Stoics all pneuma is colocated or blended 
with hylēthroughout nature, and interacts with it.28 For example 
we read:
T9: Alexander, On Mixture 216–​17 (LS 48C1, 4)
Chrysippus has the following theory of blending: he first assumes 
that the whole of substance is unified by a breath which pervades 
it all, and by which the universe is sustained and stabilized and 
made interactive with itself.
ἔστι δὲ ἡ Χρυσίππου δόξα περὶ κράσεως ἥδε. ἡνῶσθαι μὲν 
ὑποτίθεται τὴν σύμπασαν οὐσίαν, πνεύματός τινος διὰ πάσης 
αὐτῆς διήκοντος, ὑφ’ οὗ συνέχεταί τε καὶ συμμένει καὶ σύμπαθές 
ἐστιν αὑτῷ τὸ πᾶν.
The question for us to address is this: how do hylē and the pneuma 
interact with each other, and make up things, according to the Stoics? 
26. See the following section of the chapter for an account of the constitutive 
causal role pneuma has on hylē.
27. Both Anaxagoras and the Stoics also allow for causing movement, which is 
not constitutional.
28. This is an important point of difference with Anaxagoras’s mixtures, where 
the elements do not interact with each other.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
172
172
Their interaction cannot be efficient causation of the Aristotelian 
kind (which presupposes causal powers in both agent and patient; 
see, e.g., Physics III 3), because the propertyless matter has no pow­
ers or dispositions for causal interaction.29 Additionally, from T9 we 
learn that the relation of hylē and pneuma is presupposed for the uni­
verse to become causally interactive. So their relation could not be an 
instance of the same type of interaction as the one they are posited 
to explain, on pain of regress. To make progress in understanding the 
Stoics’ views regarding the interaction between hylē and the pneuma, 
we need to investigate further what the difference between active and 
passive bodies is supposed to be for the Stoics. I will argue that the 
active-​passive distinction, despite its Aristotelian “pedigree,” is very 
different from how Aristotle understands it. Consider, for instance, 
the blend of a pair of composite bodies (each of them made of pneuma 
and hylē) like water and wine. When blended, neither is passive or 
active on the other, notwithstanding the fact that they are causally 
interactive. In their interaction, neither operates on the other, bring­
ing about changes in the other (by contrast to, e.g., Aristotle’s con­
ception of causal powers). Causal interaction for the Stoics doesn’t 
require that the active “compromise” the passive.30 Rather, I under­
stand the terms active and passive as used by the Stoics as express­
ing an ontological asymmetry between pneuma-​hylē. Their asymmetry 
must be grounded in the Stoic view that pneuma comprises qualities, 
while hylē is qualityless. Furthermore, recall that, according to Stoics, 
hylē and pneuma can never separate. Although hylē and pneuma are 
physically blended the way that ordinary material objects are, e.g., 
wine and water, hylē and pneuma can never be found separately, while 
ordinary material objects can be separated even after having been 
29. The notion of hylē as bare potentiality is Aristotle’s, but such an entity, if there 
is one, is not capable of efficient causal interaction. Even if the Stoics made it a body, 
they still think of it as dependent on pneuma—​e.g., it is not separate and discrete in 
virtue of itself; it is always found in composition with pneuma. So its status of being a 
body does not ipso facto endow it with causal efficacy qua body.
30. The apoios hylē can be passive only in a receptive sense (à la Plato’s receptacle), 
rather than by suffering compromise (à la Aristotle’s patient of change).

S toic   Gu nk
173
    173
blended, as the Stoics mention in the sponge experiment (Stobaeus 
1.155; LS 48D).31 So there is an ontological difference between the 
two types of blend. Both are blends, but in addition, there must be a 
relation of ontological dependence holding between hylē and pneuma, 
which does not hold between ordinary material objects that blend, 
such as water and wine. Hylē and pneuma do not depend on each other 
to be or become bodies—​the Stoics presuppose that they are both 
bodies. Still, pneuma and hylē are different with respect to one being 
a qualified body and the other being a qualityless body. Although 
each of them as such is everlasting, they need to combine to gener­
ate our world of qualified individual material objects. I submit that 
the Stoics’ description of pneuma as active and hylē as passive is their 
way to express the interdependence of the two for the existence of the 
universe, which is all that exists. This is in line with what Alexander 
of Aphrodisias reports, when saying (in T10, immediately below; see 
also T9 above) that for the Stoics, the relation of pneuma to hylē is 
what sustains and stabilizes the universe, and makes it interactive 
(sumpathes) with itself. This shows their interrelation to be neces­
sary for the existence of the universe and for the existence of causal 
interaction in the universe.
T10: Alexander, On Mixture 225.1–​2 (LS 45H)
They [the Stoics] say that god is mixed with matter, pervad­
ing all of it and so shaping it, structuring it, and making it into 
the world.
μεμῖχθαι τῇ ὕλῃ λέγειν τὸν θεόν, διὰ πάσης αὐτῆς διήκοντα καὶ 
σχηματίζοντα αὐτήν, καὶ μορφοῦντα καὶ κοσμοποιοῦντα τούτῳ 
τῷ τρόπῳ.
So hylē and pneuma are (the only) active and passive bodies in the 
universe, and are always interlocked together everywhere in the 
31. An oiled sponge dropped into a container of water and wine would be able to 
separate these totally.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
174
174
universe. The interlocking is over and above their blending, since 
natural bodies that blend can separate, but hylē and pneuma cannot 
separate. In conclusion, on my reading (the tensile tenor of) pneuma 
has a constitutional-​causal role, rather than efficient causal one, with 
respect to hylē; and it fulfills it by means of its colocation with hylē.32 
This constitutional-​causal role results in the necessary colocation of 
hylē and pneuma. (By contrast, ordinary material substances, each of 
which is a blend of hylē and pneuma, are only contingently and not 
necessarily colocated.)
6.4.  SHARING SUBJECTS
The next question for us to address is: what results from the blend­
ing of two bodies? As we saw, there are two types of blending for 
the Stoics: between hylē and pneuma (see, e.g., Alexander, On Mixture 
216.14–​217.12; LS 48C1) and between blends of hylē and pneuma, 
which are the ordinary material objects in nature, e.g., water and 
wine (see Alexander, On Mixture 216.14–​217.12; LS 48C4–​12). Our 
sources have preserved a more detailed description of the latter 
type of blend, but we can reasonably assume that the two types of 
blend are underpinned by the same (physical) mechanism: pneuma 
pervades hylē the same way as composites pervade each other when 
thoroughly mixed. Let us examine first the case of the pneuma-​hylē 
32. My interpretation differs from an existing one that many share, represented, 
e.g., by A. A. Long and D. Sedley, who argue that
In order to do justice to Stoic intuitions, we should regard the two things that 
occupy the same space not as two determinate and independently existing bod­
ies, but as the two bodily functions (breadth and matter) which jointly constitute 
every determinate and independently existing body. (1987: 294, my emphasis)
This line of interpretation rightly points out that the Stoics use colocation, 
of breath (pneuma) and matter (hylē), to account for the composition of composite 
things. It is true that two functions of a body, e.g., elasticity and its malleability, can 
be coinstantiated in the same matter. This is unproblematic because functions are not 
material bodies, but qualifications of matter. But hylē and pneuma are not qualities; the 
Stoics claim they are coextended not as functions, but as bodies.
 

S toic   Gu nk
175
    175
blend. In general terms, we can say, with the Stoics, that in the blend 
pneuma endows hylē with properties and causal powers, but in a very 
specific way. The blending of propertyless hylē and pneuma results in 
the qualification of the composite, not the qualification of hylē itself. 
Hylē is by definition propertyless—​it is also everlasting. So it cannot 
survive acquiring properties. So how can properties be bestowed on 
propertyless matter? The Stoics solve this problem with blending: 
the propertyless can be colocated with the qualified, and this suffices 
for it to be empowered with properties and causal powers. The mech­
anism the Stoics posit is sui generis. For Aristotle, matter instanti­
ates a universal form; for Plato, objects participate in the Forms. For 
the Stoics, matter is colocated with, and interlocked with, (indepen­
dently) embodied form(s), i.e., pneuma. Alexander describes in some 
detail the Stoic account of blended composite substances, and we 
can lean on it to understand their account of the blend of simples 
(hylē-​pneuma) too:
T11: Alexander, On Mixture 216–​17 (LS 48C4–​9)
Other mixtures occur, he argues, when certain substances and 
their qualities are mutually coextended through and through, 
with the original substances and their qualities being preserved 
in such a mixture; this kind of mixture he calls specifically “blend­
ing”; … for the capacity to be separated again from one another 
is a peculiarity of blended substances, and this only occurs if they 
preserve their own natures in the mixture.
Since all this is so, they say there is nothing remarkable in the 
fact that certain bodies, when assisted by one another, are so 
mutually unified through and through that while being preserved 
together with their own qualities, they are mutually coextended 
as whole through and through, even if some of them are small 
in bulk and incapable by themselves of spreading so far and pre­
serving their own qualities. (My emphasis)
τὰς δέ τινας γίνεσθαι μίξεις λέγει δι’ ὅλων τινῶν οὐσιῶν τε καὶ 
τῶν τούτων ποιοτήτων ἀντιπαρεκτεινομένων ἀλλήλαις μετὰ τοῦ 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
176
176
τὰς ἐξ ἀρχῆς οὐσίας τε καὶ ποιότητας σώζειν ἐν τῇ μίξει τῇ τοιᾷδε, 
ἥντινα τῶν μίξεων κρᾶσιν ἰδίως εἶναι λέγει… . εἶναι γὰρ ἴδιον τῶν 
κεκραμένων τὸ δύνασθαι χωρίζεσθαι πάλιν ἀπ’ ἀλλήλων, ὃ μόνως 
γίνεται τῷ σώζειν ἐν τῇ μίξει τὰ κεκραμένα τὰς αὑτῶν φύσεις… . 
ὧν οὕτως ἐχόντων οὐδέν φασι θαυμαστὸν τὸ καὶ σώματά τινα 
βοηθούμενα ὑπ’ ἀλλήλων οὕτως ἀλλήλοις ἑνοῦσθαι δι’ ὅλων, ὡς 
αὐτὰ σωζόμενα μετὰ τῶν οἰκείων ποιοτήτων ἀντιπαρεκτείνεσθαι 
ἀλλήλοις δι’ ὅλων ὅλα, κἂν ᾖ τινα ἐλάττω τὸν ὄγκον καὶ μὴ δυνάμενα 
καθ’ αὑτὰ ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον χεῖσθαί τε καὶ σώζειν τὰς οἰκείας ποιότητας. 
οὕτω γὰρ καὶ τὸν κύαθον τοῦ οἴνου κιρνᾶσθαι τῷ ὕδατι τῷ πολλῷ 
βοηθούμενον ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ εἰς τὴν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ἔκτασιν.
I take the coextension and the mutual unification or interlocking of 
bodies mentioned in T11 to coincide temporally, rather than to hap­
pen sequentially,33 yet they are different events. The interlocking is the 
ontological dependence discussed above. As a result of colocation and 
interlocking, the blend itself comes to manifest the properties of one 
of the mixants. Whenever the mixants are hylē and pneuma, the hylē-​
pneuma composite becomes causally efficacious in virtue of the com­
presence of pneuma’s causal properties. I call this the empowerment of 
hylē with pneuma’s qualities. Although hylē does not come to possess 
the properties of pneuma, hylē can “use” them. So, e.g., the heat of the 
composite of hylē and pneuma is the totality of the heat present at the 
location of their blend, i.e., in this case, the heat of pneuma. In this way 
the composite of hylē and pneuma comes to be hot, and thereby the 
hylē too can be thought of as if coming to be hot.34 The Stoics talk as 
if hylē is qualified by the properties of its compresent pneuma. But, as 
33. While in T11 mutual unification is mentioned first and coextension second, 
in other passages from Alexander their order is reversed, and there is first coextension 
and then unification.
34. This way of thinking of how properties belong to a composite and to its mat­
ter is non-​Aristotelian. On the other hand, it is like the way Platonic Forms come to 
be present in the receptacle. The receptacle does not become hot (in an Aristotelian 
sense), but somehow “houses” heat in it. (For the Stoics, for hylē-​pneuma blends, 
pneuma is permanently housed in hylē; for causal blends, they are temporarily housed 
in each other.)

S toic   Gu nk
177
    177
I argued, in the blend, one of the entities is qualified,35 and the other is 
in the presence of the property, so long as the property continues to be 
present. The Stoics thus appear to distinguish between what we could 
call “owning a property” and “sharing its presence.” How do these rela­
tions differ metaphysically? I explain blends, whether between simple 
or composite substances, as a type of plural subject in relation to their 
property possession. An example of plural subjecthood, already dis­
cussed by Plato, is that you and I are two (but each of us is one and 
neither is two).36 Other instances of plural subjects are William and 
Mary reigning over England, or the Romans defeating the Gauls, or 
you and I playing a duet, etc. Stoic blends are a special kind of plu­
ral subjects. Typically, in case of plural subjecthood, the two or more 
subjects involved equally share one property-​instance. By contrast, 
blends comprise unequal partners with respect to the ownership of the 
properties—​one mixant owns it, and the other shares in its presence. 
The Stoics are thereby introducing a different model of property pos­
session, which I call sharing subjects, to distinguish them from plural 
subjects, allowing for inequality between partners.37
6.5.  CAUSATION
In the Stoic system, I submit, that there are two different types of 
empowerment resulting from colocation of bodies.38 I call them prop­
erty empowerment and structural empowerment respectively, and they 
35. Pneuma strictly does not possess properties but is properties. Otherwise the 
Stoics would need a further account of how pneuma comes to possess properties.
36.  Plural subjects were known to the ancients, at least since Plato’s Hippias 
Major; see Scaltsas (2006).
37. Exploring the potential applicability of the Stoics’ sharing-​subjects models 
beyond their metaphysics of blends is outside the scope of this chapter. Briefly, the 
sharing subjects model might offer to contemporary philosophy an ontology of com­
plex activities where the subjects in the activities have a variety of roles and contribu­
tion, such cases as birth; punishment; etc.
38. One advantage that the Stoic account of blending has, both for instantia­
tion of properties and for causal efficacy, is that it brings the active and the passive in 
 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
178
178
are both instances of causation. As we saw, there are two types of 
blend: blends of simple and of composite substances. Each of the two 
types of blend exhibits both types of empowerment. We have already 
discussed the hylē-​pneuma blends. Since pneuma is both qualified 
and structured, its colocation with propertyless hylē empowers hylē 
with properties and structure. The same model also accounts for the 
blend of composite substances that are themselves blends of hylē and 
pneuma, and I will focus on these in what follows.
6.5.1.  Property Empowerment
The example that follows is one that we would readily identify as one 
of efficient causation, where one composite substance makes another 
“acquire” a new property, in this case being hot. The mechanism is 
blending:
T12: Alexander, On Mixture 218 (LS 48C11)
They [the Stoics] say that fire as a whole passes through iron as a 
whole, while each of them preserves its own substance.
ἀλλὰ καὶ τὸ πῦρ ὅλον δι’ ὅλου χωρεῖν τοῦ σιδήρου λέγουσι, 
σώζοντος αὐτῶν ἑκατέρου τὴν οἰκείαν οὐσίαν.
The interaction between fire and iron does not involve any trans­
fer of a property trope from fire to iron—​there is only colocation 
of two bodies: it is the fire that is hot, and iron is in the presence 
of fire. Iron is a sharing subject with fire, sharing heat through 
colocation with fire and thereby becoming empowered with heat 
without possessing it.39 When iron and fire (which stands in for 
contact everywhere, not only on the surface. This pays justice to our intuitions that the 
agent must be present where the effect occurs. This is an Aristotelian intuition (placing 
the effect of the action of the mover in the moved), but to which (Aristotle’s) surface 
contact in causal interaction does not pay justice.
39. Fire and iron relate to heat in very different ways, even if at the phenomenal 
level they both seem hot and we think of both as hot.
 

S toic   Gu nk
179
    179
heat)40 are blended, iron is vicariously hot, through the presence 
of fire in it; when the fire moves out of the iron, heat moves out of 
the iron, too. The Stoics see the hot iron as an amalgam.41 When 
we say it becomes cool, they say fire departed. For the Stoics, a 
causal effect “stays with” its cause, in contrast to the Aristotelian, 
neo-​Aristotelian, and generally modern conception of the effect 
coming to belong to the passive agent by changing it. Relevant to 
this point is the following text:
T13: Clement, Stromata 8.9.33, 2 (LS 55I)
A “sustaining” cause42 is one during whose presence the effect 
remains and on whose removal the effect is removed.
συνεκτικὸν δέ ἐστιν αἴτιον, οὗ παρόντος μένει τὸ ἀποτέλεσμα καὶ 
αἰρομένου αἴρεται.
This is the way sharing subjects work, metaphysically. The effect 
(being hot) remains until the cause (fire) is removed.
6.5.2.  Structural Empowerment
To fully appreciate the philosophical significance of structural empow­
erment, it will be helpful to preface the discussion of the Stoics’ 
position with a very brief (and necessarily “gappy” in this context) 
excursus on how structure came into play in the history of metaphys­
ics preceding the Stoics. The Milesians tried to account for everything 
in nature using (instances of) opposite powers, such as the hot and 
cold, wet and dry. On the other hand, the identification and reification 
of structure in ontology can be traced as far back as the first genera­
tion of thinkers after the Milesians. Most notably, Parmenides and 
40. The Stoics do not distinguish, ontologically, fire from heat. For them there are 
no universals. Concepts are just descriptions of objects.
41. In physical terms, the heat of the two bodies, iron and fire, adds up while they 
are colocated, so that at the empirical level we find in that location hot iron.
42. The sustaining cause is typically for the Stoics pneuma.
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
180
180
Heraclitus built practically the whole of the universe out of structural 
features of being—​a sphere that is simple, in the case of Parmenides, 
and process, in the case of Heraclitus. The generation right after them 
distinguished between opposite-​properties and structure, and reified 
structure as equally primitively present in the universe as the oppo­
site forces. For instance, Philolaus distinguished between the limiters 
and the unlimiteds. Anaxagoras posited (in addition to the opposites) 
primitive seeds in the ontology, from which asymmetrical individu­
als grow, as we saw in ­chapter 5. Empedocles believed that parts of 
asymmetrical bodies exist primitively in the universe. Plato was the 
first to introduce structural universals, e.g., the Form of Bed. He also 
introduced a criterion to distinguish structures from opposites, which 
was a breakthrough in the history of metaphysics: structural univer­
sals are not comparatives, while opposites are; the hot can be hotter, 
but a human being cannot be more of a human being. Nevertheless, 
Plato was reluctant to introduce structural properties in his theory of 
Forms, and he never developed an ontological account of structural 
properties, but only posited them, occasionally. After Plato, Aristotle 
championed structural universals with his substantial forms.43
The Stoics too distinguish structural from opposite properties, 
and develop a different account of the causation for each. They asso­
ciate structural features and powers with pneuma. Alexander, for 
instance, says that when pneuma and hylē interact, “the whole of 
substance is unified by a breath which pervades it all, and by which 
the universe is sustained and stabilized, and made interactive with 
itself” (T9, my emphasis).44 All these causal effects, which result from 
blending of pneuma and hylē, concern structural properties of objects 
in nature. Pneuma has these powers primitively, and hylē is endowed 
with them when pneuma and hylē blend. What is more difficult to 
understand is the structural empowerment between composites of 
43. On this topic see, e.g., Scaltsas (1990).
44. The universe becomes interactive, not by acquiring new first-​order opposite 
properties, which the pneuma already has, but by the active and the passive coming 
together.

S toic   Gu nk
181
    181
hylē and pneuma, e.g., such as the blend of wine and water. Alexander 
gives three such examples:  frankincense being burned, gold being 
mixed with drugs, and wine being mixed with water.45
T14: Alexander, On Mixture 217 (LS 48C8)
The supporters of this theory [of blending] advance as grounds 
for their belief in its truth the fact that many bodies preserve 
their own qualities whether they are present in evidently larger 
or smaller volume (as can be seen in the case of frankincense; 
when burnt it becomes rarefied, but it preserves its own quality 
over a very large extent), and the further fact that many bodies, 
which by themselves cannot advance to a certain size, do so with 
the assistance of others. Gold certainly, through being mixed 
with certain drugs, can be spread and rarefied to an extent which 
is not possible when it is simply beaten… . In this way too a mea­
sure of wine is blended with a large amount of water and assisted 
by it to attain an extension of that size.
Τοῦ δὲ τοῦτο οἴεσθαι γίνεσθαι πίστεις φέρουσιν οἱ προιστάμενοι 
τῆσδε τῆς δόξης τό τε πολλὰ τῶν σωμάτων σώζειν τὰς ἑαυτῶν 
ποιότητας ἐπί τ’ ἐλαττόνων ἐναργῶν ὄγκων καὶ ἐπὶ μειζόνων 
ὄντα (ὡς ὁρᾶν ἔστιν ἐπὶ τοῦ λιβανωτοῦ, ὃς ἐν τῷ θυμιᾶσθαι 
λεπτυνόμενος ἐπὶ πλεῖστον τὴν αὑτοῦ φυλάσσει ποιότητα), ἔτι τε 
τὸ πολλὰ εἶναι, ἃ καθ’ ἑαυτὰ μὴ οἷά τε ὄντα ἐπί τι ἐλθεῖν μέγεθος ὑπ’ 
ἄλλων βοηθούμενα ἐπ’ αὐτὸ πρόεισι. τὸν γοῦν χρυσὸν ὑπό τινων 
μιγνυμένων φαρμάκων ἐπὶ πλεῖστον χεῖσθαί τε καὶ λεπτύνεσθαι, 
ἐφ’ ὅσον καθ’ αὑτὸν ἐλαυνόμενος οὐκ ἐδύνατο. … οὕτω γὰρ καὶ 
τὸν κύαθον τοῦ οἴνου κιρνᾶσθαι τῷ ὕδατι τῷ πολλῷ βοηθούμενον 
ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ εἰς τὴν ἐπὶ τοσοῦτον ἔκτασιν.
In the above passage we read that for the Stoics the blended sub­
stances “preserve their own qualities, whether they are present 
45. The first is a case of empowering via an event (burning) involving the other 
mixant (fire), while the second two cases are of empowerment by the other mixant’s 
structure.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
182
182
in evidently larger or smaller masses.” For instance, when a drop 
of wine comes to be present in the whole ocean, the wine survives 
and preserves its own properties, though it expands—​where expan­
sion is a structural alteration. How are the blended substances able 
to achieve what they do, in terms of structural modifications? The 
Stoics tell us something surprising, but in keeping with their the­
ory. Such blended substances are assisted in different ways by their 
comixants to achieve what they could not achieve on the strength 
of their own natures. Presumably in the case under discussion the 
Stoics thought that the bulk of the water enables the drop of wine to 
spread to an extent to which it could not spread on its own powers. 
What is important about this model is that it shows that the Stoics 
distinguish causation that results in property empowerment and cau­
sation that results in structural empowerment. In the case of water 
and wine, what the one mixant “gives” the other is not opposite prop­
erties, e.g., being hotter or softer, etc. —​it is that the structure of the 
one enables the other to alter structurally. In the second case, that of 
frankincense, two things happen: blending (and through structural 
empowerment, spreading) and burning. Burning destroys the body 
that has the frankincense, but the scent survives and blends with 
fire/​smoke, which then spreads. What this case shows is that struc­
tural empowerment has its limits: frankincense is enabled to spread 
over a very large extent only. Beyond that extent, its nature cannot 
sustain it and it subsequently dissipates. In that sense, structure 
is being treated by the Stoics dynamically, as a power—​it is effec­
tive over a range and then gives way. Finally, the example of gold, as 
described by Alexander in T14, is of particular interest to us, because 
it shows that the Stoics contrast the impact of efficient causation to 
blending: “Gold certainly, through being mixed with certain drugs, 
can be spread and rarefied to an extent which is not possible when 
it is simply beaten” (LS 48C8). The drugs blend with gold, thereby 
uniting with it and assisting it to spread while retaining its cohesive­
ness. Gold is thus structurally empowered to spread to an extent far 
beyond that which it could achieve on its own powers, even when 
beaten flat.

S toic   Gu nk
183
    183
6.6.  TYPES OF ONTOLOGICAL UNITY
Bringing together the interpretative results achieved so far in the 
chapter, I argue that the Stoics introduce the following types of onto­
logical unity, all resulting from the colocation and blending of bodies 
that exist as unlimitedly divided:
	
(i)	 Hylē-​pneuma unity. This is the type of unity that the uni­
verse as a whole enjoys qua composite of hylē and pneuma, 
which have always been and will always be inseparably 
blended and interlocked together.
	
(ii)	 Object unity. This is the type of unity that lumps of 
hylē and pneuma enjoy when they are physically unified 
and made into discrete material objects in the universe, 
through (the physical movements of) pneuma’s sustaining 
powers.
	
(iii)	 Causal unity. This is the unity that causally interacting 
material objects in the world enjoy, which may result 
in property empowerment or structural empowerment 
(or both).
It is very interesting to note that none of these types of ontological 
unity that colocation of gunk allows the Stoics to have in their sys­
tem are found in Anaxagoras’s system. For Anaxagoras, compresent 
opposites in different proportions are unified phenomenally into 
lumps of stuff; movement of opposites, caused by the vortex or by 
the causal effect of other opposites on them, contributes to different 
concentrations of opposites.
The three types of unity above are all cases of blending, for the 
Stoics, and are to be contrasted to a fourth one, fusion (synchusis), 
which is described, for instance, by Alexander thus:
T15: Alexander, On Mixture 216 (LS 48C3)
Other mixtures occur by through-​and-​through fusion of the 
substances themselves and their intrinsic qualities, which 
 

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
184
184
are destroyed together, as he [Chrysippus] says happens in 
the case of medical drugs when the things mixed together 
undergo mutual destruction and another body is generated 
out of them.
τὰς δέ τινας συγχύσει δι’ ὅλων τῶν τε οὐσιῶν αὐτῶν καὶ τῶν ἐν 
αὐταῖς ποιοτήτων συμφθειρομένων ἀλλήλαις, ὡς γίνεσθαί φησιν 
ἐπὶ τῶν ἰατρικῶν φαρμάκων κατὰ σύμφθαρσιν τῶν μιγνυμένων, 
ἄλλου τινὸς ἐξ αὐτῶν γεννωμένου σώματος.
Usually interpreters understand fusion as involving destruction 
of pneuma, on account of Alexander’s saying that the substances 
that are fused have their qualities destroyed, as, e.g., in the mix­
ture of medical drugs. I  argue for an alternative interpretation 
of fusion as a special type of causal interaction and mixing, and 
I  consider an advantage of my interpretation that it does not 
attribute to the Stoics the belief that pneuma, which is god, gets 
destroyed when fusion occurs. I take the Stoics to distinguish two 
types of causal interaction between material objects, one result­
ing in blending (which can bring about property and structural 
empowerment), and the other resulting in fusion. The criterion 
that differentiates these two types is this: the unity of the objects 
involved in causal interaction is put under stress, as it were, by the 
novel causal unity that the causal interaction brings about. Object 
unity and causal unity compete with each other for different out­
comes. If the object unity of the entities involved in causation is 
stronger than their causal unity, the objects and their qualities 
are preserved, in a blend. By contrast, if the object unity is weaker 
than the causal unity, the object and their qualities dissipate, in a 
fusion. So on my interpretation the destruction of the objects and 
their qualities in fusion is the loss of physical unity and continuity 
by each of the objects (rather than literal destruction), and hence 
their dispersal and disorganization. It is literally, as the Stoics call 
it, “confusion.”

S toic   Gu nk
185
    185
6.7.  CLOSING REMARKS
In this chapter my aim was to discuss an alternative gunk ontology 
in antiquity as a means for comparison and further understanding of 
Anaxagoras’s gunk ontology. I argued for the centrality of gunk in Stoic 
metaphysics and explicated its distinctive features. The Stoics’ guiding 
principle in ontology is the Eleatic Principle. Their existents are bodies 
that have the power to act and be acted upon. Gunk is fundamental 
for Stoic ontology, as it enables them to explain both the constitution 
of material objects and the causal interactions among them, with the 
physical mechanism that gunk makes possible, that of thorough blend­
ing. Bodies can blend through and through because, for the Stoics, all 
bodies exist as unlimitedly divided.46 The Stoics innovate metaphysi­
cally in their account of blending by holding that, when blended, the 
substances involved become sharing subjects of qualities and struc­
tural features. The model of sharing subjects explains how coloca­
tion has both physical and metaphysical impact on colocated bodies. 
It presupposes ontological dependence (the “mutual unification” in a 
blend), which is primitive in their system. By means of colocation and 
ontological dependence, the Stoics produced an account of the mutual 
empowerment of blended bodies which explains in their system the 
constitution of material objects (hylē and pneuma), their composition 
(e.g., water and wine), and their causal interaction (e.g., iron and fire). 
In so doing, the Stoics developed a more complex metaphysical sys­
tem than that of Anaxagoras, the first gunk lover in Western thought. 
It is a significant achievement that the Stoics could account for core 
and complex metaphysical issues without reifying abstract properties 
and universals, contrary to what their towering predecessors Plato 
and Aristotle had done, and it is philosophically and historically inter­
esting that the Stoic account is in significant ways in keeping with 
Anaxagoras, rather than with their immediate predecessors.47
46. But not all bodies blend; see footnote 9.
47. This chapter draws largely on my paper “Stoic blends”, forthcoming in the 
Proceedings of the Boston Area Colloquium in Ancient Philosophy.
 

186
186
Conclusions
Anaxagoras posits as the foundation of his philosophical system an 
ontology of causal powers which includes opposite physical qualities 
(such as the hot, the cold, etc.), as well as intelligent powers (such 
as the seeds and nous). These different types of powers do different 
metaphysical work in Anaxagoras’s system: the opposites serve as 
the fundamental building blocks of all there is,1 the seeds provide 
structures for the growth of living beings, and nous embodies the 
cosmic plan for everything in the universe. Anaxagoras’s powers are 
particular (tropes, in our modern terminology),2 and remain eter­
nally the same, both in multitude and in being. Importantly, there 
is no distinction in his system between powers in potentiality and 
activated powers—​his powers are permanently exercising their con­
stitutional causal role.
Anaxagoras’s world abides by Parmenidean ontological princi­
ples. Yet it is a world which has an origin and admits of change (in 
a qualified sense). The world originated from a primordial mixture 
of all opposites, which nous set in motion by means of a cosmic vor­
tex. Since then, the opposites have been dispersing in space, and in 
so doing they have clustered in different concentrations into bun­
dles, making up kinds of stuff, and also around seeds, making up 
organisms. Stuffs and organisms are what we would call mereologi­
cal composites, and in this sense only, they are new entities in the 
system. Composition is unrestricted for Anaxagoras, a position also 
1. Except nous, which is unmixed.
2. They are not instantiated universal properties.
 
 

Con c lusion s
187
    187
motivated by his endorsement of Parmenides’s principles. The oppo­
sites can recombine into any sort of bundle, each of which contains 
all the kinds of opposites, but it contains some of the opposites in 
higher concentrations than others. This makes it possible that any­
thing can literally “come out of” anything, without there ever being 
the sort of creation (or destruction) of being which Parmenides had 
vetoed. Anaxagoras expresses this position by saying there is a share 
of everything in everything.
This brings us to the crux of Anaxagoras’s system. I have shown 
that the existing interpretations of Anaxagoras’s tenet of everything 
being in everything encounter insurmountable textual and philo­
sophical difficulties. I have argued for an alternative interpretation, 
not in terms of containment, but in terms of the necessary compres­
ence of the shares of all the kinds of opposites. The extant texts 
support this latter way of understanding Anaxagoras’s thought. 
But how can the opposites be compresent with each other, every­
where? To address this, Anaxagoras pioneers a conception of the 
building blocks of reality, the opposites, as unlimitedly divided. This 
requirement makes his power ontology unique. Each given share 
of an opposite has proper parts into which it is divided (where its 
proper parts are opposites of the same kind).3 From this it follows 
that for any given share of an opposite, its parts are endlessly many. 
Furthermore, it follows that the parts of each opposite approach 
zero extension: the series of divisions of each share of an opposite is 
unlimited, but always remaining within the domain of the extended. 
The shares of the opposites can thus overlap with every other in 
space, being nearly extensionless. Since each kind of opposite is 
unlimited in amount, and since their shares can overlap, each kind 
of opposite can be everywhere, and thus there is no region of space 
that will lack any kind of being in it. Thus, no change in the uni­
verse needs to be explained by the creation of being from nonbeing 
in Anaxagoras’s system, since every kind of being is everywhere in 
the universe.
3. Recall that the opposites are homoeomers.

Ev e ry t h i n g i n Ev e ry t h i n g
188
188
In holding this view, Anaxagoras’s ontology represents a land­
mark in the history of metaphysics. We might call Anaxagoras the 
first gunk lover, where gunk is the term that modern metaphysicians 
use to refer to the view that the building blocks of reality (the oppo­
sites, in the case of Anaxagoras) are atomless. Anaxagoras thought of 
the opposites as gunky, and used their ontology to solve all sorts of 
metaphysical problems about things, and give an analysis of change 
in the world. The problem his system faces is that the gunky nature 
of opposites is the only metaphysical tool Anaxagoras uses to explain 
metaphysical phenomena in his system, including the formation of 
different kinds of stuff. This is, I think, one explanation too many, 
and one which gunk could not deliver. But Anaxagoras did not know 
this, and could not have known it, in view of the fact that the under­
standing he was missing required two more millennia of mathemati­
cal progress to be sufficiently grasped.
Anaxagoras is not merely the first to hold a view that modern 
philosophers, too, are interested in. He puts forward a conception 
of gunk that has not even been considered (yet) in contemporary 
philosophy—​we explore material gunk, while Anaxagoras posited 
qualitative gunk at the foundation of his system. Investigating his 
arguments (to the extent to which we can reconstruct them, given 
the scarcity of the surviving texts) gives us a new way to think 
about gunk, and is thus of value both for the sake of understanding 
Anaxagoras’s thought and for expanding our present philosophical 
horizons.
Interestingly there is one other philosophical system in antiquity 
that is grounded on the same conception of reality as atomless: the 
Stoics’. The considerations leading the Stoics to this assumption 
are very different from Anaxagoras’s, and are not motivated by 
Parmenidean concerns. Coming after Plato and Aristotle, the Stoics 
aim to develop a corporealist account of reality that programmati­
cally has no room or need for abstraction and universals. Since Plato, 
and particularly Aristotle, and all the way to our current age, meta­
physicians have overcome the restrictions imposed on philosophi­
cal explanations by physical laws by introducing abstract entities 

Con c lusion s
189
    189
such as universal properties and underlying substrata, which can 
be individuated only by abstraction. These entities are not subject 
to natural laws, such as that two material objects cannot occupy the 
same space. For instance, matter and form for Aristotle are abstract 
entities4 that make up material objects as hylomorphic composites. 
By and large, abstraction is the operation that supports most of the 
ancients’, as well as our explanatory practice in metaphysics. But 
Anaxagoras and the Stoics are two exceptions. They developed an 
alternative (and formidable) way to account for the constitution of 
objects which enables them to give metaphysical explanations free of 
abstract entities: this is unlimited division. Unlimited division is not 
abstraction—​nevertheless, it can explain spatial overlap of physi­
cal entities, and overlap or compresence provides a physical mech­
anism for accounting for various core metaphysical issues (such as 
the composition of material objects, their property possession, and 
causation). Exploring this strand of thought in ancient metaphysics 
enables us to discover new connections between thinkers that are 
historically far apart and yet share core philosophical assumptions. 
In this way, we illuminate a pattern present within the various philo­
sophical accounts of reality that have been proposed throughout the 
ages, one that, on account of the towering contributions of Plato and 
Aristotle and their significant impact on the history of metaphysics, 
has remained hidden from our attention.
4. I argue for this interpretation in Marmodoro (2009 and 2013).

190

    191
191
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Algra, K. 1994. Concepts of Space in Greek Thought. Leiden: Brill.
Allen, R. E., and D. J. Furley, eds. 1970, 1975. Studies in Presocratic Philosophy. 
2 vols. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.
Armstrong, D. M. 2005. “Four Disputes about Properties.” Synthese 144 
(3), 1–​12.
Bäck, A. 2014. Aristotle’s Theory of Abstraction. Cham: Springer.
Barbara, V. 2015. Potentiality: From Dispositions to Modality. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Barnes, J. 1979. The Presocratic Philosophers. 2 vols.; vol. 1 revised edition, 
1982 London: Routledge.
—​—​—​, ed. 1984. The Complete Works of Aristotle. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
——— . 2001. Early Greek Philosophers. 2nd ed. London: Penguin.
Bird, A. 2007. Nature’s Metaphysics: Laws and Properties. New York: Oxford 
University Press.
——— . 2013. “Limitations of Power.” In R. Groff and J. Greco, eds., Powers 
and Capacities in Philosophy: The New Aristotelianism, 25–​47. New York: 
Routledge.
Brentlinger, J. 1972. “Incomplete Predicates and the Two-​World Theory of 
the Phaedo.” Phronesis 17 (1), 61–​79.
Burnet, J. 1930. Essays and Addresses. New York: Macmillan. Co.
——— . 1982. Early Greek Philosophy. London and Edinburgh:  Adam and 
Charles Black.
Casati, R., and A. C. Varzi. 1999. Parts and Places: The Structures of Spatial 
Representation. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
 

Bi bl iogr a ph y
192
192
Caston, V., and D. W. Graham, eds. 2002. Presocratic Philosophy: Essays in 
Honour of Alexander Mourelatos. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Cherniss, H. 1935. Aristotle’s Criticism of Presocratic Philosophy. Baltimore: 
John Hopkins Press.
Cooper, J. 2009. “Chrysippus on Physical Elements.” In R. Salles, ed., God and 
Cosmos in Stoicism. New York: Oxford University Press.
Cooper, J. M. 2004. “A Note on Aristotle on Mixture.” In F. De Haas and 
J. Mansfeld, eds., Aristotle’s “On Creation and Corruption”, Book 
I: Symposium Aristotelicum, 315–​26. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Cooper, J., ed., and D. S. Hutchinson, associate ed. 1997. Plato: Complete 
Works. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Cornford, F. M. 1930. “Anaxagoras’ Theory of Matter.” Classical Quarterly 24, 
14–​30, 83–​95. Reprinted in Allen and Furley 1975, 275–​322.
—​—​—​. 1934. “Innumerable Worlds in Presocratic Philosophy.” Classical 
Quarterly 28, 1–​16.
Curd, P. 2002. “The Metaphysics of Physics:  Mixture and Separation in 
Anaxagoras and Empedocles.” In V. Gaston and D. Graham, eds., Presocratic 
Philosophy: Essays in Honour of A. P. D. Mourelatos, 139–​58. Aldershot: Ashgate.
—​—​—​. 2008. “Anaxagoras and the Theory of Everything.” In P. Curd and 
D. W. Graham, eds., The Oxford Handbook of Presocratic Philosophy, 
231–49. New York: Oxford University Press.
—​—​—​. 2010. Anaxagoras of Clazomenae: Fragments and Testimonia. A Text and 
Translation with Notes and Essays. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
Curd, P., and D. W. Graham, eds. 2008. The Oxford Handbook of Presocratic 
Philosophy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Curd, P., and R. McKirahan. 2011. A Presocratics Reader: Selected Fragments 
and Testimonia. 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Hackett.
Davison, J. A. 1953. “Protagoras, Democritus, and Anaxagoras.” Classical 
Quarterly 3, 33–​45.
de Harven, V. N.d. “Stoic Incorporeals: A Grounded Account.” Unpublished 
manuscript.
Denyer, N. 1983. “Plato’s Theory of Stuffs.” Philosophy 58, 315–​27.
Devereux, D. 1997. “Anaxagoras.” In D. J. Zeyl, ed., Encyclopedia of Classical 
Philosophy, 27–​30. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Diels, H., and W. Kranz. 1972. Die Fragmente der Vorsokratiker. 6th ed. Reprint, 
Zurich: Weidmann.
Forrest, P. 2013. The Necessary Structure of the All-​Pervading Aether. Boston: 
Walter de Gruyter.
Furley, D. J. 1956. “The Early History of the Concept of Soul.” Bulletin of the 
Institute of Classical Studies 3, 1–​18.
—​—​—​. 1976. “Anaxagoras in Response to Parmenides.” In R. A. Shiner and 
J. King-​Farlow, eds., New Essays on Plato and the Presocratics. Canadian 

Bi bl iogr a ph y
193
    193
Journal of Philosophy, suppl. vol. 2, 61–​85. Reprinted in Furley, Cosmic 
Problems: Essays on Greek and Roman Philosophy of Nature (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1989).
—​—​—​. 1987. “The Greek Cosmologists.” In The Formation of the Atomic 
Theory and Its Earliest Critics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—​—​—​. 1989. “Anaxagoras in Response of Parmenides.” In Cosmic Problems: 
Essays on Greek and Roman Philosophy of Nature, 47–​65. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
—​—​—​. 2002. “Anaxagoras, Plato, and the Naming of Parts.” In V. Caston 
and D. Graham, eds., Presocratic Philosophy: Essays in Honour of A. P. D. 
Mourelatos, 139–​58. Aldershot: Ashgate.
Furth, M. 1991. “A ‘Philosophical Hero’? Anaxagoras and the Eleatics.” 
Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 9, 95–​129.
Gilmore, C. 2014. “Location and Mereology.” In Edward N. Zalta, ed., Stanford 
Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Fall 2014 ed.
Graham, D. W. 1994. “The Postulates of Anaxagoras.” Apeiron 27, 77–​121.
—​—​—​. 1999. “Empedocles and Anaxagoras: Responses to Parmenides.” In 
A. A. Long, ed., Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy, 159–​80. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
—​—​—​. 2004. “Was Anaxagoras a Reductionist?” Ancient Philosophy 24, 1–​18.
—​—​—​. 2013. Science before Socrates: Parmenides, Anaxagoras, and the New 
Astronomy. New York: Oxford University Press.
Guthrie, W. K. C. 1965. A History of Greek Philosophy. Vol. 2, The Presocratic 
Tradition from Parmenides to Democritus. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Hawthorne, J., and B. Weatherson. 2004. “Chopping Up Gunk.” Monist 87, 
339–​50.
Hudson, H. 2007. “Simples and Gunk.” Philosophy Compass 2 (1), 291–​302.
Hussey, E. 1972. The Presocratics. London: Duckworth.
Inwood, B. 1986. “Anaxagoras and Infinite Divisibility.” Illinois Classical 
Studies 11, 17–​33.
Judson, L., and V. Karasmanes, eds. 2006. Remembering Socrates: Philosophical 
Essays. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Kerferd, G. B. 1969. “Anaxagoras and the Concept of Matter before Aristotle.” 
Bulletin of the John Rylands Library 52, 129–​43. Reprinted in A.  P. D. 
Mourelatos, ed., The Pre-​Socratics: A Collection of Critical Essays (Garden 
City, NY: Anchor Press, 1974), 489–​503.
Kirk, G. S., J. E. Raven, and M. Schofield. 1983. The Presocratic Philosophers: 
A Critical History with a Selection of Texts. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
Knorr, W. R. 1982. “Infinity and Continuity: The Interaction of Mathematics 
and Philosophy in Antiquity.” In Norman Kretzmann, ed., Infinity and 

Bi bl iogr a ph y
194
194
Continuity in Ancient and Medieval Thought, 112–​45. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press.
Kretzmann, N., ed. 1982. Infinity and Continuity in Ancient and Medieval 
Thought. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Laks, A. 1993. “Mind’s Crisis:  On Anaxagoras’ Nous.” Southern Journal of 
Philosophy 31 suppl., 19–​38.
Lanza, D. 1963. “Le omeomerie nella tradizione dossografica anassagorea.” 
La Parola del Passato 18, 256–​93.
Laurence, S., and C. MacDonald, eds. 1998. Contemporary Readings in the 
Foundations of Metaphysics. Oxford: Blackwell.
Leonard, M. 2014. “Locating Gunky Water and Wine.” Ratio 27 (3), 306–​15.
Lesher, J. H. 1995. “Mind’s Knowledge and Powers of Control in Anaxagoras 
DK B12.” Phronesis 40, 120–​42.
Lewis, D. 1991. Parts of Classes. Oxford: Blackwell.
Lewis, E. 2000. “Anaxagoras and the Seeds of a Physical Theory.” Apeiron 
33, 1–​23.
Lewis, F. A. 2013. How Aristotle Gets By in “Metaphysics Zeta”. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Liddell, H., G. R. Scott, and H. S. Jones, eds. 1968. A Greek-​English Lexicon. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Lloyd, G. E. R. 1964. “Hot and Cold, Dry and Wet in Early Greek Thought.” 
Journal of Hellenic Studies 84, 92–​106.
Long, A. A., ed. 1999. The Cambridge Companion to Early Greek Philosophy. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Long, A. A., and D. N. Sedley. 1987. The Hellenistic Philosophers. Vol. 1, 
Translations of the Principal Sources with Philosophical Commentary. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Manley D., and R. Wasserman. 2008. “On Linking Dispositions and 
Conditionals.” Mind 17 (465), 59–​84.
Mann, W. E. 1980. “Anaxagoras and the Homoiomerē.” Phronesis 35 (3), 
228–​49.
Mansfeld, J. 1980. “Anaxagoras’ Other World.” Phronesis 25, 1–​4.
—​—​—​. 1990. “The Chronology of Anaxagoras’ Athenian Period and the Date 
of his Trial.” In Studies in the Historiography of Greek Philosophy, 264–306. 
Assen: Van Gorcum 1990.
Markosian, N. 2004. “Simples, Stuff, and Simple People.” Monist 87 (3), 
405–​28.
Marmodoro, A. 2007. “The Union of Cause and Effect in Aristotle: Physics III 
3.” Oxford Studies in Ancient Philosophy 32, 205–​32.
—​—​—​. 2009. “Do Powers Need Powers to Make Them Powerful? From 
Pandispositionalism to Aristotle.” History of Philosophy Quarterly 26 (4), 
337–​52.

Bi bl iogr a ph y
195
    195
—​—​—​, ed. 2010. The Metaphysics of Powers:  Their Grounding and Their 
Manifestations. New York: Routledge.
—​—​—​. 2013. “Aristotle’s Hylomorphism without Reconditioning.” 
Philosophical Inquiry 37 (1–​2), 5–​22.
—​—​—​. 2014a. Aristotle on Perceiving Objects. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—​—​—​. 2014b. “Causation without Glue:  Aristotle on Causal Powers.” 
In C. Natali, C. Viano, and M. Zingano, eds., Les quatre causes 
d’Aristotle: Origines et interprétations, 221–​46. Louvain: Peeters.
—​—​—​. 2015. “Anaxagoras’s Qualitative Gunk.” British Journal for the History 
of Philosophy 23 (3), 402–​22.
—​—​—​. 2017. “Potentiality in Aristotle’s Metaphysics.” Forthcoming in 
K. Engelhard and M. Quante, eds., The Handbook of Potentiality. Boston: 
Springer.
—​—​—​. 2017. “Aristotelian Powers at Work: Reciprocity without Symmetry in 
Causation.” Forthcoming in J. Jacobs, ed., Causal Powers. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
—​—​—​. “Stoic Blends.” Forthcoming in Proceedings of the Boston Area 
Colloquium in Ancient Philosophy.
Mathewson, R. 1958. “Aristotle and Anaxagoras: An Examination of F. M. 
Cornford’s Interpretation.” Classical Quarterly 8, 67–​81.
Matthews, G. 2002. “On the Idea of There Being Something of Everything in 
Everything.” Analysis 62 (1), 4–​10.
—​—​—​. 2005. “Anaxagoras Re-​defended.” Ancient Philosophy 25, 245–​46.
McKoy, J., ed. 2013. Early Greek Philosophy: The Presocratics and the Emergence 
of Reason. Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press.
McKirahan, R. D. 1994. Philosophy before Socrates. An Introduction with Texts 
and Commentary. Indianapolis: Hackett.
McKitrick, J., A. Marmodoro, S. Mumford, and R. L. Anjum. 2013. “Causes 
as Powers.” Book symposium on S. Mumford and R. L. Anjum, Getting 
Causes from Powers (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011). Metascience 
22, 545–​59.
Molnar, G. 2003. Powers: A Study in Metaphysics. Edited by Stephen Mumford. 
New York: Oxford University Press.
Mourelatos, A. P. D. 1968. “The Relation of Anaxagoras and Empedocles.” 
Journal of Hellenic Studies 88, 93–​113.
—​—​—​, ed. 1974. The Pre-​Socratics: A Collection of Critical Essays. Garden City, 
NY: Anchor Press. Reprinted with editor’s supplement and bibliographi­
cal addenda, Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1993.
—​—​—​. 1987. “Quality, Structure, and Emergence in Later Presocratic 
Philosophy.” In J. Cleary, ed., Proceedings of the Boston Area Colloquium 
in Ancient Philosophy, vol. 2, 127–​94. Lanham, MD: University Press of 
America.

Bi bl iogr a ph y
196
196
Mumford, S. 2003. Dispositions. New York: Oxford University Press.
Mumford, S., and R. L. Anjum. 2011. Getting Causes from Powers. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Nadler, S., ed. 1993. Causation in Early Modern Philosophy:  Cartesianism, 
Occasionalism, and Pre-​established Harmony. Penn State University Press.
Nolan, D. 2004. “Classes, Worlds and Hypergunk.” Monist 87 (3), 303–​21.
—​—​—​. 2006. “Stoic Gunk.” Phronesis 51 (2), 162–​83.
O’Brien, D. 1968. “The Relation of Anaxagoras and Empedocles.” Journal of 
Hellenic Studies 88, 99–​113.
O’Neil, E. 1993. “Influxus Physicus.” In S. Nadler, ed., Causation in Early Modern 
Philosophy: Cartesianism, Occasionalism, and Pre-​established Harmony. 
University Park: Penn State University Press.
Palmer, J. 2009. Parmenides and Presocratic Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Parsons, J. 2007. “Theories of Location.” In D. W. Zimmerman, ed., Oxford 
Studies in Metaphysics, vol. 3, 201–​32. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pepe, L. 1991. “L’infinito e la mescolanza: Un aspetto della critica di Aristotele 
ad Anassagora.” Discorsi 11, 325–​29.
Raven, J. E. 1954. “The Basis of Anaxagoras’ Cosmology.” The Classical 
Quarterly 4 (3/​4), 123–​37.
Reesor, M. E. 1960. “The Meaning of Anaxagoras.” Classical Philology 55, 1–​8.
Reeve, C. D. C. 1981. “Anaxagorean Panspermism.” Ancient Philosophy 12, 
89–​108.
Riemenschneider, O. 2007. “Simple Analytic Proofs of Some Abstract Versions of 
the Prime Number Theorem.” In J.-​P. Brasselet, S. Ishii, T. Suwa, and M. Vaquie, 
eds., Advanced Studies in Pure Mathematics, vol. 56, Singularities:  Niigata-​
Toyama 2007, 249–​83. Tokyo: Mathematical Society of Japan.
Rodriguez-​Pereyra, G. 2002. Resemblance Nominalism:  A  Solution to the 
Problem of Universals. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Russell, J. S. 2008. “The Structure of Gunk:  Adventures in the Ontology 
of Space.” In D. W. Zimmerman, Oxford Studies in Metaphysics, vol. 4, 
248–74. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Salles, R., ed. 2009. God and Cosmos in Stoicism. New York: Oxford University 
Press.
Scaltsas, T. 1994. Substances and Universals in Aristotle’s Metaphysics. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press.
Scaltsas, T. 2006. “Sharing a Property.” In L. Judson and V. Karasmanes, eds., 
Remembering Socrates: Philosophical Essays, 142–​56. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press.
Scaltsas, T. 2016. “Relations as Plural Predications.” In A. Marmodoro and 
D. Yates, eds., The Metaphysics of Relations, 19–​35. Oxford:  Oxford 
University Press.

Bi bl iogr a ph y
197
    197
Schofield, M. 1980. An Essay on Anaxagoras. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press.
—​—​—​. 1982. Review of David Sider, ed., The Fragments of Anaxagoras. 
Classical Review 32, 189–​91.
—​—​—​. 1996. “Anaxagoras’ Other World Revisited.” In K. Algra, P. W. Van 
der Horst, and D. T. Runia, eds., Polyhistor: Studies in the History and 
Historiography of Ancient Philosophy Presented to Jaap Mansfeld on His 
Sixtieth Birthday, 3–​20. Leiden: Brill.
—​—​—​. 1998. “Anaxagoras.” In E. Craig, general ed., Routledge Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy, 249–​54. New York: Routledge.
Sedley, D. 2007. Creationism and Its Critics in Antiquity. Berkley: University 
of California Press.
Sider, D. 2005. The Fragments of Anaxagoras: Edited with an Introduction and 
Commentary. 2nd ed. Sankt Augustin: Academia Verlag.
Sider, T. 1993. “Van Inwagen and the Possibility of Gunk.” Analysis 53, 
285–​89.
Simons, P. 1987. Parts: A Study in Ontology. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
—​—​—​. 1994. “Particulars in Particular Clothing:  Three Trope Theories of 
Substance.” Philosophy and Phenomenological Research 54 (3): 553–​75.
Sisko, J. E. 2003. “Anaxagoras’ Parmenidean Cosmology:  Worlds within 
Worlds within the One.” Apeiron 36, 87–​114.
—​—​—​. 2005. “Anaxagoras and Recursive Refinement.” Ancient Philosophy 25 
(2), 239–​45.
—​—​—​. 2009. “On the Question of Homeomerity in Anaxagorean Physics.” 
Apeiron 42, 89–​103.
—​—​—​. 2010a. “Anaxagoras betwixt Parmenides and Plato.” Philosophy 
Compass 5–​6, 432–​42.
—​—​—​. 2010b. “Anaxagoras on Matter, Motion, and Multiple Worlds.” 
Philosophy Compass 5–​6, 443–​54.
—​—​—​. 2012. “Anaxagoras and Empedocles in the Shadow of Elea.” In 
J. Warren and F. Sheffield, eds., The Routledge Companion to Ancient 
Philosophy, 49–​64. London: Routledge.
Sorabji, R. 1988. Matter, Space, and Motion. Theories in Antiquity and Their 
Sequel. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
Stokes, M. C. 1965. “On Anaxagoras.” Archiv fur Geschichte der Philosophie 
47, “Part I: Anaxagoras’ Theory of Matter,” 1–​19; “Part II: The Order of 
Cosmogony,” 217–​50.
Strang, C. 1963. “The Physical Theory of Anaxagoras.” Archiv fur Geschichte 
der Philosophie 45, 101–​18. Reprinted in Allen and Furley 1975, 
361–​80.
Tannery, P. 1886. “La théorie de la matière d’Anaxagore.” Revue Philosophique 
22, 255–​74.

Bi bl iogr a ph y
198
198
Taylor, C. C. W. 1997. “Anaxagoras and the Atomists.” In C. C. W. Taylor, ed., 
The Routledge History of Philosophy, vol. 1, From the Beginning to Plato, 
208–​43. New York: Routledge.
Teloh, H. 1975. “Self-​Predication on Anaxagorean Causation in Plato.” 
Apeiron 9 (2), 15–​23.
Teodorsson, S. T. 1982. Anaxagoras’ Theory of Matter. Studia graeca et latina 
gothoburgensia 43. Göteborg: Acta universitatis gothoburgensis.
Todd, R. 1976. Alexander of Aphrodisias on Stoic Physics: A Study of the “De 
mixtione” with Preliminary Essays, Text, Translation and Commentary. 
Leiden: Brill.
Varzi, A. 2007. “Spatial Reasoning and Ontology:  Parts, Wholes, and 
Locations.” In Marco Aiello, I. E. Pratt-​Hartmann, and Johan 
F.  A. K. van Benthem, eds., Handbook of Spatial Logics, 945–​1038. 
Dordrecht: Springer.
—​—​—​. 2016. “Mereology.” In Edward N. Zalta, ed., Stanford Encyclopedia of 
Philosophy. Spring 2016 ed.
Verlag, F. S. 1975. “Doxographica Anaxagorea.” Hermes 103, 1–​24.
Vita, V. 1984. “Democritus and Geometric Indivisibles.” Bollettino di Storia 
delle Scienze Matematiche 4 (2), 3–​23.
Vlastos, G. 1950. “The Physical Theory of Anaxagoras.” Philosophical Review 
59 (1), 31–​57.
—​—​—​. 1975. “One World or Many in Anaxagoras?” In Allen and Furley 
1975, 354–​60.
Vogt, K. 2009. “Sons of the Earth:  Are the Stoics Metaphysical Brutes?” 
Phronesis 54, 36–​54.
Warren, J. 2007a. “Anaxagoras on Perception, Pleasure, and Pain.” Oxford 
Studies in Ancient Philosophy 33, 19–​54.
—​—​—​. 2007b. Presocratics. Stocksfield: Acumen.
Williams, D. C. 1997. “On the Elements of Being I.” In D. H. Mellor and 
A. Oliver, eds., Properties, 112–​24. New York: Oxford University Press. 
First published Review of Metaphysics 7 (1) (1953), 3–​18.
Zimmerman, D. 1996a. “Could Extended Objects Be Made Out of Simple Parts? 
An Argument for ‘Atomless Gunk.’” Philosophy and Phenomenological 
Research 56 (1), 1–​29.
——— . 1996b. “Indivisible Parts and Extended Objects: Some Philosophical 
Episodes from Topology’s Prehistory.” Monist 79, 148–​80.

    199
199
GENERAL INDEX
abstraction, 21–​22, 43, 45, 188–​89. 
See also metaphysics
accumulation, 67–​70
activity, 136;
cognitive, 136. See also powers
actuality, 22, 33–​34, 37, 108–​9, 170, 
186. See also Aristotle;
potentiality
aether/​aither, 14, 19, 109. See also stuffs
aggregation, 14, 29, 39, 42. See also 
mereological sum;
totality
air, 19, 109, 168. See also elements;
stuffs
aleph-​0 cardinality, 97. See also infinity
aleph-​1 cardinality, 90, 97–​98, 126, 
90n24. See also infinity
Alexander of Aphrodisias, 89, 162, 173, 
175, 180–​84. See also Aristotle;
Stoics
alteration, 25, 27, 30–​31, 45, 60;
structural, 182. See also change
Anaxagoras, 1–​156, 161, 169–​71, 183, 
185–​89, 1n1, 4n6, 4nn8–​9, 5n10, 
10n22, 11n1, 13n3, 14n5, 19n11, 
20n15, 23n23, 30n31, 127n19, 
165n12;
individuals of, 24;
metaphysics of, 10, 12;
opposites of, 171;
Physics of, 17, 28, 48, 56. See also 
metaphysics;
Presocratics
animals, 17–​18, 151. See also organisms
animate beings, 144, 152–​54. See also 
human beings;
life;
living beings;
organisms
Anjum, Rani Lill, 34, 36, 34n39
archai, 167. See also principles
Argument from the Relativity of 
Opposites, 77–​81
Argument from the Unlimited Smallness 
of the Quality Tropes, 81–​84
Aristotle, 3, 10, 12, 16, 19–​23, 33–​37, 
40–​45, 74–​81, 87, 122, 139, 145–46, 
152, 156–​57, 167, 172, 175, 180, 
185, 188–​89, 2n2, 4n8, 5n13, 7n15, 
18n9, 20n15, 21nn16–17, 46n3, 
139n16, 178n38;
account of causation of, 37n44;
Generation and Corruption of, 43–​44;
individuals of, 24;
Physics of, 19, 57n18. See also 
hylomorphism;
Theophrastus
asymmetry, 172
 

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
200
200
atomists, 38n45. See also Presocratics
atoms, 84, 94, 161. See also indivisibles
attributes. See properties
Barnes, Jonathan, 110–​11, 120, 13n4
being, 2, 22, 30, 38, 48, 186–​87, 
90n23;
forms of, 29;
living, 130;
propertyless, 171;
structural features of, 180. See also 
entities;
metaphysics;
nonbeing;
substance
biology, 155, 149n28. See also cosmology;
life;
organisms
blending, 162–​67, 171, 173–​75, 177–​78, 
180–​83, 185;
Stoic, 163–​65, 163n9, 177n38. 
See also colocation;
composite;
mixture
blood, 29. See also stuffs
bodies, 21–​23, 45, 157–​63, 167, 
173–​76, 181, 185, 157n3;
active, 172;
blending of, 183;
causally powerful, 169;
coextension of, 163, 176;
colocation of, 177, 183;
concreteness of, 23;
division of, 167;
malleable, 117;
material, 40;
parts of asymmetrical, 180;
passive, 172;
primary, 45;
Stoic blend of, 174, 165n12;
three-​dimensional, 159, 169;
unlimited division of, 158–​63, 
159n5. See also composite;
material objects;
sōmata
Bradley’s regress, 127
bundle, 29, 63–​64, 66, 68–​70, 
147, 186–87, 2n2. See also 
mereological sum;
opposites
causal agents, 3–​4, 5n10. See also 
causation;
opposites;
powers
causation, 7, 10, 12, 31–​38, 70–​71, 129, 
141, 154, 157, 162, 167, 179, 182–​86, 
189, 37n44, 46n3, 168n16;
Contagion Model of, 37;
physical, 18;
Stoic conception of, 171, 177–​82, 
171n26. See also causal agents;
interaction;
opposites;
powers
change, 4, 7, 10–​11, 22–​32, 54–​55, 84, 
96, 123, 129–​30, 139, 154, 162, 
170, 188, 5n13, 14n5;
in nous, 139;
observable, 73;
problem of, 2, 46;
qualitative, 9, 19–​20, 23, 33–​34, 43, 139;
substantial, 20, 23, 43. See also 
alteration;
creation;
generation;
metaphysics;
movement;
opposites;
transformation
Chrysippus, 158–​62, 171, 184, 98n37, 
159n5. See also Stoics
coextension, 94, 163, 175–​76, 176n33. 
See also bodies;
colocation
colocation, 94–​95, 100–​1, 117, 158, 
162–​67, 174–​78, 183, 185, 114n10, 
174n32. See also blending;
coextension;
composite;
mixture
colour, 12, 17, 19, 31, 62, 65, 68, 70, 148

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
201
    201
combination, 3, 8, 29–​30, 50, 64, 96, 103, 
163, 28n28. See also aggregation;
separation
coming-​to-​be, 48. See also generation;
passing-​away
compenetration, material, 165. See also 
compresence
complexity, 126, 130, 130n6;
operational, 137. See also structure
composite, 23, 106, 163, 169, 172, 174–78, 
180–​81, 183, 174n32, 176n34;
hylomorphic, 189. See also blending;
bodies;
composition;
mixture
composition, 29, 96, 101, 121, 185–​86, 
189, 14n5;
ontological, 29. See also composite;
mixture
compresence, 16, 29, 64, 70, 75–​76, 
90, 93, 97, 99–​100, 105–​28, 138, 
162–​65, 171, 187, 14n5. See also 
compenetrationmaterial;
mixture;
opposites
conflagration, 168n18
congregation, 129. See also separation
constitution, 10, 26, 39, 44, 51, 54, 60, 
67, 70–​75, 92, 100–​1, 132, 136, 147, 
152, 162, 170, 189, 113n9, 129n2;
of material bodies, 167–​74, 185;
physical, 136. See also nature
containment, 105–​28, 187;
constitutional, 75, 126–​27;
mutual, 128. See also Containment 
Regress Argument;
mixture;
opposites
Containment Regress Argument, 111–​13, 
119, 126. See also containment
contingency, 102. See also modality;
necessity
continuity, 23;
physical, 45. See also identity
continuum, 128, 161;
atomless, 161. See also density
corporealism. See physicalism
cosmology, 31, 42, 92, 143, 149n28;
Ionian, 31n32. See also biology;
cosmos;
physical world;
universe;
world
cosmos, 78, 130, 145–​46, 152, 154, 16n7, 
65n25. See also cosmology;
physical world;
universe;
world
creation, 7, 9, 24–​25, 28;
ex nihilo, 23, 27, 30, 84, 147. See also 
change;
destruction;
generation
Curd, Patricia, 106, 114–​19, 149–​50, 
152, 13n4, 14n5, 16n7, 83n14, 
90n23, 107n4, 115n12, 116n13, 
117n14, 119n15
Definition of Qualitative Gunk (QG), 
86, 104. See also gunk
de Harven, Vanessa, 157n3
Democritus, 3, 92, 97n35. See also 
Presocratics
density, 66, 81–​82, 95, 97–​100, 114–​18, 
128, 116n13;
continuum, 128;
variable, 100–​1. See also continuum;
preponderance
Denyer, Nicholas, 24
derivation, 51;
unrestricted, 46–​47. See also extraction
destruction, 43, 46, 60, 184;
ex nihilo, 84;
mutual, 184. See also coming-​to-​be, 
creation;
generation;
passing-​away
difference, 50, 96, 101, 126. See also 
similarity
dispositions, 5n11, 5n13. See also 
metaphysics;
properties

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
202
202
divisibility, 84, 86, 106, 122;
complete, 90n23;
infinite, 84, 97, 106, 121, 84n16, 
121n18;
unlimited, 75n5, 161n8. See also 
division
division, 55, 57, 65, 74–​82, 86–​90, 111, 
123–​24, 133, 164, 167, 67n28, 
157n3, 160n6;
infinite, 159–​61, 161n7;
metaphysics of, 93;
ontological, 137;
unlimited, 8, 10, 88–​89, 158–​62, 183, 
185, 187, 189. See also divisibility
dynamis, 32, 32n35, 35n40. 
See also powers
earth, 6, 12–​14, 16–​17, 19–​20, 29, 
64–67, 73, 147–​48, 168, 14n5, 
16n7, 46n2, 65n25, 66n26, 
130n5. See also elements;
stuffs
Eleatic Principle, 156–​57, 185. See also 
metaphysics;
Plato;
Stoics
elements, 2–​9, 24, 42, 56, 89, 111–​13, 
120, 126, 128;
fundamental, 30, 74, 76, 82, 105–​6, 
112, 114, 38n45;
partitioning of, 74;
preponderance of, 121;
simple, 43–​44;
Stoic, 163;
transformations of, 20;
ultimate, 85. See also bodies;
matter;
metaphysics;
opposites
emergence, 28–​30, 85, 50n7;
phenomenal, 29. See also creation
Empedocles, 3, 40, 45, 121, 180, 1n1. 
See also Presocratics
empowerment, 178–​82, 181n45;
mutual, 185;
property, 178–​79, 182–​84;
structural, 179–​84. See also causation
entities, 3, 21–​22, 40, 45, 57, 102, 
125–​28, 131, 142, 150–​53, 177, 
186, 189, 3n5;
abstract, 40, 188–​89;
fundamental, 162;
individual, 147;
physical, 189;
potential, 109. See also being;
metaphysics
Euclid, 97. See also mathematics
Everything-​in-​Everything Principle 
(EE-​P), 51–​55, 84, 93, 103, 105, 
112, 114, 119, 126–​27. See also 
inseparability;
mixture;
Theory of Extreme Mixture
existence, 31, 48, 108
experience, 3, 42, 61, 75, 101, 163n9. 
See also perception
explanation, 16
extension, 88, 90, 94, 181;
zero, 94, 161, 163, 166, 187. See also 
nonextension;
space
extraction, 48–​51;
mechanism of, 48. See also 
derivation;
Principle of Universal Extraction
fire, 168, 178–​79, 185. See also 
elements
flesh, 15, 17, 20, 26, 39, 49, 147, 
46n2. See also stuffs
forms, 21, 23, 40, 45, 3n4, 18n10;
abstracted, 21–​22, 24, 22n20;
Aristotelian, 43, 102, 170;
individual, 169n22;
instantiation of, 22–​23, 102;
matter and, 167, 189;
particular, 23;
reification of, 23;
substantial, 180;
universal, 22, 175. See also 
hylomorphism;
metaphysics;

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
203
    203
Plato;
species forms;
Theory of Forms;
universals
Furley, David, 149
Furth, Montgomery, 121–​24, 18n9, 
50n7
fusion, 183–​84. See also blending;
Stoics
generation, 9, 25, 29–​31, 42–​43, 46–​49, 
60, 84, 100, 108, 143, 184, 14n5, 
49n6, 149n28. See also biology;
change;
coming-​to-​be;
creation;
destruction
god, 130;
Aristotelian, 170;
Stoic, 169–​70, 173, 184, 168nn19–​20. 
See also nous
gold, 87, 107, 115–​16, 119–​20, 
126, 181–82, 14n4, 46n2. See 
also stuffs
good, the, 130, 142–​45, 143n22. See also 
teleology
Graham, Daniel, 39–​41, 66, 87
Grind model, 92–​95
gunk, 9, 75, 84–​85, 87–​89, 92–​93, 98, 
102, 163, 185, 188, 8n18, 9n19, 
75n6, 91n26;
atomless, 84, 88, 161;
colocation of, 183;
divided, 88–​91, 127, 161;
location in space of, 90–​92;
material, 102–​3, 188;
power, 9–​10, 84–​88, 100, 102;
qualitative, 85–​87, 99–​100, 
102–​3, 188;
Stoic, 156–​85. See also Definition of 
Qualitative Gunk;
material gunk
Guthrie, W. K. C., 52n10
hair, 49. See also stuffs
Hawthorne, John, 89
Heraclitus, 180. See also Presocratics
Hippassus of Metapontum, 92. See also 
Pythagoreans
Hippocratic corpus, 141n19
homoeomers, 57–​58, 74, 87, 187n3, 
57n18, 86n18. See also parts;
wholes
Hudson, Hud, 85n17
human beings, 6, 17, 24, 141, 147, 151, 
180, 143n21, 147n25, 154n34. 
See also animate beings
Hussey, Edward, 110, 112, 126
hylē, 163, 168–​76, 180–​81, 185, 168n16, 
168n19, 172n29;
propertyless, 169. See also elements;
matter
hylomorphism, 167–​68; 
20n15. See also Aristotle;
forms;
matter
identity, 21, 23, 102;
physical, 23. See also continuity
individuals, 21–​22, 58, 109, 147, 150, 
18n8, 18n10, 21n18, 142n20;
asymmetrical, 180;
structures of, 148. See also 
metaphysics;
particulars
individuation, 24, 108, 128, 137, 189, 
21n18, 107n3, 169n22. See also 
individuals;
metaphysics
indivisibles, 84. See also atomists;
ontology
infinity, 92, 99, 101, 113, 160–​61, 
127n19;
aleph-​0, 97–​98, 100, 97n35;
aleph-​1, 97, 100, 97n35;
continuum, 92;
countable, 96;
division to, 158;
of the primes, 97;
uncountable, 96. See also 
mathematics;
multitude

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
204
204
inseparability, 53–​54, 76–​84, 86, 91. 
See also Everything-​in-​Everything 
Principle;
opposites
intelligence, 129, 141–​42, 142n20, 
154n34. See also nous;
teleology
intensity, 18, 36, 59, 61–​63, 66, 68–​70, 
79–​81, 99–​100, 114, 70n30, 97n34;
change of, 101. See also opposites;
properties
intentionality, 142
interaction, 35, 44, 172–​73, 178;
causal, 172, 184–​85, 178n38. See also 
causation;
mixture
Inwood, Brad, 121, 124–​25, 151, 13n4, 
50n7, 115n12, 121n18
iron, 39, 178–​79, 185. See also fire;
stuffs
juxtaposition, 95, 166. See also blending;
mixture
Knorr, Wilbur, 92
knowledge, 155;
universal, 145, 146n24L
Laks, André, 145n23
largeness, 122–​23, 125–​26. See also 
smallness
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm, 10. See also 
philosophers
Leonard, Matt, 166n14
Leucippus, 3. See also Presocratics
Lewis, David, 84, 8n18, 20n15, 30n31
Lewis, Eric, 93–​94, 150, 64n24
life, 153. See also living beings;
organisms
line, 120–​21. See also points
liquids, 114–​17. See also pastes
Liquids interpretation, 105–​6, 113–​21. 
See also Everything-​in-​Everything 
Principle
living beings, 17, 30, 147–​51, 186, 
150n29. See also animate beings;
human beings;
life;
organisms
location, 164, 166–​67, 176;
loose, 164–​67, 165n12;
strict, 164–​67, 165n12;
theory of, 166n14. See also space
magnitude, 55, 58–​59, 103, 56n14. 
See also opposites;
quantity;
size
Mansfeld, Jaap, 121n18
masses, 114, 117, 126, 182. See also 
mass logic
mass logic, 106, 114, 119, 119n15. 
See also masses
material gunk, 8–​9. See also gunk;
reality;
universe
material objects, 4, 6, 10, 19–​21, 30, 
42, 51, 74, 147, 157, 167–​70, 
172–​74, 183–​85, 189, 4n8. See also 
phenomenal things
material substratum, 3, 19–​20, 85, 
4n8. See also matter;
metaphysics;
potentiality;
properties;
substratum
mathematics, 9, 92, 100–​1, 128, 
188, 82n13, 92n27. See also 
philosophy;
physics
matter, 9, 17–​23, 43–​45, 66, 85, 88–​89, 
102, 109, 168–​70, 175, 18nn9–​10, 
170n25;
continuity of, 163n10;
form and, 167, 189;
propertyless, 172, 169n21;
qualified, 22;
structure of, 126. See also bodies;
elements;
hylē;
hylomorphism;
material substratum

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
205
    205
Matthews, Gareth, 106, 119–​21, 
119n15, 120n16
McKirhan, Richard, 50n7
mereological composition, 2, 186. 
See also metaphysics;
parts;
what-​is;
wholes
mereological sum, 29. See also 
aggregation;
bundle;
mereology;
wholes
mereology, 74, 100, 20n15, 69n30, 74n2;
power, 75, 102;
Supplementation Principle of, 110n6. 
See also metaphysics;
parts;
wholes
metaphysics, 1–​6, 9–​10, 25–​26, 
42–​43, 47, 51, 71–​73, 102, 105, 
143, 154–55, 189, 2n2, 18n9, 
43n48, 60n20;
contemporary, 3, 9, 33, 101, 161, 165, 
4n9, 33n36;
history of, 9–​10, 20, 85, 100–​1, 157, 
179–​80, 188–​89, 55n13, 74n2;
neo-​Aristotelian, 2n2;
power, 6, 32–​35, 103;
Stoic, 167, 185, 157n3. See also 
abstraction;
change;
ontology;
reality
Milesians, 179. See also metaphysics;
Stoics
mixture, 2, 6, 12, 26, 54–​60, 81, 83, 
93, 100–​1, 106–​7, 114–​17, 121–​26, 
132–36, 163–​67, 175, 157n3, 
171n28;
cosmic, 42, 49, 56, 62–​63, 65, 90, 94, 
150, 29n29;
extreme, 8, 47, 56, 75, 77, 81, 83–​87, 
94–​95, 100, 106, 126, 75n4;
featurelessness of the, 71;
original, 6, 70, 117–​18, 7n15;
presence of seeds in the, 151;
primordial, 13, 16–​17, 51, 60–​70, 87, 97, 
108, 130, 186, 16n7, 131n7, 142n20;
total, 4, 16;
uniform, 57. See also blending;
colocation;
composite;
interaction;
Theory of Extreme Mixture
modality, 102. See also contingency;
necessity
motion, 28, 48n5. See also change;
movement
Mourelatos, Alex, 35n40
movement, 30–​31, 35, 68, 129, 144, 
171n27;
change that involves, 139;
local, 147;
physical, 183;
self-​initiated, 140;
spatial, 34–​35, 37, 43, 51, 59–​60, 
129. See also change;
motion
multitude, 36, 86, 92, 138, 186, 25n26, 
82n13, 83nn14–​15, 133n9. See also 
infinity;
plurality;
Zeno of Elea
Mumford, Stephen, 34, 36, 34n39
natural law, 91, 189. See also nature;
physical laws
nature, 7, 10, 18, 20, 22, 44, 50, 73, 100, 
136–​41, 147–​48, 154, 174, 180, 182;
laws of, 102;
metaphysics of, 51;
philosophy of, 9, 42. See also 
natural law
Necessary Inseparability Principle 
(NoSep-​P), 76, 104
necessity, 102;
physical, 130n5. See also contingency;
modality
No-​Divisibility interpretation, 121–​25. 
See also Everything-​in-​Everything 
Principle

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
206
206
Nolan, Daniel, 163–​66, 95n29, 98n37, 
166n14, 167n15
No-​Largest Principle (NoLargest-​P), 
54–60, 79, 103, 120
No-​Least Principle (NoLeast-​P), 54–​60, 
76–​79, 81–​84, 87, 93, 96, 98, 103, 
106, 111, 115, 119–​20, 126, 55n13, 
90n23, 137n13
nonbeing, 2, 25–​26, 30, 38, 48, 55, 89, 
187. See also being;
metaphysics
nonextension, 101. See also extension
nonpreponderance, 70–​71. See also 
opposites;
preponderance
No-​Separation Principle (NoSep-​P), 
76–77. See also opposites;
separation
nous, 4, 9, 11, 16, 18, 26–​31, 36, 39, 42, 
49–​59, 87, 109, 129–​48, 151–​54, 
186, 4n6, 5n10, 7nn15–16, 11n1, 
16n6, 39n47, 48n5, 129nn1–2, 
130n4, 135n11, 137n13, 
139nn14–​16, 143n21, 154n34;
changes in, 139;
cognitive powers of, 145–​47;
constitution of, 132n8;
cosmic, 153–​54;
cosmic powers of, 140–​45;
individuation of, 137, 137n13;
nature of, 138, 136n12;
physical attributes of, 133, 138;
soul and, 152;
structure and operation of, 136–​40;
uniformity of, 137;
unmixed status of, 131–​36. See 
also god;
intelligence;
vortex
number, 122–​24, 127n19;
irrational, 92. See also Pythagoreans
numerosity, 83, 86, 91, 120n17
ontological dependence, 144, 173, 176, 
185. See also colocation;
ontology
ontology, 3, 6, 9–​12, 15–​20, 22–​37, 
42–​43, 57–​58, 64, 74–​76, 84–87, 
90–​105, 111–​13, 119–​27, 130–32, 
139–​44, 148–​53, 179–​85, 188, 7n15, 
11n1, 14n4, 15n5, 43n48, 70n30;
Aristotelian, 19, 23;
gunk, 94, 101, 103, 185;
material, 20;
physical, 20;
power, 7, 9, 12, 20, 38–​43, 102, 
186–​87, 4n9, 33n37. See also 
metaphysics;
philosophy;
reality
opposites, 3–​9, 11–​24, 27, 30–​45, 
49–60, 66–​87, 91–​92, 96–​101, 
106, 112, 129–​38, 142, 148–​50, 171, 
180, 3n4, 7n15, 11n1, 13nn3–4, 
16n7, 113n9, 130n5, 131n7, 
142n20, 169n24;
bundle of, 61–​63, 68, 70, 154, 
187, 58n19;
causal operation of, 6;
combination of, 50, 103;
composition of, 16, 64;
compresence of, 16, 29, 64, 70, 187, 
14n5, 165n12;
concentration of, 29, 183;
elemental, 38n45;
fundamental, 87, 56n16;
gunky, 90–​91, 96, 127, 188;
homoeomeric, 57;
infinitely many, 170;
inseparability of, 76–​84, 
27n27, 132n8;
intensity of, 59, 69, 14n5;
mixture of, 24, 40, 63, 81–​84, 100, 
132, 186, 165n12;
movement of, 7, 147, 183;
necessary inseparability of, 80n12;
nonpreponderance of, 70–​71;
pairs of, 125;
physical, 138;
as powers, 153;
preponderance of, 51, 59, 64, 70, 
96, 131, 135, 142n20;

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
207
    207
primitive, 41;
pure kinds of, 76n7;
ratios of, 147;
relativity of, 77–​81;
succession of, 45;
unlimited smallness of, 101. See also 
bundle;
change;
metaphysics;
preponderance;
properties;
tropes
order, 129, 141, 143, 139n14;
life in good, 144;
world, 142, 154. See also intelligence;
nous
organisms, 7, 18, 30, 64, 130, 147–48, 
150–​52, 186, 30n31, 75n4, 130n6, 
141n19. See also animate beings;
life;
living beings
Palmer, John, 25–​27, 71–​72, 127–​28
paradoxes, 56, 67, 83, 97, 125, 
69n29, 75n5
Parmenidean strictures, 17–​20, 32, 
34, 38, 46, 48, 51, 60, 73, 108, 
129, 147. See also Parmenides
Parmenides, 2–​3, 5, 7, 25–​27, 54–​55, 79, 
90, 179–​80, 186–​88, 14n5, 35n40, 
38n45. See also Parmenidean 
strictures;
Presocratics
Parsons, Josh, 165–​66, 164n11, 166n14
particles, 8, 56–​57, 89, 93, 106–​11, 114, 
126, 106n2;
infinitesimal, 95;
material, 106. See also indivisibles;
stuffs
particularity, 22. See also particulars
particulars, 21, 22n20, 169n22. 
See also individuals;
particularity
Particulate interpretation, 105–​6, 
109–​13. See also Everything-​
in-Everything Principle
parts, 2, 8, 15, 29, 57–​58, 82–​89, 107–​9, 
120, 159–​64, 166–​67, 187, 2n2, 20n15;
continuum-​many, 90;
gunky, 88, 90;
infinitely divisible, 113;
material, 56n16;
proper, 9, 82, 84, 111–​13, 164, 187, 
9n20, 75n6;
structure and, 137;
unlimitedly small, 112, 120. See also 
homoeomers;
mereological composition;
mereology;
wholes
passing-​away, 48. See also coming-​to-​be;
destruction;
generation
pastes, 117. See also liquids
perceptibility, 63, 66, 69–​70, 61n21, 
63n23, 97n34. See also perception
perception, 29–​30, 37, 134–​35, 155, 
134n10;
modulo, 64, 131. See also experience;
perceptibility;
relativity
phenomenal things, 52. See also 
material objects
Philolaus, 180. See also Presocratics
philosophers, 8, 16, 75, 85, 139, 188. 
See also philosophy
philosophical language, 149. See also 
philosophy
philosophy, 9, 92n27;
contemporary, 8, 32, 102, 188;
history of, 103, 32n35. See also 
mathematics;
metaphysics;
ontology;
philosophers;
physics
physicalism, 156, 162. See also 
metaphysics;
Stoics
physical laws, 188, 98n39. See also 
natural law;
nature

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
208
208
physical operations, 157n3. See also 
division;
mixture
physical world, 4, 9, 11, 43, 101. See also 
experience;
universe;
world
physics, 9, 163;
Stoic, 157n3. See also mathematics;
science
plants, 18. See also organisms
Plato, 3, 19, 21, 35, 72–​73, 129, 143–​46, 
156–​57, 175, 177, 185, 188–​89, 
35n41, 130n3;
Form of the Good of, 143–​44, 143n22;
Forms of, 41, 102, 175, 180, 24n24, 
79n9, 176n34;
Hippias Major of, 177n36;
individuals of, 24;
ontology of, 72;
Parmenides of, 72;
Phaedo of, 72, 142, 69n29, 70n31;
Sophist of, 157;
Timaeus of, 19, 169n21, 170n24. 
See also Socrates;
Theory of Forms
Pluralists, 35n40. See also Presocratics
plurality, 109. See also metaphysics
pneuma, 163, 167–​76, 180–​81, 184–​85, 
168n16, 168n19, 172n29, 177n35, 
179n42. See also elements
points, 84, 94, 120, 128, 159, 161, 
84n16, 120n17. See also line
potentiality, 20, 33–​35, 37, 106, 108–​9, 
186. See also actuality;
Aristotle;
material substratum
powers, 5–​7, 10, 21, 31–​45, 66, 74, 
86, 102, 130, 180, 4n9, 5n12, 
32n33, 74n1;
active, 5;
atomicity of, 103;
causal, 5, 7, 12, 33, 39, 42–​43, 58, 85, 
100, 102, 175, 5n11, 5n13, 7n16, 
24n24, 169n24;
cognitive, 136, 145–​47;
concreteness of the, 23;
controlling, 136, 145;
cosmic, 136, 140–​45;
inactive, 5;
intelligent, 129, 131, 146, 153, 186;
interaction of, 34–​35;
life, 130, 147, 153–​54;
manifestation of, 102;
metaphysics of, 12, 23, 102;
nous as a bundle of, 136;
opposite, 179;
parts of, 58, 75n4;
physical, 9, 22, 141, 136n12;
preponderance of, 61. See also causal 
agents;
causation;
dynamis;
metaphysics
predominance. See preponderance
preponderance, 59, 61–​64, 66–​71, 87, 
96–​100, 121, 129, 131, 162, 96n30;
imperceptible, 63–​64;
outcome of, 66–​73;
quantitative, 61–​63, 66, 101. See also 
density;
nonpreponderance;
opposites;
Preponderance Principle
Preponderance Principle (P-​P), 60–​66, 
68–​72, 96, 98, 103, 116, 119, 
126, 66n27, 137n13. See also 
preponderance
Presocratics, 40, 1n1
Prime Number Theorem, 97. See also 
mathematics
principles, 7, 10, 20, 41–​47, 62, 73–​77, 
83, 91, 103–​4;
active, 167–​71;
cosmological, 167;
metaphysical, 55, 148;
passive, 167–​71;
Stoic two, 167–​71. See also archai
Principle of Universal Extraction (UE-P), 
48–​51, 55, 103, 50n7. See also 
derivation;
extraction
properties, 3, 5, 18, 20, 40–​45, 71, 74, 
79, 85, 101–​2, 123, 157, 169, 175, 

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
209
    209
178–​82, 5n13, 18n10, 23n23, 
86n18, 169n24;
abstract, 19, 185;
bundles of, 18, 24;
categorical, 5n13, 38n46;
contrary, 44;
essential, 25;
fundamental, 45;
inert, 38;
instantiated, 23, 85–​86, 100, 
86n18, 186n2;
nonessential, 25;
ontological receptacle of, 19;
opposite, 19, 180, 180n44;
perceptible, 63, 96;
physical, 88, 135n11, 141n19;
possession of, 167, 177, 189;
relational, 71;
second order, 132;
structural, 180;
as tropes, 102;
universal, 189, 4n8, 186n2. See also 
dispositions;
intensity;
material substratum;
metaphysics;
opposites;
quality;
relations;
tropes
Proportionate interpretation, 105–​9, 
113, 116, 107n3, 108n5. See also 
Everything-​in-​Everything Principle
proportions, 56–​57, 106–​8, 116, 126, 
183, 106n2, 107n3. See also stuffs
Protagoras, 29. See also Presocratics
Pythagoreans, 92, 141n18
quality, 22, 27, 39, 58, 86, 181, 185;
contrary, 45;
destruction of, 184;
intrinsic, 183;
opposite physical, 186;
preservation of, 184. See also 
properties
quantity, 21, 23, 36, 57, 61–​69, 85, 106, 
112, 124, 70n30;
total, 90, 106, 120;
unlimited, 59. See also magnitude;
size
realism, 23. See also metaphysics
reality, 8–​10, 25, 28, 43–​44, 84–​85, 
130, 187–​89, 43n48, 157n3;
atomless, 156, 188;
fundamental level of, 102;
as gunky, 155–​56. See also 
metaphysics;
ontology
reductionism, 41. See also metaphysics
Reeve, Christopher, 13n4
refinement, 119–​21
reification, 24, 41, 132, 180, 185. See also 
metaphysics;
ontology
relations, 71–​73, 102;
comparative, 72–​73;
external, 72–​73. See also properties
relativity, 80;
perceptual, 29. See also perception;
properties
Saturation Argument, 110–​11, 114. 
See also Particulate interpretation
Schofield, Malcolm, 107, 109–10, 
121, 149, 13n4, 64n24, 
107nn3–​4, 108n5
science, 102. See also mathematics;
physics
Sedley, David, 52–​54, 130, 149, 13n3, 
32n35, 53n12, 130n4, 135n11, 
142n20, 143n21, 148n26
seeds, 6–​7, 12–​18, 30–​31, 39, 65, 130, 
142, 147–​53, 186, 7n15, 11n1, 16n7, 
30n31, 48n4, 58n19, 142n20, 
148nn26–​27, 150n29, 154n33;
biological, 149;
homunculi as, 150–​51;
primitive, 180. See also mixture;
ontology;
powers;
structure
segregation, 121. See also composition;
separation

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
210
210
seminal fluid, 49. See also stuffs
separation, 30, 48–​49, 59, 62, 70, 83, 
91, 122, 129, 148, 28n28, 48n5, 
145n23;
spatial, 48. See also congregation;
segregation
Sider, Ted, 84, 88, 8n18, 85n17, 89n22
similarity, 23, 50–​51, 102, 23n23. 
See also difference
Simplicius, 77, 81, 140. See also Aristotle
Sisko, John, 106, 120
size, 59, 68, 124, 181. See also magnitude;
quantity;
volume
smallness, 107, 122, 125–​26;
unlimited, 100–​1, 107, 111, 114, 118, 
120–​21. See also infinity;
largeness;
opposites
Socrates, 129, 142, 144. See also Plato
sōmata, 163, 169. See also bodies
Sorabji, Richard, 93–​94, 94n28
soul, 17, 138–​39, 151–​54, 139n15;
nous and, 152. See also animals;
human beings
space, 6, 18, 49, 66–​68, 87–​88, 96, 98, 
109, 138, 186, 189;
gunk in, 163;
region in, 133, 147, 163, 187;
theory of, 166n14;
volume of, 114, 117. See also 
extension;
location;
space-​time;
time
space-​time, 30, 30n30. See also space;
time
species, 16, 130n6. See also forms;
metaphysics;
species forms;
universals
species forms, 7n15. See also forms;
metaphysics;
species;
universals
state, 35, 37
Stobaeus, 159
Stoic Blend model, 94–​95. See also Stoics
Stoics, 10, 94, 155–​85, 188–​89, 10n22, 
74n2, 88n21, 91n26, 114n10, 156n1, 
168nn19–​20, 174n32, 179n40;
corporealism of the, 156–​57, 157n3;
god of the, 168nn19–​20;
metaphysics of the, 157nn3–​4, 
163nn9–​10;
ontology of the, 157n3. See also 
Chrysippus
structure, 6–​7, 16, 126, 137, 143, 148, 
150–​53, 178–​82, 7n15, 168n20;
as a power, 182;
preexistence of, 147. See also 
complexity;
nature;
seeds
stuffs, 14–​18, 21, 26, 31, 39–​40, 53, 
58, 67, 71, 87, 93, 99, 106, 109, 
112–​19, 126, 130, 147, 13n4, 16n7, 
75n4, 142n20;
bundles of, 147, 186;
composition of, 14n5;
derivation of, 23;
generation of, 188, 14n5;
masses of, 106;
material, 66;
particles of, 57;
proportions of, 57. See also air;
earth;
flesh;
water
submergence, 116–​19
substance, 3, 27, 102, 107, 110, 162–64, 
171, 178, 180, 183, 185, 4n8, 
13n4, 107n4;
blended, 166, 175, 181–​82;
composite, 178;
individuating principle of, 169n22;
natural, 25n26;
simple, 178. See also being;
metaphysics
substratum, 22, 43, 45;

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
211
    211
characterless, 102, 168n19;
ultimate, 21–​22, 21n18;
underlying, 189. See also material 
substratum
synchusis, 183. See also blending;
fusion
teleology, 129–​30, 140–​45, 153, 143n21. 
See also intelligence;
nous;
order
Teodorsson, Sven-​Tage, 149, 150n29
Theophrastus, 134–​35. See also Aristotle
Theory of Extreme Mixture, 2, 
8–​9, 51, 54–​55, 74–​104. See 
also Everything-​in-​Everything 
Principle;
mixture
Theory of Forms, 24, 41, 72, 102, 180, 
18n10. See also forms;
Plato
time, 18, 88, 161n7. See also space;
space-​time
totality, 75, 122–​23, 176. See also 
aggregation
transformation, 20, 22–​23, 47, 51;
qualitative, 53;
substantial, 53. See also change
tropes, 3–​4, 9, 18, 22–​23, 37–​38, 42, 
59, 70, 81–​82, 85–​86, 102, 147, 
186, 3n5, 4n6;
atomic, 82;
bundles of, 43, 48, 102, 18n10;
continuum dense, 81–​82;
physical, 19;
power, 9, 22n22;
separation of, 83;
unlimited division of, 161. See also 
opposites;
properties
types, 18. See also universals
unity, 22, 183–​84;
causal, 183–​84;
hylē-​pneuma, 183–​84;
object, 183–​84. See also individual;
metaphysics;
ontology
universals, 18, 20, 23–​24, 185, 
3n4, 22n20;
Aristotelian, 102;
Platonic, 102;
Stoic, 157n4;
structural, 180. See also forms;
metaphysics
universe, 7–​9, 12–​17, 20, 26, 30–​36, 
51, 58–​59, 74–​75, 81, 85, 90, 
98, 102, 108, 126–​30, 136–​38, 
141–​42, 152–53, 161, 170, 173, 
180, 183, 186–​87, 7n15, 13n3, 
38n45, 86n19;
atomless, 9–​10;
control of nous on the, 140–​44;
history of the, 17, 24;
interactive, 180n44;
spatial regions of the, 75n4. See also 
particles;
physical world;
world
Varzi, Achille, 88, 166n14
Vlastos, Gregory, 31–​32, 
32n33, 149n28
Vogt, Katja, 157n3, 168n18
volume, 59, 68–​69, 115. See also size
vortex, 6–​7, 18, 36, 42, 49, 59, 87, 109, 
129, 140–​45, 153, 162, 183, 186, 
4n6, 5n10, 16n7, 39n47, 135n11, 
142n20. See also nous
water, 20, 168, 174, 181–​82, 185. 
See also elements;
stuffs;
wine
Wave Field model, 98–​99. See 
also waves
waves, 98–​99;
gunky, 98n38. See also 
Wave Field model
Weatherson, Brian, 89

Ge ne r a l  I ndex
212
212
what-​is, 2–​3, 8, 79. See also 
metaphysics
wholes, 2, 12, 29, 57–​58, 87, 97, 20n15;
emergent, 29;
mereological, 2n2;
nonmereological, 2n2. See also 
homoeomers;
mereological composition;
mereology;
parts
wine, 58, 114, 163, 165–​66, 172–​74, 
181, 185;
drop of, 182, 98n37. See also 
blending;
water
world, 15–​16, 19–​20, 30, 48, 54, 60, 
73, 82, 85, 102, 107, 143, 145, 
154, 130n4;
gunky, 96–​100;
nonintelligible, 113. See also 
physical world;
universe
Zeno of Elea, 92, 56n14, 75n5, 82n13, 
90n23, 127n19;
argument from multitude of, 127–​28;
paradoxes of, 97. See also paradoxes;
Presocratics

    213
213
INDEX LOCORUM
Alexander of Aphrodisias 
Mixt. 216–​17 (LS 48C1, 4), 171, 
175–​76; 216 (LS 48C3), 183; 
216.14–​217.12 (LS 48C), 162, 
174; 217 (LS 48C8), 181–​82; 218 
(LS 48C11), 178; 220.23–​36, 
166n13; 221.34–​36, 89; 225.1–​2 
(LS 45H), 173
Anaxagoras of Clazomenae 
Frag.A90, 35; B1, 19, 51–​52, 55–​56, 68, 
83, 86, 107, 110, 115, 117–​18, 125, 
29n29, 83n14; B2, 19, 115; B3, 27, 
55, 59, 61, 77–​80, 83, 90, 115, 56n14, 
77n8, 83n15; B4, 150; B4a, 17, 19, 
142, 151, 24n25, 154n34; B4b, 12, 16, 
18–​19, 39, 52, 62, 65–​66, 70, 97, 142, 
148, 6n14, 97n33, 131n7; B5, 27–​28, 
122–​24; B6, 8, 51–​52, 54, 76, 82–83, 
91, 115, 115n11; B8, 27, 77–81, 
78n8; B9, 18; B10, 15, 19, 27–​28, 49, 
46n3, 48n4; B11, 52–​53, 131–​32, 
138, 152–​53; B12, 18, 52–53, 60–​62, 
96, 131–​34, 136–​43, 145, 152–​53, 
16n6, 78n8, 96n31, 129n1, 132n8, 
135n11, 139n14; B13, 27–​28, 36, 
48, 139–​40, 140n17; B14, 138, 146, 
133n9; B15, 14, 16, 20, 29, 64–​65, 
96, 96n32; B16, 38, 116n13, 130n5; 
B17, 28, 30, 48
Aristotle 
An.405a13–​17, 152; 405b19, 139n16
Gen. et Corr.329a28–​b2, 45; 329b6–​9, 
44; 329b20–​21, 44; 330a24–​29, 
44; 330b3–​5, 44; 330b21–​23, 
44n51; 331b14–​18, 44
Met. I.4, 985a18–​21, 142; VI.3, 
169n21; VII.3, 21, 21n17
Phys. I.7, 19n12; 187b1–​2, 47n3; 
203a19, 57n18; III.3, 172
Calcidius 
293 (LS 44C), 170n25
Clement 
Strom. 8.9.33, 2 (LS 55I), 179
Diogenes Laertius 
7.134 (LS 44B), 168; 7.150–​51 
(LS 50B), 160
Galen 
Plen. 7.525.9–​14 (LS 47F), 168n19
Plato 
Hipp. Maj.300d7–​301e5, 72n32
Parm.130e–​131a, 72n33
Phaed.71a, 72n34; 97b–​98c, 142; 
101b, 70n31
Rep. 509b, 143n22
 

214
214
I NDEX  LOCORU M
Plato (Cont.)
Soph.247e, 157n2
Theaet. 197b–​d, 35n41
Plutarch 
Comm Not. 1081C–​82A 
(LS 50C), 159
Protagoras of Abdera 
Frag. DK 80B1, 30
Sextus 
Against the Professors 10.121–​26, 
139–42 (LS 50F), 158
Stobaeus 
1.142, 2–​6 (LS 50A), 158–​59; 1.155 
(LS 48D), 173
Theophrastus 
Sens. 27 (Dox. 507), 135

